
      
         
            
            
            THE Expedicion into Scotlāde of the most woorthely fortunate prince Edward, Duke of Soomerset, vncle vnto our most noble souereign lord ye kī
               ges Maiestie Edvvard the .VI. Goouernour of hys hyghnes persone, and Protectour of hys graces Realmes, dominions & and subiectes: made in the first yere of his Maiesties most prosperous reign, and set out by way of diarie, by W. Patten Londoner.
            VIVAT VICTOR.
         
         
            
            VNto the right honorable Syr VVilliam Paget, knyght of the most noble order of the Garter, Comptroller of the kynges Maiesties housholde, one of his hyghnes priuie counsaill, Chauncellor of the duchie of Lancaster, and his moste benigne Fautour and Patrone, VVilliam Patten, most hartely vvisheth felicite.
            
               
               HAuynge in these last warres againste Scotlande (that neuer wear any with better succes acheued) made notes of actes thear doon, and disposed the same since my cummynge home, into order of diarie as followeth. As one that woulde showe sum argument of remē
               braunce (right honorable Sir) of your moste benign fauour, that aswel while I was with ye right honorable my very good lord and late master the erle of Arundell, as also since, ye haue vouchsafed to bear me, I haue thought metest to dedicate my trauail vnto your honor. How finally I either am or haue ben by ony meanes able to merite the

same your gētelnes, by so moch the lesse haue I nede here too shewe: as your humayne generosite, your willyng benignite, and promptnes to proffit all men is vnto all mē so cōmonly knowen, for the whiche youre name and honor is so familiar and well estemed with forein princes abrode, & so woorthely welbeloued of al estates at home, for who was he of ony degree or cūtree that had ony iust sute, or other a do with our late souereign lord the kinges Maiestie deceased, when his highnes, in these his latter yeres for your approued wysdome, fidelite, trust, and diligence had cō
               mitted the speciall ministerie & dispatch of his weyghtie affaires vnto your handes, that felt

not as moche then as I haue foūde since? or who findeth not still a constant continuaunce thearof whear the equite of his sute may bear it? Ryght many sure of the small knowledge I haue, could I my selfe reken both of than and since, whiche here all willyngly I leaue vnattempted to doo: both bi cause my rehersall shoulde be very vnnecessarie & vaine to you yt know them better then I, and also that I should tell the tale to your self: Whoō for the respect of your honour as I haue a reuerence wyth vanitees frō your graue occupacions to deteyne, so haue I for honesties sake a shame to be suspect by ony meanes to flatter. That same your syngler humanitee

wheare wyth ye are woont also so gently to accept all thyng in so thankefull a parte & whear wt ye haue boūd me so straightly to you, dyd fyrste (to saye the truthe now) emboldē me in this theame to set pē to the book, & nowe after in thys wyse to present my worke vnto you. The which if it shal please your honour too take well in woorthe and receyue in to your tuicion, As the thing shall more indede be dignified by hauing suche a Patrone, then your dignytee gratifyed by receyuinge so vnworthy a present, euen so what fault shalbe founde thearin I resume as clerely cummyng of my selfe. But yf ought shalbe thought to be aptly sayd, pleasaūt, ony thing sauering of witte

or learnyng, I woold all mē should know it, as I acknowledge it my self, that ye must holy be referred to you, then couraging of whose fauour hathe ministred suche matter to my witte. That lyke as Ouyde sayd to Cesar of hys, so may I say to you of myne, Ingenium vultu stat
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   cadit
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   tuo.
               
                  Faustor .i.
                But now no further with my talke too troble you. Thus wt encrease of honour vnto your woorthines most hartely I wishe the same continaūce of health and wealth.
            
               Your moste bounden client and puple. W. Patten.
            
         
         
            
            A PREface, seruynge for muche parte, in stede of argument, for the matter of the storie ensuing. (?)
            
               ALthough it bee not allways the truest meanes of meting to measure all mēs appetites, by one mans affeccion: yet hereof at thys tyme dare I more then half assure me, that (euen as I would be in case like my selfe) so is euery man desyrous too know of the maner and circū
               staunces of thys our most valiāt victorie ouer our enemies,

and prosperous successe of the rest of our iourney. The bolder am I to make this general iudgement,
                  Arist. Metaph .i.
                partly, for that I am sumwhat by learning, but more by nature instruct to vnderstonde, ye thursty desyer, that all our kynde hath to knowe. And then for that in euery cō
               pany, and at euery table (whear it hath bene my hap to be since my cummynge home) the hole communicactō was in a manner nought els, but of this expedicion and warres in Scotland, whearof many to me then haue ministred so many interrogatories, as would haue wel cumbered a righte ripetunged deponent redyly to aunswer: & I indede thearto soo hastely could not: Yet neuertheles

blame them no more for quiknes of question, then I would my selfe for slownes of aūswer. For considering how muche in euery narracion, the circūstaū
               ces do serue for the perfit instrucciō of them that doo here. I can easly thincke thesame wear as muche desyred of them to be hard, as necessarie of me to be told. And specially of this (to say chefely of the battel) beyng suche a matter as neyther the like hathe bene sene wyth eies, by any of this age now, or red of istorie of ony yeres past. So great a pour so wel picked & appointed, so restfull & fresh, so muche encouraged by hope of forein ayde, at their owne doores, nay, in the middes of their house, and at the worst so

nie to their refuge: to be beaten vanquished, put to flight, and slayne: by so smal a number, so greatly trauayled and wery, so far within their enemyes lond, and out of their own, without hope, either of refuge or reskue The circūstaunces hereof with the rest of our most triumphāt iourney, whiche otherwise aptly for vnaptnes of tyme I could not vtter by woord of mouth, here mynde▪ I god willing no we too declare by letter of writīg: Not as of arrogācie taking vpon me the thing, which I my self must cōfesse many cā do better, but as of good will, doyng myn endeuour (for that in me lieth, to make all mē priuie of that, whereof it wear mete no man wear ignoraunt.

Aswel because thei may the rather vniuersally be mooued to pray, prayse, & glorifie ye most merciful Lorde, whose clemēcie hath so cōtinually of these late yeres, vouchsafed to shew hys moste benign fauour towarde vs: As also to worship honour and haue in veneracion, the reuerend worthines of our most honorable Coūsaill. By whose generall sage consultacions & circumspect wisdomes, as frēdship with forein princes & prouision for thenemie, hathe bene cōtinued and made abrode, we garded from outwarde inuasion or disturbaunce at home, no prince with obedience & diligence more nobly serued, nor no cōminaltie with Iustice & mercie, more sagely gouerned:

Euen so by the speciall inuincible vertue and valiaunt pollecie of my lorde Protectours grace, we haue fyrste and as it wear in the entrie of this moste honorable & victorious viage, ouerturned many of oure enemyes rebellious holdes, & thē ouercūmen the dooble of oure number and strength in open feld by plaine dynt of swoorde, slayne so great a multitude of them, wyth so smal a los of our syde, taken of their chefest prysoners, wun and kepe a greate sorte of their strongest fortes, bylded many nue, takē and destroyed their hole nauie, & brought the tounships in the hither partes of their boūdes, aboue .xx. mile cūpas in an honest obediēce, vnto the kynges

Maiestie. By the Martiall corage of his vndaunted hardines was this expediciō so boldly takē in hand, by the presence and aduēture of hys own persone was the same so warely & wisely conducted, by the vertuous pollicie of hys circumspect prowes was this victorie or rather conquest so honorably acheued: vnto whose valiaunce and wisdome I can entierly attribute so muche, as to the furtheraūce of Fortune nothyng at all,
                  De diuinac. ii.
                whiche as Cicero proueth, is eyther a vayne name or not at al: or if thear be is euer subiect (as ye Platonikes affirme) to wisdome and industrie. The which indede dyd so manifestly appere in thaffaires of this viage, that like as in account

the seuerall nūbers of .x.xx.xxx.xl. being caste together, must nedes make vp the iuste summe of an .C. Euen so suche his graces prouidēce, circumspection, courage & order (doon fortune what she coulde) must nedes haue atteind to such successe of victorie. That if the Romains wear content to allowe ye honour of triūphe to Scipio Africane for ouercūmyng Anniball and Syphax.
                  Tit. Liui.
                And to M. Attilius Regulus for vanquisshing the Salētynes. And thearto, to set vp images (the hyghest honour that they had) for a perpetuall memorie of M. Claudius Marcellus, and Mutius Sceuola: the one but for kyllynge Uiridomar the Frenche kynge in felde at the

Ryuer of Pade,
                  Valeri. li.i. & .iii. Plini. de vir. illust.
                and for deuising how Annibal might be vā
               quished, and ouercummynge but of thonely citie of Sarragoze: And thother but for hys attempte to slay kyng Porsenna that beseged Rome. What thankes then, what estimaciō, what honour and reuerēce cō
               digne for these hys notable demerites ought our Protectour to receiue of vs? nay, what can we woorthily gyue hym? How be it, if we call to mynde, how first about Alhallowen tyde was .v. yere .M.D.XLij. hys grace liyng as Lord wardē in our marches agaynste Scotland, by the drift of hys deuise both the greate inuasion of the late Scottishe kyng, Iames ye fift, was stoutly then withstōd

at Solom Mosse, the kyng his deathes wound geuen hym, & most parte of all hys nobilitee taken. How the next yere after, he beyng accōpanied with my lorde the Erle of Warwycke, but with an handful to speake of, dyd burne bothe Lieth and Edinborow, & returned thence triumphantly home, but with an easie marche trauailīg .xliiii lōg miles, through their mayn lond. Whose approoued valiaunce, wisedom, and dexterite in the hādelinge of our princes affaires, how cā we be but sure that it did not smally aduaūce or cause about the conclusion of an honorable peace, betwene Fraunce and vs? (although it did not then strayghte ensue) whē his grace in the same yere,

soon after hys retorne out of Scotland was deputed Ambassadour to treat with the Bisshoppe of Belay and oother the Frenche kynges commissioners at Hardilow castel. In the yere .M.D.xliiii. How hys grace about August soo inuaded the Scottish borders, wasted and burnt Tyupdale and their Marches, that euen yet they forthinke that inrode. In Februarie then next, howe, being appointed by our late suffrain Lord to vieu the fortificacions in the Marches of Caleys, the whiche hys grace hauing soon doon with diligence accordingly, he so deuised with my Lord ye erle of Warwyke, then Lieutenaunt of Bullein, and toke such order with ye rest of the garrisons thear, that wt
               
the hardy approche of but .vii. in. mē, he reysed an armie of .xxi M. Frenchmen that had encā
               ped them selues ouer the Riuer by Bulleyn, & thearwith then wan all their ordinaūce, cariage, treasure, & tentes in their cā
               pe, hole as it stode with the los but of one man. And frō thence returnyng by londe to Gynes, wan in his wey within the gū
               shot & reskue of Arde ye castel of Outinges, called otherwise the red pile. How hereto by his force. M.D.xlv. was Pykardy inuaded and spoiled, the fortes of Newhauen, Blanknestes & Bullenberge begunne bylded, and soo well plyed in woorke, that in a fewe wekes ear hys thence departinge they wear made and left defensyble.

Callynge to mynde I saye (I speake not of hys vnweryed diligence in the meane time) these hys valiaunt incursions, hys oftē ouerthrowings, and notable victories ouer our enemies And yet thoughe this his last be far to be preferred aboue thē all, hauing bene so greate, and acheuing so much in so litle tyme, the like not hard nor red of and (but that thear be so many witnesses) half incredible, yet is it none other sure, but suche as makes his graces vertue rather nue agayn then straunge, and rather famous then woō
               derful. We woōder not ye wot but at thynges straunge & seldom seen or harde, but victorie to hys grace semes no les commen and appropried then heat

to the fier, or shadow to the body. That, lyke as the well kepyng of the Palladie in Troy was euer the conseruacion and defence of the citie,
                  Palladium was an aūciēt wodden image in Troy, whearuppon Apollo by oracle did prophecie, that then shoold Troy be destroyed▪ when yt wear had out of the Citie. Thys not vnknou ē to the Grekes Diomedes▪ & Ulisses, in the time of the sege thear, shaled the tower walles whear ye image was kept, kyld the warders, and brought the image a wey with them, whearuppon soon after the citie was destroyed. euen so in warfare the presence of his parson is certain safegard of the host, and present victorie ouer thenemie: for the which I haue hard many of right honest hauour to say, that for suerty of them selues they had rather in feld be a mean souldiar vnder his grace, then vnder ony other a great Captain. And sure, but that by my professiō I am boūd and do beleve all thinges to be goouerned, not by fortune or hap, (although we must be cō
               tent in commune speche to vse the termes of our formers deuised) but by the mightie pour of

almightie God,
                  Mat .x.
                without whose regard a sparowe lighteth not vpon the ground, I could coūt hys grace a Prince yt wey most fortunate of ony lyuynge. But now remembring my religion, and what fortunes force is, & hereto seeng his graces Godly disposicion and behauour in fiercest tyme of war, seking nothing more then peace, neither cruell vpon victorie nor insolent vpon good successe, but wt most moderate magnanimitee, vpon the respect of occasiō, vsing as the Poet saith:
                  Vergil.
                
               Parcere subiectis & debellare superbos. In peace agayn hoolly bent to thaduauncement of Gods glorie and truthe, the kynges honour, and the commons quyet and wealth. And herewith conferring

the benefites and blessinges, that by the prophet Dauid the Lorde assureth too all them that so stōde in looue and dreade of hym.
                  Psal. cxi. &c.xxvii.
                I am compelled to thinke hys grace, as lest happy by fortune, so most blessed by God: and sent to vs both kynge and commons as a minister, by whome the merciful Maiestie of the Lorde, for our entier comfort of bothe soule and body, wyll woorke his diuine wyll. That if without offence I may openly vtter, that I haue secretly thoughte: I haue bene often at a great muse with my selfe, whither the kynges Maiestie of suche an Unkle and Goouernour, we of such a Mediatour

and Protectour, or hys grace agayn of suche a Prince & Cosyn might most worthely think them selfes happiest. But since I am so certaine, thexcellencie of hys actes, and the basenes of my braine to be so far at oddes, as ought that I could vtter in his prayse, should rather obscure and darken them, and as it wear washe iuery with inke, then gyue theim their due light and life: let no man look that I will here enterprise too deale with the woorthines of hys commēdacions, who both haue another matter in hande, and they agayne beyng suche as might by them selues be an ample theame for a right good witte: whearin to saye eyther litle or insufficiently, wear better

in my mynde leaft vnattēpted & say nothing at al. Mary, an Epigram made vpon ye Citezens receyuing of his grace, and for gratulaciō of his great successe and saufe retourne: the whiche I had, or rather (to saie truth and shame the deuel, for out it wool) I stale: perchaūce more familiarly then frendly, from a frende of myne: I thought it not muche a mis for the neatnes of making and fynenes of sense, and sumwhat also to serue (if reason woold beare it) in lieu of my lacke, here too place.
            
               Aspice nobilium (Dux inclyte) turba virorum.
               Vt
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   alacris latos plebs circūfusa per agros.
               
                  Te patriae patrem communi voce salutent.
               Scilicet et Romam victo sic hoste Camillus,
               Sic redijt victor domito Pompeius Iarba.
               Ergo tuus felix reditus, praesentia felix.
               Vt
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Angli, fusi
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   tua gens effera Scotti
               Dextra, (qua nūquam visa est victoria maior)
               Det Deus imperium per te coeamus in vnum:
               Simus & vnanimes per secula cū
                  cta Britanni.
            
            Though I plainly told ye not that my frēdes name wear Armigil Wade, yet, ye yt know the man, his good litterature, hys witte and dexteritee in all

his doinges, & marke the well couchynge of hys clue, mighte haue a great ges, of whose spinnyng the threde wear.
            But why these warres, by our late souereign Lorde the kynges Maiestie deceased, a Prince moste woorthy of eterne fame (whose soule God haue) wear in hys dayes begunne and yet to cōtinued. Forasmuche as by sundry publicacion of dyuers wrytynges, aswell then as since, the iust title of our kynge vnto Scotland, the Scottes often deceites, vntrueths of promyse, and periurie, hathe bene among other in the same writinges so manifestly vttred: I entend not here now to make it ony part of my matter,

which is but onely a iournall or diarie of this expediciō into Scotland, whearin I haue digested our euery daies dedes orderly as they wear doō, with their circumstaunces (so nie as I could) from the tyme of my lord Protectours grace, cummyng to Newcastell, vntyll or breakyng vp of the campe frō Rokesborow. And herein I dout not, but many thinges bothe right necessarie & woorthy to be vttred I shall leaue vntold, but sure rather of ignoraunce then of purpose. Although in dede I knowe it weare metest for ony writer in thys kynde to be ignoraūt of fewest and writyng of most, yet truste I agayne it will be consydered that it is neyther possible for

one mā to know all, nor shame to be ignoraunt in that he cannot knowe. But as touchynge dedes well doon, being within the cumpas of my knowledge: as so God helpe me, I mynde to expresse no mās for flatterie so wyll I suppresse no mās for malice. This battell and felde now, whiche is the most principall part of my matter, ye Scottes & we are not yet agreed how it shalbe named: we cal it Muskelborough felde, because that is the best towne (and yet bad inough) nigh the place of oure metīg: Sum of thē cal it Seton felde (a toune thear nie too) by meanes of a blynd prophecie of theirs, whiche is this or sum suche toy, Betwene Setō & the sey, many a man shall dye that

daye. Sum wyll haue it Fauxside, Bray feld, of the hil (for so they cal a Bray) vpon the syde whearof our foreward stoode, redy to cum doune and ioyne. Sum oother will haue it Unreskfeld, in the fallowes whear of, they stoode & we met. Sum will haue it Walliford feld, & sum no feld at all, for that they say thear wear so few slain, and that we met not in a place by appointement certayn, according to the order and maner of battell, with suche like fonde argumentes. Mary the hinderars of thys metynge I thinke for their meanyng small synne to beshrew. They of thys haste hoped to haue had the hole aduantage, for what they dyd appoynte vppon, with out warnyng

then so early to dislodge, and so hastely tapproche, who cannot iudge? And whither thei mēt to make a feld of their fight, or ment too fighte at all or not, iudge ye, by thys that after ye here. Certayne it is that agaynste their assemble and our encounter, (for they wear not vnware of our cummynge) in the former parte of the yere, they had sent letters of warnīg to the states of their Realme, and then caused ye fier crosse in moste places of theyr countrey to be caried: whearof the solempnitee is neuer vsed, but in an vrgent nede, or for a greate poure, eyther for defence of theim selues, or invasion of vs. And thys is a crosse

(as I haue hard sum say) of .ii. brandes endes, caried a crosse vpon a spears point, with proclamaciō of the time and place whā and whither they shall cū, and with how much prouision of vitail: Sum other say it is a cros▪ painted al red, and set for certayn dayes in the feldes of that Baronrie, whearof they will haue the people too cum: whearby, all betwene sixty and sixten are peremtorily summoned: that if they cum not wyth their vitayll accordyng, at the tyme and place then appointed all the lond thear is forfaited straight to the kynges vse, and the tariers taken for traitours and rebels. By reason of which letters & fyercros, thear wear assembled in their camp (as I

haue hard sū of thē selues (not of the meanest sort) to confesse aboue .xxvi.M. fighting footmen, beside .ii.M horsemē prickers (as they cal them) and hereto .iiii. thousande I rishe Archers brought by therle of Arguile, all whiche (sauing certaī that we had slayne the day before) cam out of theyr campe to encoūter with vs. Now, whear they wil haue it no felde, let thē tell their cardes, and coūt their wynnyng, and they shall fynde it a felde, howbeit, by myn assent, we shall not herein muche stick with thē, since both without them the truthe shall haue place, and also by the curtesie of gaming we ought sumwhat to suffer, and let euer the losers haue their libertie of woordes.

But whatsoeuer it wear, felde or no feld, I dare be bold to sai not one of vs all, is ony whit prouder of it, then woold be the tooth that hathe byt the tung, ootherwise then in respect that they wear our mortal enemies, and woold haue doon asmuche or more to vs: nor are nothing so fain to haue beaten theim as enemyes, as we woold reioyce to receiue them as frendes: nor are not so glad of the glorie of thys felde, as we woold be ioyfull of a stedfaste atonement: whearby like cuntreymen and cuntreymen, like frend & frend, nay like broother and broother we might in one perpetual and brotherly life, ioyn, loue▪ & lyue together, accordynge as thearunto, bothe by the appointement

of God at the firste, and by continuaūce of nature since we seme to haue bene made and ordeyned: seperate by seas from all oother nacions, in customes and conditions littell differinge, in shape and langage nothynge at all. The whych thynges oother nacions viewing in chartes, and redyng in bookes, and thear with hering thys tumult, thys rightyng these incursions and intestine warres betwene vs, do thearat no lesse marueyl and blesse thē, then they woold too here Gascoing fight with Fraūce, Aragone with Spayne, Flaūders with Brabāt, or to speake more nere and naturally, frende with frende, brother with brother, or rather hand with hand.
            
               
               To the Scottes.That no litle bothe woōder and wo it is to me my Cūtreemen (for I can vouchsafe ye well the name) to cōsider, what thing might moue ye, what tale might incense ye, what drifte force ye, what charme enchaūt ye, or what furie coniure ye, so fondly to flye from cōmō sense, as ye shoulde haue nede to be exhorted to that, for the whiche it wear your partes most chefly to sue, so vntowardly to turne from humaine reason, as ye wil be the hynderars of your owne weales, & so vntruly to swarue from the bondes bothe of promise and coouenaūt, as ye wyll nedes prouoke your frendes to plaine reuēgement of opē war. Your frendes in dede (nay neuer wynke at the woorde) that

haue so long before these warres forborne oure quarels soo iust, that wear so loth to begyn, and since that suffred so many iniuries vnreuēged: entreating your men taken, not as captiues of oure mortall enemyes, but as Ambassadours of oure derest frendes.
            Oh how may it be thought to be possible that ye shoulde euer forget, or els not euer remember the great munificence of our most magnificent prince our late kyng? that when with most crueltie, by slaughter of subiectes and burnyng of tounes,At Allowentide. M.d.xlii your last king Iamy with all your nobilitee had inuaded hys Realme, and soone after ye inuincible pollecie of my lorde Protectours grace, then liyng

at Anwike, as lord wardeyn of our Marches, by the suffraūce of Gods fauour (which, thākes to his Maiestie hath not yet to left vs) at Solom Mosse made them captyue and thrall to our prynces oune will: with whom for their dedes, if hys hyghnes had delt then as they had deserued, what should haue blamed hym? or who coulde haue controlled? since what he could doo, they could not resiste, and what he should do, they had set hym a sample. But hys Maiestie (among the houge heape of oother hys pryncely vertues) beyng euer of nature so enclined too clemencie, as neuer of will would vse extremite, euen straight forgettinge who they

wear, and soone forgyuynge what they hadde doon, did not onely then receyue theym into hys highnes grace: place euery of them with one of hys nobilitie or counsayll (not in pryson lyke a captiue) pardon theim their raundsommes: whearwith (if they be ought woorth) sum Prince mighte haue thought hymn selfe ryche, and hereto most frendely (for the tyme they wear here) entertein them, but also of hys Princely liberalitee impartinge treasure at their departing to eche of them all, dyd set theim francke and free at their own doores: Touchinge theyr sylkes, their cheynes, and theyr chere besyde: I mynde not here amōg matters

of weight to tary on such trifles: Mary thear be amoong vs that saw their habite and porte bothe at their cummynge and at their departinge. Take it not that I hit you here in the teeths with oure good turnes (yet knowe I no cause, more then for humanitees sake why ye shoulde bee forborne) but as a man may sumtyme without bost of hym selfe, say symply ye thing that is true of him selfe: so maye the subiect without obbraid of benefites, recount the bounty of hys Princes larges. Although, perchaū
               ce it wear not much agaīst manerflatly to break curtesy wt thē who either of rechelesnes forget their frendes benignitie, or els of ingratitude will not acknowledge

it. To my matter now: What woold Cyrus, Darius, or Anniball in this case haue doon? (noble cōquerours and no tyrauntes) but why so far of? what woold your owne kinge Iamy haue doon? naye what kynge els woolde haue doon as our kyng dyd? but sū
               what to saie more. As our prince in cases of pitee was of hys own disposiciō most merciful, so wanted thear not then of cō
               saillours very nere about hys highnes, that shewed them selues their frendes, & furthered hys affectes in that behalfe to the vttermost: being thus perswaded, that as ye of the nobilitee appered men, neither rude of behauour, nor base of birth, soo ye woold neuer shew your

selues inhumaine and ingrate towardes hym, too whome ye should be so depely bounde. And though since yt tyme, God haue wrought hys wyll vpon hys Maiestie (a losse to vs sure woorthy, neuer inough to haue be lamented, but that hys mercie hathe agayn so bountifully recompensed vs wyth an image, so nie representyng hys fathers Maiestie and vertues, & of so great hope and towardnes) yet be thear leaft vs moste of the coūsailours we had, who vpon occasion will bend bothe pour and wil to shew you further frendshippe. In parte of proof thearof to speake now of later daies, how many meanes and weys hath my lord Protectours grace, within his tyme

of gouernaūce vnder ye kinges Maiestie that now is, attēpted and vsed to shōne these warres and show him selfe your frēde? what pollecie hathe he left vnproued? what shifte vnsought? or what stone vnsturde? Touchynge youre weales nowe, ye mynde not I am sure to lyue lawles and hedles without a Prince, but so to bestowe your Quene, as whoose make must be your kynge: And is it then possible ye can so far be seduced, & brought too beleue, that in all the worlde thear shoulde be ony so woorthy a Prynce as our king? Aswel for ye nobilitee of his birth, for his rare cumlines of shape, his great exellēcie of qualitees, hys singular towardnes to al godlines & vertues?

Ony likely to be so naturall a Prince for you, as his maiestie borne, bred, and brought vp vnder that, hemispherie & cumpas of element, and vpon that soile that bothe ye & we be all? Ony so mete for her as your princes own cuntreman, a right Britō both bred and borne: a Prince also by birth, of so great a pour & of so mete an age? The ioynyng of whome, both the kynges their fathers dyd vowe in their lyues, and ye since agreed vpon in Parliament, and promysed also after their deathes. Than whiche thynge (takynge ones effect) what cā be more for your vniuersall commoditees, profites, and weales? whearby euen at ones of forein foes, ye shal accept as familiar frēdes,

of weake ye shalbe made strōg, of pour, rych, & of bōd free. And whither this now be rather too be offered of vs, or sued for you I make your selues iudges. What we ar able a lone to doo both in peace and warre, aswel without you as against you: I nede not here to brag. Yet seke we not the mastership of you, but the felowship, for if we did we haue ye wot a wey of perswasion of the rigorus Rethorike so vengeable vehemēt (as I thinke ye haue felt by an oration or two) that if we woolde vse the extremitee of argumēt, we wear soō able so to beat reason in to your heddes or about your heddes, that I doubt not ye woold quikly fynd what fō
               denes it wear to stond in strife

for the mastrie with more then your match: We coueit not to kepe you bond, that woold soo faine haue you free, aswel from the famed frendship of Fraūce (if I may call it ony frendship at al, that for a few crounes do but stay you styll in store for their own purpose) whearunto now bothe ye seme subiect, and your Quene ward, which frēdship neuertheles (what soeuer it be) we desyer not, ye shoulde break with them for the loue of vs, but onely in case whear ye shoulde be cōpeld to lose either theim or vs: and in that case perchaunce we maye be content agayne too lose them for you.
            Aswel from the semblaunce or rather dissemblinge of thys

fayned frendeshippe (I say) wē cooueit to quite ye, as also frō the most seruile thraldome and bondage vnder that hydeous monster, that venemous Aspis and very Antichriste the Bisshop of Rome, the whiche of so longe tyme ye haue and yet to do most miserably abyde: whose importable pride and execrable arrogancie, aswell moste presumptuouslye againste all sacred estates of Prynces vppon earthe, as also moste contiumeliously agaynst the high Maiestie of God hym selfe with fastidious and vtter contempt of bothe God and man, bothe the contexte and tenour of hys owne Decrees, Decretals, Canons, and Extrauagantes made and conspyred at

the congregacions councels and synodes at sundry tymes for the maintenaūce and augmenting of hys antichristiane authoritee, in hys holynes name assembled. And hereto hys wicked blasphemie agaynste God, his deuelish dispensaciōs against his diuine lawes, hys obstinate rebellion agaynst all powres, his outragious vsurpacion in Princes londes, hys cruell tyranny for kepyng of hys kyngdom, hys coouert hipocrisie at home, his craftie cō
               spiracies abrode, his insaciable auarice, hys suttell supersticiō, hys mischeuous malice, his priuie theft, hys open rapine, hys sacred simonie, hys prophane hoordom, his ambitiō, sacrilege, extorcion, Idolatrie & poysenynges,

with many other his carnall vertues beside. And also the vndouted witnes of holy writ, in both the testamentes dooth most certainly shew and plainely make clere to the eyes of ye all, if ye will not wilfully winke, at ye ye should willingly see. Of hym hardely spake the prophet Daniel:
                  Capi. xi.
                He shalbe lift vp a hye, & magnified against all that is God, & shall speake presumptuous woordes, and shalbe set i a coorse, vntil wrath be fulfilled against him. In the same Chap. He shal set at nought the God of their fathers, & shalbe in the dalyaunces and desyers of womē, and shal pas nought for God, but shall obstinatly be stubborne, and ryse againste all. And the holy prophet

Ezechiel.
                  Cap. xxviii
                Thy hart was lift vp very hye, and saydest: I am God, and sit in Gods seat, whear thou art but man & not God, and neuertheles hast framed thy hart lyke the harte of God. Thappostel sainct Paul also, in whome the graces of God dyd so plentyfully aboūd semed not vtterly to forget this prelate, when in his epistle too the Thessaloniens he sayde:
                  ii. Tessa. ii.
                The lorde Iesu shall not cum tyl first thear be a fayling, and that wycked man be discooueuered, the chylde of perdicion, who is aduersarie and exalted against all that is called God, in such sort, as he stik not to sit in the tēple vaūting hym self yt he is God: And addeth a litle after, whō the lord Iesu shall quel

wt the spirit of his holy mouth. Of him & his abhominable behauour is thear much in bothe the holy testamentes,
                  Hiere. xxiii eze. xxxiiii Apo. xiiii.xvii.xix.
                & a great dele more (I must cōfesse) then I knowe my cumnyng can recite, Al, so plai in sense, and easy to be vnderstōd, yt if ye confer ye woordes of the same wt ye actes of his life, ye shal haue no more cause to doubt, whither he be ye only ātichrist, thē ye may haue, whither he wear only Christ of whome sainct Ihon ye Baptist sayde,
                  Ioan. i. Mat. xv.
                behold the lābe of God: & the Centurion, This was sure ye very sonne of God. I speake neither of spite nor of spetialtie of this precious prelate Paule the .iii. yt now is alone, but of hi & his hole aūcetrie of these many yeres paste: of whome sure,

whoo list too saye ought, wear mete they sayde truthe: & whoo list to say truth, cā say no more good: for their actes by their office and lyues by their profession, ar no les certainly knowē vnto all the woorld to be thus, then is the lyon (as they say) by the pawe, or the day by ye sunneshyne. The trees of that stocke bear neuer oother frute. And thearfore was it that neyther the Grekes, the Ruthens nor many nations in theast partes besides (whome we cannot count but Christians) coulde neuer be brought ones so muche as to tast of it: and wold neuer abide the presumptuous vsurpation of his insolent imperie, but vtterly at the first did wysely refuse the vnweldy weight

of so heauy a burthen,Contrary too Christes, whose burthen is light, & yoke easly. and the peynfull wringing of so vneasie a yok: The Bohems & Germaīs, of later yeres haue quite reiect and cast him vp.
                  Mat. xi.
                And we at last, not so much led by thē
               samples of others well doings as mooued by the mere mercie and grace of almightie God,
                  Psal. cxlv.
                who (as by Dauid he hath promised) is euer at hand and nye to all them, that call vpon him in truth, and alwayes redy too doo that he cam for,
                  Mat. xviii.
                that is too saue that was forlorne: thrugh the ayde and goodnes of hys mightie pour and eterne wysedom strengthning hys worthy champion, our late soueraigne lorde, and custructinge his circūspect counsail, haue we most happely exterminate & banisht

hym our bounds. Whearby as we haue now ye grace to knowe and serue but one God, so are we subiect but to one kynge, he naturally knoweth his owne people, & we obediently knowe hym our onely soueraigne, hys highnes estate brought and reduced from perticion, & in maner subiecciō vnto the old princely entyer and absolute pour again, and ours redemed from the doubt, to whome we should obey. The greate polling & intollerable taxes of our moony, yerely both from his Maiestie and vs, now saued clere within his Realme. Not fayne now to fetch Iustice so iniustly ministred, as he ye byds moste (like Caleys market) what soeuer be the cause, shalbe sure of ye sentence,

& that so far from home & with so greate cost of money & daūger of life. Our consciēces now quite vnclogd frō the fear of his vaine terriculamēts and rattelbladders, and frō ye fondnes of his trimtrās & gugaws his interdictions, his cursings hys damynng to the deuyll, his pardons, his soilyngs, hys pluckīg out of purgatorie, his supersticious sorts of sectes of religion, his canonisacion of sainctes, forbidding & licēcing the eating of meate, syngyng & saiyng, & wot not a woord, rouynge a procession, gadding a pilgrimage, worshipīg of idols Oblaciōs & offerings,Saint Uncū
                  ber. Saint Mudwyn. Saint Agnes Saint Syth. of otes, images of wax, boud pēs & pis for deliueraūce of bad husbāds for a sick kowe, to kepe doune ye
               
belly, and when kyt hadde lost her key, setting vp candels too saincts in euery corner, & knak kynge of beadstones in euery pewe, tollyng of belles against tempestes, Scala coeli Masses, Pardon Beades, Tanthonie belles, Tauthrie laces, Rosaries, Collets, charmes for euery diseas, and Suffrain suffrages for euery sore, with a thousande tois els of his deuelish deuises, that lak of oportunitie doth let me here to tell.
            We are now no more by thē so wikkedly seduced to ye great offence of Gods dignitee & vtter parell of our soules. Nowe haue we (by hys diuine pour) wounde our selues out of the daunger of his iust indignaciō that we woorthely wear in, for

our former obstinacie, and turnyng from his truth, and haue receiued with most humble thā
               kes gyuing hys holly woord, whearof we haue the free vse in our owne tung. These goodly benefites, or rather Gods blessings, if ye wil your selues, shal we with Gods assistence bring you to enioi aswel as our selfs. But if ye will not, but still bee stubborne in your vngodlines refuse hys graces that he daily offereth, wilfully wrye soo far from hys truth, and be vtterly obstinate in vpholding ye Antichrist:
                  Daniel. xi.
                As first Daniel the prophet dooth declare what ye ar, and show you the state ye stād in, by these woordes. Thei shal magnifie hī as many as haue drunke of the wyne of ye wrath

of God, and whose names are not written in the boke of life. Euen so thinke ye hardely that the iust iudgemēt, which ye hed Priestes and seniours ye Iues, in aūswering Christ, vnwares to them selues dyd geue of thē
               selues, vnto your cōfusion shal be verefied vpō you:
                  Mat. xxi.
                which is, without mercie shall the Lord vndoo the euill, and set out his vyneyard to oother good husbandes that wil yeld him frute in due times: And ye soon after him self sayd to thē: thearfore ye kingdome of God shalbe takē frō you,
                  Eod. capit.
                & be geuen to the naciō yt will do proffit: And hereto yt sharpe sentence of s. Poul too be pronoūced, specially agaist you.
                  i. Tes. ii▪
                  
                The lord Iesu with Thaū
               gels of his blis shal cum from

heauē in a flame of fyer, taking vēgeaūce vpō all thē, yt wil not know God, & obey ye Gospel of him our lord Iesu Christ, they shalbe punisht by deathe for euer frō ye glorie of his vertue, when he shal cū to be glorified amōg his holy, & be woonderful in ye eyes of all yt beleue. Aswel, neuertheles yt ye may be deliuered frō the dreadful daū
               ger of this most terrible sentē
               ce, as also yt the lord of his vnmeasurable mercie, will ones vouchsafe to opē your eyes, & waken you out of this drousy Endimiōs dreā,
                  Endymion▪
                   be looued of ye Moon was layd by her in to a cōtinuall slepe, in a dē
                  ne of mount Latmus in Caria, whear she kyst hym, or rather this mortal A diseas cū
                  ming of burnt choler, cumpelling the paciēt to coueit nought, but drousie slepe, too forget all thīg and to be as it wear in a traunce. 
               Lethargie, whearin by ye bytyng of this most venemous Bittē with this serpēt, as cast in a deadly slumber wt a stifelinge, & benūuminge of al partes, and wt a yore, do soon dye. 
               Aspis (ye Pope I say) ye do lamētably lye a slūber, beīg benūmed of al ye lims of your soul

and lacking the vse of all your spirituall sensis:
                  Cic. i. tue. quest.
                howe euer of grace ye shalbe mooued to do, we shall of charitie most hartely pray (for we do not so much remember our quarel, & forget our profession, but that we can wish rather your amendemēt, then your destruccion) And hereto that ones also ye maye see the miserable subiecciō,
                  Cçlius. lib. xiii.
                whearunto ye are thral: and haue the grace, to praye for grace to the lorde that ye may be quited of that captiuite, and be made apt to receyue the truthe and hys holy woord: and then to know whoo be your frendes, & whyther we will you well: Wyth whoome by soo many meanes sith God of good will hathe so nie ioyned you, seme not you of

frowardnes to seauer a sunder agaynst the thyng that should be a generall wealth and cōmō concorde, the prouisiō of nature, and ordinaunce of God: and against his holy woord, which not al vnaptly, perchaūce here may be cited.
                  Mat. xix▪
                  
                
               Quos Deus coniunxit, homo ne separet. The great mischeues, rising by this disunion and seauering, and ye manifold commoditees cummyng by the contrarie, beynge shortly by you had in consideraunce, thys mariage (I doubt not) betwene our Prices shalbe cōsummate, al causes of quarel ceast, atonement betwene vs made, and affirme aliaunce of frendshippe for euer cōcluded: The which thing as most hartely, for my part I dayly wysh

for, so haue I good hope shortly to see, and herewith betake you to God.
            But now, to retourne out of my disgressiō, for though I haue bene long a talkynge to my cuntrymē abrode in the North, yet wear I loth to seme to forget my frendes, at home in the South: And fare lyke the diligent seruaunte, that walkes so earnestly on hys masters erraund, that in the myddes of his wey, forgets whither he goeth. Howebeit I might well perchaunce thinke it euen here hye tyme to leaue, wear it not yt since I am in hande to vtter in this case what I know, & nooseld of my nurce, neuer too be spare of spech: though I be but a bad euāgelist, yet wil I leaue as

few vnwrittē verites as I cā. As my lordes grace, my lord of Warwyke, thother estates of ye coūsail thear, wt the rest of ye dignite of tharmie, did at our settīg outward, tarry a few daies at Barwike: ye wel appointing of ye noble mē for their bōdes, & of the knyghtes & gentilmē for thē selues, & seruaūtes (I meane specially of ye horsmē) which though but at moustres was neuer shewed of purpose, yet coolde it not at yt tyme be hyd, but be bright & apparāt in euery mās eye: & was (if I can ought iudge) I assure you, for the goodly nūber of ye likely men & redy horses, for their perfit appointmēt of sure armour, weapō, & apparail & their sūptuous sutes of liuerers beside: wherof

I must of dutie (if I muste of dutie sai truthe) most woorthely prefer, and geue the chefest pryce and prayle too my lorde Protectours graces trayne, & to my lord of Warwykes) was I say so generally such, and so well furnished, that both theyr dutie toward their prince, their looue toward their countrey, & to the rulers wear thear: & hereto thaūciēt English courage and prowes might haue easly in this assemble bene viewed. Men goyng out, neuer better at any tyme in all poyntes appoynted, neuer better besene, wyth more courage and gladder wyll: whearof wyth spede (for no doubt our enemies had factours at thys marte among vs, though (as wisedome was)

they dyd not openly occupye) the Scottes had soone knowledge: And as they are mery men, and feat iesters hardely, they sayde (as we hard) that we weare very gay, and came by lyke a wooynge, the whyche though they spake drylie, more too tant the sumpte of oure show, then to seme to know the cause of oure cummynge, yet sayde they thearin more truly, then they woolde kyndely consyder, for in dede, euen as they wear acertayned by my lordes graces Proclamacion, aswell at and before oure entrie into their coūtrey, that the cause of our cummynge then was nothynge els but touchynge the perfourmaunce of coouenauntes

on bothe sydes about thys mariage, that had bene before tyme on both sides agreed vppon, whiche should be greatly for the wealthes of vs bothe, & not to make war sure, nor ones to be enemie, but onely to such as should appere to be the hinderars of so Godly and honorable a purpose: euen so accordynge too the promes of the Proclamacion, neyther force nor fyer was vsed wyttyngly agaynste ony oother, durynge all oure tyme of abode in the countrey, howebeit the truthe was soo, that hauynge doubt of the warste, it was wysely consulted so to go to commune wyth theim as frendes, as neuerthelesse (if nedes they woolde)

we myght be able too mete them as foes, the which thinge proued after, not ye wurst point of pollecye. But what a maruaylous vnkynd people wear they, that whear we came (as wooers cumme, not ootherwyse) but for good looue and quyet, they to rceyue vs wyth hatred and war? It was too muche vngentlenes and inhumanitee, sure in such a case too be shewed: Yet since that we so quyt theym their kindnes, and departed so litle in their det, let vs bear sumwhat wyth them. Mary I wotte they wear not all soo well content wyth the paymēt: For the Erle Huntley (a gentlemā of a great sobriete, and very good wit as by hys

very presence is halfe vttred) beynge askt of a man of estate wyth vs by wey of communicacion (as I hard) how he bare hys affeccion toward the ioyninge of the two Princes. In gude fayth (quod he) I wade it sud gea furth, and hand well wyth the mariage, but I lyke not thys wooynge. But now least I may worthely be doubted by the plot of my Prologe, to haue made the foorme of my booke, Thear is a tale indede (beside ye Bible) that sainct Peter, hauinge gottē leaue of our Lord too make a man, made one first wyth a very great hed, thē with an exceding litle neck and so forthe with such inequalitee of proportion.lyke the proportion of sainct Peters man, I will here leaue of further proces of Preface, and fall to the matter.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            CERtayn noble men, and other beynge speciall officers in thys expedicion.
            
               
                  THe duke of Somerset, my lord Protectors grace general of the armie, And Capitayn of the battaile, hauing in it iiii.M. fotemen.
               The erle of Warwyke, lord Lieuetenaūt of ye armie, and hauyng the foreward of .iii.M footemen.
               The lorde Dacres the rerewarde of .iii.M. footemen.
               The lorde Gray of Wylton, lorde lieuetenaunt of Bolleyn, hygh Marshall of the armie, and Capitayn general of al the horsmen there.
               Syr Raufe Sadleyr knight, Treasaurer of the armye.
               Syr Fraunces Bryan knight, Capitayn of the light horsemen, beynge in number .ii.M.
               Syr Raufe Uane knight, Lieuetenaūt of

all the men of armes and dimilaūces, beyng in number .iiii.M.
               Syr Thomas Darcy knight, Capitayn of all the kynges Maiestie pēcioners, & mē of armes.
               Syr Rycharde Lee knighte, deuisour of the fortifications to be made.
               Syr Peter Mewtus knight, Capitayne of all the hakbutters a foote, beyng in number .vi.C.
               Syr Peter Gamboa knight Spaniarde Capitayne of .ii.C. hakebutters on horsebacke.
               Syr Fraunces Flēmynge knight, master of the ordinaunce.
               Syr Iames Wilforde knighte, Prouost Marshall.
               Syr George Blaag, and Syr Thomas Holcroft, Commissioners of the mousters.
               Edwarde Shelley, my lord Grays Lieuetenannt of the men of armes of Bulleyn.
               Ihon Bren, Capitayne of the Pioners, beynge .xiiii.C.
            
            
               Officers vpon the sea.
               ¶The lorde Clynton, lorde Admirall of the flete, whiche was of .lxv. vessels, whereof the Galley and .xxxiiii. mo good shippes, wear perfitly appoynted for warre▪ and the residue for cariage of municion and vitaile.
               Syr William Woodhouse knight, hys Uiceadmirall.
               Thear were in the tharmie of great ordinaunce drawen foorth wyth vs by horse .xv. peces.
               And of Cariages .ix.C. cartes besyde many waggens.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE Story and proces of the iourney.
            
               MY lorde Protectours grace,Saterday the xxvii. of August. whome neyther ye length nor werines of ye way did any whit let, spedely to further that he had deliberately taken in hande, riding all the way frō Londō his own person in post, accompanied wyth my lorde Marshall, and syr Fraunces Bryan, was met a .vi. mile on thys syde Newecastell, by my lorde Lieuetenaunt and Master Treasurer (who for ye more spedie dispatch of thinges were

comen to toune there .iij. or .iiij days before) and all the nobles Knightes & Capitaynes of the armye on horsebacke, attendīg vpō them. And commyng thus to toune, my lordes grace was honorably (for the dignitie of the place) with gonshot & presence of the Mayer, Aldermen, and commoners there, aboute iij. of the clocke in the afternone, receyued and welcommed, & lay at the house of one Peeter Ryddell.
            Thys daye mornyng, in the feldes of the Northeast syde of the towne,Sundaye the the .xxviii. of August. moūster was made of suche dimie launces & lighte horsemen as were comen, wher at my lordes grace was hymself, my lorde Lieuetenaūt & other of the coūsail of the army.
            
               In the after none came ye lord of Mangiertō with a .xl. Scottish gentelmen of the east borders, and presented them selfes to my lorde at hys lodgynge, whome hys grace did gentlye accept.
            It would not be forgotten & it were but for ensamples sake, how a newe paire of gallowes were set vp in the market place and a souldior hāged for quarellyng and fightyng.
            All Capitaynes with theyr bandes that had ben moūstred,Mondaye the xxix. of August. were commaunded forwarde. My lordes grace himself dyd early also thē depart the toune, dyned at Morpeth .xij. mile on the waye, and lay that night in Anwyke Castell with syr Robert bowes knight, lord Warden

of the middle marches, beyng .xii. mile further. Where there neyther lact anye store of geastes or of good chere to welcumme them with, In the prouision wherof a mā myght note great cost and diligence, and in the spending a liberal hart.
            
               Tuisdaye the xxx. of AugustThis day his grace hauing iourneyed in the mornyng, a .x. mile, dyned at Bamborow Castell, wherof one syr Ihon horsley knighte is Capitayne.Bamborowe Castell. The plot of this Castell standeth so naturally strong, that hardly can any where (in my opinion) be founde the lyke: inaccessible on all sydes, aswell for ye great heighte of the crag, whereon it standeth, as also for ye outward foorm of the stone whereof the crag is, which (not much amis

perchaunce) I maye lyken to the shape of long bauens, stō
               dynge an ende with their sharper and smaller endes vpward. Thus is it fenced round about and hath hereto on the eastsyde the sea, at flud cummyng vp to the harde walles. This Castell is very auncient, and called in Artures days (as I haue hard) Ioyous garde: hither came my lorde Clyntō from▪ shipboorde to my lorde. In the afternone, hys grace rode too Berwycke xiiii. mile further, and thear receyued with the Captains, garrisons, and with the officers of the toun, lay in the Castel with syr Nicholas Strelley knight, the Capitayn thear.
            Muche part of this day his grace occupied in cōsultacion,Wednisdaye the last of August.
               
about ordres and matters, touchyng this voyage and armie. This day, to thentent we moughte saue the stoore of the vitaile, we caryed with vs in the armie by carte, & to besure rather amonge vs to haue, somwhat to much then ony whit to litle, as also that we should not nede to trouble oure ships for vitaile, till we came to the place, by my lordes grace appointed, euery mā of the armye vpō generall cōmaundement made priuate prouision for himselfe for .iiii. dayes vitayle.
            
               Thursday the first of September.Hys grace, not with many mo then his awn bande of horsmen, roade too a towne in the Scottishe borders, standynge vpon the sea coaste, a .vi. mile frome Berwycke, and is called

Aymouth,Aymouth. whereat there runneth a riuer into the sea, ye whiche he caused to bee sounded, & perceyuyng then thesame well to be able to serue for a hauen, hath caused since their buyldīg to be made, whereof both Master and Capitayn is Thomas Gower, Marshal of Berwyke.
            Upon commaundement generally geuen by sound of trū
               pet,Fryday the .ii of Septēber. all sauing the counsayl departed the toune, and encāped a .ii. flightshottes of, vpon the sea syde, and towarde Scotlande.
            This day my lorde Clynton with his flete, toke the seas frō Berwyke towarde Scotlande and herefore the rather, that thoughe they mighte not haue alwayes wynde at will to kepe

their course still with vs, yet & it wear but with the driuynge of tydes, they might vpon any our nede of municiō or vitaile not long be from vs. My lorde Lieuetenaūt and master Treasurer, who remayned at Newcastell after my lordes grace for the full dispatch of the rest of the armie, came this daye to Berwyke.
            
               Saterday the iii. of September.My lorde Lieuetenaunt frō out of the toune did campe in felde with the armie.
            To thentēt, the excuse of ignoraunce, eyther of the cause of my lordes graces cumming, or of his goodnes, to suche of the Scottes, as shoulde shewe thē selfes to fauour thesame cummynge, might quite bee taken from them, his graces Proclamacion

(wherof they could not but here) was openly pronoū
               ced by Heraulde, after sounde of trumpet in .iii. seuerall places of our Campe.
            Beside ye mere matter of this iorney I haue here to touche a thing, whiche seme it neuer so light to other, yet of more weight to me then to be lette passe vnspoken of.
            In the morning of this day my lordes grace, walking vpō the Rampere of the tounewalles, on the syde towarde Scotlande did tel I remembre,My lordes graces dream. that not many nightes before, he dreamt he was comen backe agayn to the Courte, whear the kynges Maiestie did hartely welcume hym home, and euery estate els. But yet him thought

he had done nothinge at all in this voyage: Whiche when he cōsidered, with ye kynges highnes great costes, and the great trauaile of the great men and souldiours, and al to haue ben done in vayne, the very care & shamefaste abashement of the thinge dyd waken hym out of hys dream. What opinion might we conceiue of his thoughtes wakyng, yt euen dreaming was moued with so pensyfe a regarde of his charge towarde his prince, and with so humain a thought toward all men els? Howbeit, my mynde is rather to note the Pronosticacion and former aduertence of his future successe in this hys enterprise, the which (I take it) was hereby then moste certaynly shewed

him, althoughe of righte fewe (or rather of none) thesame so taken. That if for ensample like to this I should reherse to you out of the olde Testament,
                  Gene. xli
                how the seuen plentifull yeres, and the seuen yeres of famyn in Egipt were plainly signified afore to Pharao by hys dreams of seuen fat oxen, and seuē full eares of corne, and by vii. leane Oxen that deuoured the fat, and .vii. withered eares consuming the full eares.
                  Iustini li. i.
                And hereto oute of prophane aucthors, how Astyages kynge of Medians was many a day before admonished, yt he shoulde be ouercommen by a Hys name was Cyrus. nephew of hys (as yet then vngotten & vnborne) and lose his kyngdome, and this by a dreame also,

wherin he thought there sprāg out of the wōbe of hys doughter Mādane, a vyne, by ye spreadinge of whose braunches all Asie was shadowed.
                  Ioseph. de antiquit. Li xvii. ca. vltimo.
                And howe Archelaus kyng of Cappadocia was warned afore of hys banishment out of hys coūtrey and kyngdome by his dreame of .x. wheat eares full type that wear eaten of Oxen: and hereto the multitude of ensamples, beside touching this case, in Tully, Valerius Maximus,
               
                  De Diuin, i Valer. li. i. ca. vii. Plin. devir. illust. capi. xxvi. Cael. antiq. lect. li. xiiii capi. xlii. Sueton. in Domitian. capi. xxiii.
                
               Plinie the secunde, Celius Rediginus, Suetonius, and in infinitie other aucthors mo, they should be to cūberous & irksum bothe for me to write and you to rede. The naturall cause of whiche kynde of propheciynge (as I may call it) whyther it come as

Astronomers hold opinion, by the influence of the ayre or by constellacion, or els by sobrietie of dyet, and peculiar to the Melācholycke,
                  Socra. apud Plat. de. Rep. ix
                both as Plato and also Phisicians affirme, or by gift of God as diuines iudge. I trust I shalbe borne with all thoughe I do not here take vpon me to discus, but leaue it for a doubt among theim as I found it. Yet that thear is such dignitie and diuinitie in mans soule, as sometyme in dreams we be warned of thinges to come, both the learninge of auncient Philosophers,
                  Iambl. inde Mister. Aegipt. Mercur. in Pymand.
                
               Plotinus, Iamblicus, Mercurius, Trismegistus, with many other dooth auowe, holy scripture and prophane stories do proue, & daily exsperience to theym that doo

marke it, doeth also shewe.
            But to thys nowe, that my lordes grace dreamt one thing, and the contrary came to passe, writers vppon exposicion of dreams, and specially Artemidorus, do make .ii. special kind of dreams,
                  Li. i. ca. ii.
                the one Speculatiue, whereby we see thinges the nexte daye after (for the moste parte) muche lyke as wee sawe them in dream: thother Allegoryke, whiche warneth vs as it were by ridddell of thynges more then a day at the least, after to come. And in these Allegoryke dreams he saith, ye head betokeneth the father, the foote the seruaunt, the righthand signifieth the mother, the lefte the wyfe,
                  Li. ii. cap i. lxv.
                and so furth. And somtyme one contrary is ment by an

other, as to seme for some cause to wepe or be sory, is a tokē of gladnes to come, and agayn to ioy muche is a signe of care,
                  Li. iii. cap. xxvii. Li. iiii. ca. iii.
                to se foule water commynge into the house, a signe to se the house burning, Apollonides a surgion thought he went out and wounded many, and sone after he healed many. Of which sort of dreames, thys of my lordes grace was, that shewed he had done nothynge, and signified (as we maye nowe be holde to conster) he should do so much, as were skant possible to doo more. Howbeit as I wolde haue no man so muche to note & esteme dreams, as to thike ther are none vayn, but al significatiue, a thing in dede, both fōdly superstitious & against ye mind

of God vttred in the olde law,
                  Deut. xviii
                So woulde I haue no man so much to cōtēne thē, as to thinke we can at no tyme bee warned by thē, a thinge also both of to much incredulite, & against the promis of God, rehersed in the new law by Peter out of ye prophet Iohel:
                  Act. ii. Iohel. ii.
                But least with my dreames I bring you a stepe, I shal here leaue them, & begin to March with the armie.
            
               Sundaye the iiii. of Septē
                  ber.My lordes grace came from out of the toune, & the army reised from out of the campe. And after disposicion of order yt syr Fraūces Bryan, the Capitain of lightt, orlinen with a .iiii. C. of his bāde should tende to the skout a mile or .ii. before. The cariages to kepe a long by the sea coaste, And the mē of armes

& dimilaūces diuided in to .iii. tropes, aūswering the .iii. wardes, so to ryde in array directly against the cariages a .ii. flight shot a sunder frō thē. Our thre battails kept order in pace betwene thē both. The foreward foremost, the battaile in ye middest, & ye rerewarde hindermost eche warde his troop of horsmē & garde of ordinaūce, & eche pece of ordinaūce, his aide of Pioners for amendement of ways where nede shoulde be founde. We marched a .vi. mile, & camped by a village called Roston in the Baronrie of Bonkēdale.
            We marched an .viii. mile til we came to a place called ye Peaths,Mundaye the v. of September. It is a valey,The Peaths. rūning frō a .vi. mile West, straight Eastwarde and toward the sea a .xx

a .xx. skore brode from banke to banke aboue, and a .v. skore in the bottom, wherein runnes a litle riuer: So stepe be these bākes on eyther syde and depe to the bottom, that who goeth straight doune shalbe in daunger of tumbling, & the commer vp so sure of puffyng & payne, for remedie wherof the trauailers that way haue vsed to pas it, not by going directly, but by paths & footways leading stopewise, of the number of which paths, they call it (somwhat nicely in dede) ye Peaths. A Brute a day or .ii. before was spred emong vs that hereat ye Scottes were very busy a working, & how here we should be stayde & met withal by thē, wherunto I harde my lordes grace vow,

yt he wold put it in profe, for he wolde not step one foote out of his course appointed. At oure comming, we found all in good peace, howbeit the syde wayes on either side most vsed for eas were crost and cut of in many places with the castyng of trauers trenches, not very depe in dede, and rather somwhat hinderyng then vtterly letting, for whither it were more by pollecie or diligence (as I am sure neyther of bothe did want) the ways by ye Pioners were sone so well plained, that our army, caryage and ordenaunce were quite set ouer sone after sun set and there as then we pight out campe. But while our armie was thus in passynge, my lordes grace willynge to loose no

tyme, and that the enemies aswel by dede as by brute should know he was come, sent an Heraulde to summon, a Castell of George Douglash called Dū
               glas,Dunglas. yt stode at the ende of the same valey nerer the sea, and a mile frō the place of our passage. The Capitain therof Matthew Hume, a brothers son of the lord Humes vpō this summons requyred to speake wyth my lordes grace, it was graū
               ted & he came. To whom ꝙ his grace, Since it cannot be, but yt ye must be witting both of our cōmyng into these partes, & of our Proclamacion sent hyther before & proclaymed also since, and ye haue not yet cōmē to vs but kepe this hold thus, we haue cause to take you as oure

mere enemie. And therefore be ye at this choyse (for we wil take none auaūtage of your beīg here now) whither ye & your cō
               panie will render your holde & stonde body & goodes, at ye order of oure will, or els to be set in it again as ye were, & we wil assay to wyn it as we can. The Capitayne beynge aboute this riddel brought in great doubt what aunswer well to make, & whyther best to do, at last stroken with the feare of crueltie yt by stubbernes he shoulde well deserue, & moued agayne wyth the hope of mercy, that by submission he might hap to haue, was content to render al at his graces pleasure, and therupon commaunded to fetche hys cō
               panye, retourned to the Castel.

In the tyme of tariyng for fetchyng his garde, we sawe oure ships with good gale and order fayre sayling into their Fryth,The Fryth. which is a great arme of ye sea, and runneth Westwarde into their countrey aboue .iiii. mile. Upō this stādeth, Lieth, Blak nest, Sterlinge & sainct Ihōs Rode, and all the beste tounes els in the Southpart of Scotlande. This Capitayn came & brought with him hys bāde to my lordes grace, which was of xxi. sober souldiours, al so apparayled and appoynted, that so God help me. (I will saye it for no praise) I neuer saw such a bunche of beggers come out of one house together in my lyfe. The Capitayne and .vi. of the worshipfull of the cōpanye

were stayed & commaundëd to the keping of ye Prouost Marshal, more (hardly) to take Mū
               dais handsell, then for hope of auauntage: the residue were licenced to gea their gate▪ wt this lesson, yt if they were euer knowen to practyse or do ought agaynste the army, while it was in the countrey & therupon takē, they should be sure to be hā
               ged. After this surrender, my lorde Ihon Gray, beyng Capitayn of a nūber (as for his approued worthines right wel he mought) was appoīted to seaze & take possessiō of the maner wt al & singular thappurtenaūces in & to thesame belōging, with whome (as it hapt) it was my chaūce to go thyther: the spoile was not rych sure, but of white

bread, oten cakes, & Scottishe ale, wherof was indifferēt good store, & sone bestowed emōg my lordes souldiors accordingly, as for swordes, buklers, pykes pottes, panz, yarne, lynnē, hēpe & heaps of such baggage beside were skāt stopt for, & very liberally let alone, but yet sure it would haue rued any good huswiues hart, to haue beholden ye great vnmerciful murder yt our men made of ye brood gees and good laīg hēnes yt were slayn there yt dai, which ye wyues of ye toune had pēd vp in holes in ye stables & sellers of ye castel eare we came. In this meane time my lordes grace appoīted, the house should be ouerthrowen, wherupō ye Capitain of ye Pioners wt a .iii.C of his laborers were sent doun to it, whome he

straight set a digging about ye foūdaciō. In ye toun of dūglas (the which we left vnspoyled & vnburnt) we vnderstode of ye wiues (for their husbādes wer not at home) yt it was George Douglash deuise & cost to cast these crosse trēches at ye peaths, & stode hī in .iiii. Scottish .l'. which is as much ster. as.iiii. good english crounes of .v.s̄. a pece, a mete reward for such a worke.
            Our Pioners were early at their worke again about ye Castel,Tuisdaye the vi. of Septē
                  ber. whose walles were so thick & foūdaciō so depe, & ther to set vpon so craggy a plot, that it was not an easy matter sone to vnderdig them: Our army dislodged & marched on. In ye wai we shuld go, a mile & a half frō Dūglas Northward, ther were ii. pyles or holdes, Thornton

& Anderwike, set both on craggy foundacion and deuided a stones cast a sunder, by a depe gut wherein ran a litle Ryuer. Thornton belōged to the lorde Hume,Thornton. and was kepte then by one Tom Trotter, whereunto my lordes grace ouer night for summons sente Somerset hys Heraulde, towarde whome .iii. or .v. of this Capitayns prikkers with their gaddes ready charged did righte hastely direct their course, but Trotter both honestly defended the Heraulde, & sharply rebuked hys men: and sayd for the summōs he woulde come speke with my lordes grace himself, notwithstāding he came not, but straight lokt vp a .xvi. poore soules like the souldiours of Dūglas

fast within ye house, toke ye keys with him, & cōmaunding them they shoulde defende ye house & tary within (as they coulde not get out) till his retorne, whiche should be on the morow wt municiō & relief, he with his prikkers prikt quite his ways. Anderwyke perteined to the lorde of Hābleton,Anderwyke. and was kept by hys sonne & heyre (whom of custume they call the Master of Hābleton) & an .viii. more with hym,To be knowē that the Scottes call ye son and heyre of euery lord the Master of ye house and surname, wherof hys father is called lorde. gentlemen for the moste part as we harde say. My lordes grace at his comming nye, sent vnto both these piles, whiche vpon summōs refusing to rēder, were straighte assayled, Thornton by batrie of .iiii. of our great peces of ordinaūce & certain of syr Peeter Mewtus

hakbutters to watch ye loopholes & wyndowes on all sydes, & Anderwyke by a sorte of the same hakbutters alone, who soo well besturd thē, yt whear these kepers had rāmed vp their outer dores, cloyd & stopt vp their stayres within, & kept thēselfes a loft for defence of their house about the battilmētes, the hakbutters gat in & fyered thē vnderneth: wherby beyng greatly trobled wt smoke & smoother, & brought in desperaciō of defēce they called pitefully ouer their walles to my lordes grace for mercy, who, notwithstandinge their great obstinaci & thēsample other of ye enemies mought haue had by their punishmēt, of his noble generosite & by these wordes making half excuse for thē. Men may some tyme do yt
               
hastely in a gere, whereof after they mai soon repēt thē, did take thē to grace, & thearfore sent one straight to thē. But ere the messēger came, the hakbutters had gottē vp to thē and killed viii. of thē aloft, one lept ouer ye walles, & runninge more then a furlōg after was staī wtout in a water. All this while, at Thornton, our assault & their defence was stoutly cōtinued, but well perceiuinge how on ye tone side thei were batred, mined on ye other, kept in wt hakbutters rounde about, & sum of our men wtin also occupiyng al ye house vnder thē (for ther had likewise shopt vp thēselfes in ye highest of their house) & so to do nothīg inward or outward, neither by shotīg of base (wherof they had but one or .ij.) nor tumbling of

stones (ye thinges of their chefe anoyaunce) wherby thei might be able any while to resist oure powr, or saue thēselfs, thei pluct in a banner yt afore they had set out in defyaūce, & put out ouer the walles▪ a whyte lynnē clout tyed on a stickes end, criyng al with one tune for mercy, but hauyng answer by the whole voice of ye assaylers, thei were traytors & it was to late, thei plukt in their stick, & sticked vp ye bā
               ner of defyaunce again, shot of hurled stones, & did what els they could, with great courage of their side & littel hurt of ours Yet then after, being assured by our ernesty, yt we had vowed ye wynning of their holde before our departure, & then, yt ther obstinacie coulde deserue no lesse

then death, pluct in their bāner once again, & cried vpō mercie, & beyng generally aunswered, nay nay loke neuer for it, for ye are erraūt traytors, then made they peticiō yt if thei should nedes die, yet that my lordes grace woulde be so good to thē as thei might be hāged, whearby they might sumwhat reconcile thēselfs to God warde, & not to dye in malice with so great daū
               ger of their soules:A pollecy of warre. A pollecie sure in my mind, though but of grose heddes, yet of a fyne deuise. Syr Miles Partrich being nie about thys pile at ye tyme & spiyng one in a red doblet, dydges, he shuld be an Englishmā & therfore cam & furthered this peticiō to my lordes grace ye rather, which then toke effect, thei

came & hūbled thēselfes to hys grace, whearupō without more hurt they wear but cōmaunded to the Prouost Marshal.My lordes graces pitee. It is sūwhat here to cōsider, I know not whither the destenie or hap of mās life: The more woorthy men, ye les offēders & more in ye iudges grace wear slayne & the beggers, the obstinate rebelles yt deserued nought but crueltie wear saued. To saye on now, ye house was soon after so blowē with pouder, yt more then ye one half fell straight doune to rubrish & dust, the rest stood al to be shaken wt riftes & chynkes. Anderwyke was burned, & al ye houses of office and stakkes of corne about them both. While this was thus in hāde, my lordes grace in turning but about

sawe the fal of Dūglas, which likewise was undermined and blowen with pouder.
            This doon, about noon we marched on passinge soon after wtin ye gūshot of Dūbar, a toun stōding lōgwise vpō ye seasyde whearat is a castel (whiche the Scottes coūt very strōg) ye sent vs diuers shottes as we passed but al in veyn: their horsmē showed thēselfs in their feldes besyde vs, toward whom Barteuile with hys .viii▪ mē all hakbutters on horsbak (whome he had right wel appoīted) & Ihō de Rybaud, with diuers other did make, but no hurt on neyther side, sauing yte a mā of Barteuiles slew one of thē with his pece, ye skirmish was soon ēded. We wēt a iiii. mile further, & hauing

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
trauayled yt day a .x. mile, we cāped nigh Cātallō, & had at night a blynde alarme.
            
            Here had we first aduertisement certein, that the Scottes wear assembled in campe at the place whear we found them.
            
               Wednesdaye the .vii. of September.¶ Marching this mornīg a.ij mile, we came to a fayre Ryuer callen Lyn rūning all straight eastwarde toward the sea, ouer this Riuer is ther a stone bridge yt they name Lyntō brig, of a toun therby on our righthād & eastward as we went yt stōds vpō thesame Ryuer, Our horsmen & cariages past through ye water, (for it was not very depe) our footmē ouer the bridge. The passage was very straight for an army, & therfore ye lēgar in settīg ouer. Beyōd this bridge

about a mile Westward (for some thought as then we turned) vpon this same Ryuer on the Southsyde stondes a proper house and of sum strengthe bylyke, they call it hayles Castell,Hayles castel. and perteyneth to the erle Bothwel, but kept as then by ye gouernours appoyntmēt, who hylde the erle in pryson. Aboue the Southsyde of thys Castell lyeth a long hil, Eeast & West, whearuppon did appere in diuers plumpes about .iii.C. of their prickers, sum makynge towarde the passage too lye in wayt ther to take vp straglers and cut of ye tayle of our hoste. My lordes grace, and my lord Lieutenaunt, against the Castell vpon an hill ouer whiche we should passe, did stay a while,

aswel for the armie that was not all cum, as alsoo too see a skyrmish that sum of these prickers by cūming ouer the Riuer toward vs began to make, but did not mainteine. Whearupō our foreward marching softly afore, hys grace then tooke his way after, at whome, out of the Castell thear wear roūdly shot of (but without hurt) vi. or .vii. peces, the whiche before that, thoughe sum of oure men had bene very nye, yet kept they all coouert. In this mean time did thear aryse a very thicke mist, My lord the erle of Warwyke then lorde Lieutenaunt (as I tolde you) of the armie, did so nobly quite himself vpō an aduenture that chaunced then to fal, as that his accustumed valiaunce

might wel be acknowledged, whearby first, and first of all men (a litle, but not without purpose now to digres) beynge lorde Lieutenaūt of Bulleyn next after it was wun, beaten on al sydes, weak without, yll harbour within, and (nowe to say trouth, for the daūger is past) skante tenable as it was, did so valiauntly defende it agaynst the Dolphyn then and all hys power, that as I remē
               bre was reconed a .lii.M. Of whome in a camisado then, as they had slayn many of our mē & wun the base toun, his lordeship killed aboue viii.C coūted of the best souldiors in al Fraū
               ce, draue the rest away, & recouered the toun frō them again. And the next yere after, occupiyng

his office of lord Admiral vpon the sea in person himself, what tyme the greate fleete of Fraunce with all their Galleys (which was no smal pour) cam to inuade our costes, he profrered battaile vnto the Frenche Admiral & all his nauie, which fight (I will not saye howe cowardly) he vtterly refused, hys lordship repeiled their force & made thē fame to flie bak agaī home with all their bragges & cost in vain. And thesame yere, but with a .vii.M. (wherof not v.M. lōded) mawgre all Fraū
               ce he burnt Treaport & diuers villages thear besyde, returned to ship again with ye los, but of one Dauid Googan & no mo. And the yere than next. M, D.xlvi. after his diligence so well

shewed amōg the rest of the cō
               missioners, yt an honorable and frēdly peace was cōcluded betwene Fraūce & vs, his lordship was sent ouer by our late souerain lord, to receiue ye oth of the late Frēch king for cōfirmaciō of the same peace. In which iorney, how nobly he did aduaūce his port for the kynges Maiesties honour & estimaciō of the realme (& yet not aboue his degre) all mē yt sawe it, will easly confesse with me, that it was to much then, to be shewed in few woordes here. Uery few thinges els (to say truth) that haue bene ony wher in these warres agaīst the enemie eyther nobly attempted or valiauntly acheued, whearin his lordship hath not bene, eyther the first ther in

office, or one of the foremost in daunger. That if it fel so fete for my purpose to speake of his lordships honour at home, as it hath doon sumwhat to touch his proowes abrode, I coulde sure for commēdacion thearof moue my self matter, wherin I wear able to sai rather liberally much, then skarcely inough: but omittīg that thearfore, & to turne to my tale agaī, his lordship regarding the daūger our rerewarde was in by reason of disorder, caused at this passage by the thicknes of this mist, & nienes of the enemies, himselfe skant with a .xvi. horse (wherof Barteuile & Ihon de Ribaude wear .ii: vii. or .viii. light horsemen mo, & the reste, of his own seruauntes) returned towarde

the passage to see to the arraye agayne. The Scottes perceyuyng our horsemē to haue past on before, & thinkīg (as ye truth was) that sum Capitain of honour did stay for the lookynge to the order of thys rerewarde: kepinge the Southsyde of the Ryuer, did call ouer to sum of our mē to knowe, whither ther wear ony noble man nie thear: they wear askt why they askt, one of thē aunswered yt he was such a mā (whose name our mē knew to bee honorable among thē) & woold cum in to my lordes grace, so that he mought be sure to cum in safetie: our yoōg souldiours nothing suspecting their aunciēt falshed, tolde him yt my lorde Lieutenaūt the erle of Warwyke was nie thear, by

whose tuiciō he shuld be safely broughte to my lordes graces presence, thei had cund their lesson, & fel to their practise, which was this, hauing cūmē ouer ye water, in the way as my lorde should passe, they had couched behinde a hillok about a .ii.C. of their prickers, a .xl. had they sent besyde, to search whear my lord was, whom whē thei foūd part of them prickt very nie. & these agayne a .x. or .xii. of my lordes small cōpanie did boldly encoūter & draue thē wellnie home to their ambush, fliynge perchaūce not so much for fear of their force as for falshod to trap thē: But hereby enformed yt my lord was so nie, they sent out a bigger nūber, & kept the rest more secret, vpon this purpose

that they might eyther by a playn onset haue distrest him or els that not preuaylinge, by feyning of flight to haue trayned him into their ambushe, & thus instruct they cam prickīg toward hys lordshippe a pace, why (ꝙ he) & wil not these knaues be ruled? geue my staff, the which then with so valiaunt a corage, he charged at one (as it was thought) Dādy Car a Capitayn among thē yt he did not onely cōpel Car to turne, & him self chased him aboue .xii. skore together, all ye way at the spear point, so yt if Carres horse had not ben exceding good & wight his lordship had surely rū him thrugh in this race, but also wt his litle bande caused all ye rest to flee a main. After whom then

as Henry Uane, a gentlemā of my lordes & one of this cōpany did fiersly pursue, foure or .v. scottes sodēly turned & set vpō him, & though thei did not alltogether skape his hādes free, yet by hewyng & māgling hys hed, body & many places els, they did so cruelly entreat him, as if reskue had not cum ye sooner: thei had slaī him out right, but saued as he was, I dare be bolde to sai, many a .M. in war & els whear haue dyed wt les, then half ye les hurt. Here was Barteuile run at sydeling and hurt in the buttok, & one of our men slayn. Of Scottes again, none slaī but .iii. takē, whearof one was Richarde Maxwell & hurt in the thigh: who had bene long in Englōd not lōg before & had receyued right many benefites,

(as I harde himself cō
               fesse) both of ye late kinges Maiestie & of my lord Lieutenaūt, & of many other nobles & gētlemen in ye court beside: & thearfore for his ingratitude & trayterous vntruth threatened too be hāged: But as otherwise he had a great dele to much more then he deserued, so had he here sumwhat to litle, for how my lordes grace bestowed hym I wot not, but hanged in dede he was not. To make my tale per fit it is certeinly thought, yt if my lorde Lieutenaunt had not thus valiaūtly encountred thē ear thei coulde haue warned their ambushe, how weakly he was warded, he had bene beset roūd about by thē, ear euer he could haue bene ware of thē or reskued of vs: wher now hereby

his Lordeship shewed hys woōted woorthines, saued hys cūpanie & discōfited ye enemie. Soon after he ouertooke my lord Protectour, being as then set at dyner, to whom he presented these prisoners & recounted hys aduētures, whose grace in the mean tune had hapt vpō a fellowe lyke a man, but I wot not of what sorte, smal of stature, red hedded, curld rounde about & shedded afore, of a .xl. yere old, & calde himself Knockes. To say sumwhat of his hauour, his cote was of ye coulor of a wel burnt brik (I meā not blak) & wel worth. xx.d.a brode yarde, it was pretely fresed, half wt an ado & hēmed roūd about very sutably with pasmaī lace of grene caddis, me thought he represented ye state of a sūner in

sum citee or of a pedler in sum boorowe, how far so euer he had trauayled that day he had not a whit fyled his bootes for he had none on, harmles bilyke, for he ware no weapon, he rode on a trottynge tyt well woorth a coople of shillynges, the loss whereof at his takyng he toke very heuely, yet did my lordes grace caus him to be set on a better. I take his learning was but smal but his vttraunce was greate sure, for he neuer lind babeling, very moyst mouthed and somewhat of nature disposed to slauer, and therfore fain (without a napkin to wype hys lyppes) to suppe at euery woord, sum said it was no faut in the man, but the maner of the cuntree, in dede they haue

many moyst mystes thear, no lak of audacity nor store of wit, for beynge taken & brought in for a spie & posed in that pointe whyther he went, neither by the honestie of hys erraunde, nor goodnes of his wit, was he able to make ony lykely excuse, the tenoure of his talke so tempred thoorow out, and the most of hys matter so indifferently mingled, as (yf they make hym not bothe) it was harde for any theare to iudge, whether they might rather counte hym a folish knaue or a knauishe foole, at whome my lordes grace and other had right good sport. As Barteuile that day had righte honestly serued, so did ye lordes righte honorably quite yt, for straight vpon the ouertakynge

of my lordes grace, my Lorde Lieutenaunt did get him a surgion, & drest he was, straight after layde and conueyed in my lordes graces own chariot, that was both right sumptuous for cost and casy for caryage. The rest yt wear hurt, wear here all so drest Scottes & oother. 
                  ••
               e had marched that day a ix. mile and camped at night by a toun standyng vpon the Fryth, & called Lang Nuddrey. Here 
                  ••
               e foūd a gētle woomā (some sayd a ladye) the wyfe of one hugh Douglas, she was greate with child, & in a house others, thear abode her good tyme of deliueraunce, & had wt her an aūcient gētle woomā her mother, a mid wyfe & a daughter: whose estate ye counsail vnderstāding, my

lordes grace & my lord Lieutenaunt took order that al night without daunger or domage she was well preserued, but sone after our departure in the morenynge, I harde, that sum of our northerne prickers had visited her, not muche for her profit▪ nor al for their honesties yt had they then bene caught wt their kindnes, thei should haue bene sure of thākes accordyng▪ good people be they, but geuen much (as thei say) to the spoyle.
            
               Thursdaye ye viii. of septē
                  ber, beynge, our lady day.¶This morning in ye time of our dislodgīg, sign was made to sum of our ships (whereof ye moste parte & chefest lay a .x. or xii. mile in the Fryth beyōd vs ouer againste Lyeth & Edinborowe) yt ye lord Admiral should cum a shore to speake with my

lordes grace. In ye meane tyme sumwhat early, as our galley was cūming toward vs, about a mile & more beyond our cāpe the Scots wear very busy a waftynge her a shore towarde them with a banner of Sainct George that they had: but my Lorde Lieutenaunt soon disapointed ye pollicie, for makyng towarde that place wheare my Lord Admirall shoulde londe, oure men on the water by the sighte of hys presence dyd soon discerne their frendes frō their foes. By and by then my lorde Clynton the Admirall came to londe, Who with my Lorde Lieutenaunte rode back to my lordes grace, among whom order was taken, that our greate ships should remooue from before

Lyeth, & lye before Muskelborowe and their camp, and oure smaller vessels that wear vitaillers to lye nerer vs. This thus apointed, my lorde Admirall rode back to take the water agayne. And as our armie had marched onwarde a mile or .ii. thear appered vpon a hill that lay longwise east & west, & on ye southsyde of vs, vpō a vi. hundred of their horsmen prickers, whearof sum within a .ii. flightshot directly againste vs vpon the same hill, and most further of, towarde these ouer a small bridge (for thear rāne a litle riuer also bi vs) very hardely did ride about a dooseī of our hakbutters on horsback, and helde them at bay so me to their noses yt whether it wear by the goodnes

of our mē or badnes of thē, the Scottes did not onely not cum doune to them, but also very curteisiy gaue place & fled to their fellowes: & yet I know they lack no hartes, but thei cā
               not so well away wt these crakkes. Our armie went on, but so much the slowlyer, because our way was sumwhat narowe, by meanes of the Fryth on the tonesyde and certain marishes so nie on ye toother. The Scottes kepte alwayes pace wt vs vpō their hill, and shewed themselfes vpon sundry bruntes, very cranke & brag, at whom as our captains did loke to ye ordryng and arraiyng again of the battailes, my lord protectors grace appointed .ii. feld peces to be turned, eche pece shot of twyse,

wherof one Gold yt master gū
               ner thear discharged the tone & did so wel direct it, yt at his former shot he strook of ye leg of a black horse, right fair and as it was thought ye best in ye cōpany, & at his next shot he kyld a man: hereby, rather sumwhat calmed then fully content, thei went theyr wayes & we saw no more of thē til ye time of our cā
               pyng, & then shewed thei thēselues very lordly aloft vpō thys hill againe oueragainst vs, as though they stood there to take viewe of our campyng & mouster of our men. My lord Marshall myndyng to knowe theyr cōmissiō did make towarde thē with a band of horsmē, but they went wisely their way & would neuer abyde ye reasoning of the

matter. In the way as we came not far from this place, George Ferrers a gentlemā of my lord Protectors & one of ye cōmissioners of ye cariages in this army, happened vpon a caue in the ground, ye mouth whereof was so worne with ye fresh printe of steps, yt he semed to be certayne thear wear sum folke within, & gone doune to trie, he was redily receyued wt a hakebut or .ii. He left them not yet, till he had knowen whyther thei would be cōtēt to yelde & cum out, which they fondly refusyng, he wente to my lordes grace, and vpon vttraunce of the thyng gat lisence to deale with them as he coulde, and so returned to them with a skore or two of pioners. Three ventes had their caue yt
               
we wear wareof wherof he first stopt vp on, anoother he fild ful of strawe and set it a fyer, whearat they within caste water a pace, but it was so well maynteyned without that ye fyre preuailed, and thei fayn within, to get them belyke into anoother parler. Then deuised we (for I hapte to be with hym) to stop ye same vp, whearby we should eyther smoother them or fynde out their ventes if thei had any mo: as this was doō, at another issue aboute a .xii. skore of, wee moughte see the fume of our smoke to cum oute, the whiche continued with so great a force & so long a while that we could not but thinke they must nedes get them out or smoother within, and forasmuch as we found

not that they dyd the tone, we thought it for certain thei wear sure or the toother, wee had doō that wee came for, and so lefte them.
            ¶By this time our ships takynge manerly their leaue of Lyeth wyth a skore of shot or more, and as they came by, salutyng ye Scottes in their cāpe also with as many, cam & laye accordynge to appoyntmente. We had gone this day about a v. mile, & cāped towarde night nye a toune they call salte, Preston by ye Fryth. Here one Charletō, a man before time banisht out of England, & continuyng all the while in Scotlande, came in and submitted himselfe to my lordes grace, who took hym to mercie.
            
               
               Fryday ye .ix. of september.¶This dai is markt in ye kallender with the name of saincte Gorgon, no famous saint sure, but eyther so obscure that no man knowes him, or els so aunciente as euery man forgettes him. Yet wear it both pitee and blame that he shoulde lose hys estimacion amonge vs. And methinkes oute of that litle that I haue red, I coulde somewhat saye to bryng hym to lighte agayne, but then am in doubte, what to make of hym, a he saint a she sainte or a neuter (for we haue all in oure Kallendar.) Of the male and female sayntes, euery leafe thear showthe samples inowe. And as for the neuter, they or rather I wot vnmarked thē vnknowē, as sainct Christmas, s. Cādelmas, sainct

Easter, Sainct Whitsontide & swete sainct Sunday yt cums ones a weke. Touchynge my doubte nowe: If the day beare name in ye woorship & memorie of hym whome the preacher Horace doth mēcion in his first booke of sermons by these wordes Pastillos Rufillus olet,
               
                  Satyr. ii. Phorcꝰ king of ye Iles Corsica & Sardinia had foure daughters, Scylla, Medusa, Stenio & Euriale called Gorgons, of whome as Neptune had rauished Medusa Gorgon in ye temple of Pallas: This Goddes for displeasure of the fact chaū
                  ged al ye heare of her hed into snakes and adders, & gaue her a further gyft yt who so euer sawe her should be turned straighte into stone, Perseus coueityng to kil this monster borowed of Mercurie his wyngs and faulchion and strooke of her hed as she slepte & brought it wt hym, which Pallas dyd after set in her shelde & it had the same pour still after as it had whyle she lyued. 
               Gorgonius hircum. then may we be bold to beleue it was a he saīct, but yet a very sloouen saynt & belyke a nesty. If this name were Kallendred of Medusa Gorgon that had the heare of her hed tourned into adders, whome Perseus ouercame and kylde, as doctour Ouide declares in his .iiii. booke of chaunges Gorgonis anguicomae Perseus superator, then maye we be sure it was a she saynte. But yf

it wear in ye honour of Pallas shelde whearin thys Medusa Gorgōs hed was grauē, as Titus 
                  Stroz. pr̄. Aeolo .iiii.
                Stroza (a deuout doctour to, but of later daies) doth say, Gorgonis anguicomae caelatos aegide vultus, Pallas habet. Then was it neyther a he nor a she but a playne neuter saynte. And thus with ye aunciente authoritie of mere poeticall scriptures, my conscience is so confounded, as I wot not in the worlde what saynte to make of hym.
                  Iacob de voragine
                Iames of the synkhole (sauyng your reuerence) a trier forsooth that wrote the Legendaurie, telleth me a very preposterous order in good cookerie, of one 
                  Legend. autea cap. cxxviii.
                Gorgō & his fellow Dorotheus, that wear first sauced with vineger and salt, and

after ye then broiled on a girdyrō. But to be playn (as it is best for a man to be wt his frēdes) he hath farced hys boke so full of lyes, yt it is quite out of credite in al honest cōpany. And for my part, I am half a shamed to say yt I saw it, but synce it is sayd, & sumwhat to tell you what that I sawe,
                  
                     Thom. Cā
                        tuar. ca. xi. Lupus. ca. cxxiii.
                  
                  
                     Petr. exorcist. cap. lxxiiii.
                  
                  
                     Thaismere trix. cap. cxlvii.
                  
                he makes me Thomas the traytour, Lupus ye Lechour Peter the knaue (yf I may call a cōiurer so) & Thais the hoor all to be hye & holye sainctes in heauē, & yt wt such prodigal impudēcie & so shameles liyng as I may safely thinke he had eyther a Bul to make sainctes of diuels, or els a placarde to play the knaue as he list. But as for Gorgon, be he as he be may, yt makes no great matter, for he

shal haue my hart while he stō
               des in ye kallender, he hath bene euer so lucky. But what saynte so euer he bee, he is sure no Scottes mans frend, but a very angry sainte towarde them, for vpon hys daye .xxxiiii. yere paste, they had a greate ouerthrowe by vs at Floddom feld, and their kyng Iamy ye fourth slayn, and thearfore is this day not smally markt among them. To tell our aduentures that befell now vpon it, I thinke it very mete that fyrste I aduertise, how here as we lay, our campe and theirs wear eyther within the sight & viewe of oothers, & indistaūce (as I gest) a .ii. myle & litle more a sunder, we had the Fryth on the north, & this hil last remembred as I

sayd on the south (the west ende Whereof is called Fauxsyde Bray,Fauxsyde Bray. whereupon stādeth a sory castell and half a skore houses of lyke woorthines by yt.) And had westward before vs, the liyng in campe. A long this hill (beinge aboute a mile from vs) were they very bisy prankyng vp and doune all the motenyng, and fayne would haue bene a counsayll with the doinges of our campe. We agayne because their armie semed to sit to receyue vs, dyd diligentely prepare that we might soon go to them, and therefore kept our campe all that daye, my lordes grace and the counsaill sittyng in cōsultacion, ye captains & officers prouidyng their bandes, store of vitaile, & furniture of

weapon, for furtheraunce whearof our vessels of municiō and vitailes wear here all redy come to the shore. The Scottes continued their brauerie on the hill, the whiche we not being so well able to beare, made oute a band of light horsmē & a troop of dimilaunces to back thē: our men gat vp on the hill & therby of euen ground with ye enemye, rode straight towarde them wt good spede and order. Whome at ye first ye Scottes did boldly countenaunce & abyde, but after when their perceyued yt our men woulde nedes cum on, thei began to pricke and would fayn haue begon ear they had tolde their erraund: but our mē hasted so spedely after, that euē straight thei wear at their elbowes,

and did so stoutly then bestur them, that what in ye onset at the first and after in ye chase (which lasted a .iii. mile, wellny to as far as the furthest of their campe on ye southsyde) they had kylde of the Scottes within a iii. houres, abooue ye number of xiii.C. & takē ye master of Hume ye lord Humes sun and heyr .ii. prestes & vi. gentlemē: whearof one (I remēber) by syr Iaques Granado, and all vpon ye hyest & well me niest of ye hill toward them, within the full sight of their hole campe. Of oure syde agayne one spanish hakbutter hurt, and taken Sir Rafe Bullmer knyght, Thomas Gower Marshal of Berwyke, and Robart Crouch: all Captains

of seuerall bandes of our lighthorsmen, and men of right good coorage & approued seruice, & at this tyme distrest by their awne forwardnes, & not by the enemies force.
            ¶After this skirmish it was marueiled on their syde that we vsed so much crueltie, & douted on ours that wee had kylde so many. Their marueyle was aunswered that they had pict ye quarell first them selues, & shewed vs a presidente at paniarhough, wher of late yeres wtout any mercie, they slewe the lorde Euers & a greate cumpenie wt hym, & our dout was clered by the witnes of their oun selues, who confessed that thear wear ii. made out of their cāpe .xv.C horsmē for skirmish & .v.C. foot

men to lye close in ambush and be redy at nede, and of all these for certain, not .vii. hūdred to retourne home.
            After this skirmish also hard we,The lord Hume hurt. that the lorde hume him self for hast in this flight had a fall from his horse, and burst so the canell bone of his neck, that he was fayn to be caryed straight to Edenborowe, and was not a litle despayred of life.
            Then also my lordes grace, my lorde Lieutenaunte & other of the counsel, but with a small garde, vpō this Fauxsyd Bray where the slaughter (as I said) was made, aboute halfe a myle southeast from them, dyd take full viewe of their campe, whereof the tentes as I noted then, were deuided in to .iiii. seuerall

orders and rewes liynge east & west and a prikshot a sunder, & moustred not vnlyke (as thought me) vnto four great ridges of rype barly.The Scottes campe. The plot whear they lay so chosen for strength, as in all their cuntrey sum thought not a better: safe on the south by a greate marysh, and on the north by the Fryth, whiche syde also they fenced with .ii. felde peces and certeyn hakbuts a crok liynge vnder a turf wal: Edēborowe on ye west at their backes, & eastward betwene vs and them, strongly defended by the course of a Ryuer called Eske runnyng north in to the Fryth: whiche as yt was not very depe of water, so wear the bankes of it so hie and stepe after ye maner of ye Peaths

mencioned before in our mundais iourney, as a small sort of resistauntes might haue bene able to kepe doun a great number of cummers vp. Aboute a xii. skore of from ye Fryth, ouer the same Ryuer is thear a stone bridge whiche thei did kepe also, wel warded wt ordinaunce. Frō this hil of Fauxsyde Bray descended my lordes grace my lord Lieutenaunt and thoother along before their cāpe wtin les then ii. flightshottes into a lane or strete of a .xxx. foot brode, fenced on eyther syde wt a wall of turf an elle of height: whiche wey dyd lead straigth northwarde and nie to a church called saint Mighels of Undreske stondynge vpon a mean risyng hill sumwhat higher then the

site of their campe. Thus this viewed, they toke their returne directly homewarde to our tē
               tes, at whom in ye way ye Scottes did often shoot, but with al their shot and of all our cumpenie they kylde but one horse in ye midst of .iii. without ony hurt of the rider.
            
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               ¶ And as my lordes grace was passed well nie half ye way homeward, a Scottish herauld with a cote of hys princes armes vpō him (as the maner is) and with him a trumpetour did ouertake his grace, we thought vpon sum message and thearfore euery mā gaue them place to cum & saye their erraundes, which as I mought ges (partly by the aunswers as followe) wear these,The herauldes message. or to this effect. The

heraulde first, my lorde the Gouernor hath sēt me to your grace to enquere of prisoners takē, and thear with to say, that for ye pitee he hath of effusiō of Christen bloude, whiche by battaile must nedes be shed, and bicause your grace hath not doen much hurt in the cuntree, he is content ye shall returne as ye cam, and wil proffer your grace honest condicions of peace. And then the trumpetour:The trumpetours erraūd. My lord my Master the earle of Huntley, hath willed me to shewe your grace, yt bicause this matter may be ye sooner ended & wt les hurt, he wil fight with your grace for the hole quarell .xx. to xx.x. to .x. or els hymselfe alone with your grace man to man. My lordes grace hauyng kept

with him my lord Lieutenaunt had harde them both thrughly, and then in aunsweryng spake sumwhat wt lowder voice, thē they had doon their messages. whear vpon wee that wear the ryders by, thynkyng his grace woulde haue it no secret, wear sumwhat the bolder to cum the nigher. The woordes whearof (as semed me) wear vttred so expeditely with honour and so honourable with expedicion, as I was for my part much mooued then to dout, whyther I mought rather note in them, ye prōptnes of a singuler prudēce or ye animositee of a noble coorage. And thei wear thus, your goouernour may knowe,
                  My lordes graces aunswers.
                  To ye herauld
                that ye speciall cause of our cummyng hyther was not to fight, but for

the thynge that shoulde be the weale of both vs and you, for God we take to recorde, wee mynd no more hurt to ye Ream of Scotlande then we doo too the Ream of England, & thearfore our quarel beyng so good, we truste God will prosper vs the better. But as for peace, he hath refused such condicions at our handes as we will neuer proffer again, and thearfore let hym look for none, til this wey we make it.
            ¶And thou Trumpet,To the trumpetour. say to thy Master, he semeth to lak wit to make this challenge to me, beynge of suche estate by the sufferaunce of GOD as haue so weighty a charge of so precious a iewel, the goouernaunce of a kyngs parson, and

then ye protection of all his reames, whearby in this case I haue no powr of my self, which yf I had, as I am true gentleman it shoulde be the first Bargain I would make, but thear be a great sort here amonge vs his equals, to whom he mought haue made this challenge with out refusal, ꝙ my lord Lieutenaunt to them both, he sheweth his small wit to make challēge to my lords grace & he so mean, but yf his grace will geue me leaue I shall receiue it, & trumpet bryng me worde thy master wil so doo, and thou shalt haue of me a .C. crownes. Nay quod my lordes grace, the erle huntley is not mete in estate with you my lord. But heraulde, say to the gouernour and hym also

that we haue bene a good seasō in this cūtrey,Sober, is the proper terme whearby the Scottes doo signifie smal, litle, easy, or slender. and ar here now but wt a sobre cumpenie & they a greate number, & yf they will mete vs in felde they shalbe satisfied with fightynge ynough. And heraulde, bryng me worde they wil so doo & by my honour I will geue ye a thousand crounes. Ye haue a proude sorte amonge you, but I truste to see their pride abated shortly & of ye erle huntleys too, iwys his corage is knowē wel ynough but he is a glorious yoong gentleman. This sayd, my lord Lieutenaunt cōtinued his requestes yt he might receyue this challenge, but my lordes grace woulde in no wyse graunte too it, these messagers had their aunswers, and thear with leaue to depart.
            
               ¶ It is an auncient order in w
                  •
               t, inuiolably obserued, that ye herauldes & trumpetours at ony tyme vpon necessarie messages may freely pas too and fro betwene the enemies, without hurt or stay of ony, as priuileged with a certein immunitee & freedō of passage: Lykewise as duryng ye time of ony such message, hostilitee on both sydes should vtterly ceas. The Scottes notwithstōding, what mooued them I knowe not, but sumwhat bisyde the rules of Stans puer ad mensam, shot, iii. or .iiii. shot at vs in the midst of this message dooīg but as hap was wyde inough. On ye morowe after thei had their gunnes taken from them euery chone, & put into the hādes of them yt coulde

vse them more wt good maner.
            ¶It becummeth not me I wot, apertly to tax their goouernour wt ye note of dissimulaciō: for how euer he be our enemy, yet a mā of honorable esiat & woorthy (for ought I knowe) of the office he beares. Howbeit touchyng this message sent by the heraulde, to say as I thinke I am fully persuaded he neuer sent it either bicaus he thought it would be receyued by my lordes grace, whoos coorage of custume he knue to be suche that would neuer brook so much dishonour as to trauaile so far to returne in vain: or els yt he mēt ony sparing or pitee of vs whō ī his hart he had al redy deuoured. But only to shewe a colour of kindnes, by ye refusal whearof

he might firste in hys sighte the more iustely (as he shoulde lyst) vse extremitee against vs, and then vpō victorie triumph with more glorie. For asfor of victorie, he thought hymself no les sure, then he was sure he was willynge to fyght. That makes me in this case nowe to be so quite oute of doute, wear the causes whearof I was after so certeinly enformed. And they were, firste his respecte of our onely strength (as he thought) our horsmen, the which not so much vpon pollecie to make his men hardy agaynste vs, as for that he plainly so took it, he caused to be published in his hoste, that it was hooly but of very yoong men vnskilfull of the warres and easie to be delt

with al. And thē his regarde to ye number & place of our powr & his, ye whiche indede wear far vnequall. And hereto his assured hope of .xii. galleys and .l. ships that alweys he lookt for to be sent out of Fraūce to cum in at our backes. He with hys hoste made themselues hereby so sure of the matter, that in the night of this day, they fel aforehande to plaiynge at dyce for certeine of our noble men and Captains of fame. For asfor al the rest they thought quite to dispatch, and wear of nothinge so mooch afeard, as least we woulde haue made awey out of the cuntrey ear they and wee had met, brutyng among them, that our ships the day before remooued from before Lyeth,

but onely to take in our footmen and caryage, to the entent our horsmen then, wt more hast and its cumber might thence be able to hie them homeward: for the fear hearof also, appointed they this night to haue geuen vs a camisado in our cāpe as we lay, whearof euen then we hapt to haue an inkelyng, & thearfore late in ye night entrenched our cariages and waggē
               boorowe had good skout without and sure watch within, so that yf they had kept pointment (as what letted them I coulde not lerne) they shoulde neyther haue bene vnwelcummed nor vnlooked for. Ye, the great fear thei had of our hasty departure made them so hasty as ye next morowe (beyng ye day

of the battaile) so early to cum towarde vs out of their campe, agaynst whoom then though they sawe our horsmen redily to make, yet woold thei not thī
               ke, but that it was for a pollecie to stay them while our footmē and cariage might fully be stowed a shipboorde. Meruailousmen, thei woold not beleue thear wear ony bees in ye hyue, til thei cam out and stang them by the noses. They fared herein (yf I may cōpare great things to small & earnestie to game) like as I haue wyst a good fellowe ear this, that hath cum to a dycyng boord very hastely thrustyng, for fear least all shoold be doon ear he could begin, and hath soon bene shred of

al that euer he brought: but after, when he hath cū tro ye boord with his handes in his boosom & remembred thear was neuer a peny in his purse, he coulde quikly fynde, yt ye fondnes was not in tariynge to long but in cummyng to soon. We ar warned if we wear wise of these wit les brūtes by ye commune prouerbe that saith: It is better sit still, then ryse vp and fall. But bylyke they knowe it not. In ye night of this dai, my lords grace appoīted yt early in ye next morning part of our ordinaūce should be planted in the lane I spake of, vnder ye turf wall next to their campe: & sum also to be set vpō the hil nie to Undreske church afore remēbred: & these to thentent we should with our

shot caus them either hoolly to remooue their cāpe, or els much to anoy thē as thei lay. It was not ye least part of our meaning also, hereby to wyn from them certein of their ordinaunce that lay nerest this church.
            ¶No great breach of order I trust, though here I reherse ye thing, yt not til after I harde touchynge the trūpetours message from the earle Huntley. Which was (as I harde ye erle hym self say) that he neuer sent ye same to my lordes grace, but George Douglas in his name: and this by him deuised, not so specially for ony challēge sake, as for that the messager should mayntein by mouth his talke to my lordes grace, whyle his eye wear rolling to toote & prie

vpon the state of our campe, & whyther we wear pakkynge or no (as indede the fellowe had a very good coūtenaūce to make a spie.) But my lordes grace of custume not vsyng so redyly to admit ony kynde of enemie to cum so nie, had dispatched thē both with their aunswers (as I sayd) ear euer they cam within a mile of our campe. As I hapt soon after to reherse the excuse of the Earle and this drift of Douglas, a gentleman Skot that was prisoner and present, sware by the mis it was lyke inough for he kend George ful well, and sayd he was a mete man to pike whatels for oother men to fight for. To thentent I woolde shewe my good will to make all thyng as easy to the

sense of the reder as my knowledge coolde enstruct, and forasmuch as the assaylee spetially of our horsmen at the firste, their retyre agayn, and our last onset, pursuit, and slaughter of the enemies, can not all be shewed well in one plot: I haue deuised and drawen, accordynge to my cunnyng, three seuerall viewes of them, placed in their order as folowe in the battayle. Whearin ar also oother tounes and places remembred, such as that tyme I thought mete to marke, and as my memorie could since call to mynde. No fyne portrayture indede, nor yet ony exquisite obseruaūce of geometricall dimēsiō, but yet neither so grose nor far from the truth I trust,

but that thei may sarue for sumeas of vnderstandynge. But since the skantnes of roome wil not suffer me plainly & at lēgth to write thear euery places name, but thearfore am fayin in stede of a name to set vp a letter. The Reder must be cōtēt to learne his A.B.C. again, such as I haue thear deuised for the expoundyng of ye same viewes. Thei that list to learne, I trust in this point will not much stik with me, considerynge also that Ignoratis Terminis,
               
                  Aristot.
                
               ignoratur & ars. Yf thei know not my A.B. C. they cannot well knowe my matter: lyke as he that knowes not Raymūdes Alphabete shal neuer cum to the composicion of his quintessēce:
                  In practica testi sui. ca. ii.
                what he shal doo though, sum practicioners

doo dout. And mīding to interrupt ye proces of the battaile ye followeth with as fewe mean matters as I maye, I haue thought good, this hereto haue before written.
            ¶ This day morenyng sumwhat before .viii. of the clok,Saturday ye x. of septēber being ye daye of ye battaile. our campe dislodged, and our hoste marched straight toward the church of Undreske, aswell for entent to haue camped nie ye same, as for placyng our ordenaunce & oother consideraciōs afore remēbred. The Scottes, I knowe not whither more for fear of our departynge or hope of our spoylynge, wear out of their campe cummyng toward vs, passed the Ryuer, gathered in array, and wellny at thys church ear we wear halfe wey

to it. They had quite disapointed our purpose, and this at the first was so straunge in our eys, that we coold not deuyse what to make of their meaning. And so much the straunger, as it was quite bysyde our expectacion or dout, that they woold euer forsake their strength to mete vs in felde. But we after vnderstood, that they dyd not onely thus purpose to doo, but also to haue assayled vs in our campe as we lay, yf we had not bene sturryng the tymelyer. And to thentent at this tyme, that aswell none of their souldiours shoolde lurke behinde them in their campes, as also that none of their Captayns shoold be able to flee from their enterprise, they had first caused

all their tentes to be let flat doū to the ground ear thei cam out, & then al that had horses aswel nobles as oother (fewe except) that were not horsmen appointed, to leaue their horses behinde them, & march on with theyr souldiours afoot. We cam on spedily a both sydes, neither as thento ony whit ware of others entent: but ye Scots indede wt a rounder pace: Betwent the ii. Hillockes betwixt vs and the church, thei moustred sumwhat brim in our eyes, at whoom, as they stayed thear a while, our galley shot of and slewe the Master of Greym with a fiue & twenty nere by him, and thearwith so skarred the .iiii. thousand Irish archers brought by the erle of Arguile, that whear

(as it was sayd) they shoulde haue bene a wyng to the forewarde, thei coold neuer after be made to cum forwarde. Hereupon dyd their armie hastely remooue & from thence declyning southwarde, took their direct wey towarde Fauxsyde Bray: Of this, sir Rafe Uane Lieutenaunt of all our horsmen (as I thinke of al mē he first did note it) quickly aduertised my lord: whoos grace thearby did redily conceiue much of their meaning: which was to wyn of vs ye hill, & thearby the wynde and ye sun yf it had shyned, as it did not (for the weather was cloudy & lowrīg) The gain of which iii. thynges whyther party, in fight of battaile can hap to obtein, hath his force doubled against

his enemie. In all this enterprise, thei vsed for hafte so lytle the help of horse, that they pluct foorth their ordinaūce by draught of men, whiche at this tyme begā freely to shoot of toward vs: whearby we wear further warned they mēt more thē a skirmish. Here wt began euery man to be smittē with ye care of his office & chardge, & thearupō accordyngly to applie him about it: Hearwith began still ridyng too & fro, herewith a generall rumor & buzzing amoōg ye souldiours, not vnlyke ye nois of ye sea beyng harde a far of: & herewith my lordes grace & the coūsel on horsbak as thei wear, fell straight in consultacion. The sharpnes of whoos circū
               spect wysedomes, as it quyckly

spyed out the enemies entntes, so did it amoong other thinges prōptly prouide thearin to preuent them, (as nedefull it was, for the tyme askt no leasure.) Their deuise was this, that my lorde Gray with his bande of Bulleners & with my lord Protectours bāde & my Lord Lieutenauntes, al to ye number of an xviii.C. horsmē on ye east half: & sir Ra
                  •
               e Uane wt sir Thomas Darey captain of ye pencioners & men of armes & my lord Fitzwaters wt his bāde of dimilaū
               ces, all to ye nūber also of a .xvi.C. to be redy & euē wt my lorde Marshal on ye west half, & thus all these toogether afore to encoūter ye enemies a frūt, whearby either to break their array, & yt wey weakē their powr by disorder,

or at ye lest to stop them of their gate, & force them to stay while our forewarde might hoolly haue ye hilles syde, & our battaile and Rerewarde be placed in groundes next that in order and best for aduauntage. And after this then; that ye same our horsmen shoolde retyre vp the hilles syde to cum doun in order a fresh and infest them on both their sydes, whiles our battayles should occupie them in fight a frunt. The pollecie of this deuise for the state of ye case, as it was to al yt knue of it generally allowed to be ye best ye coold be, euen so also takē to be of no small daūger for my lord Marshall, sir Rafe Uane & oother ye assaylers, the which neuertheles I knowe not whither

more nobly and wisely deuised of ye counsell, or more valiaūtly and willingly executed of them for euen thear wt good coorage takyng theyr leaues of ye counsel, my lord Marshal requyrīg onely, that yf it went not well wt him, my lordes grace would be good to his wyfe and chyldrē, he said he would mete these Scottes: and so with their bandes these Captayns took theyr wey towarde the enemie. By this, wear our forewarde and theyrs within a .ii. flightshot a sunder: The Scottes hasted with so fast a pace, that it was thought of the most parte of vs, they wear rather horsmen then footmen. Our men again wear led ye more wt spede. The Master of the ordinaunce

to our great aduaūtage pluct vp the hill then certeyn peces, and soon after planted .ii. or .iii canons of them, well nie vpon the top thear, whearby hauing so much the helpe of the hill, he might ouer oure mens heddes shoot nyest at the enemie. As my lordes grace had so circū
               spectly takē order for the array and station of the armie, & for thexecuciō of euery mās office beside: Euē as it is metest that hed to be highest, that shoolde wel look about for ye safegarde of all the other membres and partes of the body, so did his grace (first perfitly appointed in fayre harneys) accompanied with no mo (as I noted) then with Syr Thomas Chaloner knight, one of the Clerkes of

the kynges Maiesties priuie coūsaill) take hys way toward the heyth of the hyll to tary by the ordinaunce, whearas he mought both best suruey vs al and succour with ayde whear most he sawe nede, and also by hys presence be a defence to the thing yt stood weakest in place and most in daūger, the which thearby how much it did stede, anon shall I shewe. As hys grace was halt vp the hill (my lord Leiutenaūt as it chaūced by hym) he was ware the enemies were all at a sodeyn stay and stood still a good while. The sighte and cause hereof was marueyllous too vs all, but understādable of none, my Lordes grace thought (as in dede the most lykely was) that

the men had muche ouer shotte themselues and woolde fayne haue bene home again, & herewith sayd to this effect: These men surely wil cum no further, it wear mete to cast whear we shoolde campe, for peyn of my lyfe they will neuer fight. It had bene hardely, I wot not howe bad, but I am sure no good deuise for our pour to haue forsaken their groūde to assaile them whearthey stood, so far from the hill, that we had wellnie wunne so hardly, and shoold kepe to so much aduaū
               tage. And in warfare allways, tymely prouision is counted great pollecie. Hereto his grace was sure that wee wear able, better and longer to kepe our hyll, then they their playne.

Asfor fighting now, it mought be more then likely to who that cōsidered it, their courage was quite quayled, & thearfore had no will to cum ony further, but woold haue bene glad to haue bene whence they cam. Firste, because at that time, besyde the ful mouster of our foot men, of whoome they thought we had had none thear, but all to haue ben eyther shipt or a shipping: then they sawe playne that we wear sure to haue the gain of ye hil, and they the ground of disaduauntage, out of their holde & put fro their hope. And hereto, for that their Herauld gaue my lordes grace no warning ye whiche by him (if they had mēt to fight it out) whoo woold not haue presumed, that for the estimacion

of their honour, they woold little stuck to haue sent, and he againe and it had bene but for his thousande Crounes woold haue bene right glad to haue brought? These be the cō
               sideracions that both then and since did persuade me, my lordes grace had good cause too say thei woold not fight. Howbeit, hereunto if I wist & disclosed but half as muche now, as (I am sure) of circumspeccion his grace knue then, I doo not dout, but I were able sufficiētly to prooue, he might well be no les certeyn of yt he had sayd, then ony man might bee of an vndoon dede: the which neuertheles how true it was, ye proof of the matter soon after did declare, which was, that ye Scottes

ran quite their way, & wold neuer tary stroke wt oure footmen, whear the fight on bothe sydes shold haue bene shewed. Notwithstondyng by thys tyme consyderyng bylyke ye state they stood in, that as they had left their strength to soon, soo now to be to late to repent, vpō a chaunge of countenaūce thei made hastely toward vs agaī, I knowe not (to sai truth) whither more stoutly of courage or more strongely of order, me thoughte then I mighte noote bothe in their marche. But what after I lerned,The maner of the Scottish order in Battaile. specially touchyng their order, their armour and their maner of fight aswell in goynge to offende as in standing to defende, I haue thought necessarie here to vtter. Hakbutters haue they few

or none, & appoint theyr fight most commonly alwais a foot. They cum to the felde wel furnished all with Iak and skull, dagger, buckler, and swoordes all notably brode and thin, of excedinge good temper & vniuersally so made to slyce, that as I neuer sawe none so good, so think I it harde to deuyse ye better: hereto euery mā hys pyke, & a great kercher wrapped twyse or thrise about his neck, not for colde but for cuttīg. In their aray toward ye ioining wt ye enemie, they cling & thrust so nere in ye foreranke shoulder to shoulder together, wyth their pykes in bothe handes strayght afore them and their followers in that order soo harde at their backes, laiynge their pykes ouer theyr fooregoers

shoulders, that if they doo assaile vndisseuered, no force can well withstond thē. Standing at defēce, they thrust shoulders lykewise so nie together ye forerākes wel nie to kneling stoop lowe before for their fellowes behynde, holdynge their pykes in both handes, and thearwith in their left their bucklers, the one ende of the pyke agaynste their right foot▪ thother agaīst the enemie brest hye, their followers crossing theyr pyke pointes with theim forewarde, and thus each with other so nye as place & space wil suffer, thrugh the hole warde so thick, that as easly shall a bare fynger perce thrugh the skyn of an angrie hedgehog, as ony encoūter the frunt of their pykes. My lord

Marshall, notwithstondynge, whoom no daunger detracted from dooing his enterprise, wt the cumpanie and order afore appointed, cam full in their faces from ye hilles syde towarde them. Herewith waxt it very hot on both sydes,The countenaunce of warre. with piteful cryes, horrible rore and terrible thunderinge of gunnes besyde, the day darkened abooue hed with smoke of shot, ye sight and apparaunce of the enemye euen at hand before, the daūger of death on euery syde els, the bullettes, pellettes & arrowes fliyng each whear so thik, and so vncerteinly lightynge, that no whear was thear ony suerty of safety, euery man strooken with a dreadfull fear, not soo muche perchaunce of death as

of hurt, which thinges, though they wear but certeyn to sum, yet douted of all, assured crueltie at the enemies hādes without hope of mercy, death to flye and daūger to fyght. The hole face of the felde on bothe sydes vpō this point of ioining both to the eye and to the ear, so heauy, so deadly, lamentable, furious, outragious, terribly confuse, & so quite against ye quiet nature of man: as if to our nobilite the regard of their honor and fame, to the knightes & Capitaines, the estimaciō of their wurship and honestie: and generally to vs all, the naturall motion of bounden duetie, our oun safetie, hope of victorie, & the fauour of God that we trusted we had for ye equite of our

quarel, had not bene a more vē
               hemēt cause of courage, then ye daūger of death was cause of feare, ye very horrour of ye thing had ben able to make ony mā to forget both prowes & pollecie. But my lord Marshal & the other, with present mynde & courage waerely and quikly continued their coorse towarde thē. And my lordes grace then at his place by thordinaūce aloft. The enemies were in a fallowe felde, wherof the furrowes lay sydelyng towarde our men, by the syde of thesame furrowes, next vs and a stones cast from them, was thear a crosdich or slough, which our mē must nedes pas to cum to thē, whearin many that could not leap ouer stack fast, to no small daunger of theim selues and sum disorder

of their fellowes. The enemies perceiuing our men faste approche, disposed themselues to abyde the brunt, and in this order stood still to receyue thē. The erle of Anguish next vs in their forewarde, as Capitayn of the same with an .viii.M. & iiii. or .v. peces of ordinaunce on hys right syde, and a .iiii.C horsemen on hys lefte: Behind him sumwhat Westwarde, the gouernour with a .x.M. inlōd men (as they call them) ye choysest men counted of their cōtre. And the erle Huntley in the rerewarde, wellnie euen with the battaile on the left syde, wt .viii M. also. The .iiii.m. Irish Archers as a wyng to them both, last indede in order, & first (as they sayd) that rā a way. These

battaile & rereward wear warded also with their ordinaunce accordinge. Edward Shelley Lieutenaunt vnder my lorde Gray of hys bande of Bulleners, was the first on our syde that was ouer this slough, my lord Gray next, and so then after two or thre rākes of the former bandes. But badly yet, coolde they make their race, by reason the furrowes laye trauers to their course. That, notwithstondynge, and thoughe also thei wear nothynge likely well to bee able thus a frunt to cum within them to hurt them, aswell, because the Scottishmens pykes wear as longe or lēger then their staues, as also for that their horses wear all naked without barbes, wherof
            
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           ¶The exposiciō of ye letters of this table.
                           
                              A. Signifieth the place we camped in before the battaile.
                           
                              B. Our rerewarde.
                           
                              C. Our battaile.
                           
                              D. Our forewarde.
                           
                              E. The square close.
                           
                              F. The foot of the hylles syde.
                           
                              G. My lorde Protectours grace.
                           
                              H. The master of the ordinaunce.
                           
                              I. Our horsmen.
                           
                              K. The slough.
                           
                              L. The lane and the .ii. turf walles.
                           
                              M. Their forewarde & horsmē by ye same.
                           
                              N. Their battaile.
                           
                              O. Their rerewarde.
                           
                              PP. The .ii. hillockes before the church.
                           
                              Q. Saint Mighels of vndreske.
                           
                              R. Muskelborowe.
                           
                              S. Their horsmen at the ende of fauxside Bray.
                           
                              TTTT. Their rewes of tentes.
                           
                              V. The turf wall toward the frith.
                           
                              VV. Our cariages.
                           
                              X. the marish.
                           
                              Y. Our galley.
                           
                              Z. Edinborow castell.
                        
                        
                           ¶The significaciō of certein other notes.
                           
                              
                                 〈☐〉
                               Signifieth a footman.
                           
                              
                                 〈☐〉
                               A horsman.
                           
                              
                                 〈☐〉
                               A hakbutter a foot.
                           
                              
                                 〈☐〉
                               A hakbutter on horsback.
                           
                              
                                 〈☐〉
                               An archer.
                           
                              
                                 〈☐〉
                               A footman slayn.
                           
                              
                                 〈☐〉
                               A horsman slayn.
                           
                              
                                 〈☐〉
                               The fallowe felde, whearon their armye stode.
                        
                        
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
though thear wear right many among vs, yet not one put on, forasmuch as at our cumming foorth in the mornīg, we loked for nothing les then for battail that daye, yet did my lorde and Shelley with ye residue, so valiauntly and strongly gyue the charge vpō them, that whither it wear by theyr prowes or power, the left side of the enemies that his lordship did set vpon (though their order remayned vnbroken) was yet compelled to swey a good wey bak & gyue ground largely, and all the residue of them besyde, to stonde much amased. Before this, as our men wear well nie at them, they stood very braue & bragging shaking their pyke pointes, criyng, cum here loundes,

cum here tykes, cum here heretykes, & suche lyke (as hardely they are fayre mouthed men) Thoughe they ment but small humanite▪ yet shewed thei hereby much ciuilite, both of fayre play to warne ear thei strook, & of formall order to chyde ear they fought.
            Our Captains that wear behinde, perceyuinge at eye that both by the vnevinnes of the grounde, by the sturdy order of the enemie, and for that their fellowes wear so nie & straight before them, they were not able to ony aduaūtage to mainteine this onset, did thearfore, according to the deuise in yt point appointed, turne themselues & made a soft retyre vp towarde the hyll agayne. Howbeit, too
            
               
               
                  
                     
                        Thys secunde Table sheweth the placinge of our footmen, the slaughter of Edwarde Shelley and the oother. the Retyre of oure bande of horsemen vp to the hil, and the breach of array of the straglers from thē. But touchyng the exposicion of the notes and letters, I refer the reder to the Table before.
                        
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
confes the truth, sum of the nū
               ber that knue not the prepēsed pollecie of the counsaill in this case: made of a sober aduised retyre, an hasty temerarious flyght. Sound to ony mans ear as it may, I shal neuer admit for ony affection towarde coūtree or kyn, to be so partial, as wil wittingly, either bolster the falshod or bery the truthe, for honor in myn opiniō ye way gotten wear vnworthely wun and a very vyle gain: howbeit hereby I cānot count ony lost, whear but a fewe leude souldiours ran rashely out of array without standard or Captayn vpon no cause of nede, but of a mere vndiscretion & madnes: A madnes in dede, for fyrste the scottes were not able to pursue

because they wear footmen, & thē if they coold, what hope by flight, so far from home in their enemies londe, whear no place of refuge?
            ¶My lord Marshal, Edward Shelley, litle Prestō, Brampton and Gerningham, Bulleners, Ratclyf, the lord Fitzwaters brother, Syr Ihon Cleres son & heyr, Digges of kēt, Ellerker a pēcioner Segraue. Of my lorde Protectours bād my lorde Edward, hys graces sonne, Captain of ye same bāde, Stāley, Woodhous, Coonisby, Horgill, Morris Dennys, Arthur and Atkinson, with other in the forerāke, not being able in this earnst assault, both to tende to their fight afore, & to ye retyre behynde: ye Scottes

again, wel considering hereby how weak thei remayned, caught courage a fresh, rā sharply forward vpon them, and without ony mercy slewe euery man of our men that abode furthest in prece: a .vi. mo (of Bulleners and other) then I haue here named, in all to the number of a xxvi. and most part gentlemē. My lord Grey, yet and my lord Edward (as sum grace was) returned agayne, but neyther all in safetie nor without euident markes they had bene thear: for the one with a pyke thrugh the mouth was raced a longe from the tip of the tunge, and thrust that way very daungerously more then twoo inches wythin the neck, and my lorde

Edwarde had hys horse vnder hym with swoordes wounded sore, and I thīke to death. Lyke as also a litle before this onset, Syr Thomas Darcy vpon hys approch to the enemies, was strooken glauncing wyse on the ryght syde, with a bullet of one of their felde peces, and thearby his body broosed wyth the boowynge in of hys harneys, hys swoord hiltes broken, & the forefynger of his right hāde beatē flat. Euen so vppon the partynge of thys fray, was Syr Arthur Darcy slasht at with swoordes, and so hurt vppon the weddyng fynger of hys righte hande also, as it was counted for the fyrst parte of medecine, too haue it quite cut awaye.
            
               About the same time, certein of the Scottes ran out hastely to ye kynges Maiesties standerde of the horsmen, (the whiche syr Androwe Flammak bare) and laiyng fast holde vpon the staf thearof, cryed a kyng a kynge. That if both his strength, hys hart and hys horse had not ben good, and hereto, sumwhat ayded at this pinch by sir Raulph Coppinger a pencioner: bothe he had bene slain, and the standerd lost, whiche the Scottes neuertheles hilde so fast, yt they brake and bare away ye nether ende of the staff to the burrel, & intended so much to the gayne of the stāderd, that syr Androw (as hap was) skaped home all safe, and els without hurt. At this bysines also, was my lord

Fitzwaters Captain of a number of dimilaunces, vnhorste, but soone mounted againe, skaped yet in great daunger, and hys horse al he wē: Hereat further wear Cauarley the standard bearer of the men of armes, and Clemēt Paston a pē
               cioner, thrust eche of them into the leg with pykes: and Don Philip a Spaniard, in ye knee: diuers other mayned and hurt and many horses sore woūded besyde.
            ¶By this tyme had our forewarde, accordingly gotten the full vaūtage of the hilles side, and in respect of their march, stood sydeling toward the enemie: Who neuertheles wear not able in all partes to stonde full square in array, by reason

that at the West ende of theim vpon their right hand, and toward the enemie, thear was a square plot enclosed with turfe (as their maner of fencynge in thoose partes is) one corner whearof, did let the square of the same arraye. Our battaile in good order next theim, but so as in continaunce of array, the former parte thearof stood vpon the hilles syde, the tayle vpon the playn. And the rerewarde hoolly vppon the playn. So that by the placing and countenaunce of oure armye in this wyse, wee shewed ourselues in a maner to cumpas them in, that they shoolde no way skape vs: the whiche, by our poure and number we wear as well able to doo, as a

spynners webbe to catche a swarme of bees. Howebeit for hart and courage we ment too mete wyth them, had they bene as many mo. These vndiscrete gadlinges, that so fondly brake array from the horsmen in the retyre (as I sayde) ran so hastely thrughe the orders and rankes of our forewarde as it stood, that it did both ther disorder many, feared many, & was great encouraging to the enemie. My lorde Lieutenaūt, who had the gyding of our forewarde right valiauntly had conducted the same to their stō
               dynge, and thear did very nobly encourage & comfort thē. Bidding them plucke vp their hartes, & shew thēselfes mē, for thear was no cause of fear: asfor

victorie, it was in their oun handes if they did abyde by it, & he himself euen thear woold lyue and dye amōg them. And surely, as hys wurthines allwayes right well deserueth, so was hys honour at that tyme, accordingly furnished wt wurthy Captains. First syr Ihon Lutterel, who had the leading of a .iii.C. of hys lordships mē that wear the formost of thys forewarde, all with harneys & weapon, and in all pointes els so well trimmed for war, that lyke as at that tyme I coulde well note my lordes great cost and honour, for that their choyse and perfect appointment and furniture: so did I then also cō
               sider syr Ihon Luttrels proowes and wisedom for their valiaunt

conductiō and exact obseruaunce of order, whom (knowynge as I knowe) for his witmanhod, good qualitees & aptnes to all gentle feates besyde, I haue good cause to counte both a good Captaī a warfare in feld, and a wurthy courtyar in peace at home.I mean suche a one as Cōte Balthazar the Italian in his boke of Courtyar doth frame. Then, in the same forwarde, Syr Morrice Dēnis, another Captain, who wysely first exhortyng his men to play the mē, shewing thearby the assuraunce of victorie: & then to the entent they shoolde be sure, he woold neuer shrīke from theim, he did with no les wurship then valiaunce, in the hottest of this bysines alight amōg them, and put hys horse from hym. But if I shoold (as cause I confesse thear wear

inough) make here ony stay in hys commendacion thearfore, or of the forwarde courage of Syr George Hawarde, whoo bere the Kynges Maiesties standarde in the battaile: or of the circumspect diligence of syr William Pykering, and Syr Rychard Wingfeld, Sargeaū
               tes of the band to the foreward or of the prōpt forwardnes of Syr Charles Brādō, another Captain ther, or of ye peinful industrie of syr Iames Wilford, Prouost Marshal, who placed himselfe wt the formost of thys forewarde, or of the good order in march of syr Hugh Willoughby, and William Dēnis esquyer captaīs both, or of ye present hart of Ihon Chaloner a Captain also in ye battail, or of honest respect of Edward Chā
               berlayn,

gētlemā harbynger of ye armie, who willingly as then came in order wt the same foreward. Or of right many other in both these battailes (for I was not nie ye rereward) whose behauours & wurthynes wear at ye tyme notable in myne eye, (although I neither knue then al of thē I saw, nor coold not since remēber of thē I knue) I mought wel be in dout, it shold be to much an intricaciō to the matter to great a tediousnes to ye reder. And therfore to say on: The Scottes wear sūwhat disordred wt their cūminge out about ye slaughter of our men: ye which thei did so earnestly then entēd, thei toke not one to mercie: but more thei wear amased at this aduētorous & hardy onset.

My lordes grace, hauing before this for the causes aforesayde, placed himselfe on thys Fauxsyde Bray: and thearby quikly, perceyuynge the great disorder of these stragling horsmen: hemd them in frō further straiyng, whom syr Rafe Uane soon after with great dexterite brought in good order and array agayn. And thearwith the rest of our strengths by ye pollecie of my lordes grace, and diligence of euery Captain and officer bysyde, wear so oportunely and aptly applyed in their feat, that whear this repulse of the enemie, & retyre of vs was douted of many to turne to the daunger of our los: ye same was wrought and aduaunced (accordynge as it was deuysed) to

our certeinte of gayn and victorie. For first at this sloughe whear most of our horsmē had stond, syr Peter Mewtus Captain of all ye hakbutters a foot, did very valiauntly conduct & place a good number of hys men, in a maner harde at the faces of the enemies. Wherunto Syr Peter Gamboa a Spanyard, Captain of a .ii.C. hakbutters on horsback did redily bring his mē also, whoo with ye hot cōtinuaūce of their shot on both partes did so stoutly stay the enemies, that thei could not well cum forther forward: then our archers that marched in array on the right hande of oure footmen, & next to the ennemie prict them sharply wt arrowes as they stoode. Thearwith the
            
               
               
                  
                     
                        Thys thyrde Table sheweth the cummyng into array of oure horsmen vpon the hil agayn, the placinge of the Hakbutters against the enemie, the shotyng of our archers, and then the cummyng doune of our horsmen after about the chase and slaughter of the enemie.
                        
                           M. Signifie the pykes and weepons let N. fall by the Scottes in the place they O. stode in. As for the oother characters & notes, I referr the reder agayne to the first Table.
                        
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
Master of the ordinaunce to their great anoyaunce did gall them with hailshot & other out of the great ordinaūce directly from the hil top, and certeyn other gunners with their peces, a flanke from our Rerewarde, most of our artillerie & missiue engins, then holy thus at ones with great puissance & vehemē
               cie occupied about thē: Herewith, the full sight of our footmen all shadowed from theim before by oure horsmen & dust reysed, whoom then they wear ware in such order to be so nere vpō them. And to this the perfet array of our horsmen again cummīg cooragiously to set on them afresh. Miserable mē, perceyuyng themselues then al to late, howe muche to much, they

weare misenformed, began sodeinly to shrinke. Their gouernour that brought thē firste to ye bargain, lyke a doughty Capitain, took hastely hys horse, that he might run foremost away. Indede it stood sumwhat with reason that he should make first homewarde that fyrste made outwarde, but (as sum of them sayde) skant with honour & with shame inough. The erle of Anguish, & other chefe Capitains, did quickly followe as their gouernour led: And with the formoste their Irishmen. Thearwith then turned all the hole rout, kest doun their weapons, ran out of their wardes, of with their iackes, & with all that euer they might, betooke them to the race yt their gouernour

began. Oure men had foūd them at the first (as what could escape so many thousand eyes?) and sharply and quikly with an vniuersall outcrie, thei flye they flye, pursued after in chase amam: and thearto so eagerly, and with suche fiersnes, that they ouertooke many, and spared indede but fewe, (as it mought then hardly haue bene both folie & parell to haue shewed ony pitee) But when they wear ones turned, it was a wō
               der to see how soō & in how sundry sortes they wear skattered: The place they stood on, like a wood of staues strewed on the ground as rushes in a chāber, vnpassable (thei lay so thik) for eyther horse or mā: Here at the first had thei let fal al their pykes.

After that euery whear skatred swordes, buklers, daggers, iackes, and all thing els that eyther was of ony weyght or mighte be ony let too their course, which course amōg thē, three weys specially thei made, sum along the sandes by the Fryth toward Lyeth, sū straight toward Edinborow, whearof parte throughe the parke thear (in the walles whearof, though they be rounde about of flynte stone, yet wear thear many holes al redy made) and parte of them by the hye waye that leades alonge by holly rood Abbey. And the residue, & (as we noted then) the moste of them toward Dakyth, whiche wey by meanes of the marish,

our horsmen wear woorst able to followe. Sundry shyftes sum shrewd sū, sory, made they in their running, diuers of thē in their courses, as they wear ware they wear pursued but of one, would sodenly start back & lashe at ye legges of the horse or foyne him in ye belly, & sumtyme did they reach at the rider also: wherby Clemēt Pastō in the arme and diuers other otherwyse in thys chase weare hurt. Sum other lay flat in a furrowe as though they wear dead, therby past by of our mē vntouched, as I harde say the Erle of Anguishe confessed he couched till hys hors hapt to be brought hym. Oother sum, to stay in the Ryuer cowringe doun hys body, hys hed vnder the

rote of a Willowe tree with skant hys nose abooue water for breath: A shift, but no succour it was too many that had their skulles on, at the stroke of the follower too shrinke wt their heddes into their shulders lyke a tortuis into hys shell: Oothers again for their more lightnes, cast awai shoos and doblettes and ran in their shirtes: And sum also seen in in this race all breathles to fal flat doun, and haue run themselues to death.
            ¶Before thys, at the tyme of our onset cam thear Eastward a .v.C. of their horsmen vp a longe thys Fauxsyde Bray strayght vpon our ordinaunce and cariage. My lordes grace (as I sayde) most specially for

the dout of the same placynge hymself thearby, caused a pece or two to be turned towarde them with a few shottes whearof, they wear soon turned also and fled to Dakyth. But had they kept on, they wear prouided for accordingly, for one parson Keble, a chaplain of hys graces, and two or thre oother, by and by discharged foure or fyue of the cartes of municion, and thearwith bestowed pykes, billes, bowes, and arrowes, to as many as came, soo that of carters and other thear wear soon weaponed thear about a thousand, whoom parson Keble and the oother dyd very handsomly dispose in array, and made a prety mouster. To returne nowe, Soon after

thys notable strewyng of theyr footmens weapons, beganne a pitefull sight of the dead corpses, liyng disparsed abrode, sum their legges of, sum but hought, and left liynge half dead, sum thrust quite thrughe ye body, oothers the armes cut of, diuers their neckes half a sunder, many their heddes clouen, of sundry the braynes pasht out, sum others agaī their heddes quite of, wt other .M. kyndes of kyllīg. After yt & further in chase, al for ye most part kylled either in the hed or in ye nek for our horsmē coolde not well reach thē lower wt their swoordes. And thus wt blod & slaughter of ye enemie, this chase was continued .v. miles in length westward, frō the place of their

standynge, whiche was in the fallow feldes of Undreske, vntill Edinborowe parke, & well nye to the gates of the toune it self, and vnto Lyeth. And in breadth nie .iiii. myle, from the Fryth sandes vp towarde Daketh Southwarde. In all, whiche space the dead bodyes lay as thik as a man may note cattell grasing in a full replenished pasture. The Ryuer ran al red with blood, soo that in the same chase wear counted aswell by sum of our men, that sumwhat diligently did marke it, as by sum of them takē prisoners that very muche did lament it, to haue bene slayn abooue .xiiii. thousande. In all thys cumpas of grounde, what with weapons, armes,

handes, legges, heddes, blood, and dead bodyes, their flight mought haue easly bene tracted to euery of theyr .iii. refuges. And for the smallnes of our number, and shortnes of the tyme (whiche was skant .v. houres, from one till wellnie vi.) the mortalite was so great, as it was thought, the lyke afore time not to haue bene sene. Indede it was the better maynteyned with theyr oun swoordes that lay each whear skattred by the waye, whearof our men as they had broke one, stil tooke vp another, thear was store inough, and they layd it on freely, that righte many among theim, at thys bysynes brake thre or foure ear they returned homeward to ye armye.

I may well perchaunce confes that herein we vsed sum sharpnes (although not asmuche as we mought) and little curtesie, and yet I can safely avowe, all doon by vs, as rather by sundry respectes dryuen and compeld, then eyther of crueltie or of delight in slaughter. And lyke (sumwaye) to the diligent Master that sharpely sumtime (when warnynge will not serue) dooth beat hys scholler, not hardely for hate of the chylde, or hys oune delyghte in beatynge, but for looue he woolde haue hym amende hys fautes or negligence, and beates hym ones surely, because he woolde nede to beat hym no more. One cause of the correction

we vsed, I maye well count to be their tyrannous vowe they made (which we certeinly hard or) that whensoeuer they fought and ouercam, they woolde liea so many, and spare so fewe: a sure proof wherof thei plainly had shewed at our onset before, whear they kylde all and saued not a man.
            Another respecte was, to reuenge their great and cruel tyranny shewed at Panyar hough (as I haue before sayde) whear they slewe the Lorde Euers (whome otherwyse they mought haue taken prisoner and saued) and cruelly kylde as many els of oure men as came into theyr handes. We wear forced yet hereto by a

further & very earnest regarde, whiche was the dout of assemble of their armie again, whearof a cantell (for the number) had bene able to compare with our hole hoste, when it was at the greatest: and so perchaunce we shoulde haue bene driuen with dooble labour to beat thē again, and make two woorkes of one: whearas we well remē
               bred, that a thynge ones well doon is twyse doon. To these, anoother and not the meanest matter was,The name of lorde▪ ye Scottes take in lyke signification of speche as we do. But a larde with theim (I take it) is as a squyer wyth vs, A lound is a name of reproch as a villain or suche lyke. their armour among theim so little differing, and their apparail so base and beggerly, whearin the Lurdein was in a maner all one wyth the Lorde, and the Lounde wyth the Larde: all clad a lyke in iackes coouerd wyth whyte

with whyte leather, dooblettes of ye same or of fustian, and most commonly al white hosen. Not one wt either cheine, broochryng, or garment of silke that I coold see, onles cheynes of latten drawen four or fyue tymes along ye thighs of their hosen and dooblet sleues for cuttyng: and of ye sort I sawe many. This vilenes of port, was the caus that so many of their great men and gentlemen wear kyld & so fewe saued. The outwarde sheaw, the semblaunce & sign, whearby a starūger might discern a villain from a gentleman was not amoong them to be seen: As for woordes & goodly proffer of great raundsums, wear as commō and ryfe in the

mouths of the tone as in the toother. And thearfore hereby it cam to pas that after, at the examinacion and countyng of the prisoners, we sound taken aboue twenty of their villayns to one of their gentlemen: whoō no man nede to dout, we had rather haue spared then the villayns, yf we coold haue knowen ony difference betwene thē in takyng: And yet notwithstonding all these our iust causes and quarels to kyll them, we shewed more grace & tooke mo to mercy, then the case on our syde for the causes aforesayd did well deserue or require: for bysyde the Erle Huntley, who in good harneys appointed lykest a gentleman of

ony of them that I coold hereof or see, (but coold not then eskape bicaus he lact his horse and thearfore hapt to be taken by Sir Rafe Uane) and bysyde the Lorde of Yester, Hobby Hambleton Captayn of Dunbar. The Master of Sāpoole. The Larde of Wimmes taken by Iohn Bren. A broother of ye erle of Cassils. And bysyde one Moutrell taken by Cornelius Cōtroller of the ordinaunce in this armie. And bisyde one of ye Camals an Irish gentlemā takē by Edward Chamberlain, & bysyde many oother Skottish gētlemē mo,A kynsmā bylyke of ye erle or Arguiles whoos proper sur name is Lamall, lyke as the erle of Anguishes is Douglas, & ye erle Huntleys Gordon. A Scottish heraulde was also takē, but here not placed, bicaus my lordes grace caused hī foorth with free y to be releaced home wtout raūdsō or los whoos names & takers I wel remēber not. The prisoners accōted by ye Marshals book wear numbred to abooue

xv. Touching ye slaughter, sure we kyld nothynge so many, as (if we had mynded crueltie so much) for the tyme and oportunitee right well we mought: for my lords grace of his woonted mercy mooch mooued wt ye pitee of this sight: and rather glad of victorie then desyrous of crueltie, soon after (by ges) v. of the clok, stayed his standerd of his horsmen at the furthest part of their campe westward, and caused the trumpettes to blowe a retreat. Whearat also sir Rafe sadleyr treasurer (whoos great diligēce at yt time, and redy forwardenes in ye chefest of ye fray before, did woorthely merit no small commendacion) caused al the footmen to stay, and then wt
               
much trauaile and great peyn made them to be brought in sū order agayn: It was a thyng yet not easly to be doon, by reason they all as then sumwhat bisyly applied their market, the spoile of this Scottish campe. Whearin wear foūd good prouision of whyte bread, ale, otencakes, otemeal, mutton, butter in pottes, chese, & in diuers tentes good wyne also: good store to say truth of good vitaile for the maner of their cuntree. And in sum tentes amoong them, as I hard say wear also founde of siluer plate a dish or ii: ii. or .iii. goblettes, and .iii. or .iiii. chalices, the whiche the fynders, (I know not with what reuerence, but wt sum deuotion hardely)

pluct out of the colde clouts & thrust into their warme boosōs. Here now to say sumwhat of the maner of their campe: As they had no pauilions or roūd houses of ony cōmendable cumpas, so wear thear fewe oother tentes wt postes as ye vsed maner of makyng is: And of these fewe also, none of abooue .xx. foot lēgth, but most, far vnder: for ye most part all very sumptuously beset (after their faciō) for the looue of Fraunce with fleur de lices, sum of blue buckeram sum of black and sum of sum oother colours. These whyte ridges (as I calld them) that as we stood on Fauxsyde Bray dyd make so great mouster toward vs, which I dyd

take then to be a number of tentes: when we cam, we found it a lynnen draperie, of the coorser cameryk in dede, for it was all of canuas sheets: and wear the tenticles or rather cabayns and couches of theyr souldiours, the which (much after the common byldyng of their cuntree besyde) had they framed of iiii. sticks, about an elle long a pece, whearof .ii. fastened toogyther at one ende a loft, and ye .ii. endes beneath stict in ye ground an elle a sunder, standing in facion lyke the bowe of a soowes yoke: Ouer .ii. such bowes (one as it wear at their hed, thoother at their feet) thei stretched a shete doun on both sides, whearby their cabain becam roofed lyke

a ridge: But skant shit at both endes & not very close beneath on the sydes, onles their stiks wear the shorter, or their wiues ye more liberal to lend them larger naperie. Howbeit wtin they had lyned them and stuft them so thick with strawe, yt the weather as it was not very cold, when they wear ones couched, thei wear as warme as thei had bene wrapt in horsdung.
            This the plot of their campe was called Edminstō edge, nie Gilberton a place of the Lorde of Brimstons, halfe a mile beyond Muskelboorowe and a iiii. mile on this syde Edenborowe, and occupied in largenes with diuers tentes and tenticles, that stood in sundry partes

out of square about a miles cumpas: whearin as our mē vpon ye sound of retreat at their retire wear sumwhat assembled we all with a loud and entyer outcrie and hallowyng, in sign of gladnes and victorie, made an vniuersall noys and shout: whearof the shrilnes (as after we hard) was hard vntil Edinboorowe.
            It was a woonder to see, but that (as they say) many handes make lyght woork, how soon the dead bodyes wear stryped out of their garments starke naked, euen from as far as the chase went, vntill the place of our onset: whearby the parsonages of the enemies, might by ye wey easly be viewed and considered:

yt which for their tallnes of stature, cleanes of skyn, bignes of bone, with due proportion in al partes, I for my part aduisedly noted to be such, as but that I well sawe that it was so, I woolde not haue beleued sure so many of that sort to haue bene in all their cūtree: Amoong them lay thear many prestes and kirkmen as thei call them: of whoom it was bruted amoong vs that thear was a hole band of a .iii. or .iiii. M. but we wear after enfourmed, it was not altogyther so. At the place of the chardge at the first by vs gyuen, thear found we our horses slayn, all gored and heawē, and our men so rufully gasht and mangled in the hed

spetially as not one by the face coold be knowen who he was. Litle Preston was found thear with both his handes cut of by the wreasts, and knowen to be he, for that it was knowen he had of each arme a bracelet of golde, for ye which they so chopt hym. Edward Shelley alas that woorthy gentleman and valiaunt Captain all piteefully disfigured and mangled amoong them lay: and but by his bearde nothing discernable Of whoom (bysyde the propernes of parson) for his wit, his good qualitees, his actiuitee in feates of war, and his perfet honestie (for the whiche with all men of all estates he was alwey so much estemed & so welbelooued)

& hereto for that he was so nere my frende: I had caus inough here without parsimonie to prays his lyfe, & lament his death, wear it not that thesame shoolde be to great a digression and to muche interrupcion of the matter:As their fel sodeinly in Roō a great dungeō & swallowig of groūd Curtiꝰ a Romane gentlemā, for yt pleasyng of ye goddes & yt ye same might ceas, moūted on his horse and lept doun into the same, which straight then after closed by agayne. Vale. Max. li. vi. ca. vi. Decius Mus & Publiꝰ Decius his sun, Consule of Room, as thei shoold fight, the Father against ye I atines, & the sun after yt agaīst the Sānites, & wear warned by dream that those armies shoolde haue the victorie, whoos Captains wear first slayn in felde, thei both ran willingly in to ye hostes of their enemies, they wear slayn, & theyr armies wan the felde Plutarch. de Decio pr̄e. paral. xxxvii. Et Liui. de. P. Decio li.x. dec. i.
                But touching the maner of his death, I thinke his merit to mooch to be let pas in silence: who not inferiour in fortitude of mynde eyther vnto the Romane Curtius or the .ii. Decii, he being in this busines formost of all our men against the enemies: Consyderyng with hymself, that as his hardy charge vpon them, was sure to be their terrour, and very lykely to turne to the breach of their order: and herewith also

yt the same shoulde be greate coorage to his followers that cam to gyue the charge with hym: And ponderynge agayn that his turnynge bak at thys point, shoulde caus the contrarye and be great daunger of our confusion: was content in his kyngs and contrees quarell, in hope the rather to leaue victorie vnto his cuntremen, thus honorably to take death to hym selfe. Whoom, let no man thynke, no foolysh hardines or werynes of lyfe draue vnto so harde an enterprise: whoos sober valiaunce of coorage had often ootherwyse in the late warres with Fraunce bene sufficiently before approued, and whoos state of lyuing

my selfe I knue to be such, as lact nothing ye might pertein to perfit worldly wealth. I trust it shall not be taken that I mean hearby to derogate fame from ony of the rest that dyed thear (GOD haue their solles) who I wot bought the bargain as deere as he, but only to doo that in me may lye to make his name famous, Whoo amoong these (in my opinion) towarde his prince and cuntree did best deserue.
            Nye this place of onset, whear the Scottes at their rū
               nynge awey had let fall their weapons (as I sayd) Thear found we, bysyde their common maner of armour, certeyn nice instrumentes for war (as

we thought.) And they wear, nue boordes endes cut of, being about a foot in breadth and half a yarde in leangth: hauyng on the insyde, handels made very cunnyngly of .ii. cordes endes: These a Gods name wear their targettes again the shot of our small artillerie, for they wear not able to hold out a canon. And with these, found we great rattels swellyng bygger then the belly of a pottell pot, coouered with old parchement or dooble papers, small stones put in them to make noys, and set vpon the ende of a staff of more then twoo els long: and this was their fyne deuyse to fray our horses when our

horsmen shoulde cum at them: Howbeeit bycaus the ryders wear no babyes, nor their horses no colts: they coold, neyther duddle the tone nor fray the toother, so that this pollecye was as witles as their powr forceles.
            Amoong these weapons, and bysyde diuers oother banners standerds and penons, a banner of whyte sarcenet was foūd vnder whiche it was sayd these kirkmen cam, whearupon was paynted a wooman with her hear about her shoulders, knelynge before a crucifix, and on her right hande a church, after that written a long vpon the banner in greate Romane letters, Afflictae sponsae ne obliuiscaris,
               
whiche woordes declared that they woold haue this wooman to signifie, the church Christes spouse, and thus in humble wyse makynge her peticion vnto Christ her husbond that he woold not now forget her, his spouse beyng skourged and persecuted, meanynge at this tyme by vs. It was sayd it was the Abbot of Donforlings Banner, but whyther yt wear his or the Bysshop of Dunkels ye goouernours broothers (who I vnderstood wear both in the felde.) And what the number of these kirkmen was, I coold not certeinly learne: but sure it was sum deuout papistes deuise, that not onely bylyke woold not endevour to doo ought for atonement and

peacemakyng betwene vs, but al contrariwise brought foorth his standard stoutly to fyght in feld himself against vs: pretexyng this his great vngodlines thus bent toward ye maintnaunce of a noughtie quarell, with coolour of religion to cum in ayde of Christes church. Which church to say truth cū
               myng thus to battaile full appointed with weapon and garded with such a sorte of deacōs to fight: how euer in payntyng he had set her out, a man might well thinke that in condicion he had rather framed her after a curst quean that woolde piuk her husband by the pate except she had her will, then lyke a meke spouse that went aboute humbly by submission and prayer

to desyre her husbands help for redres of thinges amisse. Howbeit for sauynge vpright the suftiltie of this godly mās deuise, it is best we take hym he ment the most lykely: that is, the church malignaunt and cō
               gregacion of the wicked, whear vnto that Antichrist the Bysshop of Roome is husbond whome Christ sayd, as a thefe cums neuer but to steal slea & destroy.
                  Io. ca. 
                        •
                     .
                And whoos good sun this holly Prelate in his thus cummyng to the felde with his Afflictae now shewed hym self to be.
            Thear was vpon this Fauxsyde Bray (as I haue before said) a litle Castel or pile which was very bysy all the tyme of the battaile, as ony of our men

cam nye it, to shoot at them wt suche artillerie as they had (which, was none oother then of handgunnes and hakbutes, and of them not a doosein neyther) litle hurt dyd they, but as they sawe their fellowes in the feld thus driuen and beaten awey before their faces, they pluct in their peces, lyke a dog his taile: and couched them selfes within all muet: but by and by ye hous was set on fyre, and they for their good will brent & smoothered within.
            Thus thrugh the fauour of gods bounty, by the valiaunce and pollecie of my lordes Protectours grace by the foreward endeuour of all the nobles and counsell thear besyde, and by ye willing diligence of euery captain,

officer, and true subiecte els, we most valiauntly and honourably wan the victorie ouer our enemies. Of whoō .xiiii.M wear slaī thus in felde, of which nūber (as we wear certeinly enfourmed by sundry and the best of the prisoners then taken) bysyde the erle of Loghen war, ye lorde Flemmyng, the master of Greym, the master of Arskyn ye master of Ogleby, the master of Auendale, the master of Rouen and many oother of noble birth amōg them: thear wear of Lardes, Lardes sūnes & oother gentlemen slayn abooue .xxvi.C. & v.C. wear takē prisoners whearof many gentlemen also, amōg whome wear thear of name (as I haue before named) ye erle Huntley lord Chauncelour

of the Ream thear. The lord of pester, Hobby Hambleton captayn of Dunbar. The Master of Sampoole. The Larde of Wymmes, and a broother of ye erle of Cassyls. Too thousand by luckyng & liyng as though they wear dead skaped awey in ye night all maymed and hurt. Herewith wan we of their weapons and armour more then we woolde vouchesafe to gyue cariage for, & yet wear thear conueyed thence by ship into these parties of iakkes spetially and swords abooue .xxx.M. This night with great gladnes and thankes gyuyng to God (as good caus we had) about .vii. of the clok we pitched our campe at Edgebuklyng Bray bysyde Pynkersclough, and a

mile beyond the place we camped at afore.
            About an hour after that, in sum tokē (as I took it) of gods assent and applause shewed to vs touchyng this victorie, the heauens relented and poured doun a great shour of rayne that lasted wel nie an hour, not vnlyke and accordyng as after our late souereigne lordes conquest of Bullein plētifull shoures did also then ensue.
            And as we wear then a setlīg & ye tentes a settyng vp, amoōg all things els commendable in our hole iorney, one thīg semed to me an intollerable disorder & abuse, that whear as all weys both in al tounes of war & in al cāpes of armies, quietnes & stilnes without nois is principally

in the night after the watch set, obserued. (I nede not reason why) our Northern prikkers ye borderers, notwithstandyng wt great enormite (as thought me) & not vnlyke (to be playn) vnto a masterles hound howlyng in a hie wey when he hath lost him he wayted on: sum hoopynge, sum whistelyng and most with crying, a Berwyke a Berwyke a Fenwyke a Fenwyke, a Bulmer a Bulmer or so ootherwise as theyr capteins names wear, neuer linde these troublous & daungerous noyses all ye night long. They sayd they did it to fynd out their captain & fellowes, but yf the souldiours of our oother coūtrees and sheres had vsed ye same maner in that case, we shoold haue oft tymes

had the state of our camp more lyke the outrage of a dissolute huntyng then ye quiet of a well ordred armye. If is a feat of war in myne opiniō that might right well be left: I could reherse causes (but yt I take it, they ar better vnspoken then vttred, onles the faut wear sure to be amēded) that might shewe, thei mooue alweis more perel to our armie but in their one nightes so doyng, then thei shewe good seruice (as sum sey) in a hoole vyage. And since it is my part to be playn in my proces I wil be ye bolder to shewe what further I noted & hard. Anoother maner haue they amoong them of wearyng handkerchers rolled about their armes & letters broudred apō their cappes, thei

sayd themselues the vse thearof was yt ech of them might know his fellowe & thearby ye sooner assemble, or in nede to ayde one another & such lyke respectes: Howbeit thear wear of tharmy amoōg vs (sum suspicious mē perchaūce) ye thought thei vsed them for collusion, & rather bycaus they might be knowen to thenemie, as ye enemies ar knowen to them (for thei haue their markes too) & so in cōflict either ech to spare oother, or gētly ech to take oother. In dede mē haue bene mooued yt rather to thinke so, bycaus sum of their crosses wear so narrowe & so singly set on that a puff of wynde might haue blowē thē frō their brestes & yt thei wear found right often talkīg wt ye Skottish prikkers wtin les then their gads length

a sunder, & when thei perceiued thei had bene spied, thei haue begun one to run at another, but so apparauntly perlassent, as ye lookers on resembled, their chasyng like ye running at base, in an vplondish toun, whear the match is made for a quart of good ale: or like ye play in Robin Cooks skole, whear bicaus the punics may lerne thei strike fewe strokes but by assent & appointemēt. I hard sum men say it did mooch augment their suspiciō yt wey, bicaus at ye battail thei sawe these prikkers so badly demean them, more intēding ye takīg of prisoners then ye suerty of victorie, for while oother men fought, they fell to their prey, that as thear wear but few of them but brought home

his prisoner, so wear thear many yt had .vi. or .vii. Many men yet, I must cōfes ar not disposed all weys, to say all of the best, but more redy haply to fynde oothers mēs fautes then to amend their oun. Howbeit I thīke sure as for our prikkers, yf their fautes had bene fewer their infamye had bene les. yet say I not this so moch to disprais them, as for mean of amē
               dement. Their Captains and gentlemen again, ar men for ye most part al of right honest seruice and approoued prowes, & such sure as for their well dooing, woold soon becum famous yf their souldiours wear as toward as thēselues be forward.
            As thyngs fell after in communicacion, one question amōg

oother arose, who kyld the first man this day in felde, the glorie whearof one Ieronimo an Italian woold fayn haue had, howbeit it was after well tryed, yt it was one Cuthbert Musgraue a gentlemā of my lord of War wykes, who right hardely kyld a Gūner at his pece in ye Scottes foreward, ear euer they begon ony whit to turne: the fact for the forwardnes well deseruyng remembraūce I thought it not mete to be let slip in silence.
            This nyght the Skottish goouernor when he thought ones him self in sum safetie, with all spede caused the erle Bothwel to be let out of prisō: which whither he did for the doubt he had that we woold haue releaced

him wild he nild he, or whither he woold shew hīself fayn to doo sumwhat before ye peple to make sum amendes of his former faut I doo not knowe, but this sure, rather for sū caus of fear, then for ony good will: whiche was well apparaunt to all men, in that he had kept the erle so long before in hold, with out ony iust caus.
            
               Sonday the xi. of september.¶In the morenyng a great sort of vs rode to the place of onset whear our mē lay slayn, and what by gentlemē for their frēdes, and seruaūtes for their Masters, al of thē yt wear knowē to be ours wear buried. In ye mean time, ye Master & officers of ye ordinaūce, did very diligētly get to gyther all ye Skottish ordinaūce, which bycaus it lay in sundry places thei could not

inne all ouer night. And these wear in nūber a xxx. peces, whearof one culuerine .iii. sacres ix. smaller peces of bras & of iron 17. peces mo moūted on cariage.
            These thinges thus done, sū
               what a fore none our cāpe reysed, we marched alōg the Fryth syde straight toward Lyeth: & approchīg me ye same about iii. of the clok in thafter none, we pyght our fyeld a prikshot on thissyde the toun: being on the southest half sumwhat shadowed frō Edinborowe by a hill, but ye most of it liyng wtin ye ful sight & shot of the castell thear, & in distaunce sumwhat abooue a quarter of a mile. My lordes grace, garded but with a small cūpeny was cūmē to Lyeth well nie half an hour before

the armie, the whiche he found all desolate of resistaūce or ony body els. Thear wear in ye hauen that runneth into the mids of the roun, vessels of diuers sortes a xiii. Sumwhat of ode, wynes, wainskot and salt wear found in the toun, but as but litle of yt, so nothīg els of value: for how much of oother things as could wel be caried, ye inhabitauntes ouernight had pact awei wt them. My lord Marshall and most of our horsmen wear bestowed & lodged in the toun, my lordes grace, my lord Lietenaunt & the rest of tharmie in the campe.
            
               Monday the xii. of september.¶This day my lordes grace with the counsell and sir Rychard Lee, rode about yt toun, & to the plottes and hilloks on

eyther syde nie to it, to viewe & consider whither the same by byldyng, might be made tenable and defensible.
            ¶ Certayne of our smaller vessels burnt Kynkorne and a toun or twoo mo stondyng on the northe shore of the Frith against Lyeth.Tuysday the xiii. of september.
            
            In the after noon, my lords grace rowed vp the Fryth a .vi. or .vii. myles westward as it runneth into the land, and took in his way an Iland thear called sainct Coomes Ins, which stōdeth a .iiii. mile beyōd Lieth and a good wey nerar the north shore then the south, yet not wt
               in a mile of the nerest. It is but half a myle about, and hath in it a prety Abbey (but ye moōks wear gone) fresh water inough,

and also coonyes, and is so naturally strong as but by one way it can be entred. The plot whear of, my lordes grace consideryng, did quikly cast to haue it kept, whearby al traffik of marchaūdise, all cōmodities els commyng by the Fryth into their land, & vtterly ye hole vse of the Fryth it self with all the hauens vppon it shoold quyte be taken from them.
            
               Wednesday ye .xiiii. of september.¶This day my lords grace tidyng bak again Estward to vyew diuers things and places, tooke Dakyth in his way, whear a howse of George Douglasses dooth stande: and commyng sumwhat nere it, he sent Soomerset his herald with a trompet before to knowe, whoo kept it, and whether the kepers

holde it or yelde it to his grace, Aunswere was made that thear was a .lx. parsons within, whoom their maister liyng thear the saterday at night after the batell, dyd will that they, the hous, and all that was in yt shoolde be at my lordes graces commaundement and pleasure. Whear vppon the chefest came out, and in the name of all the rest humbled hymself vnto my Lords will, proferynge his grace in his Masters name, diuers fayr goshaukes, the whiche my Lords grace how nobly soeuer he listed to shew mercy vpō submissiō, yet vttering a more maiestie of honor, then to base his generositie to the reward of his enemie, did (but not cōtemptuosly)

refuse, and so without cūmyng in past by, and rode to the place whear the battell was begun to be strooken: the whiche hauyng a prety while ouerseen, he retorned by Muskelborowe and so along by the Frythe, diligently markyng and notyng thinges by ye way. And aswell in his retorne, as in his out goyng, many wear the houses, gentlemen, and oother, that vpon submission his grace receiued in to his protection.
            This dai my lords grace aswell for countenaunce of buyldyng, as though he woold tary long, as also to kepe our Pioners sumwhat in exercise (whoō a litle rest woolde soone make nought) caused along the east syde of Lyeth a greate dich and

trench to be cast toward the Frith, the woorke whearof cō
               tinued till the mornyng of our departyng.
            ¶My Lorde Clynton,Thursday the xv. of septēber hye Admiral (as I said) of this flete takyng with hym the galley (whearof one Broke is Captain) and .iiii. or .v. of our smaller vessels besides, all well appoynted with municion & men, rowed vp the Frith a ten myle westward to an hauen toun stondyng on the south shore called Blaknestes, whearat towardes the water syde is a castel of a prety strength. As nie whearvnto as the depth of the water thear woold suffer: the Skots for sauegard, had laied ye Mary willough by and the Antony of Newcastel .ii. tall ships, whiche

with extreme iniurie they had stollē from vs before tyme, whē no war betwene vs: with these ley thear also an oother large vessel called (by them) the Bosse and a .vii. mo, whearof part laden with marchaūdize: my lord Clynton, & his cōpenie wt right hardy approche, after a great conflict betwixt the castel & our vessels, by fyne force, wan from them those .iii. ships of name, & burnt all ye residew before their faces as they ley.
            
               Friday ye .xvi. of september.¶The lard of Brimston, a Skottish gentleman who cam to my lordes grace from their counsell for caus of communicacion bilyke, retourned again to them hauing wt him Norrey an herauld & king of armes of ours: whoo foūd them wt ye olde

quene at Sterlyng, a toun stondyng westward vppon ye Frith a .xx. mile beyond Edinborowe.
            ¶Thear was a fellowe taken in our cāpe,Saterday the xvii. of september. whoō ye Scottes called English William, an English man indede, yt before tyme hauyng doon a robery in Lincolnshier, did after rū awai into Scotlād, & at this time cū
               mē out of Edēborowe castel as a spie for ȳe Scottes was spied himself with the maner, and hā
               ged for his mede in ye best wise (bicaus he wel deserued) vpō a nue giebet somewhat biside our camp, in ye sight bothe of ye toun & castel. God haue mercy on his soule. Thear is no good logicioner, but woold think, I thīk, yt a Syllogisim thus formed of such a theuing maior, a rūaway

minor, and a trayterous consequent, must nedes prooue (at ye weakest) to such a hanging argument.
            Sir Ihon Luttrell knight hauyng bene by my lords grace, and the counsell elect Abbot by gods suffraunce of the monastery of sainct Coomes Ins afore remembred, in the after noon of this day departed towardes the Iland to be stalled in his see thear accordyngly: & had with him a coouent of a C. hakbutters and .l. pioners to kepe his house and land thear, and .ii. rowe barkes well furnished with municion & .lxx. mariners for them to kepe his waters. Whearby it is thought he shal soō becū a prelate of great powr. The perfytnes of his religion,

is not alwaies to tarry at home, but sumtime to rowe out abrode a visitacion, & when he goithe, I haue hard say he taketh alweyes his sumners in barke with hym, which ar very open mouthed & neuer talk, but they ar harde a mile of, so that either for looue of his blessynges, or feare of his cursinges he is lyke to be sooueraigne ouer most of his neighbours.
            My lords grace as this day geuyng warnyng that our departure shoold be on ye morowe and myndynge before with recompence sumwhat according, to rewarde one Bartō that had plaid an vntrue part: cōmaunded that ouer night his hous in Lyeth shoolde be set afyer. And as the same thesame night

about .v. of the clok was doon, many of our souldiours that wear very forward in fyering, fyered with al hast all the toun besyde. But so farfoorth (as I may thinke) without commissiō or knowledge of my lords grace, as right many horses both of his graces and of diuers others wear in great daunger ear they coold be quited then from out of the toun .vi. greate ships liyng in the hauen thear, that for age and decay wear not so apt for vse, wear then also set, a fyer which all the night with great flame did burne very solemnly.
            In the tyme of our here campynge many lardes and gentlemen of the cuntry nie thear, cam in to my lorde to require

his protection, the whiche his grace to whoom he thought good, did graunt.
            This day also, cam the erle Bothwell to my lordes grace, a gentleman of a right cumly porte and stature, and hereto of right honourable and iust meanyng and dealyng toward the kyngs maiestie, whoom my lords grace did thearfore accordyng vnto his degree & demerites, very frendly welcum and entertein, & hauing supped this night wt his grace, he then after departed.
            Thear stode southwestward about a quarter of a mile from our cāpe, a monasterie, thei call it holly roode abbey, sir Water Bonhā and Edward Chāberlayne gat lycence to suppresse it

whearupō these commissioners makyng first theyr visitacion thear, they found the moōks all gone: but the church and mooch parte of ye house well coouered with leade, soon after thei pluct of the leade & had doun ye bels (which wear but .ii.) and accordyng to ye statute did sumwhat hearby disgrace ye hous. As touchyng the moōkes, bicaus they wear gone, thei put them to their pencions at large.
            
               Sunday the xviii. of september.¶My lords grace for consideracions moouyng hym to pitee, hauing al this while spared Edinborowe from hurt, did so leaue it, but Lieth and the ships still burnyng, soon after vii. of ye clock in this morenyng caused ye cāpe to dislodge. And as we wear parted from whear

we laye, the castel shot of a peal (with chambers hardely & all) of a .xxiiii. peces, we marched sowtheast from the Frith, into ye landward. But part of vs kept the wey yt the chiefe of the chase was continued in, whearby we founde most parte of the dead corpses liyng very rufully with ye colour of their skynnes chaū
               ged grenish about ye place they had be smitten in, and as thento abooue grounde vnberied, many also we perceyued to haue bene beried in Undreske church yarde, the graues of whoom, ye Scots had very slyly for sight coouered agayn with grene turfe. By diuerse of these dead bodies wear thear set vp a stik with a clowte, with a rag, with an olde shoe or sū oother marke

for knowlege, the which we vnderstode to be markes made by ye frendes of ye partie dead when they had found him, whoō then sith they durst not for feare or lack of leasure conuey awey to bery while we wear in those partes, thei had stict vp a mark to fynde hym the sooner when we wear goon. And passyng that day all quietly a .vii. mile, we camped early for that night at Crainston, by a place of the Lorde of Ormstons. This morenynge his grace makynge Master Andrew Dudley knight, broother vnto the erle of Warwyk (as his valiaunce sundry whear tried, had well before deserued it) dispatched my Lorde Admirall and hym by shippes full fraught wyth

men and municion towarde the wynnyng of an holde in the east syde of Skotland called Broughty Crak, whiche stondest in such sort at the mouth of the tyuer of Tey, as that beyng gotten, both Dundy, sainct Iohns town, and many townes els (the best of the cuntrey in those partes, set vppon the Tey) shall eyther be cum subiecte vnto this holde, or els be compelled to for goo their hole vse of the riuer, for hauyng ony thyng thearby cummynge inwarde or outwarde.
            ¶We went a ten myle,Mūday ye .xix. of september. and camped towarde night a littell a thissyde a market town called Lawder: at the whiche as we had indede no frendely enterteynment, so had we no

enuious resistaunce, for thear was no body at home. Here, as our tentes wear a pytchyng, a doosein or .xx. of their hedge crepers horsmen, that lay lurking thearby, lyke shepe byter curres to snach vp and it wear but a sory lambe for their prey, vppon a hill about half a mile sowtheast from vs, ran at and hurt one of our mē. For acquitaile whearof, my lordes grace commaunded that .iii. or .iiii. houses (such as thei wear) stondyng also vppon a hill .ii. flight shot southward from our cāpe, shoolde be burnt. Thomas fissher his graces secretarie rode straight thyther wt a burnyng brand in his tone hand, and his gun in the toother, accōpanied with no mo but one of his own

men and fyred them all by and by. I noted it for my part an enterprise of a right good hart & courage, peraduēture so mooch the rather, bicaus I woold not gladly haue taken in hand to haue doon it so my self, spetially since parte of these prikkers stode then within a slight shot of hī. Howbeit as in al this iorney vpon ony likelihode of bysines I euer sawe hym right wel appointed and as forward as the best, so at the skirmish which the Scottes profered at Hailes castell on wedensday afore written the .vii. of this moneth, I sawe none so nere them as he: Whearby I maye haue good cause to be ye les in doubt of his hardines. Here also as we wear setteled, our herauld Norrey

retourned from the Skottes counsell, with the Larde of Brimston and Rose their heraulde: who vppon theyr sute to my Lordes grace obteyned, that .v. of theyr counsell shoolde haue his graces safecundet that at ony tyme and place within fiften dayes durynge our abode in theyr cuntrey or at Berwyke, the same .v. might cum and commen with .v. of our counsell touching the matters bitwene vs.
            
               Tuysday the xx. of september.¶Rose the heraulde departed erely with this saufecundet, our campe reysed and we went that day an .vii. myle till as far as Hume castell: whear we camped on the westsyde of a rocky hill that they call harecrag

whyche stondeth about a myle westwarde from the Castell. The Lorde of Hume (as I sayd) lay diseased at Edenborowe of his hurt in his flight at the Frydays skyrmysh before the battayle. the Lady his wife cam straight to my Lordes grace, makyng her humble sute that lyke as hys goodnes had graciously bene shewed to right many oother in receyuynge them and their howses into his graces protection and assuraunce, euen so, that it woold pleas him to receyue and assure her and her howse the Castell: My Lordes grace myndynge neuer oother but to assure her she shoolde be sure soon to forgo

it, turned straight her sute of assurance into communicacion of tendring, for my part I doubt not but the terrour of extremitie by their obstinacy, and proffit of frēdship by their submission, was sufficiētly shewed her: the which hauyng well (by like) considered, she lefte of her sute and desired respite for consultacion tyll the next day at noon, whiche hauyng graunted her, shere turned to the castell. They say a matche well made is half wun: we wear half put in assuraunce of a toward aunswer by the promesse of a prophecy amoong the Frenchmen, which sayeth. Chasteau que parloit & femme que escote: lūg voet rendre, & lautre: and so foorth. Thear wear certeī hakbutters

that vpon appointment afore, had beset the castell: whoo then had further commaundement geuen them, that takyng diligent hede none shoulde pas in or out without my lordes graces licence, they should also not occupie ony shot or annoyaunce tyll vpon further warnyng.
            ¶This Lady in this mean tyme consulted with her sun & heir prisoner with vs,Wednesday the .xxi. of september. and with oother her frendes the kepers of the castell, at the tyme appointed, returned this day to my lordes grace: requirynge first a longer respit till .viii. a clock at night, and thearwith saufcundet for Andrew Hume her secund sun and Iohn Hume lord of Coldamknowes a kinsman of her husbāds, Captains

of this castell, to cum and speake with his grace in the meane while: It was graunted her, whearupon these Captains about .iii. of the clock cam to his Lordship & after oother coouenaūtes with long debatyng on bothe partes agreed vpon, she and these Captains concluded to geue their assent to render ye Castell, so far foorth as the rest of the kepers woold thearwith be content. For .ii. or .iii. within (saide they) wear also in charge wt keping it, as wel as they: for knowledge of whose mīdes, my lords grace then sent Soomerset his herauld wt this lady to ye castel to them: who, as the herauld had made them priuie of the articles, woolde fayne haue had leasure for .xxiiii. houres

lenger to send to their Lord to Edīborowe to kno his wil, but beyng wisely & sharply cauld vpō by the herauld, thei agreed to the coouenauntes, afore by their Lady and capteyns concluded on. Whearof parte wear (as I sawe by ye sequele) that they shoolde departe thence the next daie mornyng by .x. of the clok with bagge and baggage as mooch as they coold cary, sauyng all municion and vytayle to be left be hynde them in the Castell: Howbeeit for as mooche as before tyme theyr nacion had not bene all together so iuste of coouenaunt, whearby as then we mought haue cause fyrmly to credyt their promys, my Lords grace prouidyng, ech wey to be redy

for them, caused this night viii. peces of our ordinaunce fenced wt baskets of earth to be plāted on the southsyde towarde the Castell within pour of batrie, & the hakbuttes to continue their watch and warde.
            
               Thursday ye xxii. of september.¶This mornyng my lords grace hauyng deputed my lord Gray to receyue the rendryng of the castell, and Sir Edward Dudley after to be captayn of the same. They both departed to yt: & at the time set, Androwe Hume and .iiii. oother of ye chefest thear with hym cam out, & yeldyng ye castell deliuered my lord the keis. His lordship causyng the residue also to cumme out then, sauyng .vi. or .vii. to kepe their baggage wtin (who all wear in number .lxxviii) entred

ye same with master Dudley and diuers oother gentlemē with him. He found thear indifferent good store, of vytayle & wyne: and of ordinaunce, twoo basterd culuerins, one sacre .iii. fawconets of bras, and of iren viii. peces beside. The castell stondeth vppon a rocky crag, with a prowd heith ouer all the contrie about it, on euery syde well me fenced by marrysh, allmost rounde in foorme, wt thik walls▪ & (which is a rare thing vpō so hie and stonie a groūd) A faire well within yt. The kepyng of this castell my lord betakyng vnto master Dudley accordyngly, retourned to my lordes grace at the campe.
            We reised,Friday ye xxiii. of september. and cam that mornyng to Rokesborow, and

iii. myle from Hume: our camp occupied a greate fallowe felde betwene Rokesborowe and Kelseye stondyng eastward a quarter of a myle of: a prety market toun to, but they wear all goon foorth thear. My Lordes grace wyth dyuers of the Counsell and Sir Richard lee knight (whose chardge in this expedycyon spetially was to appoynt the pioners ech whear in woork as he shoolde thynke meete, and then (whear my lordes grace assigned) to deuyse the fourme of byldyng for fortificacion: whoom suerly the goodnes of his wytt and hys greate experience hath made in that science right excellent) went straight to Rokesborowe

to caste what thear for strengthnyng might be doon. The plot and syte whearof hath bene in tyme paste a Castell,Rokesborow. and standeth naturally very strong, vpon a hyll east and west of an eyght skore in length and .iii. skore in bredth, drawynge to narownes at the easte ende: the hole grounde whearof, the old walles doo yet enuyron. Besyde the heyth and hardines to cum to, it is strōgly fenced on eythter syde with the course of ii. great riuers, Tiuet on the north and Twede on the sowth: both which ioyning sum what nie to gyther at the west ende of it, Tyuet by a large cumpas a bowte the feldes wee laye in, at Kelsey dooth

fall into this Twede which wt greate deapth & swiftnes runneth from thence eastward into the sea at Berwyk, and is notable and famous for .ii. commodities specially, Salmons: and whetstones. Ouer this, betwyxte kelsey and Rokesborowe hath thear bene a great stone bridge with arches, the which ye Skottes in time paste haue all to broken bycaus we shoold not that wei cum to them. Soō after my Lords graces survey of the plot and determinacion, to doo asmuch indeede for makynge it defensyble, as shortnes of the tyme and season of ye yere could suffer: (which was, yt one great trench of twenty foot brode with deapth accordyng, and a wall of lyke breadth, and

heyth, shoold be made a cros wt in the castel from the tone sidewall to thoother and a .xl. foot from the west ende: and that a like trēch and wall shoold likewise be cast a trauers within about a quoyts cast frō theast ende, and hereto that the castell walles on either syde, whear neede was shoolde be mended with turfe and made wt loopholes as well for shooting directly foorthward as for flankyng at hand: the woork of which deuise did make, that bisyde the sauegard of these trenches & walles, ye kepers shoold also be much fenced by both the ende walles of the castel) ye pioners wear set a woork and diligently applied in the same.
            ¶This day the Lard of Cesfoorth,

and many oother lards and gentlemen of Tyuetdale and their marches thear hauyng cum and communed with my Lordes grace, made vs an assuraunce (which was a frendship and as it wear a truis) for that daye till the next day at nyght.
            ¶This daye in the meane while theyr assuraunce lasted, these Lardes and gentlemen aforesayde, beyng the Chefeste in the hole marches and Tyuetdale, cam in agayn, whoom my Lords grace with wysdom and pollecie without any fightynge or bloodshed, dyd wyn then vnto the obedience of the kyngs maiestie: for the whyche they dyd wyllyngly then also

receyue an oth, whose names ensue.
            
               Lards.
               The lard of Ceffoorth.
               The lard of Fernyherst.
               The lard of Grenehed.
               The lard of Hunthill.
               The lard of Hundley.
               The lard of Markestone by mersyde.
               The lard of Bouniedworth.
               The lard of Ormeston.
               The lard of Mallestaynes.
               The lard of Warmesey.
               The lard of Lynton.
               The lard of Egerston.
               The lard of Marton.
               The lard of Mowe.
               The lard of Ryddell.
               The lard of Reamersyde.
            
            
               
               Gentlemen.
               George Trombull.
               Iohn Hollyburton.
               Robert Car.
               Robert Car of Greyden.
               Adam Kyrton.
               Andrew Meyther.
               Saunder Spuruose of Erleston.
               Mark Car of Litleden.
               George Car of Faldenside.
               Alexander Makdowell.
               Charles Rotherford.
               Thomas Car of the yere.
               Ihon Car of Meynthorn.
               Walter Holy burton.
               Richard Hanganfyde.
               Andrew Car.
               Iames Douglas of Eauers.
               Iames Car of Mersyngtō.
               
                  George Hoppringl
                     ••
                  
               
               William Ormeston of Endmerden.
               Ihon Grymslowe.
            
            Many wear thear mo besyde, whose names also for that they remayne in regester with these, I haue thought the lesse mister here to wryt.
            My lords grace did tender so mooch ye furtheraūce of ye work in ye castell, yt this daie (as euery day els duryng our campynge thear) his grace dyd not styk to digge wt a spade abooue .ii. houres him self:
                  Curti. lib. viii.
                whearby as his estate sure was no more embased then ye maiestie of great Alexā
               der what time wt his oun hādes he set the poor colde soldiour in his oun chaire of estate▪ to releeue hym by his tier. So by ye
               
example herof was euery man so mooued, as thear wear but fewe of Lordes knightes and gentlemen in the feld, but with spade shoouell or mattook did thearin, right willyngly & vncompeld their partes.
            
               Sunday the xxv. of september.¶ This daye began the Skottes to brynge vitayll to our campe, for the whiche they wear so well entreated and paide, that durynge the tyme we laye thear, we wanted none of the commodities their cōtry coold minister.
            
               Munday the xxvi of september.¶ No notable thyng but the continuaunce of our woork at the Castell: for furtheraunce whearof, order was taken that the Captayns of footmen eche after oother shoolde send vp his C. of souldiours thither

to woorke an houres space.
            ¶ The larde of Coldehamknowes not hauyng so fully kepte hys appoyntment made at Hume Castell touchyng his cummynge agayn to my Lordes grace,Tuisday the xxvii. of september at Rokesborowe: Sir Raufe Uane with a twoo or .iii.C. horses, about .iii. of the clock in this mornyng was sent for hym to his house, whiche was a .vii. myte from vs: the whyche chardge Master Uane dyd so earnestly applye, as he was thear wyth his number before .vi: but the Larde whither he was warned thearof by priuie skout or spie, he was passed by, an oother waye, and was soon after .vii. with my Lordes grace in the

cāpe, master Uane was welcū
               med and hauing no resistaunce made, but al submitted, & proffer of chere (for so had the lorde charged his wyfe to doe) soon after he retourned to ye campe.
            This day my lordes grace was certefied by letter from my lorde Clynton and sir Andrew Dudley that on the wednesday last beyng ye .xxi. of this moōth, after certein of their shott discharged against the castell of Browghty Crak, thesame was yeldyn vnto them, the whiche sir Andrew dyd then enter, and after kepe as captain.
            
               Wedynsday the .xxviiii. of september.¶ A Skottysh heraulde accumpanied with certein Frēchmen yt wear perchaunce more desierous to marke our armie then to wit of our welfare, cam

and declared from their coūsell ye within a seuenight after, their commissioners to whoom my lords grace had before graunted his safecundet, shoold cum & commune with our counsel at Berwyk: whose cūming my lorde Lieutenaūt & master Treasurer & thoother of our commissioners did so long while there abyde. But these Skottes (as men that ar neuer so iuste, and in nothing so true as in breache of promys and vsyng vntruth) neither cam, nor by like ment to cū: And yet sure take I this no fetch of no fine deuise, ōles thei mean hereby to wyn, yt thei shal nede neuer after to promys; vsyng the feate of Arnus,
               
                  In Epigrā. Mor
                        •
                     .
                who wt his all weys swearyng and his euer liyng, at last obteined that

his bare woorde was as much in credyt as his solemn oth, but his solemn oth indeede no more then an impudent lye: Howbeit since I am certeyn that sundry of them, haue shewed themselues right honest, I woold be loth here to be coūted so vnaduised, as to arret ye fautes of many to ye infamie of al.
            It was sayde amoong vs they had in the meane tyme receyued letters of consolacion and of many gay offers from the French kyng: yet had that bene no cause to haue broken promys wt ye coūsel of a Ream: Howbeit, as these letters wear to thē but an vnprofitable plaster to heale their hurt then, so ar thei full likly (if thei trust much therin) to fynd thē a corzey that

will freate them a nue sore.
            ¶ My lords grace consideryng that of vertue and welldooyng the proper mede is honour. Aswell thearfore for rewarde to them that had afore doon well, as for cause of encoorage to oother then after to doo the lyke, dyd this daye after noon adourne many Lordes knyghtes and gentlemen with dignitees as folowe. The names and promotiōs of whoō I haue here set in order, as they wear placed in the herauldes book.
            
               Sir Rafe Sadlier,Banereis. Treasurer.
               Sir Fraunces Bryan, Capteyn of the light horsmen.
               Sir Rafe Uane, Lieutenaūt of all the horsmen.
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
               These knightes wear made Banerettes a dignitie abooue a knight, and next to a Baron, whose acts I haue partly touched in the story before.
            
               
                  Knightes▪
                  The lord Grace of Wylton high Marshall.
               The lord Edward Seimor my lordes graces sun.
            
            Of these, the reder shal also fynde before.
            
               The lord Thomas Haward
               The lord Walldyke.
               Sir Thomas Dacres.
               Sir Edward Hastyng.
               Sir Edmund Brydges.
               Sir Ihō Thinne, my lords graces Stuard of howshold.
               Sir Miles Partrich.
               Sir Ihon Conwey.
               Sir Giles Poole.
               
                  Sir Rafe Bagnolle.
               Sir Oliuer Laurence.
               Sir Henry Gates.
               Sir Thomas Chaloner, one of the Clerks of the kyngs maiesties priuie coūsel, and in this armie, (as I mought call him) chefe secretarie, who with his great peyns and expedite diligēce in dispatch of things passyng from my lords grace and the coūsel thear, did make yt his merite was not with ye meanest.
               Sir Fraunces Flemmynge master of thordinaunce thear, a gentlemā whoom long exercise & good obseruaunce hath made in that feate right perfit, whear vnto in this viage he ioyned so mooch hede and diligence, as it was well found how much his seruice did stede.
               
                  Sir Ihon Gresham.
               Sir William Skipwyth.
               Sir Ihon Buttes.
               Sir George Blaag.
               Sir William Frauncis.
               Sir Fraunces Knolles.
               Sir William Thorborow.
               Sir George Haward.
               Sir Iames Wylforde.
               Sir Rauf Coppinger.
            
            But yt I haue writtē in ye storie before wt what forward hardines Sir George haward did bear ye kings maiestie stāderd in ye battail, & thear also of ye industrious peyn of sir Iames Wilford, & how sir Rauf Coppīger did aied not smally in saufgard of the standard of our horsmen, I woolde haue bene more diligent to haue rehersed it here.
            
               Sir Thomas Wētwoorth.
               Sir Ihon Maruen.
               
                  Sir Nychās Straunge.Yet knightes
               
               Sir Charles Sturton.
               Sir Hugh Askue.
               Sir Frauncis Salmyn.
               Sir Richard Tounley.
               Sir Marmaduke Cūstable
               Sir George Awdeley.
               Sir Ihon Holcroft.
               Sir Ihon Soutwoorth.
               Sir Thomas Danby.
               Sir Ihon Talbott.
               Sir Rowland Clerk.
               Sir Ihon Horsely.
               Sir Iohn Forster.
               Sir Christofer Dies.iii. spaniards.
               
               Sir Peter Negroo.
               Sir Alonzo de vile.
               Sir Henry Hussey.
               Sir Iames Granado.
               Sir Water Bonham.
               Sir Robert Brādling mayr of new castell and made knight

thear at my lordes graces retourne.
            
            As it is not to be douted but right many mo in the armie beside these, did also well and valiauntly quite them. Although their prefermente was rather then differred, then their deserts yet to forgotten: euen so amōg these wear thear right many, the knowledge of whose actes and demerytes, I coold not cū by: And yet woold haue no man no more to doubt of the worthines of their aduauncemēt then they ar certein of his circūspectiō and wisedome, who preferd them to it. Whearupon all mē may safely thus far foorth without offence presume, yt his grace vnworthely bestowed this honour on no man.
            
               By this day, as Rokesborowe was sufficiently made tenable and defensible, (yt whiche to see, my lordes grace semed half to haue vowed before he woold thence departe) his grace and the counsell did first determine, that my lord Gray shoold remayne vpō the borders thear as the kynges maiesties Lieutenaunt. And then took ordre for the forts, that sir Andrew Dudley Captein of Broughty Crak had leaft with hym .CC. soldiours of hakbutters and oother, and a sufficient number of pyoners for his works. Sir Edwarde Dudley Captain of Hume castell lx. hakbutters .xl. horsemē and a .C. pioners. Sir Rafe Bulmer captain of Rokesborowe .CCC. souldyours

of hakbutters & oother, & .CC. pioners.
            
               Thursday the xxix. of september being Mighelmas day.¶ As thinges wear thus concluded, & warnyng gyuen ouer night that our cāpe shoold this day dissolue, euery man fell to pakkyng a pace: my Lordes grace this morening soon after vii. of the clok was passed ouer the Twede here. The best place whearof for gettīg ouer (whych was ouer against the west ende of our cāp, and not farr from ye brokē atches of ye brokē bridge) was yet with great stones in ye bottom so vneuen of grounde: And by reason of rayne that lately tel before, the water so depe and the streame so swyft that right many of our horsemen and footmen wear greately at theyr passage in perell, and

one or twoo drowned: and many cariages ouerthrowen and in greate daunger also of losyng.
            My lords grace toke his wey strayght toward Nuecastell, and thence homeward: And my lordtherle of Warwik, my lord Grey, and sir Rafe, Sadleyr wt diuers oother rode towarde Barwyke, to abide the cūmyng of the Scottish commissioners. In ye meā time of tariyng thear my lord of Warwyk did make v. knights.
            
               Sir Thomas Neuell, the lord Neuels broother.
               Sir Anthony Strelley.
               Sir Uerney.
               Sir Ihon Barteuile, Frēch man. and anoother.
            
            
               But the Skottes lyke men, though supper in couenaunt yet cōstant in vsage: and thearfore les blusshing to break promes, then custome, came not at all: whearupō my lord & oother of our commissioners, hauyng taryed for them, the full time of appoyntment which was vntil the iiii. of october, ye next day after departed thēce homeward. In part of ye meane time, while my lordes grace was thus doyng thexploits in Skotlād as I haue before written, the erle of Linnos, wt my lord Whartō lord Warden of our westmarches against Skotland (according as his grace had before takē order) wt a nūber of v.M. entred Skotlād on the west marches. And first passing a ii. mile

(after a dayes & a nightes defence) they wan the churche of Annan, a strōg place and very noysum alwey vnto oure men as they passed that wey. Thear they toke .lxii. prisoners the kepers of thesame, burnt ye spoile for cumber of caryage, and caused the churche to be blowen wt pouder: passinge thence, a .xvi. mile within the lōd, soon after they wan a hold, called ye castle of mylke, ye which they left well furnyshed with municion & mē and so retourned. Diuers other actes notable they did, here left vnwrittē of me, because vnknowen too me, but asmuche as I certeinly hard of, I haue thought mete hereunto to adde: because I may wel coūt theim as part of this expediciō & viage.
         
         
            
            A PERoracion vnto the gentle reder, with a shorte rehersall of the Actes doon.
            
               
                  I
                Haue thus absolued my boke, but neyther wt suche spede, as perchaū
               ce it had bene the office of hym, that woold take vpō hym to wryte of this matter, nor as the dignitie of ye Argument required publicacion. For well it may be thought, a man with meane diligēce, that had ben forth in no parte of the viage might in this space haue learned and written, as muche by enquirie at home. And sith ye
               
pour of tyme is in eche case so great, as thinges indifferently good, by choyse of oportunitie are made muche comendable, & agayn by cumming out of season, maye muche be disgraced: Right small then maye I take my meryt to be, that cum nowe so intempestiuely to tell ye tale, whearof al mens eares are ful of a four mooneths before. Yet for excuse of my slacknes (as who woolde not be blameles?) trustynge that my playne confession maye the rather mooue you too take thinges too the better: I haue thoughte it best, to render you the verye cause thearof: whiche is, that after I hadde sum what entred intoo thys busynes. And

thearby compeld to consyder ye precise obseruaunce of dedes, wordes, and in a maner of gestures: and ye diligēt markinge of ye situaciō of tounes, castels and churches, of ye lieng of hils playns and feldes, of ye course of ryuers, of respect of wyndes and of infinite such other thinges that oughte fyrst too haue bene made thear, while they wear a doynge, & whyle a man had bene at them (the which in dede I had not so perfitly written in my notes, and thearfore dryuen to stresse my memorie ye more for callinge the same too mynd agayn) And here wt regardyng ye greate hede that ought to be had in rehersall of circū
               staunces, and placinge of thinges, accordingly in writing as

they wear done, seen or hard: I foūd the enterprise a great dele more weyghtie, then the slēdernes of my wit was able quikly to pas with. Howbeit, whē vppon deper consideraūce I pondered with my self, what a thīg it was to make ony monument in this so prosperous a comminaltie, wherof the Gouernours are so absolutely wise, & whear in an infinitie number of men soo fynely wytted and so profoundly learned are besyde: I rather regarded the counsell of the wyse poet Horace,
               
                  Inde Art. Poet.
                whoo wils a man to kepe his writinges in his handes nine yere, (meaning a good while for correccion) then hadde any hast of publicatiō, whearby at ones I shold lose my libertie of amēdment.

Which libertie though after, I mought haue neuer so well, yet because it is nothinge so commēdable to mend a faut as to make no faut, I woolde gladly before haue had the leysure to loke, yt the thyng might haue past as faultes from me, as my diligēce could haue made it. And surely had it not ben more for aūswering the expectacion of sum men of honour, whoo knew I was in hand wt the matter, and who els peraduenture might haue douted my diligence, then it was for myne own desyre, to haue my doings soon to cūme abrode, I woold haue taken a better breath ear they had cum out yet. But sins the chaūce is cast, & the woord thus vttred cannot be called agayn,

whearby I haue ieoperded wt your .iii. houres reding to make you cēsour of my three moneths wryting: Iudge ye I pray you (as ye maye) with fauour, and conster my meanyng to the best. My nede, I knowe is much to pray, for I am not so foolysh too thinke my self so wise, that with a text al fautles I can driue foorthe so longe a proces. But as I, for the tyme haue endeuoured to say, rather as wel as I can, then aswell as can be, soo shall thear be for me libertie too all men too wryte, what els they can vtter, eyther foorther or better: which if thei do, I shal with all my hart becum then as benign a reder to thē, as I woold wish you now to be here to me.
            
               ¶To the entent now, I woold quite from cumber of enquirie or question, suche as haply woold wyt, what a do I had in the armie, or how I hadde ony knowlege of that I haue written: I haue thought it curtesie not to be daungerous to shew, that it pleased my very good lord, ye erle of Warwyke, Lieutenaūt of the host (who thearby had pour to make officers) too make me one of the Iudges of the Marshalsey: as Master William Cycyl, now master of the Requestes, with my lorde Protectours grace was the other: whearby we both, not beynge bounde soo straightly in daies of trauel to ordre of marche: nor oother while, but when we sat in Courte, too any great

affayres, had libertie to ride, to see things that wear doon, and leysure too note occurrences yt came: The which thing (as it chaunced) we booth dyd, but so far from appoyntmēt betwene vs. As neyther was wyting of others doing, tyll sumwhat before our departure homeward. Mary, since my cūming home indede, his gētilnes being such as too communicate his notes with me (I haue I cōfes) bene thearby, bothe muche a certeyned in many thinges I douted. And sumwhat remembred of yt, which els I mought hap to haue forgotten
            ¶But now, forasmuch as it hath pleased the moste benign goodnes of God, so fauorably to ayd vs in these our affaires,

and so moch to tender the equitie of our cause, as by hys mynister, and our hed in this iourney my lord Protectours grace, we haue tourned oure enemies entents for destruccion of vs, vnto theyr own confusion: And fyrst ouerturned of thear holdes, Dunglas, Thornton, Anderwyke, and Annā church, ouercummē then with the half of their number .xxxii.M: slain xv.M.iii.C: maymed .ii.M: taken .xv.C: burned, lyeth & kynkorne (as more of their tounes els we mought, if our Chieftaī had bene as willing, as our capitayns wear redy) wun ye best of their nauie, and burnt the residue: wun from thē, and kepe in the mids of their londe saint Coomes Ins, and Broughty

crak, and thearby (but by oure leaue) kepe thē from their hole entercours of merchaūtes: wū also & kepe the Castle of Mylk and Hume castle: wun of ordinaūce in their fortes, and at the feld aboue .lxxx. peces: Bylded Rokesborow castle, & Aymouth and gayned vnto the kynges Maiesties obedience, al Tyuedale and their Marches: All this in so short a time, as within .xxv. dayes: with soo small a losse of oure syde in all the hole viage, as vnder the numbre of lx. persons: and that in this the fyrst yere of our kynges Maiesties dominion & rule: whearby, according vnto his singuler towardenes, els euident, we may well conceyue an assured hope, hys hyghnes too shall

haue a most happie reygn, and with a (Gods grace) a longe: I woold wyshe and exhort, that ye, whiche wear not theare (for thoughe ye wear far from ony daunger of the los, yet can ye not be but full parteners of the winnynge) shoolde effectually with vs (accordynge as we all haue cause) gyue & wishe, firste glorie and prays vnto God, obediēce and victorie to our soueraygn, honour and thankes vnto our Protectour and coū
               sellours, woorship to our chyualrie, commendaciō vnto the rest that wear out, and a better mynd vnto our enemies. And I, trustyng vnto the benignitie of your gentle acceptaunce, whoo of this woorke shall hap to

be Reder, with such indifferencie of request touching the same as Horace made to hys welbeloued frēd Numicius,
               
                  Epist. i.
                shal thus take my leaue of you.
            
               Viue Vale: si quid nouisti rectius istis,
               Candidus imperti: si non his vtete mecum.
            
            Out of the Parsonage of s. Mary hill in London, this xxviii. of Ianuary. 1548.
         
      
      
         
            
            Fautes escaped in the printynge, and to be correct as followeth.
            
               a. the first leaf, on the first syde, the .xviii. line, or, rede: our,
               a. the .ii. first syde, the .xvii. line, Blank nests, rede: Blaknests.
               a. vi. first syde .ii. lyne, his, rede: this.
               a. vi. second syde .ix. line, or, rede our.
               
                  
                     •
                  . v. first syde .x. line, aswel, adde: as.
               
                  
                     •
                  . ii. first syde, vi. line, put out: a meruailous.
               A. v, first syde .vi. line, their, rede: thear.
               B. iii. first side, viii. line, put out: these.
               B. iii, ii. syde, v. lyne, Douglash, rede: Douglasses.
               B iiii.ii. syde, vii. line .iiii. mile, rede: iiii. sko re mile.
               B. v.ii, syde, viii. lyne, stopt, rede: stoopt.
               B. vi, first syde, vii. line, Douglash, rede: Douglasses.
               L. vii, fyrst syde, ix. line. for, gyue my: read gyue me my.
               E. ii, ii. syde, xxi. lyne .ii. rede: ii. M
               E iiii, ii. syde, viii. line, iii. rede: iii. L
               E v, ii. syde, xiii. line, honorable, rede: honorably
               E viii.ii. syde, first line, sight, rede: fight
               F ii, ii. syde, iii. line, handes, rede: hande
               F iii, ii. syde, xvii. line, inough, rede: enugh
               F vi, i. syde, x. lyne, ony whit, adde: (I dare saye)
               
                  G ii, ii. syde, ix, line, of our, adde: horsmē before them, they had sum sight of our.
               G vii, first syde, ii line, men, rede: mens
               H iii, i. syde, xvii. line, Morris, rede: Norris thear, xx. lyne, earnst, rede: earnest
               H v, ii. syde, x. lyne, continaunce, rede: continuance
               H vii.ii. syde, v. line, bere▪ rede: bare
               H viii, fyrst syde .xiiii. line, matter, adde: and thear, xi. line, remember, adde: all thear, xx. lyne, entend, adde: as
               K ii, ii. syde, fyrst line, xv, rede: xv. L
               K vi, ii. syde, ii. line, his, rede: the
               L iii, ii. syde, vii. line, luckyng, rede: lurkyng
            
            ¶FINIS.
         
         
            
            Imprinted in Londō, the last daie of Iune in the second yere of the reigne of our souereigne lorde kyng Eduuard the VI: by Richard Grafton, printer to his moost royall Maiestie, in the yere of our lord.
            M. D. XL VIII.
            ¶ Cum preuilegio ad imprimendum solum.
            
         
      
   