
      
         
            
            
            VINDICIAE FIDEI,
OR
A TREATISE OF
IVSTIFICATION BY
Faith, wherein that point is
fully cleared, and vindicated
from the cauils of it's
aduersaries.
Deliuered in certaine Lectures at
Magdalen Hall in Oxford, By William
Pemble, Master of Arts of the same
house: And now published
since his death for the publique
benefit.
            
               PHILIP. 3. 9.
—And he found in him not hauing mine owne righteousnes,
which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, the righteousnesse which is of God by faith.
            OXFORD
Printed by IOHN LICHFIELD and WILLIAM
TVRNER, for Edward Forrest. 1625.
         
         
            
            
            TO
THE RIGHT
WORSHIPFVLL
MASTER DOCTOR
WILKINSON Principall of Magdalen
Hall: The Masters,
Batchelours, and other Students
of that flourishing
Societie.
            
               SIRS
            
            
               CVstome hath made dedication
of bookes almost
as common, as
Printing of them: and
Wisdome directs there
to dedicate, where we
owe either respect, or
thankes: this worke
therefore is yours by right, the Author

thereof (who is now with God) vndertaking
it at your request, and performing it amongst
you for your good, so that now to
bestow it vpon you is not a gift, but retribution:
and I hope, it will both stirre you vp to
be carefull to continue fit men to stand vp in
his place, and remaine to his successours as a
patterne of imitation, if it be too high for aemulation.
To commend this Authour to
you, were to bring Owles to Athens, and for
me to commend the worke, would not adde
much worth to it: I know nothing can disparage
it, vnlesse it be a naked Margent: but
you and all that will be pleased to take notice
of his yeares, and great abilities in all humane
learning, wil confesse he could not haue time
to reade many Fathers, and so that defect
may be easily pardoned. For he had fully
finished sixe lusters of yeares, yet had hee
throughly traced the circle of the Arts, and
attained to an eminency, not only in those
ordinary Sciences, wherein all Schollers haue
some smattering, but euen in those sublimer
speculations of which all are not capable,

few search after: For hee was export in the
Mathematickes both mixt, and pure: his skill
in Histories was also praise-worthy: sometime
he spent (and not without successe) in
trauailing to learne 
                  〈…〉
                and
much trauaile in the study of our home-taught
tongues, that he had worth to lai
                  •
               e
beene Professour 
                  〈…〉
               , or H
                     •
                  brew:
all which indowments, as they 
                  〈◊〉
                afterwards
haue enabled him to read with much
profit, so could they not chuse but preuent
younger yeares from reading at all the ancient
Fathers, so it was not want, but abundance
of learning, that tooke vp his time, and
preuented his Margent, and therefore I hope
shall not disparage this worke. The first weapon
young Fencers learne to vse is single
sword, when they are masters of that, they
inlarge their skill; our Author was but yong,
let it not preiudice him, that he first vses onely
the sword of the Spirit, the word of God;
especially sith that is so dextrously weelded,
that by it alone he hath deadly wounded the
Romish Leuiathan: Therefore (as in my

knowledge▪ these Lectures were heard with
much applause, so doe I perswade my selfe,
they wil be read with great approbation, and
occasion the publishing of other Lectures,
and priuate labours, wherein hee tooke no
lesse paines, nor deserued lesse praise, then in
his publike indeauours. So hoping that you
will accept this small paines of mine, I take
my leaue, and rest
            
               From Tewkeisbury this 9th of
Iuly. 1625.
               
               Yours: willing to doe you greater,
though not more acceptable
seruice,
IOHN GEREE.
            
         
         
            
            To the Christian Reader.
            
               GEntle Reader, this Treatise was neither finished
nor polished by the Author: He left it
with mee when hee died, to bee dealt
with as cause should require; vpon perusall,
I found it fit for the time, so full of lif
                  •
                so sound & cleere
in proofe, that in my conceit it will doe much good: and
here thou hast it, as he left it. The argument is of all, indifference
betwixt vs and Papists the chiefest, no controuersie
more disputed, and lesse agreed vpon then this.
Christ and his bloud is the maine cause of our spirituall
peace; Papists and others diuide with him, and take
something to themselues: the spirituall pride that is in
the heart of man, would faine haue a finger in the work
of saluation, of other controuersies betwixt vs & the other
party: some befor the Popes Kitchin, some for the
Popes crowne, but this of our Iustification, toucheth the
life of Grace to the quicke, breeds more in our flesh then
any, and th
                  •
               se sicknesses are most dangerous, that come
from within. It is a fundamentall case, wherein to faile,
takes away the essence of a Christian: Wherefore sith
there is now such need to haue the world confirmed in
this truth of God, I thought good to send this booke abroad,
wherein this is put out of question to any man of
a single eie; that we are not iustified by any thing wee
any thing we can doe or suffer.
            Many write bookes, and confute them themselues
when they haue done; but this our Author what hee
wrote, he beleeued; for being to die, he confirmed this
Truth, in a discoursefull of life and power, and professed

to take his last vpon it, that it was the very truth of
God. Wee reade that some learned Papists, when they
are to giue vp the ghost, disclaime their owne merits,
and would faine finde all in Christ alone: but this our
Author did it before sundry, with that life, and feeling,

                  〈◊〉
                cleare apprehension of the loue of God in his Sonne,
that such is heard him, and loued him well and long,
could not well tel, whether they should weepe, or reioice;
weepe, to see a friend die, reioyce to see him die so. Good
Reader, learne this holy instruction out of this booke:
that we are not to be found in our owne righteousnes at
all, and beleeue it; thou shalt haue as he had, peace passing
all vnderstanding, in life, and in death, for being
iustified by saith (not by workes) we haue peace with
God saith Saint Paul. If any ingenuous learned Papist
would vndertake to answer this booke, me thinkes I
might prophecy that as Vergeziꝰ (Bishop of Capo d' Istria,
and Nuncio to Clement the seuenth, and Paul the
third) reading Luther, to answere Luther, was conuerted,
and had his soule saued. And as Pighius, tho of a
peeuish Spirit enough, yet reading Caluin, to confute
Caluin, was in the very doctrine of Iustification confuted
himselfe, and wrote with vs. So I say, would a
modest Papist read this booke to reply vnto it, he could
not but see the truth, and yeeld vnto it. For tho many
have done excellently in this argument, yet to speake
my opinion freely, at least for perspicuitie, this surpasseth
them all. Farewell.
            
               Thine in Christ, Rich. Capel.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A TREATISE OF
IVSTIFICATION.
            
               
                  CHAP. I.
                  The explication of these tearmes. First, Iustice, or
Righteousnesse. Secondly, Iustification.
                  
                     HAuing by Gods Assistance dispatched
two of those generall points
at first proposed (touching the
Antecedents and Nature of true
Faith) we are now by the same help
to goe forward to the third generall
head; namely,Sect. l. 
                           •
                        . 1. concerning the
Consequents of Faith, which were
two, our Iustification in regard of God, & our Obedience in
regard of our selues. The former will shew vs how to
iudge of the dignity and excellent worth of Faith; being so
farre honoured in Gods gracious acceptance, as to be made
the blessed Instrument of our spirituall peace and comfort
flowing from our Iustification. The later will direct vs how
to make triall of the truth of our faith in the discouery of
that vnseparable Vnion which there is betweene beleeuing,
and obeying.
                  Let vs begin with the former, our Iustification, the doctrine
whereof I shall endeauour to deliuer vnto you, as

briefely and plainely: as so large and difficult a subiect will
giue leaue. Wherein because the opening of the word will
giue vs some light for the vnderstanding of the matter: wee
are in the first place to see what is meant by these words,
Iustification, and Iustice, or Righteousnesse.
                  Iustice, therefore, or Righteousnesse (that I meane which
is created, for of vncreated Righteousnesse, wee haue not to
speake) is nothing but a perfect conformity and agreement
with the Law of God. For Gods will being originally,
essentially, and infinitely righteous; must needs be the patterne
& 
                        •
                     ule of all derivatiue & finite righteousnesse. Now
this righteousnesse (though but one, in its substance, neuer
thelesse) admits a double consideration, being called either,
                  1 Legall and of Workes, which stands in that conformity
vnto Gods law, which is inherent within our selues,
when in our owne persons and workes we possesse and practise
that righteousnesse which is required of the Law.
                  This Legall Iustice is also double,
                  1 Of Obedience, when all such things are done, as the
Law commandeth; or left vndone which it forbids. Hee
that doth so is a iust man.
                  2 Of Punishment or Satisfaction, when the breach of
the Law is satisfied by enduring the vtmost of such penalties,
as the rigour of the Law required. For not onely hee
who doth what the Law commandeth: but euen he also
that suffereth all such punishments, as the Law-giuer in Iustice
can inflict for the breach of the Law, is to be accounted
a lust man, and reckoned after such satisfaction made, as
no transgressor of the Law. The reason of this is plaine
from the name of penall Lawes.
                  For first, where the penalty is suffered, there the will of
the Law-giuer is satisfied; for as much as his will was, either
that the Law should be obserued, or the punishment
vndergone. If therefore he, to whom the Law is giuen, doe
either: he satisfies the will of the Law-giuer. Had his will

beene absolute, so that nothing else could haue contented
him, but onely obedience: then it had beene a vaine thing
to haue prescribed a determinate penalty. But when as a
penalty is limited in case of disobedience, 'tis manifest that
though the intent of the Law-giuer was in the first place
for Obedience; yet, in the next place it should suffice, if there
were satisfaction by bearing of the penalty.
                  Secondly, the good and benefit of the Law-giuer is hereby
also satisfied. For it is to be supposed in all penall lawes,
that the penalty limited is euery way proportionable and
equivalent, vnto that good which might accrew by the obseruation
of the Law. Else were the wisedome of the Law-maker
iustly to be taxed, as giuing an apparant encouragement
to offenders; when they should see the penalty, not
to be so much hurtfull to them; as their disobedience were
gainfull. He therefore that suffers the penalty is afterward
to be reckoned as if he had kept the Law: because by his
suffering, he hath aduanced, the Law-giuers honour, or benefit,
as much as he could by his obeying.
                  2 Euangelicall, and of Faith, which is such a conformity
to Gods Law as is not inherent in our owne persons; but being
in another is imputed vnto vs and reckoned ours. The
righteousnesse of the Law, and of the Gospell, are not two
seuerall kindes of righteousnesse; but the same in regard of
the matter and substance thereof: onely they differ in the
Subiect and Manner of application. The righteousnesse of
workes is that holinesse and obedience which is inherent in
our owne persons and performed by our selues: the righteousnesse
of Faith is the same holinesse and obedience inherent
in the person of Christ and performed by him; but imbraced
by our faith, and accepted by God, as done in our
stead, and for our benefit.
                  These are the diuers acceptions of this word Iustice or
Righteousnesse; so farre as it concernes the point in hand.
                  In the next we are to enquire of this word Iustification;
which being nothing but the making of a person iust or

righteous, may be taken in a double sense. For a person is
made iust either by Infusion, or Apology. Wee will take it in
these tearmes for want of better.
                  
                     
                     Iustification by Infusion, is then, when the habituall
quality of Righteousnesse and Holinesse is wrought in any
person by any meanes whatsoeuer; whether it bee created
& infused into him by the worke of another; or obtained by
his owne art and industry. Thus Adam was made iust. Eccle.
7. 29. God hauing giuen vnto him in his creation the inherent
qualities of Iustice and holinesse. Thus also the regenerate
are made Iust, in as much as by the holy Ghost,
they are sanctified through the reall infusion of grace into
their soules; in the which they increase also more and more,
by the vse and exercise of all good meanes.
                  
                      2 Iustification, by Apology is, when a person accused
as an offender is iudicially or otherwise, acquitted and declared
to be innocent of the fault: and so free from the punishment.
When the innocency of a party accused is thus
pleaded and declared; he is thereby said to bee iustified, or
made iust▪ according as, on the contrary by Accusation
and Condemnation, a party is said to be made vniust. As 'tis
plaine by that of Isaiah, 5. 23. [They iustifie the wicked for a
reward: and take away the righteousnesse of the righteous from
him] that is, they condemne the righteous, which is a making
of them, vnrighteous in the sight & estimation of men.
So in 1 Ioh. 5. 10. [He that beleeueth not God, hath made
him a lyer] because vnbeleeuers do in their hearts call Gods
truth into question: and accuse him to be false of his word.
So againe, Psal. 109. 7. [When he is iudged, let him be condemned.]

                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Let him goe out a wicked person. For
so his condemnation makes him (that is) declares him to
be. But here further it must be obserued, that this Iustification
of a person, by pleading to, and absolution in Iudgement, is
of two sorts; according as the Persons to be iustified, are
likewise of two seuerall conditions.
                  1 Some are truely and inherently iust, being no Transgressors

of the Law; either at all; or not in that whereof
they are accused. In this case if any crime, or suspition of
crime, be layed to their charge; they are iustified; either by
a plai
                        •
                     e denyall of the fact, alledging that the fault whereof
they are accused, was neuer by them committed; or by denying
the euill of the fact, alledging that in so doing they
haue done well, because they haue done what the Law commanded;
and thats their warrant. Thus Samuel iustifies his
gouernment against all surmise of fraudulent and wrongfull
dealing, that the people might imagine by him. In
1 Sam. 12. 3. &c. Thus Dauid cleares himselfe before God,
from that crime of conspiracy against Saul his Master, and
seeking of the Kingdome (which Cush and other Courtiers
accused him of) professing his innocency; and desiring God
to iudge him according to his righteousnesse and integrity
in that behalfe: as it is Psal. 7. 3. 4. 8. There need not other
instances in so plaine a matter. Those that are iustified by
this meanes are iustified by that Righteousnesse which is of
the Law and of Workes. By which plea though man may be
iustified before man: yet in the sight of God no flesh liuing
shall be iustified. As hereafter we shall see.
                  2. Some are not truely righteous in themselues: but are
in their owne persons transgressors of the Law. These (when
they are accused) haue no other meanes whereby they may
be iustified, but by confessing the crime, and pleading satisfaction:
that for their transgression against the Law, and offence
thereby against the Law-giuer, they haue fully satisfied
by doing or suffering some such thing, as by way of iust
penalty hath beene required of them. Now hee that can
plead such a full and perfect satisfaction, ought therefore
to be accounted innocent, and free from all desert of further
punishment (for tis supposed he hath endured the vtmost of
euill the Law could inflict:) and so he is to be esteemed of,
as if he had not at all violated the Law. For plenary satisfaction
for a fault, and the non-Commission of such a fault,
are of equall Iustice: and deserue alike Iustification. In

which point, it must be no
                        •
                     ed, that if the party offended doe
pardon without any satisfaction taken, there the offender is
not iustified at all. And againe if the offence be such, as there
can be no satisfaction made: then it is vtterly impossible
that the offender should euer be iustified. Now this satisfaction
which an offender may plead for his Iustification, is
threefold.
                  1 That which is made by himselfe in his owne person.
He that can plead this kinde of satisfaction, is iustified Legally
by his owne righteousnesse and merits.
                  2 That which is made by another for him; When
another by consent and approbation of the party offended,
interposeth himselfe as surety for the party delinquent, in his
stead and name to make that satisfaction, which is required
of the party himselfe. Whether this be done by doing or
suffering the same things which the delinquent should haue
done or suffered, or some other things but of equivalent
worth and dignity. He that pleades this kinde of satisfaction,
is iustified Euangelically by grace, through the righteousnesse
of another imputed to him, and accepted for
as his.
                  3 That which is made partly by himselfe and partly by
another. Which kinde of satisfaction may haue place betweene
Man and Man: but betweene God and Man it hath
none at all. Neither by this, nor by that first kinde of satisfaction
which is done in our owne Persons, can any man be
iustified in the sight of God, but onely by the second sort,
that satisfaction which is made by another for vs. As wee
shall see afterwards.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP II.
                  In what sense the word Iustification ought to be taken
in the present controversie, and of the difference
betweene vs and our Adversaries
therein.
                  
                     HAuing thus distinguished of these words, it followeth
that in the first place, we enquire in which
of the fore-named senses wee are to take this
word Iustification. The difference betweene vs
and our adversaries of the Romish Church, is in this point
very great and irreconcileable. They affirme that Iustification
is to bee taken in the first acception, for making of a Man
Iust by infusion of Reall Holinesse into him. So that with
them to Iustifie beares the same sense as to purifie or sanctifie.
that is of a person vncleane, vnholy, vniust, to make him formally
or inherently Pure, Holy and Iust, by working in him
the inherent Qualities of Purity, Sanctity and Righteousnesse.
                  
                  We on the cōtrary teach according to the Scriptures; That
Iustification, is to be taken in the second acception, for the
pleading of a persons innocency called into Question: wherby
he is iudicially absolved and freed from fault and punishment.
So that with vs to justifie a person is in iudiciall
proceeding to acquit him of the crime whereof hee is accused,
and to declare him free from desert of punishment. Whether
of vs twain be in the right is very materiall to be determined
of, considering that all ensuing disputation touching
the Iustification of a Sinner is to bee framed vpon one of
these grounds, rightly taken; and an error here is like a
threed misplaced at first, that runnes awry afterward through
the whole piece. Our Adversaries plead for their Assertion:
the Etym
                           •
                        logy of the word iustificare is iustum facere, in
that sense (say they) as P
                           •
                        rificare, Mortificare, Vi
                           •
                        ificare,
and many the like signifie to make pure, to make dead or aliue,
by the reall induction of such and such Qualities.
                  
                     
                     Againe they alleadge Scriptures; as namely Dan: 12. 3.
[They that turne many to righteousnes [Heb. that iustifie many)
shall shine as the Starres for euer] Apoc. 22. 11. [Hee that is
righteous (iustificetur) Let him be righteous still.] Tit. 3. 7.
[He hath saued vs by the washing of Regeneration, & renewing
of the holy Ghost,—That being iustified by his grace
wee should bee made Heires according to the hope of eternall
life.] Againe, 1 Cor. 6. 11. [And such were some of you: but
yee are washed, but yee are sanctified, but yee are iustified, in the
name of the Lord Iesus, and by the Spirit of our God.]Rom. 8. 30. Heb. 9. 
                     Out of
these with some other places (but such as haue scarce any
shew of good proofe) they would faine conclude, that by
Iustification nothing else is meant, but the Infusion of the
Habite of Iustice vnto him, that was before sinfull and vniust.
                  
                  
                      Hereto wee answere. 1. First for the Etymology that
the signification of words is to bee ruled, not by Etymologies:
but by the common vse:—Quem penes arbitrium est
et vis & norma loquendi—as the Poet truly defines. Now its a
thing notorious that in the custome of all Languages, this
word Iustificare imports nothing but the declaration of the
Innocency of a person▪ and lawfulnesse of any fact: against
such accusations as impleade either, of vniustice and Wrong.
I will iustifie such a Man or such a Matter (say wee in English)
and what English Man vnderstands thereby any
thing but this, I will make it appeare such a Man is honest,
such a fact lawfull, howeuer questioned to the contrary.
In other Languages my skill serues mee not, nor is it needfull
to trouble you with Instances. Those that haue written
of this subiect of every Nation witnesse every one for their
owne Language. And further this word Iustificare being
of a latter
                        •
                     stampe, vnknowne to such Latine Authors, as are
of ancient and purer Language, fitted by Ecclesiasticall writers
to expresse the meaning of those two words of the
Originall 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      and 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ; it is apparent the Copy
must follow the Originall, and the Latine word beare the

same sense as the Hebrew and Greeke words doe. And that
this is that Legall sense which wee haue spoken of is a point
so manifest throughout the whole Bible: that nothing but
impudency can deny it. As wee shall presently perceiue.
                  For in the next place. 2 As to the Scriptures which 
they alleadge for proofe of their Interpretation of the word:
We answere: That of a Multitude of places of Scripture,
wherin the word Iustifie is vsed, our Adversaries may truly
pick out one two or three that seem to fauor their Assertion
of Infusion of habituall Iustice: yet haue they gained little
thereby, For where tenne or more may be alleadged against
one in which the contrary signification is vsed, reason tels
vs, that an Article and Doctrine of Religion ought to bee
framed out of the signification of words and phrases, which
is vsuall, ordinary, and regular; and not out of that which
sometimes comes in by way of particular exception. Might
he not be iudged destitute of sense or modesty, that would
quarrell at the signification of the word Ecclesia, that in the
New Testament it is not taken for the Company & Assembly
of the faithful, because in a place or two (as Act. 19.) it is
taken for any ordinary ciuill meeting of people together?
Wherefore we may grant them 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      in that of Dan. 12.
and (
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      in Apoc. 22.) is to be made iust, formaliter, by infusion
of inherent Holinesse in a Sinner. For so Ministers
may be said to iustifie many (as it is in Daniel) viz. by Ministery
turne many to righteousnesse, directing them to the
meanes of Holinesse, and as Gods Instruments, working in
them the graces of Conversion and Regeneration. And so
he that is iust (in the Apoc.) may be iustified still: (that is)
encrease in the inward Habite and outward Exercise of Holinesse,
more and more. thus we may yeeld them in these
two places without seeking too, other Interpretations further
off. And yet will this be no prejudice to our Doctrine
grounded vpon the other signification so generally vsed.
                  Wee answere,Lib. 1. de Iust, cap. 1▪
                      that of all those other places alleadged by 
                     Bell, and Becanus, there is not any one that doe necessarily

                      enforce such a meaning of the word;See luke 18. 14 This Man went downe to his house iustified rather then the other.His prayer was for pardon. God be mercifull, &c. For he went home Iustified (i.e) pardoned and absolued rather then the Pharisee. as hee and his fellowes
stand for. These aboue the rest haue most apparance, namely,
1 Cor: 6. & Tit. 3. Rom 8. 30. where Iustification is, say they,
confounded as one and the same with Sanctification; & Regeneration.
Wherevnto I answeare that they doe ill to confound
those things that the Apostle hath distinguished very
plainly. Hee tels the Corinthians; that the Vnrighteous
shall not inherit the Kingdome of God, and that themselues
had bin such, euen of the most notorious rancke: but now
they were washed, sanctified and Iustified. By three words
the Apostle expresseth the change of their former condition.
One Metaphoricall (yea are washed) The meaning
whereof hee declareth in two proper words following. [yee
are Sanctified] thats one degree of washing or clensing from
the corruption of Nature (in part) by the [Spirit of our God]
of whome is the gift of inherent grace. And [ye are iustified]
thats another sort of washing, from the guilt of Sinne (in the
whole) [in the name of the Lord Iesus] that is, by the Righteousnesse
a
                        •
                     d Merits of Iesus Christ. Nothing can be more
perspicuous and elegant. That place to Tit. Chap. 3 is also
as plaine. God (sayeth the Apostle) speaking of the Heires
and sonns of GOD in Christ) (hath saued vs [not
by any workes of ours; but by his owne mercy. ver. 5. This salvation
is set forth to vs in the Meanes and in the End. The
meanes are two Regeneration and Iustification. [He hath
saued vs by the washing of Regeneration, & renewing of the
Holy Ghost] This is the first Meanes (viz.) Regeneration
 expressed 1. by its properties or parts. 1. Washing or doing away
of the filthy Qualities of our corrupted Natures. 2. Renewing,
the Investing of it with new Qualities of Graces
and Holynesse.
                  
                      2 By the cause efficient the Holy Ghost, [whome hee
hath shed on us abundant
                        •
                     y] or richly, following the Metaphore,
                     Which is referred, ad gratiam Regenerationis.
comparing the Holy Ghost in this operation to water
powred out. 2 The Meritorious Cause of it [Through
Iesus Christ our Saviour] who hath procured the sending

downe of the [Holy ghost] into the hearts of the elect. ver. 6.
This is one stepp to Heauen, our Regeneration, but it is imperfect
and cannot abide the severity of Gods Iudgements:
now we must be absolutely free from all fault and guiltinesse
before we can haue hope of obtaining eternall Life: Therfo
                        •
                     e
followes the other meanes of salvation (viz.) our
Iustification, by the free grace of God which vtterly frees vs
from all blame whatsoever, both of obedience to the law and
satisfaction for Sins against the law; that thus being Regenerate
and Iustified we might obtaine the end of our salvation,
eternall Life.
                  The third place is that [Rom. 8. 30, Whom God hath Praedestinated,
                     Tom. 2. tract. 4. Cap. 2. Parag. 
                           •
                        .
                     
                     these he hath called, whome called, iustified; whome
iustified, glorified] In this place Becanus triumphs. For (sayth
he) The Apostle here describing the order of Mans salvation,
first in Gods decree; then in the Execution of it by
three degrees of Vocation Iustification and Glorification: it
followes necessarily from thence; that either Sanctification
is left out: or that it is confounded with one of those three
degrees named. Tis a desperate shift to say that Sanctification
is signified by Vocation or Glorification: therefore it must
be the same with Iustification; And this cannot be avoyded
by any Elusion. We leaue shifts to the Iesuites, returning
him to this place, this plaine direct answere. That Sanctification
is here comprised in the word Vocation. For whereas
the linkes of this golden chaine are inseparable, and all
those that are called must needes be iustified and glorified:
by vocation, must here be meant that calling which is inward
and effectuall, not that alone which is outward by the externall
Ministery of the Word. For all that are thus called, bee
not iustified, as is apparent; and againe, some, as Infants,
are iustified that are not capable of such a Calling. But now;
wherein stands the inward vocation of a sinner? Is it not in
the Infusion of inherent sanctifying Grace, enlightning his
Eyes, opening his Eare, changing his Heart, turning him
from darkenesse to light, from the power of Satan, to the

obedience of God; in a word, in the Renovation of his Fac
                           •
                        lties?
Which what is it else but Sanctification? or Regeneration?
or Conuersion? Only stiled by that tearme of Vocation
in regard of the meanes whereby it is ordinarily effected
(that is) the preaching of the word. He must needs coyne
vs some new Mystery in Divinity: who will perswade vs
that some other worke of Grace is meant by Vocation; and
not that of Sanctification. Therefore wee haue neither one
Linke snapt out, nor two shuffled together in this chaine of
our Saluation: But foure, as distinct, as vndivideable. Election,
Sanctification, (whereto we are called by the Gospell
preached, 2 Thess. 2. 14.) Iustification by Faith, (which is a
fruit of Sanctification) and Glorification.
                  
                  
                     The fourth place is that in the Epistle to the Hebrewes,
Chap. 13. 14. [For if the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the
ashes of an Heifer, sprinkling them that are vncleane, sanctifieth
as touching the purifying of the flesh: how much more shall
the blood of Christ, who through the eternall Spirit offered
himselfe without fault to God, purge our consciences from dead
workes, to serue the liuing God.]
                  Hence they argue; That as Leuiticall Sacrifices and
Washings did sanctifie the flesh from outward Legall impurity:
so the Sacrifice of Christ doth purge the Conscience
from inward spirituall vncleanenesse of dead Workes or
Sinnes.
                  This purging of the conscience is nothing, but iustification
of a sinner. Wherefore 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      and 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      be
all of one meaning.
                  To which I answere, That the Apostle in that Chapter,
and the next disputing of the vertue and efficacy of Christs
death, far exceeding the force of all Leuiticall Sacrifices (the
shadowes of it) ascribes vnto it what could not be effected
by those, (viz.) eternall Redemption [verse 12.] purging
of the conscience from dead workes [verse 12.] the putting
away of sinne, [verse 26.] The Sanctification of the Elect,
[Chap. 10. 7. 10.] made Heires according to the hope of

eternall life. In neither then of those places is our sanctification
confounded with our Iustification: but both distinctly
declared, as two seuerall partes of graces and meanes of
the Accomplishment of our eternall Happinesse. 'Tis scarce
worth the labour to examine those other Scriptures produced
by our Aduersaries, whereof some part doe directly
crosse, and the rest doe but onely in apparance confirme their
assertion. In generall therefore for them, thus much wee
confidently affirme, that let the Concordance be studied, and
all those places examined wherein either [
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ] is vsed
in the Old or [
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ] in the New Testament: there will not
one be found, no not one, in which those wordes carry any
other meaning,Rom 6. 7. then that which we stand for (viz.) the
clearing of a parties innocence questioned as faulty,[
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        ] significat liberatur: sed sersus loci d
                           •
                        scrimen indicat. and
blame-worthy. Take a taste of some places.
                  1 Iustification is sometimes applyed to 1. God, when
Man iustifies God. As Psal. 51. 4. Rom. 3. 4. [That thou 
mightest be iustified [
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ] in thy saying, and mightest
ouercome when thou art iudged.] Matth. 11. 19. [And
wisedome is iustified [
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ] of her children,] Luke 7. 35.
Luke 7. 29. [And the Publicans iustified [
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ] God,
being baptized with the baptisme of Iohn.] Can there be any
other meaning of Iustification here
                           •
                        : but this onely? That
God is then iustified, when his workes, his wisedome, his sacred
ordinances, being accused by prophane men, as vntrue,
vnequall, vn
                           •
                        ust, and foolish, are by the Godly acknowledged,
or any other meanes evidently cleared vnto all men, to
be full of all Truth, Equity, Wisedome, and Holinesse?
                  
                  2 Man and that 
                  
                  1 Before Man in things betweene Man and Man.
When Man iustifies Man, Deut. 25. 1. [If there be a controversie
betweene Men, and they come vnto iudgement, that the
Iudge may iudge them, then they shall iustifie [
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ]
the righteous and condemne the wicked,] Isaiah 5. 23. [Woe
to them wh
                        •
                     ch iustifie the wicked for a reward, and take away
the righteousnesse of the righteous from him] Prouerb. 17. 15.

[He that iustifieth th
                        •
                      wicked, and condemneth the iust, euen
they both are an abomination to the Lord.] 2 Sam. 15. 4.
[Oh that I were made Iudge in the Land, that euery man that
hath any suit or cause, might come to me, and I would doe him
Iusti
                        •
                     e. [
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ] In these & many the like places, to
Iustifie is in iud
                           •
                         ciall proceeding to absolue a party from
fault & blame: whether it be rightfully or wrongfully done.
Ezek. 16. 52. [Be thou confounded and beare thy shame, in
that thou hast iustified thy sisters] speakes God vnto Ierusalem;
in comparison of whose abhomination the sinnes of
Sodome and Samaria, were scarce to be accounted any faults.
They were Saints to her. Of the Pharises Christ speakes,
Luke 16. 15. [Yee are they that iustifie your selues before men:
but God knoweth your hearts.] That is, You stand vpon the
defence and ostentation of outward Holinesse, and deeming
it sufficient to make it appeare before Men you are holy:
without regard of acquitting the sincerity of your hearts
before God.
                  
                  
                      2 Before God, where God iustifies Man Exod. 23. 7.
[The innocent and the righteous slay thou not, for I will not iustifie
the wicked.] by esteeming him as innocent, and letting
him goe from punishment. Isaiah 50. 8. (Hee is neere that
iustifieth me, who will contend with me?) saith the Prophet in
the person of Christ, signifying God would make it appeare
that he was blamelesse, for the rejection of his people the
Iewes who perished for their owne and not his fault. Rom.
5. 18. (As by the offence of one iudgement came on all Men to
condemnation: So by the righteousnesse of one, the free gift
came vpon all men to the Iustification of life,) Rom▪ 8. 33. 34.
[Who shall lay thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God
that iustifies; who shall condemne? 1 Cor. 4. 4. [I know nothing
by my selfe: yet in this am I not iustified. Hee that iudgeth
me is God. q. d. I haue kept a good conscience in my
Ministery, but God is my iudge, though my conscience pronounce
me innocent, yet God is my sole Iudge that iudgeth
me and my conscience. Acts 13. 38. 39. [Through this

Man is preached vnto you the forgiuenesse of sinnes; and from
all things from which yee could not be iustified by the Law of
Moses; by him euery one that beleeueth is iustifyed.
                  By which places (not to name more) it appeares pl
                        •
                     inly:
that Iustification is opposed to Accusation and Condemnation:
and therefore can signifie nothing else but the defence
& absolution of a persō accused for an offender. Which thing
is so cleare and euident that it cannot be gaynsayed, except
by those alone who are wilfully blind, and obstinately resolued
to cōtradict any truth, that makes against their inveterate
errors. For our selues, we may not, nor dare not shut
our eyes against so cleare Light: nor ought we to be so bold
whē God hath acquainted vs with his meaning; as to follow
another of our owne making. And there fore according to
the Scriptures we acknowledge and maintaine, that as in
other places where mention is made of the Iustification of a
sinner before God: so in the 2 and 4 Chapters of the Ep.
to the Rom. and third Chapter of the Gal. (where the Doctrine
there of is directly handled) by Iustification nothing else
is meant; but the gracious Act of Almighty God whereby
hee absolues a beleiuing sinner accused at the Tribunall
of his Iustice, pronouncing him iust and acquitting him of
all punishment for Christs sake.
               
               
                  CHAP III▪
                  
                  The Confutation of our Aduersaries cauils against
our acception of the word Iustification.
                  
                     OVR Adversaries haue little to reply against
these so plaine places. Somthing they answere,
namely.
                  1 That it cannot be denied but that Iustification,
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
doth many times beare that sense we stand for. But 
with all they would haue vs obseru this rule that [Quotiescun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
in Scripturis Deus dicitur iustificare impium: semper intelligendum
est ex impio facere iustum. God cannot declare a

man to be iust: but of vniust he must make him iust.] And they
giue the Reason. Because the Iudgment of God is according
to Trueth Rom. 2. 2. We embrace this Rule and the
Reason of it, acknowledging that where euer there is Iustification,
there must be Iustice some way or other in the party
Iustified. But the Question stands still in what manner God
makes a sinner iust: whom hee in Iudgemenr pronounceth
so to be. They say by bestowing on him the grace of Sanctification
& perfect Righteousnesse inherent in his own Person.
We affirme, that it is by imputing vnto him the perfect
Righteousnesse of Christ, accepting Christs obedience for his.
In which diuersity let vs come as neere them as Trueth will
giue leaue. Thus 
                        •
                     arre we goe along with them.
                  
                      1 That there is inherent Righteousnesse bestowed vpon
a Sinner, whereby of vnholy, impure, vniust; he is made holy,
cleane, and iust. We all confessed this worke of the Holy
Ghost renewing Man in the spirit of his mind, restoring
in him theEph
                           •
                        . 4. 24. Col. 3. 9. Image of God inEph
                           •
                        . 4. 24. Col. 3. 9. Knowledge, Righteousnesse,
and Holinesse. That the Holy Ghost dwelles in the Elect, as
in1 Cor. 3. 16. 6. 19. 2 Cor. 6. 16. Rom. 8. Temples dedicated to his service, which he adornes by
communicating vnto them his Heauenly graces. That hee
makes them LiuingRom. 12. 5. 1 Cor. 12. 11. Members of Christs Body: and fruitfull
Ioh. 15. 4.Braunches of that true Vine. That this grace infused is
a fountaine ofIoh. 4. 14. Living water springing vp to eternall Life.
These things we beleeue and teach.
                  Wherfore whereas the Popish Doctors fall foule on our
reformed writers, charging Calvin & others for denying all
Inherent Righteousnesse in Beleeuers, & maintaining only an
Imputed Righteousnesse without them: We tell them 'tis a
grosse Calumny forged by perverse. Minds, that list not to
vnderstand Mens playnest writings. Nor Calvin
                     Cal. Iustit. lib. 3 cap. 1
                           •
                        . nor any
that euer maintained the trueth with him, euer denied the
Righteousnes o
                        •
                      
                     Sanctification. But this he denies & we also
with the Scriptures that the Righteousnesse which iustifies
vs in Gods Iudgment is not in our selues: but all in
Christ.
                  
                  
                     
That inherent Righteousnesse or sanctification allway 
keepe company with Iustification, in the same Person. Severed
they are never in their common Subiect (viz) a True
Beleeuer. as appeares Rom. 8. 30.Rom. 8. 30. But that therefore
they must be confounded for one and the same Grace and
worke of God; may be affirmed with as good Reason: as
that in the Sunne Light and Heate are all one: because alwaies
ioyned to geather.
                  That by this grace of Inherent Righteousnesse, a Man 
is in some sort iustified before God. That is so farre as a
Man by the grace of God is become truly holy and good:
so farre God esteemes him holy & good. God taketh notice
of his owne graces in his Children, he approues of them and
giues Testimony of them in case it be needfull; as appeares
by the Righteousnesse of Iob, Dauid, Zachary and other
holy Men; who were good and did good in Gods sight.
Yea in the Life to come when (all corruptions being vtterly
done away▪) the Saints shallbe invested with perfection of
Inherent Holinesse: by the Righteousnesse of their owne,
and not by any other shall they then appeare iust in Gods
fight.
                  Thus farre we agree with them. But herein now wee 
differ, that although by the grace of Sanctification infused,
God doe make him righteous and holy in some measure that
was before altogether vnholy and wicked: neuerthelesse
we affirme that by and for this Holynesse, the best of Saints
living never were nor shallbe Iustified in Gods sight; that
is pronounced iust and innocent before the Tribunall of his
Iustice. For we here take vp the forenamed Rule layed
downe by our adversaries, Whomsoeuer God pronounceth to
be perfectly iust; he must needs be made perfectly iust. For
Gods Iudgment is according to trueth. Now that no man
in this life, is made perfectly iust by any such inherent Holinesse
in him as is able to outstand the severe and exact triall
of Gods Iudgment: is a Trueth witnessed by the Scripture
and confessed alwaies by the most holy Saints of God.

Our Aduersaries indeed stiffly pleade the contrary: teaching
that sinne and Corruption in the Iustified is vtterly abolished.
The error and pride of which Imagination we shall
shortly haue occasion more at Large to Discouer vnto you.
Meane while let that much stand for good: that Man being
not made perfectly iust in himselfe cannot thereby be declared
perfectly iust before God: and therefore some other
Righteousnesse, & not that of Sanctification is to be sought
for, whereby a sinner may be Iustified in Gods sight.
                  
                      To that argument of ours from the Opposition of iustification
to Accusation and Condemnation confirmed by so
many places of Scripture;
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . Ibid. Parag. 9. They answere. That this hinders
nothing at all Both may agree to God who of his mercy
iustifies some; (that is) makes them inherently Iust; of his
Iustice condemns other (that is) punisheth them. To which
slight Answeres wee make this short reply. That where
words are opposite, (as they acknowledg these to be) there
according to the Lawes of opposition, they must carry opposite
Meaning. But vnto Accusation, Comdemnation, and
punishment nothing is opposite but defence, Absolution, and
Pardon. Where therefore Iustificare is coupled with these
words; it must needes beare this and no other meaning: of
a bad man to make a good is not opposite to Accusation,
Condemnation, or punishment of him: Accused he may be,
Condemned and punished iustly, and after made good.
                  I should but trouble you to alleadge more of their Cavills.
Let thus much suffice for the clearing of this point:
That Iustification and Sanctification are to be Distinguished
and not confounded. The Righteousnesse of the one is in vs,
in its Nature, true and good: but for its degree and measure,
Imperfect; and alwaies yoaked with the remaynder of naturall
Corruption▪ And therefore if a sinner should plead this
before the Iudgment seate of God, (offering himself to be
iudged according to this Righteousnesse and Innocency) oh
how soone his mouth would be stopped; And this confession
wrung out from out his Conscience; All my Righteousnesse

is as filthy Raggs! And againe Vilis sum; I am
vile, what shall I answere thee! But that other Righteousnesse
of Iustification is without vs in Christs possession: but
ours by Gods gratious gift and acceptation, and this
euery way perfect and vnreproued in the seuerest Iudgment
of God. And therefore when a sinner is drawne before the
Barre of Gods Iudgment, accused by the law, Satan, his
Conscience; conuicted by the euidence of the Fact, and to
be now sentenced and deliuered to punishment by the vnpartiall
Iustice of God: In this case he hath to alleadge for
himself the al-sufficient righteousnesse of a Mighty redeemer
who onely had Done and suffered for him that which hee
could neuer doe nor suffer for himselfe. This Plea alone and
no other in the world, can stop vp the Mouth of hell, confute
the accusations of Satan, chase away the Terrors that haunt
a guilty conscience, and appease the infinite Indignation of
an angry Iudge. This alone will procure fauour and absolution
in the presence of that Iudge of the whole world.
This alone brings downe from Heauen into our Consciences
that blessed peace, which passeth all vnderstanding;
but of him that hath it. Whereby we rest our selues secure
from feare of Condemnation; being provided of a defence
that will not faile vs, when after death wee shall come into
Iudgment.
               
            
            
               SECT. 2.
               
                  CHAP. I.
                  The Orthodoxe opinion concerning the manner of
Iustification by Faith, and the confutation
of Popish errours in this
point.
                  
                     HAuing thus cleared the meaning of this word
[Iustification] and shewed that the Scriptures,Sect. 2. 
                           •
                        . 
                           •
                        .
when they speake of the Iustification of a sinner
before God, doe thereby vnderstand the absolution
of him in Iudgement from sinne and punishment.

Wee are now vpon this ground to proceede
vnto the further explication of this point, to enquire by
what Meanes and in what Manner, this Iustification of a sinner
is accomplished. That we may goe on more distinctly:
I will reduce all our ensuing discourse of this point into
three heads.
                  
                     First,
                           
                              •
                            Gen. Head
                              •
                           . touching the condition required in them
 that shall be iustified.
                     Secondly, the matter of our Iustification.
                           
                              •
                            Cap. 7. (viz.)
What righteousnesse is it wherefore a sinner is Iustified.
                     
                         Thirdly; touching the forme of Iustification, in
what the quality of this iudiciall Act of God, iustifying
a sinner, consisteth.
                  
                  
                      Concerning the first at this time. The condition required
in such as shall be partakers of this grace of Iustification is
true faith,Generall head. wherunto God hath ordinarily annexed this great
priuiledge; That by faith and faith onely, a sinner shall bee
iustified: This the Scriptures witnesse in tearmes as direct
and expresse, as any can be. [Rom 3. 28. We conclude a man
is iustified by faith without the workes of the Law.] and Rom.
4. 9. [For we say that faith was imputed vnto Abraham for
righteousnesse.] and Rom. 5. 1. [Then being iustified by faith
we haue peace towards God through Iesus Christ our Lord.]
With other the like places. Whence it is agreed vpon on
all sides, that a sinner is iustified by faith: but touching the
manner, how he is said to be iustified by faith, there is much
controuersie and brawle, betweene the Orthodoxe of the
reformed Churches, and their Aduersaries of Rome and
Holland; the Arminians, and the Papists. The sentence of
the reformed Churches touching this point, consisteth of
two Branches.
                  First, that a sinner is iustified by faith, not properly
as it is a quality or action; which by it's owne
dignity and merit, deserues at Gods hands Remission
of sinnes; or is by Gods fauourable acceptance

taken for the whole and perfect righteousnesse of
the Law, which is otherwise required of a sinner:
but onely in relation vnto the obiect of it, the righteousnesse
of Christ; which it imbraceth and resteth
vpon.
                  Secondly, that a sinner is iustified by faith in opposition 
vnto the Righteousnesse of workes in the
fulfilling of the Law. Whereby now no man can
be iustified.
                  In this relatiue and inclusiue sense doe the Reformed
Churches take this proposition [A man is iustified by faith.]
They explaine themselues thus: There are two Couenants
that God hath made with man; By one of which and by no
other meanes in the world, saluation is to be obtained. The
one is the Couenant of workes, The tenor whereof is [Doe
this and thou shalt liue.] This Couenant is now vtterly
void, in regard of vs; who through the weaknes of our sinfull
flesh cannot possibly fulfill the condition of Obedience
required therby: and therfore we cannot expect Iustification
& Life by this means. The other is the Couenant of grace
the Tenor whereof is, Beleeue in the Lord Iesus and thou
shalt be saued. The condition of this couenant is Faith: the
performance whereof differs from the performance of the
condition of that other Couenant. Doe this and Liue is a
compact of pure Iustice wherein wages is giuen by debt, so
that he which doth the worke obeying the Law, may in
strict Iustice for the worke sake claime the wages, eternall
life, vpon iust desert. Beleeue this and liue is a compact of
freest and purest Mercy: wherein the reward of eternall life
is giuen vs in fauour for that which beares not the least proportion
of worth with it: so that he which personnes the
condition cannot yet demand the wages, as due vnto him in
seuerity of Iustice; but onely by the grace of a freer promise,
the fulfilling of which hee may humbly sue for. By which
grand difference betweene these two Couenants clearely
expressed in Scriptures, it appeares manifestly that these

two Propositions. [A man is iustified by workes,] [A man
is iustified by Faith,] carry meanings vtterly opposite one to
the other. The one is proper and formall: the other Metonymicall
and Relatiue. In this Proposition (A Man is
iustified by workes) we vnderstand all in proper and precise
termes: That a righteous man who hath kept the law exactly
in all points, is by and for the dignity and worth of that
his obedience iustified in Gods sight from all blame and punishment
whatsoeuer; because perfect obedience to the
morall Law in it selfe, for it owne sake deserues the approbation
of Gods seuere Iustice and the reward of Heauen.
But in that other Proposition (A man is iustified by Faith.)
We must vnderstand all things relatiuely thus. A sinner is
iustified in the sight of God from all sinne and punishment
by faith (that is) by the obedience of Iesus Christ beleeued
on; and embraced by a true faith. Which Act of Iustification
of a sinner, although it be properly the onely worke of
God, for the onely merit of Christ: yet is it rightly ascribed
vnto faith, and it alone, for as much as faith is that mayne
condition of that new Couenant, which as we must perform
if we will be iustified: so by the performance thereof we are
said to obtaine iustification and life. For when God by
grace hath enabled vs to performe the condition of beleeuing;
then doe we beginne to enioy the benefit of the Couenant;
then is the sentence of absolution pronounced in
our consciences; which shall be after confirmed in our
death; and published in the last iudgement. Secondly, our
faith and no other grace directly respects the promises of the
Gospell; accepting what God offers, sealing vnto the truth
thereof by assenting thereto, and imbracing the benefit and
fruit of it vnto it selfe, by relying wholly vpon it. This interpretation
of that proposition the Reformed Churches do
admit, & none other: reiecting as erronious and contrary to
the Scriptures such glosses as ascribe any thing to the dignity
of faith; or make any combination betweene Faith and
Workes, in the point of our Iustification. Amongst which

there are three erronious assertions touching mans Iustification
by Faith; which we are briefly to examine and refute.
                  1 That faith iustifieth vs [Per modum Causae efficientis
& meritoriae] as a proper efficient and meritorious cause.
Which by it's owne worth and dignity deserues to obtaine
Iustification, Remission of sinnes, and the grace of well-doing.
                  This is the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, which Bellarmine
labours to proue▪ in his 17. Chap. lib. pr. de Iustificatione,
where disputing against Iustification by faith alone, hee
tels vs. If we could be perswaded that faith doth Iustifie
[impetrando, promerendo, & suo modo inchoando Iustificationem,]
then we would neuer deny that loue, feare, hope,
and other vertues did iustifie vs as well as faith. Whereupon
he sets himselfe to prooue that there is in faith it selfe
some efficacy and merit to obtaine and deserue Iustification.
His Arguments are chiely two.
                  
                      From those places of Scripture, wherein a man is
said to be iustified,Gal. 2. 16. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .Rom. 5. 1. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,Rom. 28. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
or absolutely without Article or Preposition. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     per fidem,
ex fide (or) fide. Wherein these Prepositions, signifie,
saith he, the true cause of our Iustification. Which he proues
1 By the contrary, when a man is said to be iustified [
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,
Rom. 4. 2. & 3. 20. Gal 2. 16. Iam. 2.
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .] This notes the true efficient
deseruing cause of his Iustification. Secondly, By the
like in other places where we are said to be redeemed, saued,
sanctified, Per Christum, per sanguinem, per mortem, per vulnera;
and in the whole 11. to the Heb. The Saints are said
to doe such and such things (
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ) by faith. All signifying
the proper cause.
                  
                  From those places of Scripture which (sayth he) plainly 
shew: Faith doth impetrare remissionem, & suo quidem
modo mereri. Such are those [Thy Faith
                           •
                         hath saued thee]
or made thee whole. A speech that Christ vsed often; as to
theLuke 7. 5
                           •
                        . woman that washed his feet; To herMat. 9. 22. that had an issue

of Blood; To theMa
                           •
                        . 10. 52. blind man recovered of his sight. And
that to the Cananitish woman [O woman
                     Mat. 15. 21. 
                     great is thy Faith]
now see what the merit of this Faith was, (For this
                     Mat. 7. 29. 
                     saying
go thy way the Diuel is gone out of thy Daughter) Thus Abraham,
being
                     Rom. 4. 20. 
                     strenghened in Faith glorified God.) who
therefore iustified him for the Merit of his Faith. And againe
in the eleuenth to the Heb. by many examples we are
taught that (byHeb. 21. 5▪ 6. Faith (that is) by the merit and price of
Faith Enoch and other men pleased God.
                  For answeare here vnto.
                  1 Vnto the Argument from the Proposition we reply;
That if 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      & 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     must be needs strictly taken
in the same kind of Causality: then the Iesuits should doe
well to stand to that and make the similitude betweene Faith
and workes runne thus. A Man is iustified (by) workes
that is for the proper and only Merits of his obedience; so
a Man is iustified (by) Faith that is for the only merit of his
Beleeving in Christ: aud by that meanes both shallbe true
and effectuall causes of Iustification. But if Bellarmine dare
not thus presse the similitude for feare of being found guilty
of despising the blood of the New Couenant, attributing that
to the Merit of Faith which belongs only to the Merit of
Christ; he must then giue vs that leaue to distinguish which
he takes to himselfe; and if he fall to his Qualifications and
quodammodo's: he must pardon if we also seeke out such an
Interpretation of those places; as may not crosse other
Scriptures. Which for asmuch as they testifie that (We
                     Rom. 3. 24. 
                     are
Iustified by his grace through the Redemption that is in Christ)
that (All
                     Heb. 1. 3. 
                     sinne is purged by the blood of Christ) that (By
the sacrifice of himselfe he hath put away Sinne) and (With
offering hath consecrated for ouer them that are sanctified.):
we dare not without horrible sacrilege ascribe the grace of
our Iustification vnto the worke and worth of any thing
whatsoeuer in our selues; but wholy and only to the Righteousnesse
of Christ. And therefore when the Scriptures

say we are iustified (by) Faith; we take not the word (By)
in this formall and legall sense; we are iustified by the efficacy
of our Faith, or for the worth of our Faith, according as 'tis
vnderstood in Iustification by workes: but we take it Relatiuely
& Instrumentally: We are Iustified by Faith (that is)
by the Righteousnesse of Christ, the benefit whereof vnto
our Iustification, we are made partakers of by Faith, as the
only grace which accepts of the promise, and giues vs assurance
of the performance. He that looked to the Brasen
serpent and was cured, might truly be sayd to be healed (by)
his looking on, though this Action was no proper cause
working the cure by any efficacy or dignity of it selfe; but
was only a necessary condition required of them that would
be healed, vpon the obedient observance whereof, God
would shew them favor: so he that looketh on Christ beleeuing
in him, may truly be sayed to be saued and Iustified by
Faith, not as for the worth, and by the 
                        •
                     fficacy of that act of
his; but as it is the Condition of the promise of grace, that
must necessarily go before the performance of it to vs: vpon
our Obedience where vnto God is pleased of his free grace
to iustifie, Nor is this Trope, any way harsh, or vnusuall
to put Oppositum pro opposito, Relatum pro Correlato,
Habitum pro Obiecto. In Sacramentall locutions 'tis a generall
Custome, to put the signe for the thing signified: and
the like is vsed in other passages [
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
And the
                     Act. 6. 7. & 6. 5. 
                     word of God grew, &c. and 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,
the
                     1 Tim. 3. 9. & 4. 6. 
                     mystery of faith,) and 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , in the words of
Faith) and Rom. 8. 24. [
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Spe seruati sumus
(id est) Christo in quem speramus. Hope that is seene is
not hope, that is, res visa non sperata est. That of Ignatius,
[
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ] Like to that (Christ our Ioy) Anni
spem credere Terrae) Georg. 1.Virg. Georg. 1. And if we list not to be contentious,
'tis plaine enough, that in those places, where the
Apostle treats of Iustification by faith (viz) the grace of
God in Christ; opposing workes and faith, that is the Law
and the Gospell, the Righteousnesse of the Law, to the righteousnesse

of the Gospell, which is no other but the Righteousnesse
of Christ. Thus faith is taken, Gal. 3. 23. Where he
expresly treats of Iustification. But before Faith came, we were
kept vnder the Law, shut vp vnto the Faith, which should afterward
be reuealed.]Gal. 3. 23. That is, Before Christ came, and the cleare
exhibition of the Gospell, and the Righteousnesse thereof:
the Church was kept vnder the Ceremoniall Law, as vnder
a Schoole-master,
                     Act. 13. 38. directing her vnto Christ, that so [Wee
might be iustified by Faith.] that is, not by the Lesson of the
Law, but by Christ, typified and figured vnto vs therein.
                  2 Vnto the other Argument prooving the merit of
faith, we reply; That in those places is no ground, at all for
such a conceit. [Thy Faith hath saued thee,] saith Christ to
some whō he cured both in Body & Soule. But what? was it
by the efficacy and for the word of their faith that this was
done? No: As 'twas vertue went out of Christ that cured
their bodily diseases; and his compassion that mooued him
to it: so 'twas his grace and merits and free loue that healed
their soules, and brought them pardon of their sinnes in
the sight of GOD: Yet he saith; Their faith saued them,
because by beleeuing in the Sonne of God, they receiued
this fauour, though for their beleeuing they did not deserue
it. God bestowes mercy where he findes faith, not because
faith merits such fauour at his hands: but because he is pleased
to disperse his fauours in such an order, as himselfe hath
appointed; and vpon such conditions as hee thinkes good.
To that of the Canaanitish woman: Her great faith could
not claime by desert, that fauour which Christ shewed vnto
her daughter: onely Christ was pleased to honour her faith
by his testimony of it; and to helpe the daughter at the
Mothers entreaty. Christ did it vpon that request of hers
so instant and full of faith; But yet who can say she merited
ought at CHRISTS hands by that her faithfull and
instant petition? Her selfe yet liuing would deny it;
and shee doth deny it there, counting her selfe a dogge
vnworthy of the childrens bread, when yet shee beleeued

strongly, and was a child of Abraham according to the faith▪
To that of Abraham who gaue glory to God, and of Henoch
and others, who pleased God by their faith: Wee answere:
That it is one thing for a man to glorifie and please
God by his Obedience; 'Tis another, by so doing to deserue
ought at his hands. If God in much grace and fauour
accept of the honour and contentment wee are able to doe
him by our Faith and Obedience: It followes not that
therefore we must in iustice merit at his hands. Other Arguments
for them there are: but so weakely knit; they fall
in sunder of themselues. Against them we haue to obiect
the Scriptures, that so often say, [We are iustified] gratiâ and
gratis; and the Councell of Trent which they respect more
then the Scriptures, which hath defined thus: Nihil eorum
quae Iustificationem praecedunt, siue fides, siue opera, ipsam Iustificationis
gratiam promeretur, Sess. 6. Cap. 8. How then can
they say Faith merits Iustification.
                  Heere our Aduersaries haue two shifts to runne vnto,
whereby they would avoide the absurdity of this Assertion.
                  1 That this merit is not from vs: but of God. Because
Faith is the gift of Gods grace; and therefore though
we be iustified by merit: yet we are iustified by grace, because
merit is of grace. 'Tis of grace that our faith merits.
                  This you may be sure, is some of that smoake of the
bottomelesse pit, wherein hell vented out the Iesuites, and
they their darke Imaginations; all to confound whatsoeuer
is cleare and lightsome in Scripture. Scripture opposeth
these paires; Grace,
                     Rom. 11. 6. and Nature, Grace and Merit. As
the Pelagians of old confounded Nature & Grace, teaching
that we were saued by Grace: yet affirming that we are also
saued by Nature, and the naturall strength of free-will.
Which they salued thus. To be saued by Nature, is to be
saued by Grace: for Nature is of Gods grace and giuing.
So these confound Grace and Merit, making a thing Meritorious,
because its of Grace. Faith merits because its Gods

gracious gift. Nothing more contradictory. If it be his
gift, how doth it merit, or of whom? Of man it may, of
God it cannot: vnlesse we will senslesly affirme, that the gift
deserues something of the giuer. That he that giues an hundred
pound freely, is thereby bound to giue an hundred
more. Had they sayed that faith is good, because of Gods
giuing; that were true, and we may grant them that God is
honoured and pleased with his owne gifts: but that euery
good thing merits, and that we can deserue of God by his
owne gifts, is affirmed without all Reason, or Scriptures;
and will neuer be proued by either.
                  But there is yet another shift.
                  
                      2 Faith merits Iustification [Non de condigno] of the
worthinesse of it: but [de Congruo] of the fitnesse:
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      that is,
God in Iustice is not bound to bestow Iustification where
there is faith: but yet in fitnesse he ought to doe it. So that
if he doe not iustifie him that beleeues: he is likely to omit
a thing very fit and agreeable. This distinction is a meere
Imposture and collusion. Bellarmine in dealing with it
seemes to haue a dog by the eares, he is loath to loose him:
yet knowes not well how to hold him. If he be vrged
where Scriptures make any the least Intimation of such a
distinction: hee referres you to Divines, that is, Popish
Schoole-men, who out of their owne imagination haue forged
it, and in time made it Authenticall. But he stickes in
the mire, when he is to shew what merit of Condignity and
merit of Congruity is. Merits of Condignity are workes,
to which wages is due of Iustice. What then are merits of
Congruity? Such workes whereto wages is not due by
any Iustice. As for example: He that labours the whole
day in the Vineyard, merits a penny of Condignity: because
in Iustice his labour is worth his hire. But he that for
an houres worke, receiues a penny, he deserues it of Congruity:
because though his labour be not worth it, yet he was
promised a penny by him that set him on worke: Then
which fond imagination nothing can be more ridiculous,

and contrary to common sense. For the merit of any worke
is the proportionablenesse of 'tis worth with the Reward.
Now in reason wherein ariseth this proportion of any work
with that reward? Stands it in the dignity of the worke it
selfe; or in the compact made betweene him that worketh
and him that rewardeth? It is apparant that the worke is
deseruing or not-deseruing according to 'its owne Nature,
not according to a compact made. He that promiseth vnto
one more for a little worke, then to another for a great
deale in the same kinde: doth not by such a compact make
the little labour of the one more deserving then the others
great pains. We must look to the worke, what it is in its own
Nature: & as it is of some worth or no worth, so account it
deseruing or not deseruing▪ Wherfore whē in the distinction
they make some merits of Condignity or worthinesse, some
of Congruity, or of fitnesse without worthinesse, they offend
two wayes, grosly against two rules of Reason. First in opposing
termes not opposite: Worthinesse and fitnesse: being
the same, if you take them in regard of the worke. For
that which deserues a reward worthily, deserues it fitly:
(how else is it worthy of the reward, if the reward be not
fit for it?) and that which deserues it fitly (if it deserues)
it deserues it worthily.
                  2 In distinguishing vpon tearmes that doe not convenire
t
                           •
                        ti. For Worthinesse agrees to merit onely: but fitnesse
belongs to Compact. So that in plainer English, the
distinction runnes thus. Merits or deserts, are of two sorts.
Some, that are merits and doe deserue because they are worthy
of a reward: others that are no merits and doe not deserue
because they are not worthy of the Reward: but
onely obtaine it, ex Congruo, in regard of Compact and Promise.
For this Rule is most certaine, That a worke which
deserues nothing by its owne worthinesse: can neuer deserue any
thing by compact or promise. The Iesuites are senselesse in defending
the contrary.
                  If (saith Bellarmine) a King promise a Beggar 1000▪
                     
pounds a yeare, vpon no condition, then indeed the Begger
doth not deserue it. But if vpon condition he shall do some
small matter, as that he shall come to the Court and fetch it,
or bring a Pos
                        •
                     e of flowers with him, now the Begger deserues
it: and he may come to the King, and tell him, hee
hath merited his 1000 pounds a yeare. Euery man, but a
Iesuite, would say 'twere extreame impudency in a Begger
to make such a demaund, so derogatorily to the Kings gracious
bounty. Now can it helpe them to say, That a Promise
bindes vnto performance, so that God should be vniust
and vntrue, if he should not bestow the reward promised,
although the workes bee not equall to the reward. For
Gods Iustice and Truth in performing his promise, doe not
imply our merit in performing the Condition. We doe not
deserue by our well-doing; because God is iust in his rewarding.
And the reason is manifest; Because God in making
the promise, respected meerly the freenesse and bounty
of his owne grace, not the worthinesse of our workes. And
therefore that obligation whereby he hath tyed himselfe to
performance, is founded meerely in his owne Truth: not a

                        •
                     ot in our merit. Wherefore when they tell vs, that faith
merits Iustification [de Congruo] they intrappe themselues
in a grosse Contradiction; seeing to deserue [de Congruo]
is not to deserue at all; but onely to receiue the reward by
meere promise: God hauing promised to iustifie beleeuers.
Thus much touching the first Assertion, that Faith is the
proper Cause of Iustification, working it by it owne efficacy
and merits.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP II▪
                  
                  The Confutation of the Arminian errour, shewing
that faith doth not iustifie, sensu proprio,
as it is an act of ours.
                  
                     The second Error about this point is of the Arminians,
with whom also the Papists agree: Tis
this.
                  2 That we are Iustified by Faith sensu proprio,
that is, the Act of beleeving, in that 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                     credere, is imputed
to vs for righteousnesse, being accepted of God and accounted
vnto vs for that whole Righteousnesse of the Law
which we were bound to performe. So that our very Faith
is that Righteousnesse, for which we are iustified in the sight
of God; no
                           •
                         quidem merito suo: sed propter gratuitam acceptilationem
Dei.
                  
                  The authors of this opinion are Faustus Socinus that
vnhappy Haereticke in his most Blasphemous Booke [de
Christo servatore:] & Michael Servetus a Spanyard in his second
Booke [de lege & Evangelio] which Errors are confuted
by Calvin in his opuscula. A stiffe de
                        •
                     ender of this opinion
was Christophorus Ostorodius a Polonian in his disputations
contra Georgium Tradelij, who for this and other pestilent
errors about the Article of Mans Redemption, was
wi
                        •
                     h his companion Andreas Vaidonitus banished the Low
Countreys where he had seated himselfe and published his
opinions; Arminius, and his followers haue bin cheefe promoters
of it. Arminius himselfe, as in other his opinions: so
in the publishing of this vsed much closenesse and cunning
conveyance. In his private disputations [Tit. de Iustificatione]
he seemes plainly to condemne it, saying that it is an abuse to
say that Fides est causa formalis Iustificationis, and an error to
affirme [That Christ hath deserued, vt fidei dignitate et merito
iustificemur.] In his publique disputations he opens himselfe
somewhat plainly:Thes. 48. 2. 3. yet darkely enough [Thes. 19. de Iustificat.

cat. Thes. 7. These are his words. [Fidei vero Iustificatio tribuitur,
non quod illa sit Iustitia ipsa quae rigido & seuero De
                           •
                        
iudicio oppont possit; quanquam Deo grata: sed quod in iudicio
mis
                           •
                        ri
                           •
                        ordiae triumphans supra iudicium absolutionem a peccatis
obtineat & gratiose in Iustitiam imputetur. Cuius rei causaest
tum Deus iustus & misericors, tum Christus obedient
                           ••
                        
oblatione et intercessione suâ secundum Deum in beneplacito et
mandato ipsius.] Here Faith it selfe is imputed for Righteousnesse.
But tis not in Gods seuere Iudgment, but in his Iudgment
of Mercy. Faith in it selfe is not worthy: but yet Christ
by his merits hath deserued that God will gratiously accept
of it. This opinion published was quickly contradicted:
wherevpon Arminius makes knowne his mind in playner
Termes, In declaratioue sententiae ad ordines Holland: &
Westfrisiae he confesseth that in the forenamed Thesis his meaning
was,pag 6
                           •
                        . that [ipsa fides tanquam actus iuxta Evangelij
mandatum praestitus imputatur coram Deo in siue ad iustitiam,
idque in gratiâ, cum non sit ipsamet iustitia Legis. And in his
Responsione ad 31. Artic. art. 4. hee brancheth cut his opinion
in three distinct propositions.
                  
                     1 Iustitia Christi imputatur nobis.
                     2 Iustitia Christi imputatur in iustitiam.
                     3 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         credere imputatur in iustitiam.
                  
                  The first of these Propositions, he grants: That Christs
Righteousnesse is imputed to vs. The second hee denies,
That Christs Righteousnesse is imputed for Righteousnesse.
The third 
                        •
                     e grants, That the Act of beleeuing is imputed
for Righteousnesse. Here by Mysteries in these Propositions,
hereafter to bee vnfolded. Wee now meddle with
the last which yet is more roundly expressed by Arminius
in his Epistle ad Hyppolitum. [Lege princip. Pa.] [Ipsum
Fidei actum 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         credere, dico imputari in iustitiam, idque sensu
proprio non metonymice] The same is the opinion of his fellowes
the Remonstrants, ofA
                           •
                        tibell. pag. 106. 
                     Vorstius, ofCollat. cu
                           •
                         Sib. Lubber. 
                     Peter Bertius, of
Thesibu, de 
                           •
                        ustific.
                     Episcopius, and theR
                           •
                        monstr
                           •
                        nt. In Cell. Delphensi. Art. 2. Antith. 2. [Statuimus Deum Fidem no
                        
                           •
                        iram nobis imputare per obedientiam: ea
                           •
                        
                        
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         (& nos in illa) acceptos habere. rest. With whom Bellarmine agrees
pat [Liber 
                           •
                        . de Iust. cap. 17. When vpon that Rom: 4.

(His faith is imputed for righteousnesse.] he saith thus. [Vbiipsa
fides censetur esse Iustitia, ac per hoc non apprehendit fides
iustitiam Christi: sed ipsa fides in Christum est iustitia.] In
summe, their opinion runnes thus. God in the Legall Couenant
required the exact obedience of his Commandement:
but now in the Couenant of grace, he requires faith, which in
his gracious estimation stands in stead of that obedience to
the Morall Law, which wee ought to performe. Which
comes to passe by the Merit of Christ; for whose sake God
accounts our imperfect saith to be perfect obedience. This
Assertion we reiect as erronious, and in place thereof we defend
this Proposition. God doth not iustifie a man by Faith
properly, impuring vnto him faith in Christ for his perfect
obedience to the Law, and therefore accounting him iust
and innocent in his sight. Which we proue by these Reasons.
                  1 We are not Iustified by any worke of our owne. But 
beleeving is an Act of our owne: Therefore by the Act
of beleeving we are not Iustified.
                  The Maior is most manifest by the Scriptures, which teach
that we are saued by grace Ephes. 2. 5. [and therefore not by
the workes of Righteousnesse which we had wrought.] Tit. 3. 6.
[For if it be of Works, then were grace no more grace] Ro. 11. 6.
                  The Minor is likewise evident. [That Faith is a worke of
ours.] For though Iohn 6. 29. it bee said, [This is the
worke of God that ye beleeue in him whom hee hath sent] yet
will not our adversaries conclude thence, that Faith is Gods
worke within vs, and not our worke by his helpe. For so
should they runne into that absurdity which they would
fasten vpon vs. (viz.) That when a Man beleeues, tis not
man beleeues: but God beleeues in him. To beleeue, though
it be done by Gods aide: yet 'tis we that doe it; and the Act
is properly ours. And being so, we conclude, that by it we
are not iustified in Gods sight.
                  Here two Exceptions may be made.
                  1 First that we are not iustified by any worke of our 
owne (viz▪
                     ) which we our selues doe by our owne strength

without the help of grace: But yet we may be iustified by
some worke which we doe (viz) by the aide of Grace; and
such a worke is Faith. Wee answere. This Distinction of
workes done without Grace and workes done by Grace,
was devised by one that had neither Wit nor Grace; being a
T
                        •
                     icke to elude the force of such Scriptures as exclude indefinitely
all workes from our Iustification, without distinguishing
either of Time when they are done, before or after; or of
the ayde & helpe whereby they are done, whether by Nature
or by Grace. Wherefore it is without all ground in
Scripture thus to interpret these Propositions: A man is
not iustified by workes (that is) by workes done by worth
of Nature before and without Grace. A Man is iustified
by Grace (that is) by workes done by aide of Grace. These
Interpretations are meere forged inventions of froward
Minds, affirmed but not proved: as we shall more hereafter
declare,
                  
                      2 That we are not Iustified by any workes of our own,
(that is) by any works of the Law: but by a worke of the
Gospell such as faith is we may be iustified. Male res agitur
vbi opus est tot Remedijs (saith Erasmus in another case.) Tis
a certaine signe of an vntrue opinion when it must be bolstered
vp with so many distinctions. Nor yet hath this distinction
any ground in Scripture, or in Reason: for both tell vs
that the workes commamded in the Law, and workes commanded
in the Gospell are one and the same for the substance
of thē, What worke can be named, that is enioyned vs
in the New Testament, which is not also cōmanded vs in that
summary precept of the Morall Law [Thou shalt loue the
L
                           •
                        rd thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soule and with
all they strength, and with all thy mind: and thy neighbour as thy
selfe.] Luc. 5. 27. Deut. 6. 5 What sinne is there against the
Gospell, that is not a transgression of the Law? If the Gospel
cōmand Charity, is it any other then that which the Law
commands: If the Gospell cōmand Faith, doth not the Law
enioine the same? you will say No. It doth not command

Faith in Christ. I answere, yea, it doth: For that which commands
vs in generall to Beleeue what euer God shall propose
vnto vs: commands vs also to beleeue in Christ, assoone
as God shall make knowne that tis his will we should
beleeue in him. The Gospell discouers vnto vs the Obiect;
the Law commands vs the obedience of beleeuing it.
Wherefore Faith, for the Substance of the Grace and works
done by vs, is a worke of the Law; and so to be Iustified by
the Action of beleeuing, is to be Iustified by workes and by
our owne Righteousnesse, contrary to the Scriptures; and
that Phil: 5. 9. (That I may be found not, &c. This of the
first Reason.
                  
                  2 God accounts that only for perfect Righteousn
                           •
                        sse
                     
of the Law, which is so in deed and truth.
But Faith is not the perfect fulfilling of the Law.
Therefore God doth not account it 
                        •
                     or such.
                  The Minor is granted by our adversaries; That Faith is not
the exact Iustice of the Law; such as can stand before the severity
of Gods Iudgments. The Maior must be proued: That
God accounts not that for perf
                        •
                     ct Iustice which is not perfect
indeed. This appeares by that Rom. 2. 2. [The iudgement
of God is according to trueth.] Where therefore any
thing is not truly good and perfect: there God esteemes it
not so. Here also twilbe excepted.
                  That God some time Iudgeth Iudicio iustitiae, according
to exact Iustice; and then he 
                        •
                     udgeth nothing perfectly iust,
but that whi
                        •
                     h hath true perfection of Iustice in it. Sometimes
he iudgeth iudicio misericord
                           •
                        ae; according to mercy:
and so he may esteeme a Man perfectly righteous for that
which is not perfect righteousnesse in it selfe; namely for his
Faith.
                  Surely, this is a trimme distinction thus applyed, that
sets Gods Mercy and Truth together by the Eares. As
who would say, When God iudgeth out of Mercy: hee
then doth not iudge according to truth. The Scriptures
doe not acquaint vs with any such mercifull iudgement of

God. This they doe acquaint vs with, That God iudgeth
according to mercy, not when he doth pronounce and cleare
a Sinner to be perfectly righteous for that righteousnesse
which is truely imperfect: but when he iudgeth a Sinner to
be righteous for that righteousnesse which is perfect; but is
not his owne. In this Iudgement there is both Truth and
Mercy. Truth, in that he esteemes me perfectly righteous,
for that righteousnesse sake which is euery way perfect:
and mercy, that he accepteth for sinne, that righteousnesse
which is performed for me by Christ my surety; but is not
mine owne. Other mercifull Iudgement of God besides
this, we acknowledge none.
                  
                      3 We are not iustified by two righteousnesses existing
in two diuers subiects. But if wee be iustified
by the worke of Faith: we shall be iustified
partly by that righteousnesse which is in vs,
(viz.) of Faith: partly by the righteousnesse of
Christ without vs.
                  
                     Ergo we are not iustified by Faith properly.
                  The Minor is apparant. The Righteousnesse of Faith is

                        •
                     nherent in vs. and by it we are iustified (say our Aduersaries.)
The righteousnesse of Christ is inherent in him: and
by it are we iustified, say the Scriptures. [Being now iustified
by his blood, we shall be saued from wrath through him.]
Ro. 5 9. & v. 19. [By the obedience of one, many shall be made
iust.] Wherefore either we are properly iustified by both, or
there is an errour, and one part must stand out▪ We cannot
be properly iustified by both, for our own faith and Christs
obedience too: for if we be perfectly iust in Gods sight for
our own Faith, what need the Imputation of Christs obedience
to make vs iust? If for Christs righteousnes we be perfectly
iustified: how can God accoūt vs perfectly iust for our
faith? Arminius and his friends, seeing these things cannot
stand together; haue (according to the good will which
they beare toward the righteousnesse of Christ) kept in our
faith, and thrust out Christs obedience, denying vtterly that

it is imputed vnto vs for righteousnesse. But my Brethren
(which I hope make a better choice) seeing it cannot part
with ours: part with our owne righteousnesse, leaning
wholy vpon the righteousnesse of Christ; and seeking for
the comfort of our Iustification in his perfect obedience, and
not in our weake and imperfect saith. These Reasons may
suffice to shew the errour of that Assertion. We are iustified
by Fa
                        ••
                     h, sensu prop
                           •
                        rio, God accepting the Act of beleeuing
for the perfect obedience of the Law. And therefore
that in those places,We are saued by grace thorough faith. Ephes. 2. 8. where 'tis said, [Faith is imputed for
righteousnesse,] the Phrase is to be expounded metonymice,
(that is) Christs righteousnesse beleeued on by Faith, is imputed
to the beleeuer for righteousnesse.
                  Whereas our Aduersaries say that faith of its owne
dignity and desert, doth not obtaine this fauour of God,
to be esteemed for the perfect righteousnesse of the Morall
Law: but this comes to passe onely by the Merits
of Christ, who hath procured this grace vnto vs, that
God should thus accept of our Faith: wee answere, that
this is affirmed, but 'tis not prooued. They speake a little
more fauourably then the Romanists, who make faith of it
selfe to merit Iustification: these will haue it not to merit it;
but to be graciously accepted for righteousnesse. But wee
find not in Scripture any such Doctrine as this, [Christ
hath merited that wee should bee iustified for our faith,]
or [Christ hath merited for our faith, that faith should
be esteemed by God for that perfect Iustice of the Law; whereby
we are iustified in Gods sight.] These things the Scriptures
teach not: they teach, that Christ is our righteousnesse, and
that we are iustified by his blood and obedience. But that
he hath merited by his obedience, that we should be iustified
by our owne obedience and righteousnesse, is a peruerse assertion
of men that loue to runne about the bush, and leauing
the streight, to runne in crooked and froward wayes.
And it differs little from the like shift of the Disciples of
Rome, who to maintaine Merit of our workes and of Christ
                     
too; salue it with this tricke. Christ hath merited that wee
might merit. But we acknowledge, as no other merit, but
that of Christ; so no other righteousnesse to Iustification,
but his alone. Thus much of the second Assertion.
               
               
                  CHAP. III.
                  The confutation of Popish Doctrine, that other graces
doe iustifie vs, and not faith alone.
                  
                     THe third and last followes, wherein the Controuersie
is betweene vs and those of Rome;
whose Assertion is: that
                  3 A sinner is not iustified by faith alone,
but also by other vertues and
graces; as Hope, Loue, Repentance,
Feare of God, &c.
                  
                  This we also reject as an error, contrary to the Scriptures,
wherby we are taught, That a man is iustified by faith alone.
For opening the truth of which point: you must call to
minde the different acception of the word Iustifie: wherein
it is taken by vs, and by our Aduersaries. With them to
Iustifie is all one, as to Sanctifie: of vnjust and vnholy, to
make inherently iust and holy. With vs to Iustifie is to absolue
an offender, quitting him from blame and punishment.
According to these different Acceptions, this proposition
[A man is iustified by faith alone] hath a double
meaning; one thus [A man by faith alone is inherently sanctified]
another thus: [A man by faith alone obtaines absolution
in Gods Iudgement, from all faultinesse and punishment.
This latter meaning onely is true, and tis that onely
which is defended by vs of the Reformed Churches; Namely,
that faith onely is the grace of God whereby a sinner beleeuing
the promise, and resting himselfe vpon the righteousnesse
of Christ, receiues mercy from God in absoluing
him from the fault and punishment of all his Transgressions:
and to be accounted Righteous for Christs sake. Which

gracious priuiledge God hath annexed vnto faith, as vnto
the Condition of the New Covenant, and not vnto Loue,
Hope, Feare, Repentance, or any other grace; For not these,
but Faith onely, respecteth the promise of the Gospell. The
former sense of that Proposition, is false and absurde, viz.
[A Man by faith alone is inherently sanctified] nor doe any
of the Reformed deteine such a Construction thereof.
Wherefore when Bellarmine and his Complices dispute
eagerly against Iustification by faith alone, those Arguments
wherewith they suppose to smite through the Truth of our
Assertion, are let flye at a wrong Marke; being all aymed at
this Butte, (viz) to proue; That a man is sanctified by other
inherent Graces as well as faith. Which point we easily
yeeld them, confessing that inherent righteousnesse, consists
not of one, but of the
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . manifold graces of Gods Spirit,
wrought in the heart of such as are Regenerate. Neuerthelesse
for the shewing of some points which may be doubted
of; Let vs briefely take a view of the chiefe passages of
Bellarmines long discourse; which he maintaines from the
twelfth Chapter of his first booke de Iustificatione, to the
end. For to proue that a Man is iustified not by faith alone.
Of his Arguments which are few, I shall name three onely,
which are materiall.
                  1 If other vertues Iustifie as well as Faith,1 Arg. Bell. then not
faith alone.
                  But other vertues doe Iustifie—Therefore, &c.
                  The Minor he prooues out of the Councell of
Trent, Sess. 6. cap. 6. where seauen preparatory, graces
to Iustification, are reckoned vp.
                  1 Faith. 2 The Feare of God, 3 Hope in his mercy.
4 Loue of God, as the Fountaine of Iustice (& ad
benefactoris, saith Bellarmine) 5 Repentance, a sorrow
and detestation of sinne. 6 A desire of receiuing
the Sacrament of Baptisme. 7 A purpose to leade
a new life, and keepe Gods Commandements. All
these (saith Bellarmine) doe iustifie a Man, Praeparatoriè,

antecedentèr, dispositiuè. Faith, thats the
roote and beginning of our Iustification, the rest
follow in order; all must goe before as needfull
preparations: and Iustification followes, as the
effect of all in common, &c. Ergo, Not of Faith alone.
The
                     Lib. 1. cap. 13. Iesuite goes ouer euery particular,
to shew by Scriptures what force each of those
graces haue to Iustifie. But tis not worth-while
to repeate his proofes. Vnto the Argument, wee
answere two things.
                  
                  
                      1 That it is framed vpon the errour which puts out of
frame the whole dispute of our Aduersaries, about this Article
of Iustification; namely, that Regeneration and Sanctification
is all one thing with Iustification; and that to Iustifie
a sinner is nothing but to doe away inherent corruption,
by infusion of inherent righteousnesse. This we haue heretofore
by the Scriptures cleared to be false; and therefore
this Argument proouing our Sanctification to be wrought
by other graces as well as by faith, toucheth not the point
of Iustification in the Remission of sinnes, which faith alone
obtaineth through the promise.
                  
                      2 Touching these graces which they make preparatory
vnto Iustification, that is to Sanctification: Wee answere,
that tis a Philosophicall dreame of such as measure
out the workes of Gods Spirit in mans conuersion, according
to Aristotles Physickes; and those disputes touching
praeuious, or fore-going dispositions, that qualifie the
matter for receiuing of the Forme. We acknowledge, that
in mans Regeneration all graces of the Spirit are not perfected
at once. But as the ioynts and sinewes in the bodily:
so the graces of Sanctification in the spirituall New-birth,
are at first weake and feeble: Which in continuance of time
gather more strength, according to our growth in Christ.
But yet these are true for the substance: though imperfect
in their degrees and measure. There is now true Spirituall
life in such a one which was before dead in sinne: although

there be not the free and able exercise of all the vitall powers.
Health there is, but not entire from all degrees o
                        •
                      sicknesse,
and euery kinde of disease. Wherefore we aff
                        ••
                     me that
these vertues which are by our Aduersarics reckoned onely
as dispositions vnto Regeneration: are, if they be true and
not counterfeit Mettall, the maine parts and fruits of Regeneration.
                  Hence we beleeue that these are foule errors (viz.) To
teach that a man without grace by the power of his free-wil
may dispose himselfe to his Regeneration, by beleeving in
Christ, fearing and louing of God, hoping of his Mercy, repenting
of his sinnes, resoluing vpon amendment, and all
this with true and sincere affection: or to teach if a man cannot
do these things of his owne meere strength and free-will;
yet by the Spetiall aide of God inciting and helping him; 
                        〈◊〉
                     
may doe them whilst he is vtterly vns
                        •
                     nctified in statu peccati.
That true Faith, and Feare, and Hope, and Loue, and
Repentance, and purpose of Reformation, are Vertues and
Graces in a Man that is yet gracelesse and without Vertue,
because destitute of Sanctification. That these Graces consisting
in the inward motion of the soule, and change of the
Affections, are wrought in Man, not by any sanctifying
Grace of the Holy Ghost, inwardly touching the heart: but
by some other kind of Vertue and aid (they know not what)
Lib. 1. cap. 2
                           •
                        . Nectamen est a Deo intus inhabitante, per gra
                        
                           ••
                        am Sanctificari: sidextrins
                           •
                        cus ad
                           ••
                        
                        vante, & exitonte.externall,Et Cap: 13. pag. 311. H. exciting and helping forward the strength of Nature.Feare.
All these are monstrous and mis-shapen imaginations,
bred in proud hearts that would faine share the glory
of their Conversion, betweene Gods grace and their
owne free-will, and maintained by curious heads, whom
Philosophicall speculations haue transported beyond the
simplicity of diuine Truth. The Scripture speaks otherwise
of these Graces, as of those that belong to such as are not in
the way to be made good, but are made so already. [Ye are al
the Children of God by Faith in Iesus Christ] saith the Apostle
Paul Gal. 3. 28. Whosoeuer shall confesse that Iesus is the sonne
of God: God dwelleth in him and he in God.] saith Iohn 1.

1. Ioh. 4. 15. and Chap. 5. 1. [Whosoeuer beleeueth that Iesus
is that Christ; is borne of God.] Doe we by true Faith become
the Children of God, borne of him, in whom hee
dwelleth and we in him, when as yet in the meane time we are
yet vnsanctified, vnholy, vncleane, & not in the state of Grace?
Bellarmine will proue that a man may haue Faith; yet not
the Child of God: ou
                        •
                      of Iohn 1. 12. [As many as receiued
him, to them he gaue power to become the Sonnes of God: euen to
them th
                           •
                        t beleeue on his name.] See (s
                        ••
                     th he) they that beleeue
are not yet, but haue power if they list, to become the
Sonnes of God, (viz.) by going on further from Faith to
Hope and Loue, and the rest of the Tridenti
                           •
                        e dispositions.
For tis Loue properly and not Faith, that makes vs the Sons
of God; as he would proue (contrary to that expresse place
of the Galat.) out of the 1 Ep. of Iohn, where the Apostle
hath much excellent matter, but nothing to that purpose.
To the place of Iohn, wee answere, that the Iesuite playeth
with the ambiguity of the word 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , which is not here a
liberty to doe what we list; as if we could at our pleasure
become Gods adopted sonnes: but tis a right and priuiledge
which Christ the naturall Sonne bestowes on true beleeuers,
to be made Gods adopted sonnes, and so coheires
with him of the heauenly inheritance. When is this priuiledge
of Adoption bestowed? Then when they beleeue,
and assoone as they beleeue, before they be Regenerate? No,
Saint Iohn denies it. [He giues power to be the Sonnes of God,
euen to those that beleeue in him.] Who be they? Hee answeres,
vers. 15. [Which were borne not of bloud, nor of the will
of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.] Faith then is
not a Preparatiue to Iustification, but a part of it.
                  And is not Feare of GOD too?Feare. No, saith Bellarmine.
That is thePsal 
                           •
                        11. 10. Pro. 
                           •
                        . 7. Faith is radix: a part of the tree. beginning of wisedome (that is) of a perfect
Iustification. A bad interpretation, but a worse Argument.
Tis the beginning, therefore not part. Nay; If the feare of
God be the Alpha of Christian graces, certainely it selfe
makes one Letter of that Alphabet. Tis such a beginning

of wisdome: as its selfe is wisdome too. Else God himselfe
deceaues vs: who, as it is, Iob 28. 28. [Sayd vnto man: Behold
the feare of the Lord that is wisdome, and to depart from euill is
vnderstanding.] And therefore to take it in the Iesuits glosse,
Feare of God is Iustification as well as the beginning of it.
                  For Hope;Hope. If it be true, (viz.) That
                     Rom. 5. 5. 
                     which makes not
ashamed,] Which is the
                     Heb. 6. 18. 
                     Anchor of the Soule, sure and stedfast,
that entereth within the Vaile.] It would bee knowne
what difference the Iesuite will put betweene that Hope
which is in a man before: and that which is in him after his
Sanctification. If he say, It differs onely in degree: then hee
grants, tis the same in substance: whence wee haue a faire
position; That man sanctified and vnsanctified, is alike capable
of the sauing graces of Gods Spirit.
                  The like we say for Loue of God, if it be sincere and
without dissimulation bred in the heart:Loue. Vpon those spirituall
considerations not onely of Gods Mercy in Christ:
but also of his Iustice and infinite Righteousnesse; (For so
the Trent Fathers will haue this Loue to respect God, vt fontem
Iustitiae) then we affirme this spirituall Loue is not to bee
found but onely in those Hearts, that are in some measure
Regenerate and made spirituall. In (whom
                     Rom. 5. 5. 
                     this Loue of
God is shed abroad by the Holy Ghost that is giuen to them.]
as theRom. 5. 5. Apostle speaketh. This Bellarmine is so
                        •
                     ne forced
to grant: yet he puts it off with a distinction [No man can
loue God perfectly with all his heart, without the Holy Ghost:
but loue him he may imperfectly without the Holy Ghost dwelling
in him, though not without the speciall aide of God.]
Whereto we answere; 'tis one thing to loue God perfectly,
and another to loue him truely. To loue him perfectly, is to
loue him with all the heart, all the soule, all the minde, & all
the strength: which we grant no man can doe without the
Holy Ghost: but we also affirme, that no man did or shall euer
doe it in this life, so long as there is lustfull corruption in him
causing any the least auersion of his soule from God in any
motion thereof. So that if none haue the Holy Ghost abiding

in them; but such in whom Loue is thus perfected;
he must be confined with the Saints in heauen, and not haue
his dwelling with the faithfull on earth. But if imperfect
Loue of God be also from the Holy Ghost, dwelling in the
hearts of the Godly, who loue God truely in vnfeigned vprightnesse
of heart; though in much imperfection by reason
of sinne, which diuerts the heart vnto other pleasures: then it
must be knowne of the Iesuite, what he meanes by imperfect
Loue. Is it false Loue, such a meere naturall Man may
conceiue vpon generall grounds: That God is good, the
chiefest good, iust, holy, and full of all excellency? He will
not say for shame, this is a true preparatiue vnto Iustification.
Is it true loue, but in its degree imperfect, not so vigorous,
so vehement, so hot as coales of Iuniper: yet such as
hath some strength and warmth of spirituall affection?
Then we require that these men will draw vs out a line by
the Rule of the Scriptures, and to tell vs how farre the true
Loue of God may come, without the grace of the Holy
Ghost sanctifying the heart: But after tis past such a degree,
then there is required the sanctifying grace of the Holy
Ghost for it. Twill trouble their Mathematickes to describe
vnto vs in what degree of Perfection that Womans loue
was situated, whose example they alleadge for a proofe of
this point out of Luke 7. 47. [Her sinnes which were many,
are forgiuen her, for she loued much.] Can Bellarmine tell vs
how much this was? that so by that patterne we may know
how farre men goe in the true Loue of God before they bee
at all sanctified by inherent Grace? For such wonders they
would make vs beleeue concerning this penitent Sinner;
that when her soule was full of Faith and Loue to Christ,
her heart full of sorrow, her eyes full of teares for her sinnes;
yet for all that she was a gracelesse, vnholy person, whose
Loue, and Faith, and Sorrow, came not from the sanctifying
grace of the Holy Ghost, but onely from free-will helped
with some kinde of externall aide of God.
                  We haue not Faith to beleeue such Mysteries as these.

Nor yet in the last place can we conceiue how there should
be true repentance,Repentance. with a sincere purpose of Reformation
and obedience,Reformation. where the Heart is not changed and renued
by the Holy Ghost.Not of Ahab or Iudas.
                      That Godly sorrow and Hatred of
sinne should spring out of a gracelesse heart, that so holy a
Resolution of Amendment of Life should be in an vnholy
person; be Assertions so contradictory and iarring: that no
Christian Eare can with patience endure to heare them. We
conclude then touching these dispositions vnto Sanctification,
that if these Graces be true, they are parts and chiefe
Branches of inherent Righteousnesse. But if they be false
and counterfeit, they are not so much as Preparations therevnto.
So much of this first Argument: wherein yet one of
these 7 dispositions first reckoned vp is omitted (viz.) a
Desire of receauing the Sacrament of Baptisme. (that is) A
Man thats baptised in his youth, afterward, before he be
Iustified, must haue a desire to be Rebaptised. For what is
it for one baptised to desire to receaue that Sacrament againe?
This conceit is so absured that howeuer Bellarmine
reckon it vp among the other Dispositions; because of the
Authority of the councell of Trent: yet
                     Tom. 2. Tract. 
                           •
                         cap. 3. Quest. 3. Bell. lib. 1. c. 14. 
                     Becanus giues it
ouer in plaine Feild; numbring these fore naming sixe graces
onely, choosing rather to venter the Councells credit,
then his owne, by defending an vnreasonable position.
                  2 Argument.
                     2 Arg. If Faith alone doe iustifie vs; then it
may d
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     t when other graces are absent; as well
as when they are present. For seeing the Vertue
of Iustifing vs depends vpon Faith alone: and
that in this act it receaues no aide from any other
grace; It followeth that it needs not the cōpany of
any other grace: as in the law of sense. If the whole
force of Burning proceed onely from Heat: then
where Heat is, though there be no other Qualities
yet there will be burning; yea if Faith only haue
force to Iustifie, it will follow, that it may iustifie
not onely in the absence of other graces: but in the

presence of the coutrary vices. For as the absence
of other graces doth not hinder: so the presence of
other vices will not hinder Faith one jot in it office
of Iustifying.
                  But twere absurd to affirme, that Faith can Iustifie
without other vertues with other vices—Ergo,
The force of Iustifying is not in Faith alone.
                  To this we answere. That this sophisme is fashioned vpon
the same Block with the former, that to Iustifie and Sanctifie
are all one. In which sense we confesse the Consequence
is vnauoydable. If Faith alone by it owne vertue and
force did sanctifie: then it would effect this not onely in the
absence of other graces; but in the presence of their contrary
Corruptions: and the similitude which we bring to
illustrate our assertion, would confirme that of the Aduersaries.
Tis the eye onely sees, say our Men: yet the Eare is in
the Head too. Yea, reply they, But the eie could see well notwithstanding
the Eare were deafe. Tis the
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         antid. 
                           •
                        onc. Trid. Sess. 6 cap. II. Heate onely of
the fire or Sunne that warmes, though there be light ioyned
with it. True say they, But if there were no Light, yet if
heate remained, it would warme for all that: as the Heate
of an Ouen, or of Hell, burnes, though it shine not. Thou holdest
in thy hands many seedes (Tis the old comparison of
Luther on the 15 of Gen.) I enquire not what tis together
but what is the vertue of each one single. Yea, reply our
Aduersaries; thats a very needelesse question indeed. For if
among them many seedes there be some one that hath such
soueraigne vertue; that it alone can cure all diseases, then tis
no Matter whether thou haue many or few, or none at all
of any other sort in thy hand. Thou hast that which by it
owne vertue without other ingredients will worke the Cure
Nor haue we ought to make answere in this case; If, as the
Eye sees, heate warmes, seeds and other simples doe cure by
their owne proper Vertue: so Faith alone by its owne efficacy
did sanctifie vs. But there is the Errour. Faith works
not in our sanctification or Iustification by any such inward

power & vertue of its own, from whence these effects should
properly follow. For Sanctification Faith, as we haue seene,
is part of that inherent Righteousnesse which the Holy
Ghost hath wrought in the Regenerate: and tis opposed
to the Corruption of our Nature which stands in Infidelity
Faith sanctifies not as a cause, but as a part of insused grace:
and such a part as goes not alone, but accompanied with all
other Graces of Loue, Feare, Zeale, Hope, Repentance, &c.
Inasmuch as Mans regeneration is not the infusion of one;
but of the Habit of all graces. Againe, 'tis not the Vertue
of Faith that iustifies vs; The grace of Iustification is from
God, he workes it: but tis our Faith applies it and makes it
ours. The Act of Iustification is Gods meere worke; but
our Faith onely brings vs the Benefit and Assurance of it.
Iustification is an externall priuiledge which God bestowes
on beleeuers; hauing therein respect onely to their Faith,
which grace onely hath peculiar respect to the Righteousnesse
of Christ and the promise in him. Whereby tis manifest
that this argument is vaine. Faith alone is respected in our
Iustification: therefore Faith is or may be alone without other
graces of Iustification. Bellar:
                     Cap. 15. eiu
                           •
                        
                        dem Lib. primi. would vndertake to
proue that true saith may be seuered from Charity and other
Vertues: but wee haue heretofore spoken of that Point:
and shewed, that [true Faith, yet without a Forme:] [true
Faith, dead, and without a soule] be Contradictions as
vaine as [A true Man without reason] [A true Fire without
heate.] We confesse indeed that the faith of Iesuites
(the same with that of Simon Magus) may very well bee
without Charity and all other sanctifying graces; a bare
assent to the truth of Divine Reuelations, because of Gods
Authority. As tis in Diuels, so tis in Papists and other Heretickes.
But we deny that this is that which deserues the
name of true Faith: which whosoeuer hath, hee also hath
eternall life. As it is, Iohn 6. 47.
                  3 Argument.
                     3 Argu
                           •
                        
                      That which Scripture doth not affirme,
that is false doctrine.
                  
                     
But the Scripture doth not affirme that wee are
Iustified by Faith alone—Ergo, so to teach, is to
teach false Doctrine.
                  This Argument toucheth the quicke: and if the Minor
can be prooued, we must needs yeeld them the Cause. For
that the Iesuites conceiue that this is a plaine case:Bell. lib. 1 cap. 16. for where
is there any one place in all the Bible, that saith, Faith alone
Iustifies? They euen laugh at the simplicity of the Heretickes
(as they Christen vs) that glory they haue found out
at last the word (Onely) in Luc. 8. 50. in that speech of
Christ, to the Ruler of the Synagogue, [Feare not, beleeue
onely, and shee shall be made whole.]
                  And much sport they make themselues with Luther:
That to helpe out this matter at a dead lift, by plaine
fraud hee foysted into the Text, in the 3. to the Romans,
the word (Onely.) When being taught with the fact,
and required a Reason: He made answere according to his
Modesty, (Sic volo, sic iubeo, stet pro ratione voluntas.) Tis
true that Luther in his Translation of the Bible into the Germane
tougue: read the 28. verse of that Chapter, thus. (We
conclude that men are iustified without the workes of the Law:
onely through Faith.)[Allein durch 
                           •
                        en gsaubren.] Which word onely is not in the Originall.
Where, in so doing, if he fulfild not the Office of a
faithfull Translator: yet he did the part of a faithfull Paraphrast,
keeping the sense exactly in that Alteration of
words. And if he be not free from blame: yet of all men the
Iesuites are most vnfit to reproue him; whose dealing in the
corrupting of all sort of Writers, Diuine and humane, are
long since notorious and infamous throughout Christendome.
                  
                  What Luthers Modesty was in answering those that
found fault with his Translation:Bell. quotes Lu
                        
                           •
                        beri Resp. ad duos Art. ad ami
                        
                           ••
                        m quendam. we haue not to say. Onely
thus much, That the impudent Forgeries of this Generation,
witnesse abundantly: that it is no rare thing for a Lie to
drop out of a Iesuites or Fryers penne. But be it, as it may
be; Tis not Luthers Translation; Nor that place in the 8. of

                     Luke, that our Doctrine, [touching Iustification by Faith alone,]
is founded vpon. We haue better proofes then these:
as shall appeare vnto you in the confirmation of the Minor
of this Syllogisme.
                  Whatsoeuer the Scriptures affirme, that's true doctrine.
But the Scriptures affirme, a man is iustified
by Faith alone.
                  Therefore thus to teach, is to teach according to
the word of whole-some doctrine.
                  
                     Our Aduersaries demaund proofe of the Minor. We alleadge
all those places wherein the Scriptures witnesse: that
we are Iustified by faith, without the workes of the Law.
Such places are these. Rom. 3. 28. (Therefore we conclude that
a man is iustified by faith, without the workes of the Law.)
Rom. 4. 2. 3. (If Abraham were iustified by workes, hee hath
whereof to glory: but not before God. For what saith the Scripture?
Abraham beleeued God: and it was counted to him for
righteousnesse.) And vers. 14. 15. 16. (For if they which are
of the Law be heires: faith is made void, and the promise made
of none effect. Because the Law worketh wrath, for where no
Law is, there is no transgression.) Gal. 2. 16. (Knowing that
a man is not iustified by the workes of the Law, but by the Faith
of Iesus Christ: Euen we haue beleeued in Christ, that we might
be iustified by the Faith of Christ, and not by the workes of the
Law. For by the workes of the Law shall no flesh be iustified.)
Gal. 3. 21. 22. (Is the Law then against the promises of God?
God forbid. For if there had beene a Law giuen, which could
haue giuen Life: verily righteousnesse should haue beene by the
Law. But the Scripture hath concluded all vnder sinne: that
the promise by the faith of Iesus Christ, might be giuen by them
that beleeue.) Ephe. 2. 8. 9. (For by grace ye are saued, through
Faith, and that not of your selues; It is the gift of God: Not of
workes, least any man should boast.) Phil 3. 8. 9. (Yea doubtlesse,
and I count all things but losse for the excellency of the
Knowledge of Christ Iesus my Lord. For whom I haue suffered
the losse of all things: and doe count them but dung, that I

may winne Christ. And be found of him not hauing mine owne
righteousnesse, which is of the Law: but that which is through
the faith of Christ:Tit. 3. 5. 6. 7. the Righteousnesse which is of God by
Faith.) Out of which places, not to name more, expresly
touching this point of our Iustification, we argue thus.
                  
                  A Man is iustified either by the workes of the Law,
or by faith in Christ. But hee is not Iustified by the
workes of the Law. Ergo, He is iustified onely by
faith in Christ.
                  In this disiunctiue Syllogisme, they cannot find 
                        •
                     ault with
vs for adding the word [onely] in the Conclusion; which
was not in the Praemises. For Reason will teach them, that
where two Tearmes are immediately opposite, if one bee
taken away, the other remaines alone. So that in euery disjunctiue
Syllogisme, whose Maior Proposition standeth vpon
two Tearmes immediately opposite: if one be remoued
in the Minor, the Conclusion is plainely equivalent to
an exclusiue Proposition. As if we argue thus. Eyther the
wicked are saued: or the godly. But the wicked are not
saued. Thence it followes in exclusiue Tearmes, Therefore
the godly onely are saued. Our Aduersaries cannot deny,
but that the Proposition [A Man is iustified by workes, or
by Faith,] consists of Tearmes immediately opposite. For
else they accuse the Apostle Paul of want of Logicke, who
Rom. 3. should conclude falsely, [A man is iusitified by faith
without workes: if he be iustified either by both together, or
else by neither. Seeing then he opposeth Faith ād workes as
incompatible, and exclude workes from Iustification: wee
conclude infallibly by the Scriptures, That a man is iustified
by faith alone. This Argument not auoidable by any
sound āswere, puts our aduersaries miserably to their shifts.
Yet rather then yeeld vnto the truth, they fall vnto their distinctions:
whereby, if twere possible, they would shift off
the force of this Argument. Whereas therefore the Scriptures
oppose Workes and Faith: the [Law of Workes,] and
the [Law of Faith.] Our [owne righteousnesse which is of the

Law] and the (Righteousnesse of God by Faith,) manifestly
telling vs that we are Iustified, (Not by Workes, by the Law
of Workes, nor by our owne Righteousnesse which is of the Law,
but that we are iustified by Faith, by the Righteousnesse of God
by Faith.) Our Aduersaries haue a distinction to salue this
Matter withall. They say then Workes are of two
sorts.
                  
                     1 Some goe before Grace and Faith, and are performed
by the onely strength of free-will: out of that
Knowledge of the Law, whereunto Men may attaine
by the light of Nature, or the bare Reuelation
of the Scriptures. These workes or this obedience
vnto the law, which a meere naturall man can
performe, is (say they) that Righteousnesse which
the Scripture cals our owne. By this kinde of
Righteousnesse and Workes, they grant none is Iustified.
                     2 Some follow Grace and Faith: which are done by
Mans free-will, excited and aided by the speciall
helpe of Grace. Such Obedience and Righteousnesse
is (say they) called the (Righteousnesse of
God,) because it is wrought in vs of his gift and
grace. And by this Righteousnesse a man is iustified.
                  
                  By this Invention they turne of with a wet finger, all
those Scriptures that we haue alleadged. Wee are Iustified
(not by the workes of the Law,) that is, by the Obedience of
the Morall Law, which a man may performe without Gods
Grace: But we are Iustified by (Faith of Christ,) that is,
by that obedience of the Morall Law, which a man may
performe by faith, and the helpe of Gods grace.Rom. 3. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . Boasting
is excluded, saith the Apostle, by what Law? By the Law of
workes, that is, by the Law performed by the strength of
Nature? Nay, For he that performes the Law by his owne
strength, hath cause to boast of it. By what Law then? By
the Law of Faith, that is, by faith which obtaines Gods grace

to fulfill the Morall Law. Now he that obeyes the Law
by Gods helpe, hath no cause to boast. (Rom. 9. 31. 32 How knowes Bellarm
                              •
                           ne that? Bell. lib. 1. c. 19▪
                      
                     Israel which followed
the Law of righteousnesse, could not attaine vnto the law
of righteousnesse.) Wherefore? Because they sought it not
by Faith; that is, they sought not to performe the Law by
Gods Grace; (But as by the workes of the Law,) that is, by
their own strength: Thus Paul desires to be found in Christ,
(not hauing his owne righteousnesse which is of the Law) that
is that righteousnesse he performed without Gods grace before
his Conversion;
                     
                        
                           •
                        ello. cap. 16. But (the righteousnesse of God which is
by faith.) i.e. That righteousnesse which he performed in obeying
the Law by Gods grace after his Conversion. For
confirmation of this distinction, and the Interpretations
thereon grounded, Bellarmine brings three reasons to shew
that when workes and faith are opposed: all workes of
the Law are not excluded.
                  
                     1 Its manifest; Faith is a worke: and that there is a
Law of Faith as well as workes. If therefore, Rom.
3. all workes, and all Law be excluded from Iustification:
then to be iustified by Faith, were to bee
iustified without faith.
                     2 Its plaine the Apostle, Rom. 3. intends to proue that
neither Iewes by theBell lib. 1. 
                              •
                           . 19. naked obseruation of the law
of Moses: nor the Gentiles for their good workes;
before they were
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           . Tom. 2, tract. 4. cap. 2▪ quest. 6. §. 15. conuerted to the faith of Christ,
could obtaine righteousnesse from God.
                     3 The Apostle shewes, Rom. 4. 4. what workes he excludes
from Iustification, (viz.) such whereto
wages is due, by debt, not by grace. Now workes
performed without Gods helpe deserueBell. cap. 19▪
                         reward
(ex Debito:) but workes performed by his helpe,
deserve wages (ex gratia.
                     
                  
                  I doubt but (notwithstanding these seeming Reasons)
the fore-named distinction and expositions of Scripture according
thereto; appeare vnto you at the first sight, strange,
vncouth, farr besides the intent of the Holy Ghost, in all those

fore-reckoned passages of Scripture. Let vs examine it a
little more narrowly: and yee shall quickly perceiue; that
in this Schoole distinction, there is nothing but fraud & shifting.
(By workes done, by the strength of Nature wee are
not iustified. By workes done with the helpe of grace wee
are iustified.) This is the distinction: resolue it now into
these tearmes which are more proper, & it runs thus. (A man
is not sanctified by those workes of the Mora
                        •
                     l Law which
he doth without grace: but a man is sanctified by those
workes of the Morall Law he doth by Grace.) Both Sentences
are squint eyed, and looke quite awry from the Apostles
ayme in this dispute touching Iustification. Is it his
intent, Rom. 3. to proue that a sinner destitute of grace cannot
be made inherently holy, by Morality, or outward
workes of Piety? or thus. That a Sinner cannot attaine to
Sanctification by his owne strength: but he must attaine to
it by the grace of God? Take a suruey of the Chapter, and
follow the Apostles Argumentation. All both Iewes and
Gentiles are vnder sinne, verse 9. therefore (euery mouth must
be stopped) and none can pleade innocency; (and all the
world must be guilty before God.) and so liable to condemnation,
verse 19. What followeth hence now? (Therefore
by the workes of the Law, shall no flesh be iustified in his sight,
verse. 20.
                  How strange were this Conclusion, taken in our Adversaries
Construction. Ergo, By Obedience vnto the Morall
Law done without grace no flesh can attaine Sanctification
in his sight. For neither doth the Apostle speake of Sanctification,
but of absolution as is apparant; All are sinners against
the Law, Ergo, by pleading innocency in the keeping
of the Law, no Man can be wholy sanctified nor Iustified
nor absolued from Blame in Gods sight. Nor yet will the
Reason immediately annexed admit that glosse [Workes
without Grace] By the workes of the Law shall no flesh be
Iustified in his sight. Why] For by the Law commeth the Knowledge
of Sinne] that is, By the Law Men are conuinced of

Sinne, and declared not to be innocent. Which reason is not
worth a Rush, according to our Aduersaries Construction.
He that without grace shall doe the workes of the Law: he
is not thereby made holy. Why? Because the Law is
the knowledge of sinne. The Law thus obserued tels him
he is a sinner. In which reason there is no force, vnlesse it bee
true on the other side. He that by the helpe of grace doth
the workes of the Law, is thereby sanctified: because the
Law thus kept tels him he is not a sinner, which is most vntrue.
In as much, as not onely those which are destitute of
grace; but those that haue grace also, and by the helpe
thereof, keepe the Law in some measure, are by the Law notwithstanding
convinced to be sinners. The Apostle yet goes
forward. (If we be not iustified by the workes of the Law, by
what then? He answeres, (verse 21.) But now is the righteousnesse
of God made manifest without the Law.) We are iustified
by the righteousnesse of God: But what is that? It
is (saith the distinction) that obedience to the Law which
we performe by Gods grace. A glosse apparantly false. For
the righteousnesse of God here is a Righteousnesse without
the Law: But obedience to the Law, though performed
with grace, is a Righteousnesse (with) the Law; because tis
the Righteousnesse of the Law. For tis all one, he that obeyes
the Law by his owne strength; if he doe itAs Adam. perfectly
he hath the righteousnes of the law, & he that obeyethit perfectly,
by Gods grace, hath still the same righteousnes of the
law, and no other. For so the Law be kept, it alters not the
righteousnes thereof, that we keepe it by our own strength,
that wee haue of our selues, or another helpe that giues vs
strength to doe it. For then that strength which he giues vs
is our owne. Which point duely obserued cuts in sunder
the sinewes of this distinction; for tis cleare the Apostle
distinguisheth the Righteousnesse of the Law and of God
as different in thir kindes: these make them to be one and the
same thing, [Obedience to the morall Lawe] but done by
diuers helpes; one by meere nature: the other by Grace.

This is most contrary to the Scriptures, and specially to that
excellent place Rom. 10. 3. 4. &c. where the Apostle shewing
the differēce betweene the Righteousnesse which is our
owne or of the Law; and that which is the Righteousnesse
of God or Faith: tels vs. The Righteousnesse of the Law
is thus described [Th Man that doth these things shall liue
thereby:] but the Righteousnesse of Faith speaketh on this
wise [whosoeuer beleeueth on him (i. e. Christ) shall not be ashamed.)
Can any thing be more plaine; then that the Apostle
opposeth heere [Doing of the Law; and [Beleeuing] in
Christ: Not [doeing] the Law by our owne strength,
and doeing of the Law by [Gods grace.] These are
Iesuiticall glosses that corrupt Apostolicall Doctrine, and
strangely peruert the worke of Christ in our Redemption
as if he had done no more for vs but thisSo Bellarmin
                              •
                            cap. 19. answering that place▪ 
                        Gal. 2. [If righ
                           •
                        teousnesse be by the Law, then Christ dyed in vaine] saith: Nay, seeing we are iustified by faith▪ and workes following it, Christ died to purpose, that God might giue vs grace so to be iustified. (viz.) procured
that where as we could not liue by doeing of the Law
through our owne strength: God will now aide vs by
his grace, that we may fulfil the Law, and by that Legall
Righteousnesse obtaine Iustification and remission of Sinnes.
We abhorre such Doctrine, and doe reiect as vaine and imaginary
that distinction whēce such absurdities necessarily followWorkes without grace doe not iustifie.
MoreWhy? because imperfect, or because done by natures strength. Not the later: For then Adam not iustified. Not the former forse all good works of the best are imperfect. might be sayed in confutation thereof, were
it needefull: but we haue dealt long vpon this point, and tis
time to hasten forward. By the way vnto the Iesuits Arguments
in the defence of this Distinction We answere.
                  1 We confesse Faith is a worke, and in doeing of it we
obey the Law, because (as Saint Iohn speakes) Iohn. 3. 23.
[This is Gods Commandment, that we beleeue in the name of
his Sonne Iesus Christ.], And therefore the Gospell is called
[The Law of Faith.] because the promise of grace in Christ
is propounded with Commandment that Men beleeue it.
But now we deny that Faith iustifies vs, as 'tis a worke
whi
                        •
                     h we performe in Obedience to this Law: It iustifieth
vs onely as the Condition required of vs; and an Instrument
embracing Christs Righteousnesse. Nor can the contrary be
proued.
                  
                     
2 The Iesuits are mistaken in the scope of the Apostle
Rom. 3. whose intent is not to shew the Iew or Gentile could
not attaine Sanctification without Gods grace; by such Obedience
to the Law; as they could performe through the
meere strength of Naturall Abilities. They affirme it strongly:
but their Proofes are weake, being manyfestly confuted
by the whole File of the Apostles disputation, who clearely
and plainely exclude both Iewes and Gentiles, from being
Iustified by the workes of the Law without making mention
or giueing the least Intimation, by what meanes these
workes must be performed, whether without grace or by
the Helpe of grace. Yea it had been quite besides his purpose
so to haue done. For the Apostles argument is cleare
as the Light; and strong as a threefold cord. All are Sinners
against the Law, therefore by obedience vnto the Law, (Let
Men performe which way they list or can, without grace or
with grace) no Man is in Gods sight pronounced innocent,
                  
                      3 To the Last argument out of Rom. 4. 4. we answere,
The Apostle there proues: that the Faithfull, children of
Abraham; are not iustified by workes. Because Abraham
the Father of the Faithfull was Iustified by Faith; and
not by workes. Where wee affirme; That the Apostle
excludeth all the workes of Abraham from his Iustification:
both such as he performed when he had no grace, and those
he did when he had grace. For those workes are excluded
wherein Abraham might glory before Men. Now Abraham
might glory before Men as well in those workes which
he did by the helpe of Gods grace: as those which he did
without it. Nay more in those: then in these. As in his obedient
Departure from his owne Country at Gods command;
his patient expectation of the promises; his ready
willingnesse euen to offer his owne Sonne out of Loue and
Duty to God, his religious and Iust demeaning of himselfe
in all places of his abode. In those things Abraham had
cause to glory before Men, much more, then in such works

as he performed before his Conuertion: when he serued other
Gods beyond the Flood. Therefore we conclude that
Abraham was Iustified; neither by such workes; as went before
Faith and grace in him: nor yet by such as followed after.
This is most cleare by the v. 2. [If Abraham where
iustified by workes, he had wherein to glory: but not with God.]
Admit here the Popish Interpretation: and this speach of the
Apostles will be false. Thus [If Abraham were iustified by
workes] that is by such workes as he performed without
Gods gratious helpe [he hath wherein to glory▪] viz. before
Men: but [not with God.] Nay, thats quite otherwise. For
its euident. If a Man be Iustified by obeying the Law
through his own strength: he may boldly glory before God,
as well as before Men; seing in that case he is not beholding
to God for his helpe. But according to our doctrine, the
Meaning of the Apostle is perspicuous. Abraham might
glory before Men in those excellent workes of piety, which
he performed after his vocation: and in mens sight he might
be iustified by them. But he could not glory in them before
God: nor yet be iustified by them in his sight. So then all
workes whatsoeuer are excluded from Abrahams Iustification:
and nothing lest but Faith, which is imputed vnto him
for Righteousn
                        •
                     sse; as it is v. 3. Whence it followes. That
as Abraham: so all others are Iustified without all Merit, by
Gods free grace and fauour. For so it followes, verse 4. 5.
[Now vnto him that worketh, the wages is not counted by fauour;
but by Debt: but to him that worketh not; but beleeueth in
him that iustifieth the vngodly, his faith is counted for Righteousnesse.]
These words runne cleare, till a Iesuite put his
Foote into the streame to raise vp the Mudde. To him that
worketh] that is, which fulfileth the Righteousnesse of the
Morall Law: [the wages of Iustification and Life [is not counted
by fauour: but by debt] for by the perfect Righteousnesse
of the Law▪ a Man deserues to be iustified and saued. [But to
him that worketh not] that hath not fullfilled the righteousnesse
of the Law in doing all things; that are written therein:

[But beleeueth in him that iustifieth the vngodly] That is
relyeth vpon Christ, who by his Righteousnesse obtained
absolution for him (that is) Rightousnesse in himselfe.] His
Faith is imput
                           •
                        d for Righteousnesse] that is. He by his Faith
ob
                        •
                     aynes I
                        •
                     stification in Gods sight: not by Merit of his
owne, but Gods gratious acceptation of Christs Righteousnesse
for his.
                  But here our Aduersaries trouble the water by a false Inte
                        ••
                     retation.
[To him that worketh] that is, say they that
fulfil, the Law by his owne strength. Wages is not counted
by fauour, but by debt,] but if he fulfill it by Gods grace, his
wages is pai
                        ••
                      him by fauour, not of debt. Where vnto we
reply: That 1 This glose is a plaine corruption of the Text.
For by workes in this fourth verse the Apostle vnderstands
that kind of workes were of mention is made v 2 By
which Abraham was not Iustified: and these as we haue
shewed where works done by the helpe of Grace not by the
meere strength of Nature. 2 And againe for the Assertion
it selfe, namely [He that fulfils the m
                           •
                        rrall Law by the helpe
of Gods grace is iustified, by fauour not by debt] we say tis ether
a manifest falshood or at best, an ambiguous speech.
For tis one thing to bestow Grace on a Man to fulfill the
Law: and tis another thing to Iustifie him; when he hath
fulfilled the Law. If God should giue strength to a Man exactly
to fulfill the Morral
                        •
                      Law that were indeed of his free
fauour and grace: but when this man, that hath receaued
this stre
                        •
                     gth shall come before God with the perfect Righteousnesse
of the Law, pleading that in euery point he had
done what was required God is bound in Iustice to pronounce
him innocent, and of due Debt to bestow on him the
wages of eternall Life. Adams case is not vnlike to such
a Man. For God gaue Adam what strength he had: yet
Adam fulfilling the Law by that strength, should haue merited
Iustification and Life. Therefore when the Apostle
speake 
                        〈◊〉
                      all workes in the perfect fulfilling of the Law,
he sai
                        •
                     h, that [to him that worketh Wages is not counted by fauour

but: but by debt:] he speaketh exactly, and the Iesuits
in excluding workes done by Grace comment absurdly.
Thus much touching the third point concerning Mans Iustification
by Faith alone: as also of the first generall Head
promised in the Beginning. Namely, the condition required
of vs vnto Iustification (viz.) Faith.
                  
               
            
            
               SECT. 3.
               
                  CHAP. I▪
                  
                  Of the righteousnesse whereby a man is iustified before
God: that it is not his own inherent in himselfe:
that in this life no 
                        〈◊〉
                      hath perfection
of holinesse inherent
in him.
                  
                     I Proceede vnto the second Generall,Sect. 3. c. 1. of the Matter
of our Iustification where we are to enquire
what Righteousnesse it is, for which a Sinner is
Iustified in Gods sight. Iustificat
                        •
                     on and Iustice
a
                        •
                     e still coupled together; and some Righteousnesse there
must be, for which God pronounceth a Man Righteous: and
for the sake whereof he for Gi
                        •
                     eth vnto him all his Sinnes.
No
                        •
                      is a Sinner iust before God because Iustified: bu
                        •
                      hee is
therfore Iustified because he is some way or other Iust.—The
Righteousnesse for which a Man can be Iustified before God
is of necessity one of these two.2 Generall. heads.
                  
                  1 Eyther inherent in his owne Person and done by 
himselfe.
                  2 Or inherent in the Person of Christ: but imputed 
vnto him.
                  A Man is Iustified either by something in him and performed
by him: or by some thing in another performed for
him. The wisedome of Angels and Men hath not bin able
to shew vnto vs any third Meanes. For whereas it is affirmed
by some that God might haue reconciled Mankind vnto
himselfe by a free and absolute parden of their Sins without
the interuention of any such Righteousnesse, eithe
                        •
                      in

themselues or in Christ whereby to procure it: to that we
say That God hath seene it good in this matter rather to
follow his owne most wise Counsailes; then these Mens
foolish Directions. Tis to no purpose now to dispute what
God might haue done, whether God by his absolute omnipotency
could not haue freed Men from
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      Hell, by some
other Meanes without taking satisfaction for Sinne from
Christ: whether God ought not to haue the same priuiledge
which we giue vnto any mortale King, freely to pardon a
Rebell, and receaue him to fauour, without consideration
of any goodnesse in him or satisfaction made by him, or ano
                        •
                     
for him? Or, whether Sinne doe make such a deepe wound
in Gods Iustice and Honour, that he cannot with the safegard
of either passe by it without amendes. Such question▪
as these are vaine and curious prosecuted by idle and vnthinkfull▪
Men, who not acknowledging the Riches of
Gods 
                        〈…〉
                      and grace in that course of their Redemption
which god hath followed; would accuse God of Indiscretion,
for making much adoe about nothing, & teach him
to haue go
                        •
                     e a more compendious way to worke, then by
sending his owne sonne to 
                        〈◊〉
                      for vs. 
                        〈…〉
                     
stand what God hath not tell him what he might or should
haue done.
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      According to which course of his now reuealed
will we know that God hath declared his euerlasting hatred
against Sinne▪ as that thing which most directly and immediately
opposeth the Holynesse of his Nature, and the Iustice
of his Commandments. We know that for this hatred which
God beareth to Sin, no sinfull creature can be able to stand in

                        〈…〉
                      And therefore before reconciliation it was
needefull, Satisfaction should be made where offence had bin
giuen. Which seeing man could not effect by himselfe▪ God
thought it good to prouide a Mediator, who should in make

peace betweene both. So that what euer may be imagined
of possibility of other meanes to bring man to Life: yet
now wee know that sicioportuit, Thus Christ ought to suffer,
Luc. 24. 26. and that it (Behoued him to be like vs that
being a Faithfull high Priest, he might make Reconciliation for
our Sines.) Heb. 2. 17. Leauing then this new way to Heauen
neuer frequented, but by Imagination; let vs follow the
old wayes of Iustification that the Scriptures haue discouered
vnto vs: which are two and no more. Either by our owne
Righteousnesse and workes: or by the Righteousnesse & workes
of another (viz) Christ. The former is that way whereby
Man might haue obtayned Iustification and life, had hee not
bin a Sinner. But now, Man, that is a Sinner, cannot be
Iustified and saued: but onely in the later way (viz.) by the
Righteousnesse of Christ the Mediator.
                  
                  This Duine trueth is of most infallible certainty and soueraigne
consolation vnto the conscience of a Sinner: as shall
appeare in the processe of our Discourse wherin we shall
first remoue [our owne Righteousnesse: that so in the second
place we may [establish the Righteousnesse of Christ] as the
onely Matter of our Iustification in Gods sight.
                  By our owne Righteousnesse we vnderstand as the Apostle
doth Rom. 10▪ [The Righteousnesse of the Law or of
workes] which is twofold.
                  1. The fulfilling of the Law whether by the [Habituall 
Holynesse of the Heart: or by the [Actuall Iustice] of good
workes proceeding thence For the Law requires both,
That the P
                        •
                     rson be Holy▪
                      endued with all inward qualities
of [Purity and Iustice] and that the workes be Holy being
performed for Matter and all the Circumstances, according to
the Commandment.
                  
                  2 The satisfying for the Breach of the Law. For he 
that makes full satisfaction to the Law, which is broken, is
afterward no debter to the Law: but to be accounted Iust
and no Violater thereof: We must now enquire touching
these two: whether a Man can be Iustified▪
                      by his owne OObedience

to the Morall Law▪
                      Secondly, Whether he can be
iustified by▪ his owne Satisfaction for Transgression of the
Morrall Law. Concerning which two Quaeres: we lay
downe these two Conclusions which are to be made
good.
                  
                     
                         1 No Man that is a Sinner is Iustified by▪ his owne
Obedience to the Morrall Law.
                     
                         2 No Man is Iustified by his owne satisfaction for
his Transgression.
                  
                  For the former. It is the Conclusion of the Apostle
Rom. 3. 20.Conclusion. Therefore by the workes of the Law shall no
flesh be Iustified in his sight] which we proue by these Arguments.
                  The first shall be that of the Apostle in the forenamed
place which stands thus.Arg.
                  
                  Whosoeuer is a Transgressor of the Morall Law:
he cannot be Iustifi
                        •
                     d by his Obedience thereto.
But euery Man is a Transgressor of the Morall
Law. ergo, No Man can be Iustified by his obedience
thereto.
                  The Maior is an vndeniable Principall in Reason. It
being a thing Impossible that a party accused as an offender
should be absolued and pronounced innocent by pleading Obedience
to that Law which he hath plainely disobeyed.
Wherefore the Apostle takes this Proposition for granted
in these words of his [For by the law commeth the Knowledge
of Sinne] v. 20. That which conuinceth vs to be sinners: by
that tis impossible we should be declared to be righteous.
that plea wilneuer quit vs; which proues vs guilty. Yea twere
not onely folly, but madnesse to alledge that for ones iust excuse
which it selfe is his very fault whereof hee is accused.
The Maior then is certaine.
                  The minor is no lesse. (viz.) That euery man is a transgressor
of the Morall Law) If any Sonne of Adam will deny
this, his owne conscience will giue his tongue the Lie: and
the Scriptures will double it vpon him. Which hauing concluded

[Rom. 3. Gal. 2. all vnder Sinne] averre. ThatIohn 1. 8. [If we (an Apostle
not excepted) say We haue no sinne we deceaue our sel
                           •
                        es
and the truth is not in vs.] Yea (If
                     Verse 10. 
                     we say we haue not sinned,
we make God a her, and his word is not in vs] The conclusion
then is vnfallable (That by the Obedience of the Morall
Law, no Man shall be iustified (that is) quitted & pronounced
innocent before Gods iudgment seate.] This Aposticall argument
vtterly ouerthrowes the pride of Man in seeking for
Iustification by the Law: and it is of so cleare euidence, that
the Aduersaries of this Doctrine cannot tell how to avoide
it. But, for asmuch as many exceptions are taken, and shifts
sought out, for the further manifestation of the force hereof
against gainsayers of the truth: it will be requisite to examine
there euasions. Which we shall doe in the next argument.
Which is this.
                  2 Whosoeuer hauing once broken the Law & can neuer
after perfectly fullfill it:2 Argument. he cannot be Iustified by his
obedience thereto.
                  But Man hauing once broken Gods Law can 
                        〈◊〉
                     
after that perfectly fullfill it. Ergo, Man cannot
be Iustified by Obedience of the Law.
                  The Maior of this Argument is framed vpon another
ground then the former & opposed vnto that erronious tenent
of our Aduersaries. [That howsoeuer a man be a sinner
against the Law, yet neurthelesse afterward be may be iustified
by his obedience of the Law. Because God for the time
following▪ giues him grace perfectly to fulfill it.] Which opinion
is directly contrary to the reason of the Apostle which
is: [That once a sinner, and alwayes vncapable of Iustification
by the Law: for how should the Law declare him innocent that
hath, though but once transgressed against it.] Hee that hath
stollen in his youth, and euer after liued truly and iustly, can
neuer quit himselfe in Iudgement from the guilt and punishment
of thee very by pleading, he hath kept the Law in his
latter Times. Obedience that followes after, iustifies not
from the guilt that went before. As we shall see more 
                        •
                     ereafter

in the point of Mans satisfaction. But let vs grant
that the Law though once broken, yet afterwards fullfilled
would Iustifie a Man: we here defend the Minor (That
Man hauing broken G
                           •
                        ds Law, can neuer after wards perfectly
fullfill it) and so by that meanes also he is excluded
from Iustification by it. This Proposition the Romanists will
not yeeld to, with out strong proofe: Let vs explaine it and
confirme it. The Proposition may beset downe in these termes
[No Man whosoeuer can perfectly fullfill the Morall Law
in this Life] Man heare we consider in a two-fold estate of
Nature of Grace. Touching man in the estate of nature, it is
a greed on both sides that the keeping of the Law is vtterly
and absolutely impossible vnto him. But concerning Man
regenerate and iustified, they of Rome affirme he may keepe
the Law: wee of the Reformation granting that absolutely
it is not impossible (for we will not say; but God might if
he saw good bestowne such perfection of grace vpon a Regenerate
Man, that afterwards he should Liue without all

                        〈◊〉
                     , and be translated to Heauen without death) yet, according
to the order which God now holdeth in bringing
Man to saluation; we deny that there euer was or euer will
be any Mortall Man that hath or shall perfectly fulfill the
Righteousnesse of the Morall Law: This shall appeare vnto
you, by parting the Righteousnesse of the Law into its
branches, whereby you may see what it is to fullfill the
Law, and how impossible it is so to doe.
                  The Righteousnesse required by the Morall Law
is of two sorts.
                  
                      1 Habituall, in the inherent holinesse of Mans whole
person, when such gratious Qualities are fixed and planted
in euery faculty of soule and Body: as doe dispose and incline
the Motions of both onely vnto that which is conformable
to the Righteousnesse of the Law. That such Righteousnesse
is required by the Law, is a plaine Case and confessed;
That which commands the good, or forbids the euill
action; doth command the vertuous and forbid the vitious

Habit too. He that lookes for purity in the streame, cannot
but dislike poyson in the Fountaine: and God that commands
vs to doe good, bids vs also to be holy;Pure in heart vndefiled 
                           〈◊〉
                         the way, nor can wee
doe the one, vnlesse we doe the other. And therefore the Apostle
ioynes both together. [The end of the Commandement
is loue, (but where?) out of a pure heart.] 1 Tim. 1. 5.
                  
                      2 Actuall, In the exercise of all good workes enioyned
by the Law, and forbearing the contrary euill workes.
Whether these good or euill workes be inward in that spirituall
obedience which the Law required; (viz.) in the right
ordering of all the motions of our soules, that euery one of
our Thoughts, Imaginations, Purposes of our minde, and all
the secret workings and stirrings of our affections, be altogether
employed vpon Piety and Charity, not so much as touching
vpon any thing, that is contrary to the loue of God,
or our neighbour. Or, whether these good and euill works
be outward in the bodily obedience vnto the Law, in doing all
and euery externall dutie of Religion towards God: of Iustice
and Mercy towards man; and in leauing vndone the
contrary.
                  Further this actuall righteousnesse of the Law is to bee
considered two wayes:
                  
                     1 As it respects all the Commandements, and so that 
righteousnesse is onely perfect, which fulfils all and euery
particular precept of the Law.
                     2 As it respects any one Commandement, or any one 
dutie therein contained. And so we may call that righteousnesse
perfect, which exactly performes any one point of the
Law, though it faile in others.
                  
                  So you see what is to be done of him that will perfectly
fulfill the Law: let vs now see whether any man can doe so,
or no. We say no man can doe it; and we make it good in
the confirmation of these three Propositions.
                  
                     1 No man in this life hath perfection of grace and holinesse 
inherent.
                     22 Cap. 
                              •
                           . No man in this life can fully obserue all those good

workes both inward and outward which the Law requires.
                     33 Cap. 3.No man in this life can performe any one particular
good worke so exactly, that in euery point it shall answer
the rigor of the Law, and Gods seuere iudgement.
                  
                  
                      For the first we proue it by this Argument▪
                  
                  Where sinfull corruption remaines in part,Proposition. there in herent
holinesse is not perfect.
                  But in euery Man during this life there remaineth
sinfull corruption. Ergo, In no man is there, during this
life, perfect inherent holinesse.
                  The maior is without exception. For he that is part bad
and sinfull, tis not possible, he should be totally good and
holy.
                  The minor is most euident by Scriptures and each Mans
experience and reason it selfe. Gal. 5. 17. The Apostle describes
the Combat that is betweene the flesh and the spirit,
(that is) betweene corruption and grace, in a man regenerate.
[The flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit against
the flesh: and these two are contrary one to the other, so that ye
cann
                           •
                        t doe the same things that yee would.] Who can say that
holinesse is perfect in that mā, in whō corruption of Nature,
not onely troubleth, but hindreth grace in its holy operation?
Shall we say this contention lasts but for a while after a
man is newly regenerate: but in successe of time the Spirit
gets an absolute victory, corruption being not only ouermastered;
but also annihilated? If we say so, experience will
accuse vs, & conscience will iudge vs to be Lyars Where is
that man, and who is he named, that can say, he findes no rebellion
or distemper in his affections or desires, no disorder
in any motion of his soule: but that all within him is sweetly
tuned vnto obedience, without iarre and discord arising
from corruption? Certainely that humble confession of a
most holy Apostle, may cause blushing in any such proud
Iustitiary▪
                      Had Paul the body of sinne in him, and hast thou
no
                        •
                     e? He fights and wrestles, [against the Law in his members,

rebelling against the Law of his mind.) yet he is so checkt
and mated by it, that [He can neither doe the good hee would,
nor auoid the euill he would not, when he would doe well, euill is
still present with him.] And so tedious is this toyle vnto him;
that he complaines of it at the very heart, and cries out bitterly
for helpe in this conflict. Whereupon though he haue
helpe from God through Iesus Christ, yet hath hee not full
deliuerance from this inherent corruption; but is faine to
conclude in this pittifull manner, [So then I
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . euen I my selfe. 
                     my selfe in my
minde serue the law of God: but in my flesh the law of sinne.]
Euen Paul serues God in the better halfe of him: doe what
he can, sinne will haue a place in his heart, & a part of his seruice,
though he be vnwilling to yeeld it. If any will compare
and preferre himselfe to this holy man: he may prooue
himselfe prouder, but better then him he cannot. Tis arrogance
for a simple Fryer to claime perfection, when so great
an Apostle disauowes it. He that will not acknowledge that
corruption in himselfe, which Paul (in the name of all)
confesseth in his owne person; tis not because such a one is
more holy then the Apostle: but because he is ignorant, and
sees it not; or high-minded and scornes to be knowne of it.
Furthermore, Reason confirmes what Scriptures and experience
doe witnesse; (viz.) that sinfull corruption will
hang fast vpon vs vnto our dying day: for if we suppose an
vtter abolishment of sinne and corruption in our Nature; it
must needes follow, there will neuer be any sinfulnesse at all
in our workes and liues. Where the Habit is perfect, the
Action is so too: and a sweet Fountaine cannot send forth
bitter waters. Wherefore seeing not the best of men can
liue without manifold actuall sinnes: It it apparent, that this
ill fruit comes from a bad humour, in the tree, and this defect
of actuall obedience, comes from the imperfection of habituall
holinesse. This is sufficient for Iustification of the truth
of our first Preposition [That inherent holinesse in this life,
is not perfect;] Because tis alwayes coupled with some sinfull
corruption.
                  
                     
                     But here our Adversaries cry out with open mouth, that
we maintaine moastrous propositions. Namely
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      That there
is n
                        •
                      inherent holinesse in a man thats iustified, that after Iustification,
a man still remaines a sianer and vniust. That in
Iustification, sinne is not abolished, but onely couered with
Christs mantle. Thence they fall to their Rhetoricke, That all
Calvinists are but painted Sepulchers, faire without full
of rottennesse within. Like foolish Virgins that haue no oyle of
their owne: But thinke to be supplyed by that of other folkes.
Like Wolues in a Lambes skinne, which hides, but takes not away
their rauening and fierce nature. Like a leprous person in
fine cloathes; that lookes to be fauoured and imbraced by his
King, because his is well apparelled. For this is (say they)
to teach, That a Man iustified is yet a sinner in himselfe. That
corruption, filthinesse, and vncleannesse remain in him, when yet
in Gods sight he is accounted pure and cleane, because hee hath
hid himselfe v
                        •
                     der the cloake of Christs righteousnesse.
Whence also they tell vs it well follow, Wee make Christs
body monstrous, a holy, beautifull head ioyned to filthy leprous
members. Christs marriage polluted; A most holy and faire
Bridegroome coupled to a foule deformed Spouse.
                  To this we say. Truth is modest; yet shee will not bee
out-faced with bigge words. Their eloquence hath slandered;
partly vs, partly the truth. Vs, in that they affirme we
deny all inherent righteousnesse in a person iustified, which is
an impudent calumny. The truth, in condemning that for an
error which is sacred verity taught vs by God in the Scriptures,
(viz.) That a person iustified, is yet after that in himselfe
in part sinfull. This we still teach and maintaine for a
truth, firme as the foundation of the earth, that cannot bee
shaken, namely, That although a Iustified person is by the
grace of the Holy Ghost dwelling in him made inherently holy:
yet this sanctity is not that perfect purity of the heart, which the
Law requires, because some degrees of impurity and corruption
doe dwell in him till death. And therefore the most iustified
person liuing, is yet in himselfe partly sinfull and vniust;

but the sinfulnesse is pardoned vnto him in CHRIST.
                  Against this the R
                           •
                        manists contend, labouring to proue,
that in him that is iustified. Sinne doth not remaine at all: but
is vt
                           •
                        erly abol
                           •
                        shed. They proue it by such Arguments as
these.
                  1 The Scriptures testifie, That Christ is the
                     Iohn 1. 29. 
                     Lambe of 
God, that taketh away the sinnes of the world. That Hee was
                     Heb 9. 28.
                     offered to take away the sinnes of many. That in Repentance,
our sinnes are
                     Acts 3. 19. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , &c.
                      
                     blotted out. That God will subdue our iniquities
and
                     Micah. 7. 19. 
                     cast our sinnes into the bottome of the Sea; in allusion
to the drowning of the Aegyptians in the red Sea.
Wherefore if sinne be taken away, blotted out, drowned in
the Sea, like the Aegyptians: then sure it is abolished, and
remaines no longer.
                  
                     2 They prooue it from the Properties which are ascribed 
to Sinne; as namely these.
                     1 Sinne is compared to spotts, staines and filthynesse:
but from thence we are washed by the powring
on of (cleane
                        Ezek. 16. 2
                              •
                           . 
                        water) vpon vs; and by the
(Blood of Christ.)Apoc 1. 6. 1 Iohn 1. 
                              •
                           7.
                     
                     2 Sinne is compared to Bonds, Fetters, & the Prison,
whereby we are holden captiue vnder the power
of Satan: Now Christ hath broken these Chaines
and opened these prison doores, hauing (deliuered
us
                        Col. 1. 13. 
                        from the power of darknesse) and (redeemed
                        Tit. 2. 14.
                        us from all iniquity) & (made us free
                        Rom. 6. 18. 2
                              •
                           
                         
                        from Sinne
to be come the seruants of Righteousnesse.)
                     3 Sinne is compared to sicknesses, diseases, & wounds.
Now God is the best Phisition, the most skilfull
Chirurgian: and where he vndertakes the Cure, he
doth his worke throughly: he cures all diseases
and each on perfectly. He doth not spread on a
sick Man a faire Couerlid, or couer a festred wound
with a faire cloth, as Caluin imagines: but by a
purgatiue potion he expelles the disease, by a healing
plaister he cures the wound. So that there is

not left, nor corrupt matter, nor dangerous sore,
that can proue deadly according to that Rom. 8. 1.
(There is no condemnation to those that are in Christ
Iesus.) that is. There is no matter at all for which
they deserue Condemnation, as those expound.
                     4 Sinne is likned to death, nay it is the spirituall Death
of the Soule. Now he that is iustified is restored to
Spirituall Life, and where Life is there death is
quite taken away, seing a Man cannot be aliue and
dead both together. Wherefore the Apostle saith
Rom. 6. 6. [Our old Man is
                        
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           . 
                        crucified with him,
that the Body of Sinne might be
                        
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           . 
                        destroyed, that
hence forth We might not serue Sinne) and v. 11.
(We are dead vnto Sinne.)
                  
                  Hence they conclude.
                  If the filthinesse of sinne be washed away, the Chaines of
sinne broken, the Diseases and hurts of Sinne healed, the
Death of Sinne abolished: then it followes, that Sinne is
quite exstinguished, and remaines no more in those that are
iustified.
                  
                      3 They argue thus. If Sinne remaine in those that are
iustified and be onely couered: then God either knowes of
the sinne or knowes it not. To say he were ignorant of it
were blasphemy (all
                     Heb. 4. 14 
                     things being naked and bare before his
eyes.) If he know it, then either he hates it or he hats it not.
If he doth not hate it how doth the Scriptures say true that
he is a (God that hateth Iniquity.) If he do hate it thē certainly
he must punish it: God cannot see a fault and hate a fault
but he must also punish it to. If he punish it, then he which is
iustified shall yet be condemned which is absurd.
                  Vnto these Arguments we answere. Vnto the two former
thus. When we say Sin remaines in a Man regenerate and Iustified
we must distinguish the ambiguity of the word Sin.
In Sin, to vse that distinction which is authenticall with ou
                        •
                     
Aduersaries; There are three things.
                  
                     1 The offence of God, which is the fault.
                     
                        
2 The obligation vnto eternall punishment, which
is the guilt.
                     3 The staine or pollution of the soule, (viz) the inherent
vitious inclination of it vnto euill. From
whence the fault committed first issued, and which
by committing of the fault is augmented. For euill
once committed leaues a further pronnesse in the
heart to doe it againe. This we call the corruption
of Sinne.
                     
                  
                  Thus then we answer. Sin doth not remaine in those that
are iustified, & regenerate in the two first respects, viz. of the
fault and the guilt, both which are takē away by the death of
Christ. But Sin doth remain in the regenerate according to
the 3 respect, (viz.) the vitious quality and corruption thereof,
inherent in the soule: We shall explaine these answeres,
and apply them to the Arguments. We say then; That the
fault & guilt of sinne in the regenerate, is vtterly abolished by
the death of Christ. Which we doe not take in such a sense
as this. That in a man regenerate there is not at all any one
fault or guilt to be found, for to say that a man regenerate,
when he sinnes, were neither faulty nor guilty, were a grosse
vntruth, 
                        •
                      seeing tis impossible that man should sinne, yet
God not be offended; that man should sinne, and yet not
be guilty, and deseruing eternall death. Wherefore we confesse
that in the holiest of men, if they sinne, there's a true
fault, and God is displeased with it; there is also true guilt,
and for it they deserue to goe to Hell. But yet this truth also
must be acknowledged withall, that all faultinesse and
guiltinesse are quite abolished and taken away from them
by Christ, because that both are pardoned vnto them. God
is offended; but yet they feele not the wofull effects of his
indignation: because in Christ hee is graciously contented
to be reconciled with them. Againe they haue deserued
euerlasting death: but they come not to the paines thereof,
because freed from the punishment by Christs satisfaction.
Thus then we vnderstand the first part of the answere. That

the fault and guilt of sinne is vtterly abolished, that is, totally
pardoned vnto the Regenerate, by meanes of Christ, so
that no finall eternall punishment shall befall them therefore.
The other part. That Sinne (in the uitious quality and
corruption if it remaine in Men iustified) we vnderstand
with this necessaryRom. 6. 12. 14. Limitation, That it remaines in them
not in its power and strength: but in its Being and Life.
It hath vitam: but not Regnum. It reignes where there is no
Grace at all: but it liues euen where Grace is. which
though it mightily a bate to power of it: it cannot vtterly
d
                        •
                     stroy its being. Hence now its easy to vnty the Arguments.
Sinne is taken away, b
                        •
                     otted out, drowned in the
bottome of the Sea, in regare of those mischieuous effects
which sinne would haue brough on vs: God is reconciled,
the obligation, to punishment cancelled; and all the power,
force, & strength of Sin defeated; So that like the dead Egyptians
they can no longer pursue the Israelites to annoy them,
not shall stand vp as an aduersary in iudgment to condemne
vs. The Guilt of Sinne is washed away totall by the blood
of Christ: the filthynesse of corrupted Nature is in part by
Degrees clensed by the Spirite of Christ powred on vs in his
sanctifieing Grace. The Fetters and bonds of Sinne, whereby
we were held in bondage vnder condemnation, these are
quite broken asunder: but those chaines, whereby with
Paul, Rom. 7 (we are led captiue) to disobedience are some
broken, all weakened. We are freed from the power of Satan
and feare of Hell: but not wholly freed from Sinne, whereby
we are often captiues against our will. Sinne is a sicknesse,
and God is the Phisitian; a wound, and God is the
Chirurgian, true: but the cures neither perectly, yet correct
that word. He cures our sicknesse and sores perfectly: but
not suddainely, where he begines the worke he will finish
it: but he will not doe all in a day. The cure begins and
goes onward to perfection during this life: but tis neuer finished
till after death. He forgiues
                     Psal. 103. 3. 
                     all our iniquity and thats
done 
                        •
                     utirely and totally [and healeth all our infirmities]:

but this is by degrees, not all at once. In which course
God hath no cause to feare the censure of a Iesuite for vnskilfulnesse
nor stands he in need of Mans counsaile, for
prescription, nor Mans helpe to hold his hand in working,
if the Cure goe on more slowly then our foolish hastinesse
thinkes fit. Thats fit and best what God thinkes so: and
if we count him faithfull and wise in his art; tis our duty
to take his aduice: but saucy persumption to giue him any.
Lastly, where Sinne is said to be the (Spirituall Death of
the Soule) and so Life being restored in Iustification Death
must needes be quite abolished: the weaknesse of this Argument
appeares streight, if the metaphoricall terme be changed
in to proper. The death of Sinne is either the Separation
of all grace from the Soule, or the Separation of Gods Fauour
from the Soule. We are dead in trespasses and Sinnes
both waies: In regard that in the state of vnregeneration
the Soule is vtterly destitute of all Grace and goodnesse:
and also be cause in that condition it is liable to eternall
Death. Now the Death of Sinne that is eternall death in
the perpetuall Losse of Gods fauour this is cleane taken a
way from him that's regenerate. Christ by his death hath
purchased to him Life and immortality. But touching that
other; (death (that is) the want of all inherent Grace in
the Soule) They say. That in Regeneration Grace and Holynesse
is restored to the Soule, yet not so perfectly as to
abolish euery degree of Sinnefull Corruption. Before Regeneration
the Soule had no grace atall and so was vtterly
dead but it followes not, That therefore in Regeneration,
it hath all grace giuen it in all perfection, and so made perfectly
aliue: what euer harshnesse there is in the Metaphore,
the plaine termes in this case are smooth enough.
A Man may be at once a liue and dead, that is, at once a
Man may bee partly holy, and partly sinnefull. [Our old
Man is crucified with Christ vpon whose Crosse it receaued
a deadly wound; (because Christ by his sacrifice hath procured
the sending of the Holy ghost into the hearts of the

Elect; who by sanctifying them, abolished their naturall
corruptions by degrees. [That so the body of sinne might be
destroyed.] that is, not presently annihilated: 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      made
of no force and strength, made vnable to worke strongly in
vs. [That henceforth we might not serue sinne.] Though alwayes
we should haue sinne in vs. So are we [dead to sinne]
not as if sinne were vtterly dead in vs; or had no more working
in vs, then it hath in a dead carcase: but because the
guilt of sinne is fully taken away, and the power of sinne
hat
                        •
                      receiued a deadly wound, doth bleed out some of its
life now, and shall infall
                        •
                     bly bleed out the last drop of its
life hereafter.
                  Vnto the third Argument, we answere thus, That the
Hornes of those Dilemma's be made of wood, and may be
easily battered. We say then that God sees and knowes the
sinfull corruption which is in the regenerate; for wee cannot
assent vnto that wilde and franticke imagination of some;
who haue troubled the quiet of some places in this Land, by
preaching that God doth not, nay cannot see any iniquity or
matter of blame, in those that be in Christ Iesus. We beleeue
that nothing is hid from his eyes: nor be our sins lesse visible
to him then our graces. God knowes what sinnes his children
commit, he iudgeth them to be faults, and such as deserue
his infinite wrath. Yea, to goe further, as hee sees the
sinne of the regenerate: so he hates it with a perfect hatred;
it being impossible, that his pure eyes should behold impurity
and loue it. But now what followes hence? If he see it
and hate it, then he cannot but punish it. True, that consequence
is certaine. But whats next? If God punish that
sinne which is in the Regenerate how then is their sinne couered
and their iniquities forgiuen? How doth hee account
them Iust, whom he knoweth and punisheth for vniust?
Here's a Sophisme. He sees sinne, and hates sinne, and punisheth
sinne of the Regenerate: Therefore he punisheth it in,
and vpon their owne persons. Thats a non sequitur. Hee
punisheth it, but tis in the person of Christ [who hath troden

the Winepresse,] of the fierce wrath of God conceiued against
all sinfulnesse whatsoeuer in his Elect: by which meanes
his hatred towards the sinne of the Regenerate, is fully
satisfied, and also his loue towards their persons procured.
He graciously passeth by their iniquity, pardoning vnto
them what he hates, and hath punished in Christ: in which
respect he may be truly said not to see that sinne in them
which he will neuer punish in them, and to couer that sinne
which shall neuer bee layed open in iudgement against
them.
               
               
                  CHAP. II.
                  No man can perfectly fulfill the Law in performing all
such workes, both inward and outward, as each
commandement requires, against which
truth Popish Obiections are
answered.
                  
                     ANd thus much touching the first Proposition
and the first point wherein Man fals short of his
obedience to the Morall Law, (viz.) in the
imperfection of habituall inherent holinesse.
                  
                  We goe on vnto the next Proposition, touching Mans
actuall Obedience vnto the whole Law. Where we teach,
                  That no man can perfectly obey the Law in performing
all such workes,2 Proposition. both inward and outward, as
each commandement requires.
                  A man would thinke this point needed no other proofe
but onely experience. In all the Catalogue of the Saints,
can you pricke out one that after regeneration, neuer committed
sinne against the Law? We shall kisse the ground he
treads on, if we know where that man haunts, who can
assure vs that since his conuersion he neuer brake the Law.
Shall we finde this perfection in a Monkes Cell, or in a
Hermits Lodge, an Anachorites Mue, vnder a Cardinals
Hat, or in the Popes Chaire? All these are Cages of vncleannesse,

not Temples wherein dwells vndefiled Sanctity. Neuer
to sinne; thats a happinesse of Saints and Angels, with
whom we shall hereafter enioy it: but whilst w
                        •
                     e are mortall
we can but wish for it. [Thy Law, (saith Dauid) is
exceeding large.] It compriseth in it not a few, but many
and manifold duties. Good workes are by a kind of Popish
Soloecisme brought to a short summe Prayer, Fasting, and
Almes-deedes. These are eminent among the rest: but not
the hundreth part of the whole number. There is besides a
world of duties enioyned, and as many sinnes forb
                        •
                     dden:
each Commandement hath it seuerall Rankes, euery duty its
manifold Circumstances; to reckon vp all, were a businesse
which the wit of the subtilest Iesuite, or the profoundest
Diu
                        •
                     ne could hardly master. To performe them is a taske,
which is beyond the strength of the holiest Man, who in finding
it a great difficulty to doe any one well, would forthwith
iudge the performance of so many an impossibility.
But if this suffice not; we haue expresse Scriptures to proue
that no man doth actually obey the Law in all points. Such
places are these:
                  
                     
                        (1) 1 Kings 8. 46. There is no man that sinneth not.
                     
                        (2) Eccles. 7. 20. For there is not a iust man vpon ea
                           •
                        th
that doeth good and sinneth not.
                     
                        (3) Iames 3. 2. In many things we offend all.
                     
                        (4) 1 Iohn 1. 8. If we say that we haue no sinne, we deceiue
our selues, and the truth is not in vs.
                  
                  Whence we conclude, that [de facto] neuer any man did
keepe the Law: but brake it in some, yea, in many things.
And therefore we say that the dispute of our Aduersaries,
touching the possibility of keeping the Law, vanishes to
nothing. For seeing no man hath, or will euer actually keep
it (as the Scriptures witnesse) to what end serues all the
quarrelling a
                        •
                     d dispute about the possibility of keeping it. No
man shall be iustified by the Law, because he hath a power
to keepe it if he list: but because he hath actually kept it.
Whence it is manifest that the reply of our Aduersaries is

ridiculous. No man indeed doth keepe it: but yet they may
if they will. For 1. what is that to Iustification? Can a man
thats regenerate be iustified by his obedience of the Law,
when yet after his regeneration hee doth not keepe it?
2. And againe. How know these men that there was, or is,
such a power in the Saints to keepe the Law, when yet the
world neuer saw it brought into Act? Is it not more probable
that what neuer was nor will be done, neuer could
nor can be done? Were they all idle, and did not doe their
best endeauour? Tis true, none doth so much good as hee
should and might; but yet tis a sharpe censure to say that
none would put themselues forward to the vtmost of their
might. What shall be said of Saint Paul, (Phil. 3. 12.)
He confesseth that himselfe was not yet perfect: but that he
sought after it. How? negligently? No, with great diligence
and intention. He followed after. [
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ] v. 12.
and that eagerly, Reaching forth to catch the things that
were b
                           •
                        fore 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , v. 13. And pressing
towards the marke 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , v. 14. Here was diligence,
and we cannot say that Saint Paul did not doe his
best. Did Paul then fulfill the Law? It seemeth so, for here
we see he was willing,Lib. 4. cap. 
                           •
                        0. and in another place Bellarmine tels
vs he was able, for so we haue it, Paul. 4. 13. I can doe all
things through Christ that strengtheneth me: that is, fulfill
the Morall Law by the grace of Christ. Now if hee were
willing and able, then certainly he kept it. Nay tis certaine
he did not keepe it. Witnesse the Testimony of himselfe. I
doe not the good things which I would: but the euill which I
would not, that doe I Rom. 7. 19. Where is the fault then?
In the Apostles will? No, Tis plai
                        •
                     e he would haue done it.
Wast then in his ability? Yea, this was it. to will was present
with him: but he found no meanes to performe that
which is good verse 8.
                  The Iesuite then abuseth vs with a false exposition of
of that place to the Philippians interpreting it of the Apostles
ability to performe the morall Law, which himselfe

meant concerning that strength where with Christ enabled
him vnto contentation and patience in all conditions whatsoeuer.
Paul was able to beare all afflictions patiently, to
vse prosperity soberly: but to fullfill the Law in all things
perfectly he was not able. And if he were not, who is?
We conclude that the actuall Obedience of the morall Law
in fulfilling all the commandements exactly, is impossible
to a regenerate Man in this Life. Let vs now take a short
survey of our Aduersaries Arguments whereby they would
proue That actuall obedience to the whole Law is not onely
possible: but allso very easy to the regenerate and Iustified.
They are those.
                  
                     
                        •
                      That burden which is light may be carried without
shrinking vnder it,Bell. lib. 4. de Iust. cap. 1. 10. 11. 12 13. Bec
                           •
                        tom 2. tract 4. cap. 4. quest. 1. that yoake which is easy, is
worne without paine; those commandments which
are not burdensome, may be obserued without difficulty.
But such is the morall Law. [My yoake is
easy and my burden light] Mat. 11. 30. [This is
the loue of God that ye keepe his cammandments, and
his commandments are not
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , grieuous.] 1 Iohn 5. 3.
Ergo, The Morall Law may be easily obserued.
                  To this we answere, That the place of Matthew is to
be vnderstood not of the Morall Law: but of the yoake
and burden of the crosse and afflictions which euery one
must beare, that will follow Christ and obey the Gospell.
To those that are wearied and laden with the Crosse, Christs
speakes by way of Consolation, telling them whether to resort
for helpe. (Come to me and I will giue you rest) that is
comfort and deliuerance. 2 Then he perswades them to
patience vnder their affliction. (Take vp my yoake vpon you)
and beare it chearefully, which is persuasion he strength
 theus with three arguments. 1 From his owne example.
(Learne of me) to doe and suffer as I doe, enduring so many
persecutions and afflictions with all meeknesse and patience.
For I am meek and lowly in heart, quietly bearing all wrongs
and indignities from man without murmuring against God,

repining against man, seeking revenge at their hands that
haue vniustly persecuted mee. 2 From the successe of 
this patient enduring according to CHRISTS example.
And ye shall find rest vnto your soules; comfort in affliction,
seasonable deliu
                        •
                     rance from affliction. 3 From the Nature
of such crosses. For my yoake is easie, &c. Though they be
yoakes and burdens which for the present seeme grieuous:
yet they be easie, they be light, because Christs yoake and
Christs burden which he layes on all his true Disciples that
follow him, and which hee will giue them strength to support
and beare out with cheerefulnesse. This seemes the
most naturall interpretation of this place, & it is most agreeable
to the twelfth Chapter to the Hebrewes. Where the
like Arguments are vsed to comfort the godly in such afflictions,
as follow the profession of the Gospell. But yet if 
we vnderstand it of the yoake and burden of the Law: We
answere to it, and that place in Iohn, That the Commandements
of God are not grievous to the Regenerate; not because
they can perfectly and easily fulfill them: but because
that which made them intollerable and vnsupportable
vnto them, is now taken away. Whats that? The rigor
of the Law in requiring of euery man exact obedience, vnder
paine of the curse of eternall death. Here was the vneasinesse
of the yoake which punched man in his sinfull state;
this was the wai
                        •
                     ht of the burthen, vnder which euery man
out of Christ must needes be crushed and sinke downe to
Hell. Now Christ hauing fulfilled the Law, and satisfied
for all our trangressions thereof, hath made this yoake easie
for the neckes, and this burthen light vpon the shoulders of
the Regenerate; because though they be tyed to obey; yet
not vpon those seuere tearmes of being eternally accursed, if
they at any time disobey. Now they are assured their hearty
obedience shall be accepted, so farre as they are able to
performe it; and where they faile they shall be mercifully
pardoned. Which is a singular encouragement of a Christian
heart, to shew all willing and cheerefull endeauour in

obeying Gods Commandements, whereby he may giue
good proofe of his vnfained loue vnto God himselfe.
                  
                      Againe we answere that his vneasinesse and burdensomenesse
of the morall Law, is to be taken in regard of the Enmity
and opposition which a carnall man beares vnto the obedience
thereof. Vnto a naturall man it is the greatest
toyle and wearisomnesse in the world, for him to be made
to draw in this yoake. For him to bridle his desires: to
checke his disordered affections; to restraine himselfe of his
pleasures;
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      to be tyed to the exercises of Religion; to haue a
lawlesse minde brought in subiection to a strict Law: Oh
what a wearinesse is it, how he snuffes at it? Hee chafes and
sweats vnder such a burden, more then vnder the waight of
ten talents of Lead. But now vnto a heart sanctified by
grace, all such obedience becomes sweet, pleasant, and delightfull.
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
The heart now loues the holinesse of the Law; it
Rom. 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                     delighteth in the Law; takes contentment inPsal. 119. per 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      
                     the obedience
of it, and is full of singular affection and desire after it.
Whence, though it faile in many things through manifold
infirmities and temptations: yet it ceaseth not in a willing,
constant, and cheerefull endeauour to performe all. Grace
fighteth with may difficulties, and in the combate takes many
a foyle: but yet at last the victory falls on her side. For
(saith Saint Iohn,)Verse. 
                           •
                        
                      
                     He that is borne of God ouercommeth the
world. So that The lust of the eyes, the lust of the flesh, and the
pride of life; which he vnderstands by the world, (1 Iohn 3.
16.) preuaile not against him, to turne him away from the
holy Commandement giuen vnto him. But he still obeyes
cheerefully and syncerely; though not euery way perfectly.
This of the first Argument. The second is this.
                  2 If the hardest precepts of the Law may be kept;
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      then
much more all the rest which are easier.
                  But the hardest precepts may be obserued,—Ergo, the
rest also.
                  They proue the minor thus.
                  Three precepts there are, which are most hard as all
confesse.
                  
                     
                     1 Thou shalt loue the Lord with all thy heart.
                     2 Thou shalt loue thy neighbour as thy selfe.
                     3 Thou shalt not couet—The tenth Commandement.
                     
                  
                  But now all these three commandements may be kept by
the Regenerate. Ergo the rest; and so the whole
Law.
                  Wee deny the minor of the Prosyllogisme; and say that
those three precepts are not to be kept perfectly by any
man in this life. They proue it in each particular.
                  1 That a man in this life may loue God with all his
heart. This they prooue.
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                      By Scripture. Deut. 30. 6. The Lord thy God will circumcise
thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, to loue the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, and with all thy soule, that thou mayest
liue. This is a praediction or promise of that which was heretofore,
and is still accomplished in the regenerate, who being sanctified
and purified from sinne (a worke of Gods Spirit in the
heart figured by externall circumcision of the flesh) should loue
God with all their hearts.
                  2 By example of Dauid, who saith of himselfe, Psal. 1 9.
10. With my whole heart haue I sought thee; and God also testifies
of him: That he kept his commandements, and followed
him with all his heart, to doe that onely which was righteous in
his eyes, 1 Kings 14. 8. The like is recorded of Iosiah, 2 Kings
23. 25. And like vnto him was there no King before him that
turned to the Lord with all his heart, and with all his soule, and
with all his might, according to all the Law of Moses: neither
after him arose any like him. These men then loued God
with all their hearts.
                  3 By reason; For to loue God with all the heart, carries
one of these three senses. First, to loue him onely, and nothing
else, and so wee are not commanded to loue God with all our
heart, because we must loue our neighbour too. 2 To loue him
tanto conatu, quanto fieri potest; (that is) as much as
may be. Nor is this commanded (saith Becanus) and yet if it

were, who would say twere impossible to loue God as much as one
can. 3 To loue God aboue all (that is) to preferre him before
all creatures, before father and mother, as Christ did, Mat.
10. 37. and as Abraham did; before his onely Sonne. Now
this onely is to loue God with all the heart, and this, men may
doe, as appeareth in the Martyres and others, who left all for
Gods loue.
                  Vnto these Arguments we answere. That it is not so easie
a matter to loue God, with all the heart: as these imagine.
Lib. 4. cap. 1
                           •
                        .
                     Bellarmine indeed makes a (But) at it. There is nothing
required (saith he) of vs: But to loue God with all the
Heart. As if it were as easily done, as spoken. But wee beleeue
that in this (But) God hath set vp a white, which all
the men in the world, may and must aime at: but none will
shoot so steadily as to hit it. Vnto the place of Deuteronomy,
we say. God therein tels vs what his gracious worke is
in circumcising, or sanctifying our hearts, & what our bounden
duty is thereupon (viz.) to loue him with all our hearts:
the performance whereof wee must endeauour syncerely,
chough we cannot doe it perfectly. For the examples of
Dauid and Iosiah, who are said to follow the Lord with all
their heart; there is nothing else meant thereby: but a syncere
intent and endeauour in the generall to establish and
maintaine Gods pure Religion in their Kingdome free from
corruption of Idolatry; as also for their owne particular
conversation to liue vnblameably. For Dauid, tis a cleare
case that not perfection; but syncerity is his commendations;
whose many sinnes recorded in the Scriptures witnesse
sufficiently that hee had in his heart that corruption which
many times turned the loue thereof from God to other
things. How did he loue God with all his heart when hee
defiled Vriahs bed, shed Vriahs blood, intended to murder
Nabal, iudg'd away an honest mans Lands to a fawning
Sycophant, with such other faults. The Prophet himselfe
in that place in 119. Psal. witnesseth; as the vprightnesse
of his heart, [With my whole heart haue I sought thee:] so

withall, the weaknesse and corruption of it; against which
he humblie craues Gods assistance in the very next words,
[Let me not wander from thy commandements.] For Iosiah:
tis plaine that this singular commendations is giuen him,
because of his through reformations of the most corrupt
estate of Religion, which was before his reigne. Wherein
many Godly Kings before him had done something in redressing
some abuses: but none went so farre in a zealous
reformation of all, according to Moses Law. Wherefore
the Text saith, that there was no King before him like vnto
him, which cannot be meant absolutely of all, (for Dauid
is said to follow Gods will with all his heart; as well as Iosiah:)
but since the time that Religion began to bee corrupted
in the Iewish Church, there was none of all the Kings
of Iudah, that was so faithfull as Iosiah, to restore all things
to their first purity. Whence he hath the praise, that he turned
vnto God more entirely, then any other King before or
after him. But now from Iosiahs zeale in reformation to
conclude, that in euery particular of his life he kept the Law
perfectly, louing God with all his heart; is a consequence,
that wants strength of connexion.
                  Vnto the reason from the meaning of the Law, we grant.
That the first is not the meaning of it. But for the second,
(viz.) That to loue God with all the heart, is to loue him as
much as may be. The Iesuite hath no reason either to deny,
that this is not commaunded; or to affirme that if it were
commanded, tis yet possible to doe it. Would any man say;
except he care not what he say, that God doth not command
vs to loue him as much as may be? Or will it bee a
truth from any mans tongue, to say, that he loues God with
as great perfection as may be? It cannot. Which appeares
thus. Gods will is, that we should loue him with all our
hearts. Now Christ hath taught vs to pray. Thy will bee
done in earth as it is in Heauen. Thence tis euident, Wee on
Earth are bound to fulfill the Commandement of louing
God: as the Saints in Heauen doe fulfill it. But now our

Aduersaries themselues grant, that whil'st wee bee [in viâ]
wee cannot loue God so much as we shall dee [in Patriâ]
Whence it followes, that no man can loue him so much as
may be, and as he ought to doe: seeing no man hath his
heart replenished with that measure of Diuine loue, whereof
his Nature is capable, which either Adam had in his inoncency;
or the Saints haue in glory.
                  Touching the third sense of the words, we grant indeed;
that to Loue God with all the heart, is to loue him super omnia,
that is aboue all Creatures. But the Iesuites take here
but one part of true loue of God. Tis a singular part of
Diuine loue, when the heart is so fixed on God: that neither
the loue nor feare of any earthly thing can draw it from obeying
of God. Which we say, is a matter wherein euery
one failes in some kinde or other, more or lesse, though in the
end may Martyrs and other holy men, haue herein by faith
ouercome the world. But this is not enough vnto perfect
loue, to preferre God before all Temporall paines and pleasures,
profits or discommodities. He loues God with all
his heart, not onely who loues him aboue all, but also obeies
God in all. This is the loue of God, that we keepe his Commandements.
He that for Gods loue will not obey Gods
Law: he loues his sinnes more then God. Offend but in
the least thing, there's presently want of loue: for hee that
will not doe as God bids him then, is voyde of that loue
which moues him to obey at other times. He then that keepeth
Gods word, in him is the loue of God perfect indeed.—

                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , 1 Iohn 2. 5. Perfect obedience and perfect
loue are inseparable. Now seeing the former cannot be
found in mortall men: we cannot in them seeke for the latter.
And therefore this Commandement [Loue God aboue
all things] cannot be kept in this life.
                  2 That a man may loue his neighbour as himselfe. For
which purpose they turne vs vnto Rom. 13. 8. Hee
that loueth another hath fulfilled the Law. Because
the Law is comprehended in this saying, Thou shalt

loue thy neighbour as thy selfe, v. 9. and loue doth not
euill to his neighbour: therefore is loue the fulfilling of
the Law, vers. 10. And they bid vs looke Gal. 5. 14.
Where we reade, For all the Law is fulfilled in one
Word: Thou shalt loue thy neighbour as thyselfe.
                  Hereto we answere. That there's in these places, nothing
that needs answering. We grant, that the loue of our
neighbour as of our selues, is the fulfilling of the Law; that
is, of the second Table of the Law, touching our duty vnto
man, and so much these places witnesse, commanding vs also
so to doe. But now how doe our Aduersaries prooue out
of these places, that men can perfectly ob
                        •
                     serue this
Law. We yeeld the Regenerate loue their neighboars as
themselues: but that perfection of loue, which in euery point
fulfils the Law, doing our neighbour no hurt, but all good,
in all our thoughts words and deeds; this we cannot grant
them, vnlesse vpon better proofes. Let vs goe to the tenth
Commandement, which they say may be kept, that is,
                  3 Thou shalt not couet. This tenth Commandement of
the Decalogue, is (say they) possible to be fulfilled by a
Regenerate man. For three things must be obserued,
touching this concupiscence or coueting forbidden in
the tenth Commandement.
                  1 The vitious pro
                        •
                     enesse and inclination of Nature vnto
baddesires, which is styled concupiscence in actu primo.
As to haue a theeuish minde.
                  2 The inordinate motions of the heart immediately arising
from that corrupt disposition, which preuent reason,
and goe before consent; as to desire another mans money:
but sodenly vanisheth of it selfe, or vpon deliberation
tis checkt.
                  3 The consent of the will, when either it takes 
                        〈◊〉
                      mediate
delight in such desires themselues; as speculatiue f
                        •
                     rnication
&c. or when it resolues to put in execution what
the heart imagined; as to lay a plot to spoyle another of
his goods.
                  
                     
The two former, the vitious disposition of Nature, and
the inordinate desires that goe before consent: these
be no sinnes (say the Romanists) and so not forbidden
in the tenne Commandements. The last (viz.)
Euill desires with consent, they be the very sins which
are forbidden in that Commandement; Whence they
conclude that a Regenerate man may auoid the breach
of this commandment; seeing it is in the power of his
will, whether he will consent vnto such motions of the
heart or no: and if he doe not consent: then, hee sinnes
not.
                  Herevnto wee answere. That whereas they of Rome
teach, that the Habituall vitiousnesse of Nature and the disorderly
motions of the Heart which goe before Consent, are
no Sinnes: they therein erre grossily against Scriptures and
sound Reason. This the gift of these Men alwayes to iudge
flatteringly and fauourably on Natures side: they concipt
to themselues a God in Heauen like their God in Rome,
Facilem Deum, one that will wincke at small faults, and
graunt Indulgence by the Dozen. Looke what they iudge
a small Matter God must be of there mind: or else they are
not pleased. His Loue must fit there Humors; what they
thinke they can doe; that God shall haue leaue to command
or forbid: but if otherwise they'le tell him to his face,
that he is a foole ct a Tyrant, to command them that, which
now they cannot performe. For God (say they) to require
of a Man a freedome from all vitious Inclinations and euill
desires, this were as mad an injunction, as for a master to
command his seruant neuer to be hungry, or thirsty, hot or
cold, and to threaten him, that hee should looke through
a halter, in case it bee otherwise with him. This errour wee
shall more conueniently speake of in the refutation of common
and generall exceptions, which they make against
all those proofes, that doe demonstrate the impossibility
of keeping the Law, whereof this is one, that Concupiscence
in the first and second act is not Sinne. But now

whereas they affirme that it is in a Regenerate Mans power
not to yeeld consent to the motions of Sin, and that therefore
he may fulfill the Law which sayed (thou shalt not lust:)
we graunt them that the Spirit may many times get the
victory, ouermastring such vuruly motions of the heart: but
this is not perpetuall. For who is there (except extreamely
ignorant of Grace and Nature) but will confesse that many
times these 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , affections of Sinne] as the
Apostle cals them, do work in them so strongly, vpon such
circumstances and aduantages; that they doe not only [
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,
combate and fight] against the powers of grace:
but also [
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     vanquish them] and euen leade a
Man regenerate captiue vnto the Law or command of sinne.
The Apostle confesseth so much of himselfe Rom. 7. 23. Who
yet was able to doe as much as he that thinkes himselfe best.
And therefore what euer power we may seeme to haue
not to yeeld consent: yet 'tis certaine that we shall often
faile in in our practise.
                  This of the second Argument touching the obseruation
of the obseruation of the hardest precepts of the Law: The
third followes.
                  3 If a Man may doe more then the Law requires:3 Arg. he
may certainely doe as much.
                  But a Man may doe more then the Law requires.
Ergo He may doe as much.
                  The minor Bellarmine proues by the example of the
young Man Mat: 
                        〈◊〉
                      9. who telling Christ that he had
obserued all the commandements and that from his
youth; our Sauiour bids him doe one thing more and
then he should be perfect. [If thou wilt be perfect,
go sell that thou hast and giue to the poore and follow
me.] ver. 20. Now if the young Man had done this,
he had done more then the Law required. In as much
as whatsoeuer the Law required he had obserued formerly.
For do you not beleeue him that he spake true?
[All these things haue I obserued from my youth]
verse 9.
                  
                     
Whereto we answere. That we doe not beleeue the
Testimony of that vaine young Man touching his owne
Righteousnesse. Who boosted of keeping the 2. Table in
the outward duties thereof: when as yet he wanted inward
Charitie towards his Neighbuor and Loue towards God. He
auou
                        •
                     hed that he had kept all perfectly fulfilling that commandment
[Thou shalt loue thy neighbour as thy selfe:] and
there vpon is so bould as to aske Christ. what lacke I yet;
Christ to conuince him of his pride and wants, put him to
the Triall. If thou hast such perfect Charity towards Man;
then certainely if God command thee to bestow, that a part,
but all thy goods vpon the poore, vpon promise of better
things to thy selfe: thy duty vnto God and singular Charity
to Men, will make thee doe so. [Goe then sell all that thou
hast and giue
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      
                     to the poore.] Vpon this speciall Commandment,
this couetous mind shews it selfe. Nay, 'tis plaine he
loued not his Neighbour, so well as his riches. He is neither
so dutifull to God; nor charitable to the poore: as for either
of their sakes, to part with his possessions. But, might
he say, what? will not ordinary almes, or a little more then
ordinary serue the turne? Must I giue away all. Ind
                        •
                     ede
the Law requires that I be mercifull to the poore: but
wheres any Law that bids me sell my whole estate and
distribute to them that want? Christ layes an vnnecessary
burden vpon me; if I cannot be perfect without vndo
                        •
                     ing
my selfe, I will content my selfe as I am, and not seke after
such perfection. Heere a Papist will say he speake reason,
seeing Christs speech was but acounsaile of more perfection,
then the Law required. Now a Man is not to be blamed
if he chuse only to be as perfect as the Law commands him,
and so this young man was: if you'le beleeue him or them.
But the Scripture makes it plaine that he did euill in disobeying
Christ; and, that if he had obeyed him in that particular,
he had done no more then the Law required at his
hands. For obedience to euery speciall Commandment is
included in the generall. The Law indefinitely commands

vs to giue almes: now if God by a speciall commandment
limite how much we shall giue; whether halfe, or all our
Estates, to obey such a perticular precept is not to do more
then the generall Law requires vs. Such a particular Commandment
was this of Christ vnto the young Man, wherein
he sets him a spell, according to that conceit of perfection
which he had of himselfe: putting him to the practise of the
highest duty which the Law of Liberality can possible require
of a Man (viz.) to part with all. This he ought to
haue done vpon Christs particular commandment; in not
doing of it he brake the Law, and proclaimed his heart
to be full of couetousnesse, deuoide of faith in God; and
true Charity towards his Neighbour. From this place then
our aduersaries cannot proue, that this young Man might
haue doen more then the Law required: or that wee are
bound at any time to doe as Christ bid him. Christs command
was for his particular Triall: not for our Imitation.
They that take it otherwise be a generation of men that professe
Beggery; and possesse Kingdomes, who were willing
enough to part with that little they had of there owne, that
so they may liue the more Largely and plentifully vpon other
Mens. Wee goe forward to the next argument.
                  4 If the Law were impossible to be kept it were no Law:
for there is no Law of things impossible. Yea God
were more cruel and foolish then any Tyrant, too command
vs to doe that which is impossible for vs to
doe.
                  To this wee answere, That the consequences were true
if God had giuen a Law which Men neuer had strength to
performe. But now the Law written in tables on Mount
Sina, was but a reuiuing and repetion of the same Law,
which was written in Adams heart; the Characters whereof
were now defaced in his sinnefull Posterity. Adam had
strength sufficient to fulfill it: which as he receaued for himselfe
and vs; so he lost it for both. Neuerthelesse though
Strength to obey be lost: yet the obligation to Obedience

remaines. We are no more discharged of our duties, because
we haue no strength to doe it: then a debter is quitted of his
Bands because he wants money to make payment. Nor is
this cruelty or folly in God, that when he published this
Law vnto the Isralites, he did not qualifie the exactnesse
thereof, fitting the precepts to there abilities, commanding
thē to do iust as much as they could or would do. Had God
made a Law in that sort in fauour of mans sinfull nature:
they might with better reason haue layd folly to his charge,
for bending the rule to the crokednesse of mans heart; and
not leuelling it according to the streightnesse of the Rule.
God was to set forth a Law of Liberty, that should not
flatter but freely rebuke Man of all vnrighteousnesse;Iam. 1. 25. Psal. 197. a
perfect, Law containing in it a full description of Holynesse
and Iustice, which Man ought to haue and performe towards
God and his Neighbour: & in this case God had iust
reason to haue respect vnto mans duty; not his ability,
which once he had; but now had forfited and lost.
                  The next Argument is.
                  5 Euery Prayer made in Faith according to Gods
will is heard and granted.
                        
                           •
                         Argu. But we pray that we may
fulfill the Law perfectly. (For we pray that we may
doe Gods will in Earth, as it is in Heauen.)
                  Ergo God heares vs, and giues vs such grace that we
can doci.
                  Hereto we answere. That this prayer shewes vs what
we are bound too; and what is our duty continually to endeuour.
That we may doe Gods will euery day more perfectly,
cheerefully and constantly, then other. And so farre
God heares the faithfull prayers of his louing children, enabling
them to better performance, the longer they liue.
But that such perfection of Obedience is giuen to vs in this
life; as the Saints enioy in Heauen, will not be graunted by
our Aduersaries themselues. Wherefore they must also grant
that that Prayer is heard and granted vs by degrees. In this
Life we attaine such perfection as God sees fit for vs: afterwards,

that which is compleate.
                  6 They proue by these Scriptures, that the Law may be
fulfilled.6 Arg. Gal 5. The apostle reckons vp the fruits of
the spirit. Loue, ioy, Peace &c. then he sayth ver. 23.
that against such there is no Law. [That is (sayeth
Bellarmine) the Law cannot accuse such men of
Sinne. So 1 Iohn. 3. 9. [Whosoeuer is borne of God,
doth not commit Sinne, for his seede remayneth in him;
and he cannot Sinne because he is borne of God.]
Ergo, the regenerate cannot so much as breake the
Law.
                  We answere. That both these places are peruerted by
false Interpretations. Against
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                        ▪
                      such there is no Law sayth
the Apostle. Against what? such persons, or such graces?
If it be meant of Persons, (viz.) That such as haue the Spirit,
and bring forth the fruits of the Spirit there mentioned
against those there is no Law: we must take it in the Apostles
owne meaning, which hee expresseth. verse 18.
[If yee he led by the spirit ye are not vnder Law] How is that?
Are not the Regenerate vnder the Law, that is vnder the Obedience
of the Law? Yes, wee graunt on both sides
that Grace frees vs not from subiection and obedience vnto
Gods Law. How then are they not vnder the Law. Tis
plaine. They are not vnder the Curse and Condemnation
of the Law, as those be that walke in the flesh and doe the
workes thereof, who therefore [shall not inherit the Kingdome
of God] v, 19. and thats to be accursed. But such as
walke in the Spirit being regenerate and Iustified, are not
vnder the Curse: and therefore though the Law may and
doth accuse them of Sinne: yet the Law is not so against
them, as to bring condemnation vpon them (as it doth vpon
other) from which in Christ they are freed. If the clause
be vnder stood of the Graces of the Spirit, there reckoned vp
the sense is this. Against such workes there is no Law forbidding
them, as there is against works of the flesh: these agreeable,
those contrary to the law. But this makes nothing

to our Adversaries purpose. For the place in Iohn [He that is
borne of God doth not commit Sinne yea cannot.] If our Aduersaries
exposition according to the very Letter may stand
good it will 
                        •
                     ollow. That in the regenerate there is not
onely a possibility to keepe the Law: but also an impossibility
at any time to breake it. But they easily see how absurd
this position is, and that it being graunted their doctrine of
falling away from Grace lies flat in the dust; seeing Iohn
sayeth expresly. That a man regenerate, not onely, doth not,
but cannot Sinne. Therefore certainely he cannot fall from
Grace. Wherefore they helpe it out with a distinction. Hee
cannot sinne, that is, mortally. He may sinne, that is, venially,
and veniall sinnes may stand with grace and with perfect Obedience
of the Law. This distinction is one of the rotten
pillars of the Romish Church; tw'ill come in fit place to be
examined hereafter: for the present, we say, Hee that Sinnes
venially (as they mince it.) breakes the Law; and againe
a Man Regenerate may sinne mortally; which is true not
onely according to there doctrine who teach that a Man
may fall from the Grace of Regeneration which to doe is a
mortall Sinne: but much more according to the Scriptures
and Experience which witnesse that Peter, Dauid, Solomon,
and Many, yea all the Saints, haue at sometime or other there
greivous falls; out of which notwithstanding, by the
Grace of the Holy Ghost, abiding in them they recouer
themselues so that finally they fall not a way.
                  The last Argument is from the examples of such men as
haue fulfilled the Law.
                  7 The Scriptures record that diuers men haue beene
perfect in fulfilling the law in all things:7 Argu. 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     Gen. 17. 1. Abraham,
Gen. 6. 9.Noah,1 King 14. 8. Dauid,2 King 23. 25. Iosiah,2 Chro. 15. 17. Asa,Luke 1. 6. Zacharie
and Elizabeth, theIohn. 17 6. Apostles, and otherPhil. 3. 15. holy
Men.
                  Therefore the Law is at least possible to bee kept by
some.
                  Not to stand in particular examination of all the places of

                     Scripture, which are alleadged for proofe of these examples;
we answer briefly. That it is euery mās duty to aime at perfection
in his obedience, according to Christs Commandement,
Mat. 5. 48. Be ye therfore perfect, euen as your Father in
Heauen is perfect. 2 That in this life there are many degrees
of grace, which God bestowes diuersly on diuers
men, according to his owne pleasure, and their greater or
lesse diligence in the practise of Holinesse. So that comparatiuely
some men may be said to be perfect, because farre
more perfect then others, as the greatest starres bee said to
be of perfect light, because they shine brighter then those of
lesser Magnitude, though yet not so bright as the Sunne.
But 3. we affirme that no man in this endeauour after perfection,
goes so farre, as for inward Holinesse and outward
obedience to answere the perfection of the Law in all points.
Euen in these holy Saints which they bring for instance, the
Scriptures haue recorded vnto vs their failings, that in them
at once we may see a patterne of Holinesse to be imitated, and
an example of humane Infirmity, to be admonished by wee
haueGen. 15. 
                           •
                        . 3. 
                     Abraham, somtimes misdoubting of Gods promise &
protection, and helping himselfe by aGen. 20. 11. shift scarce warrantable.
Gen. 9. 21.
                     Noah ouer-seene in drinke.2 Sam. 11. 
                     Dauid breaking the
sixth and seauenth Commandements, one after another.2 Chron. 25. v. 20. 21 22. 
                     Iosiah
running wilfully vpon a dangerous enterprise against
Gods Commandement.2 Chron. 16. 7 
                     Asa relying on the King of Syria
for helpe against the King of Israel, and not vpon the
Lord,Ver. 10. & in a rage imprisoning the Prophets for reprouing
him;Ver. 12. and in his disease seeking not to the Lord: but to the
Phisitians.
                     Luke 1. 18. 
                     Zachary not giuing credence to the Angels message.
TheMar. 14. 50▪ 66. &c. 
                     Apostles all at a clap forsaking, or denying
Christ. We cannot then in these Saints finde perfection
in the full obedience to the Law; amongst whose few actions
registred by the Holy Ghosts penne: we may reade their
sinnes together; with their good workes. And had the
Scriptures beene silent in that point: yet who could thence
haue concluded, that these men or others had no faults, because

no mention is made of them? It was Gods purpose
to relate the most eminent, not euery particular action of
their liues; euen Christs story fals
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         20. 30. 31. short of such exactnesse.
                  Wee conclude then notwithstanding these Arguments.
Our second Proposition standeth firme and good (viz.)
That no man in this life can fulfill the Law in euery duty both
inward and outward: but that the iustest man on earth will
faile in many things. So if he should seeke for Iustification by
this his actuall obedience to the Law: he throwes himselfe
vnder the curse of the Law. For cursed is euery one that continues
not in [all] things, which are written in the booke of the
Law to doe them, saith theGal. 3. 10. Apostle out ofDeut. 27. 26. 
                     Moses. Which
curse must needs light on those, that are of the workes of the
Law, that is, seeke for Iustification and life by the obedience
of the Law, which yet they cannot in all things perfectly
obey.
               
               
                  CHAP. III.
                  No man in this life can performe any particular good
worke, so exactly that in euery point it shall answere
the rigour of the Law, proued by conscience,
Scriptures, reason; and Popish obiections,
answered.
                  
                     I Proceed vnto the last Proposition,
                     Proposition. which concerneth
Mans actuall Obedience to any one particular
precept of the Law. Wherein will appeare
the third Imperfection of mans Obedience
in fulfilling of the Morall Law. We haue seene. That
no man hath perfect inherent sanctity free from Natures
corruption. Againe, That no man can performe perfect
actuall obedience to all and euery duty of the Law without
failing in any one point. And this much our Aduersaries
will not much sticke to yeeld vnto vs, and confesse. That
there is no man, but sinneth at some time or other; and that

tis scarce possible to avoide veniall sinnes, as they stile them.
But then they deny vtterly. That a man sinnes in euery particular
good worke; though he cannot doe all perfectly, yet
in some he may exactly fulfill the Righteousnesse of the Law,
not missing in any one circumstance. And therfore at least by
that obedience he may be iustified. This opinion of theirs
hath neither truth in it selfe: nor yet brings any benefit at all
to their maine purpose in prouing Iustification by workes.
For to what end serueth it them to stand quarrelling for the
perfectiō of our obedience in some one or two good works;
when yet we faile in many things besides? One thing well
done will not iustifie him that doth many things ill. For
that of Saint Iames must be a Truth: Hee that keepeth the
whole Law, and yet faileth in one point, is guilty of all. Iames 2.
10. Much more guilty is he, that keepeth it in a few: and
breakes it in many. But yet further, we reiect this opinion
also, as an Errour: and we teach on the contrary. That
                  No man in this life can performe any one particular
good worke, so exactly, that in euery point, it shall answere
the rigour of the Law, and the seuere tryall of
Gods Iudgement.
                  About this Assertion our Aduersaries raise much stirre
and many soule slaunders against vs, proclaiming vs to all
the world, open enemies to all good workes, that wee bee
Factors for the Kingdome of darknes, promoting as much as
in vs lyeth all licentiousnesse in evill courses, and taking of
the courage and endeauour of Men after pious duties. For
who will set himselfe (say they) to doe any good worke if
the Protestants doctrine be true, that in doing of it he shall
commit a mortall Sinne? who wil pray, fast, and giues almes,
if when he doth these things he cannot but sinne? As good
then it were to doe euill as to doe good: a man can but sin,
and so he shall, let him doe his best. These slanderous incongruities
fastened on vs, spring not out of our Doctrine
rightly vnderstood: but out of froward and peruerse hearts,
that will not see the truth. Such aspersions will easily bee

wiped of, when after the confirmation of the Trueth wee
shall make answere to such obiections, as seeme to infringe
it. We say then. That no man can performe any good worke
required in the Law with such exact observation of every
circumstance: that (were it examined by the rigour of the
Law and Gods Iustice) no fault at all can bee found in it.
This we proue by Conscience, by Scriptures, by Reason.
                  
                  First we here apeale vnto the Conscience of Man, the Iudgment
whereof is to be regarded; and whereunto we dare
stand in this matter. Thou that boastest that in such and such
good workes; that thou hastnot committed any Sinne at
all. Darest thou indeed stand to it, and vpon these Tearmes
appeare in Gods Iudgment? Darest thou abide the strictnesse
of this examination standing ready to Iustifie thy selfe
against euery thing that hee can obiect; Wilt thou venter
thy selfe vpon this Tryall euen in the best works thou dost,
That God cannot with his most piercing eye of Iustice spy a
fault in thē, if he number thē, he shal find nothing short? if he
weigh them not one graine too light? Againe let conscience
speake, when thou hast prayed, fasted, giuen almes, done any
other excellent worke of Piety and Charity in the deuoutest,
and most vnblameable manner thou thinkest possible. Thinkest
thou verily, that in this case thou doest not at all stand in
need of Gods fauour, to passe by thine infirmities, and that
thou needest not euen in this behalfe pray; Lord forgiue me
my trespasses? What man durst say or thinke in any good
worke: Lord in this particular I doe not desire thou shouldest
be mercifull vnto me? Without doubt there is no man
liuing vpon earth that shall in serious consideration of the
seuerity of Gods iudgement, and the great infirmity of his
owne Nature, compare his own obedience with the seuerity
of Gods Iustice, but his heart will presently shrinke within
him, and his conscience shunne this tryall; as much as euer
Adam did Gods presence. The thought of such a strict proceeding
in Iudgement, would make the proudest heart to
stoope and tremble, the boldest face to gather blacknesse,

filling the soule with an horrible feare in the expectation of
that day; should the most innocent life, the most holy actions
of men be there scanned according to the rigour of Iustice:
not graciously pittied, pardoned, and accepted according
to that mercifull loue of God which couereth and passeth
by multitudes of sinnes. Twere arrogant pride in any
man to vtter that speach in a sober temper; Whereunto Iob
breakes out in a passion, chased by the sense of his miserable
tortures; and the froward disputes of his friends.Iob 16. 
                           •
                        1. 
                     Oh
(saith he) that a man might pleade with God, as a man pleadeth
with his neighbour. And againe, Lay
                     Iob 17. 3. 
                     downe now, put
me in a surety with thee, who is he that will strike hands with
me? And againe, Oh that
                     Iob. 23. 3. 4. 
                           •
                        . 
                     I knew where I might find him, that
I might come euen to his face, I would order my cause before
him, and fill my mouth with arguments. I would know the
words which he would answere mee, and vnderstand what he
would say vnto me. Speakes the man reason? or is he beside
himselfe? what? challenge God to dispute with him, and
hope to make his party good in the quarrell? This was Iobs
infirmity; Its our Aduersaries arrogancy, who dare set their
foot against Gods; and bid him pry as narrowly as hee list
into their good workes: they will maintaine the righteousnesse
thereof against all that he can obiect to proue the least
sin
                           •
                        ulnesse. Iob saw his folly: God grant that these may
theirs. In a calmer temper, when conscience was not ouerclouded
with griefe and anger: he reades vs a quite contrary
lesson. In the 9 Chapter of his booke. How should man
be iust with God? if he contend with him he cannot answer him
one of a thousand, v. 2. 3. And againe, hauing reasoned & questioned
of Gods wisdome & power, not to be questioned or
resisted by any. How much lesse shall I answere him (saith he)
& chuse out my words to reason with him? whom though I were
righteous, yet would I not answer: but I would make supplication
to my iudge, v. 14. 15. Further, If I would iustifie my selfe
mine own mouth will condemne me, If I say I am perfect, it shall
proue me peruerse. Though I were perfect yet would I not know
my soule, I would despise my life, v. 20. 21. And once more. If I

wash my self with snow water, & make my hands neuer so clean,
yet that thou plunge me in the ditch, & mine own cloathes shall
abhorre me. For he is not a man as I am that I should answere
him, and we should come together in iudgement, vers. 30. 31. 32
See, this holy Saint, who elsewhere stands peremptorily to
the defence of his Innocency and vprightnesse against that
wrongfull imputation of hypocrisie which his friends charged
him withall, telling them that till he die, he wil not take
away his innocency from himselfe, nor his heart shall not reproue
him of his dayes: yet when he sets himselfe before the
Tribunall of Gods Iustice, he dares not stand out in his own
Iustification, but submits himselfe to the mercy of his Iudge,
with humble supplication for his fauour. These confessions
of Iob be not complements out of a fained and needlesse modesty:
but the fruits of a conscience rightly informed and
apprehensiue of its owne sinfulnesse, and the seuere rigour
of Gods iudgment. The serious meditatiō of which two particulars,
we commend vnto our Aduersaries, and all other
of their humour; that are apt to entertaine fauourable and
gentle opinions touching their sinnes: and withall to nourish
high conceits of their owne goodnesse. Whence they
grow by degrees to thinke, that Gods iudgement is like
their owne foolish imaginations; and where they out of
blindnesse or selfe-loue cannot see a fault: that there God
himselfe can finde none. We hardly see beames in our own
eyes: are we then so skilfull to spie the smallest moate? who
can vnderstand his faults (saith Dauid) wilt thou answere
him; Yes I doe? A secret fault may soone s
                        ••
                     p it, a deceitfull
heart may in one circumstance go beyond thy wit & watchfulnesse.
Here then humility would doe well, and prayer
for thy ignorances, for thy secret sinnes; vnknowne to thy
selfe as much as others. Here true modesty would haue her
place, that thou preferre Gods wisedome and iudgement
aboue thine owne, remembring that he iudgeth not as man
iudgeth: but sometimes otherwise then thou doest, accounting
that abhomination, which in thine eyes is much set by;
and alwayes more exactly then thou caust; seeing much

euill in that where thou seest little, and some euill where
thou think'st there is none. And therefore alwayes speake
vnto thy selfe in those excellent words of Saint Iohn▪ If my
heart condemne (as in many things it doth) God is greater
then my heart, and knoweth all things. 1 Iohn 3. 20. God forbid
then that in any thing I should presume to pleade with
him in my Iustification. He is wise in heart, and mighty in
strength; who hath hardened himselfe against him and hath
prospered, Iob. 9. 2. Thus much touching our first Argument,
for the inward witnesse of the conscience. Which in the
most innocent life, often in the most holy worke, drawes
backe from Gods Iudgement seat, and is afraid to put it
selfe vpon the tryall of his seuere Iustice.
                  Wee haue the Scriptures to witnesse vnto vs the same
Truth. Psa. 143. 
                        •
                     . 2. [Heare my prayer O Lord giue ear
                           •
                        
vnto my supplication: in thy faithfulnesse answere mee and in
thy righteousnesse.] Here the prophet seemes to appeale to
the Iustice of God requiring his helpe vpon such tearmes,
as if God out of pure Iustice could not haue denyed him.
But tis nothing so. Tis the mercy of God the holy Prophet
sues vnto. Answere me in thy faithfulnesse and Righteousnes,
that is, in those gratious promises, wherin thou hast
made mee to trust, where vpon I doe rely. Thou art iust and
faithfull: in keeping promise, be so to me in my distresse,
who according to thy promise seeke vnto thee for succour.
Vnto this Righteousnesse of God Dauid presents himselfe,
and his supplications; but before that strict & severe Iustice
of God he dares not stand, but in all submissiuenesse prayes
in the next words. [And enter not into Iudgement with thy
seruant.] He craues mercifull audience of his prayers: but
deprecates the strict examination of his Life and doings.
He knew well that if God should deale with him vpon so
hard Termes; his owne Innocency could neuer haue made
his prayers exceptable (For (saith he) in this shall no Man
liuing be Iustified). The force of this placeLib. 1. cap. 20. 
                     Bell. seekes to
decline by three poore miserable shifts. That Dauid would

not haue God enter into Iudgement with him to iudge him
(seili
                           •
                        et) according to such things as he had of himselfe:N
                           •
                        li iudica
                           •
                        e ex his quae in me 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
but according to such things as God had giuen him, that is,
Iudge mee not according to that righteousnesse which I haue by
Nature: but according to that righteousnesse which thou hast
giuen by thy Grace.) Which interpretation how ridiculous a
phantasy it is, and quite besides the meaning of the Prophet,
tis easy for any one to Iudge by reading of that Psalme. Bell.
therefore hath another string to his Bow: but as rotten as
the Former.
                  
                      2 That the place is meant of veniall Sinnes without
which a Man cannot liue, and though they be small faults:
yet would it be no Iustice in God to punish them. So that
the meaning is, [Lord enter not into Iudgement,] that is,
Lord I will not contend with thee I confesse my selfe a sinner and
craue pardon, Diuers small faults I haue committed not against
the Law: but besides the Law, and thou mayest easily
pardon them. My case is not singular. I doe therein, but as
other Men doe, amongst whome, there is none so iust but
some time failes and offends. And therefore doe not lay
such faults to my charge. Men of corrupt conscience that
thus sport with Sinne and play with the Scriptures. The
Iesuite must bring vs better proofes, then he doth, else wee
shall neuer beleeue that Dauid was a Man of Bellarmine his
mind touching Veniall Sins. That doctrine is part of the dregs
of corrupted Nature, maynatined by Popish Moabites,
who are setled on thier Lees, infatuated by the Loue of Sin,
and flattering themselues in that wickednesse as little & light
which God accounteth worthy to be ha
                        •
                     ed. wee acknowledge
no Veniall Sinnes: but such as deserue eternall death,
which hereafter we shall make good. And therefore if Dauid
would not that God should enter into iudgement with
him, because of veniall sinnes that accompany his holiest
practises, tis in effect, that which we say; the difference is
onely in an Epithete. We say Dauid prayed not to come into
iudgement, because [his best workes were sinfull:] and

                     Bellarmine addes, Because venially, or, pardonably sinnefull.
Which aduantageth him not a jot. For let him mince it, how
him l
                        •
                     st
                        •
                     tis manifest, that these were such sinnes, as for them
Dauid durst not venter his best workes to come vnto the
Barre of Gods seuere Iudgement. There is yet another deuise.
                  That thirdly Dauid speakes by comparison. (viz.) That 
that though the Righteousnesse of his workes were true,
being absolutely considered: yet being compared with
Gods Righteousnesse, it seemed to be vnrighteousnesse. As
a candle set in the Sunne, seemes to haue no light: and a little
light compared to a greater, seemes darkenesse. Whereto
we answere that Dauid here makes a confession of his owne
sinfulnesse; not a comparison of his owne righteousnesse,
with the righteousnesse of God. He desires that God will
not enter into iudgement with him; not because he had not
so much righteousnesse as God, in comparison of whom it
seemed little or nothing: but because he was sinnefull, and
had not so much Righteousnesse as he should. Man may
haue a Righteousnesse of his owne; infinite degrees, below
the Righteousnesse of God, which yet may passe the Tryall
of Gods Iudgement without all reproofe. As is manifest
in the Righteousnesse of Adam and Christs Humanity: both
which, though inferiour to Gods Righteousnesse, were yet able
to endure that strict examination. Wherefore wee are
not accounted vniust for that imperfection, because we haue
lesse Righteousnesse then our Maker: but because wee haue
not so much as we ought to haue, according to the capacity
of our Nature wherein hee made vs. But of this more
hereafter. Let this serue for the clearing of this first place
of Scripture, and the exceptions against it.
                  The second place of Scripture, is that, Isa. 64. 6. But wee 
are all as an vncleane thing, and all our righteousnesse is as filthy
ragges, and we all doe fade as a leafe, and our iniquities like
the winde haue taken vs away. This is the confession of the
Church of God, submitting herselfe to him in the acknowledgement

of her sinnes, and the iustnesse of his anger against
her. The confession is euery way generall: both for Persons,
not one excluded; We all 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     are as an vncleane thing, and
likewise for workes, none are excused from faultinesse. All
our Righteousnesse (nay in the plurall) all our righteousnes
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     are as filthy ragges. Hence they acknowledge
that God is iustly angry with them, and that in his
righteous displeasure, they are afflicted, consumed and
brought into great aduersity, the glory of the Church, and
state decaying more and more, like a fading leafe that fall
                        •
                     
from the tree, and is driuen away with the winde; And wee
all doe fade as a leafe, and our iniquities like the winde haue taken
vs away. Against this plaine acknowledgement of mans
sinfulnesse in all his most righteous workes, the Iesuites except
diuers wayes.
                  1 That the Prophet speakes here in the person, not of
the godly: but of wicked, who make here this confession of
their sinnes. And how proued they this? Thus. The Text
saith. Behold thou art wrath, for wee haue sinned. Now
God is not angry with the godly: but with the wicked. Againe,
the Text saith, There is none that calleth vpon thy name.
That is, None of the wicked persons, for the godly doe call
on Gods Name. This exception is manifestly refuted by
the whole order of the Text, whereby it is apparent to any
that hath but halfe an eye, that this Recognition of Sinne,
and prayer for mercy beginning at the 15 verse of the 63.
chapter, to the end of the 64 chapter, is made by the whole
Church, and all the faithfull therein, confessing their owne
faults, as well as others, and suing for reliefe, not onely in
behalfe of others, but of themselues too. His reasons are
worth nothing. God is not angry with the godly, saith
Bellarmine. No? Then Peter is in an errour, who saith,
1 Pet. 4. 17. 18. The time is come that iudgement must begin
at the house of God; and if it begin at vs, what shall the end of
them be that obey not the Gospell of God; And if the righteous
be scarsly saued; where shall the vngodly and sinner appeare?
                     
Here's Iudgement on Gods house, that is, on the righteous,
that obey the Gospell, as well as on the vngodly that obey
it not. And so tis, when the godly sinne, they smart for it, in
priuate afflictions, in publique calamities, both wayes they
finde God is not well pleased with their ill doings. When a
Church and a State is ruinated, may not the most righteous
take vp this confession. Lord thou art angry for we haue sinned
Euen we by our sinnes haue hastened and increased the
publique miseries? I trow, none will deny it. Againe, the
Text speakes of those that doe not call vpon Gods Name.
But the godly call vpon it, Ergo. tis not meant of them. True,
they doe call vpon Gods Name: but is this done alwayes
with that diligence, with that zeale which God requires?
How comes it to passe then, that the godliest men are many
times secure, slothfull, cold and carelesse in the duties of
Gods most holy worship? Yea, in the corrupt and declining
times of the Church this happily is their fault chiefly,
who themselues begin to freeze in so generall a coldnesse of
the season, loosing much of that seruency of Spirit which
the Apostle requires of vs, as at all times: so then especially,
when it should reuiue and put heat into others, when their
loue of Religion begins to waxe cold. At such times zeale
in Gods seruice, vehemency in prayer, constancy in all Relious
exercises, resolute, but discreet forwardnesse in the holy
profession of Religion is most commendable. But yet it so
comes to passe, that euen then much security and slackenesse
ouercomes the godly, and whilest they should be a meanes
to preuent a mischiefe, they hasten it vpon themselues and
others.
                  And thus the Iewish Church here in this place confesseth,
that there were none that called on the name of the Lord, a
carelesse negligence, and slacknesse in the Seruice of God, was
come vpon them, so that as it is in the next words, [there
was none that stirreth vp himselfe 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     to
take hold of God.] None awaked and rouzed vp himselfe with
diligent endeauour to apply himselfe to the worship of

God, A fault wherewith God may iustly be angry: as hee
then was. This first exception then is friuolous. Others
there bee as idle.
                  2 That by (all) in this place is to be meant the greatest
part; not all the Iewes, nor all their works were sinfull; but the
greatest part. For so the word [All] is taken in some places
of Scripture: and therefore the Iesuits thinke, it must needs
be taken so here.
                  3 That if it be meant of (all) simply: yet tis not to bee
vnderstood at all Times. All the People and their workes
were nought and sinnefull, when they were to be caried away
Captiue: but it followes not, that they were so at other
times.
                  4 This must be restrained to the righteousnesse which
consistes in Obedience to the Ceremoniall Law. [All our
Righteousnesse] that is, all our Ceremoniall workes in Sacrifices,
Obseruations of Sabboaths, New-moones, Fasts and
such like, [are as filthy clouts] being done in that manner as
wee doe them (viz) without Faith and Obedience. To
these we say. That there would neuer be an end, were a
Man bound punctually to refute euery Cauill, which an Aduersary
may frame out of his fancy-full imagination, and froward
heart. We owe the Romanists no such credit: as to
assent to any point of Religion vpon their bare affirmation.
We can as confidently deny such Exceptions as these, without
yeelding them a refutation: as they doe boldly make
them without bringing any proofe. And certainely most
vaine and vngodly is that course which our Aduersaries or
any that tread in there steps doe hold in their Disputations,
about serious points of Christian Doctrine: when being vrged
with conuincing Scriptures, they thinke they haue done
the part of Schollers, and satisfied the Consciences of others
desirous of Truth, if they can amuse and stonny you a little
with two or three Interpretations and prety exceptions,
and so leaue you to chuse which you list. They will not tell
you which they will stand to: but euen when there answers

crosse one another, yet all shall downe, that if one helpe not,
another may, and altogether may vexe you, when they cannot
satisfie you. This quarrelsome humour of men, who
seeke not the truth in loue: but write to maintaine, to dispute,
is not the least vexation of the spirit, and wearinesse to
the flesh of man; as all those will witnesse, whose much reading hath led them along into the perplexed mazes of
Schoole-learning, whether Diuine or humane.
                  
                  The third place of Scripture is, Psal 130. 3. If thou, Lord
shouldest marke iniquities, O Lord who shall stand? This place 
is parallell to the former, wherein the holy Prophet desires
God to be attentiue to the voice of his supplications, craues
this audience meerely of Gods fauour; not vpon any righteousnes
or worth of his own. As for that he confesseth. That if
God should be strict to obserue wherein hee and all men doe
amisse: neither himselfe, nor any other could be able to stand
in his presence. Whence he flies from his Iustice vnto his
mercy. But there is forgiuenesse with thee that thou mayest
be feared. verse 4. Presumption then it is, and arrogant
pride for any Romanist to say. Lord if thou doe obserue
Iniquities: yet I shall be able to stand. In such and such
good workes, be extreame to marke what is done amisse;
I feare not the tryall, nor will sue to thy mercy.
                  From Scriptures we come to Reason. Which is thus.
                  Wheresoeuer there is concupiscence and inordinate motions
of the heart; wheresoeuer there's a defect of Charity
towards God and Man; Wheresoeuer veniall sinnes (as our
Aduersaries cals them) are mingled with good works: there
the best workes of men are not free from some corruptions
and sinfulnesse.
                  But in a man Regenerate there is concupiscence and
euill motions of the heart present with him, when hee
would doe good; there is a want of that measure of loue
to God and Charity to Man, which he might and ought to
haue, there also are besides many veniall faults that accompany
his best workes.
                  
                     
                     Ergo, the works of a Man Regenerate are not euery way
good: but in part sinfull.
                  The Minor is cleere and confessed by our Aduersaries:
especially for the two former circumstances of concupis
                        
                           •••
                        ce,
and imperfection of Charity: and for veniall sinnes,
they also acknowledge it a very hard matter to 
                        〈…〉
                     
in any good worke. Wherefore they areBill▪ lib. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . 17. driuen in a desperate
manner to deny the Maior and to auouch. That neither
concupiscence nor imperfection of Charity to God or
our Neighbour; nor yet veniall sinnes mingled with good
workes, doe at all impaire the goodnesse and perfect righteousnesse
o
                        •
                      our obedience to the Law; but that they are as
good with those infirmities, as without them. Bad causes
must be helpt out, by bold and desperate attempts; and so
it 
                        •
                     ares with our Aduersaries in this point. They will vtterly
deny that there is any thing euill in a man Regenerate:
rather then be forced to confesse there is any thing euill in
the workes, that he performes. The impudent vnreasonablenesse
of this their Assertion, we shall shortly speake of.
In the meane we goe on vnto the consideration of such Arguments,
which are brought by our Aduersaries, to proue.
That the good workes of men Regenerate, are truely and
perfectly good, without all faultinesse in them. They proue
it then.
                  1 From the examples of Iob and Dauid.
                        
                           〈…〉
                         4. c. 13. 17. Of Iob is said.
Iob 1. 22. In all this Iob sinned not; nor charged God
foolishly,Be 
                           〈◊〉
                        . 2. tract. 2. cap 2.
                           〈◊〉
                         4 & cap 4. quest. 1. and chap. 2. verse 10. In all this did not Iob
sinne with his lippes. Againe for Dauid: he is conscious
to himselfe, of his owne innocency, and that no
fault can be found in his doings, wherefore he prayes,
Psal 7. 8. Iudge me, O Lord according to my righteousnesse,
and according to mine integrity that is in me.
And after all this, Psal. 18. 23. 24. He professeth openly
his innocency, and reward for it. I was, saith he,
also vpright before him, and I kept my selfe from mine
iniquity. Therefore hath the Lord recompensed mee

according to my righteousnesse, according to the cleannesse
of my hands in his sight. And Psal. 17. vers 3.
Hee declares how GOD had throughly tryed him:
and yet found him faultlesse. Thou hast proued mine
heart, thou hast visited me in the night, thou hast tryed
me, and yet shalt find nothing: I am purposed my
mouth shall not transgresse. How then can any man
say that Iob and Dauid sinned mortally in their sayings
and doings: when God himselfe witnesseth for
them that they d
                        •
                     e not sinne?
                  Hereto we answere. That we doe not lay sinne vnto the
charge of those holy men: nor doe we say they did ill▪ where
the Scriptures witnesse they did well. Iob in that first Act
of his tryall quitted himselfe well, and ouercame the Temptation.
He sinned not as afterwards he did, breaking forth
into impatiency: and that is all the Scripture meant by that
speech; In all this Iob sinned not. But whether Iobs patience
were in this first conflict euery way so vnreproueable, that
not the least fault could be spied in it, in Gods seuere Iudgement,
is more then we dare affirme, or our Aduersaries will
euer be able to proue. For Dauid; his innocent demeanor
of himselfe, in the time of Sauls raigne was such: that no
Imputation of vnfaithfulnesse or ambition could iustly bee
layed to his charge. Wherefore when Sauls followers accuse
him of treason against their Master: Dauid appeales
vnto God desiring him to deale with him according to his
Innocency in that behalfe. His owne conscience, and God
with his conscience, after tryall made, acquit him from plotting
and practising against Saul, as his Aduersaries said hee
did. Thence it followes that Dauid did not offend in that
kind whereof his Aduersaries accused him. His heart was
vpright; his life was innocent; neither his Aduersares could
make proofe, neither did his conscience accuse him, or God
condemne him of these faults, that he was charged withall.
Thus farre Dauid durst stand to Gods Iudgement; that hee
was innocent in those particular euils, whereof man had accused

him: but it followes not therefore hee durst enter
into iudgement with God; and plead, that God himselfe
could find no fault at all with him. Hee might haue many
secret faults and imperfections euen in this most innocent
passage of his life; which neither himselfe knew, nor his
enemies could come to the knowledge of: and therefore
though he dare pleade his righteousnesse before God, so
farre as man can accuse him of vnrighteousnesse, yet he dare
not goe further to cleare himselfe against all that God may
obiect against him. Heare what himselfe saith in this case,
Psal. 139. 23. 24. Search me, O God and know my heart, try
me and know my thoughts. Speakes the Prophet this out of
confidence, that God vpon search and tryall, shall finde no
euill in his heart and thoughts? No, but out of holy desire,
that whatsoeuer euill is found in him may bee amended.
Hee knowes well that many things may be found faulty in
him: and therefore he stands not to iustifie himselfe: but only
sues for grace to redresse them; adding in the next words.
And see if there be any wicked way in mee; and lead mee in the
way euerlasting.
                  
                  
                      2 They proue that the workes of Men regenerate are
not Sinnefull by the Scriptures which call them good workes
and say that they are pleasing vnto God. 1. That they are
good. [Let your light so shine before Men that they may see
your good worke:] Matth: 5. 16. (Charge the rich that they
doe good and bee rich in good workes.) 1 Tim. 6. 18. [wee are
his workemanshippe created in Christ vnto good workes]
Eph. 2. 10. [why trouble yee the woman; for shee hath wrought
a good worke vpon mee.] Mat▪ 26. 10. 2. That they are also
pleasing vnto God is apparant by these places. Ye are made
(an holy 
                        •
                     riesthood to offer vp spirituall sacrifices, acceptable to
God by Iesus Christ) 1 Peter 2. 5. In the Epistle to the Philippians,
the Apostle calleth their almes seat vnto him (An
odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable well pleasing vnto
God) Philip 4. 18. Againe. (To doe good and to communicate
forget not, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased) Heb.

13. 16. Hence th
                           •
                        y argue. If the workes of Men regenerate
bee good and acceptable vnto God: then certainely the Protestants
erre in their Doctrine, teaching that the best workes
of Men are sinnefull, for as much as Sinne is neither good in it
selfe nor any way pleasing vnto God. Who is infinitely, offended
at all iniquity.
                  Hereunto we answere. That this Argument is nothing,
but a forward and wilfull mistake of our doctrine. Wee
teach, that the best workes of the best men are in part sinnefull.
They thereupon cry out that wee take away all goodnesse
from the workes of the godly, and that wee account
them to be [in se.
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                         3. c. 14. §. 
                           •
                        . i. e. Ex natura sua] damnable and mortall
sinnes. This is a foolish calumny of Men that cannot
distinguish, betweene the disease and the diseased Body:
but straightway conclude that the whole body it selfe is
nothing else, but a meere rotten vlcer, because it hath swellings
and sores in some parts of it. Wherefore to vnfold their
eyes in his point, they are to vnderstand that wee make a
necessary & true distinction between That which is sinne and
that which is sinnefull: teaching that the good workes of the
Regenerate be not sinnes, though they be sinfull. Wee explaine
it thus. That is to be called Sinne in its owne Nature,
which is the transgression of the Law in doing any act
forbidden; or in leauing vndone any act commanded by the
Law. The omitting, or committing of any such act is properly
[Bell lib. 4. c. 77. erres in saying. [Opera b
                           •
                        na
                           •
                        x gen
                           ••
                        e 
                           •
                        ue ex obiecto, sed 
                           〈◊〉
                         circumsta
                           •••
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                         
                        And it is false which he addes that God doth simply condemne (facto) almes-deeds, &c done with a
                              ••
                           d intention for vaine glory, &c. God doth not simply cō
                           demne the the wo
                              •••
                            b
                              ••
                            them for their ill doing of it.
                      
                     in se & ex Naturâ suâ] a sinne. Because it is directly
and totally in the very substance of it against the Law.
As to pray to a false God, or neglect prayer to the true
God, are both of them sinnes in their very proper Natures:
because both are forbidden by the morall law. That wee
call sinnefull, which is for the maine substance of the worke
conformable to the Law; but it failes and offends against
the Law in some circumstances required in the doing of it,
when the thing is done which the Law commands, but no
                        •
                     
perfectly in euery point as the Law commands it: such a
worke, we say, is not a sinne, though it be sinnefull; there is

                     sinne in it, but it is not all sinne. This distinction our Aduersaries
cannot but admit of, as in the workes of the Heathen
and Christians vnregerate: so in the good workes of the
Regenerate themse
                        •
                     ues. Wee and they confesse that the
morall Vertues of the Heathen were good and commendable
in the substance thereof: nor doe we thinke there is any
men so deuoide of reason, as to affirme that the Iustice, Temperance,
Chastity, Liberality of a Heathen, are meere vices &
sinnes. We all grant, they were vertues: but yet our Aduersaries
themselues cannot affirme, that they were euery
way vertuous, free from all spots and staines ofSu
                           •
                        t Vitata 
                           〈…〉
                        . 
                     Vice; seeing
they had neither faith & sanctity from whence they sprung;
nor the glory of God, at which they aimed. Now as the
vertues of the naturall man, are in part vitious: so the good
workes of the Regenerate are in part sinnefull. To fast, to
pray, to giue almes, with the like workes of Piety or Mercy,
we affirme and teach that they are good workes, good in
their nature and vse: being such actions as the Law commands.
We know none of our side so farre gone with passion,
as to maintaine that a godly man sinnes, because hee
fasts, prayes, and giues almes; as if those very acts were nothing
but damnable sinne. We detest such franticke opinions;
and if any of our Writers haue let slip such words, as
may giue occasion to our Aduersaries, so to thinke of vs:
we doe not, nor are we bound to iustifie euery hot and cholericke
speech, breathed out in eagernesse of disputation.
Good workes they be, truly and verily good: but they are
not perfectly good. When a godly man prayes he doth well:
but he neuer doth so well; but he may doe better. Nor dare
any man in the world auouch, that either the roote whence
good actions come, is purged by perfect Holinesse: or the
manner of doing them, is so exactly kept in a precise obseruation
of euery circumstance, or the end in doing them
Gods glory, and Mans good, so syncerely and truely aimed at:
that the seuerity of Gods Iustice, cannot finde any the least
failing in any of those things. This is all we teach touching

the sinfulnesse of good workes, and thus we stand too: as a most
certaine truth. And we say. That this sinnefulnesse accompanying
our good workes, is sufficient to barre vs from Iustification
by them. For we deserue not reward for what is
well done, except all were well done. But neuerthelesse it
shall not hinder Gods gracious acceptation of our good
workes, who is well pleased with the obedience of his children
so farre as it is good and holy: and when it failes, for
Christs sake he mercifully pardoneth their Trespasses. Thus
much of the second Argument. The third is from reason
grounded on Scriptures.
                  3 Where there are (sufficientia principia rectae operationis)
sufficient causes and meanes of well-doing: there a
good worke may be done without all fault.—But in a man
Regenerate, there are causes and meanes sufficient for
well-doing—Ergo, He may doe well, and not offend.
                  
                     They proue the Minor thus. To the performance of any
good worke, there is required nothing, but these things,
Knowledge of what is to be done, will and power to do it—
But now a Regenerate man hath all these. For first, his
vnderstanding is enlightned, so that hee can easily know
what is good to be done. Secondly, his will and affections
are sanctified and aided by grace, to desire and endeauour
the performance of it. And thirdly, and lastly, hee hath
power to put in practise what he knowes and desires, there
being no impediment inward, or outward that should hinder
him—Ergo, he may doe well and sinne not.
                  Here we desire them to shew vs. How a man Regenerate
is enduded with such perfect abilities, as may helpe him:
and quite rid him of all such impediments, as might hinder
hi
                        •
                      in well doing.
                  This (they say) is done by the grace of Sanctification,
giuen vnto a Regenerate man, whereby hee is freed from
all contagion of sinne: and such incombrances, as hinder
him in well-doing. For by this grace giuen to him, hee is
made a good tree: now [A good tree cannot bring foorth

                     
                        •
                     ad fruit, Matth 7. 18.—And ergo, a good man cannot
doe bad workes. 
                        〈…〉
                      made a fruitfull
Branch of Christ the true Vine, as it is Iohn 15. 5. I am
the Vine, yea are the branches, he that abideth in me, and
I in him, the 
                        〈◊〉
                      beareth much fruit. And Ergo, That
fruit onely which is good. Which Similitude of a Branch
much illustrates the matter (in their Imagination.) For
as in a Vine-Branch. If first it haue sufficient moisture
from the Body of the Vine. Secondly, if it haue sufficient
heat of the Sunne to digest that moysture. And thirdly,
if it be not hurt nor hindred by Frosts, Wette, Windes,
Wormes, or other such discommodities of the Ayre and
Soile; then certainely it will be are very much, and very
good fruit: so is it in a man regenerate. From Christ he
receiues sufficient moisture of Diuine Grace, which is in
him, [as a well of water springing vp vnto euerlasting life.
Iohn 4. 14.] He hath heat sufficient of spirituall affection,
to cause him to bud forth into good workes. For Christ
saith [I am come to send fire on the earth, and what will I
if it be already kindled. Luke 12. 49. And [Did not our
hearts burne within vs] said the two Disciples that went
to Emaus, Luk. 24. 32. Ergo, they haue heat enough. Finally,
they haue no impediment. Neither inward. For
why? It is written, Rom. 8. 1. There is no condemnation
to them that are in Christ Iesus. Ergo, no inward impediment
to well-doing. Nor outward. For it written, [nothing
shall separate vs from the Loue of God, that is in Christ
Iesus our Lord, Rom. 8. 38. Ergo, no outward impediment
of good workes.
                  Hereunto we make answer. That this Argument is a sophisticall
cauillation; which proues that which we do not deny.
They say that a Man Regenerate, hath sufficientia principia
rectae & honestae operationis. We say so too; confessing that
hee is made a good tree, a fruitfull Branch; that hee is enlightened;
sanctified, and strengthened by the spirit of God
vnto the performance of good workes. We grant that now
he is enabled to doe well, who before his Regeneration
                     
could doe nothing saue
                        •
                     ll: but the question still remaines,
whether now he doe so well, as that he doth nothing ill
when he doth best. We grant that the Vine, which in former
time yeelded nothing, but wild grapes, now being transplanted
and grafted into the best Vine, beares good grapes:
but we deny that they are so weet and kindly in eu
                        ••
                      respect,
as not to haue a little relish still of their former wildnesse
and sowrenesse. Wherefore our Aduersaries doe but
trifle with vs to tell vs that Men Regenerate haue meanes
sufficient to doe those workes that be good: this we deny
not; but we question whether they haue helpe sufficient to
performe any worke so absolutely and perfectly good; that
God himselfe cannot charge it with any Sinne at all. This
we constantly deny. And to their discourse, (That a regenerate
Man hath sufficient Knowledge, Power and will to doe
good perfectly) in this they affirme more then will euer bee
proued. Our imperfections in euery one of these three particulars
witnessed to our Conscience by Scripture and experience
doth disable vs euer frō doing any worke entirely and
totally good. Knowledge we haue: but much darkned by
ignorance. We haue a will to doe good: but that also corrupted
with much forward Rebelliō. A power we haue to do
good: but alwayes crossed and much restrained by manyfold
Lusts within, and Temptations without vs. How is it
possible for vs, being compassed about with so many infirmities:
but wee should offend in one thing or other; Becanus
here brings vs an instant of a good worke: and bids vs
shew what sinne there is in it. If (sayth he) A Man regenerate
read or heare those words of Christ. Mat: 6. [giue almes]
hee being enlightned knowes that this is a worthy and honest
worke. Wherupon he is touc
                           •
                        ed in heart and stirred vp to do it.
He consents to this motion, and resols vpon the execution, which
(supposing that he be rich) nothing now can hinder because he
is both able and willing to giue. Now then this almes being
thus giuen out of knowledge, and a pious motion of the Heart
tending to Gods honour and our Neighbours good, the Iesuit

desires to knew of vs, where their is any Sinne in it. Wee say
there is some euill in euery good worke and therefore hee
would haue vs tell him what euill there is in this Almesdeed.
Vnto this we say, that this enquiry of the Iesuite is the most
ridiculous and absurd thing, that can be. He asketh vs where
is the Sinne? what if we answere him we doe not know; Is hee
now euer the wiser? what hath he gained hereby? Are other
Mens worke without all faults because we know not what
they be? Nay, are they without fault, because themselues
know not whether there be any in them: or no? what silinesse
were it to argue in this sort? Therefore when wee
come to this point strictly to examine the workes of Men.
First we tell the Iesuite that he must not put Cases touching
generalities [suppose that such a good worke be done so and so
what then] we dispute now touching particulars in euery
Mans reall practice. The enquiry is not for the generall.
(What euill is there in such and such a good worke) done thus
and thus, according as the Circumstances are framed in an
Imagined Case. As to aske what Sinne is their in an Almesdeede
done out of Faith and Charity to Gods glory. This is a
fond question thus framed vpon generall termes we say
their is no Sinne in it. But the enquiry is in particular, what
Euill their is in such a worke done by this or that, Man, according
to all Circumstances, that were at that time incident
to the worke, as. What sinne was there in Zacheus or Cornelius
almes-deeds? This question we admit, and answere to it,
That some Sinne there was for which those holy Men, as wel
as others, would not haue beene willing that God should
enter into iudgement with them, strictly to iudge them. Yea,
but will the Iesuits reply, name what Sinne this was; or else
you wrong them. Now this is meere impudency. For who is
judge of their actions? Are we? or is it God and their owne
Consciences? we can be no judges, who at furthest can
judge but accordrng to outward appearance. We know not
their Hearts: nor are we priuy vnto euery particular Circumstance,
that did accompany those actions of theirs Circumstances

in euery particular action differ infinitely, one
Man may offend in this point, another in that: nor haue we
a generall Rule whereby to judge alike of all. And therefore
it is a childish quaere to aske on Man whether another
Man offendes, who may doe euill a 1000 times, not only
secret from others, but vnwitting to himselfe. If then the Iesuite
will haue an answere to his question, he must resort to
particular mens Consciences, and to God: for only the spirit
of Man, and the spirit of God know the things of Man.
Let him aske a Cornelius when he giues almes, whether he
doe thinke this worke so well done, that no fault can bee
found with it. Doubtlesse he will answere, that he cannot
excuse himselfe from all faultinesse: though he knew nothing
by himselfe, yet he dares not stand to Gods judgment.
His confession and prayer would in this case be the same
with Nehemiahs. Nehem. 13. 22. [Remember me O my God
concerning this also, and spare mee according to the greatnesse
of thy mercy.] at once begging fauorable acceptance of his obedience,
and gratious pardon of his infirmities. If this suffice
not in the next place, the Iesuite is to repaire to God almighty
and question him, where the Sinnes in such and such
a good workes, who no doubt can shape him an answere that
will sore confound his pride and folly, and make it quickly
appeare vnto him, that sinnefull Man, when he pleades with
God, is not able to answere him one obiection of a 100,
that God shall make against him.
                  This of the third Argument. That Man hath sufficient
meanes to doe well and not Sinne. The last followes, drawne
from such absurdities, as they say doe follow vpon our Doctrine.
Thus.
                  4 If (say they) our Doctrine be true that the best workes of
Men be Sinfull: then these absurdities be likewise true doctrine.
That to be iustified by faith is to be iustified by Sin.
That no man ought to beleeue, because the worke [Beleeuing]
is Sinne. That all good works are forbidden, because
all Sinne is forbidden. That God should command vs to

commit Sinne: because he commands vs to doe good
workes. That God bidding vs be zelous of go
                        •
                     d workes,
should in effect bid vs be zealous of mortall Sinne.
That to pray for the pardon of Sinne were a damnable
Sinne. These and such other absurd Positions would
be true: if the protestants doctrine concerning the sinfulnesse
of good workes may stand for good.
                  Hereunto we answere. That these absurdities issue not
out of our Doctrine, but out of our Aduersaries malitious
Imaginations. Who like the ragine Sea casting vp mire and
Dirt from its owne Bottome would faine throw all this filth
in the face of the Reformed Churches, to make them odious
and hatefull to the world. The best is. Truth cannot bee
disgraced though it may be belyed. These foule Absurdities;
touch vs not: but follow vpon that Doctrine which
is none of ours. Namely, That the good works of the Regenerate
are in their very Nature altogether sins, and nothing else
but sordes▪ inquinamenta, & merae iniquitates. Such an absurd
assertion would indeed yeeld such an absurd consequence.
But we defended it not: & they abuse vs grosly, whē in their
writings they report of vs the contrary that we doe mainetaine.
This onely we teach. That mens good workes are in
part sinfull. Much good they haue in them: but with all
some euill mingled therewith. Amongst the gold, some
drosse also will be sound, that will not be able to abide the
fire of Gods seuere Tryall. Imperfections will appeare in
our best workes, so long as humane infirmity and mortality
hangs vpon vs. This we teach, and from this Doctrine all
that haue reason, may see that no such vnreasonable conclusions
can be collected. And let thus much suffice for the
clearing of this third Proposition, touching the imperfection
of our obedience to the Morrall Law of God, euen in the
good workes which we performe. From whence euery godly
heart should le
                        •
                     rne both Christian Humilitie and also Industry.
First, Humility not to boast in the flesh and glory in
its owne Righteousnesse, thinking that God must highly account

off, and reward largely, that which is very little
worth. Secondly, Industry in a faithfull indeauour after perfection.
That what cannot be done well as it ought: wee
may yet euery day be done better then before it was.
               
               
                  CHAP. IIII.
                  Three generall exceptions against the truthes deliuered
in this third Section▪
                  
                  
                     THus we haue stood long in the confirmation of
our second Argument, touching the impossibility
of Mans fulfilling of the Law in this Life, and
so consequently of iustification by the Law.
                  
                  Against all that haue bin sayed for the profit of
this point; our Aduersaries haue three Common and generall
Exceptions. Which are these.
                  
                     1 That Concupiscence or Naturall Corruption in the
first and second act of it,Bell. lib. 4. cap. 1
                              •
                           . & passim aubi. is no sinne.
                     2 That imperfection in our Charity and Obedience is
no sinne.
                     3 That smaller faults, or (as they tell them) Venia
                           ••
                        
sinnes, doe not hinder the Iustice and goodnesse of any
good worke.
                  
                  To these three Positions they haue continually recourse.
                        
                           •
                         Exceptio
                           ••
                        .
For whereas they cannot deny; but that their is in the Regenerate;
both a pronesse of Nature vnto Euill, and also many
inordinate Sinnefu
                           •
                        l motions arising thence: they first deny,
that, either these Naturall Corruptions, or disordered Motions
of the Heart be any sinnes.
                  
                  Againe, they confesse that no man hath such perfect loue
of God and Man; but that he may increase in charity: nor
be his good workes so perfectly good; but that they ought
still to striue to doe them better: but then here also they
deny, that this imperfection of our charity and good works,
is any sinne.
                  Lastly, they grant that no man can auoide veniall sinnes,
                     
scarse in the best workes he doth: but then they deny that
veniall sinnes be contrary to the Law, so that albeit a man
commit them, yet he may perfectly fulfill the Law of God.
I cannot stand largely in the refutation of these foule errors.
The confutation whereof belongs properly to the Article
of remission of sinnes; where the nature and kindes of sinnes
are to be handled. For this present I shall but touch on them
briefly, and proceed to the matter.
                  1 For the first; we defend this conclusion.
                  
                  The vitious inclination and pronnesse of Nature vnto
euill,Conclusion. as also the inordinate moti
                        •
                     ns of concupiscence,
which goe before consent, they are sinnes euen in a man
regenerate.
                  
                      That the inclination and pronnesse of Nature to sinne is a
sinne, we proue thus.
                  
                      It is expresly so called by the Apostle, Rom. 7. not once
nor twice: but almost in euery verse of the Chapter. I am
carnall sold vnder sinne. The sinne that dwelleth in me. ver. 17.
20. The Law of sinne. verse 23. 25. In it selfe it is sinne,
and deserues the wages of sinne, eternall death. For which
cause the Apostle there cals it. The body of this death. verse
24. Because this inward Corruption (which is like a Body
that hath many members consisting of diuerse euill affections
spreading themselues throughout his whole Nature)
made him lyable to eternall death, from which onely Gods
mercy in Christ could deliuer him.
                  
                      2 To rebell against the Law is Sinne. Ergo, To haue
a rebellious inclination is sinne likewise.
                        
                           〈…〉
                        . 3. 12. 13. For if the act bee
euill, the habite must needes be naught: if the Law forbid
one; it must needs forbid the other. If it be euill to breake
any Commandement in act: is it not euill to haue, a pronenesse
and readinesse of minde to breake it?
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . 4. 8. 
                           •
                        ense your 
                           •
                        nds: purge 
                           •
                        ur hearts. The habit denominated
a man sinfull and not the act. Nor doth God lesse
abhorre the pronnesse of man to offend him: then wee doe
abhorre the rauenous disposition of a Wolfe, though it be a
Cubb, not yet vsed to the prey; or one tyed vp in a chaine, and
kept from rauening.
                  
                     
That the euill motions of the heart without consent be sins. 
                  
                  1 They are forbidden in the Morrall Law. In the 
tenth Commandement. Thou shalt not couet. For motions
with consent are forbidden in the other Commandments.
As appeares manifestly in Christs exposition of the Commandements.
Mat. 5. 22. were not only the outward act
of Adultery: but the inward desire is also forbidden; if wee
beleeue Christ the best interpreter of the Law: When Ergo
the tenth Commandement forbids coueting [of our Neighbours
Wife, it either meanes the same kind of lusting, with
a needelesse Tautology: or a different. viz. that which is not
consented vnto. Nor can our Aduersaries shift this off:
though Becanus most impudently denies it,Tom. 2. pag. 885. with out any
reason of his so doing.
                  2 We proue it thus. Whatsoeuer is inordinate and repugnant
to right Reason: that is Sinne.
                  But these Motions without confent be inordinate.—
Ergo They be Sinne, The Minor is confessed. That these
Motions be inordinati & recta Rationi repugnantes.
                  
                  The Maior is apparant. For what is Ordo & recta Ratio
in Moralibus: but that course of doing any thing, which
is conformable to Gods Law and his will. God is the God
of order.
                     Marke them that walke disorderly, 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , i e. sinfull, otherwise according to the Law. His Law is the rule of order in all humane actions.
Recta Ratio what is it; but the conformity of mans vnderstanding
and will vnto Gods will, which only is the rule of
righteousnesse; We neuer purpose and will matters aright:
but when wee will them agreeably to Gods will. Wherefore
it is a grosse absurdity to deny the Sinnefulnesse of these
disorderly motions: seeing no man can breake those orders
which God hath made, and yet be faultlesse. Nor is it possible
a Man should doe that which is contrary to Gods will:
And yet be without Sinne in doing of it. These motions
then without consent be confusions in Nature opposites to the
righteousnesse of the will of God; and vnto that euen and
streight order expressed in his Law.
                  We conclude then that Concupiscence and inordinate

motions of the Soule not consented vnto, are Sinnes contrary
to our Aduersaries assertion.
                  They bring some Reasons to proue they are not.
                  1 Originall sinne is taken away in Baptisme.1 Arg. Adu. But concupiscence
is not taken away in Baptisme; as appeares
by experience in the regenerate in whom it
remaines.—Ergo, concupiscence and pronnesse to
Sinne, is no sinne.
                  This Argument is friuolous. In Originall sinne, there are
two things, First, the guilt. Secondly, the inherent corruptions.
We say in Baptisme the guilt is altogether washed away
from the Baptized Elect, by the blood of Christ. And
for the corruption thereof, it is part done away by the sanctifying
Spirit of Christ, powred out vpon the Regenerate,
which by degrees purgeth out the inherent sinfulnesse of
Nature, by replanting the graces of Sanctification in all
parts. Concupiscence then, notwithstanding Baptisme remaines
in the Regenerate, and is a sinne in them, the guiltinesse
whereof God mercifully pardons in Christ.
                  2 What is not in our power to auoide:2 Arg. Adu. that God doth not
forbid vs by his Law.
                  But tis not in our power to auoide the Motions of the
heart that preuent Reason and consent. Ergo, they
be no sinnes forbidden vs.
                  To this we answere. The Maior is true in things meerely
Naturall, that fall out by the Necessity of Nature well disposed.
So we say, Gods Law were vncouth, should he command
a man neuer to be an hungry or thirst, which things
he cannot auoide, but they come vpon him, will he, nill he;
by the meere necessity of Nature. But concerning inordinate
motions, there's no such matter. God hath layed no such necessity
on Nature in her creation: but we by our sinne haue
brought it upon our selues.
                  Now such a necessity excuses vs not. In this case it helpes
a man no more to say. [I cannot auoid euill thoughts and desires:]
then it doth a desperate sinner, that by countenance

hath hardened himselfe in euill courses; or then it helpes
the Diuels and the damned, if they should say; Wee cannot
chuse but doe euill.
                  
                  3 They argue thus. That which would haue beene naturall
and without fault in man,3 Arg. Adu▪
                      if he had beene created,
in puris Naturalibus; that is, no sinne nor fault
in vs.
                  But motions preuenting consent, would be naturall,
and without fault in men so made.—Ergo, In vs
they be no faults of themselues.
                  Heere our Aduersaries haue made a Man of white Paper,
or the like to Materia prima: that hath not any quality in him
morally good or bad. That is. A Man that hath neither the Image
of God in knowledge, righteousnes, and holines, engrauen
on his vnderstanding, will, affections, and whole person; nor
yet, though it haue it not, hath in him any contrary euill quality,
that comes vpon him by reason of such a defect. Now of
such a Wiseaker they dispute. If God had created a Man thus▪
                     in puris naturalibus, neither good, nor bad, then. What
then? As the old word is. If the Heauens fall, we shall haue
Larkes good cheepe. Suppositions framed by our Imaginations
touching what might be done, are vaine and needlesse
when we see what is done. This we see that Man was created
in God's Image invested with all reall Qualities of Righteousnes
and Holinesse. This we see also, that Man being falne
is borne in Originall corruption, depriued of God's Image, &
thereupon depraued in his whole Nature by sinfull infirmity.
Wherefore a man in his pure Naturals, one that hath neither
Grace, nor Corruption, was neuer found in this world: yea,
'tis a contradiction to imagine a man thus naked without
his Qualities; that he hath Reason, but neither enlightened,
nor darkened, a will but meerely indifferent, neither enclined
to good, or euill; affections, but neither vertuously, nor vitiously
disposed. In a word, that he is a Man capable of Vertue,
or Vice; Holinesse, or Sinfulnesse, and yet hath neither.
That were to make a Man litle better then an vnreasonable

Beast. But to follow them a little. Suppose a Man were made
in his pure Naturals, would such disorderly motions be
found i
                        •
                      him?
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      Yea, say they, and that boldly. Si Homo crearetur
a Deo in puris naturalibus, proculdubiò constaret duabus
partibus repugnantibus, Spiritu & Carne: & haberet duos app
                           •
                        titus
contrarios. Rationalem, & Sensitivum: ergo naturaliter
haber
                           •
                        t quosdam motus repugnantes Rationi. Without
doubt the Iesuite is deceiued in this his Imagination, and his
Argument is not worth a Button. A Man in his pure Naturals
should haue two parts, a Soule and a Body, Spirit and
Flesh; he should haue two appetites, Reasonable and Sensuall,
ergo, these parts in their motions and desires would be contrary
one to the other. This consequent is false. They would
be diuerse, not opposite and repugnant. The Body and the
Sensitiues would lead a Man to those things that are agreeable
to the Body. The Soule and reasonable appetite, or will
would incline him to those higher and more noble objects agreeable
to the Soule. But neither of these inclinations would
crosse and trouble one another, the inferiour faculties, like
the lower Spheares would moue differently from the superiour:
but yet most orderly according to their owne nature,
without impeaching the Motions of the other. Each faculty
in it's place would worke orderly in sweet harmony and agreement
each with other, had not Sinne brought in confusion
and discord into the world, as betweene God and Man:
so betweene Man and himselfe. This we further make good
by this argument. Whatsoeuer is naturall, and so without
blame in Man: that Christ took one him—But these inordinate
Motions of the sensitiue appetite, repugnant vnto Will
and Reason; Christ tooke not on him—Ergo they are not
naturall, and without blame. The Maior we proue by that,
Phil. 3. 7. He was made like vnto Man: and Heb. 2. 17. In all
things it behoued him to be made like vnto his Brethren. And
againe, Chap. 4. 15. Wee haue not a high Priest which cannot be
touched with a feeling of our infirmities: but was in all things
tempted in like sort: yet without Sinne. Whence 'tis manifest

that Christ taking on him our Nature, tooke on him all the
properties of our Nature, and with all such infirmities of our
Nature as not sinfull in themselues, or the effects or punishments
of Sinne in vs. If therefore it be naturall vnto Man,
that the Motions of the sensitiue appetite should preuent and
be repugnant vnto Reason, and that this is no Sinne except
consent make it so: then certainly Christ had in him such motions
and inordinate desires. But to affirme that, there were
in Christ such disorderly Motions of his inferiour Faculties,
repugnant vnto his Reason and Will, is a blasphemie against
the immaculate Lambe of God, Christ was indeed tempted
(as the text saith) and in like sort as we are: but will
any Man heere vnderstand this of inward Temptations arirising
from any thing within Christ, as if he were like vnto
vs drawne aside withIam. 1. 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      
                     Concupiscence and inticed, the motions
of his sensitiue faculties, inclining him to that which was
contrary to his vnderstanding and will? We confesse that he
was fiercely tempted by Satan and wicked Men from without:
but that he was tempted by any thing in himselfe, by
disorderly Motions of his heart tending vnto euill, and ergo
checked by his will and Reason, this we account an abominable
Errour touching the spotlesse humanity of our Sauiour.
Wherein we deny, that there euer was any the least disorderly
desire, thought, word, or worke whatsoeuer. And therefore
we conclude, that such motions are not naturall vnto
Men, becomming sinfull only by accident, because they are
consented vnto: but they are accidentall vnto him, being the
fruit of originall Corruption, and are in themselues verily and
properly Sinnes.
                  
                  For Conclusion of this point, let vs heare that Argument
which Bell. makes.4 Arg. Bell.
                  
                  4. Where there is no Law,Lib. 4. cap. 1
                           •
                        . there is no sinne. Rom. 4. 10.
                  But there is no Law prescribed vnto sense and sensuall
appetites. Ergo The Motions thereof are not sinfull.
                  
                     The Maior we grant. The Minor he proues▪
                      Because the
Law praesupposeth Reason in all that whereto it is giuen.

But the sensitiue part of Man is without Reason, and
ergo not capable of a Law, according as it is in bruite
beasts, to whom ergo no Law is giuen. This he further
proues by that place, Rom. 7. 20. Now if I doe that
I would not, it is no more I that doe it, but Sinne that
dwelleth in me. Where 'tis plaine (saith Bell.) that
the Apostle did not sinne, because he lusted against his
will. 'Twas not he did the worke: but 'twas the Sinne in
him. Wherefore he saith afterward. That in his
mind, i. e. in his superior faculties he serued the Law of
God: and kept it: although in his flesh, i. e. sensitiue appetite
and inferiour faculties he serued the Law of sin:
yet, for all that he sinned not in so doing, because sinne
cannot be but in the minde, and the Law is not giuen
to those facul
                        •
                     ies that be vnreasonable.
                  To this we answere. That God giues no Law to vnreasonable
Creatures, but such as haue Reason. The sensitiue
faculties of bruite-beasts haue no other Rule then Natures
instinct, which guides and moderates their seuerall motions
in due order and measure. But in man those inferiour faculties
how euer vnreasonable, are yet capable of Reasons Gouernment,
which according to Gods Law prescribes vnto
the motions of the sensitiue appetite their measure and
bounds, beyond which they may not passe. If a man were
vncorrupt, the appetite would obey this rule of Reason and
keepe it selfe within those prescribed Bounds. But being
now corrupt by Sinne, it breakes out beyond this compasse
and ouerbeares Reason and will, which in their sinfull weaknes
are not able to bridle these vnrulie motions. wherefore
when Bell. saieth. That the Law is giuen to the reasonable
will, not to the sensiue appetite; it is vtterly false: Because in
Man it is probable of gouernment, and so subject to the Law.
Our Reason hath euen in this our corrupted estate a ciuill
command ouer our appetite and affections; so that it can
moderate them by faire persuasions now and then. That
which it can doe sometimes, it ought to doe alwaies, and if

any affections can obey Reason at sometimes, were they not
infected with Sinne, they would doe it at all times. And if
they doe well when they obey, certainly they doe euill
when they disobey. And ergo such motions of them, as are
repugnant to right reason, are nothing but rebellion against
God's Law. As to the place in the 7. Rom. we answere. That
that Interpretation of it which Bell. brings is most peruerse
and against all Sense. The Apostle complaines that he did
the Euill, which he would not; no doubt in so doeing he did
sinne. But what is it now which committed this guilt or
sinne? It is not I that doe it saieth the Apostle: but that sinne
that dwelleth in me. That is, according to Bell: not I in my
mind, or superior faculties of Reason and Will: but my inferior
Appetite and affections which doe this euill against my
consent. So the meaning shalbe Concupiscence in that duell
in the Apostle committed Sinne: but the Apostle himselfe
committed it not. Which is very absurd. As if a cholericke-Man
hauing done a mischiefe in his anger should sa
                        •
                     e, It
were not he did it; but his raging passion: or an adulterer,
that 'twas not he committed the Sinne; but his sinfull Affection
that carried him further then reason would. So that
if God will punish such a sinne; he must not punish him:
but onely his sensitiue appetite which was in fault. This is
ridiculous, for besides that it crosseth the Romanists Doctrine
manifestly; in teaching that such disorderly motions of
the sensitiue appetite be no sinnes, which heere the Apostle
contradicts, saying plainly (that the Sinne which dwelt in
him did doe the euill he would not. (viz, Sinne:) it draweth after
it this grosse Error. That some faecultie in man may sin,
and yet the man not sinne himselfe. Wherefore the Apostle in
that speach, 'Tis not I doe it: but sinne in me. doth not oppose
one facultie against the other, the reasonable will, against
the sensitiue appetite, seeking for a shift to excuse his sinne,
by putting it off from himselfe, to that which was not capable
of Sinne: but he opposeth grace in euery facultie to Corruption
in the same facultie; as two contrarie Principles and

                     causes of his actions, one mouing to good; the other enclining
to bad. Thence the Apostle saieth, that (when he
doth euill) 'tis not I that doe it. i. e, I regenerate according
to the Grace, that dwelleth in me, for that inclines me to
doe good: but 'tis the Sinne dwelling in me which (when
I would doe well) inclines me to doe euill. He heere shewes
the Roote, whence this Euill comes: but yet he doth not put
off the fault from himselfe. As 'tis himselfe doth well: so 'tis
himself
                        •
                      doth ill too, according as he concludes. vers 25.
Then I my selfe. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      doe both well and ill; well, according
to Grace, in my mind that is regenerate, part both of
inferior and superior facultie. I serue the Law of God; but ill
according to corruption remaining in me: but in my flesh, vnregenerate
part the Law of Sinne. Much more might be
added: but 'tis not my purpose, heere to enter vpon the common
place at large,
                  I proceed to the second quaestion of our Aduersaries,
who teach that albeit our Loue of God be imperfect: yet this
imperfection is not sinne in vs. They grant. That no man
hath any grace of the spirit: but he may encrease in it daily.
that the Loue of God and our Neighbours may still grow
on to farther degrees of affection; That no grace, nor good
worke hath that full perfection, which it might haue in this
Life, or which we shall attaine vnto in Heauen. But they
deny this defect to be any fault or sinne.
                  
                  2. Defectus Charitatis quod (viz) non faciamus opera
nostra tanto feruore dilectionis,Excep
                           •
                        ion. quanto faciemus in patriâ,Be
                           •
                         lib. 4 c. 10. 
                           •
                         17. 
                           •
                         cap. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . defectus quidemest: sed culpa & peccatum non est.
saieth Bell. and againe Charitas nostra quamuis comparata
ad Charitatem beatorum, sit imperfecta: tamen
absolute perfecta dici potest.
                  This is an Error, against which we defend this Conclusion
in generall, touching both Charity and all man Righteousnes.
                  
                  The defects or want of Perfection in Mans Righteousnes
is Sinne.Conclusion. contr.
                  
                  
                     
For the proofe of this point we are to obserue, that the
Imperfection, or Perfection of any thing is to be considered of
two waies.
                  1 Comparatiuely. When any thing set by another is
more or lesse perfect, then that other.
                  2 Absolutely. When considered in it selfe, it hath or
wantes that Perfection which it should haue by its proper
Nature.
                  Betweene these there is great difference. For Comparatiue
imperfection is not euill: absolute imperfection is Euill.
We may see it in an example, The Senses that are in Man
being compared with their like in other creatures, 'tis manifest
they are much excelled by them, as by an Eagle for sight,
a spider for touch. &c. Heere we say that the eie of a man is
not perfect as the eie of an Eagle: but yet we doe not account
this imperfection any Naturall euill of the eie of a man.
God might haue giuen a stronger and a clearer sight to
men: but we, blame not his workes; nor count our sight
imperfect because it hath not that singular Temper which is
in other Creatures; but because it wants at any time that
temper which is agreeable to our nature. Such a defect only,
is properly an Euill in Nature, when something is wanting
to the perfection of any part, which by the Course of
nature should be there. Thus 'tis also in Grace. Compare
we the Righteousnes of man, or Angels, with the Righteousnes
of God; we saie that God's is infinitely more perfect then the
Creatures. But now is this imperfection in Humane or Angelicall
righteousnes any Euill and Sinne in them? We saie
No. Neither are the Angels sinfull because lesse righteous
then God: nor Adam sinfull because lesse righteous then either.
God made them both lesse good then himselfe: yet very
good and without all Sinne. There be degrees of Righteousnes,
and though the Creature be infinitely below the
heighest pitch of goodnes (which is God:) yet he may bee
still aboue that lowest descent vnto Sinne and vnrighteousnes.
In Phylosophie we dispute whether the slackening of

any degree in one Quality, be the mingling of another that is
contrary. As heat in eight degrees if it decrease vnto seuen,
whether there is any degree of cold mingled with it. 'Tis
heard to say that there is. But concerning Grace and Righteousnes
'tis certaine, there is that remissio graduum without
any admixtion of Sinne and iniquity. As the Holines of Saints
is lesse then that of Angels; that of Angels lesse then the Holines
of Christs glorified Humanity, this lesse then his Diety.
And yet in the least of these Righteousnesses there is no Vnrighteousnes
at all to be found, no not in the seuere judgement
of God. Except we say there is vnrighteousnes in Heauen
where no vncleane thing can enter. Well then. What
Imperpection of mans Righteousnes is it, which is Sinne?
We say. That Imperfection, when man in any Grace or
good Worke wantes that degree of goodnes, which he ought
to haue. As in nature. If the Eye want that cleernes of sight
which should be in it: 'tis a naturall Euill. In Morality if
a man want that Temperance or degree of Temperance he
ought to haue, its a vitious and morall euill: so in Grace the
want of that righteousnes or degree of righteonsnes which
God requires to be in man, is a Sinne and spirituall Euill. All
such priuations of what should be present are Euill in what
kind soeuer. If they be in nature they be malamiseranda, deserue
pity and cure: if in Vertue and Grace; they be mala culpanda
worth of blame and punishment. Such defects as
these in Grace, when man fals short, not onely of that which
is in others; but that which should be in himselfe, doe alwaies
arise from the mixture of Corruption and Sinne. Hee
that loues n
                        •
                     t God or his neighbour so much as he ought
to doe: 'tis because his heart be wicked, at the least in part;
and that he loues others things more then he should doe.
These things are certaine and vndeniable according to those
words of St. Augustin that are authenticall.
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      
                     Profecto illud
quod minus est quam debet, ex vitio est. And againe.Lib. de perfect. 
                           〈…〉
                        . 15 
                     Pec
                        
                           •
                        atum
est, vel cum non est charitas, quae esse debet: vel minor
est quam debet. 'Tis a Sinne, not to loue. God at all: or to

loue him lesse then we should. Wherefore heere we aske
the Iesuite whether Charity and other Graces in a man regenerate
be so perfect in this Life, as they ought to be? If he
say, they be not so perfect, as they ought to be. how can he
affirme that this defect is no fault nor Sinne: Can a man possibly
doe worse, or be worse then he should; and yet be i
                        •
                     
no fault therefore? If he say they be as perfect as they should
be, his owne Conscience and the Conscience of all the men in
the World will gain-say him for a liar. No man can say, that
he loues God and his Neighbour asmuch as he ought to
doe: and that he is not bound in euery grace and good worke
to ariue at greater perfection, then hee hath for the present.
He that thinkes himselfe come nearest vnto the marke, will
yet be driuen to confesse, that he fals many bowes short of
those patternes which we ought to imitate, Adam in his Innocency;
Christs Humanity, and the Saints in Heauen. Wee
here bid them (Depinge ubi sistam) make a point where we
shall stoppe: that when we are come so farre, we need seeke
no further perfection. If they cannot do this, then they must
confesse, as the truth is, that euery man is bound by Gods
command to be more holy, to be more perfect in all Graeces
and good workes; and so farre as he wants any degree or
dramme of goodnesse, that should be in him and his works,
so farre he is sinfull and guilty of a fault.
                  3 I goe on to the last Assertion of our Aduersaries,
                     3 Exception. Bell. lib. 4 c. 17.
                     which is to
                           •
                        ching veniall sinnes, (viz.) That these doe not
hinder the righteousnesse of mens good workes. A man may be
a perfect iust man, though he commit many veniall sinnes. The
reason whereof they make to be [because veniall sinnes are
not contrary to charity, the loue of God and our neighbour, and
so may stand well enough with the fulfilling of the Law.
                  Against this errour, tending to the obduration of mans
hart in impenitency & loue of sin: we maintain this conclusiō.
                  
                  Those sinnes which the Church of Rome cals veniall,Conclusion contr. doe
truly make a man regenerate, and his workes vnrighteousnesse
in the sight of God.
                  This we proue by this one Argument.
                  
                     
Whosoeuer transgresseth the Law, he is vnrighteous in
so doing.
                  But he that commits veniall sinnes, transgresseth the
Law. Ergo, He that commits veniall sinnes is an vnrighteous
man.
                  The Maior is vndeniable. For the Minor our Aduersarie
is at a stand. They are loath to grant it: yet cannot tell
how to deny it with any honesty. Bellarmine after one or
two shuffling distinctiōs of simpliciter,
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . 4. cap. 14. & secundum quid; perfectè
and imperfectè, at last plainly denies that veniall sinnes
be contrary to the Law. For answering vnto those places in
Iames. [In many things we offend all,] and that in Iohn. [If
we say we haue no sinne, we deceiue our selues.] Hee saith they
cannot hansomly shift themselues of those places, who hold
that veniall sinnes be [propriè contra Legem.] Such as bee
of that opinion [Let them looke to it (saith he) what they
will answere to that of Saint Iames.] He that keepes the Law
in one point, &c.] He therefore will be more wise and wary.
[Sol
                           •
                        da igitur respensio est (saith he) Peccata venialia, sine
quibus non viuitur, non esse peccata simpliciter, sed imperfectè
& secundum quid: neque esse contra Legem, sed praerer Legem.]
And thus saith he, Omnia cohaerent (like a Pebble in a Withe)
[Nam qui ostendit in vno praeuaricans scilicet vnum praeceptum,
reus est omnium & simpliciter iniustus constituitur & tamen
in multis offendimus omnes, quia tametsi nihil facimus
contra Legem; tamen multa facimus praeter Legem. Et qui

                           •
                        atus est ex Deo, non peccatat transgrediendo Legem, & tamen
si dicamus q
                           •
                        ia peccatum non habemus. (viz.) nihil praeter
Legem faciendo: no
                           •
                         ipsos seducimus, & veritas non est in Nobis.]
This is an vnbound Besome, as will appeare by vndoing
that distinction which seemes to hold it together. Veniall
sinnes are not against the Law: but besides the Law.
Well, we must now know what is against the Law, & what
besides.
                        
                           ••
                        t
                           •
                        er meaning of these words [against] 
                           •
                        nd [Besides] there can be 
                           〈…〉
                        
                      That is against the Law, when any thing is done
which the Law forbids; or left vndone which it commands.
That is besides the Law, when the thing done is neither
cōmanded, nor forbidden in the Law. He then that commits

a veniall sinne, doth some such act as the Law neither forbids
nor commands. Here then we aske. Be veniall sinnes,
sinnes? Yea, they be. Is God offended with them? Yea,
and he may iustly punish them, on vs with the losse of Heauen.
For so Bellarmine himselfe confesseth.Lib. 4. cap. vse. [Peccata venialia
nisi misericorditer remittantur impediunt ab ingressu illius
Regni in quod nihil coinquinatum intrare potest.] Now sure
this is admirable, that such acts as these should defile a man,
deserue hell, offend God, in a word be sinnes, and yet for all
this neither commanded nor forbidden in any Law of God.
Was there euer such a toy heard of as this? as Sinnes beside
the Law. Tis a most ridiculous contradiction, Peccatum
praeter Legem. He that doth any thing beside the Law, not
mentioned, nor include 
                        •
                      therein by way of prohibition or
command, tis most apparent he sinnes not, nor offends not at
all. For whom doth he offend, or who can challenge him
of Sinne? Doth God the Law-giuer? No, for twas not his
intention to command or forbid such an act, and ergo, be it
done or not done, it crosseth not his will: nor hath he any
reason to finde fault or be displeased at it. Satan or Man
cannot accuse him. For let them then shew the Law that
prooues him an offender. If they cannot alleadge a Law against
which he hath transgressed: they wrongfully accuse
him of a fault. Were it not absurd accusation against a prisoner
at the Barre; to say that he hath indeed done nothing
against the Lawes of the Land: but many things besides the
Law not forbidden nor commanded in the Law, those hee
hath done and deserues to be punished for it as an offender?
                  But now if those veniall sinnes bee mentioned in Gods
Law: then are such actions either commanded or forbidden.
If commanded, then the not doing of such a thing, is plainely
contrary to the Law. As for example.
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      To steale a penny,
or some other small matter, to please an idle word, to tell an
officious lie; these be veniall sinnes say our Aduersaries. But
how hnow they, they be sinnes? who told them so? The
Scriptures they will say. Where? In the 8 and 9 Commandement.
Aske them now. Did God intend in those Commandements
                     
to forbid those actions of stealing and lying?
Yea, or No? If he intended it not; then tis no sinne at all to
doe them, seeing it cro
                        •
                     seth not Gods will, nor offends him.
If he did intend to forbid vs those things: then to doe them
is a sinne, manifestly contrary to the holy will of God, the
Lawgiuer. Wherfore let vs here remēber that excellent rule
of Bernard.
                     Bernard de Praecept
                           ••
                         Dispen. 
                     [Non iussa quïdem licitè vtrumlibet, vel admittuntur
vel omittuntur: iussa vero sine culpa non negleguntur,
sine crimine non 
                           •
                        ontemnuntur. For things not commanded:
we may either lawfully doe them or leaue them: but for
things commanded, to neglect them is a sinne, to contemne
them is a haynous crime. Wherefore this distinction of sins
against, and sinnes beside the Law falleth to dust: and our
Minor Proposition stands firme: That he who committeth
veniall Sinne, transgresseth the Law of God, and therefore is
vnrighteous for his so doing.
                  
                     Tom. 2. tract. 2 cap 2 q. 2. 
                     Becanus here forsakes the Cardinall in this distinction:
and helpes him by an other deuis
                        •
                     . He grants that Veniall
Sinnes be against the Law, and proues it, [because euery
Veniall Sinne is moraliter malum, and Ergo contra rectam rationemet
Legem aeternam.) But heres now the distinction:
It is one thing to be contra Legem; another contra finem
Legis. All Veniall sinnes be against the Law: but no veniall
sinne is properly against the end of the Law. that is, against
Charity the Loue of God or our Neighbour. Is not this a superfine
Inuention?
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Man. confess praelud. 
                           •
                        . Num. 16. As if a Subiect that hath in many things
broken the Law, should say. True my faults be against the
Law of the Land: but yet they are not against the end of
those Lawes. viz. obedience to my Prince, and Loue to
the good of him and my Country. Though I break the
Lawes: yet I would not haue you thinke; but I loue and
honour my Prince and Country well enough. Iust so the
Iesuits. A man may commit many sinnes against Gods
Law: and yet obserue the end of the Law, in louing God
with all his heart; and his Neighbour as himselfe. Then
which nothing can be more senselesse, that a man should offend
God in breaking of his Law: and yet not withstanding

loue God with his whole heart. That a man should wrong
his Neighbour doing that to him which he would not haue
done to himselfe: and yet, for all that, loue his Neighbour
as himselfe. (If ye loue mee keepe my Commandem
                           •
                        nts) saith
Christ. Iohn. 14. 15. Nay (say the Romanists) we loue him
and yet breake his Commandements. (Loue doth none eu
                           •
                        l
to his Neighbour) saith the Apostle Romans. 13.. 10 Nay
(say the Iesuits) Loue may doe euill to his Ne
                        •
                     ghbour:
and yet keepe the name of loue. A man may be angry with
another without cause, reuile him, and call him Racha, hee
may defraude him in small matters (for these they make veniall
sinnes) and yet in the meane time, all this without breath
of Charity. Himselfe would not willingly be so vsed: but
hee will vse another in this sort; and yet looke to bee
thanked for his loue too. Such grosse absurdities doe our
Aduersaries runne in to, by coyning such senselesse distinctions
of (Sinnes not against: but besides the Law) of sinnes
not against the end of the Law: though against the Law it selfe.
Our Consciences cannot be satisfied with such silly shiftes:
and therefore we leaue them vnto those that can content
themselues; and choake vp their Consciences with a little
sophistry. Men who make a pastime of sinne; and take liberty
to qualifie and dispence with Gods Law as they thinke
agreeable to their Conscience; hoping by tricks of wit and
dodging Distinctions to a void the accusations of Conscience,
and to elude the seuerity of Gods Iudgement.
                  
               
            
            
               SECT. 4.
               
                  CHAP I▪
                  
                  Iustification by workes makes void the couenant of grace of the
difference between the law & the Gospel. of the vse of the Law.
of the erroneous conceit of our Aduersaries in this point.
                  
                     THus much of these three Exceptions of our

                        •
                     econd Arg
                           •
                        ment, prouing the impossibili
                     
                        •
                     y
of our Iustification by the workes of the
Law, because we cannot perfectly fulfill the

                        •
                     aw. We goe now forward vnto two Arguments

more; taken, the one from the difference of the two
Couenants God hath made with man. First of works, the other
of grace: and the other from the Nature of true Christian Lib
                           •
                        rty
obtained for vs by Christs death.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . Argument. That which makes voide the Couenant
of Grace is a false and haereticall doctrine.
                  But Iustification of workes of the Law, makes void the Couenant
of Grace. Ergo, Tis false and haeriticall so to teach.
                  For confirmation of the minor in this Argument wee
must briefly shew. 1 (What the Couenant of Grace, what
the Couenant of workes is) 2 What opposition their is betweene
these two.
                  
                  By the Couenant of Grace
                     Couenant of Grace. we vnderstand in one word, the
Gospell, i. e. the gratious appointment of God to bring man to
Saluation by Iesus Christ. In the administration of this gratious
purpose of God we must obserue foure periods of
time, where in God hath diuersly ordered this meanes of
Mans saluation.
                  
                  1 The first is from Adam vntill Abraham.
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . Werein
God made the promise to Adam anone after his miserable
fall: and renued it as occasion serued vnto the Patriarches
and Holy men of that first Age of the world. viz. That (the
seede of the woman should breake the Serpents head) This
blessed promise containing the whole substance of mans redemption
by Christ, was religiously accepted of, and embrased
by the seruants of God in those times. who witnessed
their Faith in it, by their offering of sacryfice as God had
taught them: and thier Thankfulnesse for it, by their Obedience
and holy Conuersation.
                  
                  
                      The second is from Abraham to Moses. After that
men had now almost forgot Gods promise and their owne
duty: and Idolatry was crept into those Families, wherein
by succession the Church of God had continued, God cals
forth Abraham from amongst his Idolatrous kinred, & with
him renues that former promise in forme of a League and
Couenant confirmed by word & solemne Ceremonies. God on
the one side promising to be the God of Abraham, and of

his seed, & that in his seed all the Nations of the earth should be
blessed: Abraham for his part beleeuing the promise, and accepting
the condition of 
                        
                           •
                        bedience to walke before God in vprightnesse.
This Couenant with Abraham is rat
                        •
                     fied by
two externall Ceremonies. One of a fi
                           •
                        e-brand p
                           •
                        ssing between
the pieces of the Heifer and other Beasts with Abraham, according
to custome in making of Leagues had diuided in
twaine. Gen. 15. The other the Sacrament of Circumcision
vpon the flesh of Abraham and his posterity. Gen. 17.
                  The third period is from the time of Moses vntill Christ.
                     
When (after the Church multiplyed vnto a Nation, and
withall in processe of time, and continuance among the Idolatrous
Aegyptians, grew extremely corrupt in Religion and
Manners) God againe reuiues his former Couenant made
with Abraham. Putting the Iewes in remembrance of the
Couenant of grace in Christ. 1 By adding vnto the first Sacrament
of circumcision another of the Passeouer, setting
forth vnto the Iewes, the Author of their deliuerance; as
well from the spirituall slauery and punishment of sinne; as
from the bodily bondage and plagues of Aegypt. 2 Afterwards
by instituting diuers Rites & Ceremonies concerning
Priests sacrifices, &c. all which were shadowes of good
things to come (viz.) of Christ, the Churches Redemption
by his death. Which things were prefigured vnder those
types, though somewhat darkely, yet plainely enough to the
weake vnderstanding of the Iewes. Who in that Minority
of the Church stood in need of such Schoolemasters and Tutors
to direct them vnto Christ.
                  The fourth period and last is from Christs death, to the 
end of the world. Who in the fulnesse of time appearing in
our flesh, accomplished all the Prophecies and promises that
went before of him: and by the Sacrifice of himselfe, confirmed
that Couenant a new: which so long before had beene
made with the Church. Withall hauing abolished whatsoeuer
before was weake and imperfect, hee hath now replenished
the Church with aboundance of knowledge, and of
grace, still to continue and increase, till the consummation of

all things. In all these periods of time, the grace of God that
brings saluation to man was euer one and the same: onely
the Reuelation thereof, was with much variety of circumstances,
as God saw it agreeable to euery season. In the first
twas called a Promise, in the second a Couenant, in the two
last Periods, a Testament; the Old from Moses till Christs
death; the New from thence to the worlds end, in both Remission
of sinnes, and Saluation bequeathed as a Legacy vnto
the Church: and this bequeast ratified by the death of the
Testator, typically slaine in the Sacrifices, for confirmation of
the Old: Really put to death in his owne Person, for the
Sanction of the New Testament. But notwithstanding this
or any other diuersity in circumstance, the substance of the
Gospel, or couenant of Grace, is but one & the same, throughout
all ages. Namely, Iesus Christ yesterday, and to day, and
the same for euer.
                  
                  In the next place. By the Couenant of Workes,
                     Couenant. 2 Workes. we vnderstand
that we call in one word the Law: Namely, That
meanes of bringing man to Saluation, which is by perfect obedience
vnto the will of God. Hereof there are also two
seuerall Administrations. 1 The first is with Adam before
his fall. When Immortality and Happinesse was promised
to Man, and confirmed by an externall Symbole of the
Tree of Life: vpon condition that he continued obedient to
God, as well in all other things; as in that particular Commandement
of not eating of the Tree of knowledge of good
and euill. 2 The second Administration of this Couenant
was the renuing thereof with the Israelites at Mount Sinai:
where (after that the light of Nature began to grow darker,
and corruption had in time worne out the Characters of Religion
and Vertue, first graued in mans heart) God reuiued
the Law, by a compendious and full declaration of all duties
required of man, towards God or his Neighbour, expressed
in the Decalogue. According to the Tenor of which Law
God entred into Couenant with the Israelites, promising to
be their God; in bestowing vpon them all blessings of
Life and Happinesse, vpon condition that they would be his

people, obeying all things that he had commanded. Which
Condition they accepted of, promising an absolute Obedience.
All things which the Lord hath said we will doe. Exod.
19. 24. and also submitting themselues to all punishment in
case they disobeyed; saying Amen to the Curse of the Law.
Cursed be euery one that confirmeth not all the words of this
Law to doe them: and all the people shall say, Amen. Deut.
27. 26.
                  We see in briefe what these Couenants of Grace & Workes
are. In the second place we must inquire what opposition
there is betweene these two; Grace and Workes; the Gospell
and the Law. The opposition is not in regard of the End
whereat both doe aime. They agree both in one common
end, namely the Glory of God in Mans eternall Saluation.
The disagreement is in the meanes, whereby this End may
be attained; which are proposed to Men in one sort by the
Law, in another by the Gospell. The diuersity is this. The
Law offers life vnto Man vpon Condition of perfect Obedience,
cursing the Transgressors thereof in the least point with eternall
Death: The Gospell offers Life vnto Man vpon another condition,
viz. Of Repentance, and Faith in Christ, promising Remission
of sinnes to such as repent and beleeue. That this is the
maine Essentiall and proper difference betweene the Couenant
of workes and of Grace (that is) betweene the Law and
the Gospell, we shall endeauour to make good against these of
the Romish Apostasy who deny it. Consider we then the Law
of Workes, either as giuen to Adam before the promise: or
as after the promise it remained in some force with Adam &
all his posterity. For the time before Mans fall. It is apparant
that perfect obedience was the condition required for the establishing
of Adam in perpetuall blisse. Other meanes there
was not: nor needed any be proposed vnto him. But when
Man had failed in that Condition; and so broken the Covenant
of Workes: God to repaire Mans ruined Estate, now
desperate of euer attaning vnto happines by the first means:
he appoints a second offering vnto Adam a Sauiour; that by
Faith in him, and not by his owne vnspotted Obedience, hee

might recouer Iustification, and Life which he had lost. So
that what Adam should haue obtained by workes without
Christ: now hee shall receiue by Faith in Christ without
Workes. Since the time of Mans fall we must consider, that
the Law and Gospell though they goe together, yet as they
still differ in their vse and office betweene themselues: so also
the Law differs from it selfe, in that vse which it had before,
and which it hath since the Fall. To vs now, it hath not the
same vse which it had in Mans innocency. It was giuen to
Adam for this end, to bring himselfe to Life, and for that
purpose it was sufficient both in it selfe, as an absolute Rule
of Perfection: and in regard of Adam who had strength to
haue obserued it. But vnto Man fallen, although the Band of
Obedience doe remaine: yet the End thereof (viz.) Iustification
and Life by it, is now abolished by the promise, because
the Law now is insufficient for that purpose, not of it
selfe, but by reason of our sinfull flesh, that cannot keepe it.
This is most manifest by the renewing of the first Couenant
of Workes with the Iewes, when God deliuered vnto them
the Morall Law, from Sinai, at which time God did not intend
that the Iewes should obtaine Saluation, by Obedience
to that Law. God promised Life if they could obey, and the
Iewes, as their duty was promised they would obey; but
God knew well enough they were neuer able to keepe their
promise, and ergo 'twas not God's intention in this Legall couenant
with the Iewes, that any of them should euer attaine
Iustification, and Life by that meanes. As that first the Promise
need not to haue bin made vnto Adam, if the Law could
haue suffised for the attaining of Life: so after the Promise
was once made, the Law was not renewed with the Iewes; to
that end that Righteousnes and Life should be had by the obseruation
of it. This is the plaine doctrine of the Apostle. Gal.
3. in that his excellent dispute against Iustification by the
Law. The doubt that troubled the Galatians was this. God
had made an Evangelicall couenant with Abraham,
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . that in
Christ he and his faithfull seed should be blessed; that is, Iustified.
Afterward 430 yeares, he made a Legall couenant with

                     Abraham's posterity, that they should liue, that is, be justified
and saued, if they did fulfill all things written in the Law. The
Quaestion now was, which of these two couenants should
stand in force, or whether both could stand together. The Apostle
answere, that the former couenant should stand in
force, and that the later did not abrogate the former; not
yet could stand in force together with the former. This he
expresseth v. 17. 18. And this I say, that the couenant that was
confirmed afore of God in respect of Christ, the Law which was
430 yeares after, cannot disanull that it should make the Promise
of none effect. For if the inheritance (viz) of Righteousnes
and life, be by the Law; it is not by the Promise: but God gaue
it to Abraham by Promise, Heere now they might object,
Wherefore then serueth the Law? If Men cannot bee iustified
by keeping the Law, to what end was it giuen so long after
the Promise was made? To this the Apostle answeres. It was
added (vnto the Promise) because of the transgressions. Here's
the true vse of the Morall Law, since the fall of Man, not to
justifie him and giue life: but to proue him to be vniust and
worrhy of death. It was added [because of transgressions.] that
is. 1. To convince Man of Sinne, that he might be put in remembrance
what was his duty of old; and what was his present
infirmity in doing of it, and what was God's wrath against
him for not doing it. That seeing how impossible it
was for him to attaine vnto life by this old way of the Law.
First appointed in Paradise, he might be humbled and driuen
to looke after that new way, which God had since that time
layed forth, more heedfully attending the Promise, and seeking
vnto Christ, who is the End of the Law vnto euery one
that beleeues in him. Which vse God pointed out vnto the
Iewes, figuring Christ vnto them in the Mercyseate, couering
the Arke wherein the Tables of the Couenant were kept, and
in the Sacrifices appointed for all sorts of Transgressions against
this Couenant. To admonish the Iewes a further thing
was aimed at in giuing them the Law, namely the bringing
of them—to Christ the promised seed, in whom
Remission of Sinnes, and Life Eternall was to bee had.

1. To restraine Man from Sinne. That the Law might be
a perpetuall rule of Holinesse and Obedience whereby Man
should walke and glorifie God to the vtmost of his power.
That so those Iewes might not thinke that God by making
a gracious Promise, had vtterly nullified the Law, and that
now Men might liue as they list; but that they might know
these bounds prescribed them of God, within which compasse
they were to keep themselues, that so the ouer-flowing
of Iniquity might be restrained. These most excellent, perpetuall
and necessary vses of the morall Law, God intended in
renewing of the Legall couenant with the Iewes: & ergo the
Apostle concludes, that God did not crosse himself, when first
he gaue the Inheritance to Abraham by promise, and afterwards
made a Legall couenant with the Iewes his posterity.
Is the Law then against the Promises? (saith the Apostle)
God forbid. For if there had beene a Law giuen,
which could haue giuen Life, surely Righteousnesse
should haue bin by the Law: But the Scripture hath concluded
all vnder Sinne, that the promise by the Faith of Iesus Christ
might be giuen to all that beleeue. ver. 21. 22. Whence it
is most cleare that the Law and the Gospell in some things
are subordinate and vphold one another; in other absolute,
and destroy one another: As the Law by the discouery of
Sinne and the punishment of it, humbles man and prepares
him to receaue the Gospell. 2. As the Law is a sacred direction
for Holines and Obedience to those that haue embraced
the Gospell and all others. 3. As the Law requires satisfaction
for the Breach of it, and the Gospell promiseth such satisfaction:
thus the Law and Gospell agree well together and
establish one another. But as the Law giues life to them
that perfectly obey it, and the Gospell giues Life to them that
stedfastly beleiue it: thus the Law and Gospell are one against
the other; and ouerthrow one another. And ergo if God
had giuen such a Law to the Iewes, as could haue brought
Saluation to them through the perfect fulfilling of it: 'tis
apparant that God had made voide his former Couenant
vnto Abraham, because Righteousnes should haue bin by

the Law, and not by Christ. But now God gaue no such
Law, as could be kept by the Iewes, as the Apostle proues,
because all were sinners against it; and therefore it followes
that notwithstanding the giuing of the Law, the Promise
standes good for euer; and Righteousnes is to be odtained
onely by the Faith of Iesus Christ.
                  
                  
                     From hence we conclude firmely. That the difference
betweene the Law and the Gospell, assigned by our Diuines
is most certaine and agreable to the Scriptures. viz. That.
The Law giues Life vnto the Iust vpon Con
                        •
                     ition of perfect Obedience
in all things: The Gospell giues Life vnto Sinners vpon
Condition, they repent and beleiue in Christ Iesus. Whence
it is plaine. That in the point of Iustification these two are
incompatible, and that therefore our minor Proposition standes
verified. That Iustification by the workes of the Law, makes
voide the Couenant of Grace. Which Proposition is the same
with the Apostles assertion else-where. Gal. 2. 21. If Righteousne:
be by the Law Christ died in vaine. and Gal. 5. 4.
Ye are abolished from Christ: whosoeuer are iustified by the
Law; yee are fallen from Grace.
                  By somuch more iuiurious are these of the Romish Church
vnto the Gospell of Christ, when, by denying this difference,
they would confound the Law and Gospell: and bring vs
backe from Christ to Moses, to seeke for our Iustification
in the fulfilling of the Morall Law. They would persuade
vs that the Gospell is nothing, but a more perfect Law, or
the Law perfected by addition of the Spirit, enabling men to
fulfill it; That the promises of the Gospell be vpon this Condition,
of fulfilling the Law▪ with such like stuffe. Their Doctrine
touching this point is declared vnto vs by Bellarmine.
Lib 4. de Iustificat. cap. 3. 4. Where he comes many distinctions
betweene the Law and Gospell: but will by no meanes
admit of that which our Reformed Diuines make to be the
chiefe. The cheife distinction which he conceaues to be betweene
them he frameth thus. The Gospell (saieth he) is taken
in a double sense.
                     1 Cor. 
                           •
                        . 1. For the Doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles
by them preached and written; 2. For the Grace of the

Holy Ghost giuen iu the New Testament, which he makes to be
the Law written in our Hearts, the quickening Spirit, the Law
of Faith Charity shed abroad in our Hearts, in opposition to the
Law written in stone, to the dead and killing Letter, the Law
of Workes, the Spirit of bondage and feare. Vpon this he proceeds
to the difference betweene the Law and the Gospell.
Thus. The Law teacheth vs what is to be done, the Gospell (if
it be taken for the Grace of the holy Ghost) so it differs from the
Law; because it gaines strength to doe it: but if it be taken for
the Doctrine deliuered by Christ and his Apostles,
                     Iohn 1. 17. 
                     so it agrees
with the Law, teaching vs, as the Law doth, what things are
to be done. This Argument the Iesuite illustrates and proues
in three particulars.
                  1. The Gospell containes, Doctrinam operum, or Leges. For
Morall praecepts, they be the same in the Gospell, that be in
the Law;
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . 20. euen those praecepts that seeme most Euangelicall.
(viz) of louing our Enemies, witnes of this all the writings
of the New Testament, wherein euery where we find praecepts,
& exhortations to the same virtues, Prohibitions and
dehortations from the same vices, which the Law forbids
or commands. So that for Morals, the Doctrine of the
Gospell is but the Doctrine of the Law; newly (that is)
most cleerely and fully expounded. Nor is the Gospell in a
more perfect substance: but in Circumstance a more perspicuous
Doctrine.
                  Which, though a Trueth, yet is very ridiculouslie proued
by the Cardinall out of. Mat. 5. Nisi abundauerit &c. Vnlesse
your Righteousnes exceed. What? He saieth not the righteousnes
of the Law and Prophets: but of the Scribes and
Pharisees; yee shall not enter &c. A profound Glosse. (Christ
would not add to the Burden of the Law: but take away
from the false glosse of the Scribes and Pharisees.) Surely
good cause had our Sauiour to taxe both the Doctrine of the
Pharisees in interpreting, and their manners in their hypocriticall
practice of the Law in outward matters; without
inward Obedience; But litle Reason was there that Christ
should require of man more perfection then Gods Law required

and 'tis a fancie to dreame of any such meaning, in
our Sauiours speach.
                  2 The Gospell containes Comminations, and threatnings as
the Law doth. Witnes the many woes from Christ's owne
mouth against the Scribes and Pharisees; together with
those frequent denunciations of Iudgement and Damnation
to such as are vngodly, that doe not repent and obey
the Gospell.
                  3 Thirdly the Gospell containes promises of Life and happines:
but these Euangelicall promises be not absolute but
vpon the same Condition, that the Legall are. (viz) Cum
conditione implendae Legis, Cum conditione Iustitiae actualis, & operosae, quae in perfecta Mandatorum obseruatione
consistit. Cap. 2.
                  This the Iesuite would proue vnto vs.
                  1. From that. Math. 5. Vnlesse your Righteousnes aboud
&c. (that is, in Bellarmines Construction) so far
as, vnto the perfect keeping of the Law: you shall not
enter into the Kingdome of Heauen.
                  2. From Mat. 19. 17. Mat. 10. 19. Where Christ
speakes to the yong man. Asking him what he should
doe to be saued. If thou wilt enter into Life keepe the
Commandements. And to the Lawyer. (10. 28.) who asked
the like Question he answeres. This doe and thou
shalt liue. That is. Fulfill the Law, and thou shalt be saued.
In which wordes they say; That Christ did preach
the Gospell, and shewed vnto these men the very Evangelical
way to Saluation.
                  
                  3. From the many places of Scripture. Wherein Mortificati
                        •
                     n
of Sinne, and the studious practice of Holines.
and Obedience is required of vs. As. Rom. 8. If yee
mortifie the deed's of the flesh by the Spirit: yee shall liue.
So. Ezekiel 18. 21. If the wicked will returne from all
his Sinnes, that he hath committed; and keepe all my statutes,
and doe, that which is lawfull and Right: he shall
surely liue and not die. With a Number such like places.
                  
                  
                     
4. From the very Tenor of the Gospell.Iohn 13. 17. If ye know those things, &c. 
                     He that belieueth
shall be saued: but he that belieueth not, shall be
damned.
                     Iohn 15. 14. Ye are my friends 
                           •
                        ye do what
                        
                           •
                        uer I com
                        
                           ••
                        d you. Where we see the Promise of Life is not absolute,
but conditionall. If we doe such and such
workes.
                  
                  
                     From hence the Romanist concludes: That seeing the precepts,
threatnings, and promises of the Gospell, be for matter
the same, that those of the Law are: the true difference betweene
the Law and Gospell shall be this. That the Law
nakedly proposeth what is to be done without giuing
grace to performe it: but the Gospell not only proposeth
what is to be done, but withall giueth Grace and strength
to doe it: and therefore the Law giuen by Moses the Law-giuer
cannot iustifie, because it was giuen without the
grace of fulfilling it: but the Gospell giuen by Christ
the Redeemer doth justifie, because it is accompanied
with the grace of the holy Ghost, making vs able to keepe
the Law. For which cause also the Law of Moses is a
yoake vnsupportable, the Law of
                        
                           •
                        om 8. 15. 
                           〈◊〉
                         4. 24. 25. feare and bondage; because
it giues not grace to keepe it, but onely conuinceth
our Sinne, and threatens vs punishment: but the Law of
Christ, the Gospell is a light yoake, a Law of loue and
liberty; because it giues grace to keepe it, and of loue to
God and man: and so by fulfilling frees a man from feared
punishment.
                  This is the summe of the Romish Doctrine touching the
difference betwixt the morall Law and the Gospell in the
point of Iustification, as it is deliuered vs by Bellarmine, the
rotten pillar of the antichristian Synagogue. Wherein we haue
scarce a syllable of distinct Trueth: but all peruerted by aequiuocations
and grosse Ambiguities, as shall appeare by a
short surucy of the former discourse. Whereas then he distinguisheth
the Gospell into the doctrine of Christ, and
his Apostles, and into the Grace of the Holy Ghost: let vs
follow him in these two parts.
                  First for Doctrine. We grant that the Gospell is often
so taken: but in this matter about Iustification, this acception,

on is too large; and not distinct enough. For although, by
a Synecd
                           •
                        che of the chiefest & most excellent part, the whole
Doctrine and Ministry of Christ and his Apostles with their
successors, be called the doctrine of the Gospell, andRom. 12. 16. At that day when God shall iudge, the secrets of Men by Iesus Christ according to my Gospell. the
Ministery of the Gospell: yet all things which they preached
or wrote, is not the Gospell properly so called. But as
Moses chiefly deliuered the Law vnto the Iewes, though yet
with all he wrote of Christ, and so in part reuealed vnto
them the Gospell: so Christ and his Ministers, though chiefely
they preach the Gospell, yet in its place they vrge the
law withall, as that which hath its singular vse in furthering
our Christian faith and practise. Wherefore when we speak
of the Gospell as opposite to the Law, tis a Iesuiticall equiuocation to take it in this large sense. For the whole doctrine
of Christ and his Apostles, preached by them, and written
for vs in the Booke of the New Testament, we follow the
Apostle in his dispute of Iustification. Gal. 3. 4. 5. And according
as he doth take the Gospell strictly for the promise
of Iustification and life made vnto man in Christ Iesus. This
is in proper tearmes the Gospell (viz.) that speciall Doctrine
touching mans Redemption and reconciliation with
God by the meanes of Iesus Christ; the Reuelation whereof
was indeed [
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ] the gladdest tidings that were
euer brought to the eare of mortall man. Which Gospell in
strict teārmes the Angels preached. Lue. 2. 10. 11. Behold,
I bring you glad tidings of great ioy, which shall be to all people,
That vnto you is borne this day in the Citie of Dauid, a Sauiour
which is Christ the Lord. And afterward Christ and his
Apostles fully explained the mysteries thereof vnto the
world. According to this necessary distinction, we answer.
That if we take the Gospell in that large Acception; tis true
which Bellarmine hath. That the Gospell containes in it the
Doctrine of workes (viz.) the Morall Law, euen the very
same precepts, prohibitions, threatnings, & promises which
are deliuered in the Law. All which as Christ and his Hpostles
preached: so may all Ministers without blame, yea, they
must, if they will auoid blame, presse the same vpon their

hearers, seasonably and discreetly, that the Law may make
way for the better receiuing and entertainment of Grace in
the Gospell. But hence it followes not, that the Gospell
properly so taken, is to be confounded as one and the same
thing with the Law; because the Law is conjoyned with it
in the preachings and writings of the Ministers of the New
Testament. They still are deuided in their Nature and Offices:
nor hath the Gospell any affinity with the Law in praecepts,
threatnings, or promises. Wherefore when Bellarmine
teacheth vs. That Euangelicall promises be made with
condition of perfect fulfilling the Law. Tis a desperate errour,
and that in the very foundation. You heard his proofes before
recited: see now a little how passing weake they be.
                  
                      1 Mat. 5. Except your righteousnesse, &c. To this wee
answere. The plaine meaning of the place is this. Our righteousnesse
must abound more then that of the Pharises
(that is,) It must not be outside onely as theirs was: but inward
Righteousnesse of the heart, in inward sanctity of the
thoughts and affections, as well as of the outward Action:
or else such our hypocrisie will keepe vs from entring into
Heauen. But doth it hence follow, that because we must be
more perfect then these Pharisees, we must be as perfect in
all things as the Law requires: we must exceed them, ergo,
equall the holinesse of the Law in all points? Because wee
must be syncere without hypocrisie, ergo, we must be perfect
in all things without blame? Such consequents as these, the
Iesuit hath cōcluded out of his own head, not out of the text.
                  
                      Touching that speech of Christ to the yong man. Mat. 19.
and the Lawyer. Matt. 10. That if they did fulfill the Law,
they should liue. We answere, that Christ in so speaking vnto
them did not preach the Gospell: but shewed vnto them
the Legall way to Saluation. For these erring that grand error
of the Iew in seeking for righteousnesse not by faith but
by the works of the Law, seuering the Law, from Christ the
end thereof; (as the Apostle shewes. Rom. 9. 31. 32. & 10. 3.
and so supposing to be saued by doing some good thing.
Christ answeres them in their humour, as euery one should

be answered, that swels with high conceits of his own righteousnesse
& workes, That there was a Law to be kept: and
if they could fully obserue the righteousnes of it, they should
be saued, sending them of purpose to the Law, that they
might be humbled thereby and see their great folly in seekeing
for life by that, which they were so vnable to keepe. Against
which answere theCalv. I
                           •
                        st. lib. 
                           •
                        . cap. 18. § 9. 
                     Iesuit hath nothing to rely; but
stands much in confuting of another answere made by some
of our Diuines. That Christ spake these things Ironically. This
Bellar. seeks to confute; nor do I labor to confirm it; though
it might be justified for any thing he brings to the contrary.
                  3 Vnto those those places of Scripture that euery where 
almost promise life, blessednesse, the fauour of God, vpon
condition of [holinesse in life and conversation, that we mortifie
the lusts of the flesh, walke in the Spirit, ouercome the world,
&c.] We answere, that, Obedience is one thing, perfect obedience
is another. We say that the promises of the Gospell bee all
vpon condition of obedience: but none vpon condition of perobedience.
Tis an iniury done vnto vs, whē they say; we teach
that Euangelicall promises be absolute and without condition,
as if God did promise and giue all vnto vs; and wee doe
nothing for it on our parts. We defend no such dotage. The
promises of the Gospell be conditionall (viz.) Namely vpon
condition of repentance and amendment of life. That we study
to our power to obey God in all things; but this is such a
condition as requires of sincerity and faithfulnesse of endeauour,
not perfection of obedience in the full performance of
euery jot and Tittle of the Law.
                  Vnto the last Argument, from the tenour of the New Couenant 
(viz.) That we must beleeue if we will be saued; ergo,
the promise of the Gospell is with condition of fulfilling the
Law. This is an Argument might make the Cardinals cheeke
as red, as his Cap, were there any shame in him. Faith indeed
is a worke: and this worke is required as a condition of the
promise: but to doe this worke, To beleeue, though it be to
obey Gods Commandement; yet it is not perfectly to fulfill
the whole Law; but perfectly to trust in him, who brings
mercy and pardon for transgressions of the Law.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. II.
                  Of Bellarmines erroneous distinction of the word Gospell.
                  
                     SO much of the first member of the Iesuits distinction,
wherin his sophisticall fraud appeares,
taking the Gospel for the whole doctrine of the
New Testament, published by Christ and his Apostles,
and ergo, confounding the Law & Gospell
as one: because he findes the Law as well as the Gospell
deliuered vnto vs, by our Sauiour and his Ministers: I proceed
to the second branch of it. The Gospell (saith he) is taken
for the grace of the holy Ghost giuen vs in the New Testament:
whereby men are made able to keepe the Law. Tis so taken.
But where is it so taken? The Iesuit cannot tell you that:
[Vt verum fatear (saith he) nomen Evangelij non videtur in
Scripturis uspiam accipi, nisi pro doctrind,] No good reason
for it, in as much as tis euident to all me, that there is great
difference betweene the doctrine of Mans saluation by the
Mercy of God through the Merits of Christ (which is
properly the Gospell) and the graces of the Holy Ghost
bestowed on man in his Regeneration, whereby he is made
able in some measure, to doe that which is good. But the
fault is not so much in the name in calling the grace of God
in vs by the name of Gospell: as in the mis-interpretation of
the matter it selfe. Wherein two errours are committed by
the Iesuite.
                  
                  1 In that he maketh the grace of the New Testament,
to be such strength giuen to man: that thereby he may fulfill
the Law.
                  2 In that he saith. The Law was giuen without grace
to keepe it. In both which assertions their is ambiguity and
Error.
                  For the first. We grant that grace to doe any thing that
is good, is giuen, by the Gospell, not by the Law. The
Law commands: but it giues no strength to Obey, because
it persupposeth that he, to whome the command is giuen,
hath, or ought to haue already in himselfe strength to Obey

it. And Ergo, we confesse it freely, that we [Receaue th
                           •
                        
Spirit not by the workes of the Law: but by the hearing of
Faith preached] as it is Gal. 3. 2. The Donation of the
Spirit in any measure whatsoeuer of his sanctifying graces
is from Christ as a Sauiour, not as a Lawgiuer. Thus when
we agree. That all Graces to doe well is giuen vnto vs by
the Gospell; but next we differ. They teach that the Gospell
gies such grace vnto man, that he may fulfill what the Law
commands: and so be Iustified by it. we deny it, and say
that Grace is giuen by the Gospell, to obey the Law sincerely
without hyppocricy: but not to fulfill it perfectly without infirmities.
In which point the Iesuite failes in his proofes
which he brings.
                  1 Out of those places where contrary Attributes are
ascribed to the Law and Gospell. Vnto the Law. That it is
[the ministry
                     2 Cor. 3. 7. 
                     of death and Condemnation]2 Cor. 3. 6. [Killing
                     Gal. 5. 1. 
                     Letter]
that it (workes wrath) that it is a [Yoake
                     Gal. 5. 1. 
                     of Bondage a
[Testament
                     Rom. 4. 15. 1 Cor. 15. 56. 
                     bringing forth Childeren vnto Bondage]. But
vnto the Gospell,
                     Gal. 4. 24. that it is [The ministry
                     2 Cor. 3. 6. 
                     of Life] and [of Reconciliation]
2 Cor 5. 19.the2 Cor 3. 6. 7. 17. Gal. 4. 16. (Spirit that quickeneth) the (Testament
that bringeth forth Childeren to Liberty) which opposition
Bellarmine will haue to bee, because The Law giues
precepts without affording strength to keepe them: but the
Gospell giues grace to doe what is Commanded. But the Iesuite
is here mistaken. These opposite attributes giuen to the
Law, are ascribed to it in a twofold respect, 1 Inregard of
of the punishment which the Law threatens to offenders
(viz.) Death. In which regard principally the Law is said
to be the ministry of Death, to worke wrath, to be not a dead,
but a Killing Letter: in asmuch as being broken it leaues no
hope to the Transgresser: but a fearefull expectation of
eternall Death and condemnation of the Law vnder the Terrors
whereof it holds them in bondage. But on the Contrary
the Gospell is the ministery of Life, of reconciliation
of the quickening spirit and of Liberty, because it reueales vnto
vs Christ in whom we are restored to Life; from the deserued
Death and condemnation of the Law, vnto Gods fauour,
being deliuered from the wrath to come, vnto liberty;

being freed from slauish feare of Punishment. This is the
cheefe Reason of this opposition of Attributes. Secondly the
next is in regard of Obedience. In which respect the ministry
of the Law is said to be the Ministery of the Letter written
in tabels of stone: but that of the Gospell is called the ministery
of the Spirit which writes the Law in the fleshly tables of the
heart. Because the Law bearely commands: but Ministers
not power to obey; & so is but as a dead Letter without the
Vertue of the Spirit. But in the Gospell grace is giuen from
Christ, who by the Holy Ghost sanctifieth the heart of his
Elect, that they may liue to Righteousnesse in a sincere
thought not euery way exact conformity to the Law of
God. The like answere we giue vnto another proofe of his.
                  2 Out of that place (Iohn 1. 17. The Law came by
Moses: but Grace and truth by Iesus Christ.) that is
(saith Bellarmine) The Law came by Moses without grace
to fulfill it: but grace to keepe it, by Christ.
                  
                  We answere. The true interpretation of these words is
this: Moses deliuered a twofold Law, morall and ceremoniall.
Opposite to these Christ hath brought a twofold priuiledge.
Grace for the morall Law, whereby we vnderstand not only
power giuen to the regenerate in part to obserue this Law,
which strength could not come by the Law it selfe: but also,
much, more Remission of sinnes committed against the
Law and so our Iustification and freedome from the guilt
of sinne and course of the Morall Law. Secondly, Truth for
the Ceremoniall Law the substance being brought in and the
shadowes vanished. wherefore the Iesuite erres greately in
this point, when he makes the grace of the New Testament
to consist in this. That strength is thereby giuen us to fulfill
the Law. The grace of God in the Gospell is chiefely our
Iustification and Redemption from the curse of the Law:
and in the next place strength afforded vs to Obey the Law
in some measure not perfectly as our Aduersaries would haue
it. In the next point he erres as much in saying that the Law
of Moses was giueu without grace to obey it. A false assertion.
For although the Law of it selfe giue not grace:
yet tis certaine that grace was giuen by Christ euen then

when Moses published the Law. Sufficient for the proofe
hereof are. 1 These excellent properties ascribed vnto the
Law of God, as in other places of the old Testament: so spetially
in the Booke of the Psalmes. And amongst them in
the 19. and 119. Psalmes. Where the Law of God is said
to (giue light to the ei
                           •
                        s, to conuert the Soule, to reioice the
Heart &c.) which it could not doe of it selfe, had not the
grace of the Holy Ghost being giuen in these times. without
which the Law could worke no such sauing Effects. 2 Experienee
of those times in the Faith, Patience, and 
                           •
                        bedience,
and all sorts of graces shining in those ancient Saints (who
liued before and after the Law was giuen. Which graces
they receaued from the Holy Ghost, shed vpon their hearts
by vertue of Christs mediation, whereby they receaued
strength to liue holily in Obedience vnto the Law of God.
The difference betweene these times, and those vnder the
Law, is not. That we haue grace and they had none: but only
in the m
                        •
                     asure and extent of the same grace bestowed,
both on vs and them. In those times as the Doctrine of the
Gospell was more obscurely reuealed: so the grace wch accōpanies
it was more sparingly distributed, being confined to
to a Church collected of one nation, and bestowed vpon
that Church in a lesser measure, then now; though yet suffitiently
in that measure. But in the times of the New Testament,
the light shines more brightly, and grace is dispenced
more liberally, being extended indifferently to all Nations
and poured vpon the Godly in a larger Abundance: according
as was promised Ieremiah 31. Though also this comparison
must be restrained vnto whole Churches, what generally
is now done; for no doubt in many particulars some
men vnder the Law exceede for abundance of Grace, many
vnder the Gospell. Wherefore it is a notable iniury vnto the
Bounty of God, and the honour of those Saints of old, to
exclude them from partaking of the Gospell; to affirme that
they were led only by the Spirit of Feare,Thou art our Father and not of loue;
that they receaued not the Spirit of adoption to cry Abba
father as well as wee (though not plentifully as wee;
and soSee Beca
                           •••
                         Tom. 2. Tract. 4. cap. 
                           •
                         Quest. 1. 2. 3. that they were not Sonnes though vnder Tutors and

                     gouernors, as we confesse they were but very Seruants held in
Bondage and excluded from the inheritance of Grace, and
glory till after Christs Death. So that at best their adoptio
                        •
                     
was but conditionall with regard of Time to come: but,
for the presēt, they were handled as slaues fear'd with temporall
punishments allured by temporall rewards, like a heard of
Swine fed with base achors and huskes. These be absurd Errors
bred out of Scripture misvnderstood. Especially that
of Iohn 1. Grace came by Christ. Ergo, not before Christs In
                        
                           •
                        arnation.
A sily Argument. Christ is as old as the World
and his Grace as ancient, as the Name of Man vpon Earth.
grace alwaies came by Crhist, & was in its measure giuen by
him lōg before he appear'd in the flesh. He was euer the head
of his Church, and that his Body, which he alwaies quickned
by the blessed influence of his Spirit ministered therevnto.
Whereby the Godly before as well as since his incarnation
were made liuing members of that his misticall Body.
Wherefore it is apparant, that grace is not to be tied to the
Times of the Gospell and seuered from the Law. Nay, as of
old the Law was not alwaies without grace: so now many
times the Gospel it selfe is without grace Christ himselfe being
a stumbling stone and rocke of offence, the Gospell a Sauiour
of Death to those many vpon whome Grace is not bestowed;
to beleeue and embrace it.
                  I conclude then. That this difference, with our Aduersaries
make betweene the Law and Gospell is false: and that
their Error is pernitious in makind the Gospel to be nothing,
but a Spirit added to the Law that man may fulfill it to his
Iustification. That thus a man may be saued by Christ
through the perfect fulfilling of the Law. Which is a monstrous
and vncouth Doctrine laying an vnsupportable burthen
vpon the conscience of man and hazarding his soule to

                        
                           •
                        ternall distruction, whiles by this meanes he frustrates the
Grace of God in Christ; and withall frustrats his owne
hopes of life expecting to obtaine it by that Law which
he is neuer able to fulfill.
               
            
            
               
               SECT. 5.
               
                  CHAP. I.
                  Iustification by fulfilling the law, ouerthrowes
Christian libertie, the parts of our
Christian libertie.
                  
                     SO much of the Third Argument: The last followes
drawne from the Nature of Christian Liberty.
Which is this.
                  4. Arg.
                     4. Argument, That which ouerthrowes our Christian
Liberty purchased for vs by the death of Christ:
that's no Euangelical, but an Haereticall Doctrine.
                  But Iustification by the workes of the Law ouerthrowes
the spirituall Liberty of Man obtained for him by Christ.
                  
                     Ergò. 'Tis an Haeresie against the Gospell.
                  For the proofe of the minor Proposition, let vs in briefe
consider wherein stands that Liberty wherewith Christ hath
made vs free, that so we may the better perceiue what part
thereof, this doctrine of Iustification by works doth nullifie
and depriue vs of. The Liberty wee haue in Christ is either
in regard of the Life to come, or of this praesent life. The
first is the Liberty of Glory consisting in a fu
                           •
                        l deliuerance from
that state of vanity and misery, both sinfull and painfull, wherevnto
we are now subiect. And not we only, but the whole
Creation, which with vs 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , groaneth and
trauaileth in paine, till with vs it also be deliuered, (
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ;
From the bondage of Corruption, into the Glorious
libertie of the Sonnes of God,) as the Apostle declares Rom. 8.
19. & seq. This Liberty we haue in hope, not in possession.
The next we actually injoy in this life, and that is the Liberty
of Grace. This we may diuide not vnfitly into 3 branches:
1 Freedome from Sinne. 2 Freedome from the Law: 3 Freedome
from Men.
                  
                  1 Our Freedome from Sinne stands in 2 things; 1 In our
deliuerance from the Punishment of Sinne. For whereas

euery Sinne of it's owne Nature brings with it guiltines, and
a sure obligation vnto punishment, binding ouer the transgressor
vnto the paines of God's aeternall wrath by a strōger
chaine then of Steele or Adamant: Christ by his meritorious
satisfaction hath broken these bonds, and ransomed vs from
this fearefull Bondage vnto Hell and destruction. He being
made a Curse for vs, hath redeemed vs from the Curse of the
Law. Gal. 3. 13. That is, By taking on himselfe the punishment
of our Sinnes, in his owne person suffering, and satisfying
the wrath and Iustice of God, he hath once for euer set
vs free from the dreadfull vengeance of God, which we deserue
should fall vpon vs for our Iniquities.
                  2 In our deliuerance from the Power of Sinne, which
though it abide in vs in the Reliques of our corrupted Nature:
yet by the power of the Holy Ghost dwelling in the
Hearts of the Regenerate, it is subdued and kept vnder, that
it doth not reigne nor exercise it's commanding authority
without Controle. So that whereas the Vnregenerate be the
Seruants of Sinne, wholly at the command of Satan and wicked
affections, the Regenerate are freed from this slauery being
ruled and guided by the Spirit of the Lord, which wheresoeuer
it is, there is liberty, as the Apostle speakes, 2 Cor. 3.
17. Liberty from that blindnes wherein we are holden by
Nature, not knowing what the will of God is. Liberty from
that rebellion and infirmity of our Nature, whereby we are,
nor willing, nor able to doe the will of God. From which
we are freed in part by the Spirit of Christ, inlightning our
Mindes, and changing our Hearts. This Liberty from Sinnes
dominion and damnation, S. Paul joynes together, Rom. 8. 2.
(The Law of the Spirit of Life, which is in Christ Iesus, hath
freed me from the Law of Sinne and of Death.) And againe,
Rom. 6. 14. Sinne shall not haue Dominion ouer you, for ye are
not vnder the Law, but vnder Grace.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           2 Our freedome from the Law is eithr from the
                           Ceremoniall
                        
                        
                           or
                        
                        
                           Moral law.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
The Ceremoniall Law contained in it diuerse Carnall Ordinances
(
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ) to endure vntill the time of reformation.Heb. 9. 10.
From all which Christ hath freed the Church
of the New Testament, as namely.
                  1. From the whole burthen of Legall ceremonies whatsoeuer
vsed in the worship of God. Those resemblances are
of no vse now, when the substance it selfe is come in place:
nor may such beggarly and impotent rudiments be sought after,
when greater perfection is to be had. Gal. 4. 9.
                  2. From that restraint in things indifferent, whereunto the
Iewes were tied, but we are not bound. Such are the obseruations
of dayes, of Meates and Drinkes, of Garments, with
the like. Wherein the Iewes were rest
                        •
                     ayned: but our consciences
are left free, being taught that euery Creature of God is
good being sanctified by Prayer and thankesgiuing. 1. Tim. 4.
4. 5. And that to the1 Ti
                           •
                        . 1. 15. 
                     pure all things are pure. Onely
this being obserued, that we abuse not this our Liberty, but
that as we are informed by Faith that all things are lawfull
for vs: so we should be taught by charity to see what are expedient
in regard of others.1 Cor. 10. 23. That a due regard be had of others
infirmity, that nothing be done whereby the truly
weake may be scandalized, as the Apostle commands, Rom 14.
21. By which 
                        •
                     eanes Knowledge on the one side still preserues
vs, that our consciences be not i
                        •
                     snared with superstition,
and charity on the other side shall keepe our Liberty from
degenerating into Licentiousnesse, and vnchristian contempt
of our weake Brethren.
                  2 Our freedome from the Morall law stands in this,
that whereas the Law requires of euery Man, vpon strictest
termes of Necessity, full and compleate Obedience to all
things whatsoeuer contained in it, if he will auoide the punishment
of Hell fire: Christ hath freed all that belieue in
him from this heavy and rigorous exaction of the Law, taking
away from our Consciences this obligation vnto a necessary
fulfilling thereof, vpon paine that we shall forfeit
Heauen if we doe it not. As we shall see more anon.
                  
                     
3 In the last place our Freedome is from Men:This Liberty from humane Constitutions binding the Conscience, is 
                           〈…〉
                        
                      namely
from all power and authority they may claime ouer our consciences:
they may hold our persons in subjection, but they
cannot command ouer our consciences. We acknowledge no
Iurisdiction of Man or Angel ouer our Consciences; but only
that of God that created vs, and of Christ that hath redeemed
vs. Whosoeuer ergo shall impose vpon Man any humane
Traditions, Opinions, or Ordinations whatsoeuer to tye
his conscience vnto obedience by vertue of his own authority,
such a one trenches vpon Gods high Praerogatiue, & vsurpes
tyrannically ouer the soules of Men, according, as at this day,
that Man of Sinne doth. But here we must obserue that Humane
Constitutions be either Ecclesiasticall or Politicall. Ecclesiasticall
concerne either the matter and substance of God's
& worship when any thing is invented by Man, & commanded,
wherein and whereby to worship God. 2 The Manner
and externall order of God's worship in the determination
of indifferent circumstances tending to decencie and comelinesse.
                  
                  For the former we renounce and reiect all humane authority
whatsoeuer, that shall without warrant from the Scriptures,
prescribe vnto the Church any doctrine to be receiued
as a diuine Trueth or Custome, Ceremony or Practise whatsoeuer,
to be obserued as a proper part of God's most holy
worship. According as our reformed Churches haue happily
recouered their Liberty by breaking asunder those cordes, &
casting away that Yoake of false doctrine of Superstitions,

                        
                           ••
                        r
                           •
                        moniall will-worships, wherewith not Christ, but Anti-Christ
had insnared and oppressed the Church. And they
haue God's owne warrant for so doing, Isay. 29. 13. ratified
and explained by Christ, Mat. 15, 9. (In vaine they worship
me, teaching for doctrine Mens precepts:) which was a thing
contrary to God's expresse commandement, Ezech. 20. 18.

                        ••
                     . (Walke yee not in the ordinances of your Fathers, neither
obserue their manners, nor defile your selues with their Idoles:
I am the Lord your God, walke in my Statutes, and keepe my
Iudgements and doe them.)
                  
                     
For the later, namely humane Constitutions concerning
indifferent Circumstances in God's worship, tending to
orderly decency, agreeable to the simplicity and purity of
the Gospell: herein wee must acknowledge the authority
of the Church though not ouer our Consciences to binde
them: yet ouer our practises to order & limit them. Accordingly
as also we doe in the other branch of humane Obediences.
viz. Politicall or ciuill, comprising all Law, touching
lawfull things made for the gouernance of Kingdomes;
or inferior states by the supreame Magistrate, that
hath authority so to doe. Wherevnto we (must be subject,
not because of wrath onely,
                     Rom. 13. 5. 
                     but also for conscience sake.) For
Conscience sake, not because the highest Monarch on Earth
hath power ouer the Conscience of his meanest subject; to
binde it by vertue of his owne authority: but because God
hath established the Magistrates authority and commanded
subjects Obedience in lawfull things, and therefore we
cannot disobey them without breach of Conscience, in disobeying
and viol
                        •
                     ting also Gods Commandement. But
otherwise for any immediate power over the conscience, to
restraine the inward liberty thereof, no man without praesumption
may arrogate its nor any without slauish basenes
yeeld to another,1 Cor. 
                           〈…〉
                        
                      as the Apostle commands (ye are bought
with a price, be not yee seruants of men.) This is in breife the
Doctrine of Christian or spirituall l
                           •
                        berty, which we call
Christian: 1. from the cause of it, Christ, by whose purchase
we enioye it. 2. From the subject of it, Christians, in opposition
to the Iewes, who had not this liberty in all parts
of it as we haue. Namely in freedome from the Ceremoniall
Law, and restraint in things indifferent. In all other parts
they in their measure were freed by Christ as well as we.
Againe we call it spirituall in opposition to ciuill and bodily
Liberty: because it stands in the freedome of So
                           •
                        le and
Conscience, not in the freedome of the outward man; the
bondage and subjection whereof is no impeachment to this
spirituall freedome: As Anabaptisticall Libertines would

perswade the world contrary to the Apostles decision. 1.
Cor. 7. 22. (He that is called in the Lord being a seruant,
is the Lords Free-man.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. II.
                  Iustification by workes subjects vs to the rigour
and curse of the Law
                  
                     WE are now in the next place to see which braunch
of our liberty is cut off by the doctrine of Iustification
by workes. Not to meddle with others
whereat it giues a backblow, but to take that
which it directly strikes at: we say, it destroies our Liberty
from the moral Law, which stands heerein, that we are not
obliged vnto the perfect fulfilling of that Law, vpon paine
of aeternall Daemnation, if we doe it not. This gratious liberty
Christ hath enfranchised vs withall, whosoeuer beleiue
in him: and they that now teach we are justified by
workes of the Law, doe rob our Consciences of this heauenly
Freedome, bringing vs again vnder that miserable bōdage
vnto the Law, wherein all men are holden, which are in
state of infidelity & vnregeneration, from whom the Law in
extremest rigour exacts perfect Obediēce if they will be
sau
                        •
                     d.
                  For the cleering heereof, this in the first place is manifest.
That he which will be justified by the workes of the Law,
is necessarily tied to fulfill the whole Law: seeing ti's impossible
the Law should justifie them that transgresse it. In
the next place then we must proue, that for a mans Conscience
to be thus tyed to the fulfilling of the Law for the obtayning
of Iustification, is an vnsupportable yoake of spirituall
Bondage, contrary to that liberty, wherewith Christ
hath made euery beleeuer free. This shall appeare in confirming
of this Proportion.
                  
                  A Man regenerate endued with true faith in Christ Iesus,

is not bound in Conscience vnto the fulfilling of the whole Law
for his Iustification.
                  This Proposition seemes very strange vnto our adversaries
and to be nothing else but a ground-plot wherein to build all
licenciousnes and Libertinisme, as if we did discharge men of
all Alleageance to God & subjection to his Lawes. But
their Calumnies are not sufficient confutations of orthodox
Doctrine: for the stopping of their mouthes we throw them
this distinction, whereon they may gnaw while they breake
their teeth, before they bite it in pieces. Mans conscience
stands bound vnto the Law of God in a two fold obligation.
Either
                  1. Of Obedience, that according to the measure of Grace
receiued he endevour to the vtmost of his power to
liue conformably to the Law of God in all things.
                  2. Of fulfilling the Law, that in euery jot and tittle he
obserue all things whatsoeuer it commands vpon paine of
everlasting condemnation for the least transgression.
                  We teach that no true Beleeuer is freed from the Obligation
vnto Obedience, but so farre as by grace giuen him he
is enabled, he ought to striue to the vtmost, to performe all
duties towards God & man commanded in the Law, if he
will justifie his faith to be sound, without Hypocrisy. And ergò
our Doctrine is no doctrine of Licentiousnes. But on the other
side we teach, That euery true beleeuer is freed from
that obligation vnto the fulfilling of the Law, for the attaining
of life & justification by it. Which materiall difference
for the cleering of our doctrine not obserued or rather
suppressed byLib. 4. de Iustif. cap. 5. 
                     Bellarmine, causeth the Iesuite to labour
much in a needlesse dispute, to proue against vs, That a
Christian man is tyed to the obseruation of the morall Law.
He tells vs that Christ is a Law-giuer aswell as a Redeemer
of his Church, praescribing orders for all in common, for each
one in particular. That he is a Iudge that sentenceth according
to Law. That he is a King that ruleth ouer subjects
vnto a Law. That Christ by his comming did not destroy, but

fulfill the Law, expounded it & enioyned it to be observed by vs.
That his Apostles vrge it in euery Epistle. That a Christian
man sinniug offends against the Law, & ergò is bound to keepe
the Law. In all which the Iesuite encounters his owne
phantasy & not our doctrine which is not wounded by such
misguided weapons. For we grant without striuing, that
every Christian is tyed to obserue the Morall Law, and we
averre that it is a most vnchristian & Iesuiticall slaunder to
affirme, as he doth, that we teach (Christianum
                     Ibid 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      
                     nulli Legi
obnoxium & subjectum esse in Conscientia coram Deo.)
Nay we teach that he is bound to obey to the vtmost of his
power: and from this obligation no authority of Man or
Angell, Pope or Deuill, can discharge him. So much we
grant the Arguments alleaged by the Cardinall doe enforce,
and nothing else. They proue Obedience necessary to a beleeuing
Christian: but they can neuer proue perfect fulfilling
of the Law, to be necessarily required of him. From this
heauy burthen Christ hath eased the shoulders of all such as
are in him by a liuely Faith, of whom God doth no longer
exact perfect Obedience to his Law in those strict and
rigorous termes. that they shall be accursed if they fulfill
it not. This we proue by these Scriptures.
                  1. Gal, 1. 2. 3. (Stand fast (saith the Apostle) in the
Liberty wherein Christ hath made vs free, and be not entangled
againe with the yoake of bondage.) But what is this
Yoake of Bondage? Is it onely the obseruation of the Ceremoniall
Law? No. That was indeed part of the yoake
which the Apostles sought to lay on the Consciences of the
Galatians. But 'twas the least and the lightest part, the
weightiest burthen was the fulfilling of the Morall Law,
wherevnto by the doctrine of the false Apostles, the Galatians
stood obliged. This is plaine by the Text in the words
following. (Behold, I Paul say vnto you that if you be circū
                        cised,
Christ shall profit you nothing. For I testifie againe to
euery man, which is circumcised, that he is bound to keepe the
whole Law) The Apostles dispute is heere evident. The

                     Galatians may not be circumcised, not obserue the Ceremoniall
Law. why? Because if they did Christ should not
profit them at all. But what reason is there for this, that
Circumcision & the Ceremonies should frustrate the benefit
of Christs death? The Apostle alleageth a good reason, because
the obseruation of the Ceremoniall Law, tied them
also to the fulfilling of the whole Morall Law. The Argument
is thus framed.
                  They who are bound to keep the whole Law haue no profit
at all by Christ.
                  But they who are circumcised, are bound to keepe the whole
Law. ergo,
                  They that be circumcised haue not profit at all in Christ.
                  The minor in this Argument is the expresse words of the
Text, and the proofe of it is euident in Reason, because the
retaining of Legall ceremonies did in effect abolish Christ's
comming in the Flesh, who by his comming in the Flesh,
had abolished them. And ergo, they who in reviving
them, denied Christ's death, had no meanes at all to be
saued: but only by the fulfilling of the Morall Law. Wherevnto
they were necessarily bound, if they meant not to perish.
Which reason yet is of no force before Christ his comming,
and ergo then circumcision and other legall ceremonies,
did not lay vpon the Iewes such a strict obligation to fulfill
the whole Law. The Maior Proposition is the very reason
of the Apostles Enthymeme; thus. (Men circumcised are
bound to keep the whole Law: Ergo, Christ shall not profit them)
The Reason of the consequence is this Proposition, (Whosoeuer
are bound to keepe the whole Law, Christ profiteth them nothing
at all.) This Argument, and the Reason thereof, will hardly
passe with approbation in the Iesuites Schooles, (Men are
bound to the whole Law, ergo, Christ shall not profit them.)
Nay, will they reply: That's a non sequitur. For by that doctrine,
Christ's death hath cancelled that streight obligation
of fulfilling the Law: But euery one that beleeues the promise
of saluation in Christ, is yet notwithstanding obliged to

fulfill the whole Morall law. For this is (say they) the very
Condition wherevpon he must haue benefit by the promise,
euen (Lib. 4. cap. 2. 
                     Perfecta Mandatorum 
                           •
                        bservatio:) and therefore
he is so farre from being freed by Christ from this obligation
vnto the Law, that for a certaine, except he fulfill it,
he shall neuer be saved; asLib. 4. cap. 7. (Si Promissio vitae aeternae est conditionata, ut cap. 1. probavimus, certè necessarium est implere Conditionem, si quis sal
                        
                           •
                        us fieri vel
                           ••
                        . 
                           ••
                        s;
                           •
                         iustus non est liber ab ebligatione Legis divine: certè nisi eam impleat 
                           •
                        onsaluabitur,) 
                     Bellarmine peremptorily and
bloodily determines. These Men when they list are wondrous
mercifull toward Sinners, and can teach them trickes
by very easie meanes, to merit Heauen and Remission of
Sinnes. But their crueltie betrayes their kindnes in other
matters; in as much as when all comes to the vpshot, a Sinner
is driuen to this. If he wilbe saued by Christ, he must as
he is bound, perfectly keepe the whole: law else there's no hope for
him. This is cold comfort for the poore beleeuer: but 'tis
happy we haue not Iesuites, Pharaoh's taske-masters, set ouer
vs, to exact the whole Tale of Bricke: but a Iesus, who hath
freed our soules from this bitter thraldome and deliuered vs
from the power of so rigorous and strict commands of the
Law. We beleeue an Apostle of Christ against all the Sycophants
of Rome, and tell them that they giue the holy Ghost
the lie, when they teach that in beleeuers the obligation to
keepe the whole Law stands still in full force & vertue not
discharged by the death of Christ; directly contrarie to this
Argument of the Apostle. (Ye are bound to keep the whole law,
ergo, Christ shall not profit you.) Whence we argue thus.
Whosoeuer are bound to keepe the whole law, to such Christ is
vnprofitable.
                  
                  
                     But vnto true beleeuers Christ is not vnprofitable. Ergo
                  
                  
                     True beleeuers are not bound to keepe the whole law.
A conclusion most certaine, as from these irrefutable praemisses:
so from most euident Reason. For if such as beleeue in
Christ, (Who through the Spirit waite for the hope of Righteousness
through Faith) as the Apostle speakes here, v. 5; if such
be yet bound to fulfill the whole Law for their Iustification,
to what end is it to belieue in Christ, vnto Righteousnesse and
Iustification? If when all is doen we must be saued by doing,

what profit comes there by beleeuing? Can the conscience
find any benefit and comfort at all in Christ, when we shall
come to this wofull Conclusion; that notwithstanding there
is in Scripture much talke of Faith, of Christ, of Promises, of
Grace; yet all this will bring vs no commoditie, except this
condition be performed on our parts,
                     If the Law still rule ouer vs as seruants requiring the praescribed taske: or else shaking the Whip, and threatning stripes, & not as ouer sonne commanding Obedience. that we perfectly keepe
the Law of God: If any thing in the World, this is to imprison
the soule in wretchlesse slauerie, and to lay the conscience
vpon the racke of continuall Terrors, if Heauen be
not to be had but vpon such hard termes. And this is most
apparantlie to frustrate all benefit of Christ, of Promise, of
Faith, of Grace, of the whole worke of Redemption, seeing in
fine 'tis the Law that we must liue by, and not by Faith: the
perfect fulfilling of the Law must make vs righteous in
God's sight: and not our beleeuing in Christ, that we may
be justified. For he that keepes the whole Law, is thereby
righteous, and by nothing els. Here 'tis but a bare shift to
say, Though we be bound to fulfil the Law; yet Christ profits
vs, because he giues vs Grace to performe our Band in
exact Obedience. This evasion might it stand good, Saint
Paul were indeed finally confuted as a weake disputant. But
the Errour of this hath bin touched before, and if nothing els
were said, this Apostolicall Argument is sufficient to refute
it. I proceed to other Scriptures.
                  2. 1 Tim 1. 9. (Ye know that the Law is good, if a
man vse it lawfully; knowing this, that the Law is not made for
a righteous man, but for the lawlesse and disobedient, for the vngodly,
for Sinners, for vnholy, and prophane, &c.) The Law
is not giuen to the Righteous. How must this bee vnderstood?
Is it not giuen (quoad directionem) as a Rule prescribing
what is to be done, what is not to be done? Yes,
vve all agree in that. Hovv is it then not giuen? 'Tis ansvvered,
(quoad coactionem & maledictionem) as it compels to
obedience, and curseth the Transgressors. Thus is it not giuen
to the Iust. This ansvver is full of ambiguitie, and needes
some explication, that vve may knovv vvhat is the coaction
                     
or compelling force of the Lavv, from vvhich the Iust are
freed. In vnfolding vvhereof our aduersaries and vve differ.
Whether are in the right, we shal see by the proposal of both
our Interpretations. They say, (The Law hath no coactiue or
compelling power ouer the Iust, because the Iust doe obey it,
spoute, libentèer, & alacritèr, & ex instinctu charitatis) that is,
vvillinglie, out of Loue: but it hath a compulsiue force ouer the
vniust, because they recalcitrant & cogi quodammodò debent
ad obsequium) that is, they obey vnvvillinglie, being
forced to it by Terrors and Threatnings, and therefore; The
law rules not ouer the iust, as seruants who obey for feare: but
sonnes who obey for Loue.
                  
                  We expound it otherwise. The Law hath not coactiue
power ouer the just, because the just (that is) true beleeuers
in Christ Iesus, are freed from the necessity of perfectly fulfilling
it, for the obtaining of saluation. But the Law hath
a coactiue power ouer the vnjust & vnbeleeuers, because
they are obliged vnto the perfect fulfilling thereof, or else
to be certainly accursed. And ergo we say, the Law command's
ouer the just as ouer Sonnes requiring of them a
faithfull and willing endeavour: but it commands ouer the
vnjust, as ouer Seruants, of whom it exacts the vttermost
farthing, and vpon the legall default threatens eternall malediction.
The difference then betwixt them & vs, is this.
They make the coaction of the Law to consist in the manner
or quality of mans obedience to it. The Law compels
when men obey vnwillingly. We make the coaction
of the Law to consist in the quality of the command, &
condition, wherevpon Obedience is required. The Law
then compels, when it exacts full obedience vpon poenalty
praecisely threatned to the disobedient. Wherein the trueth
is manifestly on our side. For 'tis plaine, that compulsion
in a Law must be taken in opposition to direction, not persuation,
for Lawes persuade not, but command. For if we
speake properly a Law cannot be sai'd to compell those, to
whom 'tis giuen, as if by any real and physicall operation it

did enforce them to obedience.So a King in vnder the Direction: not the Compulsion of the law; because not tyed to the Penalty. It proposeth what is to be
done, it setteth before a man, the punishment for disobedience:
but it workes not on the will of man, to force it one
way, or other. Wherefore if we know what direction in a
Law is; we shall soone know what Compultion is. Direction
(as all agree) is the bare praescription, of what is to
be done, or left vndone. Compulsion, that is, the exaction
of obedience vpon paenalty to be inflicted. What other
coactiue force there is in a Law, no man can imagine. Well
then to apply this. The just are sub directione Legis: but
not sub coactione. This must of necessity be vnderstood
thus, the just are not vnder the coactiue power of God's
Law, 
                        ••
                     cause it doth not exact of them full obedience vpon
paenalty of aeternall death, to be otherwise inflicted on
them. As it doth exact of the vnjust. For otherwise there
will be no difference betweene the just and the vnjust in regard
of this coactiue power of the Law, if both the one and
the other be obliged to yeeld, alike, perfect obedience vpon
the like paenalty. In this case the Law will be as coactine
to one, as the other, exacting aequall obedience, vpon
aequall termes, both of the just and vnjust. (viz) obey
fully in all things: or you shall be cursed. The Sonne and
Seruant shall be all one, and the Law shall still command,
over the children, with as much terrour, as ouer the Bondslaue.
There is no difference in the world; in our adversaries
doctrine, both sorts are bound to obey perfectly, or else
certainly they shall not be saued. So that the Law of itselfe
shall be as rigorous towards one; as the other. But
we know the Scriptures offer vnto vs more mercy: and that
Christ hath discharged vs from this rigour of the Law, vnder
which euery one, that is out of him in the state of vnbeleefe
is holden in bondage. As to the difference they make
(the iust obey willingly, the vnjust vnwillingly, & ergo the
Law compels these and not those) this is nothing to the purpose.
For it alters not the nature of the Law, that it is obeyed
with diuers affections. The Law is the same, for its

command & authority; howsoeuer it be obeyed willingly
or vnwillingly; that matters not. The Law ceaseth not to
be coactiue, because ti's willingly obeyed: euen as a slaue
ceaseth not to be vnder the coaction & compelling power
of his Master, though he loue his master; and out of a willing
mind be content to abide in thraldome. And as Adam,
though he obeyed the Law willingly; yet was vnder the
coactiue power of it; because he was tyed to obey it, or else
he should certainly die the death for his transgression of it.
Wherefore I conclude, that the just are not freed from the
Laws direction, nor from the Lawes compulsion, as it compels
or enioynes them absolute obedience in all things, and
for default thereof threatens the vnauoydeable malediction
of Gods aeternall wrath.
                  3 Lastly for proofe of this point we haue those places
formerly alleaged, Rom. 6. 14. [We are not vnder the Law, but
vnder Grace.] Gal. 5. 18. [If we be led by the spirit, we are not
vnder the Law.]cum v. 11. 2 Cor. 3. 17. [Now the Lord is the Spirit, and
where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is Liberty.] Gal. 3. 13.
[Christ hath redeemed vs from the Curse of the Law, being
made acurse for vs.] All which, withRom. 7. 1. 2. &c. other the like, doe establish
this orthodoxe Doctrine; That beleeuers haue ohtained
freedome by Christ, from the rigour of the Morall Law, and
are not any longer bound in conscience to the perfect fulfilling
thereof vpon this assured perill: that if they keepe it not, they shall
not be saued. We might stand longer vpon each Testimony:
but let that which we haue said, suffice for the vindicating of
our conscience from that Torture and Bondage wherewith
these 
                        
                           ••
                        opish Doctors would ensnare vs. The knowledge of
which our Liberty, is not to giue vs occasion of security or licentiousnesse,
as these Men calumniate: but to restore peace &
spirituall rest vnto our soules, knowing that we are now deliuered
from the necessity of obeying, or of perishing, which
before we were in Christ, lay more heauy vpon our soules
then a mountaine of Lead. That so being freed from this
thraldome, we might serue him who hath freed vs, thankfully,

and chearefully, obeying him in all duty, by whom wee
haue obtained this glorious priuiledge; that whereas perfect
obedience was sometimes strictly exacted of vs: now our sincere,
though imperfect indeauours, shalbe mercifully accepted
at our hands.
               
            
            
               SECT. 6.
               
                  CHAP. I.
                  The reconciliation of that seeming opposition, betweene
S. Paul, and S. Iames in this point
of Iustification.
                  
                     THus much of this Argument and of the first
Branch of mans Righteousnes, whereby if it were
possible he should be justified. viz. His Obedience
to the Law of God. By which meanes
we haue shewed, no flesh shall be justified in Gods sight.
We are to proceed vnto the text branch heereof.2 Conclusion. viz. Mans
satisfaction for his transgression of the Law. Wherein we
haue also to proue, that a Sinner cannot be acquitted before
god's judgment seat, by pleading any satisfaction, that himselfe
can make for his offences.
                  But in our passing vnto that point we are to giue you
warning of that stumbling stone which St. Iames, (as it may
seeme) hath layed in our way: lest any should dash his
Faith vpon it; and fall, as our adnersaries haue done into
that Errour of Iustification by workes. That blessed Apostle,
in the second Chapter of his Epistle, seemes not only
to giue occasion: but directly to teach this doctrine of Iustification
by workes. For in the 21. ver. &c. He sayeth expressly,
that Abraham was justified by workes when he
offered his sonne Isaack vpon the altar; and also that Rahab
was in like manner justified by workes, when she entertained
the spies. Whence also he sets downe ver. 22. a generall
Conclusion. That a Man is justified by workes and not
by faith alone. Now in shew, nothing can be spoken more
contrary to St. Paule his Doctrine in his Epistle to the Romans
                     
and else-where. For in the fourth chap. speaking of
the same example of Abraham, he saieth cleane contrary,
that Abraham was not justified by workes, for then he
might haue boasted. ver. 2. And in the 3 chap. treating
generally of mans Iustification, by faith; after a strong dispute
he drawes forth this conclusion. That a man is justified
by Faith without the workes of the Law. v. 28. Which
Conclusion is in appearance contradictory to that of St. Iames.
This harsh discord betweene these Apostles seemes vnto
some not possible to be sweetned by any qualification, who
knowing that the Holy Ghost neuer forgets himselfe haue
concluded that if the spirit of trueth spake by St. Paul it
was doubtlesse the spirit of error, that spake by the author of
this Epistle of Iames. For this cause most likely it was
doubted of in ancient times, asHist. Eccl. 2. cap. 22. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     Eusebius and Hier
                           •
                        me
witnes. But yet then also publiquely allowed (
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     )
in many Churches, and euer since receaued in all:
Out of which for the same cause Luther and others of
his followers, since him would againe throw it forth, accounting
the author of it to haue built not gold and siluer; but
straw and stubble vpon the foundation. Erasmus assents
to Luther. And Musculus agrees with them both,
who in his Commentaries vpon the fourth to the Romans,
speakes his mind simply, that he sees not how Iames and
Paul can agree together, and therefore he turnes out St.
Iames for the wrangler, supposing that this Iames was one
of the Desciples of Iames the Apostle, the brother of
Christ, who vnder pretence of his Master's name and authority,
continually snarled at the Apostle Paul, and opposed
his Doctrine. Howbeit his Epistle got credit in after
times, (cum veritas paulatim inualescente mendacio proculcari
caeperit.) That is. When error by degrees praevailed against
the trueth. But this medicine is worse then the disease,
and is rather violence, then skill, thus to cut the knot
where it cannot bee readily vntied. A safer and milder
course may be holden; and some meanes found out for the

according of this grand difference without robbing the
Church of somuch pretious Treasure, of diuine knowledg,
as is stored vp in this Epistle. Wherefore both they of the
Romish and we of the reformed Churches, admitting this Epistle
for canonical doe each of vs search after, a fit reconciliation
betweene the Apostles. But they and we betweene
our selues are irreconcileable in our seuerall reconcileations
of them. They reconcile them thus. By distinguishing.
1. of Iustification. 2 of Workes. Iustification (say they) of
two sortes.
                  
                  1. The first when a man of vnjust is made just and holy,
by the Infusion of Grace, or the Habit of Charitie.
                  2. The 2. When a man of just is made more just by the
augmentation of the Habit of Grace first giuen vnto
him.
                  Againe they diuide workes into two sortes.
                  1. Some goe before Faith, being performed by the meere
strength of nature, and free-will without the helpe of
grace; and such workes as these are not meritorious.
                  2. Some follow Faith, being performed by the aide and
assistance of grace giuen vnto man: and such workes
as these be meritorious.
                  
                     These distinctions praepared, the worke is now ready for
the soddering, which they finish artificially glewing togeather
the proposition of the two Apostles in this sorte. St. Paul
saieth that Abraham, and all men are justified by Faith without
workes. This (say they) is to be vnderstood of the first
Iustification, and of workes done before Faith, without grace,
by the strength of nature. So that the meaning of Paule's
proposition (Abraham and all men, are justified by faith without
workes is this. Neither Abraham, nor any other can deserue
the Grace of Sanctification, whereby of vnjust and
vnholy they be made just and holy, by any workes done by them,
when they are Naturall Men, destitute of Grace, but only by
Faith in Christ Iesus, or thus. No Man merits Grace to
make him a good Man of a Bad, by any thing he doth before he

beleeue in Christ; but by beleeuing he obtaineth this. On the other
side S. Iames saith, that (Abraham and all others are iustified
by Workes, not by Faith only.) This (say the Romanists)
is meant of the second Iustification, and of such workes as are
done after Faith, by the aide of Grace: So the meaning of the
Proposition shalbe this. Abraham and other Men being
once made good and just, deserue to be made better, and more
just by such good workes as they performe through the helpe of
Grace giuen vnto them; & not by faith only. Being once sanctified,
they deserue the increase of Sanctificatiō through that merit
of their Faith, and good workes out of Faith and Charity.
                  Is not this difference between these Apostles finely accorded
think you? They will now walke together being in this
sort made friends through the mediation of the Schoole-men.
But it is otherwise. They are so far from reconciling them,
that they haue abused them both, and set them farther asunder
making them speake what they neuer meant. Neither
in S. Paul nor S. Iames is there any ground at all, whereon
to raise such an interpretation of their words. And therefore
we respect this reconcilement, as the shifting quercke of
a Scholeman's braine, that hath no footing at all in the text.
Which we doe vpon these Reasons.
                  1. That distinction of Iustification (that is of Sanctification)
into the first giuing of it, and the after increase of it,
(howsoeuer tolerable in other matters) is vtterly to no purpose,
as it is applied vnto the doctrine of these Apostles.
Who when they speake of Iustification of a sinner in God's
sight doe vnderstand thereby the Remission of Sinnes
through the imputation of Christ's Righteousnes, and not
the infusion, or increase of inherent Sanctity in the soule of
man. This confusion of Iustification with sanctification is a
prime error of our adversaries in this article, as hath bin
shewed, in clearing the acceptions of the word Iustification:
and shall be shewed more at large in handling the forme of
our Iustification,
                  
                  2. The distinction of Iustification taken in their owne

sense, is falselie applied to St. Iames as if he spake of the 2.
Iustification, and to St. Paul as if he spake of the first. For
firstLib. 4 dé Iust. cap. 18. Lorin 
                           〈◊〉
                         Iac. 
                     Bellarmine himselfe being judge St. Iames in the example
of Rahab speakes of the first Iustification, because (as
he saieth) she was then, at the first made a beleeuer of an infidell
a righteous woman of an harlot. And againe Paul,
he speakes of the 2. Iustification in the example of Abraham,
which is alleaged by both the Apostles. Heere's then
a confusion insteed of a distiction. Paul speakes of the
first, Iames speakes of the 2. and yet both do speake of both
Iustifications. Againe when they say Iames speakes of the
second Iustification, whereby of just a man becomes more
just, ti's a groundlesse imagination for asmuch as it was to
no purpose for the Apostle Iames to treat of the second Iustification,
whereby men grow better: when those Hypocrites,
with whom he had to doe, had erred from their first iustification,
whereby they were not, as yet, made good, as the
learnedIackson of lust. Faith. S. 2. cap. 6. 
                     Iackson obserues. Nay there is not in all St.
Iames his dispute, any s
                        •
                     llable, that may giue any just suspicion
that by Iustification, he meanes the increase of inhaerent
Iustice.Leeo supra 
                           ••
                        
                        tat. Bellarmine catcheth at the clause. v. 22.
(By workes Faith was made perfect) which is, in the Iesuites
construction, Abraham's inhaerent justice, begun by faith,
receiued increase and perfection by his workes) But this is onlie
the Iesuites phrensie. Abraham his faith and his Righteousnes,
whereof his Faith is but a part, was not made but
declared to be perfect, by so perfect a worke) which it
brought forth, as euen Lorinus another of that sect expounds
it orthodoxly.
                  
                  3 Thirdly, that distinction of workes done before Faith,
without grace, and after Faith by grace, is to as litle purpose,
as the former; in this matter of our Iustification. Heretofore
we haue touched vpon that distinction and shewed
the vanitie thereof, in limiting St. Paul to workes done
without grace, when simplie he concludes all workes from
our Iustification. And St. Iames though he require workes

of grace to be ioyned with that Faith which must justifie vs:
yet he giues them not that place and office in our Iustification,
from which Paul doth exclude them, and wherein our
adversaries would establish them, as it shall appeare anon.
                  Leauing then this sophisticall reconcilement coined by our
aduersaries I come to those reconciliations which are made
by our diuines; wherein we shall haue better satisfaction vpon
better grounds. Two waies there are whereby this
seeming difference is by our Men reconciled.
                  
                  1. The 1. by distinguishing the word (
                        •
                     
                     Iustification)

                        
                           which may be taken either
                           1, For the absolution of a Sinner
in Gods iudgement.
                        
                        
                           2, For the declaration of a mans
Righteousnes before men.
                        
                     
                  
                  This distinction is certaine and hath its ground in Scripture
which vseth the word Iustifie in both acceptions, for
the quitting of vs in Gods sight, and for the manifestation
of our innocency before man against accusation or suspicion
of faultines. They applie this distinction for the reconciling
of the two Apostles. Thus. St. Paul speakes of Iustification,
(in foro Dei) S. Iames speakes of Iustification (in
foro hominis) A man is justified by faith without workes saieth
S. Paul: that is in God's sight, a man obtaines remission of
Sinnes and is reputed just only for his Faith in Christ, not
for his workes sake. A man is justified by workes; and not by
Faith onely saieth S. Iames that is, in mans sight we are declared
to be just by our good workes, not by our Faith onely:
which with other inward and invisible Graces, are
made visible vnto man onely in the good workes, which
they see vs performe. That this application is not vnfit for
to reconcile this difference, may be shewed by the parts.
                  1. For S. Paul, ti's agreed on all sides that he speakes
of mans iustification in God's sight. Rom. 3. v. 20.
                  2. For S. Iames we are to shew that with just probability
he may be vnderstood of the declaration of our Iustification
and righteousnes before men. For proofe whereof

the Text affords vs these reasons.
                  1. Verse. 18. Shew me thy Faith without thy Workes and
I will shew thee my Faith by my workes. Where the true Christian
speaking to the Hypocriticall boaster of his Faith, requires
of him a declaration of his faith and Iustification thereby,
by a reall proofe, not a verball profession, promising
for his part to manifest and approue the trueth of his owne
Faith by his good workes. Whence it appeares, that before
man, none can justifie the soundnes of his Faith: but by
his workes thene proceeding. 2. V. 21. Abraham is saied
to be justified when he offered vp his sonne Isaak vpon the
Altar. Now ti's manifest that Abraham was justified in
Gods sight long before; euen. 25. yeares Gen. 15. 6. Therefore
by that admirable worke of his in offering his Sonne he
was declared before all the world to be a just man and a
true Beleeuer. And for this purpose did God tempt Abraham
in that triall of his Faith: that thereby all beleeuers,
might behold a rare patterne of a liuely and justifying
Faith, and that Abraham was not without good cause called
the Father of the Faithfull.
                  
                  3. V. 22. It is saied that Abrahams faith wrought
with his worke and by workes was his faith made perfect.
Which in the iudgement of popish
                     Lor
                           ••
                         in lacob. 
                     Expositors themselues, is
to be vnderstood of the manifestation of Abrahams faith
by his workes. His Faith directed his workes: his workes
manifested the power and perfection of his Faith.
                  It is not then without good probability of Reason, that
Caluin and other Expositors on our side, haue giuen this solution
vnto this doubt.Lib. 4 cap. 18. Bellarmine labours against it and
would faine proue that justification cannot be taken heere
pro declaratione Iustitiae. But his Argument cannot much
trouble any intelligent reader, and therefore I spare to trouble
you with his sophistry.
                  
                  This now is the first way of reconciling the places.
Howbeit the trueth is, that although this may be defended
against any thing that our aduersaries objected to the contrary:

yet many and those very learned divines chose rather
to tread in another path and more neerely to presse the Apostles
steps; whom also in this point 
                        •
                      willingly follow.
                  2 The second way then of reconciling these places, is by
distinguishing of the word (Faith) which is taken in a doubled
sense.
                  1. First for that Faith,
                     Gal. 5. 6. which is true and liuing (
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Faith which worketh through
loue) and is fruitfull in all manner of Obedience.
                  2. Secondly for that Faith which is false and dead, being
onely a bare acknowledgment of the trueth, of all Articles
of Religion accompanied with an outward Formality
of Profession: but yet destitute of sincere Obedience.
                  
                  This distinction of this word (Faith) is certaine by the
Scriptures, as hath heretofore bin shewed in handling of that
Grace. Our Men now apply it thus. S. Paul when he affirmes
that we are justified by Faith onely, speakes of that Faith
which is true and liuing working by Charity. S. Iames when
he denies a Man is justified by Faith only, he disputes against
that Faith which is false and dead, without power to bring
forth any good workes. So that the Apostles speake no contradictions,
where Paul teacheth we are iustified by a true
Faith, and S. Iames affirmes we are not justified by a false
Faith. Againe S. Paul saith we are not iustified by workes.
S. Iames saith we are justified by Workes. Neither is here any
contradiction at all. For S. Iames vnderstands by Workes,
a (working Faith) in opposition to the idle and dead Faith before-spoken
of (by a Metonymie of the Effect.) Whence it
is plaine that these two Propositions (Wee are not iustified by
Workes) which is Pauls, and (We are iustified by a working
Faith) which is Iames, doe sweetly consort together. Paul
seuers Works from our Iustification, but not from our Faith.
Iames ioyned Workes to our Faith, but not to our Iustification.
To make this a litle plainer by a similitude or twaine:
There is great difference betweene these two sayings, (A

Man liues by a Reasonable soule) and (A Man liues by Reason.)
The former is true, and shewes vs what qualities and
power are ess
                           •
                        ntiall vnto that soule, whereby a Man liues. But
the later is false, because we liue not by the quality, or power
of Reason, though we liue by that soule which hath that quality
necessarily belonging to it, without which it is no humane
soule. So also in these Propositions, (Planta vivit per animan
                           •
                        
auctricem) and (Planta vivit per augmentationem)
each Puny can tell that the former is true, and the other false.
For although in the Vegetatiue soule whereby Plants liue,
there be necessarilie required to the (Being) of it, those 3 faculties
of Nourishment, Growth, and Procreation: yet it is not
the facultie of growing that giues life vnto Plants, for they
liue when they grow not. In like manner. These two Propositions
(we are iustified by a working Faith) & (We are iustified
by Workes) differ much. The first is true, and shewes vnto
vs what qualities are necessarilie required vnto the (Being) of
that Faith, whereby the Iust shall liue. Namely, that beside
the power of beleeuing in the Promise, there be also an Habituall
Pronnesse and Resolution vnto the doing of all good
Workes, joined with it. But the later Proposition is false. For
although true Faith be equallie as apt to worke in bringing
forth Vniuersall Obedience to God's will; as it is apt to beleeue
and trust perfectlie vnto God's promises: yet neuerthelesse
we are not justified by it as it brings forth good Workes;
but as it embraceth the promises of the Gospel. Now then
Iames affirmes that which is true, that (We are iustified by a
working Faith,) and S. Paul denies that which is false: viz.
(That we are iustified by workes.
                  
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. II.
                  The confirmation of the Orthodoxe reconciliation of S.
Paul and S. Iames, by a Logicall Analysis
of S. Iames his disputation in
his second Chapter.
                  
                     THis Reconciliation is the fairest, and hath the
most certaine grounds in the text. It will, I
doubt not, appeare so vnto you, when it shall
be cleered from these Cavils that can be made
against it. There are but only two things in it
that may occasion our Aduersaries to quarrell. The first is
touching the word (Faith) we say that S. Iames speakes of a
false and counterfeit Faith. They say he speakes of that
which is true, though Dead without Workes. This is one
point.Bell. lib. 1. de 
                           •
                        ust. cap 15.
                  
                  The second is touching the interpretation of the word
(Workes) vsed by S. Iames when he saith, (We are iustified by
Workes.) This we interpret by a Metonymie of the Effect
for the Cause, We are justified by a working Faith, by that
Faith which is apt to declare and shew it selfe in all good
Workes. This interpretation may happily proue distastefull
to their nicer Palates, who are very readie when it fits their
humour, to grate sore vpon the bare words and letter of a
Text. These cauils remoued, this reconciliation will appeare
to be sure and good. For the accomplishment of this I suppose
nothing will be more commodious, then to present vnto
you a briefe resolution of the whole dispute of S. Iames
touching Faith, that by a plaine and true exposition thereof
we may more easily discouer the cauils and sophisticall forgeries
wherewith our Adversaries haue pestered this place of
Scripture. The disputation of S. Iames beginnes at the 14. v.
of the second Chapt. to the end thereof.
                  The scope and summe whereof is. A sharpe reprehens
                           •
                        ion of
hypocriticall Faith of vaine Men as they are called (v.

20) Which in the Apostles time vnder pretence of Religion
thought they might liue as they list. Two extremes there
were, whereunto these Iewes, to whom the Apostle writes,
were mis-led by false teachers and their own corruptions. The
1. That notwithstanding Faith in Christ; they were bound
to fulfill the whole Law of Moses; Against which Paul disputes
in his Epistle to the Gal. who also were infected with
that Leven. The other was, that Faith in Christ was sufficient
without any regard of Obedience, to the Law: so they
beleeued the Gospell, acknowledging the Articles of Religion
for true, & made an outward profession all should be well,
albeit in the meane Time Sanctitie and syncere Obedience
were quite neglected. The former Errour brought them in
Bondage: this made them licentious pleasing haeresie if any
other, whereof there were and will be alwayes store of sectaries
who content themselues to haue a forme of Godlines,
but deny the power thereof. Against such hypocrites & vain
Boasters of false Faith and false Religion, S. Iames disputes in
this place, shewing plainly that such men leaned on a staffe
of Reed, deceiuing their owne selues with a counterfeit & shadow
of true Christian Faith insteed of the substance. The reproofe
with the maine Reason is expressed by way of interrogation
in the (14. v.) What doth it profit my Brethren,
though a Man say he haue (as many then did, and alwaies
will say, boasting falselie of that which they haue not in
truth,) And haue not workes; that is, Obedience to God's
Will, whereby to approue that Faith he boasts of? Can
that Faith saue him? so that Faith vvithout Workes a sauing
Faith, that vvill bring a Man to Heauen? These sharpe
Interrogations must be resolued into their strong Negations.
And so vve haue these tvvo Propositions. 1 Containing the
maine summe of the Apostle's dispute: The other a generall
Reason of it. TheArg. of S. Iames. is this. Faith without Obedience is vnprofitable.
The second prouing the first, is this. Faith without Obedience
will not saue a Man. The vvhole Argument is.
                  That Faith which will not saue a man is vnprofitable, of
no vse.
                  
                     
But the Faith which is without Obedience will not
saue: Ergo
                  Faith without Obedience is vnprofitable.
                  
                     The Maior of this Argument vvill easilie be granted.
Th
                        •
                     t it is an v
                        •
                     pro
                        •
                     itable Faith which will not bring a Man to
life and Happines. But hovv doth S. Iames proue the Minor.
That a Faith without workes will not doe that? though it scarse
need any proofe▪ yet because hypocrisie is euer armed vvith
sophistrie, for a plainer Conviction, the Apostle proues it by
this manner of Argumentation.
                  That Faith which saues a Man is a true Faith.
                  But a Faith without workes is not a true Faith. Ergo
                  A Faith without workes will not saue a Man.
                  The Maier is euident to all that haue Reason. The Minor
S. Iames proues by diuerse Arguments.
                  
                  1. The first is contained v. 15. 16. 17. and it is dravvne 
                     
                        •
                      pari, from comparison vvith another like vertue. Namely
Charity tovvards the poore. The Argument is thus. If Charity
towards the poore professed in Words, but without workes be
counterfeit, then Faith in God professed in like manner without
Obedience is also counterfeite not true. But Charity towards
the poore in words professed without deeds is a counterfeit Charity.
Ergo, Faith in God without Obedience is a counterfeit and
false Faith.
                  The Reason of the maior Proposition is euident, from the
similitude that is betweene all Vertues and Graces. There is
no vertue, but men may counterfeit and falsely arrogate it to
themselues; as they may boast of a false Faith, so also (as Salomon
and experience speakes) of a false Liberality, false Valour,
false Prudence, &c. Now there is but one way to discouer
this counterfeiting in any kind, and that is to goe
from words to workes, from praesumptions and boastings
to actions. This way all count most certaine, nor will any
man beleiue words against workes, or be persuaded by
faire speaches, that the habites of vertues and graces be truly
seated in his mind, whose tongue tells vs they be so: but

his doeings confute his sayings. Wherefore the Apostle in
his comparison proceedes on an vndeniable ground. Now
for the minor (that the Charity which is rich in good words,
and poore in almesdeeds, is not true but counterfeit pitty) the
Apostle shewes by an ordinary instance (If a brother or sister
be naked, and destitute of daily food) that is. If a beleiuing
Christian want food and raiment or other necessaries (and
one of you say vnto them, depart in peace, and be ye warmed and
filled) If he giue him kind words, Alas poore soule I pitty thee
and wish thee well, I Would I had to giue thee, goe in God's
name where thou mayest be releiued, and so let him passe with
a few pittifull Complements, notwithstanding yee giue them
not those things which are needfull for the body: what doth it
profit. Is the poore man's backe euer the warmer? or his
belly the 
                        ••
                     ller, with a few windy complements? Can such
a man persuade any that he hath in him indeed the bowells
of mercie and compassion towards the needy, when they
find such cold entertainment at his Gates: 'Tis manifest
that this is but a meere mockery, and that such pittifull
words come not from a heart that's truely mercifull. The
Apostle now applies this touching Charity, vnto Faith.
v. 17. Euen so Faith if it haue not workes is dead being alone.
As that Charity, so also that Faith which men professe without
Obedience is false and fained, and therefore vnprofitable
to saue a man. It is dead: How must this be vnderstood?
Faith is a quality of the soule, and qualities are then
saide to be dead, when they are extinguished. As if we
should say such a man's Charity is dead; it is because he hath
lost it; that which was in him is abolished. But this is not
the meaning. For then when St. Iames saieth that Faith
is dead being alone: his meaning should be that Faith seuered
from workes, is no Faith at all: but quite extinguished. Now
this is not so. For there's a Faith seuered from workes in
Hypocrites, Haeretiques, Reprobates and Deuills. Which
Faith is a generall assent to all diuine truthes: and this Faith
in them hath a true being, but no sauing vse. Wherefore.

it is called 
                        •
                      dead faith in regard of the effect: because 'tis
nothing availeable to bring them in whom it is, to Life and
Saluation as a true and liu
                        •
                     ng Faith is. Heere our Aduersaries
haue much strange Contemplation, telling vs that
Faith without workes though it be a dead Faith, yet 'tis a
true Faith. Euen as an Instrument is a true Instrument,
though it be not vsed. So that in their Philosophy ti's one
and the same true Faith which is dead without, and liuing
with workes. Euen as 'tis one and the same Body which
liues with the Soule and is dead without it: or as water is
the same whether it stand still in a Cisterne or runne in a
Riuer. Whence they proceed to discourse that Charity is
the forme of Faith: and conclude that it is not the inward
and Essentiall forme of it, as the Soule is the forme of a man
(for that workes are not essentiall to Faith) nor the accidentall
forme as whitenes is of Paper; because Faith according
to their Schooles, is in the vnderstanding, and Charity in the
will▪
                      But it is the externall Forme of it, because it giues to
Faith a merit and worthines for the deserving of Heauen.
These fond speculations of the Forme and merit of Faith I
passe by now, hauing touched vpon them heeretofore. To
that which they say. That a liuing Faith, and a dead
Faith is one and the same true Faith: 'tis vtterly false, they
differ asmuch as Light and Darknes. 1. In their subject. a
dead Faith is in the Reprobate Men and Deuills. A liuing
Faith only in the Elect. 2. In their Object. A dead Faith
assents to diuine Reuelations as barely true or good onely
in the generall: a liuing Faith assents to them, as truer and
better in themselues; then any thing that can be set against
them. 3, in their Nature. A dead Faith is no sanctifying
Grace: but a common gift of Creation as in the deuill; of ordinary
illumination as in Reprobate Men. A liuing Faith is a
sanctifying Grace, a part of inhaerent holines wrought in
the heart by the speciall power of the Holy Ghost. All which
haue bin heeretofore cleared in handling the Nature of
Faith. Wherefore vnto those arguments or Sophismes rather,

whichLib. 1. de Iust. cap. 15. 
                     Bellarmine brings to proue that Iames speakes
of a true diuine, infused, Catholique, Christian Faith, though
it be dead faith; I answere breifely. That we grant a dead
Faith to be a true Faith: but it is in its kind. Because it hath
a true being in men and deuils, in whom it is, and ti's directed
toward true objects: But it is not that true Faith which
is Catholique Christian & sauing. This is of another kind, and
in comparison of this, that other is but a meere shadow and
counterfeit resemblance of true Faith. Wherefore when
those Hypocrites accounted themselues to haue that faith
which is truely Christian and sauing, S. Iames shewes them,
that this their faith which was alone naked of Obedience,
was nothing so: but a Faith of another kind, a dead faith,
hauing onely a false shew of a true and liuing faith. This
of the first Argument.
                  2 The 2d Arg. of S. Iames. Argument is contained. v. 18. being drawne
from an impossibility, in prouing the trueth of it. The
Argument stands thus.
                  That Faith, which is truely Christian may be shewen and
proued so to be.
                  But a Faith without workes cannot be demonstrated to be
a true faith.
                  Ergo. A Faith without workes is no true Faith.
                  The major is omitted as most euident of itselfe. Because
there is no morall vertue, or grace of the Holy Ghost truely
planted in the heart: but it may be knowne by some externall
Actions, which it is apt to bring forth. Euen as life
is knowne by breathing, or beating of the Pulse. The
trueth of an inuisible Grace hath it's demonstration in visible
workes. But now for the Minor, S. Iames proues that
Faith without Obedience cannot appeare by any proofe to
be true faith. Which he doth in a Dialogue betweene a
true beleeuer and a Hypocrite. Yea a man may say, thou hast
Faith, and I haue Workes shew me thy faith without workes,
and I will shew thee my faith by my workes. That is. Thou
saiest thou hast a true Faith, though thou hast no workes: I

say I haue true faith because I haue workes. Come wee
now to the triall, and let it appeare who saieth true, thou or
I. If thou saiest true; proue thy Faith by something or other
to be true. Shew me thy Faith
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         or 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         not 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . The former reading is most agreeable to the Art gument of the Apostle▪ So the Syriack-Beza, the Vulgar, the French, our last Translators. Pareus 
                           •
                        ollowes the other reading 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . and so Piscator. But they giue no good reason of this she is so doing. The change was easie from 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         into 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . without thy wotkes.
Workes thou hast none, whereby to shew thy faith, make
it then appeare by something else. But that's impossible.
Where workes are wanring, ther's no demonstration else
whereby to justifie the trueth of faith. And therefore thou
art driuen to confesse that thou vainely boastest of that
which thou hast not. But on the otherside (saieth the true
Beleeuer) I can make good, that which I say, prouing that
my faith is true by my workes. I will shew thee my faith by
my workes. My sincere Obedience is a reall demonstration:
that my beleife is no verball ostentation and vaine bragg.
This proofe of S. Iames is very con
                        •
                     incing, and gripes the
Consciences of Hypocrites, smiting them with shame and
confusion when they come to this triall; and so haue their
false and fraudulent hearts laied open. But heere it will
be asked what workes doe demonstrate the trueth of faith,
and also how they doe proue it. Whereto wee answere
Workes are of two sortes. 1. Ordinary, such workes of
Sanctity & Obedience, as are required to a holy Conuersation.
2. Extraordinary. viz, Miracles. We say S. Iames
vnderstands the former, and those onely: our aduersaries
conclude both. But erroneously, for asmuch as S. Iames
speakes not of the doctrine of faith, but of the Grace of
faith. The Grace requires good workes of Piety and Charity
as perpetually necessary for the conmirmation of it's
Trueth. So doeth not the doctrine of Faith alwaies
require Miraculous workes for the confirmation of it's
divinity: But oney at the first publication thereof. Wherefore
Lorinus is very ridiculous, who vpon this place
tels vs, that they may justly demaund of vs Haeretiques
(For so they bedust vs) Miracles for the confirmation
of our new and false Doctrine. Indeed were it new and
false their request were not vnreasonable, that we should

make our doctrine credible by doing of Miracles. But sure
the Iesuite iudgeth of our doctrine by his ovvne, vvhich
did he not suspect for a nevv Error, vvee see no reason they
should still require Miracles for confirmation of an olde
Truth For our selues we seeke not the aide of a lying Wonder
to vphold a true doctrine: nor doe we count it any disgrace
at all to our Religion, that we cannot by our Faith so much
as cure a lame Horse, as the Iesuite out ofDe lib. arbi
                           •
                        
                      
                     Erasmus scoffes
at vs. Now surely if such a beast as Bellarmine's deuout
Mare, want helpe to set her on all foure, we cannot be yet so
well perswaded of that vertue of Romish Faith, as to thinke
that a Frier will doe more good at such a jadish miracle, then
a Farrier. But whereas the Iesuite goes forward to require of
vs the other sort of good workes, of Piety and Charity for
the demonstration of our Faith hee hath reason so to doe,
though not so much as he imagines, when hee chargeth vs
with neglect of good Workes and vnbridled licentiousnesse.
Would to God we could cleere our practise from such neglect,
as well as we can our doctrine from teaching it. But yet,
by their fauour, if we come to comparisons, we know no
Reason why we should runne behind the dore, as more ashamed
of our practises, then they may justly be of theirs, in
which case we boldly bid him amongst them; that is without
sinne to cast the first stone at vs. To proceed. Seeing
Workes of Obedience are the proof
                           •
                        s of a true Faith, it must
be considered in what sort they proue it. For may not good
Workes be counterfeited as well as Faith? I answere. That
in this triall the judgment of verity & infallibility belongeth
vnto God, who only knowes the heart and conscience, being
able to discerne euery secret working of the Soule, and so to
judge exactly whether or no all outward appearances come
from inward syncerity. But for the judgement of Charity that
belongs to vs. If we behold in any man the Workes of Obedience
to God's will; of such a Man we are to judge that
he hath true Faith. Though yet herein we must as farre as
humane frailtie will giue leaue, iudge also not according to

appearance, but iudge righteous iudgment. Mens practises
must be examined: if hypocrisie bewray it self, (as 'tis hard for
a Counterfeit not to forget himself at some one time or other,
if he be duly obserued) there Charity must not be blinde: it
must see and censure it. 'Tis not a charitable, but a peruerse
Iudgment to call euill good: nor is it any offence to call that
a barren or bad Tree, that beares either no fruit at all, or none
but bad; And thus of this second Argument of the Apostle,
that these Hypocrites Faith was vaine, because, when it comes
to the proofe, it cannot be iustified to be found and good.
                  3 TheArg of 
                           •
                        . Iames. Argument is v. 19. from the example of the diuels
themselues, in whom there is a Faith without Workes,
as well in hypocrites: and ergo it is in neither of them a true
Faith. The Argument is brought in to confute a Cauill
with the hypocrite might make against the former reason.
True might he say, I cannot shew my Faith by my
Workes: yet for all that I haue a true Faith. And why? Because
I beleeue the Articles of Religion, that there is one
God, with the rest. Hereto the Apostle replies. That such a
beliefe is not a true Christian Faith, because it is to be found
euen in the diuels. The Argument runnes thus.
                  That faith which is in the diuels is no true Christian
faith.
                  But a bare assent to the Articles of Religion without Obedience
is in the Diuels. Ergo
                  A bare assent without Obedience is no true Christian
faith.
                  The Maior of this Argument will easily be granted. That
the diuels haue not that true Faith which is required of a
Christian Man to his saluation. The Minor is also euident.
That the diuels doe belieue the Articles of Christian Religion.
S. Iames instances in one for the rest, namely the Article of
the Godhead, whereto the Diuels assent aswell as Hypocriticall
Men. Thou beleeuest that there is one God, saith the true
beleeuer to the hypocrite, pleading that he beleeued the Articles
of Faith, Thou doest well. 'Tis a laudable and good thing

to acknowledge the Truth of Religion. But vvithall thou
must knovv that the diuels deserue as much commendation
for this beleefe, as thou doest. The diuels also beleeue. Euen
they confesse the Truth of that and the other Articles of Religion.
An euident proofe vvhereof is this, that they tremble
at the povver, vvrath, and iustice of God, and the remembrance
of the last iudgment, vvhich did they not beleeue, they
vvould not feare: but novv they expect it vvith Horrour, because
they knovv it vvill come vpon them. Whence 'tis plain
that the Faith of Hypocrites and diuels is all one, neither better
then other, both vnfruitfull to bring forth Obedience,
both vnprofitable to bring vnto saluation, and therefore neither
of them that true Faith, vvhich is Christian and sauing.
This Argument of the Apostles, pincheth our Aduersaries
sore, vvho stiffly maintaine that S. Iames speakes of a True,
though of a dead Faith. For they can not for shame say that
there is a true Faith in the diuels and damned Spirits. But
yet S. Iames hath concluded that they haue that dead Faith
which hypocrites boast of. What then? Then a dead Faith is
no true faith, as ourBell. lib. 1. d
                           •
                         Iustif. cap. 15. Adversaries affirme it is. Wherefore to
helpe themselues, they deny that it is one and the same dead
Faith, which is in hypocrites and euill Spirits. Indeed ex parte
obiecti, they grant that the Faith of diuels is as true and catholique
as that of wicked Men, because they both beleeue the
the same things. And also in regard of the effects, they grant
their Faith to be alike, because both be vnfruitfull. But not ex
parte subiecti, so they say there's much difference. The Faith
of diuels is of one sort, and the Faith of hypocrites of another.
But heere they make a litle to bold with the blessed Apostle,
ouerturning the force of his argument, to vphold their
owne fancie. The Apostle proues against Hypocrites that
their idle Faith without Obedience is not true sauing Faith.
Why? Because the diuel's idle Faith destitute of Obedience
is no true sauing Faith. But now. Is the Faith of diuels & hypocrites
of the same kinde and Nature. Yea, or no? No, they
be not, they be of a diuerse nature, say the Adversaries. Let it

be then considered, what force there is in the Apostle's Argument.
Faith without workes in Deuils saues them not. Ergo
Faith without workes in wicked Men, saues them not. Might
not one prompted by a Iesuite, reply vpon the Apostle. Nay
by your leaue, your Argument is inconsequent, because you
doe not dispute, ad idem. Faith in the diuels is of one kinde,
Faith in Hypocrites is of another: & therefore though Faith
without works cannot saue diuels; yet Faith without works
may saue Men. Thus were the Apostle's Argument laide in
the dust, if these Mens Opinions may stand for good. But
would you know what distinction these Men make betweene
the faith of diuels and wicked Men, which St 
                     Iames
takes for the same. 'Tis thus. First the Faith of Euill Men is
free, the Faith of diuels is compelled and extorted from them
by a kinde of force. So
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      
                     Bellarm. Fides hominum malorum
libera est, captivante nimir ùm piâ voluntate intellectum in obsequium
Christi: Fides vero Daemonum est coacta, & extracta
ab ipsàrerum Evidentiâ. Quod insinuavit idem Iacobus dicens.
Daemones credunt, & contremiscunt. Nos enim non credimus
contremiscentes, id est, inviti & coacti, sed spontè & libentèr.
Wicked Men beleeue freely and willingly. Why? Because
their pious and godly Will captiuates their vnderstanding
to the Obedience of Christ, so causing it to assent vnto the
Truth. The diuels beleeue vpon compulsion, being forced
to it by the Euidence of the things themselues. Which Saint
Iames intimates, They beleeue and tremble: that is, they beleeue
against their Wills. Is not this a shamelesse Iesuite
that will say any thing to patch vp a broken cause? For be
not these absurd Contradictions to say, that wicked Men
haue godly Wills, that by a pious Motion of the Will, their
vnderstanding is captiuated to the Obedience of Christ, and
yet they be hypocrites and wicked Men still. No Man can relish
such assertions, who knowes how averse and fromward
the will of Men is to embrace any thing that is of God, till
such time as it be regenerate by sanctifying Grace. It is
therefore without all reason, to affirme that wicked Men beleeue

willinglie, and 'tis against all experience, which shewes
that vngodly Men are vtterly as vnwilling to beleue any truth
that makes against them in any kinde whatsoeuer; as a beare
is to be brought to the stake. Indeed in matters that like them,
or such as be of an indifferent Nature, neither fauouring nor
crossing their Corruptions, they'll be apt to beleeue, though
not out of a pious affection, as the Iesuite dreames: but out
of selfe-loue and other selfe-considerations. But take them
in any other point of Religion, that doth any way grate vpon
their wicked affections, all the perswasion and instruction
in the World, cannot worke them to a beleefe of it, till the
Conscience (spite of their hearts) be convicted by some notable
Euidence of the Trueth. Now what else can be said of
the diuels; who will as willinglie beleeue what makes for
them, (if any thing did) or what makes not against them; as
any wicked man can doe? And they are as vnwilling to beleeue
any thing, that makes against them, as any wicked Man
is. Nor would they beleeue it, did not the cleerenes of diuine
Reuelations convince them of the certaine Truth thereof.
So that there is no difference at all in this respect, as the
one, so the other beleeue vnwillingly; as diuels, so wicked
Men beleeue with trembling. The diuels indeed with greater
horror, as their beleefe and knowledge is alwaies more
distinct then Mans: but yet Men with horror too, when their
Consciences by fits are awakened to behold the woes, that
are comming vpon them. Vnto this difference ofBecanus. 
                     Bell.
others adde two more. Namely: 1 That the Faith of diuels
is naturall; that of wicked Men supernaturall and infused.
2 That the Faith of Diuels is dishonest, the Faith of wicked
Men is an honest Faith. Whereto we say thus much. That
touching the first difference, we grant indeed that the Faith
of the diuels is not supernaturall except it be in regard of the
obiect. The faculties which they receiued in their creation are
not so farre corrupted in them: but that they are able to assent
vnto, and apprehend diuine Reuelations without further
helpe, then of their owne naturall Abilities. Man in his fall

sustained greater losse in the spirituall powers of his soule, &
therefore stan
                        •
                     s in need of helpe. Which helpe is afforded euen
vnto the vngodly; but this is by ordinary illumination,
not by speciall infusion of any sanctifying Grace. Enlightned
they are aboue the ordinary pitch of naturall blindnes: but
not aboue that whereto a meere naturall vnderstanding may
be aduanced. Yea were Mans Vnderstanding raised vp to
that perfection which is in diuels: this were more then Nature,
yet lesse then Grace. This common gift of Illumination
bestowed on wicked Men, but not on diuels, is no proofe
that their Faith is of a diuerse kinde. As to the last difference
we are not so far studied in Moralities, as to conceiue wherein
the dishonestie of the diuel's Faith, and the honestie of Hypocrites
Faith doth lie. To ordinarie vnderstanding it seemes
euery way as honest & commendable a matter, for a wicked
fiend, as for a wicked Man, to beleeue what God reueales
vnto him. If not, we must expect to be further informed by
these Iesuites Men that are better read in that part of Ethickes,
whether diabolicall or hypocriticall.
                  
                  4.
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         of S. Iames. This of the Apostle's third Argument. we come to the
fourth.
                  The 4. Argument is contained in the 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25
verses. Before which the Apostle repeates his maine Conclusion.
That Faith without Obedience is a false and dead
Faith. But wilt thou know O
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         as an empty Vessell without liquor 
                     vaine Man (or hypocrite) that
Faith without workes is dead? v. 20. For the convincing of
him further, he proceeds to a new Argument to proue it vnto
him. The Argument is this.
                  That Faith which will not iustifie a Man is a false and
dead Faith.
                  But the Faith which is without workes will not iustifie.
a Man. Ergo
                  'Tis a dead and a false Faith.
                  The Maior the Apostle omits as most evident of it selfe.
The Minor he proues by an induction of two Examples.
Thus.
                  
                     
If Abraham and Rahab were instified by a working
faith, thou that Faith which is alone without workes
will not iustifie.
                  But A
                        •
                     raham and Rahab were so iustified, viz. by a
working Faith. Ergo
                  Faith without workes will not iustifie a man.
                  The Reason of the Consequence is manifest. Because as
Abraham and Rahab: so all other must be justified. The
meanes of justification and Life, were euer one and the same
for all men. Which also the Apostle intimates in that clause
v. 21. Was not our Father Abraham &c. implying that
as the Father, so also the children, the whole stocke and generation
of the Faithfull, were and are still justified by one
vniforme meanes. The two instances the Apostle vrges,
that of Abraham. v. 21. 22. 23. that of Rahab. v. 25.
The conclusion with aequally issues from them both, he interserts
in the middest, after the allegation of Abrahams Example.
v. 24. I shall goe ouer them as they lie in the
Text.
                  In the example of Abraham, the Apostle v. 21. sets
downe this proposition. That Abraham was justified by a
working Faith. For this interrogatiues Was not our Father
Abraham justified by workes? must be resolued into an affirmatiue
Abraham our Father was justified by workes. That
is a working Faith. Which proposition the Apostle confirmeth
by it's parts. 1. Shewing that Abrahams Faith was
an operatiue faith declared and approued by his workes.
Secondly, prouing that by such a working Faith Abraham
was justified in God's sight. That the faith of Abraham
was operatiue, full of life and power to bring forth Obedience
vnto God, the Apostle alleageth one instance insteed of
all the 
                        •
                     est to proue it. And that is that singular worke of
Obedience vnto God's command. When he offered vp his
sonne Isaak vpon the Altar. Many other workes there were
performed by Abraham abundantly justifying the trueth
of his Faith: But the Apostle chooseth this aboue all other,

as that worke which was of purpose enjoyned him by God
for a triall of his faith. Wherein Abraham mightily ouer
                     
                        •
                     oming
all those strong temptations to disobedience and infidelity,
made it appeare, that his faith was not an idle, dead
and empty Speculation, but an actiue and working Grace.
Wherefore the Apostle adds ver. 22. Seest thou how faith
wrought with his workes, and by workes was faith made perfect?
That is as in other workes of that holy Patriarch, so specially
in that sacrificing his sonne, all that can see, may
plainely behold, the strength and life of his faith. Faith
wrought with his workes. That is. His faith directed and
supported him in the doing of that worke, as the Apostle
Paul expounds it. Heb. 11. 17 By faith Abraham offered
vp Isaack: that worke had not binne done, if faith
had not wrought it. In euery circumstance thereof faith
did all in all from the beginning of the worke to the end.
This interpretation is most simple and generally receaued.
Faith wrought with: That is. In or by his workes, vnto the
performance whereof the force of faith was in spaeciall
manner assesting. Pareus reads the words by a
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      
                     tmesis.
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . (that is)

                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      (scilicet) 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , (that is) Faith being with his
workes wrought. What? his Iustification. But this construction
seemes somewhat hard and not necessary for this
place. The other sense is much plainer, shewing vs by
or with what vertue Abraham's workes were wrought.
viz. By the vertue of his faith, which in most powerfull
manner incited and inabled him to obey. The Apostle goes
forward, And by workes was faith made perfect. That is declared
to be perfect.
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      For workes did not perfect Abrahams
Faith essentially, in asmuch as long before this time, it
was perfect, as is plaine in that Abraham was justified by
it 25 yeares before the oblation of his sonne Isaack, and also
by the strength of his Faith had done many excellent workes
and obtained great blessings at the hand of God. So that
the offering vp of Isaack was not the cause but a fruite of

the perfection of Abrahams Faith, the great difficulty of that
worke shewed the singular petfection of that Grace which
was able so to encounter and conquer it. The goodnes of
the fruit doth not worke, but declare the goodnes that is in
the tree; the qualities of the fruits alwaies depending vpon
the nature of the Tree: but not on the contrary. Thus then
the first part of the Proposition is plainly proved by the Apostle.
That Abrahams Faith was a liuely and working
Faith declaring and approuing it's owne trueth by the
workes of his Obedience.
                  
                  The next part. Namely. That Abraham was justified in
God's sight, by such a working Faith, he proue
                        •
                     . 1. By a Testimony
of Scripture. 2. By an effect or consequent thereof,
Both are expressed in the 23. v. The first in these words.
And the Scripture was fulfilled which sayeth. Abraham beleeued
God, and it was imputed vnto him for Righteousnes.
The application of this testimony is very heedfully to be
obserued, because it serues excellently for the clearing of
the Apostles meaning, when he saieth we are justified by
workes. And the Scripture was fulfilled saieth S. Iames.
When? At the time, that Isaack was offered. But was it
not fulfilled before that time? Yes. Many yeares, when
the promise of the blessed seed was made vnto him, as appeares
Gen. 15. 6. Whence this testimony is taken. How
was it then fulfilled at the oblation of Isaack? Thus. The
Trueth of that which was verified before, was then againe
confirmed by a new and euident experiment. Well. Thus
much is plaine enough. But heere now the difficulty is,
how this Scripture is applyed vnto the Apostles former dispute.
In the 21. v. He saieth that Abraham was justified
by Workes when he offered Isaack. How proues he, that
he was so justified? why by this testimony. Because the
Scripture was fulfil
                        •
                     ed at that time, which saieth, Abraham
beleeued God &c. Marke then the Apostle's Argument.
When Abraham offered Isaack the Scripture was fulfilled
which saieth Abraham was iustified by faith. For that's the

mea
                        •
                     ing of that Scripture. Ergo, Abraham when he offered
Isaac
                           •
                         was justified by workes. This at first sight s
                        •
                     emeth
farre set, and not onely besides, but quite contrary to the
Apostles purpose to proue he was then justified by workes,
because the Scripture saieth, he was then iustified by Faith.
But vpon due consideration, in
                        •
                     erence appeares to be euident,
and the agreement easie. The Apostle and the Scripture
alleaged, haue one and the same meaning: the Scripture
saieth. He was iustified by Faith, meaning, as all confesse,
a working Faith fruitefull in Obedience. S. Iames affirmes
the very same, saying, that he was justified by workes, that
is. Metonymically by a working Faith▪
                      And therefore the
Apostle rightly alleageth the Scripture for confirmation of
his assertion: the Scripture witnessing. That by Faith he
was iustified; the Apostle expounding what manner of Faith
it meanes. Namely a Faith with workes or a working Faith.
So that the application of this Testimony vnto that time of
offering vp of Isaack is most excellent: because then it appeared
manifestly what manner of Faith it was, wherefore
God had accounted him just in former times. Without
this Metonymie it appeares not that there is any force in
the application of this Scripture and the Argument from
thence. The Scripture witnesseth that Abraham was then
justified by Faith. Ergo 'tis true, that he was then justified
by Workes. What consequence is there in this Argument
except we expound S. Iames by that metonymie,
Workes, that is a working Faith? And so the Argument
holdes firme. Take it otherwise, as our aduersaries would
haue it, or, to speake trueth, according to the former interpretation
of our diuines; it breeds an absurd construction
either way. Abraham in offering Isaack was justified by
workes, that is, secundâ Iustificatione of good he was made
better. How is that proued? By Scripture. Because the
Scripture saieth. That at that time he was justified by faith.
That is, primâ Iustificatione of bad he became good. Is not
this most apparent Non-sence. Againe according to the

Interpretations of our diuines, Abraham at the offering vp
of Isaack was iustified by workes (that is, say they) declared
iust before men. How is that proued? by Scripture.
Because the Scripture saieth. That at that time, he was
justified by Faith. that is, accounted just in God's sight.
In which kind of arguing I must confesse I apprehend not
how there is any tolerable consequence. Wherefore we
expound S. Iames metonymically, putting the effect for the
cause; workes, for a working Faith, as the necessary connexion
of the text enforced vs. Nor is there any harshnes
at all, nor violent straining in this figure, when two things
of necessary and neere dependance one vpon the other, (as
workes, and a working Faith) are put one for another. Neither
haue our aduersaries more cause to complaine of vs for
this figuratiue interpretation of workes, then we haue of
them for their figuratiue interpretation of faith. For when
we are saied to be justified by faith, they vnderstand it dispositiuè
& meritoriè not formaliterè Faith in itselfe is not our
sanctification, nor yet the cause of it. But it merits the
bestowing of it, and disposeth vs to receaue it. Let reason
iudge now, which is the harsher exposition. Theirs? faith
iustifies (that is) Faith is a disposition in vs deseruing that
God should sanctifie vs by infusion of the habit of Charity. Or
ours? Workes justifie, that is, the Faith whereby we are acquited
in God's sight, is a working Faith. Thus much of this
Testimonie of Scripture prouing that Abraham was justified
by a true and working faith,
                  
                  In the next place the Apostle shewes it by a visible effect
or Consequent that followed vpon his Iustification expressed
in the next words: And he was called the freind of God. A
high prerogatiue, for God the Creator to reckon of a poore
mortall Man as his familiar freind; but so entire and true
was the faith of Abraham, so vpright was his heart, that
God not onely gratiously accounted it to him for Righteousnes:
but also in token of that gratious acceptance entered into
a league with Abraham taking him for his especiall freind

and confederate; A League of
                        •
                     ensiue and defensiue. God
would be a Freind to Abraham [Thou shalt be a blessing] and
a freind of Abrahams Freinds. I will blesse them that blesse
thee;
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      and an Enemy of Abrahams enemies: I will curse them
that u
                           •
                        se thee. Which League of freindship with Abraham
before the offering vp of Isaack was therevpon by solemne
protestation and oath renued, as we haue it Gen. 22. v.
16. &c.
                  Thus we haue this first example of Abraham. From
thence the Apostle proceeds to a generall conclusion in the
next verse (24) Yee see then how that by workes a man is iustified,
and not by Faith only. That is. Therefore it is euident.
That a man is iustified by a working faith: not by a faith
without workes. Which Metonymicall interpretation is
againe confirmed by the inference of this conclusion vpon
the former verse. The Scripture saieth, That Abraham beleeued
God and it was imputed vnto him for Righteousnes. Ergo
(saieth 
                        •
                      
                     Iames) Yee see how a man is iustified by workes
and not by Faith onely. A man might heere say. Nay rather.
Wee see the contrary. That a man is iustified by
faith onely and not by workes. For in that place of Scripture
there is no mention at all made of Workes. Wherefore
of necessity we must vnderstand them both in the same
sense. And so the conclusion followes directly. That euery
man is iustified by an actiue not an idle Faith, because
the Scripture witnesseth, that Abraham was instified by the
like Faith. Our Aduersaries collection then from this place.
(That Faith and Workes be compartners in Iustification, we are

                           〈◊〉
                         partly by faith, partly by workes) is vaine & inconsequent.
For when the Apostle saies, A Man is iustified by
workes and not by faith only: his meaning is not, that workes
and faith are two Coordinate causes by their ioynt-force-working
our Iustification; but the Apostle vtterly excludes
Faith onely from Iustification, and attributes it wholy vnto
workes. For by 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     Faith onely, he vnderstands
faith alone, that faith which is 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      v. 17. alone, solitary,

by itselfe, without workes. And such a dead faith
whereof these hypocrites boasted. S. Iames excludes wholly
from justifying of a man. I say then that he is not iustified
by faith onely: but that he is iustified by workes. That is a
working faith that is fruitfull in Obedience.
                  The Apostle goes forward from the Example of Abraham
vnto that of Rahab verse.2 Example, 25. Likewise was not Rahab
the Harlot iustified by workes? That is in the same manner
as Abraham: so also Rahab was iustified by a working
saith. Which appeared to be so by that which shee did
when she receaued the messengers, entertained the two spies
which were sent to search the land, lodged them in her
house without discouering them. And when by accident
they were made knowne, hid them secretly vpon the roofe,
and afterwards sent them out another way, conveied them away
priuily, not by the vsuall, but by another way (that is)
through the window letting them downe ouer the wall by a
Cord as the story hath it. Ios. 2. In this dangerous enterprise,
wherein this weake woman ventured her life in succouring
the Enemies of her King and Country: it appeares
plainly that she had a strong and liuely Faith in the God of
Israel: and that the confession which she made with her
mouth to the spies (The Lord your God, he is the God in Heauen
aboue and in the Earth beneath. Iosh. 2. 11.) proceeded
from a truely beleeuing heart, insomuch as her words
were made good by works, that followed them. Wherefore
the Apostle iustly parallels these 2 examples of Abraham
offering his sonne; and Rahab in the kind vsage of
the Spies, because both those facts were singular trialls of a
liuely faith which was able in that sorte to ouercome what
was hardest to be conquered. viz. Naturall affection. In
Abraham both fatherly affection to the life of a deere and
only sonne: and in Rahab the Naturall loue to ones Country
and a mans owne Life did all stoope and giue way, when
once true Faith commands Obedience. Here againe our adversaries
trouble themselues, and the Text with needlesse

                     speculations telling vs, that now the Apostle hath altered his
cliffe, and gone from the second Iustification in Abrahams
example, to the first Iustification in this of Rahab. That
Rahab was conuerted at this time of receauing the spies
being made a beleeuer of an infidell, a good woeman of a
bad. That she by this good worke did expiate her former
sinnes and merited the grace and fauour of God, notwithstanding
that she committed a venial sinne in handling
of the businesse, telling a downe-right lie, which though she
should not haue done; yet it hindred not the meritoriousnes
of the worke, with such other fond imaginations peruerting
the simplicity of the Trueth. But first they are not
agreed among themselues whether the Apostle doe in that
sort shift from one Iustification to another. Bellarmine affirmes
it and many moe. But others deny it, as may be
seene in Lorinus his exposition of the. 21. v. of this Chapter.
And were they agreed vpon it, sure I am they should
disagree from the Apostle, who makes this second instance
of the same nature with the former. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . In like manner
saieth he, was Rahab iustified: viz. as Abraham was.
Againe when they say Rahab became a true beleeuer at that
time of receauing the spies, not before, 'tis more then they
can proue. By the circumstances of the story it appeares
plainely, that she beleeued before they came, by the relation
of the great workes which God had done for his people,
and the promises that were made vnto them, that they
should possesse Rahabs countrey. This bred feare in others:
but faith in her, by the secret working of the holy Ghost: See
Ioshua 2. 9. &c. And certainly; (had she not had Faith,
before the spies came, who can thinke she would haue giuen
entertainment to such dangerous persons? But she knew
them to be the Seruants of the God of Israel in whom shee
beleeued; and therefore by thisHeb. 11. 31. Faith she receaued them
peaceably; though Enemies of her Countrey. Lastly to
that of the Merit
                           •
                        riousnes of the worke of Rahab, to deserue
Grace and Life aeternall; we reiect it, not only as a vaine

but an impious conceit, which neuer entred into the humble
hearts of the S
                           •
                        . of old: but hath bin set on foote in the
last corrupt ages of the world by men drunken with selfe-Loue,
and admiration of their owne Righteousnes.
                  
                  Thus we haue these 2 Examples whereby the Apostle hath
proued sufficiently, that the Faith which is separated from Obedience,
will not justifie a Man, & therefore that it is a dead
Faith, and not a true liuing Faith according as was proposed.
v. 20. Now for a close of this whole dispute he againe repeates
that conclusion, adding thereto anew similitude to illustrate
it by, in the last verse of the Chapter. For as the Body
without the Spirit is dead, so faith without workes is dead,
that is, As the Body without the Spirit, i. e. the Souls, or the
Breath and other Motion (is dead) vnable to performe any
liuing action whatsoeuer: So Faith without workes is dead;
that is, vtterly vnable to performe these liuing actions, which
belong vnto it. What are those? Two. 1. To repose it stedfastly
vpon the promise of life in Christ, which is the proper
immediate liuing Action of Faith. 2. To justifie a Man
in the sight of God, which by a speciall priuiledge is the consequent
of the former. These liuing actions cannot be performed
by that Faith which is dead, being destitute of good
workes. That Faith which hath not power to bring forth Obedience,
is thereby declared to be a dead Faith, deuoide of
all power to embrace the promise with confidence and relyance
as also to justifie. A Man would thinke this were plaine
enough, and needed not to be troubled with any further C
                        •
                     
                     villations.
But 'tis strange what a coile our Adversaries make
with this similitude, writhing and straining it to such Conclusions
as the Apostle neuer intende
                        •
                     
                     ▪ Hence they gather.
1. That as the Soule giues life to the Body, as the 
                        
                           ••
                        rme of the
Body: so Workes giue life to Faith as the forme of it 2 That
as the Body is the same true Body without the Soule & with
it: so Faith is one and the same true Faith without workes
and with them, which are nothing but sophisticall speculati
                        
                           •••
                        
                     
besides the purpose of the Text. The Apostle intends nothing

but to shew the Necessity of the Copulation of a liuing
Faith and Obedience together: by the similitude of the like
Necessitie of the vnion of a liuing Body, and the Soule. But
his purpose is not to shew, that the manner of their Connection
is the same, that just in euery point as the Soule is to the
Body, or the Body to the Soule: so Workes are vnto Faith,
and Faith vnto Works. It sufficeth to his intent, that as in the
absence of the Soule, the Body: so in the absence of Obedience,
Faith is dead. But thence it followes not, that
workes by their presence doe the same thing to Faith; as the
Soule to the Body by it's presence; or that Faith in the absence
of Workes remaines the same; as the Body doth in the
absence of the Soule. If we must needs be tied to the strict
termes of the Similitude: let vs a little examine the comparison,
and we shall see our Aduersaries all flye off first from it.
Let the comparison be first thus. Betweene the Body and
the Soule, Faith and Workes as the termes be in the Text. As the Body without the Soule is dead because the Soule giues
life, i.e sense, breathing, and all other Motion to the Body.
                  
                  So Faith without Workes is dead, because Workes giue life
vnto Faith.
                  But now this Comparison will not runne on all foure.
For Workes are not vnto Faith as the Soule is to the Body; but
as sense and motion is to the Body. Seeing Workes are externall
acts, not internall habits: and so are proportionable
not to the Soule, but to the liuing actions thence issuing.
Wherefore 'tis as absurd to say, that Workes giue life vnto
Faith, as 'tis ridiculous to affirme, that Sense & Motion giue
life to the Body, which are not Causes; but Effects & signes
of Life. Therefore when Faith without Workes is dead, 'tis
not spoken in that sense, because Workes giue life to Faith, as
the Soule doth to the Body. L
                        ••
                      then the Comparison bee
thus. Between the Body and the Soule. Faith and Charity.
                  As the Body without the Soule is dead, because the Soule
is the forme of the body, and giues life to it.
                  So Faith without Charity is dead, because Charity is the

Forme of Faith, and giues life to it.
                  But neither will the Comparison hold vpon these termes.
For 1. our Adversaries here put in Charity the habit, for
Workes the act: which is more then themselues ought to doe,
seeing they will tye vs at short Bitts, to the very letter of the
Text. For though we can be content to admit that interpretation,
would they admit of the Apostle's plaine meaning, &
not straine for querkes: yet seeing they argue so precisely
from the Words of the Comparison, they must not now
haue libertie from vs to goe from them, but be content to
take the Words as they lie in the Text, and make their best of
them. Yet seeing 'tis most senselesse to make Workes (that
is) externall Actions the Forme of Faith an internall habit:
let them take Charity insteed of them, an internall habit likewise,
Wil it be any better now? belike so. Thē 'tis thus. As the
Soule is the Forme of the Body: so Charity is the forme of Faith.
and as the Soule giues life and action to the Body, so Charity
vnto Faith. Will they stand to this? No. Here againe they fly
off in both Comparisons. Charity is one habit, Faith another
distinct betweene themselues, and therefore they deny, as
there's good reason, that Charity is either the Essentiall forme
of Faith, as the Soule of the liuing Body: or the accidentall
Forme, as whitenes of Paper. They say 'tis onely an externall
Forme. But this now is not to keepe close to the Apostle's
comparison, but to runne from it at their pleasure, when they
fall vpon an absurdity in pressing of it so strictly. The Soule is
no externall, but an internall essentiall Forme, & therefore Charitie
must be so, if all runne round. Againe doth Charitie giue
life or liuing actions vnto Faith as the Soule doth vnto the
Body? Neither dare they hold close to this Comparison. For
the proper worke or action of Faith is to assent vnto the
Trueth of diuine reuelations, because of Gods authoritie, as
themselues teach. Whence now comes this assent? From the
Habit of Faith, or of Charity? They grant that it comes immediatlie
from the Habit of Faith, which produceth this action,
euen when its seuered from Charity. Then 'tis plain that

it is not Charitie that giues life to Faith, which can performe
the proper action that belongs to it, without it's helpe. How
then doth Charity giue life vnto Faith? For this, they haue a
sillie conceit. Charity giues Life, that is Merite vnto
Faith. The beleefe, or assent vnto diuine Trueth is meritorious
if it be with Charity. If without, then 'tis not meritorious,
This is a fine toy, wherein againe they runne quite from
the Comparison of the Apostle. For the Soule giues liuing Actions
to the Body, not only the Qualifications of the Actions:
and so Charitie is not like the Soule, because it giues only
the qualification of Merit vnto the Action of Faith, & not
the action it selfe. Beside. A most vaine interpretation it is,
without any ground from Scripture, to say a liuing Faith,
(that is) a meritorious Faith: when euen in common sense, the
life of any habit consists onelie in a power to produce those
actions, that naturallie and immediatlie depend vpon that
Habit. And what Reason is there in the World why the Habit
of Charity should make the actions of Faith meritorious,
or, why Charity should make Faith meritorious, rather then
Faith make Charity meritorious, seing in this life there is no
such praeeminency of Charity aboue Faith? Wherefore we
despise these speculatiue Sophismes, which with much faire
glozing, our Aduersaries draw from the Text: but yet
when all comes to the Triall, themselues will not stand to
the strict application of the similitude, because it breeds absurdities,
which euen themselues abhorre. Now if they
take liberty to qualifie and interpret, they must giue vs leaue
to doe so too, or if they will not we shall take it. To shut
vp all. Their other Collection is as weake as the former:
namely. A dead body is a true body. ergo a dead Faith is
true Faith. This Argument forceth the Similitude, and
so is of a Force. In materiall things which haue a diuerse
being from different Causes, it may hold. But 'tis not so
in Vertues and Graces. Trueth and Life are both essentiall
to such qualities. True Charity is a liuing Charity (i. e.)
actiue, as the Apostle himselfe proues. v. 15. True Va-

Valour. And so of euery vertuous quality, if it be true,
'tis liuing and stirring in Action: if it be otherwise, 'tis counterfeit,
some other thing that hath onely a shadow of it. All
these Trickes are pin vpon the Apostle to pervert his plaine
meaning; viz: That as it is necessary to the being of a liuing
body that it be coupled with the 
                        •
                     oule, so 'tis necessary to
the being of a liuing true Christian Faith, that it bring forth
Workes of Obedience.
                  
               
            
            
               SECT. 7.
               
                  CHAP. I.
                  None can be iustified by their owne satisfaction for the
transgression of the Law. A briefe summe of
Popish doctrine, concerning humane
satisfactions for sinne.
                  
                     THus we haue the resolution of the dispute of S.
Iames, together with such Cauils, as our Adversaries
make vpon the seuerall passages thereof.
By the whole order whereof it appeares sufficiently
that Saint Iames disputing against Faith,
meanes thereby that false and bastard Faith which hypocrites
pleased themselues withall insteed of a true Faith: and that
disputing for workes, he meanes nothing but a working
Faith. And it appeares also that the drift of the Apostle is not
in this place to dispute directly of Man's Iustification: but
only to bring that in, as an argument to proue his principall
Conclusion. That Faith without workes is dead, because it will
not iustifie. In summe it's euident, that neither these Apostles
doe disagree between themselues, nor ye
                        •
                      either of them doe
agree with our Adversaries in teaching Iustification by the
the Workes of the Morall Law. Of the impossibility of
Man's Iustification by which meanes, Hitherto.
                  
                  The
                        •
                     r ex
                        •
                      
                     Proposition is,2 Conclu
                           ••••
                         proued. that [None can be iustified by
their owne safisfaction for the transgression of the Law] For
this is this is the only way 
                        〈◊〉
                      for an Offender to obtaine Iustification
and Absolution: vi
                        •
                     : to alleage that he hath satisfied for
his offence committed, by doing or suffering so much as the

party offended could in justice exact of him. Which satisfaction
being made, he is no longer debter vnto him, but deserues
his absolution and his fauour, as if he had not offended
at all. Now then the Question is. Whether a Sinner may, by any
thing done, or endured by himselfe, satisfie the Iustice of God, &
so obtaine absolution at the Barre of God's Iudgment. We defend
the Negatiue. That it is impossible for a Sinner, by any
Action or Passion of his own to doe so much as shall be aequivalent
vnto the wrong which he hath done vnto the glorious
Iustice of God: that there with he may rest satisfied and
exact no further paenalty. Which point is so euident vnto
the Conscience of euery one that knowes himselfe to be, either
a Creature, or a Man, or a Sinner: that it needes not any
confirmation. If we be considered as Creatures, there's nothing
that a finite strength in a finite time can performe,
which can hold proportion with the offence of an infinite
goodnes and Iustice,Phil. 4. 
                           •
                        . and the eternal punishment thereby deserued.
Consider vs as Men,Deut. 5. 6. so we are bound to fulfill the
Law of God in all perfection, nor is there any thing so true,
so honest, so just, so pure, so worthy loue and good report:
but the Law one way or other obliges vs vnto the thought
and practise of it. So that besides our due debt of Obedience,
we haue nothing to spare ouer and aboue, whereby to satisfie
God for those Trespasses that we haue committed vpon his
honour and Iustice. Lastly consider vs as Sinners, so we are
tyed in a double Obligation, 1. of punishment to be suffered
for Sinne committed. 2. Another of Obedience to be perpetually
performed. Both these debts of punishment and Obedience,
are equally exacted of sinfull Men, and ergo 'tis as
absurd in Diuinity to say, the Obedience of the Law or good
workes, will satisfie for the Transgression of the Law: as 'tis
in ciuill dealing to account the payment of one Band the discharge
also of another. Wherefore euery one that is not
blinde and proud in heart will here be soone perswaded to
relinquish all claime of Heauen by his own satisfaction, running
vnto him onely, who alone without the helpe of Man
                     
or Angell hath troden the Winepresse of the fiercenesse of God's
wrath, bearing our Sinnes in his Body on the Tree, suffering the
vtmost, whatsoeuer was due to the punishment of them. Our
Adversaries in this busines are at a stand, mistrusting their
owne, yet not daring wholly to trust to Christ's satisfactions.
They will giue him leaue to haue his part: but, by his leaue,
they will haue one share too in satisfying for Sinnes. For
they are a generation of Men that are resolued to be as litle
beholding to God, as may be, for grace, or for glory. And if
there be any article of Religion wherein Scripture and Reason
would giue the honour of all vnto God, they looke at it
with an Euill Eye, and cast about which way to thrust in
themselues for copartners. 'Tis strange to see to what passe
Pride and Couetousnesse haue brought the doctrine of Satisfaction,
as it is now taught and practised in the Romish
Church. With you patience I shall take a short survey of it,
that you may see whether of v
                        •
                     twaine rest our Consciences
vpon the surer and more stedfast anchor: we that trust onely
to Christ's satisfactions; or they that joine their owne together
with his.
                  The summe of their doctrine, as it is deliuered vnto vs by
the Councell of Trent. Sess. 6. cap. 14, 16. & Sess 14 cap. 8. 9.
with the Romish Catechisme. part. 2. cap. 5. quaest. 52. & seq.
and explained at large by Bellarmine in his two bookes De
Purgatorio in his 4th Booke De Poenitentia, and his Bookes
De Indulgentijs: is this. Sinnes are of two sorts.
                  
                  1. Sinne committed before Baptisme: as Originall Sinne in
all that are baptized Infants: and actuall sinnes in those
that are baptized at yeares of discretion.
                  2. Sinne committed after Baptisme, when after the Grace
of the holy Ghost receiued in Baptisme; men fall into Sin,
polluting the Temple of God, and grieuing his Spirit.
                  Touching the former sort of Sinnes, they are agreed that
Men are freed from them both, the fault and punishment, by
the Merits and satisfaction of Christ only without any satisfaction
on our part. But now for Sinnes after Baptisme, in

obtaining of Remission of them, Christ and we part stakes.
Which copartnership is declared vnto vs in this manner. In

                           〈◊〉
                         Sinnes (we must know) there are three things considerable.
                  
                  1. The fault in the offence of God's Maiesty, and violation
of our friendship with him. Here they grant also, That Man can
not satisfie for the fault, doing any thing that may appease
God's displeasure; and procure his loue. Christ onely hath
done this for vs, for whose onely satisfaction. God of his
mercy freely returnes into fauour and friendship with vs.
But this must be vnderstood in a catholique sense, viz: for
fault of Mortall Sinnes; as for Veniall Sinnes God is but
slightly angry with them, and so we may satisfie him for the
fault thereof, both in this life, and in Purgatory
                  
                  2. The staine or corruption of Sinne, called the Reliques of
Sinne abiding in the Soule. For the purging out of which,
there is great force in such satisfactions, as are made by
Prayers, Fastings, Almesdeed
                        •
                     s, and other laborious
workes, although the Heretiques say otherwise. That
the abolishing of inhaerent corruption is by the gift of grace
freely bestowed on vs by degrees, in the vse of all godly
meanes.
                  
                  3. The punishment of Sinne, which after the fault is pardoned,
remaines yet to be suffered. For although it be
true that God in some causes doth pardon both fault and
punishment wholy, as in cause of Martyrdome, which
sweepes all cleane, and makes a
                        •
                      l reckonings euen; and although
God might, if it had so pleased him, alwaies for
Christ's sake haue pardoned the whole debt: yet Holy
Mother Church hath d
                        •
                     t
                        •
                     rmined, that he doth not so
vse to doe. But after that in mercy he hath forgiuen the
faul
                        ••
                      yet there's an after reckoning, and we must come
to Coram for the punishment, by which his Iustice is to
receaue satisfaction. But (ye must know) the punishment
of Sinne is two fold.
                  
                     
                        •
                     . Eternall▪ in the destruction of Soule and body in Hell-fire
to endure for euer.
                  
                     
Heere now Christ's satisfaction comes in againe. By
whose merits alone they grant, we are deliuered from the
eternity of the punishment of Sinne. Which must be noted,
that Christ's satisfaction hath not eased vs of the substance of
the punishment it selfe: but only in the continuance of it.
                  2. Temporall; to endure onely for a time, whereof there are
also two degrees.
                  1. One in this life, as namely all calamities and afflictions
vpon the Body, Soule, Name, Goods, &c. together
with death the last and greatest of euills. All which
are inflicted vpon m
                        •
                     n; as punishments of 
                        •
                     inne. Of
these some come vpon vs inui
                           ••
                        bly as death vpon all men,
or as death in the wildernes on the Children of Israel, with
the like punishments, certainly and irreuocably denounced.
Now here's no remedy but patience, and that's an excellent
remedy too. For (as the ghostly Fathers of Tre
                        •
                     t informe
vs) If they be borne willingly with patience, they be satisfactions
for Sinnes: but if vnwillingly they be God's just revenge
vpon vs. Other some come, Euitably. And heere such a
course may be taken, that we need not suffer the punishment
it selfe: but we may buy it out and make satisfaction for it vnto
God by other meanes. Which meanes are principally
foure.
                  
                  1. By the vehemency of Contrition, or inward sorrow.
Which may be so intensiue as to satisfie for all punishments,
both in this life and also in Purgatory.
                  2. By other outward laborious workes. Whereby we may
buy out the obligation to temporall punishments. Such
Workes are these.
                  1. Praier with Confession, Thankesgiuing. &c. For, if
we beleeue the Cathol
                           •
                        que Doctors 'tis a very good satisfaction
to a Creditour, if the debter pray vnto him for the
forgiuenes of his dept. According to that text. Psal.
50. 15. Call vpon me in the day of trouble and I will d
                           •
                        liuer
thee. Ergo, Praier is a satisfaction for the punishment of
sinne.
                  
                     
2. Fasting, vnder which is comprehended the sprinkling of
Ashes, wearing of haire cloth, whippings, goeing bare-foote
and such other paenall workes. These also satisfie for sinnes as
'tis written 2. Sam. 12. Dauid fasted, lay vpon the ground
and wept all night. Therefore he satisfied for his Sinnes of
Murther and Adultery. And againe. Paul saieth 1. Cor.
9. 27. I beat downe my body. That is, I whippe and cudgell
my selfe to satisfie for my sinnes. And againe. Luk.
18. 13. The Publican smote vpon his breast. Ergo. Corporall
chastisement is a good satisfactions for sinnes.
                  3. Almesdeedes: comprehending all kind whatsoeuer
workes of mercy. These also buy out the punishments of
sinne according to the text Dan. 4. 24. Breake off thy sin
by Righteousnes: and thine iniquity by mercy towards the poore.
that is. By almesdeeds satisfie for the temporall punishmens
of thy Sinnes. And againe. Luk. 11. 41. Giue
almes of that which you haue and behold all things shall be
cleane vnto you. That is to say (in the language of Babell.)
The temporall punishment of sin shall be taken away. Now
all such workes as these are either.
                  
                  1. Voluntarily vndertaken of our owne accord, as voluntary
Pilgrimage, Scourgings, Fastes, Sackloth, Weepings,
and Praiers of such a number and measure,
with the like rough punishments, which we take vpon
our selues to pacifie God. All which being done with
an intent to satisfie for the punishment of our Sinnes;
must needs be accepted of God almighty for good payment:
because in so doeing, we doe more then he hath required
of our hands. Now 'tis very pleasing to God
to doe what he bids vs not: or what he bids vs, to doe to
another end of our devising. He therefore that voluntarily
vndertakes such needlesse paines, giues God high satisfaction.
According to the Text. 1. Cor. 11. 31. If wee
would iudge our selues, we should not be iudged.
                  2 Inioyned by the Priest. Who by vertue of the Keies
committed vnto him might iudicially absolue the paenitent

from the whole debt, were it not thought fit vpon speciall considerations
to keepe backe a part. Wherefore when he hath
absolued him from the fault and aeternall punishment, he
binds him vnto satisfaction for the temporall punishment, and
therefore he enjoynes him what he shall doe to buy it out.
Let him goe visit the shrine of such and such a Saint, say so
many Aues & Paternosters before such an Image, whip himselfe
so many times, fast so many daies, giue so much almes
with such like paenalties. And when he in humble obedience
hath done these things commanded by the Preist: then
'tis certaine his sinnes be satisfied for. For 'tis to be noted
that in enioyning this Canonicall satisfaction, as 'tis called,
the Priest and God almighty be just of the same mind. Looke
how much the Preist enioynes for satisfaction, God must be
content to take the same, or else the paenitents conscience
will not be quiet, because, it may be, God expected more
to be done for satisfaction: then the party hath done by the
Priests iniunction. But it is to be supposed, that as the
Pope, so euery Priest in his Chaire of confession hath an infallible
spirit, whereby he is able exactly to calculate the just
propo
                        •
                     tion betweene the sinne and the punishment, and
the price of the punishment, that so he may enjoyne just somuch
penance, as will buy it out; neither more lest the paenitent
be wronged: nor lesse, lest God be not satisfied. All
which is trimly founded vpon that text which saieth. Whatsoeuer
yee binde on Earth shallbe bound in Heauen, and whatsoeuer
yee loose on Earth shall be loosed in Heauen. Mat:
16, 19. & 18. 18. That is. Priests may forgiue the
fault and retaine the punishment, and what satisfaction they
enioyne on Earth to expiate the punishment, that will God accept
in Heauen: Or else they be deceaued. This is the second
meanes to satisfie for temporall punishments.
                  The 3. Meanes is by Pardons and Indulgences. Wherin
the superabundant merits of Christ and the Saints
are out of the treasury of the Church granted by speciall
grace of the B
                           •
                        . of Rome vnto such as are liable to

suffer the temporall punishment of their Sinnes. So
that they hauing got by his grant a sufficient portion of satisfactory
workes, out of the common stocke, they are
fre
                        •
                     d thereby from satisfying Gods Iustice, by their owne
workes. Which is a rare priviledge no doubt.
                  4. The fourth meanes is by another liuing mans satisfaction
for them. For not onely the superabundant works of
Christ and Saints departed: but the good workes of iust
men aliue will satisfie for another, being done with that intent.
So great is God's clemency towards good Catholiques,
that, though one man cannot confesse, nor be contrite
for another; yet satisfie he may the Iustice of God for his sinnes.
Both these meanes are grounded vpon pregnant places of
Scripture. Gal. 6. 2. Bea
                           •
                        e yee one anothers burthen, that
is, satisfie one for another. Againe 2 Cor. 12. 15. I will
most gladly bestow and be bestowed for your sakes: that is, to satisfie
for your sinnes. Againe 2 Tim. 2. 10. I suffer all things for
the Elects sake: that is, that my sufferings may be their satisfactions.
So Col. 1. 24. I reioyce in my sufferings for you and fulfill
the rest of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies
sake, which is the Church. That is. My sufferings with Christ's
sufferings make vp a Treasurie for the Church, that such as
want of their owne, may make vse of his satisfaction and mine.
Againe Rom. 12. 15. We being many are one anothers Members
Ergo, We may impart sati
                           •
                        factory workes one to another,
as one member doth heate to another. To conclude. 'Tis in our
Creede, I beleeue a communion of Saints. Ergo, There is a
communion of satisfactions. And so the point is very fitly proued.
Whereby it appeares that the Ch
                           •
                        l
                           •
                        ren of the Romish
Church are reasonable well prouided of Meanes to recompense
God's, Iustice, and redeeme the Temporall punishment
of their sinnes in this life.
                  The other degree of the temporall punishment is in the life
to come, namely, in 
                        
                           •
                        urgatory, whereinto all they drop who
die in Veniall Sinnes, the fault whereof was not forgiuen in
this Life; or in Mortall Sinnes, the fault whereof was forgiuen

in this Life; but full satisfaction was not made for the
punishment before death. Such must fry awhile in Purgatory
longer or shorter time according as their Sinnes are more or
lesse haynous; or as Mens hearts on Earth be more or lesse
pitifull towards them. But howeuer there they must be till
the Temporall Punishment of their Sinnes be fully suffered: or
bought out by something else that may satisfie God's Iustice.
                  This Punishment of Sinne inflicted in Purgatory, is
twofold.
                  1. Poena Damni. of Losse (viz.) of the beautifull vision of
God, and ioyes of Heauen.
                  2. Poena sensus. of sense or smart. viz. The bitter paines of
God's wrath sensibly tormenting the Powers of the Soule, inflicted
vpon them either immediatly by God himselfe, or by the ministery
of the diuels as his Instruments.
                  For 'tis a doubt not yet resolued among the Patrons of
Purgatory, whether the Diuels haue not to doe there also as
well as in hell. But whether their Tormentours be Diuels or
not, this is agreed vpon, that the Torment and Punishment
which the Soules do suffer in Purgatory, is for the Substance
of it the very same with the Torments of Hell, differing only
from it in continuance. Those of Purgatory be temporall,
these of Hell aeternall. Well now, such as haue not bestirred
themselues then, well in this Life to make all euen by full satisfactions,
such must be arrested in the mid way to Heauen,
and cast into this Prison. Out of which two Meanes there
be to be deliuered.
                  1. By suffering all this temporall punishment for so many
yeares and dayes as 'tis to continue. How many that is, you
must inquire of St 
                     Michael, the Church knowes not that.
But yet sure shee is, that many Soules shall continue in Purgatory
till the day of Iudgement, so there shallbe the same period
of the World, and of their Torments. These haue a
hard time of it; 'tis easier haply with others. But be it as 'twill
be, such as these pay the vtmost farthing, where they endure

in the flames of Purgatory, so long till the time of their whole
punishment be runne out. Then God is satisfied, and they deliuered.
                  2. By buying out this punishment by some other satisfactory
price. For although God could so haue ordered it, that euery
Soule being once in Purgatory, should suffer all the
Temporall punishments due: yet he is content to bee intreated
to commute poenance, and take some other valueable
consideration by way of satisfaction for this punishment.
But this satisfactory payment cannot be made by the Soules
themselues: it must be made by some on Earth for them.
which is done. 1. Either by laborious workes of any one
iust and godly Catholique, whether he be a friend of the deceased,
or other touched with a charitable pitty toward a
poore soule. Who by store of deuout prayers, Almes, Masses,
Pilgrimages, founding of Coue
                        •
                     ts and Hospitals, &c. may
procure a gaole-deliuery for that soule for which he intends
those good workes. 2. Or by the Pope who is purse-bearer
to the Church, and hath the Treasurie thereof vnder Lock
and Key. He now, though he cannot directly absolue the
Soules in Purgatory from their punishment, as he can Men
liuing on the Earth, yet he may helpe them another way by
bestowing on them so much of the superfluous sufferings of
Christ and of the Saints, that thereby God's Iustice may be
satisfied, for the whole punishment, which otherwise they
should haue endured. Yea such is the power of his Indulgences
to infuse a vertue into such and such Alt
                        ••
                     
                     ▪ Shrines, 
                        〈◊〉
                     
&c. that whosoeuer shall frequent such places, or vse such
prayers, all Complements duely obserued: he may at his
pleasure free one, two, three, or more soules our of Purgatory.
Nay did not Couetousnes coole the heare of his Apostolical
Charity, he might so bountifully powre out the Treasures
of the Church vpon these prisoners in Purgatory, that
they should all haue enough to weigh down the feales, & deserue
a passe-port for Heauen. Such efficacie there is in that
spirituall Picke locke which the Pope hath in keeping. All

which is very properly proued by the former places of Scripture,
and others also, were it needfull now to alleage them.
But thus we see the Catholiques are euery way furnished for
satisfactions, that what Christ hath not done for them, they
can doe for themselues, either to suffer and ouercome the
Temporall punishments of their Sinnes, or else, which is the easier
course, to buy out that punishment at a valuable price of
other satisfactionary workes, wherewith Gods Iustice shalbe
abundantly contented. Now whereas those whom they
terme Heretiques, cry out aloud that such satisfactions to
God's Iustice be indeed no Satisfactions at all, because they
are no wayes equall vnto the offence committed: and so no full
recompence of wrong offered vnto God: for the assoiling of
this doubt, they giue vs this distinction very necessary to be
obserued. Satisfaction is double.
                  1. Iustitiae: ex rigore Iustitiae, ad absolutam & perfectam
Aequalitatem Quantitatis. That is. There is a Satisfaction
of Iustice consisting in a perfect aequality between
the offence and wrong, and the recompence made, when so
much is done, or suffered, as the offended party can in iustice
exact. Now they grant that Man cannot satisfie
God in this sort in rigour of Iustice. Only Christ hath satisfied
so; for vnto such a satisfaction it is required that it be
done.
                  
                  1. Ex proprijs. By that which is our owne.
                  2. Ex indebitis. By that which is not debt of it selfe.
                  3. Ad aequalitatem. By that which is of aequall worth and
value. Now none of these wayes can our satisfaction passe
in strict Iustice Because whatsoeuer we haue, 'tis God's free
gift: whatsoeuer we can doe, 'tis our due Obedience, & when
we haue done all, yet we cannot by any finite act doe such
honour to God, as shalbe equall to that iniury we haue offered
to his infinite Maiestie. Euen the right of Nature teacheth.
as Bellarmine grants, That Man cannot parca reddere Deo,
giue him quid pro'quo.
                  
                  2. Acceptationis facti ex Gratiâ donante ad imperfectam

Aequalitatem Proportionis & ex Condigno. i, e. There is
a satisfaction of fauourable acceptance, wherein there is a
kinde of imperfect Proportion betweene the offence and the
recompence, when so much is done or suffered, as God is content
in gentlenes to take for good satisfaction. Thus then
a man may satisfie God's Iustice, because God giues him
grace to doe so much as he will accept for satisfactiō. Which
Grace is threefold.
                  
                  1. The Grace of Iustification, whereby the Holy Ghost dwels
in vs and we are made Members of Christ, and Christ is
become our Head. By meanes of which vnion with
Christ, and inhabitation of the Spirit, it comes to passe
that our workes haue a singular vertue. For Christ communicates
vnto vs his satisfaction▪ and by merits of them,
makes our Workes meritorious and satisfactorie vnto
God.
                  So that whereas all things whatsoeuer we could haue
done, where of no worth at all in the sight of God: now
Christ hath deserued such a Grace for vs that the spotted
ragges of our righteousnes and good workes being tincta
Christi sanguine (i. e.) died in the bloud of Christ receaue
such a colour, that they will passe for reasonable good
cloth. In a word, our money is now good siluer which before
was but brasse. Againe, because the holy Ghost dwels
in the just, Ergo (as Bellar: profoundly argues) their Workes
proceeding from the Holy Ghost haue [quandam infinitatem] a
kind of infinitenes in them, and thereby, quandam aequalitatem,
a kind of aequality with the injury which by sinning we offered
vnto God. Euen as a man may say, that a fly or a spyder
is a kind of infinite Creature because 'tis of Gods making:
and God you know is infinite. This is the first Grace of
Iustification. The 2 ye may call.
                  2 The Grace of Euangelicall Counsailes. For although
God might of right challenge all our workes as due vnto
him: yet so it is that he commands not all, but onely persuades
and exhortes vnto some▪ By which bounty of God,

it comes to passe that we haue certaine workes Propria &
indebita, of our owne which we owe him not; and by these we
onely make satisfaction. Yea such is the bounty of God
that he suffers vs to merit by those things which be of his free
gift, and is willingly content that what we receaue at his hand,
we giue it him backe againe for a satisfactorie payment to his
Iustice. Which is very strange I tell you.
                  3 Lastly one Grace more God giues vs. Namely. When
hee pardons the fault he remoues the aeternity of the Punishment,
and makes it Temporall that so it may be more
easily satisfied for. All which particulars and Priuiledges
are sure and certaine, because the Catholique Doctors
haue firmely proued them out of their owne heads without
the helpe of the Scripture. So then they are agreed. That
our workes are not satisfactorie in Rigour of Iustice: but only
in favourable acceptance, by grace giuen to doe them,
and Gods clemency in accepting them being done.
               
               
                  CHAP. II.
                  All sinne is remitted vnto vs wholy in the fault
and punishment. For the onely satisfaction
of Iesus Christ.
                  
                     THus I haue somewhat largely set forth vnto
you the popish Doctrine of humane satisfaction
for sinne: wherein it is plaine to all that can
see any thing, that their aime hath bin to lay
a plot to delude mens Soules and pi
                        •
                     ke their
Purses. It would require a large discourse to prosecute
their Arguments, whereby they seeke to couer their Fraud.
But they are not of that Moment as to spend time about
them, being too hasten to other matters. The summe of
them all comes vnto this. 1. That those afflictions and
Temporall chastisements which God hath laied vpon his
Children (for the Triall of their Faith and patience, for
their humiliation for sinnes past by hearty Repentance, for

their admonition for the time to come, for the example of
others. &c.) they must needs be, in these Mens Imaginations,
true satisfactions to Gods Iustice to expiate their sinnes
past. 2. That such good workes as the godly haue
performed for declaration of their piety; testification of their
thankfulnes vnto God; for to expresse the sorrow of Heart;
for to bring themselues to a greater measure of true humiliation
by much Praier, fasting, &c. for to obtaine victorie ouer
some Corruption, and temptation; for to get some grace
which they wanted; for to preuent or fit themselnes for
some Iudgement feared; &c. All this now must be conceaued
presently to be meritorious and satisfactorie to Gods
Iustice for Sinne.
                  
                  3. That such Pennance, as in the Primitiue Church was
enjoyned vnto those that after their Conversion and Baptisme,
relapsed againe to Heathenisme; or otherwise for such
as for scandalous offences were excommunicated: I say that
such Pennance enjoyned to these for testification of their
hearty sorrow for their offence, and for satisfaction to the
Congregation, before they might be againe admitted into it:
must now be turned into a direct and proper satisfaction for
the sinne it selfe.
                  4. That such indulgence or fauour as was then sometimes
vsed toward such relapsed and excommunicate persons
(in remitting vnto them some part of their enioyned
Pennance vpon euident tokens of their vnfained repentance)
this is now by these men turned quite to another vse. Namely,
to the freeing of men from further satisfaction to Gods
Iustice by applying vnto them certaine phantasticall supererogations
treasured vp in the Popes Cabbinet. These are the
maine Issues and Errors of their disputes, wherein I will
proceed no farther: but onely lay downe one generall Conclusion
opposite vnto their Doctrine, and so end this point
with a few Reasons, for the confirmation of the Trueth and
confutation of this Error. The Position is this.
                  All Sinne whatsoeuer; Originall or Actuall is remitted vnto

vs wholy in the Fault and Punishment, aswell Temporall as
Aeternall for the only satisfaction of Iesus Christ: and not any
satisfaction made by vs vnto the Iustice of God.
                  For confirmation of this sacred Trueth deliuered vnto vs
in the word and generally embraced by the Reformed Churches
(yea by our Aduersaries themselues when the Agonies
of Consciences; the app
                           •
                        ehension of Death and of Gods Iudgement
doe cleere vp their eyes, a litle to behold the vanity of
their poore satisfactions.) obserue we these Reasons.
                  First the innumerable Testimonies of Scripture ascribing
the Remission of Sinne, onely to the mercy of God in Christ
crucified. That Christ hath borne
                     1 Pet. 2. 24. 
                     our Sinnes; His bloud
hath purged
                     Heb. 13. 
                     vs of all Sinne; His death
                     Tit. 2. 14. 
                     redeemed vs from
all iniquity; His
                     Isa: 53: 5. 1 Pet 2 24. 
                     Stripes healed vs; That he hath
                     1 Tim. 2. 6. 
                     paied the
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     or price of our Ransome; That God for his
                     Coll. 2. 13. 
                     sake
hath for giuen vs our trespasses; Blotted out
                     Ibid v. 14. 
                     our sinnes; Cast
them
                     Isa 38. 17. 
                     behind his backe; Forgotten
                     Ier. 31. 34. 
                     them; with store of the
like sayings, ascribing the doeing away of all Sinnes to the
Grace of God through the Satisfaction of Christ without limi
                        •
                     ing
it to any Sinne, or mentioning any satisfactorie workes
of ours. Now what say our Aduersaries to this? By a shift
they turne of all Scriptures tending to this purpose. Thus
Christ hath satisfied for the fault of our Sinnes; and so reconciled
vs vnto God, and for the aeternity of the Punishment: but
he satisfied not for temporall punishment: We must endure Torment's
though but for a while. This is a meere Cavill without
any apparant ground from such Texts of Scripture; or
necessary deduction from other. We deny it therefore as
they affirme it. And that it may appeare to be but a forged
devise. Let vs inuert the distinction and we shall hold
it with as good probability the other way. Christ satisfied
for the fault, not for the punishments (say they.) We will
goe contrary and say, Christ satisfied for the punishment: but
not for the fault. We by our owne satisfaction must procure
Gods fauour. Now let them object what they can against
this: if we list to ca
                        •
                     ill as they doe: it may be shifted off

with as faire probabilitie; as they doe our Arguments on
the other part. Let them name all the places that say,
Christ hath
                     Coll. 1. 10. 
                     reconciled vs to God his Father. This is easily
put off. Christ hath reconciled vs. that is, Christ deserued
such Grace for vs: that we by our workes may reconcile ourselues.
Iust as they say. Christ hath satisfied. that is. procured
Grace for vs: that we by our workes might satisfie. Let
them object, Our workes can be of no worth to appease Gods
anger. We will say. True. Of themselues they are not:
but Christ hath merited that they should be of sufficient
worth. Iust as themselues say vnto vs objecting, that
our workes be not of value to satisfie Gods Iustice. True,
say they. Of themselues they be not: but Christ hath deserued
for them to make them satisfactorious. Thus if euery
idle distinction not fortified by necessary deduction from
Scripture might passe for a good answere, the certainty of
diuine Doctrine were soone shaken to pieces: and no Position
so absurd, but would be defended with much facility.
                  2. That Assertion of theirs. Namely. That the fault is
forgiuen and the punishment required, is most false and absurd;
euen in common sense. To pardon a fault and be
friends and yet require full satisfaction; to forgiue the debt,
yet to exact the payment, be not these trimme kindnesses?
Bell. de poen. lib. 4. cap. 1.Bellarmine tels vs, there be some offences of so grieuous
Nature: that satisfaction cannot be made, but in a long time.
Now in this case the partie wronged may pardon the other,
and be reconciled to him: yet the offender remaine still bound
to make entire satisfaction for the wrong. But now the Iesuite
doth not name any such case: neither indeed can doe.
For suppose a subject hath offended his Prince and the fault
deserued 7. yeares close imprisonment for satisfaction. If the
Prince should say vnto him I pardon your offence, you haue
my loue; but yet you shall lie by it to the last daie: were it
not a mockerie, would any man thank him for such a kindnes?
It is to be thought the Iesuites, the incendiaries of Christendome
would not thanke Christian Princes for such a courtesie,

if they should pardon them their fault, and hang them vp.
The like absurditie there is in this, when they say; That after
the fault pardoned; yet in this Life and in Purgatory, the
temporall punishment must be suffered. For wherefore must
it be suffered? For satisfaction say they, To what? To God's
Iustice. For what now? Is it for the fault and offence committed?
No, That's pardoned. For what then? For just nothing.
                  Againe, this Assertion is contrary to good reason. For
God's Friendship, and his Iustice may not be diuided in this
sort, as if he were reconciled and well pleased with that Creature,
which hath violated his Iustice, and not made satisfaction
for it. God's friendship with Man followes satisfaction
to his Iustice: euen as his Enmity with Man is a consequent
of the breach of his Iustice. His righteous will is transgressed,
therefore he is offended. His righteous will must be
satisfied before he be pleased. So that it is a vaine speculation
to thinke. Christ hath appeased God's anger, but not satisfied
his Iustice, for as much as his fauour is purchased onely by satisfaction
to his Iustice offended.
                  
                  3. This doctrine of humane satisfactions, obscures the
dignity, and ouerthrowes the Force of Christ's satisfactions.
If we haue a share, he hath not all the glory. Nay, he hath
scarse any at all. For aske wee. For what hath Christ satisfied?
They say, to procure God's Loue to vs. But that cannot
be, vnlesse he hath satisfied his Iustice. Hath he done this,
or no? Yes, he hath satisfied for the Aeternity of the punishment.
Yea. But how know they that? What if we vpon
their grounds say, That he hath not satisfied for the Aeternity
of it: but only merited, that our sufferings and satisfactions
should be aequivalent to the aeternity of the Punishment? Especially
considering that our Workes according to Bellarmine,
haue a certaine kinde of infinite value in them. Againe,
Aeternity is but an Accident of punishment of Sinne: the Essentials
of it are the Losse of Ioy, and the sense of Paine: if
therefore Christ haue satisfied only for that, he hath done but

the least part. Neuerthelesse our Adversaries will needes
perswade vs, that humane satisfactions doe not so much
eclipse as illustrate the glory of Christ's satisfactions: in as
much as thereby he hath not only satisfied himself: but made
vs able also to satisfie. A great matter doubtlesse. But where
saith the Scripture any such matter, that Christ hath merited
that we might merit and satisfie. And moreouer by this
Tricke, whilest Christ makes vs able to merit and satisfie: his
owne satisfaction is plainly excluded. For come to the point,
and aske. Who is it satisfies God's Iustice for Sin? Christ,
or wee? HeereBel. Lib 1. de Purga
                           •
                        : cap. 14. §. quarta Ratio. 
                     Bellarmine stumbles like a blind horse, and
of three answeres takes the very worst. Some say 'tis Christ,
and he only satisfies Properly: but we Improperly. Our works
being only a Condition without which Christ's satisfaction
is not applied vnto vs. But such smell of the fagot. For 'tis
a perilous Haeresie to say, Christ onely satisfies for Sinnes. Well
others say, That both Christ and we our selues doe satisfie, &
also there's two satisfactions for the same offence. But this
mettall clinketh not well neither. Wherefore others are of opinion,
and Bellarmine likes it. That Wee only satisfie, not
Christ. Tertius tamen modus probabilior videtur [Quòd una
tantum sit actualis satisfactio, & easit nostra.] Yea this is as it
should be, thrust out Christ, and let vs only satisfie while he
stands by and holds the Candle. Yet the Iesuite will not doe
Iesus so much wrong: for marke, to mend the matter hee
adds. [Ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         tamen excludit
                           •
                        r Christus, vel satisfactio eius.
Nam per eius satisfactionem habemu
                           •
                         gratiam, vnde satisfacimus.
Et hoc modo nobis dicitur applicari Christi satisfactio;
non quòd immediatè ipsae eius satisfactio tollat poenam temporalem nobis
debitam: sed quod mediate eam tollat, quatenùs
gratiam a
                           •
                         ea habemus, sine qu
                           •
                         nihil valeret nostra satisfactio.]
Which wordes they may vnderstand that can; For I
cannot. The Iesuite. walkes in the darke: seeking to hide
this shamefull Injury to the Merits of Christ, but it will not
be. 'Tis too apparant that Christ is to them of no account.
Only for a fashion they make vse of his Name, when they

haue reckoned vp a bedrol of their own Merits, & Sts Merits,
and such other trash, then to conclude all with a [Per Iesum
Christum Dominum nostrum.] That's the burden of the Song,
and the oyle that seasons all the Salet: asTabula de differentia 4 part. Tom. 2. cap. 15. 16. 
                     Marnix merily.
                  4. That distinction of Satisfaction in Strict Iustice, and
satisfaction in fauourable acceptance is vaine in this businesse.
We grant indeed that our good workes done out of Faith,
are pleasing to God, and graciously accepted of him: but can
it appeare, that God accepts them as satisfactions to his Iustice?
No Scripture intimates any such thing, That God's fauour
doth thus dispense with his Iustice, and make that satisfaction
acceptable, which is in it selfe no full satisfaction of
his Iustice. Shall we thinke that God in this case is put vpon
those termes of Necessity, and complement which fall out
in humane satisfactions, betweene Man and Man? It may so
fall out that a Creditor (to whom 1000 Crowns are owing)
may be content if the debtor will yeeld vp his whole Estate,
though not worth 50. Because no more can be had. So in
case of offence,Bell. lib. 4. de Paenit. cap. 1. sometime, a litle formality, or a word or two
of confession of the wrong may be accepted for satisfaction.
But God wants no meanes to receiue full satisfaction of vs,
either vpon our owne persons, or vpon Christ for vs. And
therefore 'tis without ground to imagine such a facility and
partiality of his Iustice, as to be satisfied with a few poore
complementall Formalities. Satisfactions to God's Iustice wee
acknowledge none; but such as are in Iustice sufficient. Such
are Christ's satisfactions. But as for vs, we haue nothing
to doe with satisfactions, but with free Pardons.
                  
                  5. This Doctrine of humane satisfactions taught in the
Church of Rome is altogether full of vncertainty, and ergo,
brings no rest and peace vnto mens Consciences, at all. God
pardons the fault: but requires the punishment say they. But
when is this? Is it alwaies? No, sometimes he pardons
both. But can they tell certainly when he doth? when not?
At Martyrdome he pardons all. How know they that? or
how know they he doth it not at other times too? Contrition
                     
(say they) if it be vehe
                        •
                     nen
                        •
                     , satisfies for all. But can they
tell vs the i
                        •
                     st asure of that Contrition which is satisfactorie?
It may be the partie is contrite enough: yet the Pre
                           •
                        st
enioynes Penance when 'tis needlesse. It may be he is not
co
                        •••
                     ite enough: yet no penance enioyned. Where's the
certainty, what's to be done in such a case? Christ (say they)
hath satisfied for the Aeternity of Hell punishments. Well.
But can they tell how many yeares or daies are left vnsatisfied
for; that so all things may be fitted according to the
Race of time? Laborious workes, of Praiers, Fastings,
Almes-de
                           •
                        ds, satisfie for temporall Punishments in this life
(say they) Sup
                        •
                     ose it be so. Are they sure they can also
satisfie the paines of Pu
                           •
                        gatorie? The Priest enjoynes satisfactorie
penance. But is he sure he enioynes iust so much
as will doe the Feate? Is he certaine that God will take that
for paiment, which he decrees to be paied? What if there
be not Aue-Maries enough &c? Againe suppose there
were Evangelicall Counsailes, as Vowes of Chastity, Pouerty
&c. and that to doe these things were pleasing vnto God.
Are they sure they shall passe for satisfactions presently? thou
saiest I giue this Almes, I vow Poverty, I doe this and that
to satisfie Gods Iustice for such or such a sinne. What?
Is it a Match presently, that God must doe as thou desirest:
and take what thou offerest for paiment? Soft there, a
while. Where's the warrant for that? Those that are in Purgatory,
when haue they satisfied enough? who brings word,
when they are deliuered? How knowes the Pope when he
hath bestowed vpon them sufficient supererogatiue Money
to pay the Fees of the Prison? Or doth S. Michael that
hold's, the Scales send him word, when their satisfactions
weigh downe their Sinnes? Not to reckon more vp; there
is in all this Doctrine no firme ground whereon a distressed
Soule may cast anchor: But when it hath once let slip that
maine Cable, wherevpon it might rid it out in all stormes
(the satisfaction of Christ) afterwards it is carried a d
                        •
                     ift vpon
all hazards of Windes and Seas.
                  
                     
6. The-
                        •
                     rpractise betraies their Opinion. Did they indeed
thinke that there were any seueritie in Gods Iustice, any
necessitie or sufficiencie in such their satisfactions, 'tis not
possible, they would prostitute such thing's in so base a
manner, as they doe. But when an Aue Maria, a Pater
noster before such or such an Altar; a wax-Candle to such a
Saint; a kisse of such a cold stone; a pilgriamage to Compostella
for cockle-shels; a lash or twaine vpon the Bare; two or three
meales meat forborne; a pardon purchased at a few Deniers;
yea when the roughnes and meanesse of Adams figgleaue
breeches shall be accounted a worthy matter to satisfie for
his sinne, asDe po
                           •
                        nit. lib 4. cap. 9. sect. 5. Irenaeus. 
                     Bellarmine most ridiculously doates; I say,
when such base trifles shalbe reckoned to be valuable satisfactions
to Gods Iustice: they must pardon vs if we guesse at
their meaning. They may dispute and talke while they will
in big wordes and faire glosses of Bridles against Sinnes, and I
know not what: but in fine all proues but Gins to catch money:
But such as serue themselues thus, vpon God; and play
with his Iustice, as the flie with the Candle; let them take
heed, lest in the end, they be consumed by it.
                  To leaue then these vaine Inuentions. Let vs giue to God
the glory that's due to his name: and so we shall well provide
for the peace of our Soules. Trusting entirely and onely vnto
that Name of
                     Acts Apost, cap, 4. v. 1
                           •
                        . 
                     Iesus Christ. besides which, there is not in
Heauen, or in Earth (in Man or Angell) any name, Merit,
Power, Satisfaction, or whatsoeuer else, whereby we may be saued.
And thus much touching the first maine branch of the
matter of our Iustification, namely Our owne Righteousnes,
Whereby, it appeares sufficiently, that we shall neuer be
justified in Gods Sight.
                  
                  Μόνῳ τῷ Θεῷ δόξα.
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE CONTENTS OF EVERY
Section and Chapter in this Booke.
            
               SECTION 1.
               CHAP. I. The explication of these termes. First, Iustice, or
righteousnesse. Secondly, Iustification.
               CHAP. II. In what sense the word Iustification ought to be
taken in the present controuersie, and of the difference betweene
vs and our Adversaries therein.
               CHAP, III. The confutation of our Adversaries cauils against
our acception of the word Iustification.
            
            
               SECT. 2.
               CHAP. I. The orthodoxe opinion concerning the manner of
Iustification by Faith, and the confutation of Popish errours
in this point.
               CHAP. II. The confutation of the Arminian errour, shewing
that Faith doth not justifie, sensu proprio, as it is an act of
ours.
               CHAP. III. The confutation of Popish doctrines, that other
graces doe justifie vs, and not Faith alone.
            
            
               SECT. 3.
               CHAP. I. Of the righteousnes whereby a man is justified
before God; that is not his owne inhaerent in himselfe:
that in this life no man hath perfection of holinesse inhaerent
in him.
               CHAP. II. No man can perfectly fulfill the Law in performing
all such workes, both inward and outward, as each
commandement requires, against which truth, Popish objections
are answered.
               CHAP. III. No man in this life can performe any particular
good worke, so exactly that in euery point it shall answer
the rigour of the Law, proued by conscience, Scriptures,
reason, and Popish objections answered.
               
                  
CHAP. IIII. Three seuerall exceptions against the truths deliuered
in this 3 Section.
            
            
               SECT. 4.
               CHAP. I. Iustification by workes makes voide the couenant
of grace. Of the difference betweene the Law and
the Gospell. Of the vse of the Law. Of the erronecus
conceit of our Adversaries in this point.
               CHAP. II. Of Bellarmine's erroneous distinction of the word
Gospell.
            
            
               SECT. 5.
               CHAP. I. Iustification by fulfilling the Law, ouerthrowes
Christian libertie. The parts of our Christian libertie.
               CHAP. II. Iustification by workes, subjects vs to the rigour
and curse of the Law.
            
            
               SECT. 6.
               CHAP. I. The reconciliation of that seeming opposition,
betweene S. Paul, and S. Iames in this point of Iustification.
               CHAP. II. The confirmation of the orthodoxe reconciliation
of S. Paul, and S. Iames, by a Logicall Analysis of S. Iames
his disputation in his second Chapter.
            
            
               SECT. 7.
               CHAP. I. None can be justified by their owne satisfaction
for the transgression of the Law. A briefe s
                     •
                  mme of Popish
doctrine, concerning humane satisfactions for sinne.
               CHAP. II. All sinne is remitted vnto vs wholy in the fault
and punishment. For the onely satisfaction of Iesus
Christ.
            
         
      
   