
      
         
            
            
            A TRVE REPORTE,
Of the late discoueries,
and possession, taken in the right of
the Crowne of Englande, of the Newfound
Landes: By that valiaunt and worthye
Gentleman, Sir Humfrey Gilbert
Knight. Wherein is also breefely sette downe, her
highnesse lawfull Tytle therevnto, and the great and
manifolde Commodities, that is likely to grow
thereby, to the whole Realme in generall,
and to the Aduenturers in particular.
Together with the easines and
shortnes of the Voyage.
            
            Seene and allowed.
            At London,
Printed by I. C. for Iohn Hinde,
dwelling in Paules Church-yarde, at
the signe of the golden Hinde.
Anno. 1583.
         
         
            
            
            To the Right Honourable
Sir Fraunces Walsingham Knight,
principall Secretarie to the Queene, her
most excellent Maiestie.
            
               
                  HOW much more happie
might I account my selfe,
(right honourable Sir) if I had
so well applied my time in this
Vniuersitie, as through my more
dilligent studye, I were able to
handle the matter, (which I
haue in this Treatise taken vppon
me) as the worthynes thereof dooth meryte.
            Truely Sir I was for a time, drawen into a doubtfull
ballaunce, whether I should proceede therein, as my affection
intised me, or leaue it off, as good discretion
aduised mee. Eftsoones haue I righte hartely wished
that some of those rype, and perfect witts, adorned with
like iudgement, (wherewith God hath plentifully blessed
this our age) woulde haue imploied their pennes, learnedly
to haue sette foorth thys cause: But seeing that
in wishing, I doo fynde nothing, but to wish, and
that the case so standeth, as eyther the thyng, right
woorthye bothe knowledge, and practise, shall styll

lie in a slumber, or rather rest buryed in the graue
of obliuion, vnlesse I doo make publique my weaknesse
and insufficiencye, and therby subiect my selfe
to the diuersitye of mens iudgements, I haue made
choyse, rather to indure the disgrace of the one, then
that my Countrey shoulde sustaine the inconuenience
of the other, trusting that your honour (who hath
hetherto beene a principall Patron of this Action) will
vpon my humble sute vouchsafe your fauourable protection
heereof. For wee doo reade (right honourable)
that Archimedes in respecte of his grauitie and
wisedome) helde that reputation amongst the Syracusans,
that whatsoeuer he allowed, was accounted for
good: which historye, if I shoulde apply vnto your
honour perticularlie, as both aptlie and truely I could,
I might (in the opinion of some men) incurre the suspition
of flattery, and receiue from your Honour but
the like aunswer, which King Theseus made vnto blind
Oedipus.
            
            I doo not (quoth hee) O Oedipus, honour my selfe
with other mens words, but with mine owne works.
In silence therefore will I passe your ready and vertuous
disposition, bothe honourably to fauour, and
fauourably to further all such attemptes as seeme pleasing
to GOD and profitable to your Countrey, both
which (by the testimony of good writers, the opininion
of wise men, and experience of great trauailors,
these VVesterne Discoueries doo certainly promise. In
regarde whereof, I doo the rather presume to preferre
this Pampflet to bee Patronized by so woorthy
a personne, whereby my escapes may bee the more
easilye excused, my willing paynes the better accepted,

and the voyage more effectually supplyed.
            Thus beeing lothe any longer to detayne your honour
from your weightye affayres, I humblye take
leaue, beseeching GOD manie yeeres to lengthen
your life, with much encrease of honour. From my
lodging in Oxforde, the tweluth of Nouember.
            
               
                  Your Honours poore Scholler,
in all seruice to vse. G. P.
               
            
         
         
            
            
            
               ❧The Table of the Chapters, containing
the principall matters in this Booke.
            
               1 The first Chapiter, wherein the Argument of the Booke is
contayned.
               2 The seconde Chapiter, sheweth that it is lawfull & necessary,
to trade and traficke with the Sauages. And to plant in
theyr Countreys. And deuideth planting into two sortes.
               3 The third Chapiter, dooth shewe the lawfull Title, which
the Queenes most excellent Maiestie hath vnto those
Countreys, which through the ayde of almighty GOD are
to be inhabited.
               4 The fourth Chapiter sheweth, how that the trade, traficke
and planting in those Countreys, is likely to prooue very profitable
to the whole Realme in generall.
               5 The fift Chapiter, sheweth that the trading and planting
in those Countryes, is likely to prooue to the perticuler profit
of all the Aduenturers.
               6 The sixt Chapiter, sheweth that the traficke and planting
in those Countryes, shall bee vnto the Sauages themselues
very beneficiall and gainfull.
               7 The seauenth Chapiter, sheweth that the planting there
is not a matter of such charge or diffyculty, as many woulde
make it seeme to bee.
               8 The Contents of Articles of Assuraunce, between the Principal
assignes of Sir Humfrey Gilbert Knight, & the foure
sortes of Aduenturers, with them in the voyage for the
VVesterne Discoueries.
               
            
            The ende of the Table.
         
         
            
            
            
               ❧Sir William Pelham
Knight, in commendation of the
discourse following.
            
               LIke as the Fishes, breeding in the deepe,
               Through all the Ocean are allowed to raung:
               Nor forst in any certaine boundes to keepe,
               But as their motions carry them to chaung.
               To men like libertie, dooth reason giue:
               In choise of soile, through all the world to liue.
            
            
               To valiaunt mindes each land is a natiue soile,
               and vertue findes no dwelling place amis.
               Regard of honour measures not the toyle,
               To seeke a seat wherein contentment is.
               That seat, that soile, that dwelling place of rest:
               In this discourse, most liuelie is exprest.
            
            
               Our forren neighbours bordring hard at hand,
               Haue found it true, to many a thousands gaine:
               And are inritcht by this abounding land,
               While pent at home, like sluggard
                     •
                  s we remaine.
               But though they haue, to satisfie their will:
               Inough is left, our cofers yet to fill.
            
            
               Then England thrust among them for a share,
               Since title iust, and right is wholie thine:
               And as I trust the sequell shall declare,
               Our lucke no worse, then theirs before hath beene.
               For where the attempt, on vertue dooth depend:
               No doubt but God, will blesse it in the ende.
            
            
               VVilliam Pelham.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧Sir Fraunces Drake
Knight in commendation of this
Treatise.
            WHho seekes, by worthie deedes, to gaine renowme for hire:
            VVhose hart, whose hād, whose purse is prest: to purchase his desire
            If anie such there bee, that thristeth after Fame:
            
            Lo, heere a meane, to winne himselfe an euerlasting name.
            VVho seekes, by gaine and wealth, t' aduaunce his house and blood:
            VVhose care is great, whose toile no lesse, whose hope, is all for good
            If anie one there bee, that couettes such a trade:
            Lo, heere the plot for common weath, and priuate gaine is made.
            Hee, that for vertues sake, will venture farre and neere:
            VVhose zeale is strong, whose practize trueth, whose faith is void of feere▪
            
            If any such there bee, inflamed with holie care.
            Heere may hee finde, a readie meane, his purpose to declare.
            So that, for each degree this Treatise dooth vnfolde:
            The path to Fame, the proofe of zeale, and way to purchase golde,
            
               Fraunces Drake.
            
         
         
            
            M. Iohn Hawkins, his opinion of this
intended Voyage.
            IF zeale to God, or countries care, with priuate gaines accesse,
            Might serue for spurs vnto th'attempt this pamflet doth expresse.
            One coast, one course, one toile might serue, at ful to make declard
            A zeale to God, with countries good, and priuate gaines regarde.
            And for the first this enterprise the name of God shall founde,
            Among a nation in whose eares the same did neuer sounde.
            Next as an endles runuing streame, her Channels doth discharge:
            That swell aboue theyr boundes, into an Occean wide and large.
            So England that is pestered nowe, & choakt through want of groūd
            Shall finde a soile where roome inough, and perfect doth abounde.
            The Romains when the number of their people grewe so great,
            As neither warres could waste, nor Rome suffice them for a seate.
            They led thē forth by swarming troupes, to forraine lands amaine
            And founded diuers▪ Colonies, vnto the Romaine raigne.
            
               Th'athenians vs'de the like deuise, the Argiues thus haue doone,
            And fierce A chilles Myrmidons when Troy was ouer runne.
            But Rome nor Athens nor the rest, were neuer pestered so,
            As England where no roome remaines, her dwellers to bestow,
            But shuffled in such pinching bondes, that very breath dooth lacke:
            And for the want of place they craule one ore anothers backe.
            How noblie then shall they prouide that for redresse heerein,
            With ready hand and open purse this action dooth beginne.
            Whence glory to the name of God, & countries good shall spring,
            And vnto all that further it, a priuate gaine shall bring.
            Then noble youthes couragiously this enterprise discharge,
            And age that cannot mannage Armes, let them support the charge.
            The yssue of your good intent, vndoubted will appeare,
            Both gratious in the sight of God, and full of honour heere.
            
               Iohn Hawkins.
            
         
         
            
            Maister Captaine Bingham,
his commendation vppon
this Treatise.
            
               IF honour and reward, may mooue the minde,
               By noble actions, highlie to aspire:
               The forward man in this discourse shall finde,
               Reward and honour, propos'd for hire.
               VVhich meede, no right renowmed hart mislikes:
               Though gaind by passing, through ten thousād pikes
            
            
               The white whereat wee leuell, well is knowen,
               The plot and place, with finger poynted out:
               The name thereof through all the world is blone,
               To put the hard beleeuers out of doubt.
               Our forren neighbours, like it to their gaine:
               And sucke the sweete, while sleeping we remaine.
            
            
               The iorney is but easie to bee gonne,
               The frozen Pole disioyned farre dooth lye:
               VVe shape our course, farre from the burning Zonne,
               The soile is subiect to a milder skye.
               And by proofe, of many recordes tride:
               The Paradise, of all the world beside:
            
            
               Then launch ye noble youthes into the maine,
               No lurking perrils lye amidde the way:
               Your trauell shall retourne you treble gaine,
               and make your names renoumed another day.
               For valiaunt mindes, through twentie Seas will roome:
               And fish for lucke, while sluggardes lye at home.
            
            
               Richard Bingham.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧Maister Captaine
Frobisher, in commendation
of the voyage.
            A Pleasaunt ayre, a sweete and firtell soile,
            A certaine gaine, a neuer dying praise:
            An easie passage, voide of lothsome toile,
            Found out by some, and knowen to mee the waies.
            All this is there then who will refraine to trie:
            That loues to liue abroade, or dreades to die.
            
               Martin Frobisher.
            
         
         
            
            Maister Captaine Chester,
his commendation of
this Treatise.
            MArke well this booke when you to reade beginne,
            And finde you shall great secretes hid therein.
            For with your selues you may imagine thus,
            That God hath left this honour vnto vs.
            The iourney knowne, the passage quicklie runne,
            The land full rich, the people easilie wunne.
            VVhose gaines shalbe the knowledge of our faith,
            And ours such ritches as the country hath.
            Pinche not for pence to set this action out,
            Poundes will returne, thereof be not in doubt.
            Your countrey shall be bounde due thankes to giue,
            For that the poore heereby you may relieue.
            Vnto your Prince good seruice you shall doo,
            And vnto God, a worke right gratefull to.
            
               Iohn Chester.
            
         
         
            Mathew Roydon maister of Arte
to his fellowe Student.
            TO prayse thy booke because I am thy freende,
            Though it be common and thy due indeede:
            Perhaps it may some daintie eare offende,
            Reproofe repines that vertue hath her meede.
            Yet neuerthlesse how euer thinges succeede,
            Sith to no other ende thy booke was made:
            All that I wish, is that thou mayest perswade.
            
               Mathew Roydon.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧Maister Anthony
Parkhurst in commendation
of this Treatise.
            
               BEholde a worke that dooth reueale,
               The ready way to welth and fame.
               Commodious to the common weale.
               And iust without impeache of blame.
               VVhich followed as the course doth lie,
               May make all Englande thriue thereby.
            
            
               It is not fond surmisde report,
               Nor phantasie vaine heades to feede:
               The mention of the trueth, coms short,
               And lesser then the thing indeede.
               Of recorde many thousandes are,
               That can all this and more declare.
            
            
               Howe happy were our England then,
               (Sith neither men nor shipping want)
               Some good and well disposed men,
               An other England there would plant?
               And so employ a number there,
               VVhose persons may be spared heere
            
            
               Th'atempt coulde neuer faile his fame,
               Nor proofe returne without effect:
               For commonlie all actions frame,
               VVhere Christian cause hath cheefe respect.
               And he that in the heauens aboue doth raigne,
               (No doubt) will blesse the sequell of theyr payne.
            
            
               Anthonie Parkhurst.
            
         
         
            
            Arthur Hawkins in commendation
of this Treatise.
            MY freendes, if at Th'exchaunge a man shoulde goe and tell,
            that such, and such commodities he had to sell.
            VVhereof we stood in neede and scarcelie to be founde,
            VVhereby a quicke returne with profit woulde redounde.
            I doubt not ere I past, but you would craue the sight,
            Of these commended wares, and buy them if you might.
            Y'are proferd at this time, fayre Grapes to make your wine,
            The pleasaunt fruites of Spaine, the Figs and Orenge fine.
            The speckled Russian Furres, that Esterlings vs sendes,
            The Rosen, Pitch, and Deales that Dansk and Denmarke lendes.
            The Mettall heere is showne that with a quenchles fire,
            Inflames our thirsting hartes vnstaunched in desire.
            A bargaine may you haue, t'is put into your handes,
Of all commodities you haue from other landes.
            And at so easie price you can not choose but gaine:
            A trifle is the most, together with your paine,
            But what is that some sayes? our Englishmen giues eare,
            Onelie to gaine, God shielde it shoulde be true I heare.
            If we religious be, lets rigge our shippes with speede,
            And carry Christ to these poore souls, that stande in neede,
            VVhy pause yee therevpon? the fraight will quite the charge,
            For what is doone for God, dooth finde rewarde full large.
            
               A. H.
            
         
         
            
            Iohn Achelley Cyttyzen
and Marchantailour of London,
for conclusion.
            IF truth and praise haue power, to make this matter gratious:
            VVhat neede we then extoll the thing, hath beene commended thus.
            And by the better sorte that wright, of truth and knowledge so:
            As nothing of this worke, they promised further then they know.
            Beleeue them for they be our freendes, and with our Counties weale:
            Let vs imbrase that God and truth, so loouinglie reueale.
            VVhereof the merrit is no lesse, then is the bruted Fame:
            Aske straungers and that noble minde, that did attempt the same:
            To whom we owe the titles, that to Vertues Nimpes are due:
            So good a Knight whom English men, in vertue should persue.
            No doubt but God will blesse th'atempt, succeed him roundly then:
            And in this Voyage follow fast, you that bee English men.
            VVith such supplie from time to time, as what is well begonne:
            Bee not for want of men and aide, through slackfulnes vndoone.
            So shall you harbour in your hartes, the seedes of magnanimitie:
            A vertue where with all, the Romaines did enlarge their Empery.
            Be you prepared for euery foe, and be couragious then:
            For that you slippe through negligence, will fall to other men.
            Enuie hath eyes to see afarre, your new attempt will whet:
            A number more to seeke therefore, if you your selues forget.
            Send foorth with speede, get footing there and make prouision:
            Tis ill for vs to linger thus, and talke thereof so longe.
            
               Iohn Achelley.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧The firste Chapiter,
wherein the Argument of the `Booke
is Contayned.
            
               
                  IT was my fortune (good
Reader) not many dayes past, to
meete with a right honest and discrete
Gentleman, who accompanied
that valiāt & worthy Knight
Sir Humfry Gilbert,
               Maister Edward Hay in this last iourney
for the Westerne discoueries.
And is owner and Captaine of the
onelie Vessell which is as yet returned from thence:
            By him I did vnderstande, that Sir Humfrey departed the
coaste of Englande the eleuenth of Iune last past, with fiue
sayle of Shippes from Caushenbay neere Plimmouth, wherof
one of the best forfooke his companie, the thirtenth day of
the same moneth, and returned into England.
            
            The other foure (through the assistaunce of almightye
GOD) did arriue at Saint Iohns Hauen,Sir Humfrey Gilbert did arriue at S. Iohn
                     •
                   hauen in Newfounde Land, the 3. of August. Anno. Do. 1583. in Newfounde
Lande, the thyrd of August last. Vpon whose arriuall all the
Maisters and cheefe Mariners of the English Flete, which
were in the sayd Hauen before, endeuouring to fraughte
themselues with Fysh, repayred vnto Sir Humfrey, whom
he made acquainted with the effect of his cōmission: which
being doone, he promised to intreate them and their goods
well and honourably as dyd become her maiesties Lieftennaunt.
They did all welcome him in the best sorte that
they coulde, and shewed him and his, all such courtesies as
that place coulde affoorde or yeelde.
            
               
Then he went to viewe the Countrey, being wel accompanied
with most of his Captaines & Soldiers. They found
the same very temperate,Among these there was founde the tract of a beast of 
                     •
                  . inches and a halfe ouer but somewhat warmer then Englande
at that season of the yeere, replenished with Beastes &
great store of Fowle of diuers kindes: And Fish of sundry
so
                  •
               tes, both in the salte water and in the fresh, in so greate
plentie as might suffice to victuall an Armie, and they are
verie easilie taken. VVhat sundrie other commodities for
this Realme, right necessarie the same dooth yeelde, you
shall vnderstande in this treatise heereafter, in place more
conuenient.
            On munday being the fift of August, the Generall caused
his Tent to be set vpon the side of an hill, in the viewe
of all the Flete of Englishmen and Straungers, which were
in number betweene thirty and fortie sayle, then being accompanied
with all his Captaines, Maisters, Gentlemen &
other Soldiers, he caused all the Maisters, and principall Officers
of the Shippes, as well Englishmen as Spaniardes, Portingals,
and of other nations to repayre vnto his Tent: And
then and there, in the presence of them all, he did cause hys
commission, vnder the great seale of England to bee openlie
and solempnlie reade vnto them, whereby were
graunted vnto him his heyres, & assignes, by the Queenes
most excellent Maiestie, manie great and large royalties, liberties,
and priuiledges.Sir Humfrey tooke possession of the N
                     •
                  w found l
                     ••
                  de in the right of the crowne of Englande. The effect whereof being signified
vnto the Straungers by an Interpretor, he tooke possession
of the sayd land in the right of the Crowne of England by
digging of a Turfe and receiuing the same with an Hasell
wande, deliuered vnto him, after the manner of the lawe
and custome of England.
            
            Then he signified vnto the cōpany both strangers & others
that frō thence forth, they were to liue in that Land, as the

Territories appertayning to the Crowne of England,
               Three lawes established there by Sir Humfrey. and to
be gouerned by such Lawes as by good aduise shoulde bee
set downe, which in all poyntes (so neere as might be) shold
be agreeable to the Lawes of England: And for to put the
same in execution, presentlie he ordeined and established
three Lawes.
            Fyrst, that Religion publiquely exercised, should be such
and none, other then is vsed in the Church of England.
            
            The seconde, that if any person should bee lawfully conuicted
of any practise against her Maiestie▪ her crowne and
dignity, to be adiudged as traytors according to the Lawes
of Englande.
            
            The thyrd, if any shoulde speake dishonourably of
her Maiestie, the partie so offending, to loose his eares,
hys Shippe and goods, to be confiscate to the vse of the Generall.
            All men did verie willingly submit themselues to these
Lawes.Sundry persons, be came Tennants to Sir Humfrey, & doo maintaine possession for him in diver
                     •
                   places there. Then he caused the Queenes maiesties Armes, to
be engraued, sett vppe, and erected, with great solempnity.
After this, diuers English men, made sute vnto Sir Humfrey
to haue of him by inheritaunce, they accustomed Stages,
standinges and drying places, in sundry partes of that Land
for theyr Fish as a thing that they doo make great accōpte
off, which he graunted vnto them, in fee farme. And by thys
meanes, he hath possession mayntained for him, in many
partes of that Country. To be briefe, he dyd lette, sette, giue
and dispose of many thinges, as absolute gouernour there,
by vertue of her maiesties letters pattents.
            And after theyr Shippes were repayred, whereof one, hee
was driuen to leaue behinde, bothe for want of men sufficient
to furnish her, as also to carrie home such sicke persons
as were not able to proceede any further: He departed

from thence the 20 of August, with the other three, namelie,
the Delight, wherein was appointed Captaine in Maister
VVilliam VVinters place, (that thence returned immediatlie
for Englande) Maister Morries Browne: the Golden
Hynde, in which was Captaine and owner, Maister Edwarde
Hay: and the little Frigat where the Generall himselfe
did goe, seeming to him most fitt to discouer and approche
the Shoare.
            The 21. day they came to Cape Rase, towarde the South
partes whereof, lying a while becalmed, they tooke Codd
in largenes and quantitie, exceeding the other parts of Newfound
Lande, where any of them had beene. And frō thence,
trending the Coast West, towarde the Bay of Placencia.
The Generall sent certain men a Shoare, to view the countrey,
which to them as they sayled along, seemed pleasaunt.
VVhereof his men at theyr returne gaue great commendation,
likeing so well of the place, as they would willinglie
haue stayed and wintred there. But hauing the winde
fayre & good, they proceeded on theyr course towards the
fyrme of Ameryca, which by reason of continuall Fogges,
at that time of the yeere especially: they coulde neuer see,
till Cox Maister of the Golden Hinde did discerne Lande, &
presently lost sight thereof againe, at what time they were
all vpon a breache in a great and outragious storme, hauing
vnder 3. fadome water. But God deliuered the Frigat and
the Golden Hinde, from this great daunger. And the Delight
in the presence of them all was lost, to theyr vnspeakable
greefe, with all theyr cheefe victuall, munition, and
other necessary prouisions, and other thinges of value not
fitt heere to be named. VVherevppon, by reason also that
VVinter was come vpon them, and fowle wether increased
with Fogges and Mysts that so couered the Land, as without

daunger of perishing they coulde not approche it: Sir
Humfrey Gilbert and Maister Hays, were compelled much against
theyr wills to retyre homewardes. And beeing 300.
Leagues on theyr way, were afterwarde by tempestious
weather, seperated the one from the other, the 9. of September
last, since which time, Maister Hay with his Barke,
is safelie arriued, but of Sir Humfrey as yet, we heare no
certaine newes.
            Vppon this reporte (together with my former intent, to
write some briefe discourse in the commendation of this so
noble and woorthy an enterprise) I did call to my remembraunce,Plutnrch.
the Historie of Themystocles the Grecian, (who beeing
a right noble and valiant Captaine) signified vnto hys
Countrimen, the cittizens of Athens, that hee had inuented
a deuise for theyr common wealth very profitable, but it
was of such importaunce and secrecie, that it ought not to
be reuealed, before priuate conference had with some perticuler
prudent person of their choise.
            The Athenians knowing Aristides the Philosopher, to
be a man indued with singuler wisedome and vertue, made
choyse of him to haue conference with Themystocles, and
therevppon to yeelde his opinion to the Cittizens concerning
the sayd deuice: which was, that they might set on
fire the Nauie of theyr enemies, with great facilitie as hee
had layde the plotte: Aristides made relation to the Cittizens,
that the stratageme (deuised by Themystocles) was a
profitable practise for the common wealth but it was dishonest.
The Athenians (without further demaunde what
the same was) dyd by common consent reiecte and condemne
it, preferring honest and vpright dealing before profite.
            By occasion of this historie, I drewe my selfe into a more

deeper consideration, of thys late vndertaken voyage, whether
it were as well pleasing to almightie God, as profitable
to men? as lawfull as it seemed honourable. As well gratefull
to the Sauages, as gainfull to the Christians. And vpon
mature deliberation, I founde the action to bee honest and
profitable, and therefore allowable by the opinion of Aristides
if he were nowe aliue, which beeing by me heerein
sufficiently prooued, (as by Gods grace I purpose to doo)
I doubt not but that all good mindes, wyll endeuour themselues
to be assistauntes to this so commendable an enterprise,
by the valiant and woorthy Gentlemen our Countrimen
alreadie attempted and vndertaken.
            Nowe whereas I doo vnderstande that Sir Humfrey Gilbert,
               Apparation in hand for a newe supply.
his adherents, associates, and freendes doo meane with
a conuenient supplie (with as much speede as may bee) to
maintaine, pursue and followe, this intended voyage already
in part performed, and (by the assistaunce of almightie
God) to plant themselues and theyr people in the continent
of the hether part of America, betweene the degrees of
30. and 60. of septentrionall latitude. (Within which degrees
by computation Astronomicall and Cosmographicall
are doubtles to be founde, 
                  
                     Englishmē
                     
                     Ma. Iohn Hawkins 
                     Sir Fraunces Drake 
                     Ma. Williā Winter.
                     Ma Iohn Chester.
                     Ma. Martin Furbisher.
                     Anthony Parkchurst.
                     William Batts.
                     Iohn Lowell
                     Dauid Ingram.
                  
                  
                     Strangers French.
                     Sir Iohn Ribaulte.
                     Iaques Cartier.
                     Andrew Theuet.
                     Mounser Gou
                           •
                        den.
                     Mounser Popellynere
                     Iohn Verasanus.
                  
                  
                     Italian.
                     Christopher Columnus
                  
                all thinges that be necessarie
profitable, or delectable for mans life. The climate mylde
and temperate, neither too hotte not too colde, so
that vnder the cope of heauen there is not any where to
be founde a more conuenient place to plant and inhabite
in: which manie notable Gentlemen, bothe of our owne
nation and straungers (who haue beene traueilers) can testifie:
and that those Countries are at this day inhabited
with Sauages who haue no knowledg of God▪ Is it not therfore
(I say) to be lamented, that these poore Pagans, so long
liuing in ignoraunce and Idolatry, and in sorte, thirsting

after christianitie, (as may appeare by the relation of such
as haue trauailed in those partes,) that our heartes are so
hardned, that fewe or none can be found which wil put to
theyr helping hands, and applie themselues to the relieuing
of the miserable and wretched estate of these sillie soules?
            Whose Countrey dooth (as it were with arme aduaunced)
aboue the climats both of Spayne and Fraunce, stretche
out it selfe towardes England onelie. In manner praying
our ayde and helpe, as it is not onelie set foorth in Mercators
generall Mappe, but it is also founde to bee true by the
discouery of our nation, and other straungers, who haue often
times trauailed vpon the same Coastes.
            
               Christopher Columnus of famous memorie the firste instrumēt
to manifest the great glorie & mercy of almightie God
in planting the Christian Faith, in those so long vnknown
regions, God doth not alwaies begin his greatest workes by the greatest persons hauing in purpose to acquaint (as he did) that renowmed
Prince, the Queenes Maiesties Grandfather, King
Henry the seuenth, with his intended voiage for the VVesterne
Discoueries, was not onely derided and mocked generally
euen heere in Englande, but afterward became a
laughing stocke to the Spaniardes themselues, who at thys
day (of all other people) are moste bounden to laude and
prayse God, who first sturred vppe the man to that enterprise.
            And while he was attending there to acquaint the King
of Castile (that then was) with his intended purpose, by
howe many wayes and meanes was hee derided?His custōe was to bow himselfe very lowe in making of curtesie. Some
scorned the pildnes of his garments, some tooke occasion to
iest at his simple and silly lookes, others asked if this were
he, that lowts so lowe, which did take vppon him to bring
men into a Country that aboundeth wyth Gold, Pearle, &
Precious stones? If hee were any such man (sayd they) he

woulde carrie another manner of countenaunce with him,
and looke somewhat loftier. Thus some iudged him by his
garments and others by his looke and countenaunce, but
none entered into the consideration of the inward man.
            In the ende, what successe his voyage had, who list to
reade the Decades. The Historie of the VVest Indies, the
conquest of Hernando Cortese about Mexico,
               Hernando Cortese. and those of
Francisco Pizare in Peru about Casamalcha and Cusco, may
knowe more perticulerly.Francisco. Pyzare All which their discoueries traueils,
and conquests, are extant to be had in the English
tongne. This deuice was then accounted a fantasticall imagination,
and a drowsie dreame.
            But the sequel thereof, hath since awaked out of dreames
thousandes of soules to knowe theyr Creator, being thereof
before that time altogether ignoraunt. And hath since
made sufficient proofe, neyther to be fantasticke, nor vainely
imagined.
            VVithall, how mightely hath it inlarged the dominions
of the Crowne of Spayne, and greatly enritching the subiectes
of the same, let all men consider. Besides, it is well
knowne, that sithence the time of Columnus his first discouerie,
through theyr planting, possessing, and inhabiting
those partes, there hath beene transported and brought
home into Europe, greater store of Golde, Siluer, Pearle, and
Pretious stones, then heeretofore hath beene in all ages,
since the creation of the worlde.
            I doe therefore hartelie wish, that seeing it hath pleased
almighty God, of hys infinite mercie at the length, to awake
some of our worthy Countrey men, out of that
drowsie dreame, wherein we all haue so long slumbered.
            That wee may nowe not suffer it to quaile for want
of maintenance, that by these valiant Gentlemē our Countreymen

is so nobly begun & enterprised. For which purpose,
I haue taken vpon me to write this simple shorte treatise,
hoping that it shall be able to perswade such as haue
beene, and yet doo continue detractors & hinderers of this
iourney, (by reason perhappes that they haue not deliberately
and aduisedly entered into the iudgment of the matter)
that yet now vpon better consideration they will become
fauorable furtherers of the same. And that such as are
already well affected there vnto, will continue theyr good
dispositions. And with all, I most humbly pray all such as
are no Nyggardes of their purses, in buying of costly and
rich apparrell, and liberall Contributors, in setting foorth
of games,A reasonable request. pastimes, feastings and banquettes, (whereof the
charge being past, there is no hope of publique profit or
priuate commoditie) that henceforth they will bestowe &
employe theyr liberalitie (heeretofore that way expended)
to the furtherance of these so commendable purposed proceedings.
            And to this ende haue I taken penne in hande, as in conscience
therevnto mooued, desiring much rather, that of
the great multitude, which this Realme dooth nourish,
farre better able to handle this matter then I my selfe am,
it woulde haue pleased some one of them to haue vndertaken
the same. But seeing they are silent, and that it falleth
to my lott to put penne to the paper, I will indeuour my
selfe, aud doo stande in good hope (though my skill and
knowledge be simple, yet through the assistaunce of almighty
GOD) to prooue that this voyage, late enterprised,
for trade, traficke, and planting, in America, is an action
tending to the lawfull enlargement of her Maiesties dominions,The argument of the Booke.
commodious to the whole Realme in generall. Profitable
to the aduenturers in perticuler, beneficial to the Sauages,

and a matter to be attained without any great daunger
or difficultie.
            And lastlye (which moste of all is) A thing likewise
tending to the honor and glory of almighty God: And for
that the lawfulnes to plant in those Countreyes, in some
mens iudgements, seemeth very doubtfull, I will beginne
with the proofe of the lawfulnesse of trade, traficke, and
planting.
         
         
            The seconde Chapiter, sheweth that it is lawfull and necessarye
to trade and traficke with the Sauages. And to plant in
their Countries. And deuideth planting into two sortes.
            
               
                  ANd firste for traficke, I
say that the Christians may lawfully
trauaile into those Countries
and abide there, whom the Sauages
may not iustly impugne and
forbidde, in respect of the mutuall
society & fellowship betweene
man and man prescribed by the
Lawe of Nations.
            For from the first beginning of the creation of the world
and from the renuing of the same after Noes floode, all
men haue agreed, that no violence shoulde be offered to
Ambassadours. That the Sea with his Hauens should bee

               
                  •••
               mon. That such as should fortune to be taken in warre,

                  •••
               ld be seruauntes or slaues. And that Straungers sholde

                  〈◊〉
                bee dryuen away from the place or Countrey where.

                  〈◊〉
                they doo come.
            If it were so then, I demaunde in what age, and by what
Lawe is the same forbidden or denied since? For who
doubteth but that it is lawfull for Christians to vse trade
and traficke with Infidels or Sauages, carrying thether
such commodities as they want, and bringing from thence
some parte of theyr plentie.
            A thing so commonly and generally practised, bothe in
these our dayes, and in times past▪ beyonde the memory of
man, both by Christians and Infidels, that it needeth no
further proofe.
            And for as much as the vse of trade and traficke, (bee
it neuer so profitable) ought not to bee preferred before
the planting of Christian fayth. I will therefore somewhat
entreate of planting (wythout which, Christian
Rellgion can take no roote, be the Preachers neuer so
carefull and diligent) which I meane to deuide in two
sortes.The principall causes why thys viage is vndertaken.
            
            The first, when Christians by the good likeing and
willing assent of the Sauages, are admitted by them to quiet
possession.
            The seconde, when Christians beeing vniustly repulsed,
doo seeke to attaine and maintaine the right for
which they doo come.
            And thoughe in regarde of the establishment of
Christian Religion,The first kinde of Planting. eyther of bothe maye bee lawfullye
and iustlye exercised. VVhereof manye examples
may bee founde, as well in the tyme of

               Moises and Iosua, and other Rulers before the byr
                  ••
                
               
                  •
               f
Christ. As of many vertuous Emperours and King 
                  〈◊〉
               
thence his incarnation: yet doo I wish, that before the 
                  •••
               cond
be put in practise, a proofe may bee made of the fir
                  ••
               ,
sauing that for theyr safety as well against the Sauages, as
all other sorraine enemies, they should first well and strong
lie fortefie themselues, which beeing doone, then by all
fayre speeches, and euery other good meanes of perswasion
to seeke to take away all occasions of offence.
            As letting them to vnderstand, howe they came not to
theyr hurt, but for theyr good, and to no other ende, but to
dwell peaceably amongst them, and to trade and traficke
with them for theyr owne commoditie, without molesting
or greeuing them any way, which must not be doone by
wordes onely but also by deedes.
            For albeit, to maintainer right and repell iniurie, be a iust
cause of warre, yet must there heereof be heedefull care had,
that whereas the Sauages be fearefull by nature, and fonde
otherwise, the Christians shoulde doo theyr best endeuour
to take away such feare as may growe vnto them by reason
of theyr straunge apparrell, Armour, and weapon, or
such like, by quiet & peaceable conuersation, & letting thē
liue in securitie & keeping a measure of blameles defencē,
with as little discommoditie to the Sauages as may bee, for
this kinde of warre woulde be onely defensiue and not offensiue.
            And questionles there is great hope & likely hoode that
by this kinde of meanes, we should bring to passe all effectes
to our desired purposes: Considering that all creatures,
by constitution of nature, are rendred more tractable
and easier w
                  •
               nne for all assayes, by cour
                  •
               esie and myldnes,
then by crueltie or roughnes: and therefore beeing

a principle taught vs by naturall reason, it is first to be put
in vre.
            For albeit as yet the Christians are not so throughlye
furnished with the perfectnes of theyr language, either to
expresse theyr mindes to them, or againe to conceiue the
Sauages intent. Yet for the present opportunitie, such pollicie
may be vsed by freendly signes, and courteous tokens
towardes them, as the Sauages may easily perceiue, (were
theyr sences neuer so grosse) an assured freendshippe to be
offered them, and that they are encountered with such a nation,
as bringes thē benefite, commoditie, peace, tranquillity
and safetie. To further this, and to accomplish it in deedes,
there must be presented vnto them gratis, some kindes of
our peittie marchaundizes and trifles: As looking Glasses,
Bells, Beades, Braceletts, Chaines, or Collers of Bewgle,
Christall, Amber, Iett, or Glasse &c. For such be the things,
though to vs of small value, yet accounted by them of
high price and estimation: and soonest will induce theyr
Barbarous natures to a likeing and a mutuall society with
vs.
            Moreouer, it shall be requisite, either by speeche, if it bee
possible, either by some other certaine meanes, to signifie
vnto them. That once league of freendshippe, with all louing
conuersation, beeing admitted betweene the Christians
and them▪ that then the Christians from thence forth
will alwayes bee ready with force of Armes to assiste and
defende them in theyr iust quarrelles, from all inuasions,
spoyles and oppressions, offered or to bee offered them by
any Tyraunts, Aduersaries, or theyr next borderers: and a
benefit is so much the more to be esteemed, by how much
the person vppon whome it is bestowed standeth in neede
thereof.
            
               
For it appeareth by the relation of a countreyman of
ours,This Dauid Ingram was in this last iourney w
                     •
                  th Sir Humfrey and is very desirous to be imployed 
                     ••
                  ether againe. namely Dauid Ingram, (who trauelled in those countries
xj. monethes and more) That the Sauages generally
for the most part, are at continuall warres wyth their next
adioyning neighbours, and especially the Canniballs, beeing
a cruell kinde of people, whose foode is mans flesh, & haue
teeth like dogges, and doo pursue them with rauenous
myndes to eate theyr flesh, and deuoure them.
            And it is not to be doubted, but that the Christians may
in this case iustly and lawfully ayde the Sauages against
the Canniballs, So that it is very likelie, that by this means
wee shall not onely mightely stirre and unflame theyr rude
myndes gladly to embrace the louing companye of the
Christians, proffering vnto them bothe commodities succor,
and kindnes, But also by theyr francke consents, shall
easily enioy such competent quantity of Lande, as euery
way shall be corespondent to the Christians expectation,
& contentation, considering the great aboūdance that they
haue of Lande, and howe small account they make thereof.
Taking no other fruits thereby then such as the ground
of it selfe dooth naturally yeelde. And thus much concerning
the first sort of planting, which as I assuredly hope, so
I most hartelie pray may take effect and place.
            But if after these good and fayre meanes vsed, the Sauages
neuertheles will not be heerewithall satisfied,The second kinde of Planting. but
barbarously wyll goe about to practise violence either in
repelling the Christians from theyr Portes and safe Landinges
or in withstanding them afterwardes to enioye
the rights for which both painfully & lawfully they haue
aduentured themselues thether.
            Then in such a case I holde it no breache of equitye
for the Christians to defende themselues, to pursue reuenge

with force, and to doo whatsoeuer is necessary for
the attayning of theyr safety: For it is allowable by all
Lawes in such distreses, to resist violence with violence.
And for theyr more securitie to increase their strength by
building of fortes, for auoyding the extremities of iniurious
dealing.
            Wherein if also they shall not be suffered in reasonable
quietnes to continue, there is no barre (as I iudge but that
in stoute assemblies, the Christians may issue out, and by
strong hande pursue theyr enemies, subdue them, take
posession of theyr Townes, Citties, or Villages, (and in auoyding
murtherous tyranny) to vse the Lawe of Armes,
as in like case among all nations at thys day is vsed: and
most especially to the ende they may with securitye holde
theyr lawfull possession, least happily after the departure
of the Christians, such Sauages as haue beene conuerted,
shoulde afterwardes through compulsion and enforcmēnt
of theyr wicked Rulers, returne to theyr horrible Idolatry
(as did the children of Israell,
               Iudges. 6. after the decease of Iosua)
and continue theyr wicked custome of most vnnaturall
sacrificing of humaine creatures.
            And in so dooing, doubtles the Christians shall no
whitt at all transgresse the bondes of equitie or ciuility,
for as much as in former ages, (yea before the incarnatiō
of Christ) the like hath beene doon by sundry Kings and
Princes, Gouerners of the children of Israell: cheefely
in respect to beginne theyr Planting, for the establishment
of Gods word: as also since the natiuity of Christ, myghty
and pussaunt Emperours and Kinges haue performed
the like, I say to plant, possesse, and subdue. For proofe
whereof, I wyll alledge you examples of bothe
tymes.
            
               
We reade in the olde testament, howe that after Noes
fludde was ceased, restoration of mankinde began onely of
those fewe of Noes children and family as were by God pre
elected to be saued in the Arke with him, whose seed in processe
of time, was multiplyed to infinite numbers of nations,
which in diuers sortes deuided themselues to sundry
quarters of the earth. And forasmuch as all their posteritie
being mightely encreased followed not the perfect lyfe of
Noe theyr predecessor, God chose out of the multitude, a
peculiar people to himselfe, to whome afterwardes beeing
vnder the gouernement of Moises in Mount Synay, hee
made a graunt to inherite the Lande of Canaan, called the
Land of Promise, with al the other rich and fertile Countryes
next adioyning thervnto. Neuerthelesse, before they
came to possession therof, hauing beene afflicted with many
greeuous punishments and plagues for theyr sinnes,
they fell in dispayre to enioy the same.
            But beeing encouraged and comforted by theyr Rulers,
(men of God) they proceeded, arming themselues with all
patience, to suffer what soeuer it shoulde please God to
sende: and at last attaining to the Lande, they were encoū
               tered
with great numbers of strong people and myghtye
Kinges.
            Notwithstanding,Iosua. 4. 
               Iosua theyr leader, replenished with
the spirite of God, beeing assured of the iustnes of his quarrell,
gathered the cheefe strength of the children of Israell
together, to the number of 40000. with whom he safely
passed the huge Riuer Iourden, and hauing before sent priuie
spyes for the discouery of the famous Cittie Ierico, to
vnderstand the certaintie of the Cittizens estate,Iosua. 6. he foorth
with came thether, and enuironed it rounde aboute, with
his whole power the space of seuen dayes.
            
               
In which respite, perceiuing none of the Gentiles disposed
to yeeld or call for mercie, he then commaunded (as God
before had appointed) that both the Cittie Iericho should
be burned, yea, and all the inhabitaunts, as well olde as
young, with all their cattell, should be destroied, onelie excepted
Rahab, her kindred and Familie, because she before
had hid secretly the messengers of Iosua, that were sent thether
as spies. As for all their golde, siluer, precious stones,
or vesselles of brasse, they were reserued and consecrated to
the Lords treasurie.
            In like manner he burned the cittie Hay,
               Iosua. 8. slew the inhabitants
thereof, and hanged vp their King. But for so much
as the Gebionites (fearing the like euent) sent Ambassadors
vnto Iosua, to intreate for grace, fauour, and peace: he commaunded
that all their liues should be saued, and that they
should be admitted to the companie of the children of Israel.Iosua. 9.
Yet vnderstanding afterwards they wrought this by
a pollicie, he vsed them as drudges to hewe wood & to carie
water, and other necessaries for his people. Thus beganne
this valiaunt Captaine his conquest, which he pursued and
neuer left till he had subdued all the Hethites, Amorites,
Cananites, Pheresites, Heuites, and Iebusites, with all their
Princes and Kings,Iudg. 11. 13 being thirtie and one in number, and
diuers other straunge Nations besides, whose lands and dominions,
he wholie deuided among Gods people.
            After that Iosua was deceased, Iuda was constituted Lord
ouer the Armie, who receiuing like charge from God pursued
the proceedings of the holie Captaine Iosua, and vtterlie
vanquished many Gentiles, Idolaters, and aduersaries
to the children of Israel,Iudg. 1. with all such Rulers or Kings,
as withstoode him, and namely, Adonibezek, the most cruell
tyraunt: whose thombes and great toes he caused to be cut

off,A good not for all Conquerers to be mercifull. for so much as he had doon the like before vnto seuēty
Kings, whome being his prisoners, he forced to gather vp
their victualles vnderneath his Table. In this God shewed
his iustice to reuenge tyranny. We reade likewise, that
Gedeō
                a most puissant & noble warrior, so behaued himself
in following the woorthy actes of Iosua and Iuda,
               Iudg. 6. 7. That in
short time he not onely deliuered the children of Israel frō
the hands of the multitude of the fierce Madianites, but
also subdued them and their Tyrants, whose landes he caused
Gods people to possesse and inherite.
            I could recite diuers other places out of the Scripture,
which aptly may be applied heervnto were it not I do endeuour
my selfe by all meanes to be breefe. Now in like
manner will I alledge some few of Inductions out of the
autenticall writings of the Ecclesiasticall Historiographers,
all tending to the like argument. And first to begin with all,
we doo reade. That after our sauiour Iesus Christ had suffered
his passion. The apostles being inspired with the holy
Ghost,India the great, was not preached vnto by the Apostles. Metrodorus the Philosopher, the fyrst discouerer of India the great. and the knowledge of all straunge languages, did
immediatly dispearse themselues to sundrie partes of the
world, to the preaching of the Gospell. Yet not in so generall
a manner, but that there remained some farre remote
Coūtries vnuisited by them, amōg the which it is reported
that India the great, called the vttermost India, as yet had
receiued no light of the word. But it came to passe, that one
Metrodorus, a verie learned and wise Philosopher in that
age, being desirous to search out vnknowne landes, did first
discouer the same, finding it wonderful populous and rich,
which vppon his returne being published, and for certaine
vnderstoode, there was another graue Philosopher of Tyrus
called Meropius,
               Meropius. being a christian, who did resolue himselfe
(folowing the example of Metrodorus) to trauaile thether,

and in a short time assisted but with a fewe, in a small
Vessell arriued there, hauing in his company two young
youthes,Edesius and Frumētius. 
               Edesius, and Frumentius, whome (being his schollers)
he had throughly instructed, both in lyberall Sciences
and christian Religion. Now after that Meropius somewhile
staying there, had (as he thought) sufficient vnderstanding
of the Indians whole estate. He determined to depart,
and to bring notice thereof vnto the Emperor, whom
he meant to exhort to the conquest of the same. But by
misfortune he was preuēted, for being in the middest of his
course on the Sea homeward, a sore tempest arose, and perforce
droue him backe againe, to an vnknowne Port of the
saide lande: where he by the most cruell barbarous Indians
on the suddaine was slaine with all his company,Meropius slaine. except the
two young schollers aforesaide, whome the barbarous Indians,
by reason they were of comely stature and beautifull
personages, tooke, and foorth with presented them to their
King and Queene:Edisius and Frumentius preserued by the Indians. which both being verie well lyked of,
the King courteously entreated, and ordeined Edesius to be
his Butler, and Frumentius his Secretary, and in few yeeres
by reason of their learning and ciuill gouernement, they
were had in great fauour, honour, and estimation with the
Princes. But the King departing this life, left the Queene
his wife with her young sonne to gouerne, and gaue free
scope and lybertie to the two christians, at their best pleasure
to passe to their natiue soyles, allowing them all necessaries
for the same. Yet the Queene who highly fauoured
them, was verie sorowful they should depart, and therefore
most earnestlie intreated them to tarie and assist her in the
gouernement of her people, tyll such tyme as her young
Soone grewe to type yeeres, which request they fulfilled,
            
               
And Frumentius excelling Edesius farre in all wisedome,Frumentius in great fauour with the Queene of the Indians.
ruled both the Queene and her subiects at his discretion,
whereby he tooke occasion to put in practise priuilie, that
the foundation of christian religion might be planted in the
hearts of such as with whome he thought his perswasion
might best preuaile, and that soonest would giue eare vnto
him, which being brought to passe accordingly, he then
with his fellow Edesius,
               An other great work of God begun by a man of meane birth. tooke leaue of the Queene to returne
to his natiue countrie. And so soone as he was arriued
there, he reuealed to the Emperor Constantine, the effect
of all those euents: who both commending his deeds
and wholie allowing thereof, by the aduise and good liking
of Athanasius then Bishop of Alexandria, did arme and set
foorth a conuenient power for the aide of Frumentius, in
this his so godlie a purpose.Ruffinus, the Author of this storye. And by this meanes came the
Emperor afterwardes by faire promises, and by force of
Armes together, vnto the possession of all the Indians
countrie. The author of this storie Ruffinus receiued the
trueth heereof,Euse. in his ecclesiasticall history testifieth howe that Cōstantine the great, did enlarge his dominions by subduing of Infidels and Idolatrous nations. Eusebius lib 1. de vita Constant. Cap. 4. et Cap. 9. from the verie mouth of Edesius companion
to Frumentius.
            
            Moreouer, Eusebius in his Historie Ecclesiasticall in precise
termes, and in diuers places maketh mencion how Constantine
the great, not onelie enlarged his Empire by the
subduing of his next neighbours, but also endeuored by all
meanes, to subiect all such remote Barbarous and Heathen
nations, as then inhabited the fowre quarters of the world.
For (as it is written) the Emperor throughlie aided with a
puissaunt armie of valiaunt souldiers whom he had before
perswaded to christian religion, in proper person himselfe,
came euen vnto this our natiue Countrie of England, then
called the Island of Brittaines, bending from him full west,
which he wholie conquered, made tributarie, and setled

therein christian faith, and left behinde him such Rulars
thereof, as to his wisedome seemed best. From thence he
turned his force towards the North coast of the world, and
there vtterlie subdued the rude and cruell Nation of the
Scithians, whereof part by freendly perswasions, part by
maine strength, he reduced the whole to christian Faith.
Afterwardes he determined with himselfe to search out
what straunge people inhabited in the vttermost partes of
the South.Eu. eod lib. Cap. 39. And with great hazard and labour, making his
iorney thether, at last became victor ouer them all, euen
to the countrie of the Blemmyans, and the remote Etheopians,
that now are the people of Presbiter Iohn, who yet tyl
this daie, continue and beare the name of christians.
            In the East likewise, what Nation soeuer at that timè
he could haue notice off, he easilie wunne and brought in
subiection to the Empire. So that to conclude, there was
no region in any part of the world, the inhabitaunts wherof
being Gentiles, though vnknowne vnto him. But in
time he ouercame and vanquished.
            This woorthy beginning of Constantine,
               Theodorit in Ecclesiast. Hist. lib, 5, Cap. 20. both his sonnes
succeeding his roome, and also diuers other Emperors afterward
to their vttermost endeuor followed and continued,
which all the Bookes of Eusebius more at large setteth
foorth. Theodoritus likewise in his Ecclesiasticall historie
maketh mencion how Theodosius the vertuous Emperour,
emploied earnestlie all his time, as well in conquering the
Gentiles to the knowledge of the holie Gospel, vtterlie subuerting
the prophane Temples and abhominable Idolatry.
As also in extinguishing of such vsurping tiraunts,Theodoritus cap. 26 eod. libro. as with
Paganisme withstoode the planting of christian religion.
After whose decease his sonnes, Honorius, and Arcadius,
were created Emperors, the one of the East, the other of

the West, who with all stoutly godlines, most carefully imitated
the foresteps of their father, eyther in enlarging
their territories, or increasing the christian flocke.
            Moreouer, it is reported by the saide aucthor, that The odotius
Iunior the Emperour, no whit inferiour in vertuous
life to any of the aboue named Princes,Eod. lib. 20. chap. 36. with great study &
zeale pursued, & prosecuted the Gētiles, subdued their Tyraunts
and Countries, and vtterly destroied all their Idolatry,
conuerting their soules to acknowledge their onelie
Messias & Creator, and their countries to the enlargement
of the Empire. To be breefe, who so listeth to reade Eusebius,
Pamphilus, Socrates Scolasticus, Theodoritus, Hermia,
Sozomen, and Euagrius Scolasticus, which all were most
sage Ecclesiastical writers, shall finde great store of exāples
of the woorthy liues of sundry Emperors, tending all to the
confirmation of my former speeches.
            And for like examples of latter time (yea, euen in the memory
of man) I shall not neede to recite any other then the
conquest made of the West and East Indies, by the Kings
of Spaine and Portugall, whereof there is particular mencion
made in the last chapiter of this Booke. Heerein haue I
vsed more copy of examples, then otherwise I would haue
doone, sauing that I haue beene in place where this maner
of planting the christian. Fath, hath beene thought of some
to be scarce lawfull, yea, such as doo take vppon them to be
more then meanely learned. To these examples could I
ioyne many moe but whosoeuer is not satisfied with these
fewe, may satisfie himselfe in reading at large the aucthors
last aboue recited Thus haue I (as I trust) prooued that we
may iustly trade and traffique with the Sauages, and lawfullie
plant and inhabite theyr Countries.
         
         
            
            ¶The third Chapter dooth shewe the lawfull tytle, which the
Queenes most excellent Maiestie hath vnto those Countries,
which through the ayde of almightie God are mente to
be inhabited.
            
               
                  AND it is very euident
that the planting there shall in
time right amplie enlarge her Maiesties
Territories and Dominions
(or I might rather say) restore her
to her Highnesse auncient right
and interest in those Countries,1170. Owen Gwyneth, was then Prince of North-wales.
into the which a noble and woorthy
personage, lyneally descended from the blood royall,
borne in VVales, named Madocke ap Owen Gwyneth departing
from the coast of England, about the yeere of our
Lord God. 1170. arriued and there planted himselfe,Nullū tem pus occurrit Regi. and
his Colonies,This Iland was discouered by Sir Humfrey & his cōpany, in this his last iorney. and afterward returned himselfe into England,
leauing certaine of his people there, as appeareth in an
auncient Welch Chronicle, where he then gaue to certaine
Ilandes, Beastes, and Fowles, sundrie VVelch names,
as the Iland of Pengwyn, which yet to this day beareth the
same.
            There is lykewise a Fowle in the sayde Countries, called
by the same name at this daye, and is as much to saye
in Englishe, as VVhiteheadde, and in trueth, the sayde
Fowles haue white heads.
            
               
There is also in those Countries a fruite called Gaynethes
which is likewise a welch word. Moreouer, there are diuers
other welch wordes at this daie in vse,Who hath also seene berded men there, which can not bee naturall cū
                  trimen, for that the Americans are voide of beardes. as Dauid Ingram aforesaide
reporteth in his relations. All which most strongly
argueth, the saide Prince with his people to haue inhabited
there. And the same in effect is confirmed by Mutuzuma
that mightie Emperor of Mexico, who in an Oration
vnto his subiects, for the better pacifying of them, made
in the presence of Hernando Curtese, vsed these speeches
following.
            My kinsemen, freends, and sernaunts, you do well know
that eigteene yeeres I haue been your King,Mutuzuma his Oration to his subiects in presence of Hernando Curtese. as my Fathers
and Grandfathers were, and alwaies I haue beene vnto you
a louing Prince, and you vnto me good and obedient subiects,
and so I hope you will remaine vnto me all the daies
of my life. You ought to haue in remembraunce, that eyther
you haue heard of your Fathers, or else our diuines
haue instructed you that we are not naturallie of this Coū
               trie,which Oration was made about the yeere 1520.
nor yet our Kingdome is durable, because our Forefathers
came from a farre countrie, and their King and
Captaine who brought them hither, returned againe to his
natural countrie, saying, that he would send such as should
rule and gouerne vs, if by chaunce he himselfe returned
not, &c.
            These be the verie words of Mutuzuma, set downe in the
S
                     •
                  anish Chronicles,Looke the conquest of West Indi
                     •
                  s 
                     •
                  ol. 2 31. the which being throughlie considered,
because they haue relation to some straunge noble person,
who long before had possessed those Countries, doo
all sufficientlie argue, the vndoubted title of her Maiestie:
For as much as no other Nation can truelie by any Chronicles
they can finde, make prescription of time for themselues,
before the time of this Prince Madocke. Besides all

this, for further proofe of her highnes title sithence the arriuall
of this noble Britton into those partes (that is to say)
in the time of the Queenes Maiesties Grandfather, of worthy
memorie, King Henry the seuenth, Letters pattents
were by his Maiestie graunted to Iohn Gabota an Italian,
to Lewes, Sebastian, and Sansius, his three sonnes, to discouer
remoate, Barbarous and Heathen Countries, which
discouery, was afterwards executed to the vse of the crown
of England, in the sayd Kings time, by Sebastian and Sansius
his sonnes,Ma. Oliue
                     •
                   Dalbony. Ma. Edward. Reow. Ma. R. H. Ma. I. A. who were borne heere in Englande: In
true testimony whereof, there is a fayre Hauen in Newfounde
Land, knowne and called vntill this day, by the
name of Sansius Hauen, which prooueth that they firste
discouered vpon that Coast, from the heyght of 63. vnto
the Cape of Florida, as appeareth in the Decades.
            And this may stande for another title to her Maiestie,
but any of the foresayde titles is as much, or
more then any other Christian Prince can pretende to the
Indies before suche time as they had actuall possession
thereof, obteyned by the discouery of Christopher Columnus,
and the conquest of Vasques Numes de Balboa,
Hernando Cortese, Francisco Pysare, and others. And
therefore I thinke it needeles to write any
more touching the lawfulnes of
her Maiesties title.
         
         
            
            The fourth Chapiter sheweth, howe that the trade traficke and
planting in those Countries, is likely to prooue very profitable
to the whole Realme in generall.
            
               
                  NOW to shew howe the
same is most likely to prooue very
profitable and beneficiall generallie
to the whole Realme. It is
verye certaine, that the greatest
Iewell of this Realme, and the
cheefest strength and force of the
same, for defence or offence, in
martiall matter and manner is the multitude of Shippes,
Maisters and Marriners, ready to assist the moste stately &
royall Nauie of her Maiestie, which by reason of this
voyage shall haue, both increase and maintenaunce: And
it is well knowne, that in sundry places of this Realme,
Shippes haue beene built and sette foorth of late dayes for
the trade of fishing onely:Cox the M
                     •
                  ster. Yet not withstanding the fishe
which is taken and brought into England by the English
Nauie of Fishermen, will not suffice for the expence of
this realme foure moneths, if there were none els brought
of straungers. And the cheefest cause why our Englishmē
doo not goe so farre westerly, as the especiall fishing places
doo lie, both for plenty and greatnes of fish, is for that they
haue no succour and known safe harbour in those partes.
But if our nation were once planted there, or neere thereaboutes:
whereas they now fish but for two monethes in

the yeere, they myght thē fish so long as pleased thēselues
or rather at theyr comming find such plenty of Fish readie
taken, salted & dryed, as might be sufficient to fraught
them home without long delay, (God graunting that
salt may be found there) whereof Dauid Ingram (who trauelled
in those Countries as aforesayde) saith that there is
great plentie: and withall the Climate dooth giue greate
hope, that though there were none naturallye growing,
yet it might aswell be made there by arte, as it is
both in Rochell and Bayon, or els where. VVhich beeing
brought to passe, shall encrease the number of our ships
and Marriners, were it but in respect of fishing onelie: but
much more in regarde of the sundry Marchaundises and
commodities which are there founde and had in greate
aboundance.
            Moreouer, it is wel known that all Sauages, as wel those
that dwell in the South, as those that dwell in the North,
so soone as they shall begin but a little to taste of ciuillitie,
will take meruailous delight in any garment be it neuer so
simple: As a shirt, a blewe, yellow, redde, or greene Cotten
cassocke, a Cappe or such like, and will take incredible
paynes for such a trifle.
            For I my selfe haue heard this reporte made sundrye
times, by diuers of our Countreymen, who haue dwelt in
the sotherly partes, of the VVest Indies, some 12. yeeres
together, and some of lesse time: That the people in those
partes,Clothiers. Wolmen. Carders. Spinners. Weauers. Fullers, Sheremen▪ Diers. are easily reduced to ciuilitie bothe in manners and
garments. VVhich beeing so, what vente for our English
clothes will thereby ensue, and howe great benefit to all
such persons & Artificers whose names are coated in the
margent, I doo leaue to the iudgment of such as are discrete.
            
               
And questionles heereby it will also come to passe,Drapers. Clothiers. Cappers Hatters. &c. And many decayed townes repayred. that
all such Townes and Villages, as bothe haue beene and
nowe are vtterlye decayed and ruinated (the poore
people thereof beeing not sette a worke by reason of the
transportation of rawe VVooll of late dayes, more excessiuely
then in tymes past) shall by this meanes be restored
to theyr pristinate wealth and estate, all which doo likewise
tende to the enlargement of our Nauie and mayntenaunce
of our nauigation.
            To what ende neede I endeuour my selfe by arguments
to prooue, that by this voyage, our nauie and nauigation
shall be enlarged, when as there needeth none other reason
then the manifest and late example of the neere Neighbours
to this Realme, the Kings of Spayne, and Portingall
who since the first discouery of the Indias, haue not onelye
mightily enlarged theyr dominions, greatly enritched
themselues and theyr subiectes: but haue also by iust account
trebbled the number of theyr Shippes, Maysters and
Marriners, a matter of no small moment & importaunce.
            Besides this,The ydle persons of this Realm shall by occasion of this iourney be wel employed and sette on worke. it will prooue a generall benefite vnto our
Country, that through this occasion, not onely a greate
number of men which doo nowe liue ydlely at home, and
are burdenous, chargeable, & vnprofitable to this Realme,
shall heereby be sette on worke, but also children of 12. or
14. yeeres of age or vnder, may bee kept from ydlenes, in
making of a thousand kindes of trifeling thinges, which
will be good Marchandize for that Country. And moreouer,
our ydle women, (which the Realme may well spare)
shal also bee imployed on plucking, drying, and sorting of
Feathers, in pulling, beating, & working of Hempe, & in
gathering of Cotten, & dyuers things right necessary for
dying. All which thinges are to bee found in those Countries

most plentifully.Hempe doth growe neere Saint Lawrence Riuer naturally. And the men may imploy thēselues
in draging for Pearle, working for Mynes, and in matters
of husbandry, and likewise in hunting the VVhale for
traine, and making Caskes to put the same in: besides, in
fishing for Codde, Salmon and Herring, drying, salting▪ &
barrelling the same, and felling of Trees, hewing and sawing
of them, and such like woorke, meete for those persons
as are no men of arte or science.
            Many other thinges may be founde to the greate reliefe
and good emploiemnts of no small number, of the naturall
subiectes of this Realme, which doo nowe liue heere
ydlelie to the common annoy of the whole state.Reade the beginning of the boke intituled, diuers voyages touching the discouery of America. Neither
may I heere omitte the great hope and likely hoode of a
passage by the Graunde bay, into the South Seas, confirmed
by sundrie Aucthors to be founde leading to Cataia,
the Moluccos and Spiceries, whereby may ensue as general
a benefite to the Realme or greater, then yet hath beene
spoken off, without eyther such charges, or other inconueniences,
as by the redious tract of time & perrill, which the
ordinarie passage to those partes at this day doth minister.
And to conclude this argument withall, it is well knowne
to all men of sounde iudgemēt, that this voyage is of greater
importaunce, and will be founde more beneficiall to
our Countrey, then all other voyages at this day in vse
and trade amongst vs.
         
         
            The fift Chapiter sheweth, that the trading and planting in
those Countries is likely to prooue, to the perticuler profit
of all the Aduenturers.
            
               
               I 
               Must nowe according
to my promise shew forth some
probable reasons, that the aduenturers
in this iourney, are to take
perticuler profite by the same. It
is therefore conuenient that I
doo deuide the Aduenturers into
two sortes: The Noble men
men and Gentlemen by themselues, and the Marchaunts
by themselues. For as I doo heare, it is meant that there
shalbe one societie of the Noble men & Gentlemen, and
another society of the Marchants. And yet not so deuided,
but that eache society may freely and franckly trade and
traficke one with the other.
            And first to bende my speeche to the Noblemen and
Gentlemen, who doo cheefely seeke a temperate climate,
holesome ayre, fertile soyle, and a strong place by nature,
wherevpon they may fortefie, and there either plant themselues,
or such other persons as they shall thinke good to
sende to be Lordes of that place and Country: To them I
say that all these thinges are very easye to be founde with
in the degrees of 30. and 60. aforesayde, eyther by Southe
or North, both in the Continent, and in Islands therevnto
adioyning at theyr choyse: But the degree certaine of the
cleuation of the Pole and the very Climate where these
places of force and fertilitie are to be founde, I omitte to
make publique, for such regarde as the wiser sort can easily
coniecture: the rather because I doo certainly vnderstād,
that some of those which haue the managing of this
matter, knowe it as well or better then I my selfe, and doo

meane to reueale the same when cause shall require, to
such persons whom it shall concerne and to no other: So
that they may seate & settle thēselues in such Climate as
shal best agree with their owne nature, disposition, & good
likeing: & in the whole tract of that land, by the discription
of as many as haue beene there, great plentie of minerall
matter of all sortes, and in verye many places bothe
stones of price, Pearle, and Christall, and great store of
Beastes, Byrdes, and Fowles both for pleasure and necessarie
vse of man is to be founde.
            And for such as take delight in hunting,Beastes for pleasure there are
Stagges, VVild Bores, Foxes, Hares, Conneys, Badgers,
Otters, & diuers other such like for pleasure. Also or such
as haue delight in Hawking, there are Hawkes of sundry
kindes, and great store of game, both for Land and Riuer,
as Feazaunts, Partridges, Cranes, Heronshawes, Duckes
Mallardes, and such like. There is also a kinde of Beaste,
much bigger then an Oxe, whose hyde is more then 18.
foote long, of which sorte a Countriman of ours, one
VValker a Sea man, who was vppon that Coast, did for a
trueth reporte, in the presence of diuers honourable and
worshipfull persons, that he and his company did finde in
one Cottage aboue 240. Hides. which they brought away
and solde in Fraunce for xl. shillinges and hyde,Hides solde for xl. shillings apece. and
with this agreeth Dauid Ingram, and discribeth that beast
at large, supposing it to be a certaine kinde of Buffe: there
are likewise beastes and fowles of diuers kindes, which I
omitte for breuities sake, great store of fish both in the salt
water & in the fresh,Great Grapes. Wine of the Palmtree. plentie of Grapes as bigge as a mans
thombe, and the most delicate VVine of the Palmetree,
of which wine there be diuers of good credit in this realm
haue tasted: and there is also a kind of graine called Maize,

Potato rootes, and sundry other fruites naturall growing
there: so that after such time as they are once setled, they
shall neede to take no great care for victuall.
            And nowe for the better contentation & satisfaction of
such worshipful, honest minded, & wel disposed Marchāts,
as haue a desire to the furtherance of euery good and commendable
action, I wil first say vnto thē, as I haue doon before
to the Noble men and Gentlemen, that within the
degrees aboue sayde, is doubtles to be founde, the moste
holesom & best tēpature of ayre, fertillitie of soile, & euery
other commoditie or marchaundize, for the which, with
no smal perril we doo trauaill into Barbery, Spayne, Portingall,
Fraunce, Italie, Muscouie & Dansike. All which may
be either presently had, or at the least wise in verye shorte
time, procured from thence with lesse danger thē now we
haue them. And yet to the ende my argument shall not
altogether stand vppon likelihoodes and presumptions, I
say that such persons as haue discouered and trauailed
those partes doo testifie, that they haue founde in those
Countries, all these things following, namelie.
            
               Of Beastes
for furres.
               Martens.
               Beauers.
               Foxes blacke
and white.
               Leoperdes.
            
            
               Of VVormes.
               Silke worms great & large
            
            
               Of Byrdes.
               Hawkes.
               Bitters.
               Curlewes.
               Herons.
               Partridges.
               Cranes.
               Mallards.
               VVildgeese.
               Stockdoues.
               Margaus.
               Blackbirds.
               Parrotts.
               Pengwyns.
            
            
               Of Fishes.
               Codd.
               Salmon.
               Seales.
               Herrings.
            
            
               Of Trees.
               Palmetrees yeelding sweete wines.
               Cedars.
               Fyrres.
               Sasafras.
               Oake.
               Elme.
               Popler.
            
            And sundry other strange Trees, to vs vnknowne.
            
            
               Of Fruites.
               Grapes, verie
large.
               Muskemellōs.
               Limons.
               Dates great.
               Orrenges.
               Figges.
               Proynes.
               Reisons, great
and small.
               Pepper.
               Almonds.
               Citrons.
            
            
               Of Mettalles.
               Golde.
               Syluer.
               Copper.
               Leade.
               Tinne.
            
            
               Of Stones.
               Turkeis.
               Rubies.
               Pearles, great
and faire.
               Marble, of diuers
kinds.
               Iasper.
               Christall.
            
            
               Sundry other
commodities
of all sortes.
               Ro
                     •
                  en.
               Pitch.
               Tarre.
               Turpentine.
               Frankensence
               Honny.
               Waxe.
               Rubarbe.
               Oyle Oliffe.
               Traine Oyle.
               Musk codde.
               Salte.
               Tallowe.
               Hydes.
               Hempe:
               Flaxe.
               Chuchenell
                     •
                  
and Dies
of diuers
sortes.
               Feathers of
sundry sorts,
as for pleasure
and filling
of Featherbeddes.
            
            And seeing that for small costes, the truth of these thinges
may be vnderstoode (wherof this intended supply wil giue
vs more certaine assuraunce) I doo find no cause to the contrarie,
but that all wel minded persons should be willing to
aduenture some conuenient portion, for the furtheraunce
of so good an enterprise.
            Now for the triall heereof, considering that in the Articles
of the Societie of the aduenturers in this voiage, there
is prouision made, that no aduenturer shalbe bound to any
further charge then his first aduenture: and yet notwithstanding
keepe styl to himselfe, his children, his apprentises
and seruants, his and their freedome for trade & traficke
which is a priuiledge that Aduenturers in other voiages
haue not: and in the saide articles it is likewise prouided,
that none other then such as haue aduentured in the first

voiage, or shall become aduenturers in this supply, at any
time heerafter are to be admitted in the said society, but as
Redēptionaries, which wil be very chargeable: Therefore
generally I say vnto all such according to the old Prouerb,
Nothing venture, Nothing haue. For if it do so fal out, according
to the great hope & expectation had (as by Gods grace
it wil) the gaine which now they reape by traffique into other
farre Countries, shall by this trade returne with lesse
charge, greater gaine, and more safety: Lesse charge I say,
by reason of the ample and large deepe Riuers at the verie
banke, wherof there is many, wherby both easily and quietly
they may transport from the innermost partes of the
maine land, all kind of merchandize, yea, in Vessels of great
burden, & that three times, or twise in the yeere at the least.
But let vs omit all presumptions how vehement soeuer, &
dwel vpon the certainty of such commodities as were discouered
and found by Sir Humfrey Gilbert,
               Commo
                  
                     ••
                  ties foūd in August last. and his assistants
in Newfound land, in August last. For there may be very
easily made, Pitch, Tarre, Rosen, So
                  •
               e ashes, in great plenty,
yea, as it is thought inough to serue the whole Realme
of euery of these kindes. And of Traine Oyle such quātity,
as if I should set downe the value that they doo esteeme
it at, which haue been there, it would seeme incredible.
            It is heerby intended, that these commodities in this aboundaunt
manner, are not to be gathered from thence,
without Planting and setling there. And as for other
thinges of more value, and that of more sortes and kinds
then one or two, (which were likewise discouered there)
I doo hold it for some respects, more meet for a time to be
concealed and vttered.
            Of the Fishing I doo speake nothing, because it is generally
known: And it is not to be forgottē, what very trifles

they be that the Sauages doo require in exchaunge of these
commodities: yea for Pearle, Gold, Siluer, and precious
stones. All which are matters in trade and trasfique of great
moment. But admit that it shold so fal out, that the aboue
specified cōmodities, shall not happely be found out within
this first yeere. Yet it is very cleere that such & so many
may be found out as shall minister iust occasion to thinke
al cost & labor well bestowed. For it is very certaine, that
there is one seate fit for fortificatiō, of great safety, wherin
these cōmodities following, especially are to be had, that is
to say, Grapes for wine, Whales for oyle, Hēpe for cordage
and other necessary thinges, and Fish of farre greater sise
and plenty, then that of Newfound land, and of all these so
great store as may suffise to serue our whole Realme.
            Besydes all this if credite, may be giuen to the Inhabitaunts
of the same Soyle, a certaine Riuer dooth therevnto
adioyne, which leadeth to a place abounding with ritch
substaunce: I doo not heereby meane the passadge to the
M
                     •
                  luch
                     •
                  s, whereof before I made mencion.
            And it is not to be omitted, howe that about two yeeres
past, certaine Marchaunts of S. Mallowes in Fraunce, dyd
hire a Shippe out of the Island of Iersey, to the ende that
they would keepe that trade secrete from theyr Countreimen,
and they would admit no Mariner other then the
Ship boy belonging to the sayd Shippe to goe with them▪
which Ship was about 70. Tunne. I doo knowe the Ship
and the boy very well, and am familiarly acquainted with
the Owner, which voyage prooued very beneficiall.
            To conclude, this which is already saide, may suffice any
man of reasonable disposition to serue for a taste, vntyll
such tyme as it shall please almightie God through our
owne industrie, to send vs better tydings. In the meane

season, if any man well affected to this iourney, shal stand
in doubt of any matter of importance touching the same,
he may satisfie himselfe with the iudgement and lyking of
those of good calling and credite, as are principall dealers
heerein. For it is not necessary in this treatise, publickly to
sette foorth the whole secretes of the voyage.
         
         
            ¶The sixt Chapter, sheweth that the Traffique and Planting in
those Countries, shall be vnto the Sauages themselues verie
beneficiall and gainefull.
            
               
                  NOw to the end it may appeare,
that this voiage is not vndertaken
altogether for the peculiar
commoditie of our selues, and
our Countrie, (as generallie other
trades and iourneies be) it shall fall
out in proofe, that the Sauages shal
heerby haue iust cause to blesse the
howre, when this enterprise was vndertaken.
            First and cheefly, in respect of the most happy and gladsome
tydings of the most glorious Gospel of our Sauiour
Iesus Christ, whereby they may be brought from falsehood
to truth, from darknes to lyght, from the hieway of
death, to the path of life, from superstitious idolatry, to sincere
christianity, from the deuill to Christ, from hell to
Heauen. And if in respect of all the commodities they
can yeeld vs (were they many moe) that they should but
receyue this only benefite of christianity, they were more
then fully recompenced.
            But heervnto it may be obiected, that the Gospel must

be freely preached, for such was the example of the Apostles,
vnto whom although the aucthorities and examples
before alledged, of Emperors, Kings, and Princes, as wel before
Christes time as since, might sufficiently satisfie: Yet
for further aunswer, we may say with Saint Paule. If we
we haue sowen vnto you heauenlie thinges,
               2. Cor. 9. 
               doo you thinke it
much that we should reape your carnall thinges? And withall,
The workman is worthy of his hier. These heauenly tydings
which those labourers our countrey men (as messengers of
Gods great goodnes and mercy) wyl voluntarily present
vnto them, dooth farre exceed their earthly ritches. Moreouer,
if the other inferior worldlie, and temporall thinges,
which they shal receiue from vs, be waied in equal balance,
I assure my selfe, that by equall iudgement of any indifferent
person, the benefites which they then receiue, shall far
surmount those which they shall depart withall vnto vs.
And admitte that they had (as they haue not) the knowledge
to put theyr land to some vse: Yet being brought
from brutish ignoraunce, to ciuility and knowledge, and
made them to vnderstand how the tenth part of their land
may be so manured and emploied, as it may yeeld more
commodities to the necessary vse of mans life, then the
whole now dooth: What iust cause of complaint may
they haue? And in my priuate opinion, I doo verily think
that God did create lande, to the end that it shold by Culture
and husbandrie, yeeld things necessary for mans lyfe.
            But this is not all the benefit which they shall receiue by
the christians, for, ouer & beside the knowledge how to tyl
and dresse their grounds, they shalbe reduced frō vnseemly
customes, to honest maners, from disordred riotous rowtes
and companies, to a wel gouerned common wealth & with
all shalbe taught mecanicall occupations, artes, and lyberal

Sciences: and which standeth them most vpon, they shalbe
defended from the cruelty of their tyrannicall & blood sucking
neighbors,The bargaine can not be vniust, where both parties are gainers. the Canniballes, wherby infinite number of
their liues shalbe preserued. And lastly; by this meanes many
of their poore innocent children shalbe preserued from
the bloody knife of the sacrificer, a most horrible and detestable
custome in the sight of God & man, now and euer
heertofore vsed amongst them. Many other thinges could
I heere alledge to this purpose, were it not that I doo
feare least I haue already more then halfe tired the Reader.
         
         
            The seauenth Chapter sheweth that the Planting there, is not
a matter of such charge or diffycultie, as many would make it
seeme to be.
            
               
                  NOw therefore for proofe,
that the Planting in these parts is a
thing that may be doone without
the aide of the Princes power and
purse, contrarye to the allegation
of many malicious persons,
who will neither be actors in any
good action themselues, nor so
much as afoord a good word to the setting forward therof:
and that wurse, is they wyl take vpō them to make Molehylles
seeme Mountaines, and flies Elephants, to the end
they may discourage others, that be verye well or indifferently
affected to the matter, being like vnto Esoppes Dogge
which neither would eate haie himself, nor suffer the poore
hungry asse to feede thereon.
            I say & affirme that God hath prouided such meanes for
the furtheraunce of this enterprise, as doth stande vs in
steede of great treasure: for first by reason that it hath pleased

God of his great goodnesse, of long time to holde his
merciful hād ouer this Realme, in preseruing the people of
the same, both frō flaughter by the sword, & great deathby
plague, pestilēce, or otherwise, there is at this day great nū
               bers
(God he knoweth) which liue in such penurie & wāt,
as they could be contented to hazarde their liues, and to
serue one yeere for meate, drinke, and apparel, onely without
wages, in hope thereby to amend theyr estates: which
is a matter in such lyke iourneis, of no small charge to the
Prince. Moreouer, thinges in the lyke iourneis of greatest
price and cost, as victual (whereof there is great plenty
to bee had in that countrye without money) and powder,
great artillery, or Corselets, are not needful, in so plentiful
and chargeable manner, as the shew of such a iourney,
may present, for a smal quantity of all these to furnish the
Forte onely wyl suffice, vntyl such time as diuers cōmodities
may be found out in those parts, which may be thought
wel woorthy a greater charge. Also the peculiar benefite of
Archers which God hath blessed this land withal, before al
other nations, will stand vs in great stede amongst those
naked people.
            Another helpe we haue also, which in such lyke cases is
a matter of meruailous cost, and wil be in this iourney procured
very easily (that is to say) To transport yeerely as wel
our people, as al other necessaries, needful for thē into those
parts by the Fleete of Merchaunts, that yeerely venture for
Fish in Newfound Land, being not farre distaunt from the
countrey, meant to be inhabited, who commonly go with
empty Vesselles in effect, sauing some lyttle fraught with
Salt. And thus it appeareth that the Souldiers wages, and
the transportation may be defrayed for farre lesse summes
of money, then the detractors of this enterprise haue giuen

out. Againe, this intended voiage for conquest, hath in lyke
manner many other singular priuiledges, wherewith God
hath as it were, with his holy hand blessed the same before
all others. For after once we are departed the coast of England,
we may passe straight way thether, without daunger
of being driuen into any the countries of our enimies, or
doubtfull freends, for commonly one winde serueth to
bring vs thether, which sildome faileth from the middle of
Ianuarie, to the middle of Maie, a benefite which the
Mariners make great account off, for it is a pleasure that
they haue in few or none of the other iournies. Also, the
passadge is short, for we may go thither in thirty or forty
daies at the most, hauing but an indifferent winde, and returne
continually in sixteene or twenty dayes at the most.
And in the same our iourney, by reason it is in the Occean,
and quite out of the way frō the intercourse of other countries:
we may safely trade and traffique, without perill of
pyracie, neither shal our Ships, people, or goods, ther be subiecte
to the arrest or molestation of any Pagan Potentate,
Turkishe Tyrant, yea, or christiā Prince, which heertofore,
sometimes vpon slender occasion in other parts, haue staied
our Shippes and marchaundizes, whereby great numbers
of our Countrimen haue beene vtterly vndoone, dyuers
put to raunsome, yea and some lost their liues: a thing
so fresh in memory as it needeth no proofe, and well worthy
of consideration.
            Besides, in this voyage, we doo not crosse the burnt line,
whereby commonly both beuerage and victuall are corrupted,
and mens health very much impaired, neither doo
we passe the frozen Seas, which yeelde sundrye extreme
daungers: but haue a temperate Climate at all times of the
yeere, to serue our turnes. And lastly, there neede no delaies

by the way, for taking in of freshwater and Fewell,
(a thing vsually doone in long iourneys) because as I said
aboue, the voyage is not long, and the fresh waters taken
in there, our men heere in England, at theyr returne
home, haue found so holesome and sweete, that they haue
made choise to drinke it before our▪ Beere or Ale.
            Beholde heere good Countreimen, the manifolde benefites,
commodities and pleasures heeretofore vnknowne,
by Gods especiall blessing not onelie reuealed vnto vs, but
also as it were infused into our bosomes, who though hetherto
like Dormise haue slumbered in ignoraunce thereof,
beeing like the Cattes that are lothe for theyr praye to
wette their feete, yet if now therefore, at the last we would
awake, and with willing mindes (setting friuolous imaginations
aside) become industrious instruments to our selues,
Questionles we shoulde not onely heereby setfoorth
the glorie of our heauenlie Father, but also easily attaine
to the ende of all good purposes, that may be wished or
desired.
            And may it not much encourage vs to hope for good
successe in the countrey of these Sauages, beeing a naked
kinde of people, voyde of the knowledge of the discipline
of warre, seeing that a Noble man, beeing but a subiecte in
this Realme, (in the time of our King Henrie the second)
by name Strangbowe, thē Earle of Chepstowe in South
VVales, by himselfe and his Alleis and assistaunts, at their
owne proper charges, passed ouer into Ireland, and there
made conquest of the nowe Countrey, and then kingdom
of Ly
                     ••
                  ster, at which time it was verie populous & strong;
which historie, our owne Chronicles doo witnes. And
why should we be dismaide, more then were the Spaniardes,
who haue beene able within these fewe yeeres, to

conquer, possesse and enioy; so large a tracte at the earth,
in the west-Indies, as is betweene the two Tropicks of Cā
               cer
and Capricorne, not onely in the maine firme lande
of America▪
                which is 47. degrees in latitude frō South to
North, & doth cōtain 2820. English miles at the least, that
the King of Spayne hath there, in actual possession besides
many goodly & rich Islands, as Hispaniola, now called Sa▪
               Domingo, Cuba, Iamica, and diuers other, which are bothe
beautifull and full of treasure, not speaking anie whitt at
all, how large the saide Lande is from East to VVest, which
in some places is accounted to be 1500. English miles at
the least, from East to VVest, betweene the one Sea and
the other.
            Or why should our Noble nation be dismaide, more
then was Vasques Numes de Balboa,
               2. D
                     •
                  cad. lib. 5. fo. 77. of the West Indes, in English Cano
                     •
                  s is a kinde of boate. 3. Decad. lib. 1. fol. 
                     •
                  7▪
                a priuate Gentleman
of Spayne, who with the number of 70. Spaniardes at
Tich
                     •
                  ri, gaue an ouerthrow vnto that mightie King Chemacchus,
hauing an Armie of an hundred Canoas & 5000.
men, and the say de Vasques Numes not long after, with his
small number, did put to flight King Chiapes his whole
Armie.
            Likewise Hernando Cortese, beeing also but a priuate
Gentleman of Spayne,
               About the yeere of our Lord 1511. after his departure from the Islands
of Cuba and Acusamill, and entring into the firme of America,
had many most victorious & triumphant conquests,
as that at Cyntla, where beeing accompanied with lesse thē
500. Spanish footemen,Conquest of the West Indes fol. 43 and 45. in English. thirteene Horsemen, and sixe peeces
of Ordenaunce onely he ouerthrewe 40000 Indians
The same Cortese with his sayde number of Spaniardes,
tooke prisoner that mightie Emperour Meter
                     •
                  ma in his
most cheefe and famous Cittie of Mexico, which at that
instant had in it aboue the number of 500000▪ 
               Indians at

the least, and in short time after, obteyned not onelie the
quiet possession of the saide Cittie, But also of his whole
Empire.
            And in like manner in the Country of Peru, which
the King of Spayne hath nowe in actual possession, Francisco
Pysare, with the onelie ayde of Diego de Almagro, and
Hernando Luche, beeing all three but priuate Gentlemen
was the principall person that first attempted the discouerie
and conquest of the large and rich Countrye of Peru,
which through the ayde of the almighty, he brought to
passe and atchiued, in the Tambo of Cassiamalcha, (which
is a large place of ground, enclosed with walles) in which
place he tooke the great and mightye Prince Attabalipa
prisoner,A meruelous victorie. amidest the number of 60000 Indians his subiectes,
which were euer before that day accounted to bee a
warlike kinde of people, which his great victory it pleased
God to graunt vnto him in the yeere of our Lorde 1533.
he not hauing in his company aboue the number of 210.
Spaniardes, whereof there was not past 60, horsemen in
all: After the taking of which Prince, Attabalipa, he offered
vnto Pyzare for his raunsome, to fill a great large Hall
ful of Golde and Siluer, and such Gold and Siluer vessels
as they then vsed, euen as hie as a man might reache with
his arme. And the sayd Prince caused the same Hall to bee
marked rounde about at the sayde height, which raunsome
Pyzara graunted to accept. And after when as thys
mightie Prince had sent to his vassals & subiects to bring
in Golde and Siluer for the filling of the Hal, as aforesaid,
as namelie to the Citties or Townes of Quito, Pacyacama
and Cusco, as also to the Caloa of Lyma, in which Towne,
as their owne writers doo affyrme, they founde a large
and fayre house, all s
                  •
               ated and couered with 
                  •
               olde: and

when as the said Hal was not yet a quarter full, a mutenye
arose amongst the Spaniardes, in which it was commonly
giuen out, that the said Prince had politiquely offered this
great raunsome vnder pretence to rayse a much more
mightie power, whereby the Spaniardes should bee taken
slayne, and ouerthrowne: wherevppon they grewe to
this resolution, to put the sayd Prince to death, and to
make particion of the gold and siluer already brought in,
which they presently put in execution. And comming to
make perfect Inuentory of the same, as well for the Emperor
then King of Spayne, his fift parte as otherwise there
was founde to be already brought in into the sayde Hall,
the number of 132425. pounde weight of siluer, and in
golde the number of 1828125. pezos,A pezo is worth vii. s. vi. d. English. which was a ritches
neuer before that nor since seene of any man together, of
which there did appertaine to the Emperor for his fyft
parte of Golde 365625. pezos, & for his fift parte of siluer
26485. pound weight, & to euery Horseman 8000. pezos
of gold, and 67, pounde weight of siluer. Euery Soldier
had 4550. pezos of golde, and 280. pounde weight of
siluer. Enety Captain had, some 30000. some, 20000. pezos
of golde and of siluer, propottionally aunswerable to
theyr degrees and calling, according to the rate agreed vpon
amongst them.Se the History of the West Indies in French; the xiii. booke. fol. 138. some part whereof is translated into English. 
               Fraunces Pizare as their General, according
to his degree and calling proportionally, had more
then any of the rest, ouer and besides the Massie table of
gold, which Attahalipa had in his Lyttier, which wayed,
25000. pezos of Golde: neuer was there before that day,
Soldiers so riche in so small a time, and with so little danger.
And in this iourney for want of Iron, they did shoe
theyr Horsses some with Gold, and some with siluer. This
is to be seene in the generall. Historye of the west Indies,
whereas the dooings of Pizare, and the conquest of the

               Peru is more at large set foorth.
            To this may I adde the great discoueries & conquestes,
which the Princes of Portingall haue made rounde about
the West, the South, and the East partes of Africa, and also
at Calicute and in the East Indies, and in America, at Brasilia
and elswhere, in sundry Islandes in fortefying, peopling,
and planting all along the sayd Coastes, & Islandes,
euer as they discouered, which beeing rightly wayed and
considered, dooth minister iust cause of incouragement to
our country men, not to account it so harde and difficult athing
for the subiectes of this noble Realme of Englande,
to discouer people plant and possesse the like goodly lands
and rich Countries not farre from vs, but neere adioyning
and offering it selfe vnto vs (as is aforesayde) which haue
neuer yet heeretofore, beene in the actuall possession of
any other Christian Prince, then the Princes of this realm
All which, (as I thinke) shoulde not a little animate and
encourage vs, to looke out and to aduenture abroade, vnderstanding
what large Countries and Islandes the Portingals
with theyr small number haue within these fewe
yeeres discouered, peopled, and planted, some part wherof
I haue thought it not amisse, breefely in perticuler to
name, bothe the Townes, Countries, and Islandes, so
neere as I coulde vppon the suddaine call them to remembraunce,
for the rest I doo referre this Reader to the Histories,
where more at large the same is to be seene. Fyrste
they did winne and conquere from the Princes of Barbary
the Island of Geysera & towne of Arzilla, not past 140
myle distaunt from their Metrapolitane and cheefe Cittie
of Fesse: and after that they wunne also from the sayde
Princes the Townes of Tangier, Seuta, Mazigam Azamore
and Azaffie, all alongst the Sea Coastes. And in the

yeere of our Lorde 1455. Alouis de Cademost
                     •
                  
                a gentleman
Venetian, was he that first discouered for theyr vse
Cape Verd, with the Islandes adioyning, of which hee
then peopled and planted those of Bonanista and Santiago
discouering also the Riuer Senega, otherwise called Niger
and Cape Rouge and Sere Leone, and in a fewe yeeres after
they did discouer the Coast of Ginea, and there peopled &
built the Castell of Myne: then discouered they further,
to the countreys of Melegettes, Benyn, and Manicongo,
with the Islandes of Principe, Anobon, Saint Mathew, and
S. Thomas, vnder the Equynoctial lyne, which they peopled
and built in the sayd Island of S. Thomas, the Hauen
Towne or Port of Pauosan. After that, about the yeere of
our Lorde 1494. one Bartholomew Dias was sent foorth,
who was the first man that discouered and dobled that
great and large Cape called Bon, Esperance, and passing the
Curraunts that runne vppon the sayd coast, on the Southest
parte of Affrica, betweene the sayde maine Land and
the Island of S. Lawrence, otherwise called of the auncients,
Madagascar, he discouered to the harbor named the
Riuer of Infants. After that since the yeere of our Lorde
God 1497. and before the full accomplishment of the
yeere of Christ 1510 through the trauails and discoueries
of Vasques de Game, Peeter Aluares, Thomas Lopes, Andrew
Corsale, Iohn de Empolie, Peeter Sinter, Sancho Detoar,
               Ceffala is accounted to be the place where the Noble and wise King Salomon did fetch his golde.
and that noble and woorthy Gentleman Alonso de
Alburqueque, they did discouer people, and plant at Ceffala,
beeing vpon the East side of Affrica, in 20. degrees of latitude
of the South pole, and direct West from the Islande
of S. Lawrence, (at which Port of Ceffala, diuers doo afirme
that King Salomon did fetch his golde) As also vpon
the sayd East side of Affrica, they did afterwarde discouer

people, and plant at M
                     •
                  nzanbique, Quil
                     ••
                   Monbaz
                     •
                  
                and
Melinde 2. degrees of sotherly latitude, and so vppe to the
streight of Bubell, Mandell at the entring of the Redde sea,
all vppon the East coast, of Affrica, from whence they put
off at the Cape of Garda Funi, and past the great gulfe of
Arabia, or Indian Sea East to Sinus Persicus, and the Island
of Ormus, and so passing the large and great Riuet Indus,
where he hath his fall into the mayne Occean, in 23. degrees
& di. vnder the tropick of Cancer, of Septentrionall
latitude, they made theyr course againe directly towards
the South, and began to discouer people and plant vpon
the west side of the hether India at Goa, Mangallor, Canan
                     •
                  r,
Calecute, and Chochyn, and the Island of Zeylam.
            
            And heere I thinke good to remember to you, that after
theyr planting vpon this coaste, their forces grewe so
great, that they were able to compell all the Mores, the
subiectes of the mighty Emperor of the Turks to pay tribute
vnto them, euer as they passed the Gulfe of Arabia,
from the porte of Mecca in Arabia filice, where Mahomet
lyeth buried, or any of the other portes of the sayd Land,
euer as they passed to and from the Hauens of Cochyn,
Calecute, and Cananor, and by theyr martiall manner of
discipline, practised in those partes, the great and mightye
Prince the Sophie Emperor of the Persians, & professed enemie
to the Turck, came to the knowledge and vse of the
Caliuer shotte, and to enterlace and ioine footemen with
his Horsemen, sithence which time the Persians, haue
growen to that strength and force, that they haue giuen
many mighty and great ouerthrowes to the Turke, to the
great quiet of all Christendome.
            And from the Island of Zeylam aforesayde, they also
discouered more East, in passing the Gulfe of Bengala, and

so passed the notable and famous Riuer of Ganges, where
he hath his fall into the maine Occean, vnder the tropicke
of Cancer, and to the Cape of Malaca, and vnto the
great & large Islands of Sumatro,
               These are the furthest parts of the world from Englande. At these Islands hath Sir Fraunces Drake beene, wher the fame of the Qu. most excellent Maiestie was renowmed. 
               Iaua maior, Iaua minor,
Mindano, Palobane, Celebes, Gilolo, Tydore, Mathin, Borneio,
Machian, Terranette, and all other the Islandes of
Molucques and Spiceries, and so East, alongst the
coasts of Cataia, to the Ports of China, Zayton, and
Quinsay, and to the Islandes of Zipango, and Iapan,
situate in the East, in 37. degrees of septentrionall latitude
and in 195. of longitude. Their noble and woorthy discoueries
heere also is not to be forgotten, that in the yeere
of our Lorde 1501. that famous and woorthy gentleman
Americus Vespusue, did discouer people and plant to theyr
vse the Holdes and fortes which they haue in Brasillia▪
                of
whom (hee beeing but a priuate Gentleman, the whole
Country or firme Land of the VVest Indies, is commonly
called and knowne by the name of America.
            
            I do greatlie doubt least I seeme ouertedious in the recitall
of the perticuler discoueries and conquestes of the East
and west Indies, wherein I was the more bolde to vrge the
patience of the Reader, to the ende it might most manifestly
and at large appeare, to all such as are not acquainted
with the Histories, howe the King of Portingall, whose
Country for popularity and number of people, is scarce
comparable to some three shires of Englande. And the
King of Spayne likewise, whose naturall Countrey dooth
not greatly abounde with people Both which Princes by
meanes of theyr discoueries, within lesse then 90. yeeres
past, haue as it appeareth, both mightely and meruailouslie
enlarged theyr territories & dominions through theyr
owne industrie, by the assistance of the omnipotēt, whose

ayde we shall not neede to doubt, seeing the cause & quarrell
which we take in hand tendeth to his honour and glory,
by the enlargement of the Christian fayth.
            To conclude, since by christian duety we stand bounde
cheefely to further all such acts as doo tende to the encreasing
the true flocke of Christ, by reducing into the right
way those loste sheepe which are yet astray. And that wee
shall therein followe the example of our right vertuous
predicessors of renowmed memory, and leaue vnto our
posteritie, a deuice memoriall of so godly an enterprise.
Let vs I say for the considerations alledged, enter into
iudgement with our selues, whether this action may belong
to vs or no. The rather for that this voyage through
the mighty assistaunce of the omnipotent God, shal take
our desired effect (whereof there is no iust cause of doubt)
Then shall her Maiesties dominions be enlarged, her highnes
auncient titles iustly confyrmed, all odious ydlenes
from this our Realme vtterly banished. Diuers decayed
Townes repay red, and many poore and needy persons
relieued, and estates of such as nowe liue in want shalbe
embettered. The ignorant & barbarous Idolaters taught
to knowe Christ. The innocent defended from their bloodie
tyrannicall neighbours. The diabolicall custome of
sacrifycing humaine Creatures abolished.
            All which (no man doubteth) are thinges gratefull in
the sight of our Sauiour, and tending to the honour and
glory of the Trinitie: Be of good cheere therefore, for
he that can not erre hath sayd: That before the ende of the
world, his word shall bee preached to all nations. Which
good worke, I trust is reserued for our Nation to accomplish
in these partes: Wherefore my deere Countrimen,
be not dismayed, for the power of God is nothing diminished,

nor the loue that he hath to the preaching and
planting of the Gospell any whirt abated. Shall we then
doubt he will be lesse ready, most mightily and miraculously
to assist our Nation in this quarrel, which is cheefely
and principally vndertaken for the enlargement of the
christian fayth abroade, and the banishment of ydlenes at
home, then he was to Columnus, Vasques Numes, Hernand
                     •
                  
Cortese, and Fraunces Pyzare in the west: and Vasques de
Game, Peter Aluares, & Alonso de Alburqueque in the East.
            Let vs therefore with cheerefull mindes and couragious
hearts, giue the attempt, and leaue the sequell to almightye
God, for if he be on our part, what forceth it who be
against vs. Thus leauing the correction & reformation
vnto the gentle Reader, whatsoeuer
is in this Treatise too much or
too little, or otherwise vnperfect,
I take leaue and
so ende.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ❧The Contentes of the Articles of
Assuraunce, betweene the Principall assignes of Sir Humfrey
Gilbert Knight, and the foure sortes of aduenturers,
vvith them in the veyage for the Westerne Discoueries.
            
               Assocyates. which be such as aduē
                  ture. C. l.
               Assystants. which be such as aduē
                  ture. L. l.
               Aduenturers in the first degree. which be such as aduē
                  ture. XX. v. l.
               Aduenturers in the second degree. which be such as aduē
                  ture. Xii. l. x. s.
            
            EVery person which hath aduentured in money or
commodities with Sir Humfrey Gilbert Knight,The ratification of former Aduenturers. or
with any principall assigne from him, shal haue and
enioy all such Lands, Liberties, Freedomes, Priueleges
and commodities as to any of them hath beene graunted
or couenaunted by the said Sir Humfrey, or by any
principall assigne, in writing to bee shewed vnder his or
theyr handes and seales. So as he hath or shall deliuer in
all his aduenture before the last day of December next.
            And euery person which hath aduentured himselfe in
the last voyage,Rewards to such as haue aduentured in person in the last voyage Associates▪
                & continued in the same, vntil such time
as the admirall of the sayd voyage was lost, and will aduenture
himselfe in this next voyage, shall in recompence
haue his rate doubled.
            
                EVerie person, that shall aduenture in this next voyage,
in money or commodityes, the some of one
hundreth poundes and receyued by the treasurer,
agent or other person authorised to bee kept in a Store-house,
prouided for that purpose: shal beare the name of
an associate, he, his heires, and fower of his seruaunts
seruing him seuen yeeres, to haue free libertie to trade
and trafique in the said Countries. And shall haue a iust

portion accordyng to the quantity of his aduenture, of al
commodities gotten & retourned into England, by any
the Vessels which shall be set forth by the sayde principall
assigne, before the twenteth of March next, in Anno
1583.
            
                He shall haue to him and his heyres for euer, sixteene
thousand acres of Land, there to bee peopled and manured
at his pleasure, holding the same in socage tenner by
Fealtie onely, with aucthoritie to keepe Court Leete,
and Court Barron vppon the same, at his pleasure, with
as great roialties in as large & ample maner as any Associate
there, or other Subiect in this Realme now enioyeth
any landes in England.
            
            
                Hee to bee chosen for one of the cheefest persons for
making of Lawes there. And shall be free frō all arrestes,
tortures, and execution by Marshall Lawe.
            
                Yeelding and paying yeerely, tenne shillinges for euerye
thousand acres after the same shall bee possessed and
occupyed one whole yeere and to the Queenes maiestie
the fift part of Golde and Syluer Ower, which shall bee
cleerely gotten, one other fift part of Golde, Syluer,
Ower, Pearle and Precious stones, to Sir Humfrey Gylbert
and his heires, and to the principall assigne the like fift
part. & also one fift part of Christall to the said principal
assigne to be found and clearely gotten vpon the same
sixteene thousand acres.
            
                There shalbe leuied within three yeeres after the sayd
Land shalbe inhabited, for euery acre manured on halfepeny
yeerely for the building of Fortes, Townes, Churches
Shippes, maintenaunce of learning and Soldiers,

and releeuing of maimed persons &c. to bee bestowed
and imploied at the discretion of the principall▪ Assigne
and his heyres, the Lieftenaunt and Associate, there for
the time beeing.
            
                EVery parson aduenturing as aforesaid the some of
fifty poundes,Assistants shall beare the name of an Assistant,
he, and his heires males, and three of his seruaunts,
seruing him seuen yeeres to haue free liberty to trade, as
in the first Article of Associates.
            
                He shal haue to him his heires for euer eight thousand
acres of Lande, to bee peopled and manured as aforesaid,
holding the same as aforesaid, with free libertie
to keepe court Leete & court Baron, at his pleasure, and
to take the commodities therevnto belonging.
            
                Yeelding & paying as in the fourth Article of the Associates.
            
                To beleuied one halfepeney yeerely for euery acre, as
in the fift Article of the Associates.
            
                EVery person aduenturing as aforesaid:Aduenturers in the first degree. the some of
xxv. pound shall be an aduenturer of the first degree
he, and his heires males, and two of his seruants seruing
him seauen yeeres, to be free of trade, &c. as in the
first Article of the Associates.
            
                Hee shall haue to him and his heires for euer, foure
thousand acres of Land, to bee peopled and manured as
aforesaid, holding the same as aforesaid, with free liberty
to keepe Court Barron at his pleasure, & to take the
commodities therevnto belonging.
            
               
                Yeelding and paying as aforesaid, and ouer and aboue to
the principall assigne the tenth part of Copper.
            
                To be leuied one halfepeny yeerely as aforesaid.
            
                EVery person aduenturing, as aforesaid the some of
xii. pound x. shillinges,Aduenturers in the secōd degree. shalbe an aduenturer of the
second degree, hee and his heires males and one of
his seruauntes seruinge him seuen yeeres, to be free of
trade, &c. as in the first article of the associates.
            
                He shall haue to him and his heires for euer two thousand
acres of land, to bee peopled and manured as aforesaid,
holding the same as aforesaid.
            
                Yeelding and paying as aforesaid, in the third article of
the aduenturers of the first degree.
            
                To be leuied one halfepeny yeerelie as aforesaid.
            The generall and admirall in this voyage,Generall. shall haue
in all thinges as an associate, with double quantity of
Land, the Leiftenaunt and Viceadmirall in quantity of
Land as an associate, and in priuiledges as an assistant.
            Euery Captaine,Captains and Maisters. and Maister of a ship in the said voyage,
shall haue as an assistant.
            EVery Ma. his mate, Ma. Carpenter and Ma. Gunner,
and quarter Ma shall haue in Land as an assistant, &
in priuiledges as an aduenturer of the first degree.
            EVery skilfull man in trying of minerall matters, and
euery apoticarie sk
                  •
               lfull in choise of drugges, shall
haue in Land as an assistant, and in priuiledges as an
aduenturer of the first degree.
            
               
EVery Gunners and Carpenters mates, Steward, Surgion,
Boteswane, Purser, Trumpeter and other Officer
and necessarie artificer, hauing their necessary
instumentes and tooles, shall haue according to the rate
of Landes as an aduenturer of the first degree, and in preuiledges
as an aduenturer of the the second dgree.
            Euery Soldiour and Mariner shall haue in all thinges as
an aduenturer of the second degree.Soldiours
            
            EVery Person that shall winter and remaine in those
Countries, one whole yeere shall haue double the
quantity of Land, as by this rate hee ought to haue,
if hee did not stay one yeere as aforesaid.
            These rewardes to be extended to those persons only,
which shall trauell in the sayd voyage for, their thirds
or shares vppon their owne aduentures without wages
and not to any others.
            EVery person, who shalbe willing to aduenture in
commodites, as aforesaid vnder the some of xii.
pound x. shillinges shall haue freedome of trad, land
and liberties rated, according to the proporcion of his
aduenture
            FVery person which hath, or shall aduenture in this
voyage in money or commodities as aforesaid, and
will also aduenture his person in this next voyage
shall haue in respect of his person according to the ra
                  •
               
aforesaid, ouer and aboue his aduenture.
         
      
   