
      
         
            
            THE DEVICE
of the Pageant borne
before Woolstone▪ Dixi
LORD Maior of the
Citie of London.
An. 1585.
            October 29.
            IMPRINTED
at LONDON by
Edward Allde.
1585.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A Speech spoken by him that rid
on a Luzarne before the Pageant
apparelled like a Moore.
            
               FRom where ye Sun dooth settle in his wayn
            And yoakes his Horses to his fiery Carte,
            And in his way giues life to Ceres Corne,
            Euen from ye parching Zone behold I come
            A straunger straungely mounted as you sée,
            Seated vpon a lusty Luzerns back.
            And offer, to your Honour (good my Lord)
            This Emblem thus in showe significant.
            Loe louely London riche and fortunate,
            Famed through the Worlde for peace and happinesse:
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                aduaunc't and set in Highest seat,
            
               
                  •••
               wtified throughly as her state requires.
            First, ouer her a Princely Trophey standes,
            Of beaten golde: a riche and Royall Armes:
            Wher-too this London euer more bequeathes,
            Seruice of Honour and of Loyaltie.
            Her props are well aduised Maiestrates,
            That carefully attend her person still.
            The honest Franklin and the Husband-man,
            Layes downe his sackes of Corne at Londons féet,
            And bringes such presents as the Countrie yéeldes.
            The pleasaunt Thames a swéet and daintye Nymphe,
            
            For Londons good conuayes with gentle streame,
            And safe and easie passage what shée can,
            And kéepes her leaping Fishes in her lappe.
            The Souldier and the Sayler franckly bothe,
            For Londons ayde are all in readines,
            To Uenture and to fight by Land and Sea.
            And this thrise reuerend honorable Dame,
            
               Science the sap of euery common wealth.
            
               
Surnam
                  •
               d Mechanicall or Liberall
            
            Is vowed to honour London with her skill,
            And London by these fréendes so happy made:
            First thankes her God the Author of her peace,
            And next, with humble gesture as becomes,
            In méeke and lowly manner dooth she yéeld,
            Her selfe her welthe with hart and willingnes.
            Unto the person of her gracious Quéene,
            
               Elizabeth renowned through the world,
            Stall'd and annointed by the highest powre,
            The God of Kings that with his holy hand,
            Hath long defended her and her England.
            
            This now remaines right honourable Lord,
            That carefully you doo attend and Kéep,
            This louely Lady rich and beautifull▪
            
            The Iuel wherwithall your soueraigne Quéene,
            Hath put your honor louingly in trust:
            That you may adde to Londons dignity,
            And Londons dignity may adde to yours,
            That woorthely you may be counted one,
            Among the number of a many moe:
            Carefull léeftenaunts, carefull Maiestrates,
            For Londons welfare and her worthines.
            Dixi.
         
         
            ¶Spoken by the Children in the
Pageant viz.
            
               London.
               NEw Troye I hight whome Lud my Lord surnam'd▪
               
               
                  London the glory of the western side:
               Throughout the world is louely London fam'd,
               So farre as any sea comes in with tide.
               Whose peace and calme vnder her Royall Quéene:
               Hath long bin such as like was neuer séene.
               
                  
Then let me liue to caroll of her name,
               that she may euer liue and neuer dye:
               Her sacred shrine set in the house of fame,
               consecrate to eternall memorie.
               My péerles mistresse soueraigne of my peace:
               Long may she ioy with honours great increase.
            
            
               Magnanimity.
               THe Cuntry and the Thames affoord their aide,
               and carefull Maiestrates their care attend▪
               
               All English harts are glad, and well appaide,
               in readines their London to defend.
               Defend them Lord and these faire Nimphs likewise:
               that euer they may doo this sacrifice.
            
            
               Loyaltie.
               THe greatest treasure that a Prince can haue,
               dooth louely London offer to her Quéene,
               Such loyaltie as like was neuer séene.
               and such as any English hart can craue.
            
            
               The Cuntry
               FOf Londons aide the Cuntry giues supplie,
               of néedfull things, and store of euery graine:
               
                  London giue thanks to him that sits on hie▪
               
               had neuer Towne lesse cause for to complaine,
               And loue and serue the soueraigne of thy peace:
               Under whose raigne thou hast this rich encrease.
            
            
               The Thames.
               WIth siluer glide my pleasant streames doo runne,
               where leaping fishes play betwixt the shores:
               This gracious good hath God and kinde begun,
               for Londons vse with help of Sailes and Ores.
               
                  
                  London reioyce and giue thy God the praise:
               For her whose highnes lengths thy happy daies.
            
            
               The Souldier.
               ARmour of safe defence the Souldier hath,
               So louely London carefully attends:
               To kéep her sacred soueraigne from skathe,
               That all this english land so well defends.
               And so farre London bids her souldiers goe,
               As well may serue to shéeld this land from woe.
            
            
               The Sayler.
               THe Sayler that in colde and quaking tide,
               the wrathfull stormes of Winters rage dooth bide
               With streamers stretcht, prepares his mery bark,
               for cuntries welth to set his men awark.
               That Quéene and Cuntry eazely may sée:
               The Sea-man serues his Prince in his degrée.
            
            
               Science.
               FOr Londons safety and her happines,
               the Souldier and the Sayler may you sée:
               All well prepar'd and put in redines,
               to doo such seruice as may fitting be,
               and Arte with them doo ioyne and they with me.
               
                  London then ioy and let all ages knowe,
               What duty to thy soueraigne thou doo showe.
            
            
               The first Nymphe.
               THus with the morning Sun and euening starre,
               these holy lights shall burne, the chéerfull flame
               With swéetest odour that perfume as farre
               as India stands in honor of her name.
               Whose Trophey we adore with sacred rights:
               With swéetest incense and with endles lights.
            
            
               
               The Second Nymph.
               SO long as Sunne dooth lend the world his light,
               or any grasse dooth growe vpon the ground:
               With holy flame, our Torches shall burne bright,
               and fame shall brute with golden trumpets sound
               The honor of her sacred regiment:
               That claimes this honorable monument.
            
            
               The third Nymph.
               OUr holy lights shall burne continually,
               to signifie our duties to her state:
               Whose excellent and princely maiestye,
               approoues it selfe to be moste fortunate.
            
            
               The fourt Nymphe.
               VErtue shall witnes of her woorthines,
               and fame shall register her princely déeds:
               The world shall still pray for her happines,
               from whome our peace and quietnes procéeds.
            
            Verses written vnder the Armes
of England.
            Gallia victa dedit flores inuicta Leones,
            Anglia, ius Belli in flore, Leone suum:
            O sic ô semper ferat Anglià laeta triumphos,
            Inclita gallorum Flore, Leone suo.
            Donne by George Peele Maister of artes in Oxford.
         
      
   