
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧TH' APPELLATION OF
IOHN PENRI, vnto the Highe
court of Parliament, from the bad and injurious
dealing of th' Archb. of Canterb. &
other his colleagues of the high commiſsion: Wherin
the complainant, humbly ſubmitting himſelfe
and his cauſe vnto the determination of this honorable
aſſembly: craueth nothing els, but either
releaſe from trouble and perſecution, or juſt
tryall.
            PSALM. 35. 19, 20, &c.
            Let not them O Lord, that are mine enemies vniuſtly, reioyce ouer
me: neyther let them vvinke with the eye, that hate me vvithout
a cauſe. For they ſpeake not as friendes: but they imagine deceitfull
vvordes againſt the quiet of 
                  〈◊〉
                land. And they gaped on
me vvith their mouthes, ſaying 
                  〈…〉
                our eye hath ſeene. Thou
ſeeſt it O Lord: keepe not 
                  〈…〉
                far from me, O Lorde.
Ariſe and vvake to my iudgement, 
                  〈…〉
                to my cauſe, my God, and
my Lord. Iudge me O Lord, according to my righteouſnes: and let
them not reioyce ouer me. Let them not ſay in their hearts, O our
ſoule reioyce: neyther let them ſay, vve haue deuoured him.
            IEREM. 20. 21.
            The Lord is vvith me as a mightie Gyant, therefore my perſecutors
shall be ouerthrovvn, and shall not preuaile, and shalbe greatly
confounded: for they haue done vnvviſely, &c.
            ANNO DOM. 1589.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            To the right Honorable, th'aſſembly of the
High court of Par
                  •
               iament, IOHN PENRI
wiſheth the direction of Gods ſpirite, in all their
conſultations, that they may ſo behaue themſelues
in the ſetting forward of Gods glorie, and
the good of the weale publique: (as in the day,
wherein the ſonne of God, Chriſte Ieſus, ſhall in
flaming fire, render euerlaſting perdition, to
thoſe that obeye not the Goſpell) they may bee
found blameles in his ſight. March 7.
            
               
                  THat vvhich in regard of my priuate
ſafetie and quietnes (right Honorable
and worſhipful) I am bound
before the Lorde to performe, the
ſame hath the credite and good report
of the cauſe of God, in the promoting
whereof, by his great and vnſpeakable mercies,
I haue bene employed whether I woulde or no,
at this preſent enforced me to accompliſh. The care
of procuring mine owne ſafetie (by al lawful waies)
from the dangerous attempts of thoſe that ſeek nothing
els, but mine vtter ouerthrowe and vndoing:
nature it ſelfe, and eſpeciallie Gods ordinance hath
layed vpon my ſhoulders. The burthen whereof I
cannot reject, vnleſſe I would ſhew my ſelfe on the
one ſide, more vnnaturall then the bruite beaſtes,
which will neuer be guilty of their owne dammage
for the moſt part, if they ſee any way to auoide the
ſame: and on the other ſide, to correct Gods prouidence
in refuſing to trie al the lawful means, which
he hath ordained and appointed for the deliuerie of
his children, out of the hands of their malicious enemies.
But ſeeing vnto this care of my priuate ſafe

gard, is alſo joyned the publike clearing of Gods eternall
trueth, from all the ſlaunders, wherewith the
iniquitie of mine aduerſaries by my vnjuſt trouble
would take occaſion to ſtaine the ſame: may not all
men clearely ſee, that I am drawen into this action
with a twofold coard (which as the wiſe man ſaith,
is not eaſily broken) of vnanſwerable neceſsitie?
            The vnjuſt dealing of the Archb. of Canterb. &
others of the high commiſſion, is ſuch towards me,
and of a long time hath bin, as in the dayes of peace
and publike tranquillity, of my gracious and dread
ſoueraigne Queene ELIZABETH: I may nowe juſtly
account my ſelfe, to be one, that in regarde of liberty
and quietnes, am vnjuſtly bereaued of the former
publique benefit. The cauſe why I enioy not
the ſame is, that my conſcience will not ſuffer me
(whome the Lord of his infinite goodnes, hath enlightened
with the knowledge of the ſauing trueth
of his goſpell) to beholde with ſilence, the lamentable
miſery of ſoules, wherein my countrymen the
inhabitants of Wales liue at this preſent, both in reſpect
of their great ignorance and the greeuous deformity
of gods ſanctuary among them. And I enjoy
not the ſame, becauſe vnto my ſmall ability, I
haue labored and doe labour to effect ſome redreſſe
of their foreſaide miſery, by lamenting their caſe,
ſhewing vnto them and your Hh. their griefe, together
with the medicine, which the lord hath ſanctified
as his owne ordinance to cure ſuch maladyes.
An vnworthy preſident to be conueyed vnto poſterities,
that it ſhould not be lawfull for a man in the
time of knowledg, to lament the ignorance of his
bretheren, in the time of the ſauing health of mens
ſoules, to withſtand their violent perdition, in the

time of Sions building, to lament and repaire the
ruines thereof. And that in a ſtate profeſſing enmity
vnto the Romish religion, it cannot be ſafe for a
man to ſpeake againſt the fornication of that ſtrumpet
and humbly to intreat, that the holy temple
may be cleanſed of all her pollution. And yet behold,
ſuch is my caſe for bewailing the ſpiritual bondage
of my countrimen, for ſhewing vnto them the
way whereby they might be reſtored vnto the glorious
liberty of the ſonnes of God, for crauing that
they may be trained in this way, and for mocioning
that gods holy ſanctuary among them may be purified,
I am teſted from poſt to piller, and permitted
to haue no aſſurance of quiet aboade in any of her
majeſties territories and dominions, by the men aforenamed,
beſides the injurious impriſonment,
wherein heretofore they haue deteined me for this
ſame cauſe. And to the ende I may truely acquaint
you of the parliament with my troubles, and the
true cauſes thereof, you are to vnderſtand, that the
beginning of theſe mens hatred towards me, did ariſe
from the goodwill I beare vnto the glory of my
God and the good of his church, and that the continuance
thereof, is for the ſame cauſe. For vntill ſuch
time, as the Lorde vouchſafed to vſe me (moſt vnworthie,
I acknowledge from the bottome of my
heart) as an inſtrument to motion the parliament,
holden by prorogation, in the 29. yere of her Majeſties
raigne, in the cauſe of Gods truth, I was a man
altogether vnknowne vnto th'Archb. or any other
of the high commiſſion, by whome I am now perſecuted.
My ſuite then vnto the parliament was, that
the goſpell of Chriſt might in a ſauing meaſure, be
made knowen and publiſhed amongſt the inhabitants

of wales, my deare & natiue countrimen. The
equitie of this petition; I manifeſted in a publiſhed
treatiſe, allowed to be printed by publike authority.
The ſupplication,Maſter Edvvard Donlee. together with the printed treatiſe,
were preferred by a worſhipfull gentleman of
my countrie, being himſelf a member of the houſe,
who alſo ſhewed the equitie of the petition, and in
effect auouched the truth of that which in the treatiſe
was ſet downe. The ſuit I was perſwaded, would
haue beene verie plauſible in a chriſtian ſtate, and
the parliament ſhewed no diſliking thereof, though
they ſinned in the careleſſe reſpect they had therevnto.
Th'Archb. and his aſſociates were contrarie
minded, they thought the enterpriſe to be intollerable.
And yet was there no alteration of the eſtabliſhed
gouernment of Biſhops at that time ſought
for. The diſlike of the petitiō they did not conceal,
and therfore preſently diſpatched their warrants to
call in the printed bookes, and to enquire for the author.
The books in nomber about 500. togither with
my ſelfe, were faſtened vpon by the wardens of the
Stacioners, M. Biſhop and Denham, accompanied
with Cole the Purſiuaunt, wherevpon being caried
before the high commiſſioners, I was for enterpriſing
the former action, charged by th'Archb. owne
mouth, not onely to be a factious ſlaunderer of her
Majeſties gouernment: but alſo to haue publiſhed
flat treaſon and hereſie in my ſaide treatiſe, I was
threatned very bloodily, and reuiled vpon in a moſt
vnchriſtian ſort, with earneſt proteſtation, that they
woondered how I durſt ſollicite the parliament in
that petition. See the curſed and outragious prophanenes
of theſe, whom the Lorde hath in his juſt
judgement giuen ouer to withſtande the mightie

power of his word! As though the matter were to
be aſtonied at, that they ſhould be more forward in
hindring the cauſe of Gods glory, then meaner men
ſhould be to promote the ſame. If they had beene
the true gouernours of Gods Church, they woulde
haue ſhewed themſelues the moſt earneſt fauorers
of that ſupplication. For it is well knowen, in what
a taking the country of wales is, for want of the true
knowledge of God. And aſſuredly they, who of intended
mallice withſtood that motion, ſhal one day
feele the price and reward of their diſobedience vnto
their neuer ending woe. VVell, mine offence in
preſuming to ſpeake in the cauſe of God, oppugned
by my betters, was accounted ſo haynous, as in cloſe
priſon I muſt be kept 12. daies, at the keepers vttermoſt
perill. Before my departure from the commiſſion,
vnderſtanding their intent to commit me, I demaunded
the particuler cauſe why I was ſo hardlie
dealt with. Anſwere was made, that they would examine
me againe and then I ſhould know. After a
moneths impriſonment I was deliuered without anie
examination, or anye mention of the crimes of
hereſie and treaſon wherewith I had bene charged.
And ſo vnto this daie, I remaine ignorant of anie expreſſed
cauſe wherefore, they either tooke away my
books, or debarred me of my libertie, and readie by
the grace of God, both to conuince the high commiſſion
of moſt injurious dealing in the premiſes, &
to cleare my ſelfe of anie crime they can lay to my
charge, whenſoeuer, before you of this honorable
aſſembly, or any other equall judgement ſeat they
darebe tried with me.
            Since the time of my releaſe, I ſawe my ſelfe
bounde in conſcience, not to giue ouer my former

purpoſe, in ſeeking the good of my countrymen, by
the rooting out of ignorance and blindnes from among
them. And as it pleaſed the lord to increaſe
this my care, ſo haue mine aduerſaries augmented
their rage and fury towards me, and eſpecially to
the cauſe that I maintaine. This furye of theirs, at
diuers times ſhewed by many of their inſtruments,
did eſpecially manifeſt it ſelfe on the 29. of Ianuary
laſt. At which time one Richard Walton hauing a
commiſſion from the Archb. and others, wherein
all her maieſties officers were chardged and commaunded
in her name, to aſſiſt the ſayd VValton to
make entry into all houſes, ſhops, &c: to apprehend
all thoſe whome he ſhould any waies ſuſpect, and
to commit them at his diſcretion vnto the next
Gaol or priſon, vntil farther order ſhould be taken
with them, came into the place of mine aboad at
Northampton, ranſacked my ſtudy, and tooke away
with him all ſuch printed books and written papers
as he himſelf thought good, what they were as yet
I cannot juſtly tel. And not contented to keepe him
ſelf within the immoderate limits of a larger commiſſion,
then as I thinke can be warranted by lawe,
he offered violence vnto diuers perſons, and threatened
not only to breake open doores (hauing noe
ſuch commiſſion) but alſo to vntile houſes, vnleſſe
he could find me where in deed I was not. At his
departure he charged the Maior of the towne, who
then attended vpon him, to apprehend me as a traitor,
giuing out that he had found in my ſtudy both
printed bookes and alſo writings, which conteined
treaſon in them. Whereas the bookes and writings
of geateſt diſgrace (evē in the ſight of his maſter)
which he could there finde, were, one printed

coppy of the demonſtration of diſcipline, and an anſwere
vnto maſter D. Some in writing, both which
he caried away with him. The treaſon conteined in
either of thoſe books, is no other then that which
Amaſiah the high prieſt at Bethel, found in Amos
the prophet,Amos 7. euen the cleare words of truth not to
be abidden in a corrupt ſtate of a church I graunt.
            Behold nowe my Lordes, and you the reſt of this
high court, the original and continuance of theſe
mens enmity towards me. And judg whether I haue
not greate reaſon, both for mine owne ſafety, and
for the clearing of the cauſe wherein I ſtand, to vſe
this lawful meanes of Appelation vnto your Hh. and
worſhips from their tirannous and vngodly dealing
with whome neither mine owne innocency, nor yet
the equity of the cauſe can any whit preuaile. They
are knowne to be very mighty, and haue felt them
very vnjuſt and tiranous. The only juſtice which I
can expect from them, if I fall into their hands, is to
be kept languiſhing in priſon during their pleaſure,
and neuer ſuffered to come to the triall of my cauſe.
If I hoped for any other meaſure, I ſhould reaſon
contrary vnto mine owne experience, againſt which
no conceite ought to take place.
            In conſideration wherof, being now by the lords
prouidence kept out of theire handes, and that in
the time of the meeting and aſſembly of the higheſt
councell of this kingdome, I doe in moſt dutifull &
humble ſort, make this my juſt appelation from the
Archb. of Canterbury and the reſt of his colleagues
in commiſſion, vnto you of the honorable and high
court of parliament, humbly referring my ſelfe and
my cauſe vnto your determination according vnto
juſtice. My only ſuite and petition is, that either I

may haue aſſurance of quietnes and ſafety, or that
the cauſes of my trouble being laide open by mine
aduerſaries, I may receiue condigne puniſhment of
mine offences. Where it may be ſeene that I craue
no immunity, let me haue juſtice and that is all I
craue. This in regard of your places you are bound
to affoard me,If the high commiſſioners can juſtly charge me vvith anye crime, I doe them a great benefite, and greatly endammage my ſelfe, in appealing vnto the parliament. as in the day of judgment you ſhall
anſwere before him vnto whome no vnrighteouſnes
is acceptable. I doe mine aduerſaries no injury in
appealing from them vnto you. For they may be aſſured
of juſtice at your hands, if they will adueuture
to purſue their ſuite. And me they cannot blame in
repairing vnto you for judgment and equitie, ſeeing
from their tribunal ſeat, I am like to receiue nothing
elſe but gal and woormwood. If their cauſe againſt
me be good, if it be ſtrong, if it be to be embraced,
nowe let them not be aſhamed to bring it
out into the face of the ſunn, here they may be aſſured
of juſtice, without any ſuſpition of partiallity.
My reaſons vſed in my laſt ſupplication vnto your
Hh. againſt their gouernment are but a fewe, if D.
Bridges, or any of their ſide can anſwere them, I wil
grant my ſelfe to haue oppugned the truth, and ſoe
wil deſtroie my ſelfe that which I haue built amiſſe,
otherwiſe they ſhewe them ſelues to be but vpholders
of a ruinous building, and the repairers of that
which wanteth a foundation. They can not refuſe
you of the Parliament to be their judges, vnleſſe either
they think much to be tried by you, or becauſe
as it is in the prouerb, they which do euil hate the
light.
            They will it may be, alleage the prerogatiue of
their commiſſion to be very large, what then? doe
they think, herby to haue libertie to oppreſſe whom

they will, doe they thinke hereby to be aboue the
parliament, whereunto al courts in the land are and
ought to be ſubiect, and from whence the highe
commiſſion deriueth al the prerogatiue it hath? Are
al courts, yea and al perſons in the land ſubiect vnto
the parliament only the Archb. and the high commiſſion
excepted? What elſe were this but for them
to claime a forreine authority vnto them ſelues, and
to begin after the manner of their prediceſſors, to
ſhake of the yoke of the ciuil authoritie? Frō which
ſuſpicion as they would cleare themſelues, ſo muſt
they be content, to yeeld that the parliament may
be the judges betwene vs. Except they be aſhamed
of their cauſe and their proceedings therein, they
cannot poſſibly refuſe this offer of juſt trial. And no
reaſon they ſhould, for they cannot pretend them
ſelues either to be greater in power, or more forward
in good wil to adminiſter juſtice, then the R.
honourable aſſembly of parliament is well knowne
to be. Though I feare me R. honorable & worſhipful,
that the Lord wil enter into judgment with you
for the ſmal care you haue to yeld his ſonne Chriſt
Ieſus his right in this kingdome.
            If heere they ſhould demaund by what authoritie,
either I may lawfully appeale from them,That I am bound to appeale and the Parliament to receiue mine Appellation. or by
what obligation your honors are bound to giue eare
vnto my complaint: although both be alredy ſhewed,
yet a farther anſwere vnto both are to enſue as
followeth. I appeale from them at whoſe handes I
can receiue no equitie,Act. 25. by the ſame commiſſion,
that the apoſtle Paul and the prophet Ieremy appealed
vnto the ciuil magiſtrates from the vſurped
and tirannical high prieſtes in their daies.Ierem. 26. 12. The accepting
of Paules appellation by Feſtus an heathē
               
judg, and the deliuery of Ieremy by the princes of
Iudah from the ſlanderous accuſations and wrongful
proceedings of the wicked prieſts and falſe prophets
(beſides many other vnanſwerable reaſons)
do neceſſarily bind me to appeale, and the parliament
not to denie me the ſhadowe of their winges,
vnder which I may be kept from the violence of
mine enemies. when Feſtus willing to get fauour
with the Iewes, vſed this ſpeech vnto the apoſtle
wilt thou goe then to Ieruſalem and there be judged
of theſe things before me, Paul knowing that at
Ieruſalem the malice of his enemies would be more
likely to take effect then elſe where, anſwered I ſtād
at Ceſars judgment ſeate, where I ought to be judged.
If I haue done wronge, or committed any thing
woorthy of death, I refuſe not to dye: but if there be
non of theſe things true whereof they accuſe me, no
man can deliuer me vnto them, I appeal vnto Ceſar,
his appellation was receiued of the Pagan judge.
Nowe my ſtate being not in reſpect of danger, altogeather
vnlike the condition, wherein the holy Apoſtle
was at this time, mine anſwere vnto the high
commiſſion is I appeale vnto the parliament, where
I ought to be judged. If I haue done any wronge or
committed any thing worthy of death, I refuſe not
to dye. The parliament wil not be partial in adminiſtring
juſtice vnto me according to my deſerts. But
if there be nothing laied to my charge, but the defence
of Gods cauſe, and the oppugning of impietie
and corruption, no man ought to deliuer me into
your hands, whoe care not whome you aflict in the
maintenance of your owne kingdome, I appeale vnto
the parliament. I am in regard of my ſafety as neceſſarily
driuen therunto, as the Apoſtle Paul was ro

appeale vnto Ceſar, or rather more. For he might
conceiue ſome hope of juſtice, when he was to be
judged of Feſtus, who did not ſo mortally hate his
cauſe as the high prieſt and others his accuſers did,
whereas I am to haue you for my judges, who alſo
are mine accuſers, and ſworn enemies vnto the cauſe
I appeale to the ciuil ſtate, I hope by their meanes
to be heard and deliuered from your tyrannie. As
the prophet Ieremie was in the like caſe by meanes
of the princes in his time. The high prieſts and prophets
judged him wor
                  •
               hie to die, the princes hearing
his cauſe debated in their preſence, deliuered
him out of danger.
            The whol action is ſet downe cap. 26. of his propheſie
in theſe words. Now when Ieremy had made
an end of ſpeaking all that the lord had commaunded
him to ſpeak vnto al the people,Iere. 
                     •
                  6. 6. 7. then the priſts
and the prophetes and all the people tooke him,It is no nevv thing to find the ſuppoſed pillers of the church to be the moſt peſtilent enemies thereof
and ſaid thou ſhalt die the death. Why haſt thou
propheſied in the name of Iehouath, ſaying, this
houſe ſhalbe like Shilo, and this city ſhall be deſolate
without an inhabitant. And al the people were
gathered againſt Ieremy in the houſe of the Lo
                  •
               d.
And whē the princes of Iudah heard of theſe things
they cam vp from the kings houſe into the houſe of
the Lord, and ſate downe in the entry of the newe
gate of the Lords houſe. Then ſpake the prieſts and
the prophets vnto the princes and to al the people
ſaying: this man is worthy to dye▪ for he hath propheſied
againſt this city as you haue heard with your eares.
Then ſpake Jeremiah vnto all the princes and to all
the people ſaying, the Lord hath ſent me to propheſie
againſt this houſe, & againſt this city al the things that
you haue heard. therefore now amend your waies and

your workes, and heare the voice of the Lord your god,
that the lord may repent him of the plague that he hath
pronounced againſt you. As for me: behold I am in
your hands, doe with me as you think good & right: but
knowe you for certaine that if you put me to death, you
ſhall ſurely bring innocent bloud vppon your ſelues,
vppon this City & vppon the inhabitants thereof: for
of a trueth the lord hath ſent me vnto you, to ſpeake al
theſe wordes in your eares. Then ſpake the princes &
al the people vnto the prieſts & prophets: this man
is not worthye to dye, for he hath ſpoken vnto vs in
the name of the lord our god.
            
            Let my cauſe now right Honourable, be weighed
with the prophecy in this place, thereby it ſhal appeare
vnto you, that neceſſitie is laied vppon me to
appeale from mine aduerſaries, and that yee are
bound to heare my cauſe, by the example of theſe
noble men. Jeremy was judged by his enemies worthy
to dy, and I aſſure my ſelfe it was not their falt
that he was ſuffered to liue. They wanted but power
and opportunity to diſpatch him. They did what
in them lay when they apprehended him, and adjudged
him woorthy to die for ſpeaking againſt the
State. The princes hearing the greeuouſnes of his
accuſation, thought them ſelues bound to try out
the matter, and ſitting in judgment, heard the cauſe
equally on both ſides, and ſo cleared the prophet.
Nowe had Ieremy done wel, if hearing the greuous
accuſations of his enemies, he would not haue taken
th'oportunitie offered him by the lords prouidence
to haue judgment at the hands of the princes? he
had not out of queſtion, or had the princes don wel
in beleeuing th'accuſations and ſlaunders of the
priſts and falſe prophets againſt him, and ſo in permitting

the prophet to be debarred of his libertie,
without any farther examination of the matter, or
had they done wel in ſitting ſtil, while the pore prophet
and his mighty aduerſaries tried out the matter?
They ſawe an other duty to be required of them
and therefore preſently without delay they holpe
him that was ready to periſh. The caſe is now with
me as it was then with the prophet: I am judged by
th'Archb. of Canterbury and others in commiſſion
with him, to be a man vnworthy to liue in any State
And I haue more cauſe to thanke the Lord for the
peaceable gouernment of her right excellent majeſtie,
thē for any fauour of mine enemies that I now
breath aboue the earth: I muſt either appeale from
them, or be guiltie of mine owne blood. I appeale
therefore vnto the high court of Parliament, and if
ye therein aſſembled, either credite the ſlaunders of
mine aduerſaries before ye know the cauſe, or ſit ſtil
in rejecting my juſt Appellation, and ſuffer them to
perſecute mee without a cauſe. Festus an heathen
Iudge, and the princes of Iud
                  •
               h, will riſe vp in judgment
againſt you. For the ſame God that required
at their hands the deliuery of his ſeruants out of the
handes of their rauening enemies, requireth of you
th' equall hearing of my cauſe. And if ye ſuffer me
to fall by their meanes, you ſhall bring innocent
blood vpon your owne ſelues and this whole kingdome.
            My caſe at this time is the caſe of the poore, the
fatherleſſe, the ſtranger and the widdowe, and therefore
in that reſpect, ye ought to haue a ſpecial conſideration
of it. For not to deliuer the widdowe and
the fatherleſſe from the violence of the oppreſſor,
when it lieth in your power, what is it elſe but for

to oppreſſe the poore the widow and the fatherles,
concerning whome the Lord hath thus ſpoken,They are to be accounted oppreſſors vvhich vvill not if they may deliuer the oppreſſed. 
               If
thou vex or trouble ſuch, & ſo he cal and cry vnto me,
ſurely I wil heare his cry. And then ſhal my wrath be
kindled & I wil kil you with the ſword, and your wiues
ſhalbe widowes, and your children fatherleſſe. Either
then by graunting vnto me righteouſe judgment,Exod.22.23.
ye of the parliament muſt deliuer me from oppreſſion
and wrong, or I muſt be forced to account you
among the number of mine oppreſſors. And you
knowe, that being oppreſſed and troaden downe, I
am bound to cry to the Lord for aide, otherwiſe, I
ſhal diſobey his commaundement, Pſal. 50. 15. Acquainting
him with my griefe he hath promiſed to
heare my ſuite, what will followe thereof, you cannot
I am ſure be ignorant. For then he hath proteſted
that his wrath wil be kindled againſt you & that
he will deuour you with the ſword, and cauſe your
wiues to be widowes, and your children fatherleſſe,
doe ye not then ſee your ſelues bound to receiue
mine appellation with ſuch a bond, as in wiſdome ye
ought to take heede that ye incurre not the danger
thereof.
            Although then I be a thouſand degrees inferiour
vnto mine aduerſaries, in regard of outward things:
yet by the mercies of the Lorde, I haue the vpper
hand of them, in the goodneſſe and equitie of my
ſuite. For I come vnto you in the name of God,
moſt humbly intreating, and earneſtly beſeeching,
that in a good matter, euen in my right, I be not ouerthrowen
by the power of vnconſcionable enemies,
and therefore many waies, I come not without
th'vnreaſonable ſupport of my peticion. I come
euen with that warrant, by the vertue whereof the

poore, the widowe, the fatherleſſe and the ſtranger
are of due to haue their right againſt the mightieſt
potentate vnder the ſunn. And that is the commandement
of the Lord of heauen and earth, concerning
th' adminiſtration of juſtice without partialitie:
you ſhal haue no reſpect of perſons in judgment ſaieth
the Lord,
               Deut. 1. 17. 
               but ſhal heare the ſmall as the great, you ſhal
not feare the fuce of man, for the iudgment is Gods.
And again, you ſhal not doe vniuſtly in iudgment. Thou
ſhalt not fauour the perſon of the poore,
               Leuit. 19. 15 
               nor honor the
perſon of the mightie, but ſhalt iudg thy neighbour
righteouſly, Theſe ye knowe are the commaundements
of the land, wherby ye are bound to heare me
vnleſſe ye think you may haue reſpect of perſons in
judgment, for if the Archb. or any of his aſſociats
came vnto you to be heard againſt me, you would
eaſely condiſcend vnto the motion. The like fauor
are ye bound to ſhewe vnto me, becauſe you are to
heare the ſmal as well as the great, and ought not
to fauour the perſon of the mightie. It is not vnknowne
vnto you, what the prophet Eſaiah ſpake of
the judges in his time,Eſai. 1. 23. 24 becauſe they would not help
the fatherleſſe to his right, nor ſuffer the widowes
cauſe to come before them, would ye avoide the
juſt deſert of that reprehenſion? Then I beſeech you
helpe me to my right, and ſuffer my cauſe to come
before you, leaſt it may be truely ſaide of you, that
you execute no judgment, no not the judgment of
the fatherles and oppreſſed.
            And albeit you wil not doe this in regarde of my
perſon which a
                  •
                as the fatherleſſe, as the poore and
as the ſtranger, yet deny me not the ſame, either in

                  ••
               ſpect of the cauſe of God for the which I am
t
                  •
               oubled, or in conſideration of th' equity of mine

aduerſaries, from whome I can neither hope for juſtice
in my trial, nor ſafety from danger. The cauſe
of this my trouble and perill (as before hath bene
briefly touched) is only that the Lord vouchſafed
me the fauour, to motion a redreſſe of the great ignorance
and corruption which at this day raigneth
in the church within my country. And becauſe I doe
not conceile that which in conſcience I am bounde
to lay open:namely, that the blindnes and ignorance
of our blind & ignorant guides, the tiranny, vnlawful
bondage, and vnjuſt oppreſſion of Gods church
by vngodly, and tiranical Lord Biſhops, with the
reſt of th'vnlawful church gouernoures (who euen
by vertue of their places cannot chuſe but oppreſſe
the church of God) are the ready and direct waie,
not only to kepe my countrimen from eternal life,
but alſo to bringe the Lords wrath vppon vs, our
prince, maieſtrats, people, and the whol kingdome.
So that I am moleſted for ſoliciting the cauſe of
God, the cauſe of mens ſoules, the cauſe of her maieſtie,
and the State, with whome the Lord (with
out ſpeedy repentance) is not likely to beare any
longer, for the manifold corruptions of our church.
I am moleſted becauſe I cannot be content that
my countrymen ſhould want the means of their ſaluation,
and ſo run headlong to their owne eternall
ruine, and becauſe I am not ſilent at the miſerable
prophanation of Gods ſanctuary, by ſwine and vncleane
beaſtes: I am moleſted becauſe I ſuffer not
without any ſhewe of diſlike, the holy miniſtery of
the Lord and the ſacred gouernment of his church,
to be a pray vnto ſuch men as are not worthy to liue
in any wel ordered common wealth, much leſſe in
a reformed church: I am moleſted becauſe I hold it

vnlawful for any man to take vppon him the care,
charge, and ouerſight of thoſe ſoules, whome he
cannot poſſibly feede, guide, and direct in the paths
and paſtures of eternal life: I am moleſted becauſe
with the holy Apoſtle Peter, I think it vnlawfull
for any miniſter to be Lord ouer gods heritage,
               1. Pet. 5. 1. 2. and
thinke the judgment of our Sauiour to be ſounde,
who held it vnlawful for his miniſters to Rule like
Lordes:
               Luk. 22. 25. I am moleſted becauſe I hold that which is
ſet downe Heb. 3. 6. to be true, whereby I am inforced
to confeſſe, that as non but Moſes or ſome other
prophet, by the expreſſe commaundement of God,
was to ordaine th'officers of the church vnder the
lawe. So non but our Sauiour Chriſt, or his apoſtles
in the expreſſe written word, are to ordaine the officers
of the churche gouernement vnder the newe
couenaunt. I am alſo moleſted, becauſe (being conſtrained
by the former ſcripture, Hebr. 3. 6.) to acknowledge
that our Sauiour lefte an externall gouernement
of his Church, and ſo is equall with Moſes:
and ſuch a gouernement as cannot be changed
by any but himſelfe, and ſo is ſuperior vnto Moſes.
I am driuen to confeſſe this vnchangeable forme of
externall church gouernement ordained by him, to
be a gouernment, th' execution whereof, is committed
to theſe 4. officers: namely, Teaching Pastors &
Doctors, gouerning Elders, & ministring Deacons, becauſe
I finde non other officers or offices, either expreſſed
or included in the Newe Teſtament: Apoſtles,
Prophetes and Euangeliſtes onely excepted,
which being remooued out of the Churche by the
Lord himſelfe, the boldnes of our Biſhops & their
defenders is intolerable, in demanding why Paſtors,
Doctors, Elders and deacons, ſhould be permanent:

ſeeing Apoſtles, Prophets and Euangeliſts were but
temporarie. As though the Lord himſelfe were not
of ſufficient wiſedome to ordaine what he thought
good in the gouerment of his Church: or as though
he were bounde, either to continue Apoſtles, Prophets,
and Euangeliſts, or to abrogate th'other 4. offices,
& vnder the Goſpell to haue no gouerment of
his appointment, muchleſſe vnchangeable. I am moleſted
becauſe I made it knowne, that to maintaine
a Churche gouernement, which at the pleaſure of
man according to the diuers eſtates of the Church
may be changeable: is flatly to ouerthrowe the prerogatiue,
whereby Chriſte Ieſus is aboue Moſes, in
th'ordering of his owne houſe. Th'outwarde regement
whereof, cannot be held chaungeable vnder
the Goſpell, according to times, places, countries &
ſtates, but Chriſt Ieſus muſt be made inferior vnto
Moſes, contrary to th'expreſſe decree and counſell
of th'eternall God, Heb. 3. 6. Briefly, I am moleſted
becauſe I made it knowen, that the gouernment of
the Church by L. Biſhops and Archbiſhops, (being
as they themſelues graunt, a temporarie gouernement,
fit for the Church in time of peace,D. Bridges page 284. but not of
perſecution,T. C. pa. 135. 76. and neuer ordained by the Lorde, but
inuented by man to preuent ſchiſmes, &c.) is intollerable
in Gods Church, becauſe it maketh Chriſt
Ieſus to haue ordained, either a changeable church
gouernement of his owne houſe, or none at all, and
ſo to be far leſſe faithfull in Gods houſe then Moſes
was.
            Theſe and ſuch like (my Lordes) are the cauſes
why th'Archb. and his, are ſo bloodily affected towardes
me. And I haue (as mine aduerſaries themſelues
confeſſe) alleadged vnto you the true cauſe

of their hatred and enmitie. For if th'Archb. &c.
were demaunded by this honourable aſſembly, why
they impriſoned me, why they rifeled my ſtudie, &
tooke away my writinges, why they now ſeeke for
me: their preſent anſwere would be, that I am an enemie
to the preſent gouernment of the cleargie, eſtabliſhed
by her Majeſties prerogatſue and the
conſent of the State. And what is this in effect, but
becauſe I thinke Chriſt Ieſus to be more faithfull in
the gouernment of his owne houſe then Moſes was.
            I know in deed, that for this cauſe they giue out,
that I am an enemie to her Majeſties gouernment,
a ſeditious and diſcontented ſubject, guiltie of many
attemptes and practiſes againſt her royall prerogatiue,
and one that intendeth nothing els, but the
vtter innouation of the ſtate: wherein I doe
acknowledge th' auncientThe crimes vvherevvith. and perpetuall ſlaunder
of Gods trueth and his ſeruants in all ages.Gods, trueth and his ſeruants haue bene charged in all ages, are treaſon and ſedition. For it
hath bene the continuall courſe and practize of the
diuell at all times, to laye matter of ſtate vnto their
charge, that haue gainſaid any of thoſe corruptions
which his inſtruments haue maintained in Gods holy
ſeruice. And if our Biſhops ſhould new refraine
from this ſlaunder, then could they not ſo manifeſtly
diſcrie themſelues (as they doe) to be their naturall
ſucceſſors, whoſe roomes in this age, they ſupplie
in the defence of the kingdome of darkeneſſe
and ignorance.
            Our Sauiour Chriſte was guiltie of ſo many and
ſo outragious practiſes, againſt the State wherein
he liued, as Pilate the Iudge could not ſaue his life,
and be a friend vnto Ceſar.
            This did the high prieſt openly proteſt againſt
him, Iohn. 19. 12. And can we then maruel that his

trueth in this age among our high prieſts is ſubiect
vnto the ſame obloquie? Tertullus th'orator would
not be tedious in accuſing th'apoſtle Paule: if Felix
of his curteſie would but heare him a few words, he
would briefly lay forth the cauſe of the Iewes hatred
towards the apoſtle in this ſorte.Act. 24. 5. 
               Certainly wee
haue found this man a peſtilent fellowe, and a mouer of
ſedition among the Jewes thorough out the world, and
a chief mainteiner of the ſect of the Nazarites. The
wicked Iewes alſo Act. 17. 6. 7. miſſing of Paul and
Silas, drew Iaſon with certaine other brethren vnto
the heads of the city crying.Act. 17. 6. 7. 
               Theſe are they that haue
ſubuerted the State of the world, and here they are that
gainſay the decrees of Ceſar, ſaying that there is an other
king on Jeſus &c: where I do the leſſe maruel,
that ſedition and treaſon is laied to my charge, for
maintaining the trueth, in aſmuch as the Biſhopps
them ſelues in their allowed tranſlation of the great
Bible, vppon the fore aleaged place of Act. 17. haue
giuen this note, namely. That the common and vſuall
weapons which the wicked vſe againſt the members of
Chriſt,
               The Bishops note. 
               are treaſon and ſedition. Their wicked ſlander
againſt al that ſeeke the reformation of our church,
and particularly againſt me, haue verified the truth
of this doctrine, for aſſoone as any ſhewe their diſlike
of theſe corruptions, with a deſire to ſee Chriſt
bearing ſway in the church of England by his owne
lawes, they preſently exclaime, that theſe are the
men which ſubuert the ſtate of the Realm, and that
gainſay the decrees of her maieſtie, affirming that
there is an other Soueraigne, whoſe alone lawes
muſt be harkened vnto, and whoſe alone offices are
to be allowed of in the gouernment of the church,
and that is Chriſt Ieſus th'eternall ſonne of the liuing

God: in deed if to defend the prerogatiue
which he ought to haue in appointing th'officers &
gouernors of his church, be ſedition and treaſon, I
doe confeſſe in deed, that after the way which they
cal ſedition and treaſon: ſo ſerue I the God of my fathers.
But this is non other treaſon then that where
vnto our Sauiour Chriſt and his apoſtles before me
haue giuen their hands and conſented: and none other
treaſon then that, wherevpon all Kings and
Queenes do firmly lay the foundation of their royall
crownes and Scepters. And therefore ye of the
parliament, ought to be ſo farr from being mooued
with theſe ſhamefull reportes, nowe raiſed by our
Biſhops againſt Chriſt Ieſus, againſt his trueth and
his members, as ye ſhould not permitt ſuch profane
mouthes, that preſume in this ſort, to whette their
tongues againſt heauen, and him that ſitteth therein,
to eſcape vnpunniſhed. The forgers of theſe palpable
vntruethes, confeſſe themſelues, that Treaſon
and Sedition are th'ordinarie weapons of the wicked
againſt the members of Chriſte, which in deede
hath bene th'armour wherewith the diuell in all ages,
hath furniſhed his champions againſt the truth.
And I cannot blame our Biſhops for being skilfull
in this accuſation, ſeeing ſo many of their predeceſſors
haue in the like cauſe, troaden the like path before
them.
            Amos no ſooner began to vtter the trueth in Bethel,
but Amaſiah the high prieſt there preſently
ſmelled out his dangerous attempts. And therefore
like a good ſubiect in the ſingular good will he bare
vnto his Soueraigne Lord, Ieroboam the ſonne of
Ioaſh king of Iſrael, he waded farther into the matter,
and at length found Amos his treaſon and ſedition

to be ſo intollerable, as the Land was no longer
able to beare it. Eſpecially ſeeing th'enterpriſes of
the prophet were taken in hand even in the middeſt
of the kingdome, to ſtir vp the ſubiects to innouation,
in regard whereof, the high prieſt ſawe him ſelfe
bound in conſcience to ſend Ieroboam this meſſage.
Amos hath conſpired againſt thee,
               Amos. 7. 11. 12. 
               in the middeſt of the
houſe of Iſrael, the land is not able to beare his words,
for he hath openly ſpoken that which the Lord hath put
into his mouth. The like treachery in the place before
ſet down,Ierem. 2. 6. did the prieſts and the prophets finde
in Jeremiah: yea and ſuch is the care which the lims
of Sathan haue of the ciuil maieſtrate, that rather
then kings and princes ſhould be honored with the
maintenance of a perfect building of Gods church,
they can preſently finde no leſſe then ſedition and
treaſon in their purpoſes, that indeuoure to further
that worke.
            When Jeruſalem began to be reedified, in the
daies of Artaxerxes, the men beyond the riuer knew
well enough, that the building of Gods church and
th'eſtabliſhing of his true ſeruice amongſt men, is
ſtraight way a wicked and a rebellious enterpriſe.
For which cauſe they ſent word vnto the king, that
if Jeruſalem a city rebellious and wicked, ſhould be
once built, the kings tribute thereby ſhould be diminiſhed,
and becauſe they had bin brought vp in the
kings court, and that it was not meet for them to ſee
the kings diſhonor, they ſent him word, that if hee
would ſearch the booke of the Chronicles of his father,
he ſhoulde finde the true Churche of God to
haue bene alwaies rebellious & noiſome vnto kings
and princes, and to haue mooued ſeditions of olde:
for which cauſe alſo it had bene deſtroyed. And further

they certified him that if he would ſuffer the
church to be reedified, by that meanes the portion
beyond the riuer ſhould not be his.Ezra. 2. 19. Nor long after
this time Nehemias with the Elders of the Iewes
ſtrengthened their hands to finiſh the building of
Ieruſalem. What ſaith Sanballat, and Tobiah a ſeruant,
what a thing is this you doe? will you rebell againſt
the King? As if the building of Gods church
could not chuſe, but be a rebellious interpriſe. You
ſee by theſe examples right honorable, that it is the
lotte of Gods ſeruants, to be accounted, ſeditious
men, and traitors vnto princes and ſtates, whenſoeuer
they doe, but ſet their faces towards the building
of the Lords houſe, and you ſee apparantly by
theſe teſtimonies, that it is no newe found ſlaunder
which the high commiſſioners haue forged againſt
me, but an auncient quarrell of the Diuell in all ages
and times againſt Gods trueth.
            Which may be the better manifeſted if you doe
conſider, if either they can alleadge no reaſon of
their accuſation, or the ſame (if they do ſhewe any)
is becauſe I afforad my bounden ſeruice vnto the
trueth.2. Infallible marks of the enemies of the trueth. For th
                  •
               ſe are infallible markes, whereby awicked
enemy of the trueth, and a ſlaunderer of the
members of Chriſt may be knowne, namely, that either
he can yeald no reaſon of his ſlaunder (becauſe
he thinketh it ſufficient for him in that cauſe, to inuent
an vntrueth without any proofe) or his reaſon
ſhalbe becauſe the ſeruants of God, doe faithfully
employ them ſelues in the ſeruice of their maiſter,
Rheum and Geſhem accuſed Ieruſalem of rebelliō,
ſo did Sanballat accuſe Nehemias, and the Elders
of the Iewes. But how prooued they their accuſations?
They neede not to labour that way, becauſe

they ſlaundered the church of God, and the true
members thereof, againſt whome for the mo
                  •
               t part,
a ſlaunder without proofe wil be in ſteed of a thouſand
witneſſes. Ieremiah was accounted worthie to
die by the priſts and prophets in his time, and what
was their reaſon? Why ſay they, he hath propheſied
in the name of the Lord,Ierem. 2. 6. 9. ſaying, This City ſhalbe
made deſolate without an inhabitant. Lo heer my Ll.
the infalliable markes of the ſlaunders and enemies
of Gods children, and where you finde theſe marks
giue judgment accordingly. Nowe may it pleaſe
your honors to demaund of the high commiſſion,
why they account me to be a diſturber of the peace
of our church, and a ſeditious perſon. Either they
wil think them ſelues not bound to giue any reaſon
of their accuſation, becauſe againſt thoſe that
ſeeke the wealth of Ieruſalem, any vntrueth wilbe
admitted, or their reaſon wilbe becauſe I hold it vnlawful
for them to liue in popiſhe callings, to be
Lords ouer their bretheren, to ſmother the trueth,
to rob Chriſt of his honor, and his church of her libertie,
or to ſpeake in their owne wordes, becauſe I
diſlike the gouernment of the church by L. Archb.
and Lord Bb. eſtabliſhed by the prerogatiue of hir
majeſtie and the parliament. Hereby in trueth declaring,
that in perſecuting me a worm of the earth,
they are imployed in his cauſe, with whom I feare
me, vnleſſe they repent, they ſhal haue their reward
for ſpeaking euill of the trueth. For what elſe doe
they, in giuing out that I am a ſeditious perſon, for
oppugning the gouernment of Archb. and L. Bb. &
for maintaining the gouernement by Paſtors, Doctors,
Elders and Deacons, but affirme the defence
of Gods trueth, to be ſedition, and the defence of

the libertie of his Churche to be treaſon? Will the
par
                  •
               iament then ſuffer the cauſe of God to be thus
ſhameful
                  •
               y abuſed, by wicked and prophane men?
Well my Ll. though you receiue not my Appellation
in regarde of my ſelfe: yet ſuffer the trueth to
come before you. Suffer not the cauſe of God and
his Church, for want of juſt triall, to fall into ignomie
and diſcredit. Let it neuer be ſaid, that Feſtus an
heathen Iudge, ſhould be more fauorable in ſupporting
the credite of Gods trueth and the profeſſors
thereof, then the parliament of England would be.
            The ſpilling of my blood for this cauſe, though
it be a matter to be regarded of you that are in authoritie:
yet I thanke he Lorde, it is not the thing
that I feare: For by his ineſtimable goodnes, I finde
my ſelfe an vnworthye wretche, to be one of them,
who in this cauſe are not afraide of death when it
commeth,Iob. 5. 21. 24. and one of them that may laugh at death
and deſtruction, becauſe I knowe the beaſt & ſtones
of the fielde to be at league with me, and that euerlaſting
peace for euer and euer, ſhall be vnto me of
the Lords free and vndeſerued reward. But the diſcrediting
of the truth by my hard vſage, is the thing
that I regarde, and the ſpilling of my blood for defending
the trueth, and writing againſt impietie, is
it, that I feare me, will make this lande an aſtoniſhment
to our neighbors round about vs. Be it then,
that my complaint at this time, were not the complaint
of the oppreſſed and the ſtraunger: yet inaſmuch
as it is the cauſe of Chriſt Ieſus, for the which
I am perſecuted, you are bound to receiue mine Appellation.
And here me thinks, the Lord demandeth
of you that are parlament mē, as ſomtimes he did of
the people of Iudah, what iniquitie you finde in the

Church gouernment by teaching Paſtors and Doctors,
gouerning Elders, miniſtring Deacons, that
you haue not onely committed two euils, the one in
refuſing that gouernement: th'other in chuſing to
your ſelues, theſe broken pits, I meane the gouernment
of Archb. Lord Bb. which can holde in them
nothing profitable to Gods Church: but alſo think
thoſe that plead for Chriſts intereſt vnworthie your
protection and countenance, againſt the injuſt and
cruell enemies, and the cauſe wherein they ſtande,
vnworthie your defence? The Lord I ſaye, demaundeth
what iniquitie you finde in the gouernment of
his ſonne, that you haue thus altogether rejected
and forſaken the ſame, and cannot abide (I ſpeake
now vnto ſuch as are enemies therevnto) to haue it
conſulted vpon in your meeting. The beſt anſwere,
which in this point you can make, are of late publiſhed
by the publike authoritie of the Biſhops thē
               ſelues.
            Let theſe reaſons then be briefely examined,The Bb. reaſons in the defence of their hierarchie, and againſt chriſts true gouernment examined. &
ſee whether they will be a ſufficient warrant for her
Majeſtie and you in the day of Chriſte Ieſus, to refuſe
his gouernment, and to imbrace this hierarchy
of Bb. in ſteed thereof.
            Firſt, it is ſaide that this hierarchie is eſtabliſhed
by the authoritie of her Majeſtie & the parliament.T. C. Epiſt. page 2.
The Lord anſwereth, that for this cauſe, the Nauie
of the Spaniarde of late, threatned our deſtruction▪
and that for this cauſe we haue had extreme famine
in all our quarters, deare yeares, and many an vnſeaſonable
harueſt; and that for this cauſe, he threatened
to take away our dread ſoueraign (whom good
Lord ſpare in thy mercies, and crowne with eternal
bleſſednes for thy ſonnes ſake) by ſo many conſpiracies,

as haue bene villanouſly attempted within
our land, and therefore warneth her Majeſty & you
of this honorable courte, that vnleſſe you woulde
feele his heauie hand vnto your deſtructiō, that this
wicked and peſtilent gouernment of L. Bb. ſhoulde
be no longer maintained by your prerogatiue.
            Secondly,T. C. pa. 16. & page 140. it is alleaged, that this gouernment by
Paſtors, Doctors, Elders and Deacons, was inuented
by, they know not whom, and that it is not yet proued,
that any ſuch gouernment was in the primitiue
Church.
            VVhy this is more then ſhameleſſe impudencie,
Is not that prooued in the 31. yeare of the raigne of
Queene Elizabeth, to haue bene at all in the primitiue
Church, which our booke of common prayer,
in the beginning of her Majeſties raigne, teſtified
to haue beene therein, and to ſhewe the neceſſitie
thereof, declareth that we are to wiſhe for the diſcipline
then practized? Thus you may ſee, that our
Bb. to ſaue themſelues harmeleſſe, take leaue when
they thinke good,Before the Commination on Ashvvedneſdaye to croſſe the booke of Common
prayer in that which is moſt true, and which their
owne writings graunt to be true, whereas they crie
treaſon, treaſon, when other men do not allow that
which is amiſſe therein. And you may alſo ſee howe
fit they are to lead others in the way of life, who are
now growne ſo ſharpe ſighted, as they will ſweare,
that at noone dayes they can ſee no light, whereas
in the very morning they themſelues ſawe the vpriſing
of the ſun. But to anſwer this point in a word,
the Lord maketh it knowne vnto the parliament of
England, that his ſonne Chriſt Ieſus, was the author
and ordainer of this Church gouernement, whiche
vncleane mouthes affirme, to be inuented by they

know not whome: yea, but our Bb. proteſt, that the
opinion which now th
                  •
               y haue of their owne gouerment
will not be ſhaken,T. C. page 8. vntill they be reſolued in
two points, whereof now they are ignorant.
            Firſt, that a direct commaundement be brought
out of the word to prooue, that there ſhould be in
all ages and ſtates of the church of Chriſt,This is a popish demand one onely
forme of gouernement. Secondly, that ſome
particular churches be ſet downe, wherein the deſired
gouernment by Paſtors, doctors, Elders, & Deacons
was practiſed. The high court of parliament is
here ſōmoned by the Lord of heauen, to judg whether
the iniquity of theſe men be to be borne with,
who bluſh not to ſpeake euel of that vpright waie,
whereof they acknowledge them ſelues to be meetly
ignorant, why would they not require a reſolution
of their doubts, before they had gainſaid the holy
ordinance of the lord, and accuſe the ſame as traiterous
vnto her maieſties gouernment, and dangerous
vnto the ſtate?An anſvvere to the Bb. 3. & 4. reaſons. but concerning the former of
their demaundes, the Lord anſwereth, that there is
a direct commaundement in the word, whereby the
church in all ages and ſtates, is enjoined to acknowledg
the Lord Ieſus to be ſuperior vnto Moſes.
            And therefore alſo that there is a direct commaundement
in his word, whereas by all adges and
times, are bound to haue on only outward forme of
church gouernment. The latter queſtion though it
be a popiſh interrogatorie, is yet ſatiſfied without
any greate labour. For the church of Rome, Phillippi,
Epheſus,Rom. 12. 6. 7. Derbe Liſtra,8. Act. 20. 28. & 14. 23. &c.Phil. 1. with many others mē
               tioned
in the word, practiſed this gouernment by
Paſtors, Doctors, Elders, and deacons. And if Chriſt
Ieſus be as faithful in Gods houſe, as Moſes was, it

is cleare that no church, as before was touched in
what age or ſtate ſoeuer, can haue any lawful gouerment
eſtabliſhed, but only this, by Paſtors, Doctors
Elders, and Deacons, becauſe no church vnder the
lawe could haue any lawful eſtabliſhed gouerment
but that preſcribed by Moſes.
            Whereby the pretence that other churches profeſſing
the Goſpel haue not this gouernment,T C. pag 82. Our Bb. 5. reaſon anſvvered. is euidently
ſhewed to be nothing elſe, but a profe that
other churches haue their imperfections and are not
as yet ſo farr built, as the Lord requireth. Aſa was a
godly King, and reformed many things in the houſe
of God: yet the Idolatrous high places remained al
his daies. Theſe high places were the blemiſh, and
imperfections of his gouernment. Nowe were it any
reaſon becauſe he was a godly King, that therefore
the ſpots of the church vnder him ſhould be the paterne
of Ioſiahs reformation, and that the high places
ſhould ſtil be continued? It muſt needs be ſo if
our Bb. manner of reaſoning againſt the Lords holy
ordinances be good and allowable.
            In the ſixth place the inconueniences of receauing
this gouernment of the Lords ordaining are
ſaide to be ſo greate,T. C. pag. 16 Our Bb. 6. reaſon. that the attempting thereof
might bring rather the overthrowe of the Goſpell
heere amongſt vs, then the end that is deſired. If the
receiuing of the Lordes diſcipline, be inconuenient
vnto any ſtate, that is not the fault of god his ordinance,
but the ſinne of men, which haue made their
eſtate out of ſquare, as Chriſt cannot be wholly receaued
thereunto without their likely detriment.
To gainſay the trueth, becauſe an inconuenience
wil followe the embracing of it, is an argument not
to be heard of amongſt chriſtians. For our Sauiour

Chriſt him ſelfe affirmed it, to be no light matter to
enter into the kingdome of heauen, and therefore
declareth them to be vnfit diſciples for him,Luk. 13. 14. & 14. 26. that wil
not enter thereunto through manye tribulations:
yea and forſake all earthly comforts,Matth. 16. 24 much leſſe the
maintenance of their outward eſtate,Mark. 8. 35. rather then
not to followe him in all the waies wherein he requireth
their obedience. To pretend inconueniences
then, in this cauſe bewraieth an hollowe hart
vnto Gods glory. And yet it is not halfe ſo inconuenient
to bring in Chriſtes gouernment, as it was
to expel popery. If her maieſtie and the parliament
would agree to eſtabliſh the ſame, al inconueniences
would be ſoone preuented. The feare of ouerthrowing
the Goſpel by that meanes, is a ſlaunderous
ſurmiſe, and vndutiful vnto her maieſty and the
ſtate, vnleſſe our Bb. be guiltie vnto them ſelues of
ſome ſuch purpoſes, I knowe not why this ſhould be
aleadged.
            The inconueniences are, firſt the alteration of
the whole ſtate of the lawes of this realme, as the
vtter ouerthrowe of the ſtudie of the ciuil lawe and
the alteration of the ciuil and common lawe. As
though al theſe things coulde not be helped by one
act of parliament. Popery had more ſhew and coulor
of trueth to reaſon thus for it ſelfe, in the raigne of
our late Soueraigne of famous memory, King Henry
the 8. So had heathen Idolatry in the daies of
Ioſiah, or Hezekiah. They that vſe ſuch arguments
ſhew them ſelues to be giuen ouer to withſtand the
trueth. I hope the Parliament wil admit of no ſuch
reaſon, as theſe are. Chriſt Jeſus must not be allowed
by his owne lawes to rule in ſtate, he muſt needes be decreede
by our lawes inferiour vnto Moſes, and that becauſe

we wil not aulter the ſtate of our lawes, we wil not
haue the ſtudye of the ciuil lawe ouerthrowne. We muſt
not greatly wonder, that papiſts and Mahometiſts
doe kepe Chriſts holy and ſacred verity out of their
dominions: ſeeing in a ſtate profeſſing the true God,
ſuch godleſſe men are found, as tremble not to publiſh
and vtter their vngodly conceits in this ſort, againſt
Gods heauenly ordinances: and eſpecially,
ſeeing in a ſtate profeſſing the true God, ſuch pretences
are of force to keepe out Chriſts ſoueraigne
and kingly gouernement. I hope that you who are
parliament men, ſee this kinde of reaſoning to bee
ſuch, as will ſtand in no account at the dreadfull day
of judgement. That which is ſpoken of Ciuillians, is
alſo ſlanderous. For they liue by temporall courts,
and therefore it is not neceſſarie that their profeſſion
ſhould decay, when the Antichriſtian gouernement
of Archb. and Lord Bb. is expelled out of our
Churche. Further our Archb. and L. Bb. vſurpe the
determination of many ciuil cauſes, in the deciding
whereof, Ciuillians might be well imployed. And is
it more reaſon in deede, that the true Churche of
God ſhould want the vſe of Chriſts holy lawes and
ſtatutes, then the ſtudie of the Ciuill law? O moſt
ſhamefull ſpeeche to be conceiued, much more to
be publiſhed in print (and that by Biſhopps) in the
dayes of the Goſpell. But what dare not they publiſh,
who profeſſe themſelues to gainſay the way of
trueth?
            And therefore they are not aſhamed to giue out,T. C. pag. 8.
that the deſired alteration of Church gouernment,
would bring the judiciall law of the Iewes into our
ſtate. This is a lewd ſlaunder. For Chriſts gouernement
neceſſarily, requireth no part of the Iewiſhe

lawe, to be receiued into any common wealth: but
that which is morall.
            It is further objected,T. C. pag. 87. that the lawes maintaining
the Queens ſupremacy in gouerning of the church,
and hir prerogatiue in Eccleſiaſticall cauſes, muſt
be abrogated, or els Chriſte cannot raigne in our
ſtate. The reaſon whereof (right honourable) you
haue heard before alleaged, both by the Iewes vnto
Pilate: namely, that our Sauiour Chriſte Ieſus, is a
deadly enemie vnto Ceſar, and alſo by Rehum, and
the men beyond the riuer vnto Artaxerxes. For as
they noted, the building of the true church of God
cannot chuſe, but be an hindrance vnto princes. For
Ieruſalem is knowne of olde to be a rebellious citie.
But remember then, O my God, if they belong
not vnto thee, that thus ſlander the trueth, and the
vpright ordinances of thy ſonne Chriſt Ieſus, and if
they be thine, conuert them ſpeedily. My Lords, &
you the reſt of the parliament, as you haue any care
of the glory of your God, ſee that the enemies of
reformation, may either deciſt from their forgerie
againſt the trueth, or prooue their accuſations. The
Lord will judge you, euen as you judge his cauſe,
now offered vnto your conſideration. Wherefore as
you will anſwer before him, & as you mean to haue
any fauor at his hand, deliuer the cauſe of his ſonne
Chriſt Ieſus from this ignomie.
            There is yet in this point, another fault founde
with the gouernment of Chriſte,It is reaſon that all ſtates should be maintained ſauing the eſtat of chriſts kingdome. and another great
reaſon alleaged, why the hierarchie of Bb. ſhoulde
be maintained: and it is, that the one of the 3. ſtates
vpon the authoritie, whereof the lawes of England
haue hitherto ſtood, cannot without great inconuenience
be now ouerthrowen. Wherevnto the Lord

replieth, that the goſpell of his ſonne, was brought
into this kingdome by the 2. Eſtates, to wit, by the
temporall Lords of the vpper, and the commons of
the lower houſe: whereas ſince a thirde Eſtate, vz.
Lords ſpirituall (as they are called) was added vnto
the 2. former, little or no good hath bene enacted
for the glorye of God by that counſell. And if our
State had bene contented, according to the order of
nature, to ſtand vpon two legs, it is not to be doubted,
but that all the wounds and ſores of our church
had bene healed, and Chriſts diſcipline long ago eſtabliſhed
to our comfort, and to the vnſpeakeable
good of our poſterities. Moreouer, the Lord threateneth
aſſuredly, becauſe of this monſtrous and vnnatural
leg: wherevpon our lawes vnto this day, are
falſly ſaid to haue ſtood, and by the power whereof,
all the world knoweth, this kingdom to haue withſtood
the right of his ſoone, to laye our whole ſtate
euen with the grounde, ſo that it ſhall haue nothing
whereby it may be vpheld. And L. Bb. haue no better
intereſt to vphold our lawes then Lorde Abbots
haue. The ſtate may as well want the one as the other,
and with as ſmall inconvenience.
            There is added as a concluſion of theſe inconveniences,T. C. pa. 8
                     •
                  
                that it is dangerous to pick quarrels with
lawes ſetled: but there is no daunger to quarrell
with the lawes of Chriſts kingdome. They of all other
princes lawes may be ſecurely quarrelled with,
ouerthrowne, and troaden vnder feete without all
danger, and yet in our ſtate are they no quarrellers,
that abuſe the ſonne of God. The time will come,
wherein it ſhall appeare, that it had bene better for
all ſuch wretches, that the wombe had beene their
graue, then that they ſhould haue bene giuen ouer

to runne into their owne deſtruction. Our ſtate
hath well profited in religion, that nowe after 31.
yeares of the goſpell enjoyed,T. C. p. 92. 93 Ieſus Chriſte in demanding
his owne right, is nowe accounted a daungerous
quarreller againſt lawes ſetled. This ſlaunder
hath bene alreadie anſwered. So hath the other
ſet downe page 92. 93. of this booke concerning the
likelihood of altering our ciuill gouernment into a
popular ſtate, if Chriſt were once permitted to bear
the ful ſway therin. The reſt of the particuler cauils
contained in ſom few pages of this book, concerning
maintenaunce of the miniſter by tythes, the inconueniencie
both of the miniſters election by the people,
and alſo of excommunication by the whole
Church, are meer cauils, and anſwered before in the
generall, and therefore here, needleſſe to be ſtoode
vpon.
            Now the high court of parliament hath heard of
all the iniquitie that can be found in the Lord, and
his ſonne Chriſt Ieſus and you haue heard of all the
reaſons (your careles and wilfull negligence to deal
in the Lords matters onely expected) whereby hitherto
you haue bene enduced to refuſe the church-gouernment,
which he himſelfe hath laid downe &
preſcribed in his word, and to imbrace in ſteed therof,
a confuſed and an imperfect conſtitution of mans
deuiſe: whether theſe reaſons ſet downe by our Bb.
themſelues, will be a ſufficient warrant vnto you in
the day of judgement, to refuſe Chriſt Ieſus to rule
ouer you and your people, to maintaine the popiſhe
hierarchie of L. Bb. and to countenaunce their proceedinges,
who are wholy beſtowed (for the moſt
part) in perſecuting and moleſting thoſe, who open
their mouthes in the cauſe of God and his people,

for the reſtitution of thoſe lawes and liberties into
our Church, whereof they haue tyrannouſly bereaued
it. But if you thinke as the trueth is, that theſe
figge leaues, iſſuing out of the dark vnderſtandings
of wicked men, can ſerue you in no ſteed againſt the
wrath of the lambe. Enter more narrowly into this
cauſe, grant the ſame, and thoſe that ſtande in it juſtice
againſt their enemies, leaſt it be layde to your
charge, that you haue called good euill, and euill
good, and leſt it be laid to your charge, that you account
your owne wayes equall, and the wayes of the
Lord vnequall, & that you haue executed no judgement,
no not the judgement which concerneth the
ſincere and true worſhip of the eternal. Vnto the equitie
of my cauſe, which yet (as ye ſee) is not mine,
but the Lords, let this alſo be joyned, that mine aduerſarie
can lay nothing to my charge, wherby I can
be proued to haue brokē any penal law of the land.
I doe thinke my ſelfe in the cauſe, wherin the Archbiſhop,
and the reſt, that are joyned with him, are
become mine enemies, to haue incurred, the penaltie
of non of our laws, inaſmuch, as I haue not tranſgreſſed
the lawe of God. For I ſuppoſe my ſelfe to
liue in that ſtate, the laws whereof are to be accounted
of no force, which make him puniſhable, whoe
before the Lord is an innocent and guiltleſſe. The
duty of a chriſtian ſubiect draweth from me this perſwaſion,
that our ſtate and gouernment vnder her
maieſtie, eſtabliſhed by the authority of this houſe,
wil not account any lawe to be forcible, but that
which is agreeable with the law of God, and that,
non are puniſhable by any lawe in force amonge vs,
but thoſe only, who are offenders againſt the lawes
of God. For with what face can it be auouched,

that he is to be puniſhed, againſt whome the Lord
doth not commaunde the ſword to be drawne. And
thriſe miſerable is that ſtate, wherein theſe lawes
are in force, which commaund them to be ſmitten,
which are not euel doers. Of which number non are
to be accounted, ſaue thoſe only who by violating
humane poſitiue lawes, break alſo the lawe of God.
They that hold the contrary, are not worthy to liue
in a chriſtian ſtate. They highly derogate from her
maieſties credit, and the good lawes of this kingdome.
And non can poſſibly hold ſuch a poſition, but
thoſe, that vnder a pretence of authority, either doe
or would take occaſion to oppreſſe, and tiraunize ouer
her maieſties ſubiects, Nowe mine accuſers cannot
proue me to haue broken the lawe of God in ſeking
the ouerthrowe of their places, vntil they haue
firſt prooued their own callings to be lawful, according
to the word, vnto which time, if I could haue
bin aſſured of quietnes at their hands, this mine appellation
had bene needleſſe.
            Whereas nowe I am of neceſſitie conſtrayned
thereunto as wel for the reaſon before mentioned,
as alſo, becauſe I can nether haue aſſurance of ſafety,
nor juſt trial at their hands. I can hope for nether of
theſe from them. For they haue wholly vowed them
ſelues with all their might and maine, to ſlaunder,
aſſaile, reſiſt, and hinder, the cauſe of Gods honor,
the ſaluation of his church, in the defence whereof,
farbeit but I ſhould ſpend my bloud (as by the grace
of God I will) when I am thereunto neceſſarily called,
wherefore except ether mine aduerſaries (which
I hartily wiſh) would leaue the ſmothering of the
trueth, and the vnjuſt defence of their intollerable
corruptions, or that I ſhould ſurceaſe, (which I truſt

ſhal neuer come to paſſe) mine indeuours, to haue
the Goſpel planted in my country, and the houſe of
God cleanſed from pollution, I can look for nothing
elſe but al extremities at their hands.
            Heereby alſo it is manifeſt, that theſe men wil be
ſo far, from graunting me either any releaſe from
their tirannous Perſecution, or yet equity of judgment:
as they cannot poſſibly yeeld either of the
twoe, without the dangerous inpairing of their own
ſtate. My courſe by the aſſiſtance of God I meane
not to alter. The cauſe of my poore country, I mean
to reſpect as long as I liue, and neuer meane to giue
ouer, the diſcouering of thoſe wicked men, who in
this cleare light of the Goſpel, detaine the trueth in
vnrighteouſnes.In my ſupplication to the parliament. If I may haue (rather if Chriſt Ieſus
may haue) juſtice againſt them, I haue lately prooued
vnto you, that not one of theſe men, (I meane
Lord biſhops, and whoſoeuer depend vppon them)
ought to be maintained within theſe domminions.
Nowe ſeeing both the obtaining and alſo the ſolliciting
of this ſuite, muſt needs be joyned with the impairing
of the Archbiſhop of Canterburies eſtate &
the reſt in commiſſion with him, who ſitt in theſe
vnlawful chaires of Lord biſhops, or any wiſe depend
vppon them, how can they without their owne
irrecouerable loſſe adminiſter juſtice or graunt quietnes
vnto me? Doe they meane to yeeld vnto the
knowne trueth, and to giue ouer their places? Why
then am I moleſted by them? Doe they meane to be
ſtil the men, which hytherto they haue bene, that is
enemies vnto Chriſts holy diſcipline, and gouernement?
Then cannot they poſſibly affoard me any vpright
triall. For if they ſhould, the church of God
would be ſoone disburdened of them. And in wiſedom

they cannot let me go on quietly in my courſe,
for the more the trueth is opened, the neerer are
they to their fall. My cauſe being thus, what may be
ſaide of the parliament, if I be not releeued by your
meanes, in my moſt equal, moſt reaſonable, and moſt
chriſtian ſuite.
            Yea but ſeeing mine aduerſaries, are ſo mighty,
as they are knowne to be, and this ſuite ſo vnl
                  •
               kely
to preuaile againſt them in our dayes, were it not
better forme, to let them runn on in their wickednes,
then thus to ſtriue to mine owne hinderance,
and extreame peril in a gainleſſe enterpriſe? And
what calling haue I to deale in this cauſe? That is it
I knowe that the Diuel would haue, euen to be lett
alone, and permitted quietly to cary all before him
at his owne pleaſure, without any controlement?
As though the ſtones of the ſtreet, had not a ſufficient
calling to gainſay the wickedneſſe of men, when
the ſeruants of God are tongtied. And either it muſt
be ſaid, that ſinne at ſome age and time, hath a commiſſion
to goe vncontroled, or that the meaneſt in
Gods church, may ſpeake in the behalfe of Gods
honor, when other men are ſilent, at the treading
thereof vnder foote. The general deſolution then,
and the oppreſſion of Gods church in my country,
joyned with the deepe ſilence of all other men, doe
make it lawful and warrantable for me, to ſeeke the
ouerthrowe of Sathans kingdome, not withſtanding,
that I acknowledg my ſelfe, euery way vnfit for
ſo greate aworke. And if it ſhould pleaſe the Lord
to ſtir vp any of place, and guifts, to deale in the
cauſe, I would ſoone ſet my hand vppon my mouth
and be ſilent. But I hope that the Archbiſhop, and
his bretheren, are not growne to that paſſe, as they

will take the liberty to continue in vnlawful callings,
and to moleſt thoſe, that gainſay the badd
courſe, becauſe they ſee not what calling any one
man can haue to finde fault with their proceedings.
And I hope that you of the parliament, conſidering
the equity of my ſuit, wil vonchſafe me the hearing
in ſo reaſonable a petition.
            Conſider the matter which way you wil, and you
ſhal find mine Appellation on all parts to be juſt:
but eſpecially in regard of the proceedings of mine
aduerſaries. The conſideration whereof is not to be
ouerpaſſed by the parliament, if any portion of the
equitie, and juſtice, ſometimes floriſhing in that aſſembly,
benowd therein remaining. Their vnlawful
proceedings appeare, firſt, in that they aſſume vnto
them ſelues, the hearing of thoſe cauſes, wherein
by vertue of their cōmiſſion, they haue no warrant
to deale, whereat the parliament cannot winke, vnleſſe
they would ſuffer an Anarchie to take roote
in our ſtate. This they doe in a double ſort. For firſt
as before hath bene ſet downe, they lay treaſon to
my charge, and therefore ſend for me by their purſiuants.
What hath the high commiſſion to doe,
with men ſuſpected of treaſon? Is the place at Lambeth
now become the palor, where traitors ſhould
be araigned? The Archbiſhop of Canterbury, the
biſhops of London, Wincheſter, Doctor Coſin, &c.
nowe become judges in thoſe cauſes? Whether they
incurr not the danger of lawe, by entering into ſuch
matters, as are not within the compaſſe of their
commiſſion, you of this honorable aſſembly are beſt
able to judge. The trueth is that the Archbiſhop,
& his aſſociates, when I was examined before them
in the 29. yeare of her maieſties raigne, enforced

me to cleare my ſelfe vppon mine oath, of the treaſon,
which they gaue out to be contained in the 40.
page of my booke at that time written vnto the parliament.
Tollerate this courſe, and what parloure
or chamber may there be ſo priuate, wherein the
Archbiſhop and his aſſiſtants wil not arraigne their
ſeditious traitors as they faulſay account them.
            Secondly they preſume to determine of thoſe
ſuites, the hearing whereof are referred vnto the
higher courts, and ought not to be vſurped vppon
by inferiors, vntil the higher councels haue declared,
that they will not determine of them. In this
point, I had triall of their dealing the laſt parliament.
At which time they preſumed contrary vnto
right and lawful cuſtome, and to the infringing of
the auncient liberties of this noble houſe, to arrogate
vnto them ſelues, the determining and finall
ending of that ſuite, wherein I moued the parliament
and not the high comiſſion. And they wrongfully
impriſoned me in the time of the parliament,
for becomming a ſuiter even in the cauſe of God vnto
that aſſembly whereas by the priuiledges of this
high counſel, I was not to be moleſted by any, during
your ſeſſion, but only by your honors, vnto
whom I became a peticioner. It nothing preuailed
me to ſhewe the high commiſſioners, that I was a
ſuitor vnto the higheſt court in the land, and therefore
not to be troubled by any inferior vnto them,
during the time of their aſſembly, for the ſupplication
which I had thereunto preferred. Neither did
it any thing auaile me, to manifeſt it to be diſhonorable
vnto this houſe, & to their honors therein met
together, that they ſhould not be the judges of thoſe
ſuits whereof they were entreated to conſider.
            
               
The injury which at that time they offered vnto
the liberties of this honorable court, (to commit,
their tiranny to me wards) had not bene ſo intollerable
vnleſſe they, who vſurped vnto them ſelues
the deciding of my cauſe, had bene al of them members
of this houſe. The perſons then in commiſſion,
were theſe. Th' Archb. of Cant. the Bb. of London,
Wincheſter and Lincolne: D. Lewine, D. Cooſins,
all parliament men at that inſtant. Now judge whether
it be not againſt all right, that ſome fewe of the
inferiour members in that houſe, (of which number
in reſpect of manye, I might juſtly account the men
before named) ſhould extort vnto their priuat cenſure,
the judgement of a cauſe preferred publikely
vnto the whole parliament. The time hath beene,
wherein this high courte woulde not haue taken a
meaner injurie offered vnto their liberties, at the
handes of anye prerogatiue within this kingdome:
whether it ſtands not with the honor and credit of
parliament men amongſt poſterities, not to haue
their liberties thus infringed and diminiſhed, by inferior
and baſer courts: it behoues them that loue
their countrie, and endeuor to maintaine the welth
thereof to conſider.
            But whether this be behoofefull vnto the ſtate or
no, I am ſure it concerneth me not to be judged by
that court, wherein I may not anſwer vnto mine accuſers
(being the ſecond head of the injurious and
intollerable dealing of mine aduerſaries) but muſt
be enforced vpon mine oath to accuſe my ſelfe. I am
readie to aunſwere whatſoeuer they can laye to my
charge, and therein deſire no other fauour at your
Hh. hands, then Felix a pagan judge and an infidell,Act. 23. 35.
offered voluntarily vnto Paule th'apoſtle, that is, to

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
aunſwere vnto mine accuſers. This equall maner of
triall which fellons enjoy at euery bar in this land,
cannot be denied vnto me with any reaſon. And becauſe
our law affoordeth this equitie vnto knowne
malefactors, the tyranie of the high commiſſioners
is vnſpeakable, in conſtraining men to accuſe themſelues.
Porcious Feſtus an heathen idolator, when
the Iewes woulde haue judgement againſt S. Paule,
before they had by witneſſes conuinced him of any
crime:Act. 25. 16. anſwered, as the holy ghoſte noteth, that it
was not the maner of the Romanes (being Gentils
and ignorant of the true God) for fauor to deliuer
any man to death, before that he which is accuſed
haue his accuſers before him, and haue place to defend
himſelfe concerning the crime. And may not
the men, who profeſſe they know God, be aſhamed
in their own cauſe, for the fauor which they vnjuſtly
beare vnto themſelues, to impriſon their bretheren
profeſſing the ſame religion with them,The maner of adminiſtring juſtice at Lambeth. becauſe
they will not be their owne accuſers? And yet all
the juſtice that poore chriſtians haue at Lambeth
is this. You are now ſent for by Lords grace here, &
vs her Majeſties commiſſioners, we grant in deed,
that as yet we know nothing wherewith you may
bee charged. For accuſers you haue none, neither
were you ſent for to anſwere vnto thē. For it is our
maner to deliuer men into bonds (yea and to death
if the cauſe ſo require) though they haue no accuſers
to conuince them of any crime. And therefore
you muſt here be depoſed vpon your oath, to reueal
whatſoeuer you know by your ſelfe, or any other of
Gods children her Majeſties ſubjects. Whereby it
ſhall come to paſſe, that you ſhall eſcape vs narrowly,
but ere you depart the court, we will finde ſufficient

matter to impriſon you, and if you refuſe the
oath, to priſon you ſhall goe. For we adminiſter it,
Ex officio, and ſo vpon your refuſall, we may impriſon
you.
            And will the high court of parliament ſuffer this
bloodie and tirannous inquiſition, to be practized any
longer within this kingdom? What can the murthering
inquiſitors of Spaine do more, then by this
ſnare, inueigle mens conſciences, & conſtraine them
to ſpill their owne blood? It is wel knowne, that no
ſuch maner of iniquitie can be warranted vnto the
high commiſſion, by the poſitiue lawes of this land.
For in a criminall cauſe, they inforce no man to be
his owne accuſer. And againſt the law of God, (by
which no man ſhoulde be punniſhed vnder two or
three witneſſes) and of nature, all men knowe this
manner of proceeding to be. For admit that the law
of blaſphemie were now in force among vs, & that
a man in the dayes of his iniquitie had blaſphemed
the God of Iſrael, were it not both againſt the lawe
of God and of nature (the Lorde hauing vouchſafed
him repentance of his ſinn, and in his prouidence ſo
diſpoſed of the fact, as no witneſſes could be produced
againſt him) were it not I ſaye, both againſt the
word and againſt nature, for him in this caſe to accuſe
himſelfe? And yet the Archb. and his fellow officers,
would either impriſon a man ex officio, for denying
the oathe in this point, or compell him to be
his owne vnnatural murtherer. O miſerable judges,
before whom a man muſt needes, either tranſgreſſe
the lawes of God and of nature, or thruſt himſelfe
into inevitable daunger. If they ſay, it is to be preſuppoſed,
that without juſt cauſe of ſuſpition, they
will put no man to his oathe: therein they proteſt

no more then the Iewes did in accuſing our Sauiour
Chriſt, and the inquiſitors of Spaine, draw with
them in the ſame line. For the Iewes, they thought
much,Iohn 18. 30. that Pilate ſhould demand of them, what accuſation
they coulde laye to our Sauiour Chriſtes
charge, and therefore ſaid vnto him, if he were not
an euill doer, we would not haue deliuered him vnto
thee. Where we may euidently ſee, the wiſedom
and diſcretion of the enemies of God and his ſeruauts
to be ſuch, as they neuer accuſe any man, contrary
vnto right, equitie & conſcience. And as concerning
the Spaniſh inquiſition, it is well knowne,
that that holy houſe, conuenteth no man, without
great ſuſpition of hereſie. No more doe the high
commiſſion, offer an oath vnto anye, without great
cauſe, at the leaſt, without vehement ſuſpition of his
enimitie to Lord Bb. and their gouernment.
            And they are not only moſt injurious, in them
ſelues, but they commit the execution of their tiranical
proceedings vnto thoſe very often, whiche an
honeſt man would be aſhamed to entertaine in his
family. To haue a warrant for the apprehending,
and touching of whomeſoeuer it pleaſe you to ſuſpect,
is a charge of greate waighte, and ought not to
be committed vnto any, but vnto ſuch, as are known
to haue a rare and choiſe gouernment, ouer them ſelues.
Otherwiſe if a lewd and an vndiſcreete turbulent
fellowe, be armed with this overlarge and
vnbrideled commiſſion, is not vnlikely but he will
abuſe halfe the ſubiects hir maieſtie hath. And I
pray you, what is likely to inſue thereof? Euen this.
The intolerable vexation and bondage, of her maieſties
free borne ſubiects and people, and in time it is
to be feared the great diſhonor, if not the contempt

of laweful authority it ſelfe. The Archb. of Cant.
with his colleagues, ſendeth abroad his warrant to
apprehend, whomeſoeuer the meſſenger therein named
doth ſuſpect. Ought not this waighty charge
to be very waightely handeled? What choiſe then
make they of the meſſenger? Surely Richard Waltō
is a man fit for the purpoſe. For they know his good
behauiour, approued ſufficiency, and wiſdome to be
ſuch, as for his outragious lewdnes, diſhoneſty, and
want of gouernment ouer him ſelfe, amongſt all the
roiſters in this land, they could not choſe a more
knowne, and notorious lewd perſon, and more vnfit
for ſo waigh ie a charge to be the purſiuant, he was
ſomtimes bedle vnto a company in London, (of the
blacke Smithes I thinke.) The office though but
meane, yet was that company aſhamed, to haue a
perſon of that ſlanderous looſe behauiour for their
bedle, and therefore, for his detected crimes, heere
not to be named, they put him out of his place, being
aſhamed to retaine him. And yet this is the man
Right honorable, vnto whoſe diſcretion the Archb. of
Cant. will commit the moleſting and impriſoning
of whomſoeuer he ſhal ſuſpect. Admit that among
his c
                  •
               ppes, ſom of his companions, doe bribe
him to apprehende the honeſteſt and beſt affected
ſubiect in a country, he may doe it by his commiſſion,
and for his knowne lewdnes he is not vnlikely
to attempt the fact. The magiſtrate is to aſſiſt him.
And when he hath offered you this injury you haue
your amends in your hands, for he did no more then
by his commiſſion, he is warranted, & thoſe who ſet
him a worke are the high commiſſioners, who haue
a prerogatiue aboue lawe, as they would beare the
world in hand. May not her maieſties ſubiects then,

thinke them ſelues to be in a good taking, when
their libertie ſhal depend vpon the pleaſure or diſliking
of ſuch as are the ofſcouring and refuſe of men.
And I doe thinke it neerely concerneth your Hh.
of the parliament, to ſee that this abuſe of the high
commiſſion by theſe men, be no longer tollerated
in our ſtate. For what care the high commiſſioners,
howe tirannouſly they deale with hir maieſties moſt
louing ſubiects, as long, as they hope that no mans
accuſation and complaint, howe juſt ſoeuer, though
in the behalfe of the intereſt of Chriſt Ieſus, can be
heard and countenanced againſt them? And therefore
they are growne ſo inſolent, as they dare enjoine
hir maieſties officers, either at their commandement
to worke impoſſibilities, or vpon the peril
to anſwere the matter before them. Form this inſolency
of theirs it is, that of late they haue in their
mandatory letters, enjoined the Major of Northampton,
to ſurceaſe the execution of his office in the
gouernment of that towne vnder hir maieſtie, and
either to become their purſiuant, in apprehending
one of his neighbours, or elſe perſonally to appeare
before them at London, and not to departe their
court without ſpecial leaue▪ his affaires in her maieſties
ſeruice,M. Sharpe book binder of Northamton. and the diſtance of Place betweene
Northampton & London, nothing conſidered. And
yet required they of him that which he coulde not
bring to paſſe, becauſe the party whome he was to
apprehend, being wel known to be a dutiful ſubiect,
and for the loue he beareth vnto Gods truth to haue
bene heeretofore ſo cruelly? dealt with at ſome of
their hands, by long impriſonment, and ſo euil dealt
with, as his cauſe comming to be heard before the
Ll. of her maieſties priuy counſel, their Hh. judged

the biſhops proceeding againſt him, to be againſt
lawe and conſcience, and ſo were the meanes of his
deliuery, the party I ſay, nowe fearing the like injuſtice,
that hee ſometimes taſted of, was compelled
with the hinderance of his family to abſent himſelf
from his calling. And from this hope, that their procedings
ſhal neuer com into queſtion, it alſo cōmeth
to paſſe, that they giue out that I am an Anabaptiſt,
an vnderminer of the chair of the magiſtrat, a peſtilent
& a dangerus ſubiect many waies. For otherwiſe
they would neuer haue permitted by their authority
any ſuch bookes to be publiſhed againſt me,M. D. Some table page. 3. line 20. yea
but I hold her maieſtie with many thouſandes of hir
beſt ſubiects to be vnbaptiſed,M. D. Some Epiſt. pag. 2 and the queſtion betweene
maſter Doctor Some and me is, whether
ſuch as were and are baptiſed by popiſh prieſts and
vnpreaching miniſters haue and doe receiue a ſacrament.
If mine aduerſarie himſelfe had not cleared
me of this accuſation by his publike writings,Page 53. his
ſlander might at the leaſt haue bin probable, wheras
nowe his owne writings doe giue him and his allowers
the ſhameleſſe vntrueth. But howe can they be
held no miniſters, but that the Elements adminiſtred by
by them, ſhould be denied to be ſacraments? I truſt the
one may be held, & the other not denied, with better
reaſon by far, then the Archb. of Cant. can hold
baptim deliuered by women, whome al the worlde
knowe not to be miniſters,M. D. Some pag. 185. line 3. 31. to be a ſacrament. And
howe wil maſter D. Some anſwere himſelfe in this
point, which hath confeſſed al vnpreching miniſters
both popiſh prieſts, and proteſtant Idoles, to be no
miniſters?M. D. Some table pag. 4. 
               But it is an Anabaptistical error to account
magiſtracie for an human ordinance. As though nothing
ordained by man could be Gods ordinance alſo?

Or that the places Rom. 12. 1. & 1. Pet. 2. 13. were
irreconcileable? And that it were a more Anabaptisſtcal,
and intollerable error in me, to affirme the gouernment
and offices of the common wealth, to be
humaine conſtitutions, which is true then, for our
Biſhops to hould the gouerment, and offices of our
churches to be the ordinances of man, which is moſt
falſe? Theſe and al ſuch accuſations laid againſt me
and Gods trueth, as by the grace of God in mine
anſwere to maſter D. Some, which are it be long I
hope to publiſh, notwithſtanding they haue it in
their hands, they ſhalbe proued to be palpable ſlanderers.
So I do moſt humbly intreat you of this honorable
aſſembly, in regard of the Lords eternal veritie,
againſt which theſe vntrueths are giuen forth,
to ſee that either mine accuſers ſhall prooue theſe
crimes, wherewith I am charged, or ceaſe to ſlander
and trouble me for profeſſing the trueth. The cauſe
is the cauſe of God, as I haue proued, it is the cauſe
of the church, and ſo the cauſe of many thouſandes,
of the moſt truſty, moſt ſure, moſt louing ſubiects,
that her maieſtie hath, whoſe harts by the repelling
of this my ſuite, muſt needes be vtterly diſcouraged
and throwne downe? when they ſhal ſee the cauſe of
God to haue taken no place in the higheſt court in
the land. And being the cauſe of God & his church,
and that againſt ſinne, againſt impietie, againſt that
which is likely to be the vndoing and ouerthrow of
her Majeſtie and our ſtate: it deſireth no fauor but
to be heard, and to cleare it ſelfe, euen in the preſence
of the aduerſarie, that vpon good groundes
you may either acquite it, or condemne it. It will
prooue it ſelfe by Gods aſſiſtance, to be the author
of no tumulte, no ſedition, nor treaſon. It will alſo

prooue, that no danger or inconuenience, can poſſiblie
enſue the receiuing of it into any ſtate: & that
the bookes and writinges, ſincerely fauouring the
ſame (for any vnſound, or any vnjuſtifiable bookes,
that haue bin publiſhed, which might ſeem to yeeld
any countenance vnto it, the cauſe is not to anſwer)
haue not bene invented of late, or ſtamped by mans
brain, but haue had their beginnings from the daies
of our Sauiour Chriſte, and his Apoſtles, and were
penned by the ſpirite of God himſelfe. On the contrarie
ſide, it offereth to conuince the aduerſaries
cauſe, as an author of tumult and ſedition from time
to time, both in Churche and common wealth, as
traiterous vnto the Majeſtie of Ieſus Chriſte, a dangerous
enemy vnto princes and ſtates, and the fourtaine
of all confuſion and inconvenience, not to bee
repaired. And it offereth to prooue this cauſe & ſide
of our Bb. to haue no other original and beginning,
then the good intents of mans invention, not warranted
by the word, euen corruption it ſelfe. And to
be now ſupported and maintained, onely by the vnlawfull
inſtitutions of man.
            So that it is nowe manifeſted vnto your honors,
by how many waies you are bound before the Lord
to accept and giue eare vnto this mine appellation,
and I to appeale. Mine only hope is in you, be not
vnmerciful and pittileſſe towards me. I am perſecuted
and oppreſſed for the cauſe of God, by thoſe enemies,
that cannor poſſibly affoard me either vpright
judgment, or releaſe from trouble, without
their owne likely ouerthrowe. I deſire, but that
which is moſt chriſtian, namely that I may not haue
them both for mine acuſers and judges, who before
any ſeate of juſtice, dare not ſtand to their accuſations

againſt me, and whome their proceedings with
me, and alwaies heretofore with the cauſe I defend,
doe manifeſtly conuince, that all trueth and equitie
is periſhed from among them. Either the cauſe, and
their doings haue no trueth, no ſtrength, and no equitie
in them, or elſe they wil now ſhe we the ſame
in your preſence, non haue authority to exammine
their proceedings, whether they dare this attempt
or no. I do heere before Heauen and earth, before
hir maieſtie and this aſſembly, before euery eſtate in
this land, and al ages to come, cleare my ſelfe, and
the cauſe I defend, from the grieuous and vngodly
ſlaunders, whereby they doe continually loade the
ſame. I offer my ſelfe, and my cauſe to be tried by
any lawful authoritie, ſo dare not mine aduerſaries,
let them proue that I haue done any thing whereby
in equitie I deſerue puniſhment, & I will not grudge
to ſuſtaine the ſame: So that mine aduerſaries be
not my judges, and the judges of my cauſe, vnto
whom they cannot chuſe but be vtter enemies. I do
not here ſet downe all, that coulde be ſaide againſt
them, and their proceedings, which are moſt Antichriſtian
and intollerable diuers wayes. I omit that
they are fallen from euill to worſe, ſince the beginning
of her Majeſties raigne vnto this houre, and
that they are likely to proceed in this courſe (without
their reſtrainte) vntill they haue brought the
Lords hand to execute his vengeaunce againſt vs &
our land. Their errours are growne intollerable, euen
in the maine pointes of religion, and that contrarie,
not onely vnto the written word of God: but
euen to the writings, that haue bene and are publiſhed
by authoritie, euen by themſelues. They allow
a forme of morning prayer, joyned vnto all printed

Pſalmes in meeter, allowed alſo by publike authoritie.
Therein it is flatly and expreſly ſet downe, that
it is not poſſible for anye man ordinarily to be ſaued,
but by preaching: and yet behold theſe men, euen
our Bb. eſpecially the Archb. of Cant. haue and
doe maintaine, that men may heare, beleeue, and ſo
ordinarily be ſaued without preaching. And by the
practize of this monſtrous errour,Rom 10. 14. 1. contrarie to the
word of God,Cor. 1. 21. contrarie vnto the eſtabliſhed,Iam. 1. 21. & priuiledged
doctrine, allowed and practized in this
kingdom in the beginning of her Majeſties raigne.
They are the verye knowne cauſe of the perdition
(without the Lordes ſecreete and vnreuealed mercies)
of infinit thouſandes of ſoules in this land. But
although I ſay, that in their vngodly proceedings,
they neither agree with the Lord and his word: nor
with themſelues and the receiued and eſtabliſhed
doctrine in our Church: yet I do here omit to make
any catalog of their damnable errors and practiſes.
Onely in this pointe I wiſhe your Hh. to conſider,
whether in trueth, the words of the prophet Hoſea
may not be truely applied vnto our Biſhops in England
at this day, & the moſt that depend vpon them
The prophet is a foole in all good waies,Hoſea. 9. 7. 8. 
               the ſpirituall
man is mad: The watchman of Ephraim ſhould be with
God: but the prophet is the ſnare of a fouler in al his
waies, and hatred in the houſe of God,
               Zephan. 3. 4. or whether with
Zephaniah and Ezekiel you may not truely ſay vnto
them,Ezek. 13. 4. 
               that they are light and wicked perſons, ſuch as
haue poluted the ſanctuary, & wreſted the lawe that
they are like the Foxes in the waſt places, and ſuch as
haue not riſen vp in the gapps, nor made vpp the headg
for Englande, to ſtand in the battel in the day of the
Lord. And if you finde theſe things to be verified in

our prophets and ſpiritual men, then alſo vndoubtedly
may it be ſaide vnto England, the dais of thy
viſitacion 
                     〈◊〉
                   England are come, the daies of thy repentance
are at hand, and England ſhal knowe it. Becauſe
thy prophets for the moſt part are fooles, and thy ſpiritual
men are madd, thy watchmen are as the ſnare of a
fowler in al their waies, yea and they are the very cauſe
that the houſe of thy God is ſo hated, and deteſted of all
eſtates, as the building thereof is not regarded
            
               It remaineth now right honorable, that I betake
you vnto the almightie, whoſe cauſe is nowe in hand
and before whome one day you ſhall giue account
of your dealings in it, humbly beſeeching, and intreting
you, that herein, and in all other matters of
waight, you would take the holy man Iob for a patterne,
that the ſame eternal bleſſing may fall vppon
you, which he enjoieth to his neuer ending comfort
with whoſe words I wil end. And when the eare hard
me,Iob. 29. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15 16. 17. 
               (ſaith Iob) it bleſſed me, and when the eie ſaw mee,
it gaue witneſſe to me, for I deliuered the poore that
cried, and the fatherleſſe, and him that had none to help
him, the bleſſing of him that was ready to periſh, came
vppon me, and I cauſed the widowes hart to rejoice, I
put one iuſtice and it couered me, my iudgment was a
robe and a crown, I was the eyes to the blinde, and I
was the feet to the lame, I was a father to the poore,
and when I knewe not the cauſe I ſought it diligently,
I brake alſo the chawes of the vnrighteous man, and
pluckt the pray out of his teeth.
            
               Your moſt humble ſuppliant,
IOHN PENRI.
            
            
         
      
   