
      
         
            
            
            
            
            
            
            Christian Oeconomie:
            OR,
A SHORT
SVRVEY OF THE
RIGHT MANNER OF
erecting and ordering a Familie,
according to the
Scriptures.
            First written in Latine by the Author
M. W. PERKINS, and now set
forth in the vulgar tongue, for more common
vse and benefit, by THO. PICKERING
Bachelar of Diuinitie.
            
               PROV. 24. 3, 4.
Through wisdome is an house builded, and with vnderstanding
it is established. And by knowledge
shall the chambers be filled with all precious and
pleasant riches.
            
               AT LONDON
Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, and are to be sold
by Edmund Weauer. 1609.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
HONORABLE ROBERT
Lord RICH, Baron of
Leeze, &c.
            
               RIght Honorable; Among
al the Societies & States,
wherof the whole world
of mankinde from the
first calling of Adam in
Paradise, vnto this day, hath consisted,
the first and most ancient is the Familie.
For if we looke into the Scriptures;
The writings of Moses, which in time
goe beyond all the Histories and Records
of men, doe euidently declare, it
was the will of God, to sanctifie that
first coniunction of Adam and Eue, as
the roote wherein mans whole posteritie
was virtually contained, and whence
in the ages succeeding, both Church
and Common-weale should spring



and grow to their perfection. And all
those nations and Countries before the
Flood, the Heads whereof lineally descended
frō the two first houses of Seth
and Cain, had no outward forme of ciuill
gouernment, by which they were
ruled, nor any visible face of a Church
whereto they had relation, but the
whole frame of their policie both Ciuill
and Ecclesiasticall was confined
within the precincts of priuate families.
And from the flood, the house of
Noah became the common Mother, in
which the other two states were included,
and out of whose bowels they issued
afterward in the multiplication of
posteritie, for number, equall to the
starres of the skie, and the sands by the
sea shore.
            Answerable to the voice of the scripture,
hath been the verdict of the Heathen
in this point. Some of the
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                learned
among them, haue called the Familie,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                
               the first societie in nature, and the
ground of all the rest. Some againe haue
compared it to the Bee-hiue, which we
call the Stock, wherein are bred many



swarmes, which thence doe flie abroad
into the world, to the raising and maintaining
of other States.Xenoph. ibid. Others do not
vnfitlie resemble the same to a Metropolis,
or mother Citie, which first traineth
vp her natiue inhabitants, and
then
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Cic. 3. de Nat. Deor. remoueth some of them to other
places of abode, where they may bee
framed as members, to liue in obedience
to the lawes of their Head.
            Vpon this condition of the Familie,
being the Seminarie of all other Societies,
it followeth, that the holie and
righteous gouernment thereof, is a direct
meane for the good ordering, both
of Church and Common-wealth; yea
that the lawes thereof being rightly informed
and religiously obserued, are
auaileable to prepare and dispose men
to the keeping of order in other gouernements.
Hence it is, that the Holie
Ghost in the booke of the Scriptures,
hath in great wisedome commended
both Rules for direction, and examples
for imitation, to Husbands and Wiues,
to Parents and Children, to Masters
and Seruants in euerie point of Christian



carriage touching God and man.
For this first Societie, is as it were the
Schoole, wherein are taught and learned
the principles of authoritie and
subiection. And look as the Superiour
that faileth in his priuate charge, will
proue vncapable of publike employment;1. Tim. 3. 5
so the Inferiour, who is not framed
to a course of Oeconomicall subiection,
will hardly vndergoe the yoke
of ciuill obedience.
            Againe, the corruption or declination
of this first gouernment, must of
necessitie giue way to the ruinating of
the rest. For an error in the foundation,
puts the bodie and parts of the whole
building in apparent hazard. In the old
world,Gen. 6. 12. before the flood, though all flesh
had corrupted their waies; yet the first
ground of that vniuersall ouerflow of
sinne, issued out of the state Oeconomicall,
and thence was deriued into
the whole earth. It was the fault of the
priuate gouernment of Eli the Priest,
that made his sonnes Hophni and Phinehas,
               1. Sam. 2. 12. 23, 24, 25. of vngratious children, vngodlie
Church-men. It was the error of Dauid


               
in the administration and guidance
of his owne house,2. Sam. 14 33. which incouraged
Absalom and Adoniah his sonnes,1. King. 5. 6. vpon
presumption of their Fathers indulgēce,2. Sam. 15
to become ill Common-wealths
men,1. King. 1. to aspire, and vsurpe the kingdom
by plots and practises of Rebellion.
            To forbeare further matter of instance
in this kinde; by the due consideration
of the premisses, I hold it a
thing both necessarie and behoofefull
for al estates, to be throughly informed
of the right manner of erecting and ordering
the priuate condition of the Familie,
whereby they may be furnished
with fit grounds for the commō good
in more publike and open courses. For
which end this present Discourse of
Christian Oeconomie, was first contriued
by the Author, and now thought
fit to be set foorth, for the instruction
and edification of ye multitude. Which
as it commendeth it selfe by the shortnes
and perspicuitie, both which being
applied to vnderstanding and memorie,
may giue contentment to euerie
well-disposed Reader; so it carrieth a



kinde of eminencie aboue other Treatises
of this nature before published, in
sundrie regards.
            First, whereas Experience teacheth,
that the Questions of conscience in
matrimoniall affaires, are very many in
number, and difficult in nature; here
we shall finde either direct answeres to
some of them, or at least the grounds of
resolution in diuers cases, warranted by
the word, in such sort, as little or nothing
will appeare, vpon the triall, to
be vntouched, making for the Readers
satisfaction.
            Secondlie, the maine scope of the
Author in the seuerall branches hereof,
is, to make plaine this truth in particular,
That no Familie can bee interessed
in the blessing and fauour of God,
which is not founded in his feare, and
ordered according to his reuealed will.
For though the Heathen in their writings
of the like Argument,Aristot. Politic. Xenoph. in Oecon. doe shew,
that Nature by her dimme light may
affoord some good directions to this
purpose, and that men meerely natural,
haue prospered in the practise of Oeconomicall



vertues; yet the true happines
of houses and inhabitants wholly
dependeth vpon the speciall grace
of God, and issueth out of his promise;
and that is directed onely to them that
feare him and walke in his waies;
               Psal. 128. 1 it being
godlinesse alone which hath the promises of
this life and the life to come.
               1. Tim. 4. 8 Therefore to
dreame of a blessing in any other state,
which is not seasoned with godlinesse,
and ordered by direction of diuine
lawe, is but a witlesse presumption;
considering that the familie it selfe
from whence they grow, hath no further
assurance of blessednesse, then
it hath right and title in the promise.
            Lastly, it containeth here and there,
some speciall grounds of trueth, tending
to the discouerie of diuers errors
of Popish doctrine in points appertaining
to Mariage; as namely these;
I. That this estate is free to all men,
euen to such as haue the gift of continencie▪
and for those who haue not the
power to abstaine, it is expressely enioyned
by God as necessarie.1. Cor. 7. 1. 2. 8. 9. Which



discouereth that error of absolute inhibition
thereof to some sorts of men,
without the least exception of abilitie
to forbeare. And in this case, though
the Church of Rome prescribeth an
helpe by prayer and indeuour, where
the gift is wanting; yet herein, she addeth
two more absurdities to the former;
imposing a necessitie of containing,
by her lawes, where God hath
giuen libertie, by his word; and causing
to flee from that onely Remedie
which himselfe hath sanctified, to another,
whereunto hee neither giueth
charge by his will, nor incouragement
by promise. II. That Marriages consummate
without the free and aduised
consent of Parents, either explicite in
tearmes, or implicite by conniuence, are
in the court of conscience, meere nullities.
A doctrine cleered in this Booke,
both by Scriptures, and by consent of
Antiquitie. Wherein is challenged the
Iesuites proposition, That the sole consent
of the parties is sufficient,Bellarm. de Matrim. Sacram. libr. c. 19. 
               ad Matrimonium
firmum ac ratum efficiendum.
As also that decree of the Councell of



Trent,Concil. Trident. Sess. 24. Decreto de clandest. Matrim. which professeth a detestation
of clandestine contracts, and yet with
the same breath pronounceth the curse
of Anathema vpon them, who affirme
that Parents may ratifie or make voide
Mariages contracted by their children,
without their allowance. III. That
Matrimonie lawfullie begun and consummate,
is made voide onely by way
of diuorce in the case of Adulterie. So
saith our Sauiour;Matth. 5. 32. 
               Whosoeuer shall put
away his wife, (except it be for fornication,
&c.) And this liberty granted by Christ
both to dissolue, and to marrie againe,
cannot be restrained or cut off by any
humane ordinance. A point directlie
impugned by two other Rules of that
Councell. One, that the Church of
Rome erreth not, when she teacheth
(as they professe,Concil. Trid. Sess. 24. Can. 7. 
               Iuxta Euangelicam &
Apostolicam doctrinam, but in truth expressely
contradictory thereunto) That
the knot of mariage cannot be broken
because of adulterie, and that neither
partie may vndertake to be maried againe,
during the life of the other, after
the dismission. The other, that the vow



of Chastitie and entring into holy Orders,
is of force to loose the bond of
Mariage. And in this case, separation is
made and allowed de facto, by the sole
authoritie of the Pope, notwithstanding
the refusall of the setled partie to
yeeld consent. IV. That the iudgement
and determination of causes matrimoniall,
as of Contracts and their
impediments, of degrees of kinred, of
diuorces, &c. resteth originally in the ciuill
Magistrate, in whose power it is, to
ordaine and establish lawes touching
them, agreeable to Gods word, and to
cause them to be put in execution. For
this purpose, in doubtfull and difficult
cases, the
                  See the Code in sundrie places. Lib. 5. tit. 4 de Nuptijs, tit. 5. de incesto, &c. ancient Church hath not
absolutely rested in her owne decrees,
but hath made recourse to the seate of
Iustice, specially vnder Christian Magistrates,
submitting her selfe to their
lawes and constitutions in that kinde.
Whereas theConcil. Trid. sess. 24. can. 12. Church of Rome hath
determined, that these causes doe simplie
and only appertaine to Ecclesiasticall
Iudges; and therefore hath concluded
Mariage to be a Sacrament; that



the definition of cases coniugall, becomming,
vpon this ground, an action
of a spirituall nature, might be transferred
from the Ciuill to their spirituall
Courts. The soueraigntie whereof; in
these affaires, by their owne constitutions,
is greatly inlarged. For though
they admit, that politike Princes haue
some interest in them; yet they must
hold it,Bellarm. de Matrim. Sacram. cap. 32. 
               with subordination to the autoritie
of the Church-Magistrate; and when the
Rector of the Prouince maketh a law
hereof, hee must doe it approbante Principe
Ecclesiastico, by the allowance of
the Pope; otherwise his lawes are
meere nullities. And among their
reasons of policie, this is one of the
principall, that they might by this
meanes raise a commoditie to the Sea
of Rome, by the sale of their dispensations.
            Now these points, together with the
substance of this small discourse, I willingly
commend vnto your Lordship,
desiring that vnder the wings of your
Honourable protection, it may safelie
walke abroad in the world, to the view



and benefit of others. The true report
of your ancient loue of the truth, and
fauourable inclination to the Ministers
and dispensers thereof, hath giuen mee
incouragement in this action; the rather,
for that the Argument fitteth in
some sort your present estate, whose
house God hath adorned with oliue
plants,Psal. 128. 3. a vertuous and hopefull issue,
whose young yeeres being seasoned
therein, by the sweete sauour of their
fathers vertues, may yeeld in time a
plentifull increase of Honour in this
Common-wealth; and consequentlie
aduance your Name in themselues and
their posteritie. To this may be added
mine own desire to giue some testimonie
of dutie to your Lordship, as holding
it your due, to be had in Honourable
tearmes with men, whose care
hath been to maintaine the Honour of
the Highest by your constant profession
and practise of Religion. And thus
emboldening my selfe vpon the perswasion
of your Lordships fauour and
acceptance, I humblie take my leaue,
and commend you to the grace ofAct. 20. 32


               
God, who is able to build you vp further,
and giue you an inheritance among
them which are sanctified.
Finching-field, Septemb.
26. 1609.
            
               Your Lordships to be commanded
in all Christian dutie,
THO. PICKERING.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A SHORT SVRVEY
OF THE RIGHT
MANNER OF ERECTING
and ordering a Familie, according
to the Scriptures.
            
               CHAP. I.
               Of Christian Oeconomie, and of the Familie.
               
                  CHristian Oeconomie,
is a doctrine of the
right ordring of a Familie.
               The onely rule of
ordering the Family,
is the written word of God. By it Dauid
resolued to gouerne his House, whē he
saith, I will walke in the vprightnesse of my
heart in the midst of my house, Psal. 101. 2.
And Salomon affirmeth, that through
wisdome an house is builded, and with vnderstanding
it is established, Prou. 24. 3.
               
                  
A Familie, is a naturall and simple Societie
of certaine persons, hauing mutuall
relation one to another, vnder the
priuate gouernement of one. These
persons must be at the least three; because
two cannot make a societie. And
aboue three vnder the same head, there
may be a thousand in one familie, as it
is in the households of Princes, and
men of state in the world.
            
            
               CHAP. 2.
               Of the Household seruice of God.
               
                  A Family, for the good estate
of it selfe, is bound to the
performance of two duties;
one to God, the other
to it selfe.
               The dutie vnto God, is the priuate
Worship and Seruice of God, which
must be established and setled in euery
family. And the reasons hereof are
these.
               First, because this duty standeth by
the expresse commandement of God,
who by his Apostle willeth men to pray



                     
                        ••
                     ery where, lifting vp pure hands, without

                        ••
                     rath or doubting, 1. Tim. 2. 8.
               
                  Againe, it is confirmed by the cu
                     
                        ••
                     ome
and practise of holy men in their

                        •
                     mes; I know (saith the Lord touching
Abraham) that he will commaund his
sonnes and his household after him, that

                     •
                  hey keepe the way of the Lord to doe righ
                     ••
                  eousnesse
and iudgement, that the Lord
may bring vpon Abraham, that which he
hath spoken to him, 
                     
                        •
                     en. 18. 19. To the
same purpose speaketh Ioshua; If it seeme
euill vnto you to serue the Lord, chuse this
day whom yee will serue, whether the gods
whom your Fathers serued (that were beyond
the floud) or the gods of the Amorites
in whose land ye dwell: But I and my house
will serue the Lord, Iosh. 24. 15. And Cornelius
is reported to haue been a deuout
man, and one that feared God with all his
household, Act. 10. 2.
               
                  Thirdly, common reason and equitie
sheweth it to be a necessarie dutie;
for the happie and prosperous estate of
the familie, which consisteth in the mutuall
loue and agreement of the Man
and Wife, in the dutifull obedience of



children to their parents, and in the
faithfull seruice of seruants to their
Masters, wholly dependeth vpon the
grace and blessing of God, and this
blessing is annexed to his worship: for
1. Tim. 4. 8. Godlinesse hath the promises of
this life, and the life to come. Psalm. 127. 1.
Except the Lord builde the house, they labour
in vaine that builde; except the Lord
keepe the Citie, the keeper watcheth in vaine.
Vers. 2. It is in vaine for you to rise early,
and to lie downe late, and eate the bread of
sorrow, but he will surely giue rest to his
beloued. Vers. 3. Beholde, children are the
inheritance of Iehouah, and the fruite of
the wombe his rewarde. Psalm. 128. 1. Blessed
is euery one that feareth the Lord, and
walketh in his waies. Vers. 2. When thou
eatest the labours of thy hands thou shalt be
blessed, and it shall bee well with thee.
Vers. 3. Thy wife shall be as the fruitefull
vine vpon the sides of thy house, and thy
children like Oliue plants round about thy
table. Vers. 6. Yea, thou shalt see thy childrens
children, and peace vpon Israel.
1. Sam. 1. 27. I prayed (saith Hannah) for
this childe, and the Lord hath giuen mee



my desire which I asked of him.
               
                  The household seruice of God hath
two parts; the first is a conference vpon
the word of God, for the edification of
all the members thereof, to eternall life.
The second is, Inuocation of the name
of God, with giuing of thankes for his
benefits; both these are commended in
the Scriptures. Deut. 6. 6. These words
which I command thee this day, shall be in
thy heart. Vers. 7. And thou shalt whet them
vpon thy children, & talke of thē whē thou
tariest in thine house, & as thou walkest by
the way, and when thou liest downe, and
when thou risest vp. Vers. 20. When thy
sonne shall aske thee in time to come, saying,
what meane these testimonies, and ordinances,
and lawes, which the Lord our God hath
commanded you? Vers. 21. Then thou shalt
say vnto thy son, we were Pharaohs bondmē
in Egypt, but the Lord brought vs out of Egypt
with a mightie hand. Vers. 24. Therefore
the Lord hath commanded vs to do all
these ordināces, & to fear the Lord our God.
Psal. 14. 1. The foole hath said in his heart,
There is no God. v. 4. They cal not vpō God.
               The times of this seruice are these:
               
                  
The morning, in which the familie
comming together in one place, is to
call vpon the name of the Lord, before
they begin the workes of their callings.
               The euening also is another time to
be vsed in prayer, because the familie
hath seene the blessing of God vpon
their labours the day before, and now
the time or rest draweth on, in which
euery one is to commend his body and
soule into the protection of the Lord;
for no man knoweth what shall befall
him before he rise again, neither knoweth
any whether euer he shal rise againe
or not, it is therefore a desperate boldnesse
without praying to go to rest.
               Besides this, there be other times also
wherein to performe this dutie, as
before and after meales; For meats and
drinkes are blessed to the receiuers, by
the word and prayer. 1. Tim. 4. 4. Whatsoeuer
God hath created is good, neither is
any thing to be refused, if it be taken with
thankesgiuing, for it is sanctified by the
word of God and prayer.
               
               
                  Now these times, the word of God
approueth. Deut. 6. 6. Thou shalt talke of



them, when thou liest downe, aud when thou
risest vp. Psalm. 55. 18. Euening and morning
and at noone, I will pray and make a
noise, and he wil heare my voice. Psa. 127. 1.
It is in vaine to rise earely, and to lie downe
late, and eate the bread of sorrow, except
the Lord vouchsafe a blessing, who will
surely giue rest to his beloued.
               
                  To these may sometimes be added
the exercise of fasting, which is (as occasiō
serueth) to be vsed both publikely
& priuately, especially when they of
the familie be therunto called by some
present or imminent calamitie. Hest. 4.
16. Go and assemble all the Iewes that are
found in Shusan, and fast yee for mee, and
eate not, nor drinke in three daies, day nor
night: I also and my maids will fast likewise,
and so will I go in to the King, which is
not according to the law; and if I perish, I perish.
Zachar. 12. 11. And in that day shall
there be a great mourning in Ierusalem, and
the land shall bewaile, euery familie apart,
the family of the house of Dauid apart, and
their wiues apart, the family of the house of
Nathan apart, and their wiues apart, &c.
               
               Wherefore, those families wherein



this seruice of God is performed, are, as
it were, little Churches, yea euen a kind
of paradise vpon earth. And for this
purpose S. Paul writing to Philemon,
greeteth the Church that is in his house,
Philem. 1. 2. And in like manner, he sendeth
salutations to the Church of Corinth,
from Aquila and Priscilla, and the
Church which was in their house, 1. Cor.
16. 19. On the otherside, where this dutie
of Gods seruice is not vsed, but either
for the most part, or altogether
neglected, a man may tearme those families,
no better then companies of
prophane and gracelesse Atheists, who
as they deny God in their harts, so they
are knowne by this note, that they doe
not call vpon the name of the Lord, Psalm.
14. 4. Yea such families are fitly compared
to an heard of swine, which are
alwaies feeding vpon the maste with
greedinesse, but neuer looke vp to the
hand that beateth it downe, nor to the
tree from whence it falleth.
               The other dutie concerning the
house it selfe, is, That euery member in
the familie, according to their abilitie,



employ themselues in some honest and
profitable businesse, to maintaine the
temporall estate and life of the whole.
Gen. 3. 19. In the sweat of thy face shalt thou
eat bread, till thou returne to the earth, for
out of it wast thou taken; for dust thou art,
and to dust shalt thou returne. 1. Cor. 7. 20.
Let euery man abide in the same vocation
wherein he was called. Now if any one in
the familie starteth aside out of his calling,
and inticeth another to idolatrie,
he is to be reuealed, Deut. 13. 6. And againe,
their case is very fearefull that do
nothing in their houses, but go finely
and faire daintily from day to day. This
is the blacke marke that the Scripture
sets vpon the rich glutton, Luk. 16. 19.
There was a certaine rich man, which was
cloathed in purple aud fine linen, and fared
deliciously euery day.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 3.
               Of maried folkes.
               
                  A Familie is distinguished into
sundry combinations or couples
of persons.
               
                  
A couple, is that wherby two persons
standing in mutuall relation to each other,
are combined together as it were
in one. And of these two, the one is alwaies
higher, and beareth rule, the other
is lower, and yeeldeth subiection.
               Couples are of two sorts; principall,
or lesse principall.
               The principall, is the combination
of maried folkes; and these are so termed
in respect of Mariage.
               Mariage is the lawfull coniunction
of the two maried persons; that is, of
one man, and one woman into one
flesh. So was the first institution of mariage,
Gen. 2. 21. which is expounded
by our Sauiour Christ, Matth. 19. 6.
Therfore they are no more two, but one flesh.
And also by Paul, Ephes. 5. 31. For this
cause shall a man leaue father and mother,
and shall
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   
                  cleaue vnto his wife, (as two
boords are ioyned together with glue)
and they which were two, shall be one flesh.
Wherefore this is an eternal law of mariage,
that two, and not three or foure,
shall be one flesh. And for this cause,
the fathers, who had many wiues and



Concubines, it may be that through
custome they sinned of ignorance, yet
they are not in any wise to be excused.
               Mariage of it selfe is a thing indifferent,
and the kingdome of God stands
no more in it, then in meats and drinks;
and yet it is a state in it selfe, farre more
excellent, then the condition of single
life. For first, it was ordained by God
in Paradise, aboue and before all other
states of life, in Adams innocencie before
the fall. Againe, it was instituted
vpon a most serious and solemne consultation
among the three persons in
the holy Trinitie. Genes. 1. 26. Let vs
make man in our image, according to our
likenesse, and let them rule ouer, &c. Gen.
2. 18. Iehouah Elohim said, It is not good
that the man should be himselfe alone, I will
make him an helpe meete for him. Thirdly,
the manner of this coniunction was excellent,
for God ioyned our first parents
Adam and Eue together immediately.
Fourthly, God gaue a large blessing
vnto the estate of mariage, saying,
Increase and multiplie and fill the earth.
Lastly, mariage was made & appointed



by God himselfe, to be the fountaine
and seminarie of all other sorts & kinds
of life, in the Common-wealth and in
the Church.
               Now if mankind had continued in
that vprightnes and integritie which it
had by creation, the state of single life
had been of no price and estimation amongst
men, neither should it haue
had any place in the world, without
great contempt of Gods ordinance and
blessing.
               Neuerthelesse, since the fall, to some
men who haue the gift of continencie,
it is in many respects farre better then
mariage, yet not simplie, but only by
accident, in regard of sundrie calamities
which came into the world by sin.
For, first it freeth a man from many and
great cares of houshold affaires. Againe,
it maketh him much more fit & disposed
to meditate of heauenly things,
without distraction of mind. Besides
that, when dangers are either present,
or imminent, in matters belonging to
this life, the single person is in this case
happie, because he and his are more secure



and safe, then others be who are
in maried state. 1. Cor. 7. 8. Therefore I
say to the vnmaried and widowes, It is good
for them if they abide euen as I do. vers. 26.
I suppose then this to be good for the present
necessitie, I meane, that it is good for a man
so to be, vers. 28. But if thou takest a wife
thou sinnest not, and if a virgin marrie she
sinneth not; neuerthelesse such shall haue
trouble in the flesh, vers. 32. And I would
haue you without care.
               
               The end of mariage is fourefold.
               The first is, procreation of children,
for the propagation and continuance of
the seed and posteritie of man vpon the
earth, Gen. 1. 28. Bringforth fruit multiplie,
fill the earth, and subdue it, Genes. 9. 1.
1. Tim. 5. 14.
               The second is the procreation of an
holy seed, wherby the Church of God
may be kept holy and chaste, and there
may alwaies be a holy company of men,
that may worship and serue God in the
Church from age to age, Malach. 2. 15.
And did not he make one? yet had hee abundance
of spirit; and wherefore one? because
he sought a godly seed.
               
               
                  
The third is, that after the fall of mankind,
it might be a soueraigne meanes
to auoid fornication, and consequently
to subdue and slake the burning lusts
of the flesh, 1. Cor. 7. 2. Neuerthelesse for
the auoiding of fornication, let euery man
haue his wife, and euery woman haue her
husband. vers. 9. But if they cannot abstaine,
let them marrie; for it is better to marrie,
then to burne. And for this cause, some
Schoolemen doe erre, who hold that
the secret comming together of man
and wife, cannot be without sinne, vnlesse
it be done for procreation of children.
Lombard the master of the Sentences
saith the contrarie, namely, that
mariage before the fall was only a dutie, but
now since the fall it is also remedie.
               
               
                  The fourth end is, that the parties
married may thereby performe the duties
of their callings, in better and more
comfortable manner. Prou. 31. 11. The
heart of her husband trusteth her, and hee
shall haue no need of spoile. vers. 13. She seeketh
wooll, and flaxe, and laboureth cheerefully
with her hands.
               Mariage is free to al orders, and sorts



of men without exception, euen to
those that haue the gift of contimencie;
but for them which cannot abstaine, it

                     •
                  s, by the expresse commandement of
God, necessarie. Hebr. 13. 4. Mariage
is honorable amongst all men, and the bed
vndefiled. 1 Cor. 7. 9. But if they cannot
abstaine, let them marrie.
               
               By which it appeareth to be a cleare
case, that the commandement of the
Pope of Rome, whereby he forbiddeth
mariage of certaine persons, as namely,
of Clergie men, is meerely diabolicall;
for so writeth the Apostle, 1. Tim. 4. 1.
The spirit speaketh euidently, that in the latter
times some shall depart frō the faith, and
shall giue heed vnto spirits of error, and doctrines
of diuels, vers. 3. forbidding to
marrie.
               
               But against this doctrine sundrie
things are alleaged.
               
                  Obiect. 1. The Apostle commandeth
the married among the Corinthes, to
abstaine with consent for a time, that they
might giue themselues to fasting and praier,
1. Cor. 7. 5. I answere, that Paul speakes
not in that place of daily and common



seruice of God in prayer, but of the solemne
and extraordinarie exercise therof,
which was ioyned with fasting and
abstinence, in common dangers and
calamities.
               
                  Obiect. 2. 1. Cor. 7. 32. He that is vnmarried
careth for the things of the Lord,
how he may please the Lord; but the married
person careth for the things of the world.
Answ. The place is not generally to be
vnderstood of all, but indefinitely of
those married persons that are carnall
and fleshly. And he that is married, is to
bee so carefull for the things of the
world, as that he ought, and may haue
also a special regard of those things that
concerne God and his kingdome.
               
                  Obiect. 3. 1. Tim. 5. 11. The yonger widowes
(saith the Apostle) will marrie, hauing
damnation because they haue broken
the first faith. Answ. By the first faith, Paul
vnderstandeth that promise and vow
which they made vnto Christ, when
they were baptised; and they are there
said to begin to waxe wanton against Christ,
by denying or renouncing that faith,
and not otherwise.
               
                  
                  Obiect. 4. He that doth earnestly and
from his heart, craue the gift of continencie,
God will giue it him, and therfore
he need not marrie.
               
                  Answ. The gifts of God are of two
sorts, some are Generall, some are Proper
Generall gifts are such as God giueth
generally to all, and these may be
obtained, if they be asked according to
Gods word, lawfully, Iam. 1. 5. If any of
you lacke wisedome, let him aske it of God,
who giueth to all men liberally, and reprocheth
no man, and it shall bee giuen him.
vers. 6. But let him aske in faith, and wauer
not. Proper gifts, are those which
are giuen only to some certaine men;
of which sort is the gift of continencie
and such like, which though they bee
often and earnestly asked, yet they are
seldome or neuer granted vnto some
men; as appeareth in Pauls example,
who being buffetted by Satan, saith of
himselfe, For this thing I besought the
Lord thrice, that it might depart from me;
but he said vnto me, My grace is sufficient
for thee, 2. Cor. 12. 8. 9.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 4.
               Of the Contract.
               
                  MArriage hath two distinct
parts, the first is the beginning;
the second, the accomplishment
or consummation
thereof.
               The Beginning, is the Contract or
Espousals; the End or accomplishmēt,
is the solemne Manifestation of the
Contract, by that which properly we
call Mariage. Deut. 20. 7. What man is
there that hath betrothed a wife, and hath
not taken her? Let him go and returne againe
vnto his house, lest he die in battell,
and another man take her. Matth. 1. 18.
When his mother Marie was betrothed to
Ioseph, before they came together, She was
found with child of the Holy Ghost.
               
               Betweene the Contract and Marriage,
there ought to bee some certaine
space or distance of time. The reasons
whereof may be these:
               First, a businesse of so great importance
as this is, would not be rashly or



vnaduisedly attempted, but should rather
be done by degrees in processe of
time, according to that saying, not so
ancient as true.Diu deliberandum quod s
                        •
                     mel sta
                     
                        •
                     uendum. 
                  Actions of weight, before
resolution, require mature deliberation, Secondly,
That during such a space, inquirie
may be made, whether there be
any iust cause, which may hinder the
consummation of Marriage: considering
that before the parties come and
conuerse together, what is amisse may
be remedied and amended, which to
do afterward will be too late. Thirdly,
In these cases, persons espoused must
haue regard of honestie, as well as of
necessitie; not presently vpon the Contract,
seeking to satisfie their own fleshly
desires, after the manner of bruit
beasts, but proceeding therein vpon
mature deliberation.
               The Contract is a mention or mutuall
promise of future mariage, before
fit and competent Iudges and Witnesses.
               The best manner of giuing this promise,
is, to make itIn ver
                     
                        •
                     is de 
                        〈…〉
                     . 
                  in words touching the
present time, and simplie without any



exception or condition expressed or
conceiued. For by this meanes it comes
to passe, that the bond is made the surer,
and the ground or foundation of
future mariage the better laid. And
hence alone it is, that the persons betrothed
in Scripture are termed man
and wife. Iacob speaking of Rahel, who
was only betrothed vnto him, saith to
Laban, Giue me my wife, Genes. 29. 21.
Deut. 22. 23. If a maid bee betrothed to a
husband, and a man find her in the towne,
and lie with her, then shall yee bring them
both out vnto the gates of the citie, and shall
stone them with stones to death, the maid,
because she cried not being in the citie, and
the man, because hee hath humbled his
neighbours wife. Matth. 1. 20. Ioseph feare
not to take Mary thy wife.
               
               Now if the promise bee vttered in
words,In futurum. 
                  for time to come, it doth not precisely
bind the parties to performance.
For example, if one of them saith to the
other; N. I will take thee, &c. and not,
N. I do take thee, &c. by this forme of
speech the match is not made, but only
promised to bee made afterward. But if



on the other side it be said, N. I do take
thee, and not, I will take thee; by these
termes, the mariage at that very instant
is begun,Non de facto, de 
                        •
                     ure. not in regard of fact,
yet in regard of right and intrest, which
the parties haue each in another in
deed and in truth. And this is the common
opinion of the learned. Yet notwithstanding,
if the parties contracting
shall say each to other, I will take thee to,
&c. with intention to bind themselues
at the present; the bond is in conscience
precisely made before God, and so the
Contract is indeed madeDe praesenti. 
                  for the present
time before God. True it is, that he
which standeth to his promise made, as
much as in him lieth, doth well: yet if
the promise hath or conceiueth some
iust cause, why hee should afterward
change his purpose, the Contract expressed
in termes for time to come,
though it were formerly made, & confirmed
by oath, must notwithstanding
giue place to the Contract made for
time present.
               Those espousals, which are made
vpon condition, which is honest, possible,



and belonging to Mariage, doe
cease or depend: so far forth as the condition
annexed ceaseth or dependeth.
For example; If the one partie promiseth
to marry the other vpon cōdition,
that his or her kinsman will yeeld consent
to the match; or vpon condition
of a dowrie that shee shall bring vnto
him, sutable to her education, and the
familie whereof she commeth: these
conditions being kept or not kept, the
promise doth likewise stand, or not
stand.
               But those conditions which are necessarily
vnderstood, or which may
certainly be kept and come to passe, do
neither hinder nor suspend Marriage.
As this: I promise thee mariage, if I liue;
or, I promise to marie thee, if the Sunne rise
to morrow.
               
               Againe, conditions that are either
impossible or dishonest, are not to bee
accounted as promises annexedJn sauorem Matrimony. in
way of Marriage. Of which sort are
these, I will be thy wife, if thou willt take vnto
thee wings and flie, or, If thou wilt bring
an vntimely birth.
               
               
                  
Furthermore, if the parties betrothed,
do lie together before the condition
(though honest & appertaining to
mariage) be performed; then the contract
for time to come is, without further
controuersie, sure and certaine.
For where there hath been a carnall vse
of each others bodie, it is alwaies presupposed,
that a mutuall consent, as
touching Mariage, hath gone before.
            
            
               CHAP. 5.
               Of the choise of persons fit for
Marriage.
               
                  FOr the making of a cōtract,
two things are requisite:
first the choice, & then the
consent of the parties.
               Choice is an enquirie after persons
mariageable.
               Persons mariageable, are such as be
fit and able for the maried state.
               This fitnes or abilitie is knowne and
discerned by certaine signes; which are
either essentiall to the contract, or accidentall.
               
                  
An essentiall signe is that, without
which the contract in hand becomes a
meere nullitie. And of this sort there
are principally fiue.
               The first is the distinction of the sex,
which is either male, or female. The
male is man of a superiour sexe, fit for
procreation. The female is woman of
an inferiour sexe, fit to conceiue and
beare children. 1. Cor. 11. 7. The man
ought not to couer his head; for as much as
he is the Image and glorie of God; but the
woman is the glorie of the man. 1. Tim. 2.
12. I permit not the woman to teach, neither
to vsurpe authoritie ouer the man, but to be
in silence. By this distinction is condemned,
that vnnatural and monstrous sin
of vncleannes betweene parties of the
same sexe,Rom. 1. 26 commonly termed Sodomie;
as also the confusion of theSpecies. 
                  kinds
of creatures, when one kind commits
filthinesse and abomination with another.Leuit. 18 22. 23.
               
               The second signe, is, the iust & lawf
                     •
                  ll
distance of blood.
               Distance of blood is then iust and
lawfull, when neither of the persons



that are to be married, do come neare
to the kindred of their flesh, or to the
flesh of their flesh, for so the Scripture
speaketh, Leuit 18. 6. No man shall come
neare to any of the flesh of his flesh: or to
the
                  Ebr. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   
                  kindred of his flesh. Where it is to be
obserued, that by a mans flesh is meant
that substance which is of himselfe, or
whereof himselfe consisteth. And by
the flesh of his flesh, that which next and
immediately issueth out of that flesh
whereof he consisteth. Whereupon it
followeth, that the touching or comming
neare of flesh to flesh, is not spoken
of strangers, but of those only that are of
kindred.
               Kindred is of two sorts, consanguinitie,
or affinitie.
               Kindred in consanguinitie, are those
which issue from out, & the same common
blood or stocke. And there be certaine
degrees, whereby kinsmen of this
sort are distinguished one from another.
               A degree is a generation or descent
betweene two persons that are of the
same blood. For one person cannot



make a degree, vnlesse he be considered
relatiuely in regard of generation.
               Now many degrees continued or
deriued from one and the same head,
do make a Line; And a Line is twofold,
the Right line, or the Ouerthwart, cō
                  monly
termed collaterall.
               In the Right Line, looke how manie
persons there are, so many degrees
there be, that only excepted, which vpon
occasion offered, is in question, and
from which we begin the account.
               
                  Abraham.
                  Isaac.
                  Iacob.
                  Ioseph.
               
               Heere Ioseph is distant three degrees
from Abraham, Iacob two, Isaac one, or
the first.
               The Right line is either ascending
or descending.
               The right line ascending, is the race
of all the ancestors; and it hath sundrie
degrees. Of the first whereof is, the father



and the mother; of the second, the
grand-father both by the father and
mothers side, that is, the father of my
father, and the father of my mother;
and the grand-mother, that is to say,
my fathers and my mothers mother.
Of the third, is, the great grand-father,
or the father of my grand-father; and
the great grand-mother, or the mother
of my grand-father. Of the fourth, is
the great grand-fathers father, and the
great grand-fathers, or grand-mothers
mother. Of the fift, is the great grand-fathers
grand-father, & the great grand-fathers,
or great grand-mothers grand-mother.
Of the sixt, is the great great
grand-fathers grand-father; & the great
great grand-fathers, or great great
grand-mothers grand-mother.
               The right line descending, is the race
of a mans owne posteritie. And that also
hath sundrie degrees. The first wherof
is, the sonne and the daughter; the
second, the nephew, and the neece;
the third, the nephewes sonne, and the
neeces daughter. The fourth is the nephewes
nephew, or the sonne in the





                  


                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  


                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  


                  
fourth degree of lineall descent, & the
neeces neece, or the daughter in the
same degree of descent. The fift is hee
and she that are three lineall descents
from the childs child. And so are the
rest in their order, by what names soeuer
they be called and knowne.
               Now in this right line, whether
ascending or descending, the person, of
whom the case or question is moued,
commeth neere to the kindred of his
flesh. And therefore mariages in this
line are prohibited infinitly, without
any limitation; so as if Adam himselfe
were now aliue, he could not marry by
the law of God, because hee should
come neare to the kindred of his owne
flesh, as Moses speaketh. The reason
hereof is, because in the right line, superiours
and inferiours are to each other
as parents and children; and the
kindred betweene parents & children,
being the first and nearest of all other,
their coniuction in marriage must
needs bee most vncleane, and repugnant
vnto nature.
               The collaterall or crooked line, is



that, which walketh by the sides of the
right line, whether ascending or descending,
in the row of the kindred.
And it is either vnequall or equall.
               The vnequall is that, whereby the
person in question and his kinsman, are
vnequally distant from the common
stocke, or head of the kindred.
               And in this line, looke how many
degrees the kinsman that is furthest off
from the common stock, is distant from
the same, so many is he and his kinsman
in question distant one from the other.
               
                  For example,
                  Thare.
                  
                     
                        Abraham—
                        Nachor
                        
                           
                              Bethuel
                              Laban.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               Heere Laban being remoued furthest
off, to wit, three degrees from the
common stock Thare; is likewise three
degrees distant frō 
                  Abraham, his great
vnckle, and Abraham so many from
him.
               
                  
Furthermore, kinsmen in this Line
are of two sorts; some are Superiours to
the person in question, some are Inferiours
to him.
               Superiours are such, as are a kinne to
his father, and mother, of some side; and
that either nearer, or further off.
               Those that are of neare kin to them,
bee these. I. The vncle of the fathers
side, or the fathers brother; the aunt of
the fathers side, or fathers sister. The
vncle of the mothers side, or the mothers
brother; the aunt of the mothers
side, or the mothers sister. II. The
great vncle, or grand-fathers brother;
the great aunt, or grand-fathers sister.
The great vncle, or grand-mothers brother,
and the great aunt, or grand-mothers
sister. III. The great vncle by
the fathers side, or great grand-fathers
brother; and the great aunt by the fathers
side, or great grand-fathers sister.
The great vncle by the mothers side, or
the great grand-mothers brother; and
the great aunt by the mothers side, or
the great grand-mothers sister. IV. The
great grand-vncle by the fathers side,



or great grand-fathers fathers brother:
and the great grand-aunt by the same
side, or the great grand-fathers fathers
sister. The great grand-vncle by the
mothers side, or great grand-mothers
mothers brother: and the great grand-aunt
by the same side, or the great grād-mothers
mothers sister.
               Now these in regard of their inferiours,
are in stead of parents, and therefore
do come neare to the kindred of
their flesh.
               Those superiours which are of kindred
to parents on the one side, a farre
off, are these. I. The sonne and daughter
of the great vncle or aunt by the fathers
side; or of the great vncle or aunt
by the mothers side. II. The nephew
and neece of the great vncle or aunt by
the fathers side, or of the great vncle or
aunt by the mothers side,Sobriuo propior. 
                  neare to the cozin germane.
               
               And these as they stand in comparison
with their inferiours, doe not
come neare to the kindred of their
flesh.
               The equall collaterall line, is that,



whereby kinsmen are equally distant
from their head.
               Kinsmen of this line, are, I. whole
brothers, that is, brothers by the same
father and mother, or halfe brothers,
that is, brethren by the same father, but
not by the same mother. Againe whole
sisters by the same father or mother, or
halfe sisters by one of them and not by
both. II. The brothers children or
cousin germans; that is, the vncles sons
or daughters, or the aunts sonnes or
daughters. The sisters children, or cousin
germans; that is, the aunts sonnes
or daughters, which are the children of
two sisters. III. The cousin german,
the son of the great vncle by the fathers
or mothers side, and the cousin german
the son of the great aunt, by the fathers
or mothers side. The cousin-german
the daughter of the great vncle, by the
fathers or mothers side, and the cousin
german, the daughter of the great aunt
by the same sides.
               In this line, looke how many degrees
the partie in question is remoued from
the common stocke, by so many twice-told,



is he remoued from his kinsman
in question. Put the case betweene Bethuel
and Isaac, as in this example.
               
                  Thare
                  
                     
                        Abraham—
                        
                           
                              Isaac.
                           
                        
                        Nachor
                        
                           
                              Bethuel.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               Heere Bethuel being two degrees remoued
from Thare, is foure degrees
distant from Isaac.
               
               Now he that is in the second degree
of this line, comes neare to the kindred
of his flesh; and for that cause the mariages
of brethren, and sisters are vnlawfull,
and forbidden.
               But against this, sundrie things are
alledged.
               
                  Obiect. 1. The sons of Adam, who
were the first brethren in the world,
married their sisters; marriages therefore
in this degree may seeme to bee
lawfull. Answ. The case of those persons
in those times, was a case of necessitie,
which could not be auoided, and therupon
was warranted by diuine dispensation.
For God had giuen them his



owne expresse commandement in this
behalfe; Beare fruits and multiplie, Gen.
1. 28. Besides that, there were then no
other women in the world, by whom
they might haue issue and posteritie,
but only by their sisters. Whereupon it
is manifest, that Gods will was, to permit
them to take euen their sisters to
their wiues. But now out of this speciall
dispensation from God, such matching
is vtterly vnlawfull, being an apparent
breach of another expresse commandement
giuen afterward by God
himselfe, Leuit. 18. 9. 11. To this purpose
saith Augustine in way of answere to the
example propounded.De ciuit. 
                  The practise of
those first times,
                  Dei. lib. 1
                        •
                     . ca. 16. 
                  then backed by vrgent nenessitie;
the more ancient it was, the more
damnable it proued afterward, when it was
restrained by Gods commandement.
               
               
                  Obiect. 2. Sarah was Abrahams sister,
and yet Abraham tooke her to wife.
Gen. 20. 12. Yet in very deed she is my sister,
for she is the daughter of my father, but not
the daughter of my mother, and shee is my
wife. Gen. 11. 29. Abraham and Nahor
tooke them wiues, and the name of Abrahams



wife was Sarah. Answ. Touching
this instance, there are sundrie opinions.
The Iewes doe grant thus much,
that she was called by a name common
to all kinsfolke of that sexe, to wit, a
Sister; yet indeed shee was Abrahams
neece, the sister of Lot, and the daughter
of Haran, Abrahams brother, which
Moses elsewhere calleth Iischa, Genes.
11. 29. Others thinke, that shee was
daughter in law to Thare, Abrahams father;
because Abraham himselfe saith,
She is the daughter of my father, not of my
mother. Others are of opinion, that she
was Harans daughter in law, and after
his death was translated into the family
of Terah, her grand-father; who was also
in ste
                     •
                  d of her father being dead, and
thence shee was termed his daughter
Now howsoeuer in this varietie of
iudgements, it is hard to find certaintie
of truth, yet this is out of doubt, that
God in those daies tolerated many
things, which notwithstanding he did
not altogether approue.
               Obiect. 3. 2. Sam. 13. 13. Thamar saies
to her brother Amnon; Speake I pray thee



                  to the King, and he will not denie mee vnto
thee. Ans. The speech of Thamar is not
simplie to be taken, as if she desired that
which she said, or as if it were lawfull to
be done, which she wished him to do;
but only that she sought to put him off,
by giuing him this counsell, in respect
of her owne deliuerance from that present
danger; wherein shee was. Or at
least it way be said, that she erroniously
supposed it was lawfull for the King to
grant such a sute, if it had bin made vnto
him by her brother Amnon. Whether
way soeuer this speech bee taken,
there can no such thing bee gathered
thence, as is pretended.
               Now out of the second degree of
the equal collateral line, it should seeme
that those who are ioyned one to another
in mariage, do not touch the kindred
of their flesh; and therefore the
law of God forbiddeth not cōsobrines
or cousin-germans, that is, brothers and
sisters children to marrie.
               
                  Yea if examples be of force for this
purpose, the Scripture approueth such
mariages. For thus it is written, that Iacob



                  married Rahel the daughter of Laban,
his mothers brother, Genes. 28. 2.
Againe, that Mahlah, Tirzah, and Hoglah,
Milcah and Noah the daughters of
Zelophehad, were married vnto their fathers
brothers sonnes, Numb. 36. 11. And
Othniel the sonne of Kenaz, the cousin of
Caleb, tooke Kiriath-sepher; and hee gaue
him Acsah his daughter to wife, Ios. 15. 17.
               
                  Howbeit in this case, the rule of the
Apostle is to be followed; That nothing
be done, euen in things that are otherwise
lawfull, whereby a mans brother may
stumble, or bee offended, or made weake,
Rom. 14. 21. Wherefore it is conuenient,
that such mariages should not be,
because sometimes they may giue offence
in regard of the law of the Magistrate;
and because they come somewhat
neare to the bonds and termes of
blood and stocke, which God hath set
downe in his word. Augustine in his 15.
booke, De ciuitate Dei, chap. 16. saith to
this purpose, Experti autem sumus, &c.
that is, We haue found by experience, that
in regard of that neerenesse of blood, which
cousin-germans haue vnto the degrees of



brothers and sisters, how rarely custome
hath admitted those mariages, which were
warrantable by lawes, because the law of
God hath not forbidden them, nor as yet the
law of man. Neuerthelesse the practise lawfull
in it selfe, was forborne the rather, because
it came neare to that which was vnlawfull,
and therfore mariage with the cousin-german,
seemed in a manner to be marriage
with a mans own brother or sister, &c.
Howbeit, there is no question, but in these
times it hath been well prouided by lawes,
that such mariages should not be vndertaken.
For as the multiplication of alliance is
hindered thereby, so this inconuenience also
groweth from them, that friendship and loue
which is procured by affinitie, betweene men
that are strangers; cannot be enlarged and
encreased, where men goe not out of the limits,
and termes of their owne blood; Yea,
there is naturally in man a commendable
measure of shamefastnesse, whereby vpon
consideration of nearenesse in blo
                     •
                  d, hee acknowledgeth
a due debt of modestie and honor
to his next kindred, and consequently
estraineth himself in regard of them from
he occasions and actions of concupiscence,



whereunto hee is inclinable in respect of others.
And hence it is, that generally the
modestie that ought to be in those which intend
mariage, auoideth as much as may be,
these and such like coniunctions. The same
is the iudgement of Ambrose in one of
his Epistles to his friend Paternus,Epist
                        •
                     l. li. 
                        〈◊〉
                      66. 
                  wherin
he disswadeth him frō marrying his
sonne with his cousin-g
                        •
                     rman, vpon the
grounds before alledged by Augustine
adding this withall, that though it were
in it selfe lawfull, being no where forbidden
by God, yet in sundrie respects
being inexpedient, it ought not to bee
done, according to the saying of the Apostle,
All things are lawfull for me,1. Cor. 6. but all
things are not expedient.
               But it is auouched to the contrarie,
that God by expresse law forbiddeth
mariage with the aunt, the fathers sister
Leuit. 18. 12. and with the mothers sister▪
vers. 13. and with the fathers brother
wife, which is also the aunt, vers. 14.
therefore by the law of proportion, 
                     •
                  
forbiddeth matching with the childr
                     ••
                  
of these persons. For in nature it is a ruled
case: If a man may not marrie th
                     •
                  


                  
mother, much lesse may he marrie the
daughter.
               
                  Answ. The argument is faultie, and
concludes nothing to the purpose. For
there is not the same reason of both. In
the right line of consanguinitie, those
which are sisters to father and mother,
stand in the place and stead of parents;
and their nephewes and neeces are to
them as children, therefore mariages among
them can stand by no law, either
of God, of nature, or by the positiue
lawes of nations. It is not so with cousin
germans. For hauing no such relation,
there is not in their mariages, by the
law of Moses, any discouerie of shame,
or breach of ciuil honestie. The blessing
of God vpon some of them mentioned
in Scripture, as vpon Iacob and Rahel,
and such like, doe euidently shew that
they were lawfull in themselues, and
pleasing vnto him. And thus much
touching kindred by blood or consanguinitie.
               Kindred in affinitie, is that, whereby
the termes of two kindreds, are brought
into the societie of one and the same



familie; or whereby persons that are
not of blood, are by marriage allied
each to other. Hence it is termed affinitie,
because it maketh an vnitie of
termes in kindred, which before were
distant.
               Affinity or alliance groweth by mixtion
or participation of blood, in the
coupling of man and wife together in
lawfull mariage. For a bare and simple
contract, maketh not alliance betweene
partie and partie properly, but mariage
after the contract finished and consummate.
               Againe, the same alliance ceaseth
and determineth vpon the death of either
partie espoused or maried; yet so
as the prohibition of coniunction remaines,
and stands in force, for the preseruation
of publike honestie.
               Now there is a kind of resemblance
and proportion betweene kindred of
blood, and kindred by mariage, not only
in regard of degrees and line, but also
in respect of the prohibition of degrees.
               Those that are of alliance, are commonly



reduced to these heads. I. The
father in law, or the husbands or wiues
father. The mother in law, or the husbands
or wiues mother. II. The mothers
husband, or step father to them
that come by another man. The fathers
wife, or step-mother to those that come
by another woman. III. The wiues
fathers father, or grand-father, and the
wiues mothers mother, or grand-mother;
or the grand-father and grand-mother
of the wife. IV. The sonne in
law, or daughters husband, and the
daughter in law, or sons wife. V. The
neeces husband, & the nephewes wife.
VI. The step-son, or son in law, that is,
the son of a man by another wife, or of
a woman by another husband. The
step-daughter, or daughter in law, that
is, the daughter of a man by another
wife, or of a woman by another husband.
VII. The step-sons son, or his
son who comes of a man by another
woman, or of a woman by another mā.
And the step-daughters daughter, or
her daughter who comes of a man by
another woman, or of the woman by



another husband VIII. The husbāds
or wiues brother, & the husbāds sister,
or brothers wife. IX. The sisters husband,
and the brothers wife.
               Concerning affinitie, I propound
these rules.
               I. Looke in what degree a man is of
consanguinity to ones wife, in the same
degree of affinitie hee is to the wiues
husbād. And cōtrariwise for example.
               
                  Isaac
                  
                     
                        Esau.
                        Iacob.
                        
                           
                              Ioseph—
                           
                        
                        Ioseph
                     
                  
               
               
                  Samuel
                  
                     
                        Aaron.
                        Eli.
                        
                           
                              Maria.
                           
                        
                        Leui.
                     
                  
               
               Heere, if Mar
                        •
                     e Iosephs wife, be distant
from Esau Iosephs vncle by the fathers
side, two degrees, then also is Ioseph
himself distant from Aaron the brother
of Eli his father in law, two degrees. If
Marie the wife, be distant from her own
father Eli one degree, and from her
grand-father Samuel two; then also is
her husband distant from Eli his father
in law, one degree, and from Samuel his
wiues grand-father, two. Another example.
               
                  
                  Herod.
                  
                     
                        Herod.
                        Philip, whose wife is
Herodias.
                     
                  
               
               Heere Herod being in the first degree
of consanguinitie with his brother Philip;
Herodias his brothers wife is in the
first degree of affinitie to him.
               II. Rule. Cousins by mariage within
the degrees, both of the right and
collaterall line, doe come neere to the
kindred of their flesh, in the same manner
that cousins by bloud doe, in the
same lines; and the like degrees in both
are forbidden. Therefore in the right
line of affinitie, it is as well vnlawful for
the father in law to marrie the daughter
in law, or the sonne in law to marry
the mother in law; as it is for the father
to marrie the daughter, or the sonne the
mother. Againe, in the collaterall, it is
as vnlawful for the vncle by the mothers
side, to marrie the wife of his
sisters son, and so in other degrees, as it
is for him to match in the same degrees
of cōsanguinitie. The reason is, because
in these lines, as well as in those of consanguinitie,



superiours and inferiours,
are each to other as parents and children.
               
                  From hence amongst other things,
it may bee gathered, that it is in no sort
lawful for a man, when his wife is dead,
to marrie her sister, Leuit. 18. 16. Thou
shalt not discouer the shame of thy brothers
wife; for it is thy brothers shame. And Leuit.
20. 21. The man that taketh his brothers
wife, committeth filthines, because he
hath vncouered his brothers shame.
               Against this doctrine it is obiected.
First, that God commandeth not to
take a wife with her sister, during her
life, Leuit. 18. 18. in which place, hee
doth not simplie forbid a man to marry
two sisters one after another, but to
marrie them both together, and therefore
after the wife is dead, a man may
marrie her sister.
               
                  Ans. The place is a flat prohibition of
the sin of Polygamie. For to take a wife
to her sister in the Hebrew phrase, is nothing
else but to take two wiues one to
another. The like forme of speech is
vsed otherwhere by Moses, as Exo. 26. 3.
               
                  
                  Fiue curtaines shall bee coupled together,
[the woman to her sister] that is, one to
another; and the other fiue curtaines shall
be coupled [the woman to her sister] that
is, the one to the other. Ezech. 1. 9. The
foure beasts were ioyned with their wings,
[the woman to her sister] that is, the
one to the other. Againe, Moses himselfe
there alledgeth two reasons against
Polygamie: the one is, because the man
is to loue, cherish and comfort this wife;
whereas, if he should take vnto him another
besides her, he should greatly vex
his first lawfull wife. The other, because
by that meanes he should vncouer the
shame of his wife; that is, he should play
a very dishonest part with her, to whom
he was before lawfully married.
               
                  Obiect. 2 The Lord commanded by
a speciall law, that the brother, in case
his brother died without issue, should
take his wife, and raise vp seede vnto
him, Deut. 25. 5.
               
                  Answ. The words of Moses are a speciall
exception of a generall law propounded
in Leuit. 18. 16. Thou shalt not
discouer the shame of thy brothers wife; for



it is thy brothers shame. And they are peculiarly
directed to the Israelites, vpon
speciall cause; that, when the elder brother
died without seed the name of the
first borne might not be extinct, but the
familie might bee preserued in that
name, by raising vp of seed vnto him,
which being a priuiledge proper to the
Israelites, vpon that speciall consideration,
it must not bee enlarged to any other
sort of men whatsoeuer. Neither
is the text to be vnderstood of cousins
remoued only, as some thinke, but also
of the next of the kindred by blood;
as appeareth plainly by the historie of
Ruth, chap. I. vers. II. in these words of
Naomi to her daughters in law, Turne againe,
my daughters; for what cause will
you go with me? Are there any moe sonnes
in my wombe, that they may bee your husbands?
Turne againe, my daughters, go
your way, for I am too old to haue a husband,
&c.
               III. Rule. The wiues kinsman by
blood, is of affinitie to her husband only;
but vnto his kindred by blood, the
said kinsman hath no affinitie at all. So



on the contrarie it is true, that though
the husbands kinsman by blood, be allied
to his wife, yet he hath no alliance
to those that are kinsmen of blood vnto
her. The reason is, because betweene
the kindred of blood on the mans side,
and the kindred of blood on the womans
side, there is no affinitie. For the
prohibition of the degrees of affinitie,
hath force in those only which are the
cause thereof, and goeth no further.
Now the cause being only in the married
persons themselues, the effect may
not in reason be enlarged, to them that
are of the same blood with either of
them.
               From this rule it followeth, that the
kindred of both married persons by
blood, may lawfully match together.
The sonne in law, may match with the
daughter of his mother in law. The father
and the son by another wife, may
marrie the mother and the daughter.
Two brothers may lawfully match
with two sisters.
               IV. Rule. Kindred of affinitie to the
wife,Beza de repudijs. 82. are also kindred of affinitie to her



husband; but how? not properly, but
only after a sort, and as it were, of affinitie.
So on the contrarie. Kindred of
alliance to the husband, are, as it were,
of alliance to his wife. For example.
The wife of my father in law, which is
not my wiues owne mother, but her
step-mother, is, as it were, my mother
in law, for she is (as it were) of affinitie
to me, because she is indeed of affinitie
to my wife.
               Those which are of affinitie only after
a sort, cannot conueniently match
one with another. And therefore the
sonne in law may not marrie with his
wiues step-mother; because being of
affinitie to his wife, shee is in stead of a
mother in law to him. Neither may the
daughter in law match with her husbands
step-father, because hee is (as it
were) a step-father to her. Againe, my
sisters husband may not marry my brothers
wife; for they are after a sort, brother
and sister each to other. The reason
hereof is, because the wife is holden
in law aCuius nuptias in
                        •
                     re non licet, eius nec coniu
                     
                        •
                     is licet. part of her husband, and therfore
if affinitie hinders mariage with



one of the married couples, it hindreth
as well in the like case and respect, mariage
with the other.
               And thus much touching the distance
of blood, which in the choice of
persons fit for mariage, is most necessarily
to be obserued. For in the 18. chapter
of Leuiticus, there are sixteene seuerall
sorts of persons with whom mariage
is forbidden. The first is the mother.
The second is the step-mother.
The thid, the sister by the same father
and mother. The fourth, the half-sister,
by one of the parents only. The fifth is
the neece by the sonne. The sixth, the
neece by the daughter. The seuenth,
the fathers sister. The eight, the vncles,
that is, the fathers brothers wife. The
ninth, the mothers sister. The tenth, the
daughter in law, or sons wife. The eleuenth,
the brothers wife. The twelfth,
the wiues mother. The thirteenth, the
step-daughter, or the wiues daughter
by another husbād, or husbāds daughter
by a former wife. The fourteenth, is
the step-sonnes daughter, that is, his
daughter who was the wiues sonne by



another husbād. The fifteenth, the step-daughters
daughter. The sixteenth, is
the wiues sister. And not only these,
but all other answerable to them, either
in the same or like degree, are by equall
proportion forbidden to be had in mariage.
               It is alledged, that the prohibitions
mentioned in that chapter, are meerely
Mosaicall, that is, Ceremoniall, and
therefore doe not bind vs now in the
new Testament.
               
                  Answ. It is a flat vntruth; as shall appeare
by these reasons.
               First, the Cananites long before these
lawes were giuen by Moses to the Israelites,
were grieuously afflicted for
the breach and contempt of the same,
as may bee gathered by that which is
written in the same chapter of Leuiticus,
                  Chap. 18.
vers. 3. According to the workes of the land
of Canaan, yee shall not do, neither walke in
their ordinances. And vers. 24. You shall
not defile your selues in any of these things:
for in all these the nations are defiled, which
I will cast out before you. vers. 25. And the
land is defiled; therefore I will visite the wickednes



thereof vpon it, and the land shall
vomit out her inhabitants.
               
               
                  Secondly, the Prophets themselues
after Moses, are wont to account these
prohibitions not Ceremonial, but Morall.
Ezech. 22. 10. In thee, haue they discouered
their fathers shame; in thee haue they
vexed her, that was polluted in her flowers.
Amos 2. 7. A man and his father will go
in to a maid, to prophane the name of my
holinesse.
               
                  Thirdly, the same lawes are also vrged
in the new Testament, wherin Legal
Ceremonies were determined, and
had their end. Mark. 6. 18. Iohn said to
Herod, It is not lawfull for thee to haue thy
brothers wife. 1. Cor. 5. 1. It is heard certainly,
that there is Fornication among you,
and such Fornication, as is not once named
among the Gentiles, that one should haue his
fathers wife.
               Fourthly, Nature it selfe by proper
instinct, abhorreth such kind of coniunctions,
& the prohibitions of them,
haue sufficient ground, euen from her
principles. For to this purpose it is, that
not only the lawes of the Romane Emperours,



but also the ciuill Canons and
constitutions of men, very skilfull in
that kind, haue in all ages expresly bin
made against such persons, as haue offended
in those societies forbidden by
the law of Moses.
               
               
                  Fiftly, The Lord himselfe hath denounced
many and great punishments
to be inflicted vpon the breach of the
same lawes. Leuit. 20. 11. The man that
lieth with his fathers wife, because hee hath
vncouered his fathers shame, they shall both
die; their blood shal be vpon them. vers. 12.
The man that lieth with his daughter in
law, they both shall die the death; they haue
wrought abomination; their blood shall bee
vpon them. vers. 14. He that takes a wife
and her mother, committeth wickednesse;
they shall burne him and them with fire.
vers. 16. The man that taketh his sister, his
fathers daughter, or his mothers daughter,
and seeth her shame, and she seeth his shame;
it is villanie: therefore they shall be cut off
in the sight of their people. vers. 20. The
man that lieth with his fathers brothers
wife, and vncouereth his vncles shame, they
shall beare their iniquitie, & shall die childlesse.



                  Deut. 23. 2. A bastard shall not enter
into the congregation of the Lord, euen to
his tenth generation. Deut. 27. 20. Cursed
be he that lieth with his fathers wife.
               The third essential Signe of a person
mariageable, is abilitie and fitnesse for
procreation. And this in an holy and
modest sort is alwaies supposed to bee
in the partie contracted, vnlesse the cō
                  trarie
be manifestly knowne, & discerned
by some apparent infirmitie in the
bodie.
               Hence I gather, that it is vnlawful to
make a contract with such a person, as is
vnfit for the vse of mariage, either by
naturall constitution of bodie, or by accident.
For example; in regard of sicknesse,
or of frigiditie, or of the palsie vncurable,
or lastly of the depriuation of
the parts belonging to generation.
These and such like impediments are
of force, though a contract should alreadie
be made, yet to make it a meere
nullitie, considering that God maketh
knowne his will in them, that hee approoueth
not of such espousals, but
would haue them to be dissolued.
               
                  
Againe, that which is made betweene
two persons that areImpuberes. vnder age, is to
bee holden and accounted as vnlawfull.
And though it should be done by
consent, or cōmandement of Parents,
yet it is of no moment. This alwaies remembred;
except it bee ratified by a
new consent of the parties after they be
come to age; or that they in the meane
time haue had priuate and carnall copulation
one with another.
               Againe, put the case two be espoused,
whereof the one is vnder age, the
other of full age; the partie that is of
full age, ought to tarrie and expect the
time, wherein the issue of the espousals
formerly made, may bee manifested.
And the vnder-aged may not break off
consent, either before, or when they be
come to perfect yeares, but must rest in
expectation of the accomplishment of
the contract, when hee or she shall be
out of their minoritie.
               The fourth essential Signe, is a sound
and healthfull constitution of bodie,
free from diseases incurablie contagious.



                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  


                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
               
               
                  
Whereupon it followeth, that a promise
of mariage made betweene those,
whereof the one hath a disease so lothsome,
as that the other vpon good
ground cannot possiblie endure familiar
societie and companie with him;
though it do not wholly hinder the vse
of the bodie, is vtterly vnlawfull.
               Of this sort is the Leprosie, the Frēch
poxe and such like. For seeing there
cannot be any matrimonial vse of them
that are tainted with such contagious
diseases, without apparent danger of
infecting each other, and those also,
which haue societie with them, and others;
yea and by this meanes the issue
of their bodies, growing of a corrupted
seed, are euen borne to perpetual miserie,
and to the great hurt and hinderance
of the Common-wealth; the case
is plaine, that such mariages cannot be
vndertaken with good conscience.
               Now if the one party haue a disease,
though not contagious, yet either incurable,
or soTurpi. lothsome, as the other
hath iust cause to abhor his companie;
for example, if he be sicke of a Lethargie,



of the falling sicknes, or such like
diseases; then, though it be lawfull to
match with him, because such a contract
is not expressely forbidden, neither
is it apparantly hurtfull to the Cō
                  mon-wealth,
yet is it not expedient, because
the disease being lothsome to the
sound partie, the mariage also will become
vnprofitable, and the partie in
danger of breaking the commandemēt
of the Morall law, wherein God forbiddeth
to commit adulterie.
               The fifth essentiall Signe of a person
mariageable, is freedome from mariage;
whereby both the parties which
enter contract, are so at libertie, that neither
the man hath in present another
wife, or is promised to another; nor the
woman hath another husband, or is
promised to another. The reason is, because
God himselfe esteemeth that mariage
only lawfull, wherein one man is
ioyned to one woman, and they both
into one flesh; & consequently iudgeth
it vnlawfull, as for one man to haue
more wiues; so for one woman at the
same time to haue more husbands.
               
                  
Hence it followeth, that it is against
the law of God, and the first institution
of mariage, that a contract should bee
made betweene such persons, whereof
the one is formerly betrothed to another.
For so long as the first promise
stands in force, the man can no more be
betrothed to two women, then he may
be the husband of two wiues; because
the spouse by the bond of her promise
to the man, becomes a wife; and the
man by the bond of his promise to the
woman, becomes an husband, Deut.
22. 23. 24.
               Againe, there can bee no sure-making,
and consequently no mariage
with such a one, as either hath been diuorced
without a sufficient cause, or
hath wrongfully forsaken and reiected
a lawfull mate before. To this purpose
saith our Sauiour Christ, Matth. 19. 9.
I say vnto you, that whosoeuer shall put away
his wife, except it be for whoredome, & marieth
another, committeth adulterie; and
whosoeuer marrieth her which is diuorced,
committeth adulterie. And Saint Paul,
1. Cor. 7. 11. But & if she depart, let her remaine



vnmarried, or be reconciled vnto her
husband, and let not the husband put away
his wife.
               
               Hitherto I haue treated of essentiall
markes, which belong to the being of
mariage. Now I come to those that are
accidentall.
               An accidentall marke of a person fit
for mariage, is that, which belongeth
not to the being, but to the well being,
that is, to the holines and puritie of that
estate. And of this sort, there be three
that are the principall.
               The first is paritie or equality, in regard
of Christian religion; For in mariage,
there is a speciall care to be had,
that belieuers be matched with belieuers,
and Christians with Christians;
not belieuers with Infidels, or Christians
with Pagans. For the former sort
are only and alwaies to be made and
kept, and the latter to be auoided, yea
inhibited by positiue lawes and constitutions,
the breach whereof in such cases
is seuerely to be punished. The neglect
of this point was one principall
cause of the destructiō of the old world



by the floud. Gen. 6. 2. The sons of God
saw the daughters of men, that they were
faire, and they tooke them wiues of all that
they liked. Abraham obserued it in the
mariage of Isaac his sonne, and for that
purpose tooke an oath of his seruant.
Gen. 24. 3. I will make thee sweare by the
Lord God of heauen, and God of the earth,
that thou shalt not take a wife vnto my son,
of the daughters of the Cananites among
whom I dwell. And in imitation of that
holy example, Isaac also giues a charge
vnto Iacob his son, that he should not
take a wife of the daughters of Canaan,
Gen. 28. 1. Afterward there was an expresse
law of God giuen by Moses, touching
the Gentiles that liued in that
land. Exod. 34. 15. Beware that thou make
not a couenant with the inhabitants of the
land, &c. vers. 16. And take of their daughters
vnto thy sonnes, and their daughters go
a whoring after their gods; and make thy
sonnes goe a whoring after their gods.
And the same law was vrged by Ezra
the Priest in his time. Ezra 10. 11. Separate
your selues from the people of the land,
and from the strange wiues. Lastly, S. Paul


                  
exhorteth the Corinthiās, 2. Cor. 6. 14.
Be not vnequally yoked with the Infidels.
And Titus 3. 10. Reiect him that is an heretike,
after once or twice admonition.
               
               But suppose it falleth out, that the
espousals be past, and that both parties
at the first were belieuers, or one of thē
only; or that at first both were vnbelieuers,
and yet afterward one of them is
conuerted to the faith; or further, admit
that both were belieuers at the contract,
yet within some time after, the
one becomes an Infidell, that is to say,
a Iew, a Turke, or an obstinate Heretike,
that denies the faith, and razeth
euen the very foundation of Religion;
in this case what is to be done? Surely
euē such espousals once made and ended,
if there be no other impediments
but these, are to stand & continue firme
and vnchangeable; so long as the vnbelieuing
partie doth willingly yeeld,
and submit him or her selfe to the performance
of mariage duties, properly
belonging to man and wife. My reason
is, the speech of Paul, who saith; If any
brother haue a wife, that beleeueth not, if


                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  


                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  


                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  


                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  


                  
                  she be content to dwell with him, let him not
forsake her. Againe, The woman which
hath an husband that belieueth not, if he
be content to dwell with her, let her not forsake
him, 1. Cor. 7. 12. 13.
               If it be heere alledged, that the sin of
adulterie dissolues the bond both of
contract and mariage, and therefore
much more doth idolatrie or infidelity,
which is a sinne farre more detestable
then adulterie: I answere, that the questiō
is not, whether of these is the greater
sin, or more hainous in the sight of
God; for Infidelitie in both respects far
exceedeth the other; but whether of
them is more repugnant to the nature
and condition of wedlocke. Now the
sinne of adulterie is that alone, which
breakes the bond, and renounceth the
troth plighted in mariage, and is the
proper cause of a diuorce, and not Idolatrie
or Infidelitie.
               The second note, is parity or equalitie
in regard of age and condition.
               First of Age; because though the mariage
of persons, whose yeares are farre
vnequall, is not expresly forbidden in



the word; yet is it agreeable to the rules
of expediencie and decencie, that the
aged should match with the aged, the
yonger with the yonger.
               Reasons are these. First, because the
comforts of this societie in likelihood
will by this meanes alwaies be equall,
and consequently bring the more contentment
to either partie. Secondly,
these vnequall mariages are often times
offensiue to others. Thirdly, they cannot
but in some cases proue offensiue euen
to themselues. For when a man of
great yeares matcheth with a woman
very yong, or a yong stripling marrieth
an aged woman; the elder partie growing
weake and impotent, may the sooner
come to be vnfit for mariage duties;
and the yonger being of greater strēgth
and abilitie,, the more in danger of being
exposed to incontinencie, and that
in the highest degree, vnlesse he be restrained
by Gods speciall grace. For
this cause it was a great fault, wherewith
one Apuleius was iustly charged,
that being but a very yong man, he was
married to a wife of 60. yeares of age.
               
                  
Secondly, of condition and estate.
For this also is answerable vnto the Apostles
rule, who exhorteth men to
thinke of, and to do those things which
are true, iust, commendable, and of good
report, Philip. 4. 8. Thus it is a seemely
and commendable practise, that, the
Prince, the Noble man, the free-man,
the gentleman, the yeoman, &c. should
be ioyned in societie with them, that
are of the same or like condition with
themselues, and not otherwise. For this
cause are the auncient Romans greatly
to be commended, who (as we reade
in their stories) had such a carefull respect
of their mariages in this behalfe,
that they made lawes and constitutions
for the restraining of inequalitie of
worldly estate in such societies, by this
meanes preuenting much confusion
and disturbance in families, and other
orders of men. Whereunto agrees that
of Tertullian,
                  Tertul. ad vxor. li. 2. who saith, That if a free woman
had affianced her selfe to him that was
a bond-man to another, and being thrice admonished
thereof, by him that had authoritie
ouer her, did notwithstanding perseuere



in her purpose; she should, according to the
law, lose her freedome.
               
               The third note is publike honestie
and credit, whereby the contract made
becomes a matter of good report, well
thought and spoken of abroad. Whatsoeuer
things are of good report, thinke on
them. Philip. 4. 8. From hence I gather,
               I. That it is an vnseemely thing for a
mā to make promise of mariage to such
a woman, as hath bin formerly deflowred,
or hath and is, or may beconuinced
of adulterie & vncleannes. Nay I adde
further, that a cōtract made with such a
one, as himself hath before deflowred,
is by the law of God vnlawfull. For the
adulterer and the adulteresse, by diuine
law should be put to death, and be cut
off from humane societie, Leuit. 20. 10.
               II. It is altogether inexpedient, that
a woman should be married to such a
man, as hath a Concubine, vnlesse hee
formerly renounce her, and testifie the
same by true and vnfeined repentance.
The reason is plaine. Such a mariage
cannot be vndertaken in the Lord. And
the partie himselfe, being before polluted



with his Concubine, becomes now
by mariage to another, an adulterer;
and she that is maried vnto him, by this
her act yeelds consent vnto his adulterie.
               III. That no man professing Christian
religion, much lesse a Minister of
the word, ought to take to himselfe in
mariage a harlot, a defamed woman, or
one that comes of infamous parents,
though she be repentant. Leuit. 21. 7.
The Priest shall not take to wife one that is a
whore, or prophaned, that is to say, which
hath an euill name, or comes of ignominious
parents. Which law, though it
was in part Ceremonial and Leuitical,
and so far forth abrogate; yet hauing in
it some Moralitie, in as much as the reason
therof (to wit, because it is reprochfull
to a Christian, but specially to a Minister)
is still in force, it is to be holden
perpetuall. For Christian profession,
and the Ecclesiasticall Ministrie is principally
to be respected, and whatsoeuer
may preiudice the dignitie and credit
thereof, to be auoided.
               
                  Obiect. 1. The Prophet Hosea was



commanded to take vnto him a wife of
fornication, that is, an harlot, Hosea 1. 2.
Answ. Hosea did it not in deed, but in
type and resemblance. For God commanded
him in his prophecie, to take
vpon him (as it were) the person of a
fornicator, that by this meanes hee
might the more effectually charge and
cōuince the Israelites of their vncleane
and vnchast conuersation.
               
                  Obiect. 2. The Lord also forbiddeth
the Priest to marrie a widow, Leuit. 21.
14. it may seeme therefore vnexpedient
for a Minister so to do. Answ. The law
concerning the mariage of a virgin, and
not a widow, was not enioyned to all
Priests, but only to the chiefe Priest, Leuit.
21. 10. And hee also might marrie a
widow, but such a one only, as had bin
the widow of a Priest, and not any other,
Ezech. 44. 22. Now this was commanded
them vpon speciall consideration.
For the High Priest was a type of
Christ, and Christ was in time to come
to call his Church, the elect, among the
Gentiles, and to marrie them as a virgin
espoused vnto himselfe. Yea he was also



to marrie his Church as a widow, but
the widow of a Priest only, because he
was to gather to himselfe the remnant
of the Church of the Iewes; howbeit
not all of them, but such only as came
of the holy Fathers, and were Israelites,
not according to the flesh, but according
to the promise.
               IV. That it is not meete for a man to
be contracted to the sister of her that is
alreadie affianced vnto him.
               And so much of the first point, required
to the making of a contract,
namely, the choice of a person fit for
mariage.
            
            
               CHAP. 6.
               Of consent in the Contract.
               
                  THe second thing required
to the making of a
contract, is the free and
full consent of the parties,
which is indeed
the very soule and life
of the contract. And this consent standeth
in the approbation, or (as wee



commonly call it) the Sure-making of
the parties contracted.
               Consent in this case is twofold, either
of the man and the woman, or of
their parents.
               Touching the first; That the man
and the woman may yeeld free consent
each to other, it is necessarie that, in respect
of vnderstanding, their iudgemēt
should be sound; and in regard of will,
their choice should be free. And here
sundrie cases are to be resolued.
               I. Case. When the contract flowes
not from the wil and good liking of the
parties, but is forced and compelled,
what is then to be done?
               
                  Ans. If the espousals haue bin made
through force, or feare; I meane, such
as may befall a constant, and resolute
man, and which hath bin wrought, vpon
good knowledge, and cōsideration;
then are they of no moment, & in truth
meere nullities; because there is wanting
to them the free and voluntarie accord,
and assent of both parties. Neuerthelesse,
if afterward they shall grow to
a new consent, or both yeeld to an after-acceptation



of that which was formerly
made, the espousals shall then
stand in force; without further exception,
or contradiction.
               II. Case. But how if consent bee
past, and in processe of time it appeares
to the espoused persons, that they haue
erred, either in choice, or consent, or
both?
               
                  Answ. There is a three-fold error in
consent; the one of the person, the other
of the abilitie, or estate of the person;
the third of the qualitie.
               Error in respect of the person, is, whē
one person is taken for another; or whē
the contract is made betweene two,
whereof the one was taken to be such a
partie, as afterwards he proued not to
be. Now where this error is committed,
it is a plaine case, there was no consent;
and therefore the contract, vpon
certaine knowledge therof, is quite frustrate.
For the knowledge of the partie
is the ground of consent, and belongs
consequently to the very substance of
mariage.
               Neuerthelesse, if, the error being



once knowne, the parties haue had secret
societie one with another; & haue
either againe consented, or growen to
an after-acceptation of the consent before
made, the contract may and doth
stand in full force. For example: Iacob,
by the deceit of Laban, had taken Leah
for Rachel, to his wife; so saith the text,
When the euening was come, Laban tooke
Leah his daughter, and brought her to him,
and he went in vnto her, Gen. 29▪ 23. But
when the morning was come, behold it was
Leah, 25. Now by the iudgement of the
best Diuines, Iacob might iustly haue renounced
Leah, if he would, because Laban
had giuen her vnto him for Rachel,
and so deceiued him; yet hee would
not vse extremitie, but kept her as his
wife.
               If it be said, there was an error in the
person, therefore no consent, and so
Leah was not his lawfull wife, but Rachel.
I answere, that Iacob did renue his
cōsent afterward, & that renued cōsent
following vpon their knowing one of
another, made her his wife, though in
extremity & rigor she was not. Againe,



                  Rachel was indeed the partie to whom
he was espoused, by the former cōtract;
and therfore, vpon their mutuall agreement
afterward, she also became his
wife. So saith the holy Ghost, vers. 27.
Fulfill seuen yeares for her, and we will also
giue thee Rachel for thy seruice, &c. v. 28.
Then Iacob did so, and Laban gaue him
Rachel his daughter to be his wife.
               
               Error of the ability or estate is, when
one of the parties to whom cōsent was
giuen by the other, being taken for
rich and wealthie, in the issue proues to
haue been very poore, and not sufficient
to maintaine that state of life.
               Touching this error, it is to be considered,
whether the cōtract was made
absolute, for the time present, & so for
euer afterward, or conditional for time
to come only. If it were absolute, that
is, conceiued in termes of the present
time, then though the deceit bee verie
offensiue to the partie deluded, and vpon
his complaint ought in equitie to
be punished by the Magistrate; yet it is
not of force to breake off the contract;
because the abilitie of either or both



parties belongs not to the essence of
mariage. But if it were for time to
come and conditionate, then he or she
that made promise vpon this condition,
is free and not bound in conscience
to fulfill the promise; vnlesse the condition
expressed aforehand be kept, and
performed.
               Error of the qualitie of the person,
is, when she which was in the espousals
taken to bee a virgin, is afterward
found to be with child by another, before
they come together. By this error
the Couenant is made void, and becomes
a meere nullitie; so as the man
cannot be compelled, vpon true and
certaine knowledge thereof, to marrie
the woman; but may renounce her, vnlesse
both parties come to a new agreement,
or haue priuately knowne each
other vpon mutuall consent. For first,
God did in expresse tearmes command
the Iewes, that such a woman should
be stoned to death: Deut. 22. 20. If the
maid (that was giuen to wife) be not found
a virgin, vers. 21. then shall they bring the
maid to the doore of her fathers house, and



the men of her citie shal stone her with stones
to death, because she hath wrought folly in
Israel, by playing the whore in her fathers
house. Therefore it was not the will of
God, that she should be retained as a
wife, but vtterly reiected and forsaken.
Againe, this was so vsual a practise in Israel
vpon Gods commandement, that
godly and righteous men, vpon the
discouerie of this error, would not in
conscience be perswaded, to marry thē
to whom they had been betrothed,
Matth. 1. 18. Ioseph her husband (hauing
found, before Marie and he came together,
that she was with child) being a iust
man, and not willing to make her a publike
example, was minded to put her away secretly.
               
               III. Case. What shall we thinke of
the espousals of such, as are furious, and
franticke?
               
                  Answ. We must distinguish of these
diseases. For Madnes is, either perpetuall,
or by fits only with intermission.
               If it be perpetuall, the case is cleere,
that whether one of the parties only, or
both be franticke, the contract made



betweene them, is altogether vnprofitable
& vaine. For such know not what
they do whē they make a promise, and
the consent which passeth betwixt thē
cannot be free, full and perfect, but must
needs be hindred and preiudiced by
the heate and violence of their disease.
               Now although perpetuall madnesse
be a iust impediment of mariage, and a
sufficient cause to dissolue a contract,
yet it is meet that there be a conuenient
space of time agreed vpon, wherein
all meanes may be vsed for the curing
of this disease, to the end that Gods wil
touching their amendment may be the
more euidently knowne; and both the
parties themselues, and their friends
may giue testimonie to the world, that
they haue had a carefull respect of the
contract before made.
               Againe, if it be not continuall, but
by
                  Dilucida interualla. 
                  fits, so as they haue some good daies,
and quiet intermissiō, the case is otherwise.
For the contract shall be ratified,
and stand in force: prouided, that it was
manifestly knowne, that the said parties



were both in their right wits, before
they plight their troth each to other;
and themselues be willing afterwards
to confirme their promise forme
                     •
                  ly
made, by renuing their consent.
               Consent of the Parents, is that act
whereby they giue their word and promise,
to bestow their children in mariage,
and in regard of right, doe indeed
presently bestow them.
               Therefore priuate contracts, that are
made without free and lawfull consent
of parents, are not only vnprofitable
and vnlawfull, but euen by the law of
God meere nullities. Reasons. I. They
are contrarie to the expresse will and
commandement of God: Exod. 20. Honor
thy father and thy mother. II. They
are flat repugnant to naturall equitie;
which teacheth, that he who hath not
power, nor right ouer himselfe, cannot
bind himselfe by promise to another.
Now children haue not power ouer
themselues,Gal. 4. 1. but are vnder the gouernment,
& at the disposition of their Parents;
therefore the couenants which
they make, are not made and appointed



of God, and those which God maketh
not, are in deed and truth none
at all.
            
            
               CHAP. 7.
               Of Reiection, or Refusall of the
Contract.
               
                  COntrary to a complete and lawful
cōtract,Repudium. is Reiection, wherby
the Contract is dissolued,
or broken off.
               A lawfull Contract is then dissolued,
when some great and hainous fault
followeth immediately vpō it, in either
of the parties espoused. And from hēce
arise diuers and sundrie cases to be set
downe and resolued.
               The first is this. What is to be done,
when some disease befals one of the
parties immediately after the contract
made?
               
                  Answ. Those diseases which take away
the vse of the bodie, and altogether
disable the partie from the performance
of the promise made, in respect of mariage



duties, are very iust impediments
of mariage, and consequently do break
off the Contract. Of which sort are vncurable
palsies, frigiditie, and such like,
whereof I haue spoken before.
               Neuerthelesse a couenāt once made,
is not suddenly to bee renounced, for
feare of breeding offence. And therefore
some longer respite is to be taken
from the time of the contract, in which
they are to rest in expectation of amēdment,
before the said diseases be publikely
and solemnely declared to be incurable,
and consequently that the couenant
made is become void.
               Now, if the disease do not for the
present take away the vse of the body,
and yet in time proues incurablie contagious,
and so lothsome, that the one
may iustly feare to keepe and conuerse
with the other; as it falleth out when
one is tainted with leprosie; then the
contract is vtterly to be dissolued, as if
God himself should haue commanded
it, though the promise was formerlie
made, & the parties themselues should
be vnwilling. God hath ordained Matrimonie



to helpe, not to hurt either the
persons themselues, or others. Where
therefore these diseases be, which may
infect, hurt, or destroy others, there
God hath, as it were, testified from heauen,
that the act done is not pleasing
vnto him, and that presently it ought to
be frustrate.
               The contract being thus once dissolued,
the sounder partie shall be at his,
or her libertie to marrie againe. But the
diseased is by the Magistrates authoritie,
to be forbidden societie with any other
in way of mariage, and commanded
to lead his life, where he may conueniently
from companie, for feare of
infection. And withal he is for his owne
part, to sue vnto God by prayer in faith
for the gift of continencie. For certaine
it is, that he to whom God hath denied
the power of vsing mariage with good
conscience, is thereby euen called to
continencie and single life.
               But if the disease be not contagious,
yet either incurable, or so nastie, that
either of the espoused hath iust cause to
be afraid of the others companie; then



both are to be aduised, not to claime
their right, but willingly to surrender it
each to other by mutuall consent, that
they may be free againe, & not bound
by any former promise to liue together
as man and wife. Considering that they
haue no hope mutually to conuerse together,
with comfort & contentment,
while they so remaine.
               Vpon this aduice giuen by their lawfull
Pastor, or some in his stead; if they
both yeeld, or one of them at the least
desires to be at his owne libertie, the
espousals are forthwith to be brokē off.
But if neither will consent to a separation,
but rather proceed as they haue
begun, and in probability the one haue
no iust cause to hold the other in suspition,
in respect of contagion; they are
not to be hindered from the consummation
of their mariage.
               Furthermore, though one of them
should haue a disease, which is continuall
without intermission, & yet curable,
or any other incōuenience should
befall either of them, after the sure-making,
wherby they become lame, deafe,



or dumbe, &c. yet this is not a sufficient
cause to moue them to renounce, and
dissolue the contract.
               A second Case. What if it falleth
out, that after the finishing of the contract,
one of the espoused persons bee
long absent from the other, so as the absence
bee preiudiciall to the mariage,
that should ensue vpon the contract?
               
                  Answ. Inquirie must be made, whether
this absence be voluntarie, or against
the will of the partie.
               If it be voluntarie. For example; if
the man vpon an honest and iust cause,
the woman also being priuie thereunto,
shall go beyond seas, and being admonished
of his dutie before hand, shal
notwithstanding stay a whole yeare or
more, and will not returne, but further
wilfully absent himselfe; then may it be
lawfull to the woman, to craue of the
publike Magistrate a dissolution of the
couenant made, & consequently marry
another man, vnlesse the former, to
whom she was contracted, be heard of.
If he be, then shall it be lawfull for him
to pleade for himselfe, and tendring no



iust cause of his refusall, he shall be forced
by the Magistrates authoritie to
stand to his promise, and take the woman
for his wife. And the same order
is to be taken in the wilfull absence of
the woman, after she is contracted.
               If againe, the man or woman shall
vpon an euill mind, and with purpose
to deceiue each other, absent thēselues,
and depart; meanes must be vsed, that
they may be admonished of their dutie.
That being done, or at least vndertaken,
and yet the partie offending will
not appeare, if the other that is present,
vpon certaine knowledge of his, or her
want in respect of continencie, shall sue
to the Magistrate; after publike and solemne
notice giuen, the contract may
be broken.
               But if on the other side, either of
them be absent against their wil, and intendeth
no fraud or deceit, but is violently
detained, by captiuitie, imprisonment,
sicknes, force, banishment, transportation
or such like; then the partie
present being desirous of the consummation
of the mariage, ought either to



make meanes vnto him, and expect his
returne, or haue certaine notice of his
death, before she promise, or haue to do
with any other in way of mariage.
               A third Case. What if after the contract,
one of the parties becomes furious,
or madde?
               
                  Answ. If the disease be continuall,
without intermission, in all equitie and
likelihood, the espousals are to be dissolued,
vnlesse both parties after knowledge
and experience of the disease,
haue knowne one another: yet in this,
and all such like cases, it is fit that all
good meanes be tried and vsed, and sufficient
time be giuen for the restoring
of the diseased, to their former good
estate, and for the accomplishment of
the mariage lawfully begun, as before.
            
            
               CHAP. 8.
               Of Mariage.
               
                  MAriage is that, wherby the coniunction
formerly begunne in
the contract, is solemnely manifested,
and brought to perfection.



Mariage is consummate by three sorts
of actions; one of the parents of the
Bride and Bridegroome, the other of
the Minister in publike, the third of the
persons coupled together.
               The action of the Parents is vpon
the Mariage-day, to bring the Bride,
and deliuer her to the Bride-groome,
that they two may become actually
man and wife, and performe each to
other all matrimoniall duties.
               And where the mariage is complete,
in any other manner, so as the Parents
vpon sound iudgement and deliberation,
shall deny their full and free consent,
either in expresse words, or by cō
                  niuence
and silence, and that vpon iust
and lawfull cause; there, though in the
ciuill courts of men, it may stand, and
the children borne therein bee legitimate
before men, yet the truth is, before
God it is of no force, but a meere
nullitie.
               And because this doctrine, touching
consent of parents in these Cases, is of
great vse, and auaileth much to the supporting
and mai
                     •••
                  ining of families; I



will first open the truth thereof, and
then proue it by reasons.
               Vnder the name of parents are comprehended;
First, the Father and Mother.
Secondly, all Tutors and Guardians,
who haue the proper & sole charge
of wards, or others vnder yeares of discretion.
Thirdly, all such as are kindred
of blood, who are in stead of parents to
childrē, as the vncle by the fathers side,
the vncle by the mothers side, and such
like.
               Now touching the consent of parents,
that is, of father and mother, I
hold it requisite of necessitie to marriage:
For the authoritie of parents must
not be resisted, or violated. As for Tutors,
and such as haue the place of parents,
their consent is not required of
necessitie, butDe honestate. of honestie at least, because
the power and authoritie of the
parent, though it be not taken away, yet
it is lessened, when it is either transferred
to another person, or in part resteth
in the child alreadie bestowed.
               Secondly, by parents consent, I vnderstand
that which they giue, not



rashly, vnaduisedlie, or foolishlie, but
out of good & wise consideration, and
vpon true and sound iudgement, of the
businesse in hand: For otherwise, as
much as in them lieth, they make the
mariage void and of none effect. And
they are then thought to carrie a right
iudgement of the thing, when they be
able to yeeld a iust cause of yeelding, or
denying their consent. For example;
if a father denies to bestow his daughter
Iulia vpon Sempronius, because hee
knowes him to be an Arrian, a Pelagian,
or of any other sort of Heretikes; he
withholdeth his consent vpon a good
ground, & he doth that which he doth,
of iudgement.
               Yet further I adde, that where the
parents do dissent, and can yeeld no
probable cause thereof; the mariage
consummate without their consent,
ought to be confirmed and ratified by
the authoritie of the Magistrate, who is
Pater patriae. And this seemes to be the
most equall course, both for the auoiding
of greater scandals, & for the preuenting
of wrong, that may otherwise



be done in some particular case, as to a
woman that is defloured and reiected.
               Thirdly, consent of parents is either
expressed, or implied; Expressed, when
it is giuen by words; Implied, when it
is yeelded by silence. For it standeth
with most equitie and indifferencie, to
thinke that those parents do giue consent,
who do not by word expresly denie
the same.
               Fourthly, children are either subiect
to the authoritie of their parents in the
familie; or at their owne libertie, & out
of their parents subiection. Those that
are at liberty, are tied necessarily to subiection
in respect of mariage; but the
other being still of the familie, and vnder
iurisdiction, are bound to be ordered,
by their parents in the bestowing
of themselues.
               This is briefly the meaning of the
question in hand. Now, for proofe of
this point, I will propound three sorts
of arguments, wherof some are drawne
from the law of God, some from the
light of nature, and some from the
iudgement of the ancient Church.
               
                  
For the first sort. According to the
law of God, mariage is not only a ciuill
and politike, but also a diuine and spirituall
coniunction, the author and ordainer
whereof, vpon speciall cause,
was God himselfe: This our Sauiour
Christ witnesseth, when he saith, Those
whom God hath ioyned together, let no man
separate, Matth. 19. 6. That therefore
mariages may be soundly ratified and
confirmed, the authoritie and power of
God himselfe is necessarily to be interposed.
               If it be asked, How God that is in
heauen, should bring and ioyne together
man and wife vpon the earth?
               I answere, that he doth it not immediately
by himselfe, as he brought Euah
vnto Adam, but in & by some solemne
and lawful meanes. And this meane, is
that great and ancient power and prerogatiue
of parēts. And the law of God
hath giuen them this power, not in ciuill
contracts and compositions alone,
but euen in the beginning and accomplishing
of mariages. Deut. 7. 3. Thou
shalt not giue thy daughter vnto his sonne,



nor take his daughter vnto thy son. Ierem.
29. 6. Take wiues for your sonnes, and giue
your daughters vnto husbands, that they
may beare sonnes and daughters. 1. Cor. 7.
36. But if any man thinke that it is vncomlie
for his virgin, if shee passe the flower of
her age, and need so require, let him doe
what he will, he sinneth not, let them be maried.
               
               Hence it was, that Abraham by right
of this authoritie, gaue order what wife
his seruant should prouide for his son;
Thou shalt not take a wife to my sonne of the
daughters of the Canaanites; But thou shalt
go vnto my countrie, and to my kindred, and
take a wife vnto my sonne Isaac, Gen. 24.
3. 4. Sampson, though he was inflamed
with the loue of the womā in Timnath,
whom he saw to be beautifull in his
eyes, yet hee durst not take her to his
wife, till she was giuen him of his parents,
Iudg. 14. It was an expresse law
of God, that if a man intised a maid that
was not betrothed, and lay with her, hee
should endow her, and take her to his wife:
But how? marke in what manner the
holy Ghost proceedeth, If her father refuse



to giue her to him, he shall pay money according
to the dowrie of virgins, Exod. 22.
16. 17. Deut. 22. 28. 29. In which text,
Moses plainly teacheth, that the consent
of the two parties is not sufficient,
no not though they haue had societie
together, vnlesse they haue the free cō
                  sent
of their parents also. In like maner
it was ordained by God, Numb. 30.
4. 5. 6. That if a woman vowed a vow vnto
the Lord, being in her fathers house, & her
father hearing it, holdeth his peace concerning
her, that is, approueth her vow by
winking at it, her vow shall stand. But if
her father disallow her, that is, giueth no
approbation or consent vnto the vow
made, it shall be of no value, and the Lord
wil forgiue her, because her father consented
not. Now, if the vow of children made
vnto God, and pertaining to his worship,
cannot be ratified without the parents
approbation; of how much lesse
force shall any priuate contract or mariage
be, without their allowance?
               The second argument is taken from
the light of nature, and it is gathered by
proportion on this manner: A son priuilie



alienateth and selleth away his fathers
lands, either in whole or in part.
The question is, whether this alienation
be good in law, yea or no? Answere
is, No. And why? Because the land did
not belong to the son, but was part of
his fathers substance. In like manner, a
son alienates himselfe, and is betrothed
to a woman, to marrie her without his
parents knowledge: Is this act of the son
warrantable and sound? By no meanes;
for the son in respect of his body, is part
of the fathers goods, and may not be alienated
from him without consent. A
notable reason hereof we find in Iob 1.
For when God had giuen Satan power
to destroy and spoile all Iobs goods, and
whatsoeuer he had, the diuell doth not
only touch the wealth of Iob, but his
children also, as a part of his substance.
In this respect the Iewes were permitted
by God to sell their children. Exodus
21. 7.
               Againe, for the accomplishment of
mariage, there must needs be a mutuall
donation, betweene the spouse and the
espoused. And what is that which is



mutually giuen? Surely their persons,
or rather their bodies each to other, for
so Paul saith, 1. Cor. 7. 2. Let euery man
haue his wife, and let euery woman haue her
owne husband. But by whom is this donation
to be made? by sons and daughters
that are in the familie, vnder the iurisdiction
of their parents? It may not
be; For nature her selfe taketh it for
granted, that he which is not at his own
libertie, cannot yeeld to the giuing of
himselfe. The donation therefore remaines
in the right of the parent, in as
much as the wil & consent of the child,
ought to depend vpon his wil and consent,
to whom God hath giuen power
and authoritie in this behalfe.
               In the third place, let the iudgement
of the ancient Church be obserued.
Ambrose, in his first booke of the Patriarch
Abraham, chap. 9. requires this
consent in mariages, which he saith is
so equall and agreeable to nature, that
euē the Poets acknowledged the same.
For which purpose he reciteth two verses
out of the Grecian Poet Euripides, in
his Tragedie called Andromacha, wherin



in when Orestes desired to marrie Hermion,
she frames him this answere, That
the matter of her mariage wholly depended
vpon the pleasure and authoritie
of her father, & was not in her owne
power or libertie. Innocentius, who was
both a Pope and Martyr, in his decretall
epistles, so strictly requireth consent
of parents,Sub Innocent. 3. canon. 51. 
                  as where it is wanting, he concludes
the mariage to be void. In the Coū
                  cell
of Lateran, it was decreed that
Clandestine contracts & secret mariages,
made and vndertaken betweene partie and
partie, should be holden as vnlawfull as mariages
in those degrees of consanguinitie and
affinitie, which are forbidden by God. Tertullian
saith,Tertul. lib. ad vxorem, 2. ad finem. That in this world the sonne
cannot
                  Ritè & Iure. Basil. epist. 1. ad Amphiloch. Canon, 42. 
                  rightly and lawfully marrie without
the allowance of his father. Basil in an
Epistle to Amphilochius Bishop of Iconium,
affirmeth; That mariages which are
made without them which haue power ouer
the parties, are fornications, and therefore
that they which are ioyned together in mariage,
while their parents or masters liue, are
in no sort free from imputation of sin, vntill
they haue approbation from them, for then



mariage is ratified & confirmed, when they
haue yeelded allowance thereunto.
               
               The second Action touching the
consummation of mariage, is the action
of the Minister. And that is the blessing
or sanctification thereof, which is a solemne
worke, wherby the Minister pronouncing
the parties contracted to be
man and wife before the whole congregation,
commendeth them and their
estate vnto God by solemne prayer.
               This solemne sanctification is grounded
vpon the practise of God himselfe,
who hauing giuen Euah to Adam, blessed
them, saying, Increase and multiplie,
Gen. 2. 22. and 1. 27. For that which God
then gaue, the Minister standing in his
roome, now prayeth may be giuen to
the man and wife. Yea it is agreeable to
the generall rule of the Apostle, Let all
things bee done decently and in order,
1. Cor. 14. 40.
               Now that this action is to be approued
and vsed in the Church, appeares
by these reasons. I. Mariage as it is a
publike action, so it is after a sort a spirituall
and diuine ordinance, whereby it



differeth from the contract: For the
contract being meerely ciuill, as it standeth
by consent of men, so by the same
consent, it may bee broken and dissolued,
but with mariage it is otherwise.
II. Marriage is the Seminarie of the
Church and Common-wealth. III. It
was the practise of ye Primitiue Church.
Tertullian speaking of the marriage of
Christians with Christians,Lib. 2. ad vxorem. acknowledgeth
himselfe not to bee able sufficiently
to declare the happines of that coniunction
which is made by the Church, consecrated
by prayers &
                  Oblationem sic exponit Beatus Rhenanus. Niceph. lib. 14. cap. 55. Ambros. epistolar. lib. 9. epist. 70. ad Vigilium. 
                  solemne seruice, witnessed
by the Angels, and ratified by God
himselfe. Nicephorus reporteth of one
Synesius, who auouched that God & the
lawes, and the holy hand of Thesphylus had
giuen him a wife. Ambrose saith, That
mariage ought to be sāctified, with the vaile
wherewith the Priest was wont to couer the
Bride and the Bride-groome in the publike
congregation, and with his blessing.
               
               The third and last action belonging
to the accomplishment of this estate, is,
that of the parties themselues, whereby
the Bride is in decent and modest manner,



brought vnto the house and home
of the Bride-groome. It is the law of this
estate published by God himselfe in Paradise,
that the man, euen in respect of
habitation, should leaue father and mother
and cleaue to his wife, Gen. 2. 24,
               Heere question is moued, whether
mariage is to be solemnized with mirth
and feasting. Answ. I. It is lawfull and
warrantable to vse feasting and mirth at
mariages, because these be things indifferent,
and wee haue examples thereof
in the Scriptures. Laban made a feast at
the wedding of Iacob and Rachel, and
inuited all the men of the place to it,
Gen. 29. 22. Christ himselfe did approue
the resort of people to the mariage at
Cana in Galilee, both by his presence,
and by that honorable gift of sixe water-pots
of the best wine, Ioh. 2. 2. 7. 8.
II. It is not only lawfull, but conuenient
and fit to be done, if there be abilitie;
according to the commendable
custome of the place & countrie wherin
men do dwell; so as in the vse thereof,
these cautions bee obserued. First,
that in mirth and merry-making, there



be care had that nothing be done which
is dishonest, prophane, or of ill report.
Philip. 4. 8. Whatsoeuer things are honestpure
of good report, thinke on these things.
Secondly, That ioy in them be mixed
and moderated with the feare of God,
without which Laughter and reioycing
is meere madnesse, Eccles. 2. 2. Thirdly,
That it bee performed in a moderate
and sober vse of the creatures, without
riot & excesse. Thus we reade that at the
great feast of Ahashuerosh, it was appointed
by the King himself, that they should
drink orderly, & none might compel another
to drinke more then he thought
conuenient, Ester 1. 8. And where weddings
are kept contrary to these directions,
they are not feasts celebrated vnto
God, but vnto ye diuell; which also may
be said of all other festiuall meetings.
               And so much touching the point of
mariage, in which this is to be remembred
for a cōclusion, That where there
is generally a nullitie in the contract, or
a separation following vpon it, there is
also a nullity in regard of the consummation
of mariage.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 9.
               Of the duties of married persons.
               
                  THus farre haue we proceeded
in the doctrine
of marriage; and now
we come to the duties
which they who bee
maried are to performe
each to other.
               These are principally two: Cohabitation,
and Communion.
               
                  Cohabitation is their quiet and comfortable
dwelling together in one place,
for the better performance of mutuall
duties. 1. Cor. 7. 10. And to the married
command I, not I but the Lord, let not the
wife separate her selfe from her husband:
vers. 12. But to the remnant I say, not the
Lord, If any brother haue an vnbeleeuing
wife, and she be content to dwell with him,
let him not forsake her: vers. 13. And the
wife which hath an vnbeleeuing husband,
which is content to dwell with her, let her
not forsake him. 1. Pet. 3. 7. Likewise let the
men dwell together, as becōmeth them that



haue knowledge; giuing honor to the woman
as to the weaker vessell, euen as they
which are heires together of the grace of life,
that your prayers be not interrupted.
               This dutie must bee kept especiallie
the first yeare of mariage, Deut. 24. 5.
When a man taketh a wife, hee shall not go
on warfare, neither shall be charged with
any busines, but shall bee free at home one
yeare, & reioyce with his wife which he hath
taken. And the ground of this commandement,
no doubt, is, that they might
learne to know one anothers cōditions,
and that they might worke a setled affection
one towards another, which afterward
vpon no occasion might bee
changed.
               Yet they may bee absent each from
other in two cases: First, vpon mutuall
consent for a time, for the performing
of some busines, that is requisite for the
familie, Prou. 7. 19. For mine husband is
not at home, he is gone a far iourney: at the
appointed time he will returne againe. Secondly,
the like absence is allowed,
when some great and weightie affaires
either in the Church or Common-wealth



                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  


                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  


                  
are in hand, 2. Sam. 11. 9. 10. But
Vriah slept at the doore of the Kings Palace,
with all the seruants of his Lord, and went
not downe to his house? v. II. Then Vriah
answered Dauid; The Arke, and Israel, and
Iudah dwell in tents, and my Lord Ioab,
and all the seruants of my Lord abide in the
open field; shall I then go into my house to
eate, and drinke, and lie with my wife? by
thy life, and by the life of my soule, I will not
do this thing.
               
               Hence ariseth a question: What if after
mariage consummate, there grow
vpon one of the parties a contagious
disease that cannot be cured, but is so
lothsome, that the other whole partie
cannot endure cohabitation at all?
               
                  Answ. Both the mariage it selfe, and
the dutie of dwelling together, ought
to continue firme and sure notwithstanding:
yet so as the sound partie neither
may, nor ought in good conscience,
to desire coniunction with the other,
whereby he, or she may bring infection
vpon themselues, and consequently
hurt their children, and indanger
the Common-wealth.
               
                  
But if either of the parties haue not
the gift of continencie, nor cannot abstaine;
they must sue for it vnto God in
earnest prayer, who will giue it vnto
them.
               For there God hath called a man or
woman to continencie, where they be
necessarily hindred from the vse of the
ordinarie and lawfull remedie of the
contract.
               The contrarie to Cohabitation is
Desertion.
               Desertion is, when one of the married
folkes, vpon a wilfull, and obstinate
mind of their owne head, departeth
from the other, without a iust, and necessarie
cause.
               Touching this point, there bee sundrie
Cases expounded.
               I. Case. Suppose that an husband
which is an vnbeleeuer, or an heretike
in the foundation, of his owne accord,
vpon detestation of true religion, quite
forsakes the beleeuing wife, and denies
any more to dwell with her; what is to
be done?
               
                  Answ. All good meanes must bee



first vsed to bring the infected partie to
repentance; and when none will succeed,
but the case remaineth desperate,
then mariage is dissolued on his
part, and the beleeuing wife is free to
marrie another. So saith the Apostle,
1. Cor. 7. 15. If the vnbeleeuing partie depart,
let him depart; a brother or a sister
is not in subiection in such things; but God
hath called vs vnto peace. In which words
obserue a twofold reason: I. He that
is at libertie may marrie another; now
the beleeuing partie forsaken, is at libertie;
because hee is not in subiection in
such things: therefore he may marrie
another. II. God hath called vs vnto
peace, saith Paul, and this peace cannot
be kept, if the beleeuing partie forsaken
cannot containe, vnlesse he marrie.
Ambrose vpon the place saith,Ambros. in 1. Cor. 7. 15. 
                  That mariage
cannot stand firme, which is separated
from the worship and seruice of God; and
therefore it is no sinne in the partie that is
for saken for Gods cause, to be married to another;
and the vnbeleeuer departing, sinneth
both against God, and against the law of
wedlock, because he denies to remain in that



estate, in regard of religion. Therefore hee
breakes the couenant of mariage, and the other
is not bound in this case to keepe touch
with him.
                  Libr. 4. dist. 39. the master of the
sentences, saith, That the beleeuing partie
in this case, is not bound to follow the vnbeleeuer
when hee departeth, but while hee
liues may marrie another.
                  Lib. de Fide & operib. cap. 1
                        •
                     . Augustine affirmeth,
that euen the wife which is ioyned
to her husband in lawfull societie, if shee will
not abide with her Christian husband, because
he is a Christian, may be forsaken and
left, without sin. And it is far better that
the couenant should be dissolued, that
man and wife haue made each with other,
then that the Couenant which
man hath made with God. The people
of Israel being in affliction, were constrained
to break the former made with
strange women, that they might keepe
the latter, Ezra 10. 11. 19.
               It is alledged, that the vnbeleeuing
partie may haply repent, and then to
make a dissolution is in vaine. But I say,
that it is as likely that he will neuer repent,
and therefore there is cause that
the knot should be dissolued.
               
                  
Againe, it is lawfull (say some) to
make a diuorce out of the case of Adulterie.
Answ. The belieuing partie
which is forsaken, is not the cause of
the diuorce, but is a patient of the separation,
wrongfully made by the vnbeleeuer.
And Christ where he mentioneth
the Case of Adulterie, Matth. 19.
speaketh of an equall mariage, whereas
Paul speakes of an vnequall.
               II. Case. What if there fall out a desertion
betweene two married folkes,
which are both beleeuers?
               
                  Answ. The faultie person, who is the
cause of this desertion, is to be forced
by course of Ciuill, and Ecclesiasticall
censure, to performe his, or her dutie.
Vpon which proceeding, if he remaine
obstinate and peruerse in will; the other
must in patience, & earnest prayer
vnto God, waite the time, vntill his
mind may be changed, and he made to
relent by the order of the Magistrate.
But if the one of them, by iust occasion
of feare, be compelled to depart from
the other; and cannot returne againe
without apparent danger of life; in this



case they are not bound to returne; but
the delinquent partie is to remaine solitarie,
till they be instructed and made
willing to doe their duties: and in the
meane while, the partie innocent must
be resolued that God hath called him
or her to single life.
               Againe, be it that the one is resolutely
vnwilling to dwell with the other,
and thereupon flies away without any
fault of the other; if the thing after a
long space bee sufficiently knowne before-hand,
and all possible meanes haue
been vsed, to reclaime the guiltie person;
yea being called, he doth not personally
appeare before the Iudge, to
yeeld a reason of the fact; after publike
and solemne declaration made, the Minister
vpon such desertion, may pronounce
the mariage to be dissolued. For
he that vpon malice flieth away from
his mate, is to bee holden in the same
termes with an vnbelieuer, who departs
vpon detestation of religion, and
the seruice of God, 1. Tim. 5. 8.
               Howbeit, if the place whither he is
fled, be vnknowne, and vpon his flight



there be found some fault in the Plaintiffe,
she is not to be heard, or set at libertie
by the Iudge in this case, though
shee pretend want of the gift of continencie.
               But suppose he that fled come againe
vnlooked for, and requires his spouse;
then in case the former course hath not
bin taken, nor iudgement giuen against
him, they may be reconciled and come
together againe. If it hath, and matters
be concluded, hee is not vpon his returne
to bee heard, but rather seuerely
punished.
               Like vnto Desertion, is malicious and
spitefull dealing of married folkes one
with the other.
               
                  Malicious dealing is, when dwelling
together, they require each of other intolerable
conditions: and when the one
doth not regard nor relieue the other,
being in danger or extremity, as is meet.
For this is as much as to betray one anothers
estate and life to their vtter enemies.
               Heere it may be demanded, what a
belieuer should do, who is in certaine



and imminent danger, either of losse
of life, or breach of conscience, if they
both abide together?
               
                  Answ. I. This certaine danger hath
his originall, either from one that is a
stranger, or from one of the parties: If
from a stranger, then the husband either
takes vpon him the defence of his
belieuing wife, or not; if he doth, then
she ought to abide with him. If not, she
may depart and prouide for her owne
safetie. II. Againe, if the husband
threatneth hurt, the belieuing wife may
flie in this case; and it is all one, as if the
vnbelieuing man should depart. For to
depart from one, and driue one away
by threats, are aequipollent.
               Neither may this seeme strange vnto
any, that the belieuer in such case is
allowed to depart. For a husband that
is a Christian is married two waies: First
with Christ, and secondly with his wife.
The former mariage is made in Baptisme,
and is a more holy coniunction,
then is the latter. Therfore when these
two cannot stand together, but one of
them must needs be dissolued; the latter



must rather be left then the former. Againe,
if the belieuer should remaine
with the vnbelieuer, she should haplie
be vrged sometimes, in case of danger
vpon infirmitie, to deny Christ, & make
ship wracke of faith and good conscience;
which may in no sort be done of
either partie: and therefore separation
is to be made rather in this society, then
that the cōiunction with Christ should
not stand firme, and continue.
               It is alledged, that if this be so, then
the belieuing wife forsakes the vnbelieuing
husband, which she may not do.
               
                  Answ. She forsakes him not finally,
but leaues him for a time. Againe, the
desertion is not made by the person,
which giueth place for the time, but by
him in whom is the cause of the desertion;
euen as he is not to be termed a
Schismatike, which separateth himself,
but hee in whom is the cause of the
Schisme.
               Againe, it is obiected, that he which
flieth leaues his calling; and euery man
must abide in his calling; according to
the rule of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 7. 20.
               
                  
                  Answ. There is a double calling; The
generall, standing in the worship of
God; The particular, as the calling of
mariage, or of single life. When these
two callings cannot stand together, the
latter must giue place to the former,
Luk. 14. 26. If any man come to me, & hate
not his father, and mother, and wife, and
children, and brethren, and sisters; yea and
his owne life also, he cannot be my disciple.
               
               III. Case. When the husband is
perpetually absent from the wife, what
is to be done?
               
                  Answ. If he be absent either because
he is in captiuitie, or vpon malice, or
feare, or any such like cause; the wife
must rest in expectation of his returne,
till she hath notice of his death, either
by sufficient testimonie, or by apparant
likelihoods. Now in the want of testimonies,
and coniectures in this behalfe,
if the partie forsaken cannot certainly
determine, that the absence was made
vpon an euill mind; some haue thought
that it behoueth her to expect his comming
again for the space of foure years;
others of fiue; some of seuen, some of



ten yeares; after which time, she is free,
and may marrie another man. And if
the partie do haplie returne againe after
some long space of time, who was
probablie thought to haue been dead,
the latter ma
                     •
                  iage vndertaken vpon necessarie
ignorance of such an euent, may
be dissolued; and it shall not be imputed
to either partie, considering it fell
out not by their fault, but only by accident.
               Now if the question bee of wilfull
and affected absence, the same is to be
determined concerning that, which
hath bin said before touching the point
of Desertion.
            
            
               CHAP. 10.
               Of the Communion of married folkes,
and of due beneuolence.
               
                  THe cōmunion of man & wife,
is that dutie, whereby they do
mutually and willingly communicate,
both their persons, & goods
each to other, for their mutuall helpe,



necessitie and comfort, Ephes. 5. 28. So
ought mē to loue their wiues as their own bodies;
he that loueth his wife, loueth himselfe.
               
               This dutie consisteth principally in
the performance of special beneuolēce
one to another, & that not of courtesie,
but of due debt, 1. Cor. 7. 3. Let the husband
giue vnto the wife due beneuolence,
and likewise also the wife vnto the husband.
               
               Due beneuolence must be shewed
with a singular and entire affection one
towards another; and that three waies
principally.
               First, by the right and lawfull vse of
their bodies, or of the marriage-bed,
which is indeed an essentiall dutie of
mariage.
               The mariage-bed signifieth that solitarie
and secret societie, that is betweene
man and wife alone.
               And it is a thing of it owne nature
indifferent; neither good nor bad; and
so Paul numbereth it amongst indifferent
things, 1. Cor. 7. 27. Art thou bound
vnto a wife? seeke not to be loosed: art thou
loosed from a wife? seeke not a wife. Wherfore
the Church of Rome erreth two



contrarie waies. First, in that it maketh
mariage to be a Sacrament, and so euerie
action of it, to be of the owne nature
good. Secondly, in that they prohibite
mariage of certaine parties, and the reason
of the prohibition may seeme to be
this; that they thinke this secret comming
together of man and wife to be
filthines.Canon. Proposuisti, Distinct. 82. This was the sentence of Syricius,
that filthie Pope of Rome; who
determined that mariage was the vncleannesse
of the flesh, and to that purpose
abused the words of the Apostle,
Rom. 8. 8. affirming, that they which
are in the flesh, that is, in the estate of
Matrimonie, cannot please God. Yea and
after that mariage was condemned by
them, some began to detest and hate
women,Sozomen. lib. 3. cap. 16. as Ephraim the Syrian,Sess. 8. Canon. 9. 10. of whō
Ecclesiasticall stories make mention.
And the Councell of Trent is of the
same iudgement. For whereas it opposeth
mariage and chastitie; it plainly determineth
that in mariage there is no
chastitie.
               This comming together of man and
wife, although it be indifferent, yet by



the holy vsage thereof, it is made a holy
and vndefiled action, Hebr. 13. 4. Mariage
is honorable among all, and the bedde
vndefiled. And it is (as all other creatures
and ordinances of God are) sanctified
by the word & praier, 1. Tim. 4. 3.—Forbidding
to marry, &c. v. 4.—And nothing
ought to be refused:—for it is sanctified by
the word of God, & praier. In which place
it is to be obserued, how the Apostle
applieth the point of sanctification directly
to mariage.
               The word of God giueth direction
to married folkes two wayes. First, by
giuing them warrant, that they may
lawfully do this action; because whatsoeuer
is not done of faith (which faith
must be grounded on Gods word) is a
sin. Secondly, by prescribing the right
and holy manner of doing the same.
               The holy maner stands in these particulars.
               First, that it be done in moderation.
For euen in wedlocke excesse in lusts is
no better then plaine adulterie before
God.Ambros. lib. de Philosoph. citat. ab August. contr. Iulianum. lib. 2. This is the iudgement of the ancient
Church, that Intemperance, that



is, immoderate desire euen betweene
man and wife, is fornication.
               Secondly, that it be vsed in an holy
abstinence.
               Abstinence from this secret societie,
must be vsed in two cases.
               First, while the woman is in her
flowers, Leuit. 18. 19. Thou shalt not go
to a woman to vncouer her shame, as long as
shee is put apart for her disease. And it is
made one of the properties of a good
man, not to lie with a menstruous woman,
Ezek. 18. 6.
               
                  Secondly, in the time of a solemne
fast, when some grieuous calamitie is
imminent. Then they are to giue themselues
(by mutuall consent) to fasting
and prayer, 1. Cor. 7. 5. Defraud not one
another, except it be with consent for a time,
that you may giue your selues to fasting and
prayer: and againe come together, that Satan
tempt you not for your incontinencie.
2. Sam. 11. 11. Then Vriah answered Dauid,
The Arke, and Israel, and Iudah dwell
intents: and my Lord Ioab, and the seruants
of my Lord abide in the open fields:
shall I then go into mine house to eate and



drinke, and lie with my wife? By thy life,
and by the life of thy soule, I will not do this
thing. Zach. 12. 12. The familie of the house
of Dauid shall mourne apart, and their
wiues apart; the familie of the house of Nathan
apart, and their wiues apart, &c.
               
               
                  Next vnto the word, this action may
be sanctified by prayer, for a blessing
vpon it. Children are the gift of God,
and therfore married folkes are not only
to vse the meanes, but also to pray
for the obtaining of them, Psal. 113. 9.
He maketh the barren woman to dwell with
a familie, and to be a ioyfull mother of children.
Psal. 127. 3. Behold children are the
inheritance of the Lord, and the fruit of the
wombe his reward. Examples for this purpose
are these, Gen. 25. 21. Isaac prayed
vnto the Lord for his wife, because shee was
barren, and the Lord was intreated of him;
and Rebekah his wife conceiued. 1. Sam. 1.
26. 27. And she said, Oh my Lord, as thy
soule liueth, my Lord, I am the woman that
stood with thee here, praying vnto the Lord.
vers. 27. I prayed for this child, and the
Lord hath giuen me my desire, which I asked
of him.
               
                  
                  Now the fruits, which are reaped
and inioyed by this holy vsage of the
mariage bed, are three. I. The hauing of
a blessed seed. Deut. 28. 1. If thou shalt
obey diligently the voice of the Lord thy
God, &c. Blessed shall be the fruit of thy bodie,
and the fruit of thy ground. Which also
is called the seed of God, being begot
in an holy maner, Mal. 2. 15. And did not
he make one? yet had he abundance of Spirit:
And wherefore one? because he sought
a seed of God: therefore keepe your selues in
your spirit, and let none trespasse against the
wife of his youth. II. The preseruation
of the bodie in cleannesse, that it may
be a fit Temple for the holy Ghost to
dwell in, 1. Thess. 4. 3. 4. This is the will of
God, euen your sanctification, that euery
one of you should know how to possesse his
vessell in holines and honor, and not in the
lust of concupiscence, euen as the Gentiles
that know not God. III. The holy estate
of marriage is a liuely type of Christ
and his Church, and this communion
of married persons, is also a figure of
the coniunction that is betweene him,
and the faithfull, Hos. 2. 19. I will marrie



thee vnto me, for euer; yea I will marrie
the vnto me in righteousnes, in iudgement,
in mercie and in cōpassion: I will euen marrie
thee vnto me in faithfulnes, and thou
shalt know the Lord. Ephes. 5. 23. For the
husband is the wiues head, euen as Christ is
the head of the Church, and the same is the
Sauiour of his bodie.
               Heere some questions are to be resolued.
               
                  Case. I. Whether may mariage be
dissolued in the case of barrennesse?
               
                  Answ. No. For barrennesse is an
hidden infirmitie for the most part, and
which God hath many times cured, euen
when it seemed to be desperate, as
in Sarah. Again, the fruit of the wombe
is Gods blessing; and wholly dependeth
vpon him. Hee therefore that in
want of children, reiecteth his wife,
whom he hath receiued at the hands of
God, offereth wrong euen to God
himselfe.
               
                  Case II. What if either of the married
folkes commit fornication, or any
sinne of the same kind greater then
fornication, as Incest, Sodomie, lying



with beasts, or such like.
               
                  Answ. Adulterie and fornication
are most grieuous and open crimes,
which do breake the very bond and couenant
of mariage, Prou. 2. 17. and therfore
when they are certainly knowne
by such persons, they are at no hand to
be winked at, but the Magistrate is presently
to be informed of them. Howbeit,
if the innocent partie be willing
to receiue the adulterer againe, in regard
of his repentance; lest hee should
seeme to fauour and maintaine sin, and
to bee himselfe a practiser of vncleannesse,
he is to repaire to the Congregation,
and declare the whole matter to
the Minister, that he may vnderstand
the parties repentance, and desire of
forgiuenesse.
               And if the adulteresse hath conceiued,
and is in trauell, the husband to
auoid the imputation of hauing an
heire in bastardie, is to make relation to
the Church of the repentance of the adulteresse;
or to acquaint some certaine
persons therewith, not to the end that
she should be punished for the fact, but



that they may take notice of a child
cōceiued in adultery, whom afterward
he may lawfully put off, as none of his.
               The matter being knowne, the innocent
partie may require a diuorcement.
For adulterie is such a sin, as doth
quite break off not only the vse, but the
bond and couenant of mariage, Matth.
19. 9. I say therefore vnto you, that whosoeuer
shall put away his wife, except it be for
whoredome, and marrie another, committeth
adulterie, &c. And yet the same
bond may be continued, and grow vp
againe by the good will and consent of
the partie innocent, and consequently
they may be reconciled, and dwell together
still. 1. Sam. 25. 44. Now Saul had
giuen Michal his daughter Dauids wife,
to Phalti the sonne of Laish, which was of
Gallim. 2. Sam. 3. 14. Then Dauid sent
messengers to Ishbosheth Sauls sonne, saying,
Deliuer me my wife Michal, which I
married for an hundred foreskins of the
Philistims. The same course may be taken
in like cases by the innocent, specially
vpon the repentance of the guiltie
person. But yet euery man must be left



to his owne conscience, and none is to
bee compelled to take another, from
whom hee may iustly bee separated against
his will.
               Now in requiring of a diuorce, there
is an equall right and power in both
parties, so as the woman may require it
as well as the man; and he as wel as she.
The reason is, because they are equally
bound each to other, and haue also the
same interest in one anothers bodie;
prouided alwaies, that the man is to
maintaine his superioritie, and the woman
to obserue that modestie which
beseemeth her towards the man.
               After the diuorcement made, it shal
be lawful for the harmelesse partie, not
hauing the gift of continencie, vpon
leaue obtained of the Church, and the
Christian Magistrate, to marrie againe.
               But what then shall become of the
partie offending?
               
                  Answ. If vpon the hazard of his
Conscience in want of the remedie,
any libertie of second mariage, bee to
bee granted vnto him by the Church
or Ciuill Magistrate; (as indeed here in



England there is not;) diuers restraints,
in this Case, must be obserued.
               First, no such libertie is to be granted,
so long as the matter remaines vncertaine,
whether they may be reconciled,
specially while the partie innocent
liueth in single life. Secondly, it
must euidently appeare, that the said
offending partie hath earnestly rpented
him of his sin, before he can either
be receiued into the Church, or admitted
to a second mariage. Thirdly, this
liberty is not to be granted him either
presently, or vnaduisedly; but vpon frequent
and serious admonition, rather
to giue himselfe to mourning and lamentation,
and still to remaine alone,
then to desire againe to enioy the benefit
of that state, which he hath alreadie
so shamefully abused.
               So much of the first way of performance
of due beneuolence.
               The second way is, by cherishing one
another: Ephes. 5. 29. No man euer hated
his owne flesh, but nourisheth and cherisheth
it, as Christ also doth the Church. This
cherishing is the performing of any duties,



that tend to the preseruing of the
liues one of another. Wherefore they
are freely to cōmunicate their goods,
their coūsel, their labors each to other;
for the good of themselues and theirs.
               
                  The third way is, by an holy kind of
reioicing and solacing themselues each
with other, in a mutuall declaration of
the signes and tokens of loue and kindnesse.
Prou. 5. 18. Reioyce with the wife of
thy youth: vers. 19. Let her be as the louing
Hind, and pleasant wild goat: let her breasts
satisfie thee at all times, and delight in her
loue continually. Cantic. 1. 1. Let him kisse
me with the kisses of his mouth, for thy loue
is better them wine. Gen. 26. 8. So after he
had bin there a long time, Abimelek King
of the Philistims, looked out at a window,
and loe, hee saw Isaak sporting with Rebekah
his wife: Then Abimelek called
Isaak and said; Loe, shee is of a suretie thy
wife. Esay 62. 7. As a yong man marrieth
a virgin, so shall thy sonnes marrie thee; and
as a Bridegroome is glad of the Bride, so
shall thy God reioyce ouer thee.
               This reioycing and delight is more
permitted to the man, then to the woman;



and to them both, more in their
yong yeares, then in their old age.
            
            
               CHAP. 11.
               Of the Husband.
               
                  MArried folkes are either
husbād or wife.
               The husband is he
which hath authoritie
ouer the wife;
hereupon in Scripture
he is called the guide of her youth,
Prou. 2. 17. and they twaine being but
one flesh, he is also the head ouer his
wife.
               
               The duties of the husband towards
the wife, are these:
               
                  I. To loue her as himselfe: Eph. 5. 33.
Let euery one loue his wife euen as himselfe.
Gen. 24. 67. Afterward Isaak brought her
vnto the tent of Sarah his mother; and hee
tooke Rebekah and she was his wife, and he
loued her: so Isaak left mourning for his
mother. Note, how the loue of the husband
to the wife, mitigates sorrow for
the death of the mother.
               
               
                  
                  He is to shew this loue in two things:
First in protecting her from danger,
Gen. 20. 16. And vnto Sarah he said, behold
I haue giuen 1000. shekels of siluer vnto
thy brother: behold he is the couering of
thine eies amongst all that are with thee. Let
it be knowne amongst all, & be thou instructed.
1. Sam. 30. 5. Dauids two wiues were
taken prisoners also, Ahinoam the Izreelite,
and Abigail the wife of Nabal the
Carmelite: v. 8. Then Dauid asked counsell
of the Lord saying; Shall I follow after
this companie,? shall I ouertake them? And
hee answered him, Follow, for thou shalt
surely ouertake them, and recouer all. Secondly,
in regarding her estate as his
owne, and prouiding maintenance for
her, both for his life time, and as much
as he may, for time to come after his
death. Ephes. 5. 28. So ought men to loue
their wiues, as their owne bodies: he that
loueth his wife loueth himselfe; vers. 29. For
no man yet hated his owne flesh, but nourisheth
it, &c. Exod. 21. 10. If he take him another
wife, he shall not diminish her food,
her rayment, and recompence of her virginitie.
Ruth. 3. 9. Vnto whom he said, who



art thou? which said; I am Ruth thine
handmaid, spread therefore the wing of thy
garment ouer thine handmaid; for thou art
the kinsman.
               II. To honor his wife: 1. Pet. 3. 7.
Giuing honor to the woman.
               
               This honor stands in three things:
First, in making account of her, as his
companion, or yoke-fellow. For this
cause, the woman, when she was created,
was not takē out of the mans head,
because she was not made to rule ouer
him; nor out of his feet, because God
did not make her subiect to him as a seruant;
but out of his side, to the end that
man should take her as his mate. Secōdly,
in a wise & patiēt bearing or couering
of her infirmities, as anger, waywardnes
and such like, in respect of the
weaknes of her sexe, 1. Pet. 3. 7. Giuing
honor to the woman, as vnto the weaker
vessell, seeing yee are heires together of the
grace of life, that your prayers bee not hindred.
Thirdly, by suffering himselfe
sometimes to be admonished or aduised
by her. It was Gods commandement
to Abraham concerning Sarah his



wife; Let it not be grieuous in thy sight for
the child, and for thy bond-woman: in all
that Sarah shall say vnto thee, heare her
voice; For in Isaak shall thy seed be called,
Gen. 21. 12. Thus Elkanah was willing
to subscribe vnto his wife Annaes aduice,
for her tarrying at home till the
child was weaned, 1. Sam. 1. 23. And Elkanah
her husband said vnto her, do what
seemeth thee best: tarrie vntill thou hast
weaned him: only the Lord accomplish his
word. Hereupon the Heathen Philosopher
said,Arist. Ethic. lib. 8. 
                  That the master of the familie
exerciseth (after a sort) a power Tyrannical
ouer his seruants, a power Regall ouer his
children; because Kings are fathers of their
Cōmon-weales: but in respect of his wife, he
exerciseth a power Aristocraticall, not after
his owne will, but agreeable to the honor and
dignitie of the married estate; and consequently,
that he ought not in modestie
to challenge the priuiledge of prescribing
and aduertising his wife in al matters
domesticall, but in some to leaue
her, to her owne will and iudgement.
               Heere question is moued, whether
the husband may correct the wife?
               
                  
                  Answ. Though the husband be the
wiues head, yet it seemeth he hath no
power nor libertie granted him in this
regard. For we reade not in the Scriptures,
any precept or example to warrant
such practise of his authoritie. He
may reproue & admonish her in word
only, if he seeth her in fault. For, thus
we reade, that Iacob censured his wife,
being impatient, euen in anger, Gen.
30. 2. Am I in Gods stead, which hath withholden
from thee, the fruit of the wombe?
And Iob reproued his wife, Iob 2. 10.
Thou speakest like a foolish woman. What?
Shall we receiue good at the hand of God,
and not receiue euill? But hee may not
chastise her either with stripes, or stroks.
The reason is plaine; Wiues are their
husbands mates; and they two be one
flesh. And no man will hate, much lesse
beat his owne flesh, but nourisheth and
cherisheth it, Ephes. 5. 29. Againe, it is
the commandement of God, that man
should not trespasse against the wife of
his youth, Malac. 2. 15. Chrysostome saith,In 1. Cor. 11. Homil. 26.
                  It is the greatest reproch for any man, that
can bee, to beate his wife. Plutarch in the



life of Cato the Censor, affirmeth, that
he which smiteth his wife, doth all one, as
if he should lay violent hands vpon the sacred
images of the gods, which was counted
an high degree of offence among
the Heathen.
               It is alledged, Husbands are cōmanded
so to loue their wiues, as Christ
doth his Church; now Christ chastiseth
his Church, with strokes; & therefore
so may the husband his wife.
Answ. As Christ doth entirely loue his
Church, so hee may also chastise the
same, because hee is not only the husband,
but also absolute Lord and King
of his Church: so is not the husband
absolute ouer the wife.
               But his authority ouer the wife, is after
a sort ciuill, as is the authoritie of
the Magistrate ouer his people. Ans. It
is not so. For the Magistrate hath in his
hand the power of the sword, by which
power he inflicteth punishment in case
of offence. But the husband can challenge
to himselfe no such power:
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   yea it
is flatly forbidden in the Ciuil law, that
he should scourge or strike his wife.
               
                  
Neuerthelesse, if she grow to extremities,
and be desperately peruerse, so as
there be no hope of amendment; then
the Magistrate may be informed, who
to preuent scandals, and to prouide for
publike peace, both ought and may assigne
vnto her necessary correction, and
punishment according to her desert.
Now the husband that hath a wife so
stubborne and peeuish, must beare it, if
it may be borne, as the portion of his
crosse laid vpon him by God. And in
this case, if he be impatient, he may in
some sort be pardoned and pitied, but
he is not wholly to be excused.
            
            
               CHAP. 12.
               Of the Wife.
               
                  THe wife is the other
married person, who
being subiect to her
husband, yeeldeth obedience
vnto him.
               Touching the subiection
of the wife, the word of God mē
                  tioneth
it in sundrie places. Rom. 7. 2.



                  The woman which is in subiection to the
man, is bound by the law to the man, while
he liueth. Ephes. 5. 24. As the Church is in
subiection to Christ, euen so let the wiues bee
to their husbands in euery thing. Colos. 3.
18. Wiues submit your selues vnto your husbands,
as it is comely in the Lord. 1. Tim. 2.
12. I permit not a woman—to vsurpe authoritie
ouer the man. And it was a law
established by God immediately after
the fal, Gen. 3. 16. Vnto the woman he said,
I wil greatly increase, &c. and thy desire shal
be subiect to thine husband, and he shall rule
ouer thee. Indeed the daughter, according
to the Ciuill law, euen when shee
is married isIn potestate patris. 
                  in the power of her father,
and not of her husband. But this is directly
against the law of Moses, and crosseth
the law of Nature, Leuit. 22. 12. 13.
Numb. 30. 13.
               Now the duties of the wife, are principally
two.
               The first is, to submit her selfe to her
husband; and to acknowledge and reuerence
him as her head in all things.
Gen. 20. 16. Likewise Abimelech said vnto
Sarah; Behold thy brother, that is, thy



husband, whom thou callest thy brother,
is the vaile of thine eyes to all that are
with thee. As if he should say, Thy husband
is thy head, and hath power ouer thee,
and thou oughtest to reuerence him. For of
ancient times, the wife was couered
with a vaile in the presence of her husband,
in token of subiection to him.
Thus Rebekah at the sight of Isaak tooke
a vaile, and couered her head therewith,
Gen. 24. 65. 1. Cor. 11. 3. The man is the
womans head. Ephes. 5. 22. Wiues submit
your selues vnto your husbands, as vnto the
Lord; for the husband is the wiues head, euen
as Christ is the head of his Church. The
reason hereof is good. For the wife enioyeth
the priuiledges of her husband,
and is graced by his honor and estimation
amongst men. His Nobilitie maketh
her noble, though otherwise shee
is base and meane; as contrariwise, his
basenesse and low degree, causeth her,
though shee bee by birth noble and
honorable, to bee by estate base and
meane.
               The second dutie is, to be obedient
vnto her husband in all things; that is,



wholly to depend vpon him, both in
iudgement and will. For looke as the
Church yeelds obedience to Christ her
head, and yeelds her selfe to be commanded,
gouerned, and directed by
him, so ought the woman to the man.
So Sarah is said to obey Abraham, and to
giue him the termes of obedience, Shee
called him Lord, or Sir, 1. Pet. 3. 6. Hence
it followeth, that the woman is not to
take libertie of wandring, and straying
abroad from her owne house, without
the mans knowledge & cōsent. 2. King.
4. 22. Then she called to her husband and
said, Send with me, I pray thee, one of the
yong men, and one of the asses; for I will
haste to the man of God, and come againe.
Againe, that shee is to follow her husband,
when hee flitteth or departeth
from place to place, vnlesse hee forsake
either her or Christ. To this purpose
Paul saith hee had power to lead about a
wife, being a sister, as well as the rest of the
Apostles, 1. Cor. 9. 5. Thus Sarah went
with Abraham into Egypt, Gen. 12. 11.
and out of Egypt, Gen. 13. 1. and to Gerar
to soiourne there, Gen. 20. 1. 2. 3. Thus



the wiues of Iacob departed with him,
from their father Laban, Gen. 31. 17.
               
                  Contrary to these duties, are the sins
of wiues; To be proud, to be vnwilling
to beare the authority of their husbāds;
to chide and braule with bitternes; to
forsake their houses, &c. Prou. 27. 15.
A continuall dropping in the day of raine,
and a contentious woman are alike. vers. 16.
He that hideth her, hideth the winde, & she
is as the oyle in his right hand, that vttereth
it selfe. Exod. 4. 26. Then Zipporah said,
O bloodie husband; because of the Circumcision.
It was the fault of the Leuites
Concubine, Iudg. 19. 2. Who played the
whore, and went away from him vnto her
fathers house to Bethlem Iudah, and there
continued the space of foure moneths. It was
the sinne of Queene Vashi, who refused to
come at the Kings word, which he had giuen
in charge to the Eunuches: therefore
the King was verie angrie, and his warth
kindled in him, Ester 1. 12. Lastly, to be
a cause of griefe to their kindred. Thus
the proud wiues of Esau, the daughters
of the Hittites, were a griefe of mind to
Isaak and Rebekah, Gen. 26. 35. & 27. 46.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 13.
               Of the Parent.
               
                  HItherto hath been treated of
the first Couple, whereof
the family cōsisteth, namely,
of married folkes. Now
follow the other; and they are of two
sorts; either such as, whereby the familie
is increased, and multiplied; or such
as are helpes thereunto.
               Those whereby the familie is inlarged,
are also of two sorts; Parents and
Children.
               Parents are they which haue power
and authoritie ouer children.
               The duties of parents are especially
two; One to bring vp their children;
The other to bestow them, when they
haue brought them vp.
               Touching Education or bringing vp
of children, the parents care must bee,
both that they may liue, and also that
they may liue well, Ephes. 6. 4.
               Touching the preseruation of the
life of the child, there are many duties



required of the Parents, specially foure.
First, the mother is her selfe to giue the
infant sucke, and to wrap it vp in swadling
clothes. Paul cōmends it for a note
of a good wife, to nurse her owne children,
1. Tim. 5. 10. Thus Sarah gaue sucke to
Isaak, Gen. 21. 7. Anna nursed Samuel,
1. Sam. 1. 22. Dauid in likelihood was
nursed by his mother, Psal. 22. 9. Thou
gauest me hope euen at my mothers breasts.
And our Sauiour Christ was also nursed
by Marie his mother, Luk. 11. 27.
and swadled, Luk. 2. 7. Now the reason
hereof is plaine. God hath giuen milke
to women that beare children, & hath
so appointed, that no meat is more naturall
to the child, then the mothers
milke. And nature it selfe teacheth this
in the course of other creatures. The
earth nourisheth that which it bringeth
forth. The fruit which the tree beareth
is fed by the sap that comes from
the root therof. Yea amongst the bruit
beasts, euen those that be most sauage,
as the Tigres, do giue sucke vnto the
yong ones which they bring forth.
               Yet in case of want of health, or abilitie,



or any other iust impediment, the
mother may in equity beforborne, and
the child committed vnto a nurse. And
so we reade that Rebekah the daughter
of Bethuel, and afterward the wife of
Isaak had a nurse, Genes. 24. 59. whose
name was Deborah, Gen. 35. 8. And Pharaohs
daughter in a case of necessitie,
committed Moses to be nursed of an Hebrew
woman, whom she tooke not to
be his mother, but a stranger; and her
fact was allowed by God, Exod. 2. 7. 9.
               The second dutie of the Parent is, to
prouide for his child meate, drinke, and
clothing. Our Sauiour Christ saith, that
Parents euen by the light of nature,
though they be euill, will not denie or
withhold necessarie food from their
children: Mat. 7. 9. 10. What man is there
among you, that if his son aske him bread,
will giue him a stone, or if he aske a fish, will
giue him a scorpion? And Paul saith, If
there be any that prouideth not for his owne,
and namely for them of his houshold, hee
denieth the faith, and is worse then an Infidell,
1. Tim. 5. 8.
               The third dutie is, when God giueth



abilitie & meanes, to lay vp some thing
for the future maintenance of the child.
2. Cor. 12. 14.—for the children ought
not to lay vp for the fathers, but the fathers
for the children. Prou. 19. 14. House and
riches are the inheritance of the fathers.
               
               The fourth is, to obserue both the
inclination, and the naturall gifts of bodie
and mind that are in the child, and
accordingly to bestow it in some honest
calling & course of life. Prou. 20. 11.
A child is knowne by his actions, whether
his worke be pure and right. In the Ecclesiasticall
historie,Ruffin. Eccles. hist. lib. 1. c. 14. written by Ruffinus, it
is recorded, that Alexander Bishop of
Alexandria, saw a far off, in a place neare
to the sea, a companie of children playing
together, and in their play imitating
himselfe in sundrie Ministeriall
actions. And whē he had a while viewed
them, he perceiued that they examined
& baptised one another, according
to the solemne order vsed in y• Cōgregation:
which thing, whē he had made
some of his Clergie acquainted withall,
and taken order that the children
should be sent for, and brought before



him, he demanded of them, what sport
they vsed, and in what manner they
played one with another. The children
at first, for feare, denied what they had
done, yet vpon further examination
they confessed, that they had made Athanasius
(who afterward became Bishop
of the place) their Bishop, and that
hee instructed and baptised sundrie of
their companie. He further asked both
Athanasius himselfe, and those which
were said to haue been baptised, what
questions he asked them, and what answeres
they gaue; and perceiuing by
their speeches, that they had framed
themselues, though in sporting maner,
to the Church-proceedings in those
actions; vpon conference had with his
Clergie, hee determined, that those
which had first been asked, and had giuen
answere fully, according to the
forme vsed in that Church, and thereupon
baptised, should not be rebaptised.
And for Athanasius and the other
children, which had done the part of
Ministers in their kind, he sent for their
parents, and gaue them great charge



that they should be brought vp in learning
and religion, that so they might in
time be fit for the publike Ministerie.
The like course we reade to haue been
taken by the Heathen, for iudgement
of the inclination and towardnesse of
their children.Nazianz. epist. ad Eudoxam. The Athenians made a
law, that before children were bestowed
in any calling, they should bee first
brought into a publike place, where Instruments
belonging to all sorts of
trades were laid; and look in what kind
of Instrument any of them tooke most
delight, the child was thought to bee
most fit for the trade, whereunto that
Instrument belonged, and afterward
applied to the same with good successe.
               Now the Parents first and principall
care must be for the Church; that those
of their children which haue the most
pregnant wit, and be indued with the
best gifts, be consecrated vnto God, and
brought vp in the studie of the Scriptures,
to serue afterward in the Ministerie
of the Church. Thus Anna dedicated
Samuel her son vnto God by vow,
1. Sam. 1. 11. And shee vowed a vow, and



said, O Lord of Hostes, if thou wilt—giue
vnto thine handmaid a man-child, thē I wil
giue him vnto the Lord all the daies of his
life. And she did according to her vow,
and the Lord blessed Samuel her sonne,
who in processe of time became a great
Prophet.
               The next point of Education of children,
is to prouide that they may liue
well, and lead a godly life. To this purpose
Parents must do three things.
               First, they are to be carefull, that the
child, so soone as may bee, after it is
borne, bee admitted into the true
Church of God by Baptisme, and haue
a fit name giuen vnto it.
               
                  Secondly, they are to endeuour to
sow the seeds of godlinesse and religion
in the heart of the child, so soone as it
comes to the vse of reason and vnderstanding;
and as it growes in yeares, so
care must be had that it grow in knowledge
and grace. To this purpose is the
vow and promise made in Baptisme,
which parents are bound to call vpon
the child to remember, when it comes
to yeares. It was the godly care of Timothies



                  parents, 2. Tim. 3. 14. But continue
thou in the things which thou hast learned,
knowing of whom thou hast learned
them, vers. 15. And that thou hast knowne
the holy Scriptures of a child, which are able
to make thee wise vnto saluation, through
the faith which is in Christ Iesus. This was
the commandement of God to the parents
of his people, Deut. 6. 7. Thou shalt
rehearse these words which I command thee
continually to thy children, and shalt talke
of them whē thou tarriest in the house. And
vers. 20. When thy sonne shall aske thee in
time to come, saying; What meane these Testimonies,
and Ordinances, and Lawes,
which the Lord our God hath commanded
you? Then thou shalt say vnto thy sonne; We
were Pharaohs bondmen in Egypt, &c.
This was obserued by the Israelites in
the ages 
                        •
                     cceeding: Psal. 44. 1. We haue
heard with our eares, O God: our fathers
haue told vs the workes that thou hast done
in their daies in old time.
               Thirdly, the first instruction of children
in learning & religion, must be so
ordered, that they may take it with delight.
For which purpose, they may be



sometimes allowed in moderate maner
to play, and solace themselues in recreatiōs
fitting for their yeares. And if they
do amisse in either, they are to bee restrained
by the bridle of discipline. First
by reproofe in word, and when that wil
not helpe, by the rodde of correction.
Zach. 8. 5. The streets of the citie shall bee
full of boyes and girles, playing in the streets
thereof. Prou. 29. 15. The rod and correction
giue wisdome, but a child set at libertie
makes his mother ashamed. vers. 17. Correct
thy son, and he will giue thee rest, and giue
pleasures to thy soule. Hebr. 12. 9. We haue
had the fathers of our bodies which correct
vs, and we gaue them reuerence.
               
               Yet in this point, two extreames are
carefully to be auoided; That the Parent
be not either too seuere, or too indulgent
to the child. For seue
                     •
                  itie Paul
giues his rule, Ephes. 6. 3. Parents prouoke
not your children to anger, that is, by
too much austeritie in gouernmēt. For
lenitie, we haue old Eli his example,
1. Sam. 2. 23. And he said vnto them, Why
do yee such things? for of all this people, I
heare euill reports of you. Doe no more my



sonnes, &c. So much for Education.
               
                  The second general dutie of parents,
is the bestowing of their children; This
bestowing is, when they knowing their
children fit for mariage, not to haue the
gift of continencie, do vse their best indeuour
to prouide matches for them
in time, or at least, do aduise them therunto
by themselues or by their friends:
1. Cor. 7. 36. If any man thinke it vncomelie
for his virgin to passe the flower of her
age, and need so require—let them bee
married. vers. 38. he that giueth her to mariage,
doth well. Ierem. 26. 6. Take yee
wiues—and take wiues for your sonnes,
and giue your daughters to husbands, &c.
Gen. 28. 1. Isaak called Iacob and blessed
him, and charged him and said vnto him;
Take not a wife of the daughters of Canaan:
Arise, get thee to Padan Aram—and
thence take thee a wife of the daughters of
Laban thy mothers brother. Iudg. 14. 2.
Sampson came and told his father and his
mother, and said, I haue seene a woman in
Timnah of the daughters of the Philistims;
now therefore giue me her to wife.
               This dutie is now adaies carelessely



neglected of Parents; and the fruit therof
is dangerous. For hence it comes to
passe, that their children oftentimes do
either commit whoredome, or vndertake
wicked and vngodly mariages.
               In the choice of a husband or wife,
the Parents ought to haue a greater respect
vnto pietie and wisedome, then
vnto beautie and riches, or any other
outward blessings. Yet where they all
concurre, the partie so qualified is the
more thankfully to be entertained. Vpon
these grounds the Priest of Prince
of Midian, gaue his daughter Zipporah
to Moses, and Moses agreed to take her,
Exod. 2. 19. A man of Egypt deliuered vs
from the Philistims, and also drew vs water
enough, & watered the sheepe—And
Moses agreed to dwell with the man, who
gaue vnto Moses Zipporah his daughter.
Iosu. 15. 16. Then Caleb said, He that smiteth
Kiriath-sepher, and taketh it, euen to
him will I giue Achsah my daughter to wife.
Yea it is a sinne to marrie only for beautie,
without consideration of the better
things. Thus the old world sinned, whē
                  the sonnes of God saw the daughters of men



that they were faire, and tooke them wiues of
all that they liked, Gen. 6. 2. and Sampson,
who only vpon the sight of the woman
in Timnah, of the daughters of the
Philistims, without further inquirie,
desired that she might be giuen him for
his wife, Iudg. 14. 2.
               Againe, it is meet that parēts should
deale moderately with their children
in this case, and not vndertake at any
hand to force and compel them to marrie
this or that partie. This was the iust
commendation of Rebekahs parents,
who though they were Idolaters, yet
had that regard of equity, that they first
called her and asked her consent, before
they sent her away with Abrahams seruant,
to be maried to Isaak, Gen. 24. 58.
Now in case the Parents faile in their
dutie in this regard, the son or daughter
may lawfully declare the matter
first to their kinsfolke, and afterward (if
need be) to the Minister, or Magistrate,
and sue for redresse by their means and
direction.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 14.
               Of the Sonne.
               
                  THe sonne is he, who is
in subiection to his
parents.
               The duties of a son
to bee performed to
his parents, are principally
two.
               
                  First to yeeld them obedience, whether
they be his naturall parents or otherwise,
as his step-father & step-mother,
and that while he liueth. Eph. 6. 1.
Children obey your parents in the Lord; for
this is right. Luke 2. 51. Then hee went
downe with them, and came to Nazareth,
and was subiect to them. Exod. 18. 19. Moses
father in law said vnto him, Heare
now my voice, I will giue thee counsell, and
God shall be with thee. Ruth 3. 5. And Ruth
said vnto Naomi her mother in law, All
that thou biddest me, I wil do. Iob 1. 5. And
whē the daies of their bāquetting were gone
about, Iob sent and sanctified them.
               
                  
This obedience must shew it selfe in
two things.
               First in the choyce of a lawfull calling,
wherein the child is to be ordered
and appointed at the discretion of the
parent.
               Secondly in mariage: For in that, the
parent is the principall agent and disposer
of the child. Now although his
authoritie be not so great, as that the
child is to be forced and compelled by
him; yet the reuerent and dutifull respect
which the child ought to beare
towards him, ought to be a strong inducement,
not to dissent, or renounce
his aduice, without great and waightie
cause. Yea the child must endeuour by
all manner of dutifull cariage to ouercome,
or at least to mitigate his parents
seueritie in that behalfe.
               Now for the daughters: They must
yeeld obedience to their parents in all
Domesticall labours, that they may be
skilfull in houshold affaires. Thus did
the seuen daughters of the Priest of
Midian, accustome themselues to draw
water, and fill the troughes to water



their fathers sheepe, Exod. 2. 16. Thus Rebekah
was seene to come out of her fathers
house, with her pitcher vpon her
shoulder, and to go downe with it to
the well to fill it, and giue drinke to her
fathers Camels, Gen. 24. 16. 17.
               The second dutie of the sonne, is to
recompence his fathers loue, and care
ouer him, by relieuing him in case of
want, if God giue abilitie, with food
and rayment, and other necessaries.
Herein children must deale with their
parents, as the brood of the Storke is reported
to do with her, by feeding her
when she is old; wherein they doe no
more but what shee before hath done
vnto them. It is Pauls counsell, that childred
& nephewes should recompence
the kindnes of their kindred in the first
place, 1. Tim. 5. 4. and therefore to their
parents, the head & foūdation of their
kindred. When Ioseph was in prosperitie,
and his father Iacob in want, he first
gaue him corne freely; and afterwards
sent for him to Egypt, and there prouided
for him; in so much as the text saith
of him, that he nourished his father and



his brethren, and all his fathers house-hold
with bread, Euen as the mother puts
meat into the childs mouth, Gen. 47. 12.
When Naomi the step-mother of Ruth
was of great yeares, and her strength
spent, Ruth gathered corne in the haruest
for reliefe of them both. Yea when
Boaz gaue her to eate and to drinke, she
reserued part of her victuals, & brought
it home with her gleanes to refresh her
mother, Ruth 2. 14. 18.
               The necessitie of the performance of
these duties is so great, that if the sonne
neglecteth them, and doth the contrarie,
by ill vsage of his parent, either in
word or deed, he is worthie of death,
euen by Moses law: Exod. 21. 15. He that
smiteth his father or his mother, shall die the
death.
               
               The law of the first borne of a mans
children, that he should haue a greater
portion of his fathers goods, then any
of the rest of his brethren, is perpetuall,
and admits no exception, but only in
the case of notorious wickednes. Deut.
21. 17. He shall acknowledge the son of the
hated for the first borne, & giue him a double



portion of all that he hath, for he is the
first of his strength, and to him belongeth
the right of the first borne. This was the
law; yet we reade that Ruben lost this
prerogatiue, by reason of his incest, and
Iudah the fourth sonne of Iacob had the
dignitie of the first borne, Gen. 49. 8.
Thou Iudah, thy brethren shall prayse
thee—thy fathers sonnes shall bow downe
vnto thee.
               
               In the Church of the old Testament,
the priuiledge of the first borne was
three-fold; the first of gouernment and
royaltie, the second of Priesthood, the
third of the double portion. And it is
probable that this was for the most part
Ceremoniall, and was accomplished
and determined in Christ, who was the
Image of the inuisible God, & the first borne
of euery creature, Colos. 1. 15.
               Heere two questions are propounded.
               
                  Quest. I. Whether is it lawfull for
the sonne to make a vow belonging either
to religion, or to ciuill conuersation,
without the consent of the parent?
               
                  Answ. A vow so made is not of force



to bind the child, but by the Law of nature
& common equitie, is to be made
void. For it is a ruled case, that he which
is not his owne man, that is to say, at his
owne libertie, but vnder the power of
another, cannot bind himselfe. Againe,
the authoritie of the parent by the law
of God is great; For it alloweth the father
to make void the vow of the child
pertaining to Gods worship, Numb.
30. 6.
               
                  Quest. II. Whether is the consent
of the parents to be required in the second
mariages of their children?
               
                  Answ. 1. Of ancient times, both by
C. de Nuptijs. L. vidua, & L. in cōiunctione.Ciuill lawes, & also by Imperial constitutions,
it was prouided that no widowes,
though made free by their former
mariages, should make any contract
againe, without the good will of
their parents. 2. Consent in this case,
though it be not absolutely necessarie, yet
it is to be thought fit and conuenient, because
children in some regards exempted
from parents authoritie, doe owe
notwithstanding the dutie of honor
vnto them, by Gods expresse commandement,



Exod. 20. 12. and consequently
ought to testifie the same, by being
ordered and aduised by them in some
sort, euen at the after-bestowing of
themselues. Hence it is, thatBeza de repud. & diuort. sect. de spōsalibus abs
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      consensu parfactis. later Diuines
haue holden vpon good ground;
That the espousals of widowes, who
haue some more libertie, then the child
first married, being made without their
parents knowledge, cannot but incurre
iust reprehension, howsoeuer they may
stand in force without it.
            
            
               CHAP. 15.
               Of the Master.
               
                  NExt vnto parents and children,
wherby the family
is increased, is a second
sort of couples, which
are helpes therunto. And
they are Masters and seruants.
               The Master is a member in the familie,
which hath power and beareth
rule ouer the seruant. And his dutie
stands principally in three things.
               
                  
First, To make a good choice of his
seruants; which is then done, when he
inquireth first after such as feare God,
and be willing to serue him. Paul makes
the seruice and feare of God the maine
ground of true obedience in seruants,
Ephes. 6. 5. 6. 7. Colos. 3. 22. It was the
rule of Dauids choice, Psal. 101. 6. Hee
that walketh in the perfect way, he shall serue
me. Abrahams chiefe seruāt of his house,
was a man that feared God, as appeareth,
in that he made conscience of his
oath, Gen. 24. 2. 3. and prayed also for
successe in the busines whereabout he
was sent. Gen. 24. 12. O Lord God of my
Master Abraham, I beseech thee send mee
good speed this day, and shew mercie to my
Master Abraham. Cornelius of Caesarea,
the Captaine of the Italian band, had a
souldier that daily attended on him,
who feared God, and seruants also beside
him, to whom hee made knowne
the heauenly vision which hee saw,
Act. 10. 7.
               Secondly, To enioyne them labour,
and not to require more of them, then
their strength will beare. The master is



to rule ouer the seruant in iustice. And
then is his cōmandement vniust, whē it
will not stād with the course of nature,
with the abilitie of his seruant, or with
the word of God. Therefore he is to require
labour at their hāds proportionable
to their strength, & yeeld thē sometimes
intercession & rest. Leuit. 25. 46.
Ouer your brethen the children of Israel, ye
shall not rule ouer one another with crueltie.
1. Pet. 3. 8. Bee pitifull, bee courteous, one
beare with another. And for the furtherance
of busines, it is conuenient that
the master be oftentimes present with
the seruāts in their works. Prou. 27. 23.
Be diligent to know the state of thy flock, and
take heed to thy heards. The good matron
ouerseeth the waies of her houshold, Prou.
31. 27.Arist. Oeconom. 7. A man of Libya being asked,
what it was that might make a horse
fat; he answered, The masters eye.
               
               Thirdly, To recompence the diligence
and paines of his seruant, and
that three waies.
               First, by giuing him his due of meat
and drinke for the present. The good
matron giueth the portion to her houshold,



and the ordinary to her maids, Prou. 31. 15.
               
                  Secondly, by paying him his hire in
the end of his seruice: The labourer is
worthie of his wages. Luk. 10. 7. Well done,
good seruant and faithfull; thou hast been
faithfull in little, I will make thee ruler ouer
much; enter into thy masters ioy. Mat. 25. 21.
               
                  Heere three caueats are to be obserued.
I. That the wages be proportionable
to the work. II. That it be paid
in due time, without deferring. So the
Master of the vine-yard, when euen was
come, called his seruants together, to
giue thē their hire, Mat. 20. 8. III. That
the seruāt be not defrauded of any part
of his due. For this is a crying sin; Deut.
24. 15. Thou shalt giue him his hire for his
day, neither shall the Sunne go downe vpon
it—lest hee crie against thee vnto the
Lord, and it bee sinne vnto thee. Iam. 5. 4.
Behold, the hire of the labourers which haue
reaped your fields, which is kept backe by
fraud, crieth, and the cries of them which
haue reaped, are entred into the eares of the
Lord of hosts.
               Thirdly, if the seruant in time of his
seruice be sicke, the masters care must



be by all means possible to procure his
recouery. Equitie must be the rule in
these cases; and masters are to do to their
seruants that which is iust and equall. Col.
4. 1. Now the seruant haplie falles sicke
by and in his seruice, and his health
yeelds not only profit to his master, but
incouragement also to himselfe. The
good Centurion in case of his seruants
sicknesse, tooke the best course to haue
him restored, Matth. 8. 6.
            
            
               CHAP. 16.
               Of the Seruant.
               
                  THe Seruant, is a person
in the family subiect
vnto his master.
               
                  The dutie of a seruāt
is, faithfully and diligētly
to demeane himselfe
in the affaires of his master, and to
doe seruice vnto him as vnto Christ,
though he be froward and hard-harted.
Titus 2. 9. Let seruants be subiect to their
masters, and please them in all things, not
answering againe. Ephes. 6. 5. Seruants, be



obedient to them that are your masters according
to the flesh, with feare & trembling,
in singlenes of your hearts, as vnto Christ.
Col. 3. 22. Thus Iacob serued Laban,
Gen. 31. 38. This twentie yeares haue I bin
with thee; thine ewes and thy goates haue
not cast their yong, and the rammes of the
flocke haue I not eaten, &c.
               
               Contrariwise, the seruant must take
heed that he doe not his masters businesse
negligently, or for fashion sake, or
with eye-seruice as a man-pleaser; that
in case of rebuke or controlement, he
answere not againe; lastly, that hee be
trustie & withhold his hands from picking,
and his heart from deceiuing his
master.
               Seruants are of two sorts; either free,
or bond-seruants.
               A free-seruant is he, whom his master
hireth for wages to do him seruice.
To him belongs the iust paiment of his
hire, and in case of offence, them master
hath authoritie to censure and correct
him, prouided that in the execution
thereof, respect bee had vnto his age,
and the correction be vsed with moderation,



as if hee were his sonne.
               A bond-seruant, is a seruant bought
for money, and is commonly called a
slaue. Touching this sort, a question is
moued, whether a Christian may with
safe conscience, haue and vse a man as
his slaue?
               
                  Answ. The power & right of hauing
bond-men, in those countries where it
is established by positiue lawes, may
stand with good cōscience, if it be vsed
with moderation. That authoritie in
this behalfe is moderate, wherein these
seuen caueats be obserued.
               I. That the master haue not ouer his
seruant the power of life and death; for
this takes away the lawful power of the
Magistrate, to whom only the Lord
hath committed the sword of iustice.
               II. That there be not libertie granted
him, to vse his seruant at his owne
will and pleasure in all things; for this
was not granted by the law of God to
his owne people: Exod. 21. 26. If a man
smite his seruant or his maid in the eye, and
hath perished it, he shall let him go free for
his eye: Also if he smite out his seruants or



his maids tooth, he shall let him go out free
for his tooth.
               
               III. That the power be not enlarged
to the commanding of things against
piety or iustice; for in these cases
a man must rather obey God then
man, Act. 4. 19.
               IV. That masters do not take libertie
to make separation of those their seruants
that be married, the one from the
other, or of those that be parents from
their children; considering that God
himselfe hath made these societies, and
ioyned such persons together, and
therefore man may not separate them.
               V. That the masters do not take libertie
to put ouer their seruants to vngodly
and vnbelieuing masters, for that
is an vnkind and cruell libertie, & may
be an apparāt occasion to make the seruant
fall away from religion, and renounce
the true God.
               
                  VI. That they do not bind them to
perpetuall slauery, & neuer make them
free. Exo. 21. 5. But if the seruant say thus,
I loue my master, my wife and my children,
I will not go out free.
               
                  
VII. That the seruitude be not procured
and retained by force; for it is a
more grieuous crime to spoile a man of
his libertie, then of his riches.
               Now yt the same power limited with
these cautions, is lawfull & warrantable
in cōsciēce, it appears by these reasons.
               I. God hath ordained & allowed it,
euen by warrant of his owne law: The
posteritie of Cham was cursed by Noah,
and condemned to slauerie, Gen. 9. 25.
And he said, Cursed be Cham, a seruant of
seruants shal he be to his brethren. So were
the Gibeonites by Ioshua, Ios. 9. 23. Now
therefore yee are cursed, and there shall none
of you be freed from being bond-men, and
hewers of wood, & drawers of water, for the
house of my God. So was the theefe, Exo.
22. 3. If he had not wherewith to make restitution,
then hee should bee sold for his theft.
Again, those that are ouercome in war
may be held captiue, and it is lawful for
the conquerer to kill them, & therefore
to make them slaues: and if being takē,
they be saued from death, they owe all
that they haue to them by whom they
are saued.
               
                  
                  II. The law of God gaue libertie to
any mā that would, to make sale of himselfe
to another. Leuit. 25. 45. Of the children
of the strangers that are soiourners among
you, of them shal ye buy, & of their families
that are with you, which they begat in
your land, these shall be your possessiō. Deut.
15. 12. If thy brother an Hebrew sell himself
to thee, or an Hebrewesse, and serue thee six
yeares, euē in the seuenth yeare thou shalt let
him go free from thee: and vers. 17. Thou
shalt take an aule, & pierce his eare through
against the doore, and he shall be thy seruant
for euer.
               III. The mā that is ransommed frō
his enemie, is bound to serue as a slaue
in liew of thankfulnesse.
               
                  IV. The examples of the godly in
the Scriptures. Abraham had seruants
whom he bought for siluer, Gen. 17. 12.
Euerie manchild of eight daies old among
you, shal be circumcised in your generations,
as well he that is borne in thine house, as he
that is bough with money of any stranger,
which is not of thy seed. Gen. 24. 35. The
Lord hath blessed my master Abraham wō
                  derfully—
for he hath giuen him sheep and



beeues, and siluer and gold, & men-seruants
and maid-seruants, and camels and asses.
               V. The Apostles do not disallow of
such seruāts, but cōmand thē being seruants,
& called to the professiō of Christianitie
in that state, not to change, but
to abide in their calling. 1. Cor. 7. 21. Art
thou called being a seruant? care not for it.
               
               It is alledged that such seruitude is against
the law of nature. Ans. It is indeed
against the law of intire nature, as it was
before the fall, but against the law of
corrupted nature since the fall, it is not.
               But Christ hath purchased liberty to
belieuers, Coloss. 5. 11. Ans. Only a spirituall
libertie in this life; & a corporal only
in the life to come. For though y• seruant
in regard of faith & the inner man
be equal to his master, because in Christ
Iesus there is neither master nor seruāt,
bond nor free; yet in regard of the outward
man & ciuill order amongst men,
the master is aboue the seruant, and the
seruant is, & must be subiect to the master.Theodor▪ Orat. 8. Neuerthelesse where this kind of
seruitude is abolished, it is not to be againe
receiued or intertained amongst



Christians, specially considering, it is a
far more milde and moderate course to
haue hired seruants.
               If it be said againe, that the Heathen
Philosopher holdeth seruitude to be naturall,
wherby some are by birth bond,
and others free. I answere, That seruitude
proceedeth not of nature,Aristot. polit. lib. 1. but hath
his originall from the lawes of nations,
and is a consequent of the fall. For all
men by nature are equally & indifferētly
free, none more or lesse then others.
            
            
               CHAP. 17.
               Of the Master of the familie or goodman
of the house.
               
                  THus much touching the diuers
and seuerall combinations or
couples belonging to the state
Oeconomicall. Frō which do arise two
persons of a mixt or compounded nature
and condition, cōmonly called the
Goodman, & the Goodwife of ye house.
               The good man or master of the familie,
is a person, in whom resteth the priuate
and proper gouernment of the whole



houshold, and he comes not vnto it by
election, as it falleth out in other states,
but by the ordinance of God, setled euen
in the order of nature. The husbād
indeed naturally beares rule ouer the
wife; parents ouer their childrē, masters
ouer their seruāts: but that person who
by the prouidence of God, hath ye place
of an husband, a father, a master in his
house, the same also by the light of nature,
hath the principality & soueraigntie
therein, and he is Paterfamilias, the
father and chiefe head of the familie: to
him therefore the true right and power
ouer all matters domestical, of right appertaineth.
The duties of the master of
the familie, are specially fiue.
               I. To beare the chiefe stroke, and to
be the principal agent, directer and furtherer
of the worship of God within
his familie. Ios. 24. 15. I and my household
wil serue the Lord. And this he doth partly
by praying for & with his houshold,
and partly by instructing thē in the holy
Scriptures, and in the grounds of religiō,
that they may grow in knowledge
and reape benefit by the publike Ministerie.



Thus God commanded the men
of Israel to walke in their families. Deut.
6. 7. Thou shalt rehearse them continually
vnto thy children, and shalt talke of them,
when thou tariest in thine house,—& when
thou liest downe, & when thou risest vp. Againe,
vers. 20. When thy sonne shall aske
thee,—what meane these testimonies,
and ordināces & lawes, which the Lord our
God commanded you? Then thou shalt say
vnto thy son, We were Pharaohs bondmen
in Egypt, but the Lord brought vs out of Egypt,
with a mightie hand. This testimony
God gaue of Abraham before the law
was giuen, Gen. 18. 19. For I know Abraham
that he will command his sons, and his
houshold after him, that they keepe the way
of the Lord. And this houshold of Abraham
was very large, for the holy Ghost
saies long before, that he had three hundred
and eighteene,
                  [Ethchanicau] suos initiatos. 
                  that were borne and
brought vp in his house, Gen. 14. 14. It was
in likelihood ye course of Salomon which
he had learned of his father Dauid, and
giuen for a rule to al masters of families.
Prou. 4. 1. Heare O children the instruction
of a father, and giue eare to learne vnderstanding



—For I was my fathers sonne,
deare and tender in the sight of my mother,
when he taught me and said vnto me, Let
thine heart hold fast my words. The company
of the Disciples were the household
of Christ, and he himselfe did administer
all parts of the seruice of God
with them and among them. Luk. 22. 15.
To this purposeIn Ioan. tract. 51. in fine. 
                  Augustine saith, That
the master of the familie, doth after a sort,
and in his measure performe the dutie of a
Churchman, or Bishop within his house.
               
               
                  II. To bring his familie to ye Church
or Congregation on the Sabbath day,
to looke that they do religiously there
behaue themselues, & after the publike
exercises ended, & the Congregation is
dismissed, to take account of that which
they haue heard, that they may profit in
knowledge and obedience. Act. 10. 24.
The day after, they entred into Caesarea;
Now Cornelius waited for them, & had called
together his kinsmen & special friends.
vers. 33. Now therefore (saith Cornelius to
Peter) are we all heere present before God, to
heare all things that are commanded thee of
God. Iob 1. 5. And when the daies of their



banqueting were gone about, Iob sent and
sanctified them, & rose vp early in the morning,
& offred burnt offerings, &c. 2. King.
4. 23. And he said, wherefore wilt thou go to
him to day? It is neither new moone nor Sabbath.
For this very cause the fourth Cō
                     mandement
is giuen first of all & principally
to the master of the familie, that
he might see the Sabbath kept, and be a
principal doer in all parts of Gods worship
therein. Exod. 20. 10. In it thou shalt
not do any worke, thou nor thy son, nor thy
daughter, thy man-seruant, nor thy maid,
nor thy cattel, nor thy stranger that is within
thy gates.
               Neither is this his care tied only to
the Sabbath, but vpon other daies besides
it, he ought to cause them of his
houshold, as much as in him lieth, to repaire
to places, where the word of God
is preached. Commendable was the
practise of Marie the sister of Martha, in
this case, who when Christ came to her
house is said, to sit at his feete and attend
vnto his preaching, Luk 10. 39.
               III. To prouide for his family meat,
drinke and clothing, and that they may



liue a quiet & peaceable life, 1. Tim. 5. 8.
Pro. 27. 26. The lambs are for thy clothing,
and the goats for the price of thy field. v. 27.
               And let the milke of thy goats be sufficient
for thy food, for the food of thy familie, and
for the sustenance of thy maids. 1. Cor. 9. 9.
Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the
oxe, that treadeth out the corne: doth God
care for oxen? either saith he it not altogether
for our sakes? Matth. 13. 52. Euery
scribe which is taught vnto the kingdome
of heauen is like vnto an housholder, that
brings forth out of his treasurie, things both
new and old.
               IV. To keepe order, and to exercise
discipline in his house, and that in this
manner:
               
                  In case of offence, when a capitall
crime is committed, which incurreth
publike censure; he is not to punish it
himselfe, but to bring the offender to
the ciuill Magistrate, to informe of his
fault, that he may haue his desert: It was
a course established by the Iudicial law,
which God gaue vnto Moses for his direction
in causes criminall among the
Israelites: Deut. 21. 18. 19. 20. If any man



hath a son that is stubborne, & disobedient,
which wil not hearken vnto the voice of his
father, nor the voice of his mother, and they
haue chastened him; then shal his father and
his mother take him, and bring him out, vnto
the Elders of his citie, and vnto the gate
of the place where he dwelleth, and shall say
vnto the Elders of his citie; This our son is
stubborne, and disobedient, and he will not
obey our admonition: hee is a rioter, and a
drunkard. Againe, Deut. 13. 6. If thy brother
the son of thy mother, or thine own son,
or thy daughter, or the wife that lieth in thy
bosome, or thy friend which is as thine owne
soul, entise thee secretly saying, Let vs go and
serue other gods (which thou hast not
known, thou, I say, nor thy fathers) thou shalt
not consent vnto him, nor heare, neither shal
thine eye pitie, nor shew mercie, nor keepe
him secret. Zach. 13. 3. And when any shall
yet prophesie, his father and his mother that
begate him shall say vnto him, Thou shalt
not liue: for thou speakest lies in the name of
the Lord: and his father, and his mother
that begate him, shall thrust him thorough
when he prophesieth.
               If the fault be of an inferiour nature,



and lesser in comparison; the master of
the familie ought to proceed by priuate
censure vpon the delinquent partie,
sometimes by admonitiō, otherwhiles
by correction, and chastisement, according
to the quality of the offence, & the
condition & state of the person. Leuit.
19. 17. Thou shalt plainly rebuke thy neighbour,
and not suffer him to sin. Mat. 1
                     •
                  . 15.
If thy brother sinne against thee, go and tell
him his fault betweene him and thee alone:
If he heare thee not, take yet with thee one or
two. Prou. 29. 17. Correct thy sonne, and he
will giue thee rest, and will giue pleasures to
thy soule.
               
               When admonitions and corrections
will not preuaile, the partie must bee
brought before the Ministers, and Gouernours
of the Church, that they may
censure him. Matth. 18. 17. If he will not
heare them, tell it vnto the Church. And
the Apostle Iames giueth order that the
Ministers of the Church should come
to those that are sicke, and pray for
them, Iames 5. 14. which if they doe in
case of infirmitie; then they are also to
be sought vnto, in case of errour and



offence committed, for redresse.
               
                  But when none of all these meanes
will do good; if the partie be a seruant,
his master may, and ought to remoue
him. Psal. 101. 7. There shall no deceitfull
person dwell within mine house; he that telleth
lies shall not remaine in my sight. Ioh.
8. 35. The seruant abideth not in the house
for euer.
               
                  V. To giue intertainment to those
that are strangers, & not of the familie,
if they be Christians, and Belieuers; but
specially to the Ministers of the Word.
Rom. 12. 13. Giuing your selues to hospitalitie.
Hebr. 13. 2. Be not forgetfull to lodge
strangers: for hereby some haue receiued Angels
into their houses vnawares. This duty
the woman of Shunem & her husband
performed vnto the Prophet Elisha,
2. King. 4. 10. Let vs make him a little chā
                  ber,
I pray thee, with walles, and let vs set
him a bed there, and a table, and a stoole,
and a candlesticke, that he may turne in hither,
when he commeth to vs. These are
the duties.
               
               Heere if it be demanded, whether the
master of a familie is alway, and necessarily



bound in his owne person to doe
all these things?
               I answere, that if there be iust and
necessarie cause, either in respect of his
owne inabilitie, or in regard of publike
imployment, vpon a lawfull calling,
whereby he is hindred, so as he cannot
do any of them himselfe, at some times;
it is lawfull for him to haue, and vse a
deputie. This our Sauiour Christ teacheth
in effect, when he saith, Who then
is a faithfull seruant, and wise, whom his
master hath made ruler ouer his houshold,
to giue them meate in season? Mat. 24. 25.
Thus Abraham had a steward of his
house, Eliezer of Damascus, Gen. 15. 2.
and he performed the waightiest matters,
that concerned the establishment,
and continuance of Familie, not by
himselfe, but by his Steward, as namely
the choice of a wife for his sonne Isaak,
Gen. 24. 2. Therefore Abraham said vnto
his eldest seruant of his house, which had the
rule ouer all that hee had; Put now thine
hand vnder my thigh, &c. Thus Pharaoh
King of Egypt had Ioseph, Gen. 39. 4. So
Ioseph found fauour in his sight, and serued



him, and hee made him ruler of his house,
and put all that he had in his hands.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 18.
               Of the Mistresse of the familie, or Goodwife
of the house.
               
                  THe Goodwife or Mistresse
of the house, is a
person which yeeldeth
helpe and assistance in
gouernmēt to the Master
of the familie. For
he is, as it were, the prince and chiece
ruler; she is the associate, not only in
office and authoritie, but also in aduise,
and counsell vnto him. 1. King. 17. 17.
And after these things, the sonne of the woman,
which was wife, or
                  [Bagnalath babbaijth.] Domina domus. 
                  mistresse of the
house, was sicke.
               
               Her dutie is two-fold.
               First to gouerne the house, as much
as concerneth her, in her place. 1. Tim.
5. 14. I will therefore that the yonger women
marrie, and gouerne the house. And that
she doth three waies. I. By exercising
her selfe in some profitable employments,



for the good of her charge, Prou.
31. 13. She seeketh wooll, and flax, and laboureth
cheerefully with her hands. II. By
appointing her maids their worke, and
ouerseeing them therein. Vers. 15. She
riseth whiles it is yet night, and giueth the
portion to her houshold, and the ordinary to
her maids. III. By ordering her children
and seruants in wisdome; partly by
instruction, partly by admonition, whē
there is need. Vers. 26. Shee openeth her
mouth with wisdome, and the law of grace is
in her tongue. vers. 28. Her children rise vp,
and call her blessed, &c. Tit. 2. 5. That they
be discreet, chast, keeping at home, &c. Act.
18. 26. Priscilla in her house, with Aquila,
instructed Apollos, in that wherin he was
wanting, expounding vnto him the way
of God more perfectly. Gregorie Nazianzen
in an Oration made for his father, saith,
That his mother was not only an helper, but
also a teacher or instructer, and guide vnto
his father in matters of religion & godlines.
               
               
                  The second dutie is, to giue the portion
of food vnto her familie, or cause
it to be giuen in due season. Prou. 31. 15.
She riseth whiles it is yet night, and giueth



the portiō, or meat to her houshold. Thus did
Rebekah in her house. Gen. 27. 9. Get thee
now to the flock, & bring me thēce two good
kids of the goats, that I may make pleasant
meat of thē for thy father, such as he loueth.
               
                  Quest. Whether may the goodwife,
without the consent of the goodman,
giue and bestow the goods belonging
to the familie?
               
                  Ans. I. There are some things which
are proper to her selfe, and not part of
her dowry which she brought vnto her
husband. And these she may claime as
her owne, because either they were reserued
vpon the match made betweene
them, or else are peculiar vnto her by
their mutuall consent, and of them she
may lawfully giue, without her husbands
knowledge. II. The goods
which are common to them both, are
of another nature; and these shee may
not bestow, without his allowance, either
expresse or at least general and implicite,
specially when the giuing of
them doth or may grow in likelihood,
to the hinderance, and preiudice of the
state of the familie.
               FINIS.
            
         
      
   