
      
         
            
            
            A
Short vievv of
the Perſian Monarchie,
and of Daniels
weekes: Beeing a peece of Beroaldus
workes: with a cenſure
in ſome
points.
            
               LONDON
Imprinted by Thomas Orwin.
1590.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A ſhort view of the Perſian
Monarchie, and of Daniels
weekes: being a peece of Beroaldus
workes.
            
               THe Perſian Monarchie
is firſt named ſiluerie,
becauſe the people of
God (after the Temple
reſtored, and the Citie
Ieruſalem walled) liued
peaceablie vnder the
Perſians. But how long
this continued, or how manie Kings it had,
neither the Hiſtoriographers of our time, nor
the prophane doo ſufficientlie know: which
thing they doo declare in their diuers and vncertaine
Hiſtories, ſhowed foorth and publiſhed
by them to the world of theſe matters.
But wee, becauſe we know the former Perſian
Kings out of the holie Scripture, and the latter
the prophane hiſtories dooth mention of this
matter: therefore we are able more certainlie
to determine, than either Herodotus or Ioſephus
or Manetho, or Metaſtenes, or Cteſias from whō
the true report of theſe matters is vſed to be cited.
Concerning the time and continuance of
the Perſian Monarchie we cannot doubt, ſeing
the beginning is apparāt out of the holy ſcripture,
and wee vnderſtand from prophane Stories

the ouerthrowe to bee by Alexander the
Great. Therefore let vs firſt ſpeake of the time
wherein the Perſian Empire bare ſway; then
of the Kings who gouerned that ſiluer Emperie,
which ſucceeded the golden Monarchie
of the Babylonians.
            
            The Perſian Monarchie begins from that
yeare, in the which Cyrus the great was firſt
aduaunced by God to the rule of Aſia, after
Darius the Mede, whom the holie Oracles call
the King of Perſia; and endeth and is determined
in the death of Darius the ſonne of Arſanes:
for then (no man reſiſting) the Wealth of
the Perſians came to Alexander the great, and
Aſia (which before obeied the Perſians) became
ſubiect to him. Now, the firſt yeare of
Cyrus the greater, or of the King of the Perſians,
falls into the third yeare of the foureſcore
Olympiade; which was from the beginning of
the world, three thouſand foure hundred ſeuentie
two; and was the yeare ſince Rome was
built 295. fortie yeares after the Kings were
baniſhed and exiled the Citie: which wee vnderſtand
to be certaine, laying down the times
in order, as they bee expounded in the holie
Scripture; and the Olympiades conferred and
laide together with theſe, and alſo the yeares
of the continuance of the Citie of Rome. And
thoſe things which haue been otherwiſe defined
by prophane Writers and Writers of
our time, we haue obſerued to be vnture. Yet

the death of Darius the laſt King of the Perſians,
the prophane Hiſtorie referres to the firſt
yeare of the hundred & thirteenth Olympiade;
and that yeare is the fift of Daniels nineteenth
weeke; and the yeare of the Citie built foure
hundred and fiue & twentie; and the yeare of
the world three thouſand three ſcore & two.
From which account of time we vnderſtand,
that the Perſian Monarchie is to haue allotted
to it for the continuance a hundred and thiritie
yeares, although otherwiſe hereof other men
haue determined.
            But we cannot miſſe, becauſe we haue the
time of the deliuerance from Babilon (which is
the beginning of the Perſian Empire) certainlie
ſet downe and defined by the holie Scripture;
and the times which follow, as the death
of Darius the laſt King of Perſia, and of Alexander
the great, ſet downe faithfullie; & thoſe
who diſſent from vs, we are able by good reaſon
to diſprooue: & that eſpeciallie ſeeing the
exact time is ſet downe in the Scripture, when
Cyrus the greater began his Empire, and the
death of Alexander the great (which fell in the
next Olympiade from the death of Darius) is agreed,
confeſſed and determined of manie Hiſtoriographers.
For then there was a more aſſured
obſeruation of the Greekiſh Hiſtorie,
manie learned and notable men hauing comprehended
them in their writings, agreeing in
the ſetting downn of the accoūt of thoſe times.

But thoſe things which fell out before theſe
times, haue not ſo faithfullie been by Writers
collected: whereby it commeth to paſſe, that
the prophane ſtorie is verie obſcure: which
obſcuritie we are able to diſpearſe & to make
cleere, by that computation of time which we
haue laide downe; becauſe this is grounded
from a moſt vndoubted obſeruation, gathered
from holie ſcripture: which is not neceſſaire
for vs at this time to handle more at large, ſeeing
it hath been handled before. In the which
treatiſe, we haue ſet downe the exact account
of time, determined in the holie ſcripture:
which as it may bee referred to prophane ſtories,
if it hath little beene obſerued by former
Writers, may yet now bee vnderſtood by the
table of this Chronicle, continued and ſucceſſiuely
drawen downe from the beginning of
the world, euen vnto our times.
            Now concerning the Kings of Perſia, who
ruled theſe hundred & thirtie yeares, the place
of Daniel which is in his eleuenth chapter and
ſecond verſe, is of great vſe to the vnderſtanding
of the truth: which is in this ſort; Beholde
yet three Kings ſhall ſtand vp in Perſia, and the
fourth ſhall be richer than they all: and when he is
growen great through his riches, hee ſhall ſtirre vp
all against the King of Graecia. From this place
of Daniel, wee vnderſtand that Perſian King,
which afflicted Graecia with warre, to bee the
fift Monarch of the Perſians fromRather, from Darius, named in verſ. 1. 
               Cyrus the

greater: but the fift King in order from Cyrus,
by thoſe things which he did, & from the monuments
of prophane Writers, wee doo finde
to bee Xerxes: for the Angel opened theſe
things to Daniel, in the third yeare of King Cyrus,
as it is cap. 10. ver. 2. Becauſe therefore, beſides
Cyrus, there were yet to bee 3. Kings of
Perſia, after whom the fourth was to inuade
Graecia by warre, whom al prophane hiſtories
doo witnes to be Xerxes; by good right therfore
we ſay, that Xerxes the terror of Graecia,
was theThat he was the 4. it ſhalbe ſhewed hereafter. 5. Emperor of the Perſians from Cyrus
the greater. Now who were Kings in the
times which fell out betwixt theſe, the holie
writings doo ſuggeſt vnto vs: who doo purſue
and faithfullie expound the Hiſtorie of
thoſe Meſne times; ſo farre as their knowledge
concernes the Church of God, by theſe names
of Aſſuerus, Darius, Artaxerxes:
               There be ſeuerall Kings of thoſe names: but for time in this order. Artaxerxes, to whom an epiſtle was writtenn againſt the Iewes ſoone after their returne: Aſſuerus, and Darius Artaxerxes. wee haue
theſe Kings expreſſed in holy Writ, who that
they may be diſtinguiſhed from other Kings,
who had likewiſe the ſame names, they are to
be aſsigned and ſet out by thoſe epithites and
ſurnames, which may bee moſt agreeable and
fit the preſent matter and hiſtorie which wee
repeate out of Eſdra and Nehemiah. To Aſſuerus
therefore wee will adde the ſurname of
Artaxerxes, Darius we will name Aſſyrius,
and we will ſurname Artaxerxes Pius: for he
beſtowed a great care on the Church of God,
as afterwards ſhalbe vnderſtood.
            
               
And that wee may proceede orderlie, let vs
firſt handle Aſſuerus, who is made knowen
vnto vs from Eſdras hiſtorie.There Artaxerxes & Aſſuerus are ſeuerall men: and the former is named laſt: becauſe to him was ioyned the narration of the letter which cauſed the temples worke to bee ſtaied. In the which hiſtorie
the 4. chapter and 6. verſe, The Enemies
of the people of God are ſaid in the beginning of the
reigne of Aſſuerus, to haue written an accuſation
against the Inhabitants of Iuda and Ieruſalem:
whereby it came to paſſe, that thorough the Edict
of the ſame Aſſuerus (to whom wee haue added
the ſurname of Artaxerxes, becauſe afterward
the ſcripture nameth him by the ſame
name) the worke of the houſe of God ceaſed. Now
there is often and vſuall mention of this Aſſuerus
Artaxerxes in the booke of Ester: whō
by this we vnderſtand to ſucceede immedi
                  ••
               
               lie
Cyrus in gouernment becauſe in the 4. of
Eſdr. the 5. verſ. the work of the houſe of the
Lord is ſaid to be hindred vnder Aſſuerus, all
the dayes of Cyrus King of Perſia, euen to the
reigne of Darius the King of Perſia. Now that
this Aſſuerus ſucceeded Cyrus in gouernment
(whoſe Viceroy before he had been in Perſia,
and Vicegerent in Cyrus name) we may gather
out of the beginning of the firſt of Eſter.
Where in the firſt chapter and third verſe according
to the Hebrew, it is ſaid, that the
ſtrength of Perſia and Media was before him: and
it is ſaid, that there were in preſence before him in
his Court Noble men and Princes or Rulers ouer
Prouinces 127. ouer whom hee gouerned: whome
many moneths he entertained with princely entertainment.
               
But the greater and more able part
of the ſtrength of Perſia and Media, which
was then ſaid to be in the Court of Aſsuerus,
was before in expedition with Cyrus the greater.
Now after Aſſuerus wee place Darius,
whom we haue named Aſſyrius, for a difference
from others, who are called in the ſaid
Monarchie, Darius: becauſe in the 6. of Ezra
the 11. the Iewes are ſaid to haue kept a ſolemn
feaſt of ſweete bread ſeuen dayes in mirth, becauſe
the Lord had made their hearts glad, and
had turned the hart of the King of Aſſur towards
them,The Ebrewes, (who ſhoulde haue skill in their owne ſtories) hold this Darius to bee the ſonne of Eſter. to helpe their hands in the work
of the houſe of the God of Iſrael. But this Darius
Aſſyrius is mentioned in the beginnings
of the prophecies of Aggey and Zacharie, vnder
whom the building of the temple of God
was begun anew. Whoſe praiſe is, that the
building of the temple (intermitted vnder Aſſuerus
Artaxerxes) by his authority was begun
againe and finiſhed.This Artaxerxes and Aſſuerus (whom being two, he nameth one perſon) may bee known, not only by this Authour, but alſo by Dan. 10. 11 to haue had a ſhort reigne: and Darius (vnder whom the Temple was built) was of antiquitie holden moſt commonly, (excepting ſome one or two learned) to begin
his reigne no whit aboue thirtie yeares from Babels fall: but rather ſhorter much, though a ſhorter time ſhould hardly be graunted. But 107. yeares frō 
                  Cyrus (as ſome would) ſhould be too much for 50000. (being men at Cyrus Monarchie) to be workefull for the Temple. Which we gather from
the Prophecie of Aggey and Zacharie; but
chieflie we vnderſtand it from the hiſtorie of
Eſdras: for in the fourth chapt. 24. verſe it is
ſaid, that the houſe of the Lord was intermitted
vnder Aſſerus, nor begun againe before

the 2. yeare of Darius the King of Perſia: but
in the 6. chapt. & 14. verſ. it is thus ſpoken of
the houſe of God, built vnder Darius Aſſyrius;
But the Elders of Iuda built and proſpered
according to the prophecie of Aggey the prophet,
and Zacharie the ſonne of Addo: and they edified
and built, the God of Iſrael commaunding them,
and Cyrus and DariusHeere And might be held as the Hebrues holde it, for which is.
                
               and Artaxerxes
Kings of Perſia.Here his iudgmēt ſtaggreth. Any man may know by the text and the time that Darius alſo Arraxerxes grāting authoritie to build the temple, the worke being finiſhed in Darius ſixt yeare, & after that Ezra the the ſonne of Saraiah comming to Ieruſalem frō 
                  Babel is the ſeauenth of Artaxerxes: either the two termes muſt needes (as Hebrues aſſuredly hold) ſignifie one perſon: or the two must reigne at once. Now, he in this
verſe, who is in the laſt place called
Artaxerxes, ſeemeth to be Aſſuerus
Artaxerxes, by whom it hath been ſaide
before the worke of the Lord was hindred;
vnleſſe our coniecture deceiue vs: becauſe by
reaſon of Heſter and Mardochey he fauoured
the proceedings of the people of GOD, the
which before he greatly miſliked. For peraduenture,
when he now waxed old, Darius Aſſyrius
beeing conſorted in gouernment with
him, he alſo commaunded the temple of God
to be built, Darius chieflie buſying himſelfe
thereabouts, as the diuine Oracles haue witneſſed
to vs. Alſo that Artaxerxes may be he
whom we name Pius, vnder whome by Nehemias
the Citie was compaſt about with a wal,
and the temple obtained his ornaments. Others
referre the word Artaxerxes toThis is moſt holden and plaine. 
               Darius
Aſſyrius, as if and were put in ſtead of of; that
is to ſay, becauſe the ſurname of Artaxerxes
was proper to the kings of Perſia, as Caeſar was
a common name to the Emperours of Rome,
               
and Pharao to the auncient Kings of Egypt, as
after Alexander the great the name of Ptolomey
was attributed to all the Kings of Egypt, till Egypt
was reduced to the form of a prouince by
the Romanes. But to Darius Aſſyrius, wee adioyned
in ſucceſsion Artaxerxes Pius,
               The ſelfe ſame man: as by the Scripture examined, anie may ſee: and Hebrues with maine Latines holde. of whō
there is mention made as it were in a new hiſtorie,
in the ſeuenth chapter and firſt verſe after
this manner. After theſe words, In the kingdome
of Artaxerxes the King of Perſia, Eſdras
the ſonne of
               The time for the yeare ſeauenth, vpon the ſixt: and the name of Artaxerxes that went before in the ſecond of Darius graunting the building of the Temple: ſhow the two names ſignifie but one King, as was touched before. Seraias caſe best diſcuſſeth the whole time of the Perſiās. For ſeeing Seraias was killed by Nabucadnezzar 52. yeares before Cyrus tooke Babylon: and Eſdras is commonly graunted to haue ſeene the Perſians last reigne. It is as much as olde age can ſuffer in one mans life (aged 50. yeares before) that the Perſians ſhould reigne in that mans life 130 yeares more. For ſo he must match Iſaacks yeares 180: and that ſo hee did or came neare it, may be proued by manie likelihoods. It is but a bare conjecture, for to imagine that Eſdras omitted his father or grandfathers, two or three, betwixt him and Seraias. No man hath authoritie to forme more than is, to the Bible.  Seraias; there is added: This Eſdras
went vp from Babilon, and he was a ſleight Scribe
in the lawe of Moſes, which the Lord God gaue to
Iſrael. And the King gaue vnto him all his request
according to the hand of the Lord which was vpon
him. For (as it ſhalbe touched afterwards) Iudea
did then ſeeme (
                  Zorobabel was aliue the yere before, and yonger than he.
               
               Zorobabel being dead) to
want a Ruler. For which cauſe, in the ſeuenth
yeare of Artaxerxes Pius, Eſdras is ſent into
Iudea, with commaundement to compound
the cauſes of the people of God. For ſo in the
ſaid 7. chap. 24. verſ. it is ſaid, But thou Eſdras
according to the wiſedome of thy God, which is in
thy hand, appoint Iudges and Gouernours to iudge

the people which is beyond the Riuer, to wit, thoſe
that knowe the Lord; yet alſo teach freelie thoſe
which are ignorant.
               Who was alſo Darius Pius & Longimanus: & ſeemeth to be that brother of Xerxes, of whoſe quiet reigne Iuſtine writeth. Herodotus writeth, that the ſonne of Atoſſa (Eſter is ſhe) gate the Kingdom, though he took one brother for the other. From the ſame Artaxerxes
Pius afterwards Nehemias is ſent into Iudea
to compound eccleſiaſticall cauſes in the twē
               tieth
yeare, as it is largely expounded in the ſecond
of Nehemias. Seeing therefore Artaxerxes
Pius is thus knowen vnto vs out of the Hiſtorie
of Eſdra & Nehemia we haue made him
to ſucceede Darius Aſſyrius. Wherefore we
know from the holie Scripture, theſe Kings to
wit Cyrus Maior, Aſsuerus Artaxerxes, Darius
Aſſuerus, & Artaxerxes Pius, whom Xerxes
the terrour of Graecia ſucceedeth, the fifth
in ſucceſsion from Cyrus Maior.
            
            And thus we haue named the former kings
of Perſia, ſtaying our ſelues vpon the authoritie
of holie Scripture, careleſſe in the meane
while of Herodotus and Cteſias, and of others,
who follow Herod. or Cteſias of whom we wil
ſpeake afterwardes. Now who thoſe Kings
were, who ſucceeded this Xerxes in Perſia, we
collect out of the prophane ſtorie.
            
               This would not ſoone be graunted, nor at all: he was elder than Lō
                     gimanus and ruler of the wars of Greece and not with the Iewes. Ezra. 4. 
               Xerxes was the ſonne of Artaxerxes Macrochir,
that is, the long handed: whome hee
ſucceeded in the Kingdome. From whoſe
twentie yere, they who reckon the beginning
of Daniels Seuens, may now perceiue how far
they are from the truth, when they take this
Artaxerxes Longimanus the ſonne of Xerxes,
for Artaxerxes Pius; who peraduenture was

the grandfather of Artaxerxes Longimanus. But
after Artaxerxes Longimanus, Darius Nothus
(begotten by him) ſucceeded in the Kingdom,
Artaxerxes Mnemon (that is by ſurname, the
Rememberer) ſucceeded Darius Nothus, beeing
his baſtard; whoſe brother was Cyrus, called,
the leſſer, (famous in the Greeke hiſtorie, and
in Xenophon) who was fellow in Armes with
him againſt Artaxerxes. After Artaxerxes
Mnemon, Ochus his ſonne reigned ouer the
Perſians. Then Arſes the ſonne of Ochus, who
(being deſtroyed with his whole familie) had
for his ſucceſſor, Darius the laſt king of Perſia;
whom Diodorus Siculus in his 17. booke ſayth
to be the ſonne of Arſanes, who was the brother
of Ochus; yet Iustine in his 10. booke, nameth
him Codomanus. Againſt this Darius, Alexander
the great made warre, hauing tranſferd
to him the power and Monarchie of the
Perſians, according as it was appointed by
God, and foretolde to come to paſſe in Daniels
viſions; that we may thinke no change in gouernments
nor in the reſt of our life, to bee
without the prouidence of God.
            Theſe therefore are the Kings of Perſia,
knowen vnto vs, partly out of the holie Scripture,
partly out of the prophane Hiſtorie of
Herodotus, Thucidides, Xenophon, Cteſias, & Diodorus
Siculus, whom alſo Euſebius doth otherwiſe
order and name: wee will yet neuertheleſſe

ſtand to the iudgement of thoſe forenamed
authors, and will inſiſt in this deſcription
and Catalogue. From the holie Scripture
acknowledged, theſe are the fiue former
Kings of Perſia.
            
            
               1The particular Kings of Perſia, neuer were, & neuer will be knowen by Writers. For times touching ſcripture of 49. yeares: for the chiefe worke of walling leruſalem to that Aben Ezra wilagree: and no Hebrue wil grant that they reigned aboue 130. yeres but rather cōe farre ſhort. And flout manie cloſely in Seder Olam, as groſely deceaued that giue the Perſians 250. yeares though not the moſt part were ſo much deceiued. The fiue generations of Ioſuahs poſteritie to Iuddue, will compell them to graunt nere that ſomme: but to more than that, no likelihood can vrge.  Cyrus Maior.
               2 Aſſuerus Artaxerxes.
               3 Darius Aſſyrius.
               4 Artaxerxes Pius.
               5 Xerxes the terror of Graecia.
            
            The reſt from prophane ſtories are made
knowen to vs vnder theſe names.
            
               6 Artaxerxes Longimanus.
               7 Darius Nothus.
               8 Artaxerxes Memor.
               9 Ochus.
               10 Arſes, who alſo is Arſanes.
               11 Darius Codomanus, the ſonne of
Arſanes, the brother of Ochus.
            
            
               This ſomme will not ſoone be diſprooued, though the particular Kings be not agreed vpon: which yet 
                     〈◊〉
                   neuer agreed vpon: not anie learned Christians, for the Bible is compelled to take notice of.Theſe eleuen Kings gouerned the Perſian
               
Monarchie for a hundred and thirtie yeares
as before hath been declared. But to theſe
Kings we doo not adde their yeares: becauſe
we want the certaine knowledge of the Perſian
hiſtorie. For albeit in the holy ſcriptures
certaine yeares are reckoned of the former
Kings, to wit, of Cyrus, Aſſuerus, Artaxeres,
Darius Aſſyrius, and Artaxerxes Pius; yet we
cannot from theſe, certainlie define the yeares
of their gouernment, becauſe that is not the
purpoſe of the Scripture, to teach how long
they reigned: therefore it is not greatly neceſſarie
to enquire more curiouſlie after them.
But becauſe our time vſeth much Ioſephus in
theſe hiſtories, as alſo Metasthenes,
               
                  Metaſtenes a forged author, yet deceaued manie. and I know
what fragments added to him of incertain authors
ſcarce of good credite; therefore they
are eſpeciallie to bee admoniſhed of thoſe errors,
which Ioſephus admitteth in this Hiſtorie
in the eleuenth booke of his antiquities or old
affaires. For partly out of Herodotus, who
did not ſo much purpoſe to write a hiſtorie, as
to reteine and recreate the Reader with pleaſant
narrations, partlie out of authors I know
not what (for they are almoſt infinite, who
haue handled Perſian affaires) they reckon the
Perſian Kings in this ſort: firſt Cyrius, then Cā
                  biſes
the ſonne of Cyrus, then Magus, after him
Darius the ſonne of Histaſpis, then Xerxes: after
Xerxes they name another Cyrus, whome
he will haue to be the ſonne of Xerxes, who

amongſt the Graecians is ſaid to be Artaxerxes,
vnder whom (hee ſaith) the hiſtorie of Ester
fell out. From thence he paſſeth to Alexander
the great: who ſubdued Darius the laſt King
of the Perſians: which how diſcordant they
be from holy ſcripture, is manifeſt from thoſe
things which before haue been ſpoken, that
there neede be no ſtay made to confute this.
            Furthermore (as before we haue ſaid) neither
Herodotus, nor Cteſias, or they from who
theſe broached their ſtories, we haue followed
in the enumeration of the former Kings of
Perſia; becauſe we haue certaine teſtimonies
out of the Scriptures, of theſe kings who reigin
Perſia vnto Xerxes. So, after Cyrus we doo
not name Cambyſes, nor after him Magus, nor
after him Darius Histaſpis: which names, becauſe
they are neuer found in Scripture, by vs
are pretermitted. For we muſt wholly reſt in
the authoritie of holie Scripture, which handleth
theNot all the Kings, becauſe they touch not the common weale. hiſtorie of theſe times, & neither to
Herodotus, nor anie other whoſoeuer hee bee,
that ſaith he bringeth a true Hiſtorie from the
Perſian Records, as Cteſias is bolde to profeſſe
of himſelfe. Who being taken in the warre
of Cyrus the leſſer by Artaxerxes Memor, becauſe
he was a Phiſician, was admitted into
the Kings Court; in the which liuing long,
he grew more skilfull (as he himſelfe ſaith) of
the Perſian eſtate, than either Herodotus or any
other, who (before him) intreated of the Perſian
               
affaires: yet he after Xerxes nameth Artaxerxes
the ſonne of Xerxes, whom they call
Longimanus, after whom they reckon Xerxes
the ſonne of Longimanus; who when he reigned
ſome moneths, was ſlaine by the treacherie
of Secundianus another ſonne of Artaxerxes,
but a baſtard: who therefore reigned after
Xerxes the ſecond, but yet a ſhort time, becauſe
another ſonne of Artaxerxes Longimanus
(called Darieus or Darius) made him away,
by the ſame pollicie as he made away his brother.
For they ſay, that Darius the ſonne of
Artaxerxes by his concubine, truſting to the
learning of the Perſians, contended for the
Kingdome with Iſogeus the legitimate ſonne
of Artaxerxes Longimanus; and that both of
them referred the cauſe to the Councell of
Perſia; in the which Darius Nothus or baſtard,
became victor, and got the vpper hand: from
whom (afterwards) the Perſian Kings are lineallie
deriued. For Artaxerxes was the ſonne
of this Darius Nothus named Memor, for a difference
from the other called Longimanus; then
Ochus the ſonne of Artaxerxes Memor, whō
               Arſes ſucceeded, ſurnamed by Iuſtine Codomanus,
as before we haue ſaid. In the rehearſing
of the genealogie of the Kings of Perſia, wee
haue pretermitted Xerxes the ſecond, and Secundianus
(whom ſome cal Sogdianus) becauſe
either of them reigned but a few moneths, although
Diodorus Siculus remembreth thē out

of Cteſias, whom neuertheleſſe others paſſe ouer.
The yeares of theſe Kings vncertaine &
ill reckoned in prophane hiſtorie, we haue not
particularlie remembred, becauſe the Hiſtoriographers
confound them. Therefore we are
cōtent with the ſomme of their yeares, which
they reigned in all, which wee haue obſerued
to be certain from thoſe things, which before
haue been propounded.
            But before we giue ouer this hiſtorie of the
Kings of Perſia, becauſe there is nothing in it
ſo illuſtrious, as Xerxes going downe into
Graecia, let vs ſee in what Olympiade he by war
inuaded Graecia: for this is handled by manie
Greeke Hiſtoriographers; but how truely, that
we are now to ſee. Pauſanias ſetteth down in
Arcadie, that then Xerxes paſſed ouer into
Graecia with that infinit hoaſt, (which the Hiſtorians
report of, that the Medes at one dinner
dranke vp all the Riuers) when Gelon gouerned
in Syracuſa; whom the Athenians and the
Laced aemonians (by their Embaſſadors) ſollicited
to take part with them againſt Xerxes, as
it is in Herodotus in his 7. booke. The ſame
Pauſanias in Eliac, affirmeth the ſame Gelon to
haue obtained the gouernement of Syracuſa,
in the ſecond yeare of the ſeuentie two Olympiade.
Moreouer he affirmeth in his Eliac, that
thoſe Perſians which Xerxes left behinde him
in Graecia with Mardonius, were ouerthrowen
at Platea, in the 75. Olympiade. But Diodorus

Siculus in the eleuenth booke of his Librarie,
affirmeth Xerxes to haue mooued war againſt
the Graecians in the 75. Olympiade; in which
time he ſaith, Gelon gouerned in Syracuſa. Polybius
Megapolitanus is of the ſame opinion in
his 5. booke with Diodorus Siculus: who ſaith
that the Romanes firſt ioyned league with the
Carthaginians. After the Kings were exiled
Rome, the Conſulls had ruled the Common-weale
eight and twentie yeares before the firſt
paſſage of Xerxes into Graecia. But Rome was
in ſubiection to Kings 243. yeare (as Sextus
Rufus maketh computation) deducting the
times of the Kings. From that time (if you
reckon 28. yeare) we ſhall come to the 3. yeare
of theTo teach the vanitie of this conſent: wee may mark out of Pauſanias other accounts for men of that age: as Oebotas is in Olympiade the ſixt: and Xenophō
                   in 25. but in Triclinius in 79. both winners of the footerace. Of Xenophō Pindarus made an Ode. Infinite varietie of Writers diſanulleth this cō
                  ſent. 74. Olympiade. Now it is manifeſt and
apparant by this, that Pauſanias and Diodorus
Siculus, as alſo Polybius, moreouer Dioniſius Halicarnaſſeus
who is of their iudgment, & others
who haue likewiſe noted theſe times vnto vs,
haue all erred: becauſe Cyrus Maior (King of
Perſia) ruled the Kingdome after Darius the
Mede, in the third yeare of the 80. Olympiade, as
the times determined by the teſtimonie of holie
Scripture doo conclude. And after Cyrus,
theſe three Kings ſucceeded in Perſia, Aſſuerus
Artaxerxes, Darius Aſſyrius, and Artaxerxes
Pius. But the 20. yeare of Artaxerxes Pius
the Temple was whollie reſtored, and it is
noted that the Citie Ieruſalem was compaſſed
with a wall, as afterwards will appeare out of

the hiſtorie of the ſeuen firſt ſeuens of Daniel.
But the ſeuenth ſeuē, which is the limit of this
time, is ended in the third yeare of the 92. Olympiade.
            
            Moreouer there is reckoned the 32. yeare
of Artaxerxes Puis in the 13. of Nehem and the
6. verſ, which falleth out in the third yeare of
the 95. Olympiade. So it appeareth how farre
theſe Writers are from the true obſeruing of
the times; ſeeing it may ſeeme, that the paſsing
of Xerxes into Graecia, was only about the 90.
Olympiade: becauſe Artaxerxes Pius muſt haue
reigned in Perſia before Xerxes the terrour of
Graecia:
               Nay rather later in part than he, for he ſeemeth to touch the Perſiās ouerthrow to haue been for hindring of the Temple. Ezra. 6. 13. & Dan. 11. The power of Perſia raiſed against Greece, was to look for a ſharp puniſhment frō him whoſe eies were a flame of fire: for the ſorrow cauſed to Daniels people. as it is apparant out of the Prophecie
of Daniel: in whoſe eleuenth chaper and 2.
verſe it is plainlie ſaid; After Cyrus 3. Kings
ſhall rule in Perſia before Xerxes, who ſhal trouble
all Graecia. Yet Xerxes might goe downe into
Graecia vnder Artaxerxes Pius, when hee was
elected King. For euen as vnder Cyrus reigned
Aſſuerus, ſo vnder Artaxerxes Xerxes
might reigne: and the Perſian Monarchie (euē
as the Romanes) at one time might haue manie
Imperators.
            By this it appeares, that the errors admitted
by prophane Hiſtoriographers, and the Chronicles
of our time, in the ſupputation of times,
may be eſpied, and in ſome part amended: But
it is requiſite for vs for this time to pretermit
that care, & to referre it vnto ſome other time
leaſt by handling of other matters, we may

ſeeme to haue forgot our own purpoſe. Theſe
things haue been thus laid downe by vs out of
the holie Scriptures concerning the Perſian
Monarchie, and the Monarchs of Perſia, to lay
open (in ſome part) the truth of the Perſian
Hiſtorie, and to purge it from fables.
            But now we are to come to theThe terme weekes much entangleth the weake, and requireth a comment in Engliſh: for a terme plaine in Ebrue or Greeke. ſeuens of
Daniel, which in the chapter going before, we
haue taught to haue been deuided by the Angell
into three parts; yet ſo, as he hath ſelected
ſeuen out of them, & hath appointed them to
the reſtoring of the Temple and the Citie.
Then he dooth enumerate ſixtie two: in the
which the Church of God was afflicted diuerſlie.
In the third place, the laſt which is the
ſeuentieth, hath been ſet downe: which hath
with it the concluſion and end of all the ceremoniall
of the lawe. But the ſeuen forenamed
ſeuens in the firſt place, becauſe they ſignifie
a yearely time, doo make fortie and nyne
yeres, for that number ſeuen times ſeuen doth
amount vnto: the Hiſtorie whereof, the writings
of Nehemias and Eſdras doo conteine;
which the Latins comprehend in one volume:
ſo as the booke of Nehemias, they call the ſecond
booke of Eſdras. And Ierome in his Epiſle
to Paulinus concerning the books of holy
ſcripture, ſaith that Eſdras & Nehemias were
ſtreightned into one volume: from the which
this preſent Hiſtorie of ſeuen ſeuens or weeks
is to be deriued. And in the firſt chapter of

               Eſdras, the Edict of Cyrus is laid downe, by the
which the people of God is
                  Daniel praied for reſtoring of the Citie, and the Angel accordingly ioineth to the grant ofreturne the building of the Citie: that wee ſhould not ſeek for ſundrie times to take the beginning of our account: vnles whē God maketh a thing plaine, we will be finding out inuentions. reſtored to his libertie
after 70. yeares captiuitie in Babylon. The
people being returned into their Country, the
third chapter teacheth, that the Altare was firſt
built, in the which they offered ſacrifices to
God, which giueth vs alſo to vnderſtand, that
in the ſecond yeare after the returne into their
Countrey, the foundations of the temple were
laid by Zorobabel the ſonne of Salathiel Prince
of Iuda, and by Ioſua the ſonne of Ioſedeck the
high Prieſt. In the fourth chapter, Eſdras teacheth
that the building of the Temple was hindred
by the commandement of Aſſuerus Artaxerxes,
nor begun again to be builded before
the ſecond yeare of Darius Aſſyrius. But in
the ſixt chapter he ſheweth, the Temple was finiſhed
in the ſixt yeare of Darius Aſſyrius,
Zorobabel and Ioſua, imploying and buſying
themſelues chiefely about it, being thereunto
incited by the Prophets Aggey and Zacharie.
The Temple being reſtored and almoſt finiſhed,
Zorobabel Prince of Iudea may be thought
to die, becauſe Eſdras is ſent to Iuda from the
King of Perſia as Viceroy, with agreat companie
of voluntarie Iewes: who remained in
Chaldea after the Edict of Cyrus, and the departure
of their Countrey men; who beeing by
God awakened, had rather leaue their wealth
in Babylon to liue in their owne countrey, than
by enioying it to liue in a ſtrange Countrey.

Yet Eſdras is ſent to Iudea, chiefly to conſtitute
Rulers & Iudges, who might miniſter iuſtice
to the people, thereby to eſtabliſh the ſtate of
the Iewes Commonweale: which is done in
the ſeuenth yeare of Artaxerxes Pius, as it is
in Eſdr. the 4. & the 24. After Eſdras, the ſame
Artaxerxes Pius ſendeth (as his Embaſſador)
Nehemias, with authoritie and commaundement
for couering the gates of the Temple,
that is, for finiſhing the building of the Temple,
as alſo for walling the Citie Ieruſalem, as it
is in 2. Nehem and the 8. Now Nehemias had
this Embaſſage in the twentieth yeare of Artaxerxes
Pius, as it is in the firſt verſe of the 8.
chapter; which was 13. yeres after Eſdras was
ſent Embaſſador to Iuda. Yet Nehemias was
ruler and protector ouer Iuda 12. yeares, as it is
declared in the 5. chap. and 14. verſe. But how
great paines Nehemias tooke in fortefying the
Citie Ieruſalem and compaſsing it with a wal,
is declared from the ſecond chapter to the ſeauenth.
And in the 6. chapter and 15. verſ. is declared,
the great diligence which both hee and
the Iewes vſed in fortefying the Citie Ieruſalem,
ſo great a worke being finiſhed within fiftie
and two dayes, being the fiue & twentieth
of the moneth Elul, which in our account is
Auguſt. And thus we haue the firſt ſeuen ſeuens
fullie ended, that is in the twentieth yeare
of Artaxerxes Pius, in the which Nehemias
came to Iuda. For ſo the Angel foretold, Dan.

chap. 9. verſe. 25. that to the building againe of
ſtreete and walls, ſhould be ſeuen ſeuens, and that in
a troubleſome time. The hoſtile attempts of
the aduerſaries of the people of God, and their
deteſtable counſels practiſed againſt the good;
alſo the niggardlines of the rich towards the
poore: all which are deſcribed verie largely of
Eſdra and Nehemias, doo manifeſt the troubles
and miſeries of theſe times.
            The twentieth yere therefore of Artaxerxes
Pius walleth Ieruſalem & finiſheth the temple
with all his appurtenances; to the finiſhing
whereof, Nehemias had gotten and obtained
ſtuffe of the King. By reaſon whereof, the
Iewes ſay trulie in the ſecond of Iohn and the
twentieth verſe: This Temple was in building
fortie and ſixe yeares; and wilt thou raiſe it vp againe
in three dayes? Which trulie the Iewes
may be thought to ſpeake, as thereby to mention
the twentieth yeare of Artaxerxes Pius,
rather than the ſixt yeare of Darius Aſſyrius.
For by what reaſon that place may receiue other
conſtruction I vnderſtand not, vnleſſe we
will ſay,The very matter dooth ſtill driue him to grāt theſe two names to mean one King: or two beginning reigne together Eſters ſonne he ſhuld be thoght that ſo fauored the Iewes. that Darius Aſſyrius and 1. 
                  
                     •••
                  axerxes
Pius (whom by the Scripture we vnderſtand
to be diuers kings) to haue reigned at one time,
and in the meane time to haue fauoured the
people of God, and to haue taken that care vpon
them, becauſe they were deuoted to Religion.
This not withſtanding we ſhalbe alwaies
cōpelled to affirme, that the Temple was built

in the ſixt yeare of Darius Aſſyrius, as it is in
Eſdras 6. and 15. ver. to the complement wherof,
manie things wanted, which were added
vnder Artaxerxes Pius:
               If any cā ſpeak better thā this to the text of Daniel, he ſhall doo verie well to helpe the world with it. vnder whom (in his
twentieth yere) we will ſay that Ieruſalem was
fortified, as we doo vnderſtand out of the 2. of
Nehemias the 2. verſ. and the 6. cap. and 15. ver.
Wherefore we will thinke (and not without
reaſon) that the Temple was finiſhed with all
his adiuncts (which before were wanting) vnder
Artaxerxes Pius, as peraduenture there
might bee additions to the Temple for the
roomes of the Prieſts miniſtring by courſe in
the Tabernacle of the Lord, & barnes or garners
for to lay vp the firſt fruites and tythes of
the Prieſts. And wee may ſay, that the ſame
time the Citie Ieruſalem attained her fortification.
            But the place of the Goſpel before remembred
is not to be paſt ouer; whereby the authoritie
of Ioſephus,
               
                  Ioſephus regarded cuſtom of ſpeach, rather thā truth, ſometimes vnwares he ſpeaketh well: thē he is voide of parcialitie. Often he foloweth heathen: or of malice croſſeth prophecies and his whole nation: thē his authoritie is nothing. Writer of the Iewiſh ſtorie
(whom our time too greatly eſteemeth of)
is to be diminiſhed: who trulie in manie places
ſheweth himſelfe to be ignorāt of thoſe things
which he handleth, and argueth himſelfe to be
a ſtranger in his owne Common wealth. And
it is requiſite for this which we haue in hand,
to ſhew himto bee ſcarce aduiſed and circumſpect,
nay, moſt notable impudent and a liar,
that we may vnderſtād that his writings muſt
be more narrowlie lookt into and examined

of vs. For he in the 15. booke of the Iewiſh
antiquitie, the 14. chapt. ſaith, That Herode the
ſonne of Antipater erected the Temple from the
foundation farre more ſumptuouſlie and largelie
than it was: and to haue finiſhed it with his additions
and gates, in eight yeares and a halfe. But the
Iewes that liued in that age, conuince him of
lying, who (caſting their eyes to the old building)
ſay, that that was built in the ſpace of 40
and 6. yeares. Beſides, we know that the ſecōd
Temple, that is, that Temple which Zorobabel
(with Ioſua) built, and the reſt of the Companie
of the Iewes, which returned frō the captiuitie
of Babylon; to haue been ouerthrowen &
ſubuerted, about fortie yeres after the death of
Chriſt, with all the pompe of the ceremonies
of the lawe: which theAnd the Talmud Zoar, and commentaries commonly. Iewiſh Hiſtoriographers
alſo doo acknowledge, to haue bin done
by Titus, referring the deſtruction of the ſecond
Temple, to the Romanes and their Imperator
Titus. And wee know by the certaine
predictions of the prophets, that the ſame Tē
               ple
ſtood when Chriſt Ieſus our Lord beeing
man, conuerſed in mount Sion. For Aggey
ſaith in the 2. chapt. 10. verſe. That the glorie
of the ſecond Temple built by Zorobabel, ſhould be
farre greater than that was of Salomons Temple,
looking vnto the preſence of Chriſt the Lord,
who was therewith to beautefie their Temple.
Yet if (as Ioſephus ſaith) Herode had built
that Temple in which our Lord was conuerſant,

that ſhould not haue been the ſecond temple,
but the third; the forme whereof ſhoulde
haue been farre otherwiſe, as Ezechiel deſcribeth
it in the latter end of his prophecie. Therfore
manie of our time are to bee condemned
of ſloth and ignorance, who ſtand ſo affected
to the writings of Ioſephus, and the like Writers,
that preſentlie they aſſent vnto them, and
beleeue thoſe things to, be true which are propounded
by them; the book of the holy ſcripture
in the meane while paſt ouer and neglected,
and the diuine hiſtories careleſly read ouer:
which hiſtories muſt be firſt and chieflie learned;
by the which all other are to bee iudged
of & examined, none but a moſt vniuſt iudge
will denie.
            But becauſe it is ſaid, the ſecond Temple
was finiſhed in ſixe and fortie yeares: and yet
neuertheleſſe ſeuen ſeuens which amounteth
vnto fortie nine yeares, is aſsigned to the abſolute
finiſhing of the temple: therefore it muſt
thus be vnderſtood, That the Temple was abſolutely finiſhed, with the Citie walled about
in the nine and fortieth yeare after the libertie
reſtored by Cyrus. Yet ſixe and fortie yeares to
be onely beſtowed in the building of the temple:
becauſe three whole yeares were paſſed
before Zorobabel & the other, which returned
out of captiuitie, came to doo that worke. For
after Cyrus Edict publiſhed for the libertie and
reſtoring of the people of GOD, a great time

was requiſite to conſult of the manner of their
returne, and for to compell thoſe that ſhould
returne, and to ſettle their affaires, who determined
to leaue Chaldea, to retourne to their
Countrey. Let vs therefore graunt a yere for
theſe matters: which being ended, let vs admit
the Iewes returners, to haue begun their iourney
the ſecond yeare from the publiſhing of
the Edict; and ſo we ſhall vnderſtand theſe returners
to haue come into their Countrey a
yeare and almoſt a halfe after the Edict of Cyrus.
For from Babylon to Iudea, the iourney to
thoſe that haue lets, is of foure moneths trauell,
as it is written in the 7. of Eſdr. 8. verſe, in
this ſort. And they came to Ieruſalem the fift
moneth, which is the ſeuenth yeare of the King: becauſe
they begun to goe from Babilon in the first
day of the first month: and came into Ieruſalem
the first day of the fift moneth, according to the
good fauour of God towards them. Now, the
foundations of the Temple were not layd as
ſoone as they came to Ieruſalem: for we read in
the third of Eſdr. and the 8. verſe, that this was
not done till the ſecond yere after their return.
From whēce we gather, that there wereTo the foundation in ſome plain forwardnes: wherefore in the 3. of Cyrus, Daniel was in heauineſſe for the worke hindred. three
yeares from the Edict of Cyrus, to the foundations
of the Temple laid: to the which, if we
adde ſixe and fortie yeares, we haue nine and
fortie yeares which are aſsigned to the firſt ſeuen
ſeuens, which ended and expounded, according
as they were propounded by the Angel

wee muſt paſſe ouer to the ſixtie and two
ſeuens which follow:
                  Ioſephus in Euſeb, dem. 8. to the full finiſhing of the Temple, reckoneth 49. yeres. which we will handle
ſhortly, leaſt we be tedious.
            The ſixtie two ſeuens, which ſucceede the
ſeuen before ſpoken of, begin from the twentie
and one yeare of Artaxerxes Pius, which is
the fourth yeare of the ninetie two Olympiade,
               Though hee make ſome account of a nū
                  ber certaine in Olympiades: he might rather for this than anie thing elſe blame the heathen of vncertaintie.
from whence beginneth the eight of Daniels
ſeuens. But this time is ended and compaſſed
in the beginning of the ſeuētieth ſeuen, which
falleth into the ſecond yeare of the hundred &
one Olympiade, when Quintus Tiberius Nero
reigned in Rome after Octauius Augustus, the
yeare from the Citie built, ſeuen hundred ſeauentie
eight. Now what was the ſtate of the
church in theſe ſeuentie two ſeuens, is opened
and taught by the viſions of Daniel, as before
we haue ſaid. Therefore in the ſeuenth chapter
of Daniel, foure Monarchies are propounded
vnder foure terrible beaſts; vnder whom
the people of GOD was diuerſlie afflicted.
Whom although earthlie and ſen ſuall men
deſired to deſtroy & conſume, yet they could
neuer remooue the people of God from their
conſtancie and faith, God miraculouſlie preſeruing
and defending his Church. But the
Iewes Commonwealth liued proſperouſlie enough
vnder Artaxerxes Pius; when that Perſian
King (vnto whom the reſt of Aſia and Syria
obeyed) cared for it and the people of God.
For hee (after the death of Zorobabel) compounded

and eſtabliſhed the Church cauſes, as
may be vnderſtood by the Commentaries of
Eſdras and Nehemias. After this Artaxerxes
Pius, wee haue taught the Empire of the Eaſt,
or the Perſian Empire, to ſucceed to Xerxes the
terror of Graecia: but from this Xerxes immediately
to Alexander the great doth the Angel
paſſe, paſsing ouer the other Kings of Perſia,
becauſe they were inferiour in renowme to
Xerxes, neither greatlie regarded the cauſes of
the Church, but ſuffering them to paſſe according
to the time; being ouer ſeriouſlie buſied
exacting and gathering vp of tributes, and the
yearely reuenue.
            By the going downe of Alexander into
Syria, it might be thought, that the Church of
God ſhould ſuſtaine great dammage, by reaſon
of his warre againſt Tyrus, and againſt Egypt:
for the going downe out of Phoenicia into Egypt,
is through Iudea; and Alexander the great
was verie angrie with the Iewes, becauſe they
had denied him aid and prouiſion, and becauſe
they tooke the Perſians part, whome they then
obeyed. Beſides, religion and true godlineſſe,
diſſenting from others who were idolaters,
prouoked wicked men and contemners of
God, againſt the people of God. But God (in
whoſe hand are not onely the hearts of Kings,
but of all men) reconciled Alexander to his
people; and brought the inſolencie of a fooliſh
and proud yong man (intollerable through

ſucceſſe of his victories) to a moderation, and
cauſed him to performe great ſignes and arguments
of fauour to thoſe with whom hee ſeemed
to be moſt diſpleaſed. Therefore in this
Hiſtorie, we may obſerue the ſame, which we
vnderſtand to haue fallen out in the firſt times
of the Church of Iſrael, betweene Laban and
Iaacob. Gen. 31. 24. For Laban with an exaſperate
minde and with a great band purſued Iaacob
(who fled from him), in hope to finde Iaacob
vnprouided, & to ouerthrow his ſubſtāce.
Yet this boldneſſe of Laban God in a wonderfull
manner kept vnder, forbidding him, not
onely not to deale raſhlie with Iaacob, but not
ſo much as to ſpeake raſhlie to him; ſo God
repreſſed this furious man, and compelled him
to ſeeke his friendſhip, whom he went about
to deſtroy. In the ſame manner, God made Alexander
the great (an inſolent and proud king,
diſpleaſed with his people (that is) the Iewes,
whom in hope he had now deuoured and deſtroyed)
ſo quiet as a ſheepe, and brought him
to wonder at thē, and to preſerue them whom
he went to deſtroy.
            But the Succeſſors of Alexander, ſome of
whom ruled Aſia, & ſome Egypt, afflicted the
Iewes afterwards with diuers miſeries, becauſe
when the one lay in waite for the others
life, wealth and Kingdome, and deſtroyed thē
               ſelues
through mutuall warres, both of them
aimed at Iudea, as a reward of victoire. Theſe

Hiſtories which Daniel hath ſet downe in few
words, prophane Writers haue at large layde
downe in their Writings:In the Image legs, chapt 2. fourth beaſt chap. 7 buckes hornes chap. 8. and in a proper ſpeach, chapt. 11. and 12. from which wee
vnderſtand the word of God to be moſt true,
and all things to be gouerned by diuine decree
and prouidence. Neither doo we acknowledge
the Church of God to bee ſubiect vnto
the iniuries of tyrants, without his certaine appointment.
And there are extant learned interpretations
vpon Daniel, not onely of auncient
Diuines, but alſo of later, and of our time, by
the which his Viſions and the Hiſtories theretoo
pertaining are expounded. There are alſo
added to Daniels writings, certaine mens Cronicles,
by the which manie hiſtories of Scripture
are opened and explaned: wherefore we
neede not (in this place) be anie longer in the
expounding of the Greeke and Romane Monarchies,There is no word in Daniel which handleth the Romanes dealing against the lewes: vntill they denie and kill Christ, after the 490. Y. for which time their citie was called, the holy Citie. There onely the Romanes be noted, and tearmed a wing or campe of Infidels, or abhominable.
which are handled ſhortly in Daniels
writings; yet to thoſe Monarchies Iudea became
ſubiect, euen as to the Perſian Monarchy
theſe ſixtie and two ſeuens. But we will onely
by the way note this in this argument, that
the Greekiſh Monarchie is called that power
of Alexander the great and his Succeſſours,
which was afterwards ouerthrowen by the
Romans: as afterwards alſo the Romans (which
obſcured all others) was ouerthrowen by the
Gothes. But it is therefore callec the Greekiſh
Monarchie, becauſe in the 8. of Daniel, the 21.
verſ. the Goate bucke (which is Alexander the

great) is ſaid to bee the King of the Graecians.
For by a common conſent of all Graecia, at a
Councell helde at Corinth, Alexander the great
was declared Emperour of Graecia to purſue
the Perſians by warre.The not able horne in the forehead of the Bucke is the firſt King of Iauan Dan. 8. Whereby it came to
paſſe, that the Macedonian Empire of Alexāder
is named in Scripture the Graecian, long before
that Alexander was borne. But Philip the Father
of Alexander the great, hauing ouercome
the Graecians at Chaeronea, commaunded himſelfe
to be called (not the King, but) the Duke
of Graecia, as Iustine in his ninth booke declareth:
whoſe example Alexander the great following,
ſummoning the Cities of Graecia to
appeare at Corynth, after he had ſetled the ſtate
of the Kingdome, hee cauſed himſelfe to bee
choſen Duke of Graecia in his fathers place, as
Iustine declareth in his eleuenth. Therefore being
choſen the Reuenger of Graecia (ſo oftentimes
inuaded by the Perſians) inuaded Aſia:
which he ſubdued with that ſpeede, as the holie
Oracles before opened to Daniel, and had
declared and denounced; that thoſe who meruaile
at the felicitie of Alexander,
               His Kingdome is a Leopard with 4. wings. Dan, 7. and (as it is
commonly called) the fortune, are to be ſent to
the diuine decrees ouer Kingdomes, and to be
admoniſhed of the diuine will & prouidence;
on which the condition & ſtate of all men dependeth.
Therefore, what the Kingdome of
Alexander the great was like to be, & how to
bee diuided vnto maine, it is eaſie to bee found

out of Daniel. In the which, it is to be marked,
that by reaſon of the ſcituation of Iudea, the
Kings of the North are ſaid to be the Kings of
Aſia, and the Kings of the South are called
the Kings of Egypt, proceeding from Ptolomeus
the ſonne of Lagus.
            
            Now there reſteth & is remaining one ſeauen,
which is the laſt & the ſeuentith; wherof
alſo ſme thing muſt be ſaid, ſeeing it comprehendeth
the Miniſterie of Chriſt the Lord &
his death,Epheſ, 1. in which is the fulnes of times. Of
the which it is thus prophecied in the 9. of
Daniel the 27. ver. But he ſhall confirme the couenant
for many in
               The Hebrue might be better tranſlated for plaines but for ſmal things men ſhould not fight. 
               one ſeuen, & in the half of the laſt
ſeuen ſhall ceaſe offring & ſacrifice, and in the Tē
                  ple
ſhalbe abhomination of deſolation, and deſolation
ſhall continue vntill a conſummation and ende.
Which words in part are rather taken out of
ſome Greeke Interpreter, than out of the Hebrue
text; and whether they be taken out of
the ſeuentie Interpreters, the proper interpretation
of this verſe in the Greeke Copies printed
at Strausburge in the yeare of our Lord
1526. maketh ſomewhat doubtfull.
            If anie enquire after the Hebrue,The Greek & Hebrue are omitted (which bare Engliſh men neede not to be troubled with) though he ſet them downe. and deſireth
to know, let them heare and vnderſtand
that the words may be thus tranſlated, And
one ſeauen ſhall confirme the couenaunt for manie:
and the halfe of that ſeuen ſhall cauſe to ceaſe
Sacrifice and Offering, and euerie one ſhall bee amazed,
for the extremitie of abhomination & deſolation

ſhall drop vpon the astoniſhed,Whereas Mat. Beroaldus expoundeth the halfe ſeuen, & not onely the time of our Lords death, to conteine the miniſterie of doctrine, which maketh ſtrong the couenaunt for many, that is, the heathē: and the ſame time to cauſe ſacrifice to ceaſe: as well by the doctrine teaching of that, as by the Lords verie death: Of this the reader is to be admoniſhed leaſt he ſhould thinke him to ſay, that Chriſt ſhould die in halfe that ſeauen: whereof he is of ſome vniuſtly blamed: as alſo an other of his iudgement. euen vnto a
certaine deſtruction.
            
            But in this place, wee muſt chieflie looke
vnto the Hebrue, becauſe the Latine & Greek
doth expound and ſignifie, in the halfe of that
laſt ſeauen the ſacrifices ſhall ceaſe. Which
was not ſo, neither doo the Hebrew wordes
teach that: which ſay, The halfe of that laſt ſeuen
will adde an ende to the ſacrifice and ceremonies of
the lawe. But the halfe of that ſeauen, ſignifieth
thoſe things which are done in the laſt ſeauen
of all, which brought an ende to the ceremoniall
lawe of Moſes, the eternall couenaunt of
God, concerning our ſaluation by Chriſt the
Lord, being declared ſtable and firme. But afterwards
there was nothing to be lookt for to
the Citie Ieruſalem & to the vnbeleeuers (who
contemned God calling them) but a beadroule
of miſeries, which ſhould deſtroy Ieruſalem, &
enwrap the Iewiſh people, rebellious and diſobedient
to God, in infinite calamities.
            But thoſe things brought an ende to the ceremonies
of the lawe, which were done in the
halfe of the laſt ſeauen; which teach that Ieſus
Chriſt was made manifeſt, Iohn Baptist being
the publiſher & foremeſſenger of ſo great
a good. To whom God ſpake whileſt hee liued
in the deſert, giuing him commandements
which he ſhould put in practiſe, then when it
was the 15. yeare of Tiberius Caeſars Empire, as
it is written in the third of Luke: where theſe

things are thus ſet downe; But in the 15. yeare
of the reigne of Tiberius Caeſar, Pontius Pilate
being Lieutenant of Iudea, and Herode Tetrarch
of Galilee, and his brother Philip Tetrarch of
Iturea and of the Region of Traconitis, and
Lyſama Tetrarch of Abilena, Ananias and Caiphas
beeing the high Sacrificers, the word of the
Lord came vnto Iohn the ſonne of Zacharie, being
in the wilderneſſe: And he came into all the countrey
of Iordan, preaching the baptiſme of repentance
for remiſsion of ſinnes. It appeareth therefore
out of theſe words of the Euangeliſt Luke
that after his commiſsion & commaundement
giuen from heauen, Iohn came into all the Region
nere Iordan, preaching the baptiſme of
repentance for remiſsion of ſinnes: who whileſt
he baptiſed the people, waſheth Chriſt the
Lord (beginning to be thirtie yeare olde) with
the waſhing of baptiſme, as it is taught in the
ſame third chapter of Luke the Euangeliſt, in
theſe words; And it came to paſſe when all the
people was baptized, and Ieſus had been baptized
and was praying, the heauen opened: And the holy
Spirit deſcended in a corporall forme as a Doue
vpon him, and a voice came from heauen; Thou art
my ſonne, in thee I am well pleaſed. And Ieſus began
to be as it were thirtie yeare olde.
            
            Now this obſeruation of the age of the
Lord, and of the Romane Emperour Tiberius is
not lightlie to bee paſſed ouer, becauſe from
thence is the certaine knowledge of the death

of the Lord and his age, as alſo of the ende of
the ſeuentie ſeuens of Daniel. Now wee haue
alreadie ſhewed the death of our Lord Ieſus
Chriſt, to be the limit and ende of Daniels ſeauentie
ſeauens, which wee can eaſelie gather
into what inſtance of time they fall out. And
we know from the hiſtorie of the Goſpel, that
Chriſt the Lord was crucified that day in the
which the Paſſeouer was to be offered by euerie
familie; which was the fourteenth day of
the firſt moneth, that is March, as the account
of the olde yeare was vſuallie taken, as before
hath been declared in the account of moneths
and yeares. Therefore the 14. day of the moneth
of March (which to the Hebrues is Niſan,
and is the firſt moneth of the ciuile yeare
amongſt the people of God) is the ende and
concluſion of the ſeauentie ſeauens; becauſe
then the Lord is dead: whom Daniels Prophecie
witneſſeh (in the time of the halfe laſt ſeauen)
to haue performed amongſt men the dutie
of a true teacher and ſauiour. Alſo the hiſtorie
of the goſpel, which remembreth foure
feaſts of Eaſter after his baptiſme (as Andreas
Oſiander hath learnedly gathered and expounded
in his edition of the Harmonie of the goſpell)
frō whence is gathered both the certaine
age of Chriſt while he liued vppon earth, and
the certaine time of his death. For becauſe
Chriſt the Lord was baptiſed the 15. yeare of
Tiberius Caeſar, & was then baptiſed, when he

began to bee thirtie yeares of age, (as it is expounded
in Luke the Euangeliſt the 3. chapter)
trulie he muſt ſuffer death for vs on the croſſe
the eighteenth yere of Tiberius, then when he
was three and thirtie yeares olde; that is, when
he had fullie accompliſhed thirtie two yeares
and a halfe: for the halfe of the laſt ſeauen cō
               teineth
three yeares and a halfe; in which is
anoynted the Holie of Holieſt, Chriſt Ieſus,
and declared King of his heauenlie Father vpon
Mount Sion, by whom our ſinnes were thē
to be purged. Moreouer, the ſacrifices of the
Lawe were to be taken away by the death of
the immaculate Lambe; that is, the Lord leſus
Chriſt, after hee had on earth finiſhed the
dutie of a true teacher and prophet. But he began
to teach and to manifeſt himſelfe to be the
true Meſsias or Chriſt, when he began his 30.
yeare, but in that function he ſpent three yere
and a halfe. From whence the thirtieth yeare
of his age is the firſt of his Miniſterie, then
the 31. the ſecond, and the 32. the third: in
the which Chriſt the Lord was the Miniſter
of circumciſion. From whence the thirtie &
three yeare of his age, in the midſt where of he
fullie finiſhed his miniſterie, ſhalbe ſaid the
halfe yeare of the laſt half ſeauen, in the which
were fulfilled all the prophecies of the Prophetes
concerning our ſaluation purchaſed by
Chriſt the Lord the three and thirtieth yere of
his age. But that three & thirtieth yeare of the

Lord vnexpired, falleth into the eighteenth Y.
of Tiberius Caeſar; becauſe in the fifteenth yere
of Tiberius, beginneth the thirtie of the Lord:
whereby the one and thirtieth yeare of our
Lord falleth into the ſixteenth yeare of Tiberius,
and his thirtie two yeare runneth into the
ſeuenteenth yeare of Tiberisn, then the three
and thirtieth yeare of the Lord, muſt needes be
referred to the eighteenth yeare of Tiberius:
which becauſe they be grounded on the teſtimonies
of holie Scripture, and not on the vncertaine
opinions of men, they appeare to bee
true and certaine.
            But that the Lord Ieſus Chriſt accompliſhed
two and thirtie yeares & a halfe on earth,
the auncient Church alſo acknowledged, as
reuerent Bed a hath witneſſed in his booke of
the Nature of things, the fortie ſeuenth chapter:
whoſe words are theſe; For the faith of the
Church (if I am not deceiued) embraceth this, that
the Lord liued in the fleſh ſomewhat more than two
and thirtie yeares vnto the time of his paſsion; becauſe
he was baptized at thirtie yeres, as the Euangelist
Luke witneſſeth, and preached three Y. &


an halfe after his baptiſme, as Iohn teacheth in his
Goſpel, not onely by the time of the Paſſeouer, but
alſo in his Reuelation. Daniel alſo in his viſion appointeth
the very ſame propheticallie. Surely the
holy & apostolike Church of Rome testifieth, that
ſhe reckoneth this faith euen by thoſe notes, which
ſhe vſeth yerely to write in her waxe things:
               In Cere
                     ••
                  . 
               where

calling into the peoples minde the time of the Lords
paſsion, noteth alwaies three and thirtie yeare leſſe
than Dionyſius reckoneth from his incarnation.
Theſe things Beda deliuereth of the age of the
Lord Ieſus. But I am ignorant
                  Carthuſianus ap. 11. expoundeth Beda That by dayes 1260. muſt bee vnderſtood all the time of the Euangel call lawe: becauſe Christ had preached ſo long a time: Beda vnderſtood that time to haue been an alluſion to the time of our Lords preaching. what place of
the Reuelation teacheth it: but we may think
that this was confeſſed in olde time by ſome
receiued Cabala or tradition. Euſebius in his 8.
booke & ſecond chapter of the demonſtration
of the Goſpell confirmeth this, ſaying; Surely
it hath been recorded in written Storie, that all the
time of the teaching and dooing of miracles of our
Sauiour was three yeares and a halfe: which is
truly the halfe of one ſeauen. In a ſort Iohn the Euangelist
will declare this to them who ſhall attentiuely
conſider his Goſpell. Thus farre Euſebius.
Afterwards Abbas Vſpergenſis ſaith in the life
of Tiberius; The three and thirtieth yeare of his
incarnation, our Lord Ieſus ſuffered in his fleſh and
roſe again. Alſo Nicephorus Calliſtus concludeth
the firſt booke of his hiſtories thus; This first
booke of hiſtories conteineth three & thirtie yeres,
the beginning taken from the two and fortieth yere
of the reigne of Auguſtus Caeſar now wexing old;
in the which our Lord Ieſus Christ (with fleſh) came
foorth of the holie Virgine: but the ende ending in
the eighteenth yeare of Tiberius Caeſars reigne:
which truly is from the creatiō of the world
               He followeth the Greekes most groſse errour by miſtaking the Septuaginta vpon Gen. 15▪ & 11 5538.
but was from the birth of our Lord three and thirtie.
Theſe out of manie may ſuffice: from
which it is apparant that the time of the life of

the Lord Ieſus on earth was well knowen to
the auncient Fathers. Whereof yet the Diuines
of our time doo ſo diſpute, that a matter
of it ſelfe plaine enough, they doo ſo enwrap
and infolde, that it is very hard for them to vnlooſe
themſelues from their trifling lets.
            Therefore in the eighteenth yeare of Tiberius,
and the three and thirtieth of Chriſt the
Lord, we haue concluded the ſeuentie ſeuens
of Daniel; which, to what yeares of the Olympiades,
               The 4 yeare of the Olympiad 202. ſuppoſing his owne accōpt to be true, as he placed Cyrus: otherwiſe Olympiades are of no certaintie.
or to the Citie of Rome, or to the creation
of the world they are to bee referred, may
moſt certainly be gathered out of the continuance
and compariſon of times, determined by
the authoritie of holie Scripture as is noted in
the Table. But the eighteenth yere of Tiberius
is the foureſcore & 4. yeare from the building
of Rome;
               784. but of the world created three thouſand
nine hundred ſixtie one:For one yeares difference, a modeſt ſtudent will not ſtriue. which notation
of time to be diligentlie conſidered, and not to
be ouerpaſſed careles or ſlothfullie, the oracles
of the Prophets concerning theſe matters doo
declare.A ſpeciall point. For if by proper ſcripture from Adam deriued, our Lords time of ſuffering might not be ſhewed, a matter most needful & wiſhed of al, had been omitted, but God omitteth nothing good for vs. But ſo diligent a care and carefulneſſe
which the Scripture vſeth in noting
downe theſe times ſhuld ſharpen our diligence
and ſhake out of vs all ſluggiſhnes; wherefore
there is no reaſon why this our paines ſhould
be deſpiſed of anie or miſliked, ſeeing it conſiſteth
and is grounded on the word of GOD,
and not on the traditions or opinions of men.
But by this we vnderſtād that the knowledge

of theſe times do chieflie concerne vs, becauſe
they were written for vs, who are come to
thoſe acceptable times & to that grace, which
we haue alſo obteined; which trulie now lōg
agoe hath been prophecied by the oracles and
foretellings of the Prophets. For as the Apoſtle
Peter ſaith in the firſt chapter of his firſt epiſtle;
Of this ſaluation the Prophets enquired &
ſearched, who prophecied of the grace to come on
you, ſearching in what time, or after what ſeaſon
the ſpirit of Christ which was in thē, did foretel the
ſuffrings which ſhould come to Chriſt, and his glorie
to come: to whom it was reuealed, that not for
themſelues but for vs they did ſhowe thoſe things
which now are declared vnto vs by thē who preach
the Goſpel vnto vs, the holie ſpirit hauing been ſent
from heauen, which things the Angels deſire to behold.
So Peter the Apoſtle commendeth the
greatnes of the grace communicated vnto vs
in his time, foretold and foreended by the Prophets;
that the Angels alſo doo admire it, and
doo deſire to behold the complement thereof;
whereof that the elect be not defrauded, wee
muſt ſtriue by all meanes.
            The fruite alſo which floweth from theſe
times is not to be omitted, becauſe theThe Iewes feare diſputing vpon this text: more than anie other, and leſt meddle with it in their comments. Iewes
by the demonſtration of them, may be cōuinced,
to yeeld yet at the length vnto Chriſt, and
reſt themſelues in Chriſtianitie, and leaue off
to blaſpheame. To which purpoſe wee muſt
not onelie ioyne Daniels ſeuens, but alſo Iaacobs
               
prophecie, which is in this ſort in the 49.
of Geneſis 10. The Scepter ſhall not be taken from
Iuda, nor a Ruler out of his loynes till Silo come:
that is his ſon, to wit Iuda, and he ſhalbe the expectation
of the Gētiles.
               
                  Zoar vpō that place doth confeſſe the nature of God conteined in Shiloh, and moſt Rabbines expound that place of Chriſt. For that this ver. is thus
to be interpreted the Rabbines alſo confeſſe, the
truth compelling them: for they ſay, Silo ſignifieth
Beno, that is, His ſonne; which is the Meſſias
Chriſt the Lord, the ſonne of Iuda. For
Chriſt the Lord roſe from Iuda, as is confirmed
and taught by the Scriptures. Heb. 8. 14.
To this the Prophecie and teſtimonie of Aggey
the Prophet beeing added is of no ſmall
force, in which the ancient Rabbines acknowledge
the preſence of Chriſt the Lord to bee
ſignified, with the which hee was to beautefie
the ſecond Temple, which place is cited out
of the 2. Aggey the 8. And I will mooue all Nations,
and the deſired ſhall come to all the Gentiles,
and I will fill the houſe with glorie ſaith the Lord of
hoasts. Thus farre Beroaldus.
            
            Now that the ſaid ſeauens of Daniel may
the more eaſelie be vnderſtood, becauſe many
Interpreters both Graecians & Latines, haue in
certaine places departed from the Hebrue text,
ſhall be added in this place an interpretation as
neere anſwering the Hebrue words as we can
Dan. 9. 24.Becauſe it is not good to haue differing tranſlations for ſmal points is one kingdom this for his, was borrowed from a defender of his iudgment. SEVENTIE SEVENS (of yeares)
are cut out, for thy people, and for thy holy Citie:
to conſume wickednes, & to aboliſh ſinnes,
and to make reconciliation for iniquitie, and to

bring righteouſnes euerlaſting, and to ſeale Viſion
and Prophet, & to ſhew CHRIST the HOLIE
of HOLIE. Know then & marke: from
the outgoing of the Word, to returne & to build
Ieruſalem, vnto CHRIST the GOVERNOVR,
ſhal be ſeuen ſeuens (of yeares) and ſixtie & two
ſeuens: in the other it ſhalbe reſtored and builded,
Streete and Wall: and troublous ſhall theſe
times be.Though theſe words be not in the text: yet for light of the argument, they may well be vſed: ſo doo the beſt that profes folowing of the Hebrue. They think it no departing from the Hebrue to adde words for explication, and nothing is more vſuall. It is maruell that ſome of iudgement blame ſo vſuall and lawfull a matter. 
               In that after the ſixtie and two ſeuens
CHRIST ſhalbe killed, and not for himſelfe:
thereupon the Citie and holy place ſhall hee deſtroy,
the GOVERNORS own people to come:
and their ende ſhalbe with a Flood: and at the
ende of warre, it ſhall haue a finall iudgement to
deſolation. But he ſhal confirme the Teſtament
for manie the laſt Seauen: when in HALFE
THAT SEAVEN he ſhall finiſh the Sacrifice &
Oblation. Afterwards by an Armie abhominable
he ſhall make a deſolation: euen till vtter deſtruction
and finall Iudgement flowe vpon the
deſolate.
            
               The iudgement of Henrie Wolphius touching
Beroaldus, may fitly be ioyned here.
               THe fourth Article of the time changed, being
the ſeuenth of the olde teſtament, conteineth
foure hundred and ninetie yeares, Daniels
ſeauentie weekes. It beginneth from the
firſt yeare of Cyrus, and endeth in the ioyfull &
moſt famous Iubilee of all Iubilees, in the yeare
wherein Chriſt ſuffred, being the truth of that
type or figure.
               
                  
                  Daniels words concerning thoſe ſeauentie
ſeauen are diuerſelie interpreted by the learned:
but in my iudgement of all other moſt
learnedlie and moſt truelie hath Matthew Beroald,
in his Cronicle deliuered the minde of
the Prophet. The ſeuentie begins from the going
foorth of the Word, to repaire and reedifie
Ieruſalem, to wit of that Word which is
ſet down in the ſecond of the Chr. and the laſt.
verſe. Neither frō anie other time can this beginning
be ſet down: for the Citie & Temple
are not repayred in one yere.
               Furthermore, when the Prophet diuideth
the ſeuens into two parts, into ſeuen and ſixtie
and two ſeauens: the firſt Seuen he referres to
the troubleſome times, in the which the ſtreet
& ditch are ſaid to be renued and built againe:
which is certainlie knowen to haue been finiſhed
in fortie and nine yeares. Thirdly, he doth
ſo interpret the words of the Prophet (that is,
And after ſixtie and two ſeauens Christ ſhalbe killed)
that he ſaith theſe ſeuens be ended in the
paſsion of Chriſt, and after this that there was
nothing to be looked for, but a finall deſtruction
and deſolation of the Citie and Temple; all
which are moſt notorious. And in the 24. ver.
he doth ſo deſcribe the ende of the ſeuens, that
it cannot otherwiſe be vnderſtood then to fall
out in the paſsion of Chriſt. For he ſaith, To
conſume impietie, to ſhut vp ſinne, to purge iniquitie,
to bring in euerlasting iustice, to fulfil viſion &

prophet, & to annoint the Holie of Holiest. Who
knoweth not that theſe things wer performed
when Chriſt ſaid, All things are finiſhed? To
conclude that which is ſaid, And in the halfe of
the ſeauen he ſhall cauſe to ceaſe oblation and ſacrifice,
is trulie expounded of Chriſts preaching
which he began in the fourth yeare of the laſt
ſeauen.
            
            
               To this may be added a parcell of Bucholcerus
words touching the expoſition of the
last halfe ſeuen for the vſe of them that
little are acquainted with this part of
Scripture: but ſome words of his where
the matter well ſuffereth, ſhalbe omitted:
ſuch as would require a long ſpeach vpon
them.
               LEt vs come to the declaration of the reſidue
of the 9. of Daniel, in the which the ende of
the ſeuentie ſeuens is deſcribed. The firſt ſeauen
ſeauens are 49. yeares, becauſe euerie ſeauen cō
                  teineth
ſeauen yeares. Thoſe former 49. yeares
runne out vnder Eſdra and Nehemias reedifying
the Temple. To theſe let there be added ſixtie
and two ſeauens, that is to ſay 434▪ yeare, & they
ſurmouut vnto ſixtie and nine weekes, or 483.
There remaineth one ſeauen, that is the laſt ſeauen:
in the halfe whereof Chriſt did teach three
yeare & a halfe, till by his death vpon the croſſe
he purged ſinne and ended the ſeuens.
               Diuerſitie of expoſition grewe by reaſon of
this; He ſhall confirme the couenant for manie in one

ſeauen. For that the ſeauenth yeare, or laſt of the
laſt ſeauen might be complete: manie haue extended
the ende of the ſeauens, vnto the preaching
of the Apoſtles, and to the 4. yeare after the
death of Chriſt. Others haue been of another
opinion.
               We (by their fauour) doo thinke that Daniel
plainlie pointed out the perſon and the courſe
of life of the onely Meſſias, & that by great aduiſe
the laſt ſeuen is deriued from all the former.
For the halfe of the laſt ſeauen doth belong vnto
the Meſſias and to his wonderfull workes: that
ſeauen tolde the Meſſias to be come, in that ſeauen
Christ the Annoynted began to teach, he eſtabliſhed
a new lawe and abrogated the olde, hee
tooke away ſinne, cleanſed iniquitie, fulfilled the
prophecies, he finiſhed the work of redemption
and brought eternall righteouſnes. Neither can
theſe ſeuens which Daniel here mentioneth, be
aſcribed vnto the Apoſtles, that is, to cleanſe
ſinne, to take away iniquitie, to bring righteouſnes;
for this is the dutie of the onely Meſſias: to
the finiſhing whereof, Daniel ſaith the laſt ſeuen
is appointed: and he ſaith this twice, firſt generallie
and then ſpeciallie. Generallie, He ſhal confirme
the couenant in one ſeauen. Speciallie, In the
halfe of the ſeauen he ſhall make to ceaſe the Sacrifice.
So that is generall, After 62. weekes Christ ſhalbe
ſlaine. Where it might be doubted, whether immediately
after the 62. weekes fullie ended, the
Meſſias was to be ſlaine. The particular therefore
which teacheth the confirmation of the couenant
or Chriſts preching to be tied to the half
of the laſt ſeuen, expoundeth the generalitie of
both. Therefore it is not Daniels meaning, He
will confirme the couenant in one ſeauen, that is to ſay,

the last yet running out and continuing. Yet leaſt the
time of Chriſts miniſterie ſhuld be referred vnto
all the laſt ſeauen, or to the beginning thereof;
he addeth by way of correction, in the halfe
of the laſt ſeauen: that at once hee might teach
Chriſts miniſtery ſhould bee referred to the laſt
half of the laſt ſeauen.Though many Tranſlaters runne on the middle of the ſeauen: yet many the eldeſt and the late, follow the proprietie of the Hebrue word: which moſt often is taken for halfe, & neuer for middle, but when the matter forceth that ſignification. But the whole ſum of 490. yeare here ſuffreth it not to be wreſted. Otherwiſe, if 3. yere & a
halfe be reckoned from the beginning of that
ſeauen, and be ended in the midſt thereof; ſeauentie
weekes ſhould not be accompliſhed but
69. ſeauens & a halfe that is 487. yere, not 490.
               Reuerent Beda ſaw this: who in his booke of
the account of times the 7. chapter, writeth after
this manner; Christ was not ſtaine immediately
after the 62. ſeauens, but in the ende of the ſeuentieth
ſeauen: which ſo farre as we can coniecture he ſeparated
from the other, becauſe he was to ſpeak more of this
hereafter. For both Christ was crucified in that, and
of a faithleſſe people he was denied, not onely at his paſſion,
but continuallie from the time when Iohn began
to preach him. The halfe of the last ſeauen was the 15
yeare of Tiberius Caeſar, when after the baptiſme of
Christ, the cleanſing by ſacrifices amongst the faithfull
began to be contemned. Thus farre Beda. More
of Bucholcerus the Reader may fetch frō himſelf.
            
            
               The Concluſion.
               This Treatiſe was thought needfull in this time, wherein
ſome would make this Prophecie of Dan. 9 to bee worſe than
nothing: as ſpeaking of a certaine number of yeres, to mens opinion
hethertoo, but not ſo to bee vnderſtood. Therein the
Iewes woulde triumph ouer all Chriſtians, that viged this
prophecie for deſcribing Chriſts time: and Chriſtian ſhould
ken ſmall thankes for that newe opinion, as alſo little to them
that cannot ſee this point to be of ſpeciall vſe. Here Strangers
opinions were brought, to ſtay the raſhnes of the vnlearned,
who thinke all things new that they know not. The Writer
of the obſeruations vpon this, tranſlated by I▪ A. (a friend of
his) in an Apologie of his owne writeth more at large vppon
that. The Lord giue iudgement in all points.
               
               FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   