
      
         
            
            
            A DIRECTION FOR THE GOVERNment of the Tongue according to Gods word.
            PRINTED BY IOHN LEGATE Printer to the Vniversitie of Cambridge. And are to be solde by Abraham Kitson at the signe of the Sunne in Pauls Church-yard in London. 1593
         
         
            
            
            TO THE READER.
            
               CHristian Reader, lamentable and fearefull is the abuse of the tongue among all sorts and degrees of men every where. Hence daily arise manifold sinnes against God, and innumerable scandals and grievances to our breethren. It woulde make a mans heart to bleede, to heare and consider how Swearing, blaspheming, Cursed speaking, Railing, Backbiting, Slandering, Chiding, Quarrelling, Contending, Iesting, Mocking, Flattering, Lying, dissembling, Vaine and Idle talking overflowe in all places, so as men which feare God had better be any where, then in the companie of most men. Well then, art thou a man which hast made little conscience of thy speech and talke? repent seriously of this sinne, and amende thy life, least for the abusing of thy tongue thou crie with Dives in Hell,
                  Luke 16.14.
                
               Send Lazarus that he may dippe the tippe of his finger in water and

coole my tongue. And if thou be one which hast had care to order thy selfe in speech and silence according to Gods word, oh, doe it more. For what ashame is it, that men with the same tongue wherwith they confesse the faith and religion of Christ, should by vaine and ungodly speech utterly denie the power thereof? And for thy better helpe herein, I have penned these fewe lines following, concerning the Government of the tongue. Vse them for thy benefite, and finding profite thereby, give glorie to God. M.D.XCII. Decemb. 12.
            
            
               W. Perkins.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            OF THE GOVERNMENT OF THE TONGVE.
            CAP. I. Of the generall meanes of ruling the tongue.
            
               THE government of the tongue is a vertue pertaining to the holy usage of the tongue according to Gods worde.
            And for the well ordering of it, two things are requisite: a pure heart, and skill in the language of Canaan.
            The pure heart is most necessarie,Matt. 15.19. because it is the fountaine of speech, and if the fountaine be defiled, the streames that issue thence can not be cleane.
            And because the heart of man by

nature is a bottomlesse gulfe of iniquitie, two things are to be knowen: first, howe it must be made pure: and then howe it is alwayes afterwarde to be kept pure.
            The way to get a pure heart, is this. First, thou must seriously examine thy life and thy conscience for all thy sinnes past then with a heavie and bleeding heart confesse them to God, utterly condemning thy selfe. Thirdly, with deepe sighes and grones of spirite crye unto heauen to God the Father in the name of Christ for pardon, I say, for pardon of the same sinnes, as it were for life and death, and that, day and night, till the Lord send downe from heauen a sweete certificate into the perplexed conscience by his holy spirite, that all thy sinnes are done away. Nowe at the same instant in which pardon shall be graunted, God likewise will once againe stretch forth that mightie hand of his, whereby he made thee when thou wast not, to make thee a newe creature, to create a newe heart in thee, to renewe a

right spirite in thee, and to stablish thee by his free spirite. For whome he justifieth, them also at the same time he sanctifieth.
            The purified heart appeareth by these signes. I. If thou feele thy selfe to be displeased at thine owne infirmities and corruptions, and to droupe under them as men doe under bodily sicknesse. II. If thou beginne to hate and to flie thine owne personall sinnes. III. If thou feele a griefe and sorow after that thou hast offended God. IIII. If thou heartily desire to abstaine from all manner of sinne. V. If thou be carefull to auoid all occasions and intisements to euill. VI. If thou trauell and doe thine indeauour in euery good thing. VII. If thou desire and pray to God to wash and rinse thine heart in the blood of Christ.
            When the heart is pure, to keep it so is the speciall worke of faith, which purifieth the heart.
               Actes 19.15.
            
            Faith purifieth the heart by a particular applying of Christ crucified with all his merites. 2. kin. 4.34. 
               Elisha when hee went up and

lay upon the dead childe, and put his mouth on his mouth, and his eyes upon his eies, and his hands vpon his hands; and stretched him selfe upon him, the flesh of the childe waxed warme. Afterward Elisha rose and spread him selfe upon him the second time:
               vers. 35. 
               then the child neesed seaven times and opened his eies. So must a man by faith even spread himselfe upon the crosse of Christ, applying hands and feete to his pearced hands and his feet, and his wretched heart to Christes bleeding heart, and then hee shall feele him selfe warmed by the heat of Gods spirite, and sinne from daie to daie crucified with Christ, and his dead heart quickened and reviued. And this applying which faith maketh, is done by a kinde of reasoning, which faith maketh thus. Hath God of his mercie given his owne Sonne to be my saviour, to shed his blood for mee? and hath hee of his mercie graunted unto mee the pardon of all my sinnes? I will therefore endeavoure to keepe my heart and my life unblameable that I doe not offende him hereafter in worde or

deede, as I have done heretofore.
            
               The language of Canaan is,Isa. 19.18. Rom. 15.6. whereby a man endewed with the spirite of adoption, unfainedly calleth upon the Name of God in Christ, and so consequently doth as it were, familiarly talke and speake with God. This language must needes be learned, that the tongue may be well governed. For man must first be able to talke with God, before he can be able wisely to talke with man. For this cause when men are to have communication one with another, they are first of all to be carefull that they often make their prayers to God that he would guide and blesse them in their speeches, as David did: Set a watch, O Lorde,
               Psalm. 141.3. 
               before my mouth, and keepe the dore of my lippes. And againe: O Lord open thou my lippes,
               Psalm. 51.17. 
               and my mouth shall shew forth thy praise. where we may see, that the mouth is, as it were, locked up frō speaking any good thing, untill the Lord open it. And Paul having the gift of ordering his tongue in wonderful measure,Ephes. 6.19. yet desireth the Ephesians to pray for him, that utterance might be given him,
               
and good reason, because God ruleth the tongue.
               Prov. 16 1.
            
         
         
            CAP. II. Of the matter of our speech.
            THe gouernment of the tongue containeth two parts: Holy speech, and holy silence. In holy speech must be considered the matter of our speech and the manner.
            The matter is commonly one of these three: either God, our neighbour, or our selues.
            As concerning God, this caueat must be remembred, that the honourable titles of his glorious Majestie be neuer taken into our mouthes, unlesse it be upon a weightie and just occasion, so as we may plainly see that glorie will redound to him thereby: and for this cause the thirde commandement was giuen, that men might not take up the Name of God in vaine,
               Exod. 20.7. that is, rashly and lightly.
            And therefore lamentable and fearefull

is the practise euery where. For it is a common thing with men to begin their speech, and to place the titles of Gods most high Majestie in the forefront almost of euery sentence, by saying, O Lorde! O God! O good God! O mercifull God! O Iesu! O Christ! &c. If a man be to say any thing, he will not say Yea, or Nay: but, O Lorde yea, or O Lorde nay. If a man be to reprooue his inferiour, he will presently say, O Lorde have mercie on vs, what a sloubacke art thou? what a lye is this, &c. An earthly Prince, if he should haue his name tossed in our mouthes at euery worde, would neuer beare it, and how shall the euerliuing God suffer it? nay, how can he suffer it? I say no more, but thou with thy selfe thinke how: for in the third commandement the punishment is set downe, that he will not hold him guiltlesse that taketh his Name in vaine. And the Angels in reuerence to Gods Majestie couer their faces, Isa. 6.2.
            Concerning our neighbour, we are to consider whether the thing which wee

are about to speake be good or evill.
            This being weighed, if it be good, and so commendable, then we are readily and cheerefully, and that upon every occasion ro utter it, especially in his absence, whether he be a friend or a foe: as S. Iohn writeth of Demetrius. Demetrius (saith he) hath good report of all men,
               3. Ioh. 12. 
               and of the trueth it selfe: yea, and we our selves beare recorde, and ye knowe that our testimonie is true.
            
            As for the evill which any man shall knowe by his neighbour, he is in no wise to speake of it, whether it be an infirmitie or a grosse sinne, unlesse in his conscience he shall finde him selfe called of God to speake.
            A man is called to speake in three cases: I. when he is called before a magistrate, & is lawfully required to testifie the evill which he knoweth by another. II. when any is to admonish his brother of any fault for his amendement. III. when the hurt or daunger that may arise of the evill is to be prevented in others. As a man may say to one well disposed, take heede of such a

mans company: for he is given to such or such a vice.
            To this ende, they of the house of Cloe doe certifie Paul of the disorders in Corinth.
               1. Cor. 1.11. And Ioseph certifieth his father of his brethrens slaunders.
               Gene. 37.2. In this case all treasons are to be revealed, as tending to the ruine of the whole Common-wealth. Thus Elisha revealeth the secret of the King of Syria.
               2. Kin. 6.8.
            
            And if it shall be thought convenient to mencion the evill which we know by any man, it must be done onely in generall maner; the person, & all circumstances which will descrie the person, concealed.
            Concerning things which are secret in our neighbour, we are not to be suspicious, but to suspend both speech and judgement. Love suspecteth no evill. Iudge nothing (saith Paul) before the time,
               2. Cor. 13. 1. Cor. 4.5. 
               untill the Lord come, who will lighten things that are hidde in darknesse, and make the counsells of the heart manifest. Augustine hath a good and a speciall rule to this purpose,
                  Aug. li. 10. cō
                     fess. 23. that there be three thinges of which wee must give no judgement;

Gods predestination, the Scriptures, and the Estate of men uncalled.
            As touching a mans selfe, he is neither to praise nor dispraise him-selfe. As Salomon saieth,Prov. 27.2. 
               Let another man praise thee, and not thine owne mouth: A straunger, and not thine owne lippes. Yet otherwhiles the times doe fall out, that a man may use an holy kinde of boasting, especially when the disgrace of the person is the disgrace also of the Gospell, and of Religion, and of God himselfe: as Paul did, But wherein, saith he,2. Cor. 11.22. 
               any vvill use boldnesse, (I speake foolishly) I vvill use boldnesse. They are Hebrevves, so am I, &c.
            
         
         
            CAP. III. Of the manner of our speech, and vvhat must be done before vvee speake.
            THVS much of the matter of our speech. Nowe followeth the manner.
            
               In the manner of our speaking, three thinges are to be pondered: What must be done before we speake: what in speaking: what after we have spoken.
            Before we speake, consideration must be used of the thing to be spoken, and of the end. Iames requireth that men should be slowe to speake, and swift to heare.
               Iam. 1.19. 
               Salomon saith,Prov. 18.13. 
               He that answereth a matter before he heare it, it is follie & shame to him. The minde is the guide of the tongue: therefore men must consider before they speake. The tongue is the messenger of the heart, and therefore as oft as we speake without meditation going before, so oft the messenger runneth without his arrand. The tongue is placed in the middle of the mouth, 
                  Chrys. hom. 22. ad pop. Antioch.
                and it is compassed in with lippes and teeth as with a double trench, to shewe us, howe we are to use heede and preconsideration before we speake: and therefore it is good advise to keepe the key of the mouth not in the mouth, but in the cupbourd of the heart. Augustine saith well, that as in eating and drinking men make choyce of meates:
                  Lib. de nat. & grat.
                so

in manifolde speeches we should make choyce of talke.
            Here are condemned idle wordes, that is, such wordes as are spoken to little or no ende or purpose. And they are not to be esteemed as little sinnes, when as men are to give account of every idle worde.
               Mat. 12.36.
            
         
         
            CAP. IIII. What is to be done in speaking; and of wisedome.
            WHEN we are in speaking, two thinges are to be practised: first, care must be had of the speach, that it be gratious: secondly, it is to be uttered with convenient bondes of trueth.
            The speech is gratious, when it is so uttered,Col. 4.6. that the graces of God wrought in the heart by the holy Ghost, are as it were pictured and painted foorth in the same: for speach is the very image of the heart.
            
               Ephe. 4.25. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .Contrarie to this is rotten speach, that is, all such talke as is voide of grace, which is the heart and pith of our speach.
            
               And by this it appeareth, Eph. 5.3. Psal. 16.4. that no vice can be named but with disliking: & hereupon in Scriptures when by occasion a vice should be named, in token of a loathing thereof, the name of the vice is omitted, and the name of the contrarie vertue used in the roome thereof, as in these wordes: Iob. 1.5. 1. Kin. 21.10. 
               For Iob thought: It may be that my sonnes have sinned and blessed, that is, blasphemed God. This being true, then by proportion the visible representation of the vices of men in the worlde, which is the substance and matter whereof playes and enterludes are made, is much more to be avoyded.
            Gods graces, which we are to shewe foorth in our communication, are these: Wisedome, Trueth, Reverence,1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9. Modestie, Meekenesse, Sobrietie in judgement, Vrbanitie, Fidelitie, Care of others good name▪ but let us consider of them in order.
            Wisedome in our speach is a goodly ornament. The Apostles when they waited for the Holy Ghost in Hierusalem, it descended upon them in the forme

of fiery tongues:Act. 2.4. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Prov. 6.23. & then it is said that they spake as the holy Ghost gave them utterāce in Apophthegmes or wise sentences. And he that governeth his tongue wisely, addeth doctrine to the lips, that is, so speaketh, as that others be made wise thereby.
            This wisedome is then shewed, when a man can in judgement apply his talke, and, as it were in good maner make it fit to all the circumstances of persons, times, places,Prov. 19.11. thinges. A foole powreth out all his mind: but a wise man keepeth in till afterwarde. A worde spoken in his place, is like apples of golde with pictures of silver.
            
            Now he that would have his speach to be wise, must first of all him selfe become a wise man. And the wise man of whome the holy Scriptures speake, is a godly man, and such an one as feareth God: because this feare of God is the beginning and head of wisedome:Prov. 1.7. eccles. 12.13. Psal. 14.1. & 38.5. Gene. as on the contrarie, the foole, whereof the Scripture often speaketh, is the ungodly person, that maketh no conscience of any sinne. And indeede such a one is the most senselesse foole of all. He that shall ever and anon

be casting him selfe into the fire and water, and runne upon daungerous places to breake his legges, armes, necke: and further shal take pleasure in doing al this, is either a foole or a mad man. Now the ungodly man as oft as he sinneth, he indevoureth as much as in him lieth to pitch his soule into hel, & wheras he taketh pleasure in sinne, he sports him selfe with his owne destruction. Furthermore the man fearing God must have two things in his heart: a perswasion of Gods presence, and Awe.
            The perswasion of Gods presence is, whereby a man is continually resolved, that wheresoeuer he is, he standeth before God, who doeth see even into the secrets of his heart. This was in Cornelius:
               Act. 10.33. 
               Now therefore, saith he, we are in Gods presence to heare all things that are commaunded thee of God.
            
            Awe in regard of God, is that whereby a man behaveth him selfe reuerently, because he is in Gods presence.
            Awe is either in regard of sinne, or of chastisements.
            Awe in respect of sinne, is when one is

afraide to sinne, fearing not so much the punishment, as sinne it selfe, because it is sinne. For he feareth God indeede, which is of this minde, that if there were no Iudge to condemne him; no hell to torment him no Divell nor conscience to accuse him; yet he would not sinne, because Gods blessed Majestie is by it offended and displeased: and if he had it in his choyce, whether he would sinne or loose his life, he had rather dye then willingly and wittingly sinne against God. This awe being in Ioseph, was the cause that mooved him not to commit follie with Putiphars wife. Gen. 39.9. 
               How then, saith he, can I doe this great wickednesse, and sinne against God?
            Awe in chastisements is, when one humbleth him selfe under the mightie hande of God with all meekenesse and patience, when God layeth his hande on him more or lesse. When Shemi came foorth and cursed David, and flung stones at him, what did he? truely he stoode in awe of God, and therefore saide, 2. Sā. 16.10. 
               What have I to doe with you, ye sonnes of Zerviah?

for he curseth, even because the Lorde hath bidden him curse David, who dare then say, wherefore hast thou done so?
            
            When a man is thus made wise, that is, righteous and fearing God, he is so guided by the spirite of feare, that he can not but speake wisely. Salomon saith, Prov. 10.31. 
               The lippes of the righteous knowe what is acceptable: but the mouth of the wicked speaketh frowarde thinges. And againe, The heart of the wise guideth the mouth wisely. Contrarie to this is fond and foolish talke, an example hereof we have in Luke, where Pilate wanting the feare of God, saith, I finde no fault in Christ: let us therefore chastise him,
               Luke 23.14. 
               and send him away.
            
         
         
            CAP. V. Of Trueth, and of Reverence in speach.
            TRVETH of speach is a vertue whereby a man speaketh as he thinketh: and so consequently, he speaketh as every thing is, so farre forth

as possiblie he can. It is made a note of a righteous man, to speake the trueth from the heart:
               Psal. 16.2. Prov. 12.22. 
               and they that deale truely are Gods delight.
            
            This is alwayes required in all our doctrines; accusations, defences, testimonies, promisses, bargainings, counsels: but especially in Iudges and Magistrates sitting on judgement seate,Prov. 17.7. because then they stand in Gods steade, who is trueth it selfe.
            To this place belongeth Apollogie, which is,Matt. 10.32. when a Christian called before a Magistrate, and straightly examined of his religion, confesseth Christ boldly, and denieth not the trueth.
            Contrary to this, is Lying, Cogging, Glosing, Smoothing, dissembling: As for example,1. Kin. 5.25. 
               Gehazi, after hee had received money and garments of Naaman the Syrian against Elis
                     ••
                  es will, he went and stoode before his master, who saide unto him, whence commest thou, Gehazi? who making it nothing to lye for a vantage, smoothed it over finely, and sayde, thy servaunt went no

whither. To the like effect and purpose, report is made of a rich man that had two chestes: the one whereof he calleth all the worlde; the other, his friende. In the first hee putteth nothing: in the seconde he putteth all his substance. When his neighbour came to borrowe money, he useth to answere, truely I have never a penny in all the worlde, meaning his emptie chest, but I will see (saith he) what my friend can doe, looking thereby for interest by the money out of his other chest.
            This vice is very common, and it is a rare thing to finde a man that maketh a conscience of a lye.
            Lying is when a man speaketh otherwise then the trueth is, with a purpose to deceive. Here note that there is great difference betweene these two speeches, It is an untrueth; and, It is a lye. The first may be used when a man speaketh falshoodes. But in using the seconde, we must be heedie and sparing: for when a man is challenged for a lye, three thinges are layde to his charge. I

That he speaketh falsely. II. That he is willing to doe so. III. That he hath a desire and purpose to deceive.
            
               Quest. Whether may not a man lye, if it be for the procuring of some great good to our neighbour, or to the whole countrey where we are?
            
               Answ. No: Reasons are these. I. Lying is forbidden, Iam. 3.12. prov. 12.22. 
               as an abomination to the Lord. II. Rom. 3.8. 
               We are not to doe any evill that good might come thereof. III. He which lyeth, in so doing conformeth him selfe to the devill, who Ioh. 8.44. is a lyar and the father thereof.
            
               Object. I. Such lying is for our neighbours good and not against charitie. Answ. No: for 1. Cor. 13.6. 
               charitie rejoyceth in the trueth.
            
            
               Object. II. The holy Scriptures haue mentioned the lyes of the Patriarches. Answ. We must not live by examples against rules of Gods worde.
            
               Object. III. Rahab and the mydwives of Egypt in saving the spies, and in preserving the Israelites infantes used lying, and are commended for their factes.
            
               
               Answ. They are commended for their faith, not for any lying.
            As trueth is required in speech, so also reuerence to God and man.
            Reuerence to God is, when we so speak of God and use his titles, that wee shew reuerence our selues, and mooue reuerence in others. Deu. 28.58. 
               If thou wilt not keepe (saith the Lorde) and doe all the wordes of this Lawe, (that are written in this booke) and feare the glorious and fearfull Name, THE LORD THY GOD, then the Lorde will make thy plagues wonderfull.
            
            Here take heede of all maner of blaspheming, which is, when men use such speeches of God, as doe either detract any thing from his Majestie, or ascribe any thing to him, not beseeming him: A sinne of all to be detested. Reasons. I. A blasphemer is viler then the rest of the creatures: for they praise God in their kinde, and shew foorth his power, goodnesse, and wisdome: but he dishonoureth God in his wretched speech. II. Hee is as the madde dogge that flyeth

in his masters face, who keepeth him and giueth him bread. III. Custome in blasphemies sheweth a man to be the child of the deuill, and no child of God as yet. A father lying on his death bed called the three children to him which hee kept, and tolde them that onely one of them was his owne sonne, and that the rest were onely brought up by him: therfore unto him hee gaue all his goods: but which of these three was his naturall sonne he would not in any wise declare. When hee was deade, euery one of the three children pleaded that hee was the sonne, and therefore that the goods were his. The matter being brought before a Iudge could not be ended: but the Iudge was constrained to take this course: hee caused the dead corpes of the father to be set up against a tree, and commaunded the three sonnes to take bowes and arrowes, and to, shoote against their father and to see who could come neerest the heart. The first and seconde did shoote at their father and hitte him, the thirde was angrie

with both the other and refused to shoot. This done, the Iudge gaue sentence that the two first were no sonnes, but the third onely, and that he should haue the goods. The like triall may be used to know who be Gods children. Such persons with whome blaspheming is rife, are very deuils incarnate, and the children of the deuill, who rend God in pieces, and shoote him through with their dartes, as it is said of the Egyptian when hee blasphemed,Levit. 24.11. vaijkkobh.
                that hee smote or pierced through Gods Name.
            
            Againe, here wee must be warned to take heede of that customable swearing, and also of perjurie. It is a very strange sinne: for the perjured person doeth not onely sinne himselfe, but withall he endeavoureth to intangle God in the same sinne with himselfe.
            Further, take heede least thou doest either make or recite the jestes which are contrived out of the phrases of Scripture: which are very many and verie usually rehearsed in companie.Exod. 30.31. The oyle wherewith the tabernacle and the arke of

the testament and the Priestes were annointed, was holy: and therefore no man might put it to any other uses, as to annoint his owne flesh therewith, or to make the like unto it. Iohn 19.8. Pilate a poore Painyme when he heard the name of the Sonne of God was afraid: and we much more ought to tremble at the word of God, not to make our selves merry with it. And therefore the scoffing of Iulian the Apostata is very fearefull, who was wont to reach Christians boxes on the eare, and with all, bidde them turne the other, and obey their masters commandement, Whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheeke,
               Mat. 5.39. 
               turne to him the other also. And he denied pay and like reward to his souldiers that were Christians, because he saide he would make them fitte for the kingdome of heauen, considering that Christ had said, Blessed are the poore in spirite:
               Matt. 5.3. 
               for theirs is the kingdome of heaven.
            
            Here also men must learne to take heed of all manner of charmes and inchauntments, which commonly are nothing

else but words of scripture or such like, used for the curing of paines and diseases both in men and beastes. As for example, the first words of S. Iohns Gospell, In the beginning was the Worde, and the Worde was with God &c. are used to be written in a paper and hung about mens neckes to cure agues. But the truth is, such kinde of practises are deuilish. Patrones of charmes holde that in such wordes as are either diuine or barbarous, is much efficacie. But whence is this efficacie? From God? from men? or from the deuill? If it shall be saide from God, we must knowe that the worde used in holy maner, is the instrument of God to convey unto us spirituall blessings, as faith, regeneration, repentance: but it doeth not serve to bring unto us corporall health. Well then, belike wordes take vertue from the speaker, and are made powerfull by the strength of his imagination.
                  Parac. libr. de Tartar
                        •
                     .
                Indeed of this opinion are some Phisitians, as Avicenna and Paracelsus, who thinke that phantasie is like to the sunne, which worketh on all things

to which his beames doe come: and the latter that by imagination miracles may be wrought. But this opinion is fonde and the reasons alledged for it are without weight. For imaginations are no things but shadowes of things. And as an image of a man in a glasse hath no power in it, but only serves to resemble & represent the bodie of a man: so it is with the phantasie and conceit of the minde & no otherwise. And if imagination haue any force, it is only within the spirits and humours of a mans owne bodie: but to give force to worke in the bodies of others it can not; no more then the shadow of one bodie can ordinarily cure the body of another on which it lighteth. Wherefore words used in the way of bodily cure, be they in they in them selues never so good, are no better then the deuils sacraments: and when they are used of blinde people, he it is, that comming under hand, worketh the cure, & by turning himselfe into an Angell of light, deludes them. But it were better for a man to die a thousand times then to use such remedies, which in

curing the body, destroy the soule.
            Lastly, avoid all imprecations and cursings either against men or other creatures: For God in judgement, to punish such cursed speaking, often brings to passe such imprecations: as may appeare in the Iewes, who at the arraignment of Christ, cryed saying,Matt. 27.25. 
               His blood be upon us and upon our children: which imprecation is verified upon them till this day. At Newburge in Germany a certaine mother cursed her sonne, saying, Get thee away,
               
                  Lonicerus theatr. histor. prec. 4. 
               I would thou mightest never come againe alive: the very same day he went into the water and was drowned. Againe, a mother brought her child to the Vniversitie of Wittemberge,
               
                  Idem.
                by reason he was possessed with an uncleane spirit: beeing demaunded how it came to passe, she answered in the hearing of many, that in her anger shee saide, The devill take thee, and thereupon presently the childe was possessed. And in our countrey, men often wish the plague, the poxe, the pestilence to their children, their seruants, their cattell: and often it falles out accordingly.
            
               Reuerence to man is in two respects, either because he is created after the image of God, or because he is aboue us in age, giftes, authority.
            In the first consideration, men must haue care to giue such names to children as are proper and fit, usuall and knowne: the signification whereof, may admonish them of the promises of God, of godlines, or of some good duty. And there be foure allowed endes of giving names. I. To preserue the memory of some thing by the name giuen, as Adam, Israell, Isaac. II. To signifie some thing to come, as Evah, Abraham, Iohn, Peter. III. To preserue the name and memorie of parentes and kindred, which was used in the birth of Iohn Baptist. This custome may still be retained, if there be any good example in the ancetours that the childe may follow. IIII. That the life and profession of good men may be revived in the renuing of their names.
            Here we must take heed, in no wise to giue to children, the proper names or

titles of God, as Iesus, Immanuel, &c.
            
            Neither are the professours of the Gospell to be intituled by the names of such as have beene famous instruments in the Church, as to be called Calvinists, Lutheranes, &c. Now this I say,
               1. Cor. 12.13. 
               that every one of you saith, I am Paules, and I am Apollos, I am Cephas and I am Christes: Is Christ divided? or was Paul crucified for you either were ye baptized in the name of Paul?
            
            And it is a bold part of the pestilent generation of Papistes, who take to themselves the name of Iesuites,
               Actes 11.26. Rom. 11.4. for the name of Christian was given to the disciples at Antioch not by the devise of man, but by devine oracle.
            
            Reverence to man as he is superiour, is in using fitte titles of reverence. Sara is commended in Scriptures for obeying her husband and for calling him Syr. But excesse must here be avoided, when titles of honour proper to God are given to men,1. Pet. 3.6. as head of the Catholique Church to the Pope, Lady and Queene of heaven to the mother of Christ. This fault

Christ. This fault Christ reprooved in the young man, saying, Why callest thou me good,
               Marc. 10.18. 
               there is none good but God.
            
         
         
            CAP. VI. Of Modestie and of Meekenesse.
            
               MODESTY in speech hath divers caveats: first if a man speake any thing of him selfe, that is, in his owne commendation, let him alter the person and speake of him selfe as of another: I know a man (saith Paul, speaking of him-selfe) in Christ above fourteene yeres agoe,
               2. Cor. 12.2. 
               &c. which was taken up into Paradise, and heard wordes which can not be spoken. And Iohn saith of himselfe;Iohn 19.26. 
               When Iesus sawe his mother, and the disciple whome he loved, standing by, &c. Here take heede of boasting, whereby men imitate the devill, who said,Luke 4.6. 
               All this power will I give thee, and the glorie of those kingdomes, for that

is delivered unto me, and to whomsoeuer I will give it.
            
            Againe, when a man shall have occasion to speake of his owne faultes and corruptions, let him speake the uttermost against himselfe, as Paul called him selfe the first of all sinners.
               1. Tim. 1.13, 15. But 
                  〈◊〉
                be to mention any thing of him selfe, that may minister matter of commendation, let his speech rather incline to the defect, then to the excesse: as Paul saith, I am the least of the Apostles,
               1. Cor. 15.9. 
               which 
                     〈◊〉
                   not meete to be called an Apostle, because I persecuted the Church of God.
            
            Secondly, in the mentioning of things which moove blushing, we are to use as seemely wordes as may be chosen. Gen. 41 1. Afterwarde Adam knewe Hevah his wife, which conceived and bare Cain. 1. Sam. 24.4. And when he came to the sheepecoates by the way where there was 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and Saul went in to cover his feet, that is, to doe his easement.
            Meekenesse also required in communication, which is, when a man useth 
                  〈◊〉
                and faire speech. 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
remembrance &c. that they be courteous,
               Tit. 3.2, 3. 
               shewing all meekenesse to all men, for we our selves also were in times past unwise, disobedient, &c.
            
            Meekenesse and gentlenesse shewes it selfe in Salutations, Answeres and Reproofes.
            For the first, daily experience sheweth, that it maketh much for the maintaining of love, to call men by their proper names or surnames. And this was a signe of speciall favour that God called Moses by his proper name. Yet more convenient it is, to salute our betters by names of honour or office. Thus the disciples call our Saviour Christ Rabbi: and it was the usuall manner among the Iewes, to call their betters Adon, that is, Lorde, or syr.
            The formes of salutations are to be after the order practised in scripture. An Angell saluted Gedeon thus: The Lorde be with thee thou valiant man.
               Iud. 6.12. And Boaz came to Bethlehem, and said to the repers, The Lorde be with you:Ruth. 2.4. and they answered, The Lorde blesse thee. And the Angell

saluted Mary: Haile, freely beloved, the Lorde is with thee, &c. Christ comming among his disciples, saide, Peace be among you: and he taught them comming to any house to say,Matt. 10.11, 12, 13. 
               Peace be to this house.
            
            By this it appeareth, that our common formes of salutations are commendable: which are of divers sortes: as when one meetes another, God save you: when one goes away, God be with you
               ▪ in the morning, God give you a good morning: after noone, God give you a good evening: when one is going on his journey, God speede your journey: when one is working, God speede you: in eating, much good doe it you: when one hath a new office, God give you joy of your office: when one is sicke, God comfort you, &c.
            
            And when children salute their fathers and mothers after this manner: I pray you father blesse me, I pray you mother blesse me: it is a seemely thing. For God hath made parents to be the instruments of blessing to their children in nurtoring them and praying for them. As

the fift commaundement saith, Honour thy father and mother, that they may prolong thy dayes.
            
            It is 
                  〈◊〉
                use in all places, when a man neeseth, to salute him by saying, Christ helpe you. But there is no cause why the words should then be used more then at another time▪
               
                  Aug. de hist. animal. l. 1. cap. 10. & probl. sect. 33 Plin. li. 28. c. 2. The reasons are▪ I. It is an olde custome fetched from the Gentiles before Christ, and hath no ground at all: for they used with the like wordes to wish men health, because they thought neesing to be a sacred and holy thing: and because some take it to be a signe of unhappie and evill successe, which indeed is otherwise. II. If there be any danger in the brain before neesing when a man hath neesed the danger is past▪ as learned Phisitians teach: therfore▪ there is no cause of the using such words then more then at coughing.
            Our answeres must be soft that anger be neither kindled nor increased.Prov. 15.23. 
               A soft answere putteth away wrath, but grievous words stirre up anger.
               1. Sam. 24.7, 8 
               Nabal by 
                  〈◊〉
                language provoked David to wrath, but Abigail by the contrarie appeased him.

               Gedeon spake gently to the men of Ephraim,
               Iudg. 8.3. when they were angry against him, and appeased them. For the text saith, When he had thus spoken, then their spirits abated towards him. Therefore Salomon saith well, A joy commeth to a man by the answere of his mouth, but how good is a word in due season.
            
            Now if any shall raile on us, our duty is, not to raile againe.Rom. 12.14. 
               Blesse them that persecute you, Blesse, I say, and curse not. Be curteous,
               1. Pet. 3.4. 
               not rendring evill for evill neither rebuke for rebuke, but contrariwise blesse, knowing that ye be thereunto called, that you should be heires of blessing. This thing was notably practised by David. Psal. 109.4. For my friendship, they were mine adversaries, but I gave my selfe to prayer. And therefore in this case, either silence is to be used, or at the most onely a just and manifest defence of our innocencie to be made.2. Kin. 18.36. 
               Ezechias commaunded the people to be silent, and not to say any thing to the speech of Rabsachai, now flattering now threatning. When Eli spake hardly of Anna, &

badde her put away her drunkennesse, she answered,1. Sam. 1.15. 
               Nay, my lorde, I am a woman troubled in spirite, I have neither drunke wine nor strong drinke, but have powred out my soule before the Lorde.
               Gene. 40.15. Thus Ioseph cleareth him-selfe, saying, I have done nothing wherefore they should put me in the dungeon. And Daniel to Nabuchodonosor: Vnto thee, O King,
               Dan. 6.22. 
               have I done no hurt. And our Saviour Christ when the Iewes saide unto him,Ioh. 8.48, 49. 
               Say wee not true, that thou art a Samaritane and hast a devill? answered, I have not a devill, but I honour my father, and yee have dishonoured me. And Paul beeing to make an apologie for himselfe, begins thus: Men and brethren,
               Actes 23.1. 
               I have in all good conscience served God untill this day.
            
            Now when a man hath thus cleared him selfe, though his owne worde in his owne behalfe take no effect, yet let him patiently commit his cause to God, who in time will manifest the trueth,Psal. 26. and bring it to light: As David did, Iudge me, O God (saith he) for I

have walked in mine innocencie. And againe,Psal. 37.32▪ 33. 
               The wicked watcheth the righteous, and seeketh to slay him: but the Lorde will not leave him in his hande, nor condemne him when he is judged.
            
            Meekenesse in reproofes is, when any shall admonish his brother of any fault for his amendment, with the like moderation that Chirurgeons use, who beeing to set the arme or legge that is forth of joynt, handle it so tenderly, that the patient shall scant feele when the bone falles in againe. This counsell Paul giveth: Breethren, if any man be fallen by occasion into any fault,
               Galat. 6.1. 
               ye which are spirituall, restore such a one (or set him in joynt againe) with the spirite of meeknesse. This was practised by Abraham towardes Lot, when their heardmen were at variance, saying, Let there be, I pray thee,
               Gene. 13.8, 9. 
               no strife betweene thee and me, neither betweene mìne heardmen and thine: for we are brethren.
            
            And this is done foure wayes. First, when wee reproove a man generally, as Nathan did David by a parable.2. Sam. 12.
               
Secondly, when in the roome of a reproofe we put an exhortation: In the exhortation insinuating an oblique reproofe, as when a man shall sweare in his talke, I, shall not need alwaies to say, Yee▪ doe verie ill to sweare, and so to dishonour God: But, I w
                  •
               ll lappe it up in the forme of an exhortation, as pilles are lapt in sugar by saying, Yea and nay▪ yea and nay shall serue among us. Rebuke not an Elder,
               1. Tim. 5.1. 
               but exhort him as a father, and young men as breethren, saieth▪ 
               Paul to Timothie. Thirdly, when the reproofe is propounded in a mans owne person as though hee were faultie which reprooveth. Paul practised this: Novv these things, breethren,
               1. Cor. 4.6. (saieth hee) I have figuratively applyed to mine owne selfe and Apollos for your sakes, that yee might learne by us, that no man presume above that which is vvritten. Fourthly, when the fault is directly reprooved, but yet partly with prefaces, that wee doe it of love,Galat. 61. that wee wish well to the partie, that wee speake as

considering our selves, that wee also are in daunger of the same fault: and partly by framing the reproofe out of the worde of God, that the partie may see him-selfe, rather to be reprooved by God, then by us: after this manner the inferiour may admonish his superiour, especially when there is no other way of redresse, and hee is to listen, yeelding himselfe tractable. Naaman is advised by his servant, who said, Father, if the Prophet had commaunded thee a great thing,
               2. Kin. 5.13. 
               wouldest thou not have done it: how much rather then, when he saieth to thee, Wash, and be cleane? Then went hee downe and washed him-selfe seven times in Iordan
               ▪
            
            When any shall in this manner be admonished of a fault, they are to yeeld themselves tractable and thankefull and heartily glad of so good a friend. Notable is the speech of the Psalmist: Let the righteous smite me, it is a benefite:
               Psal. 141.5. 
               & let him reproove me, it is the chiefe ointment, let it not be wanting to my head.
               
And Salomon saith, A reproofe entreth more into him that hath understanding,
               Prov. 17.10. 
               then an hundreth stripes into a foole.
               Prov. 27.5. And, Open rebuke is better then secret love.
            
         
         
            CAP. VII. Of Sobrietie, Vrbanitie, Fidelitie, and care of others good name.
            
               SOBRIETIE in judgement is, when a man either suspendeth his opiniō of his neighbours sayings or doings, or else speaketh as charitably as he can, by saying as little as may be, if the thing be euill: or by interpreting all in better parte; if the speech or action be doubtfull. Therefore doe thus: despise not thy neighbour, but thinke thy selfe as badde a sinner, and that the like defectes may befall thee. If thou canst not excuse his doing,

excuse his intent, which may be good: or if the deede be euill, thinke it was done of ignorance: if thou canst not no way excuse him, thinke some great temptation befell him, and that thou shouldest be worse, if the like temptation befell thee: and giue God thankes that the like as yet hath not befallen thee. Despise not a man being a sinner, for though he be euill to day, he may turne to morrow.
            Here is condemned all headie and rash judgement,Matt. 7.1. whereby men make things either worse then they are, or else they take and turne all things to the worse parte. Thus the deuill dealt with Iob, saying, Doeth Iob feare God for naught,
               Iob. 1.9, 11. 
               &c. but stretch out thine hand now and touch all that he hath, to see if hee will not blaspheme thee to thy face. Such was the dealing of Doeg with David.
               1. Sam. 22.9. 
               I sawe the sonne of Ishai (saith he) when he came to Abimelech the sonne of Ahitub, who asked counsell of the Lorde for him, and gave him victuals, and he gave him also the sworde of Goliah the

Philistin. Here the backe-bither concealeth the necessarie circumstances, whereby Achimelech might have beene excused, as that David asked bread being hungrie, and that he told not Ahimelech that he was out of Saules favour but he turneth all his speech to this end, to bring the Priest into suspicion with Saul.
            
            Thus the Pharises dealt▪ 
               Iohn came neither eating nor drinking, and they say,
               Matt. 11.19. 
               Hee hath a devill. The Sonne of man came eating and drinking, and they say, Beholde a glutton, and a drinker of wine, and a friend of Publicanes and sinners.
            
            Contrarie to this sobrietie is Flatterie, whereby for hope either of favour or gaine, men, and especially such as are of dignitie and place, are soothed up in their sinnes, and extolled above measure, even to their faces. As when Herode arayed in royall apparell, and sate on the judgement feare, and made an oration,Actes 12.22. the people gave a showte, saying, the voice of a God, and not of a man.
               
But marke what Salomon saith,Prov. 27.14. 
               He that praiseth his friend with a lowde voice, rising earely in the morning: it shall be counted to him for a curse. One being asked which was the worst of all beastes, answered, Of wild beasts, the tyrant: of tame beasts, the Flatterer. And another said, that Flatterers were worse then crowes. For they eate onely dead carrion: these feed on living men.
            And of all kindes of Flatterie, that is the worst, when a man shall speake faire to his neighbours face, and praise him: but behinde his backe, speake his pleasure, and euen cut his throate.Psal. 54.21. 
               David complaineth of his familiar friend, that the words of his mouth were softer then butter, yet warre was in his heart; that his wordes were more gentle then oyle, yet they were swordes. The Pharises behinde Christes backe, tooke counsell howe they might intangle him in talke: but before his face they say,Matt. 24.16. 
               Master, wee knowe that thou art true, and teachest the way of God truely, neither carest thou for any man: for thou considerest

not the person of men.
            
            
               Vrbanitie is a grace of speech, whereby men in seemely manner use pleasantnesse in talke for recreation, or for such delight as is joyned with profite to them selues and others. The Preacher saith, There is a time to laugh,
               Eccle. 3.4. 
               and a time to weepe. When the Lorde brought againe the captivitie of Sion, we were like them that dreame.
               Ps. 126.1, 2. 
               Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with joy.
            
            Now this mirth must be joyned with the feare of God, otherwise Salomon saith well. I have saide to laughter, thou art madde:
               Eccle. 2.2. 
               and of joy, what is that thou doest? And Christ saith, Woe to you that now laugh,
               Luke 6.25. 
               for yee shall weepe. Secondly with compassion, and sorow for Gods people in affliction and miserie. They drinke wine in bowles, and annoint themselves with chiefe oyntments,
               Amos 6.6. 
               but no man is sorie for the affliction of Ioseph. Thirdly, it must be sparing and moderate. Paul condemneth such as are lovers of pleasures,
               2. Timot. 3. 
               more

then of God. Fourthly, it must be void of the practise of sinne.Hebr· 11. 
               Moses is commended that he refused the pleasures of sinne.
            
            The usuall time of mirth is at meates. And here Sampsons practise may bee followed,Iudg. 14.12. who at his mariage feast propounded a riddle or harde question to his friendes. And Ambrose thinketh that he did this to stoppe the mouthes of talkers, and to occupie their wits.
            Withall it must bee remembred to be a Christian dutie, even at the table to maintaine talke of religion,Luke 11.37▪ & 14.1. & 22.15. and of duties of godlinesse, after the practise of our Saviour Christ: though many upon little ground thinke otherwise. Tertullian recordeth of the Christians of his time that they used in their love feasts to talke togither,Apol. ca. 39. as considering with themselves that they had God him selfe as an earewitnesse to them. Chrysostome of this point saith well.Hom. 2. in 2. Thess. 2. cap. 
               I would to God (saith he) that in tavernes, and feastes, and at bathes men woulde talke and dispute of Hell: for the remembring of Hell would

hinder a man from falling to hell. And it was the manner of the Primative Church at Dinner and Supper to use the reading of the Scriptures. When ye come to the table (saith Augustine) heare that which is reade according to custome,
               
                  Aug. epist. 109. 
               without any stirre or striving: that your mouthes may not onely receive the meate, but your eares may hunger after the worde of God.
            
            And this holy rejoycing at meates, is specially to be used with such as are godly. As Salomon saith, that hee vvhich eateth at the covetous mans table,
               Prov. 23.8. 
               shall vomite his morsels, and shall loose his sweete wordes. The faithfull at Ierusalem did breake bread togither,
               Actes 2.46. 
               with gladnesse and singlenesse of heart.
            
            
               Quest. Whether jesting be tollerable in any sort, or not?
            
               Answ. That jesting which standeth in quippes, tauntes, and girdes, which serveth onely for the offence of some, with the delight of others, is not tollerable:Ephes. 4.25. because all speech must edifie, and minister grace to the hearers: neither

doeth it agree with Christian gravitie and modestie. But two kindes of jesting are tollerable: the one is moderate  and sparing mirth, in the use of  things indifferent, in season convenient, without the least scandall of any  man, and with profite to the hearers. The second is that which the Prophets used, when they jested against wicked persons, yet so, as withall they sharpely reprooved their sinnes.1. Kin. 18.27. 2. Kin. 2.23. Isa. 14.11. 
               At noone Eliah mocked them, and saide, Crie alowd, for he is a god: either he talketh or pursueth his enemies, or is in his journey, or it may be he sleepeth, and must be awaked▪
               
            
            As for laughter, it may be used: otherwise God woulde never have given that power and facultie into man: but the use of it must be both moderate and seldome, as sorrowe for our sinnes is to be plentifull and often.Luke 19. Iohn 11. Hebr. 5.7. This we may learne in Christ his example, of whome wee reade that hee wept three times at the destruction of Ierusalem, at the raising of Lazarus, and in

his agonie: but wee neuer read that hee laughed.
            
               Fidelitie is constancie in all our lawful sayings and promises.
            A promise is to be made with this condition (If God will) and then if a man be prevented by death,Iames 1.15. 1. Chr. 13.2. or by any like meanes, hee is not to be blamed: otherwise a mans lawfull worde and promise bindeth him according to the will and pleasure of him to whome it is made.2. Cor. 1.17, 23.
            
            Nowe if afterwarde it be hurtfull to him that made it, he may crave to be free from his promise: and libertie being graunted,Psalm. 15.4. take it. But a promise bound with an oth is to be kept, though private hinderances follow: yet so as the Magistrate may order the matter, and proceed in equitie, that the dammage may be the lesse.
            The last grace which is to be used in speech, is care of our neighbours good name,Prov. 22. which is farre better to him then great riches.
            
            Here is condemned the tale-bearer,

which of an euill mind telleth a thing of another, to bring him into hatred, or to reuenge himselfe, or to get something, which otherwise he could not obtaine.
            This talebearing is of divers sortes. One is,Rom. 1.30. when men whisper abroade secretly the fault of another, whereas they shoulde rather admonish the partie, as Cham when he had seene his fathers nakednesse,Gē. 9. ranne straight and tolde his breethren. The second, when they adde to or change the thing said or done, as it serveth for their purpose. Some of the witnesses which came against Christ, charged him to say, I will destroy this Temple which is made with hands, and in three dayes builde another without handes. Where first they chaunge his meaning; for Christ spake of the temple of his bodie. Secondly, they adde to the wordes. For Christ saide not, I will destroy this temple: but,Matt. 26.60, 61· 
               destroy yee this temple. Therefore the Holy Ghost noteth them with the name of false witnesse bearers. The thirde, when men surmise, and tell that which was never

done. When Ieremie was going out of Ierusalem to the lande of Benjamin,
               Iere. 37.13. and was in the gate of Benjamin, Irijah tooke him, and saide, Thou fleest to the Chaldeans. Then saide Ieremie, that is false, I flee not to the Chaldeans, but hee would not heare him. The fourth is the coloured tale-bearing, when one speaketh evill of another, with fine prefaces and preambles, feigning that he is very sory that his neighbour hath done such or such a thing: that he speaketh it not of malice, but of a good minde: that hee is constrained to speake: that he speaketh not all he could speake: that the partie to whome the tale is tolde must keepe it secret.Vpon Psal. 15.3. 
               Luther writeth of this fault very well. This vice (saith he) whereby wee tell abroad the things which we heare of others, and take them in worse parte, is very rife, and of great force to sowe discordes: the rather because it often sheweth it selfe under the pretence and name of counsell and good advise. And it is a notable visard for a talebearer, to transforme him selfe into an angell of light,

and under zeale for Gods glorie to backbite anll accuse his neighbour of heresie, errour, and wicked life.
            
            
               Therefore the Prophets meaning is, that we should conceale the evils that be in our neighbour, and not speake them to others▪ though he be an enemie and deserve it at our handes, and onely speake of those good things in him, which seeme to preserve concord: for this we would that men shoulde doe unto us. Yea, and let us take heede that we judge not or condemne any mans saying or doing rashly.
               
                  Confes. lib. 9. 
               Augustine saieth, that this was the care which his mother had towards her enemies. To doe this is a notable point of just dealing, but indeed there is no man utterly without this fault in this life: such is our wretched state in this worlde. For though some are of this minde, that they desire not to have other mens wants tolde them, and will not take all in worse part, yet if they be told and taken in worse parte of others, they can willingly heare them, neither will they checke the teller, but suffer bad

surmises to take place with them. But Gedaliah the sonne of Ahicham excelled in the contrarie vertue,
               Ier. 40. 
               who chose rather to hazard his life, then to suspect evill by Ismaell.
            
            This tale-bearing is the common table talke in England: and it is wonderfull to see, how those, who are otherwise godly, are overtaken with it: but men must learne to stande more in awe of Gods commaundement, and also to consider that the same thing a man speaketh of another, commeth home againe by his owne dore. Wherfore, when men shall enter any evill communication of others, we are to interrupt it by other talke, as not regarding it.
            Here remember that when governours and Magistrates shall use harde wordes, not in the way of defamation, but for the reprooving of a vice, it is not to slaunder:Gal. 3. mat. 3. as, O foolish Galathians: O generation of vipers. And Christ tearmeth Herod, Foxe.
            
         
         
            
            CAP. VIII. Of the bondes of Trueth.
            
               THVS much of grace in speech. Now followeth bondes of trueth, whereby the trueth of our talke is testified and confirmed.
            There are three: A simple assertion, an asseveration, an othe.
            A simple assertion, is either a simple affirmation, as yea, yea: or a simple negation, as nay, nay: they are to be used only in our familiar and common talke. Let your communication be yea, yea; nay,
               Matt. 5. 
               nay: and whatsoever is more, commeth of evill.
            
            If the trueth which we affirme or denie be doubtfull or contingent, then such clauses as these (It is so, or it is not so as I thinke, as I remember, as I take it)

are to be added. If one shall say, It is so, and afterwards it proove otherwise, hee receiveth discredite, because he spake an untrueth. But if he shall say, I thinke it is so, though it fall out otherwise, yet he saveth his credite, because he deceiveth not, but onely is deceivrd.
            An asseveration is, when one doeth vehemently affirme or deny any thing. This is not to be used at euery worde: but then onely when a trueth of greater importance is to be confirmed. When the false prophets among the Iewes and the Priestes would not beleeve that Ieremie was sent of God: what saith he? not simply,Iere. 26.15. 
               The Lord hath sent me: but, In trueth the Lorde hath sent me. Our Saviour Christ, when he used to speake any waightie matter, used to say, Amen, Amen, Verily, Verily, which is a plaine asseveration: for Amen is more then a simple affirmation, and it is lesse then an othe, as the very sence of the worde doth import: which is no more, but Truely, Certenly.
            
            The thirde is an othe, which must

not be made by any thing in heaven or earth, but onely by the Name of God alone.
            It must be used as the last refuge and remedie of all. For when any trueth of great importance is to be confirmed, and all signes, evidences, proofes, witnesses, faile among men on earth: then wee may lawfully fetch the Lorde as a witnesse from heauen, who is the knower of all trueth.
            And in this case an othe may be taken: either publikely before a Magistrate, or privately among private persons, if it be done with reverence and consideration:Gene. 31.53. as it was betweene Iacob and Laban.
            
         
         
            CAP. IX. What is to be done when wee have spoken.
            AFter a man hath spoken his minde, very fewe wordes more are to be added. He that hath knowledge

spareth his words. In many words there can not want iniquitie:
               Prov. 17.25. 
               but he that refraineth his lippes is wise.
            
            He that speaketh many wordes, speaketh either false things or superfluous, or both: as when a river overfloweth, the water gathereth much slime: so many wordes many faultes. When a vessell being smitten maketh a great noise, it is a token that it is emptie: and so the sound of many wordes shewes a vaine heart. The Gentiles have said, that God gave a man one tongue and two eares, that hee might heare more and speake lesse. Valerius Maximus reporteth of Xenocrates, that being in the companie of some that used railing speeches, held his tongue: and being asked why he did so, answered, That it had repented him that he had spoken, but it never repented him that he had helde his peace. And the proverbe is, He that will speake what he will, shall heare what he would not. To the framing of our speech Ambrose requireth three things:
                  Offic. lib. 1. a yoke, a ballance, and a metwand: a yoke, to keepe it in

a stayed gravitie: a ballance, to giue it weight of reason: a metwand, to keepe it in measure and moderation.
            This rule must be practised carefully, for the avoiding of chiding, brawling, and contention. Let nothing be done by contention, Philip. 2.3. Let students and schollars learne to practise this: for what shall another mans opinion hurt thee, though in reasoning he be not of thy minde in every point.
            Here take heede of the spirit of Contradiction, whereby some by thwarting and contradicting euery man, at length prooue either obstinate Heretikes, or lewde Atheists, and make no bones to contradict the holy Ghost, and to call the scriptures in question, and dispute that there is no God.
            Nowe if a man speake necessarie thinges, though he continue his speech till midde-night, as Paul did,Actes 20.7. it can not be called immoderate or superfluous talke.
         
         
            
            CAP. X. Of Writing.
            
               ALL this which is set downe 
                  〈◊〉
                concerning speech, must as well be practised in writing as in speaking. Whereby are condemned ballads, bookes of loue, all idle discourses and histories, being nothing els but inticements and baites unto manifold sinnes, fitter for Sodom and Gomorrah then for Gods Church. And it must be followed as well in speaking of Latine or any other tongue, as English, which students haue not marked: for whereas they will not sweare in English, yet in Latine they make no bones of it, saying, Mehercule, mediùs fidiùs, aedipol, per deos immortales. And whereas they holde but one God in judgement, yet in their Latine exercises, they speake of Iupiter, and of the immortall gods, after the manner of the

heathen. What a shame is this, that a Christian, and that in Christian schooles, should either be ashamed or not use to speake as a Christian, but as Atheists do? If thou haue many tongues and knowest not howe to use them well: hee which hath but his mother tongue, ordering it aright, is a better linguist then thou.
         
         
            CAP. XI. Of Silence.
            
               WIse and godly silence is as excellent a vertue as holy speech: for hee knoweth not howe to speake, which knoweth not howe to holde his tongue. The rule of our silence must be the lawe of God. By meanes of which, wise consideration must be had, whether the thing which we haue in mind be for Gods glory and our neighbours good: which done, wee are answearably to

speake to be silent.
            Here must be considered the things of which silence must be used, and the persons before whome▪ The things are many. First, if any trueth be to the hinderance of Gods glorie, or of the good of our neighbour, it must be concealed.
            The concealing of the trueth, is either in whole or in parte. In whole, when the speaking of the least worde is hurtfull:
                  Aug. li. ad Consen.
                As for example, the father and the sonne are both sicke at once: the sonne dieth first, the father asketh whether his sonne be dead or not: if it be said no, an untrueth is told: if yea, then the fathers griefe is increased, and his death hastened: therefore silence is the best. In dayes of persecution holy Martyrs haue chosen rather to suffer death then to reueale their brethren, that haue bene of their priuate assemblies with them.
            The concealing of a thing in part is, when a man speakes a little of the trueth, and concealeth the rest. Which is warranted in all good and lawfull proceedings, which manifestly tend to the glorie

of God. When Samuel 
               
                  〈…〉
                
               David, he answereth the Lord and saith, 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  an I goe? for if Saul 
                     〈◊〉
                   of it he will kill me. Then the Lord answered, 
                     〈…〉
                   with thee, and say,
               1. Sā. 16.1, 2, 3. 
               I am come to 
                     〈◊〉
                   sacrifice to the 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and call for 
                     〈◊〉
                   to sacrifice, and I will 
                     〈◊〉
                   thee 
                     〈…〉
                  
                had shewed King Zedekiah how he might escape death, then the King said unto him, Let no man knowe of these wordes,
               Iere. 38.24, 25, 26. 
               &c. but if the princes understand that I have talked with thee, and they come unto thee, and say unto thee▪ Declare unto us what the King hath said unto thee, &c. then shalt thou say unto them, I humbly besought the King that he would not cause me to 
                     〈◊〉
                   to 
                     〈◊〉
                   house to die there. And afterward he so answered, and the matches was not perceived. The like was practised by 
                  〈◊〉
                
               Actes. 23.6.
            Secondly, thou art to conceale thine owne secrets. Sampson revealing his

owne secret, Iudg. 
               
                  〈◊〉
                overthrewe himselfe▪ If thou desire ease by revealing, then 
                  •
               ell them but 
                  〈◊〉
                fewe and to such as are faithfull.
            That which thou wouldest not haue knowen, 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
                  〈◊〉
                for howe shall another keepe thy counsell, when thou canst not doe it. Keepe thy friendes 
                  〈◊〉
                likewise, if it be not hurtfull: and let ministers conceale the sinnes and wantes that trouble the conscience of such as are dying. Let Magistrates conceale thinges done in the Senate▪ especially concerning warre, least they be reuealed to the enemie.
            If God bring any strange thing to passe, speake not boldely of it, but in silence wonder▪ 
               Iob at the consideration of Gods Majestie in his workes, saith, Beholde,
               Iob. 39.37. 
               I am vile: what shall I answere thee? I will lay my hande upon my mouth. Na
                     ••
                  b and Abehu for offering incense with strange fire before the Lord were both distroyed with fire: which beeing done, Moses told Aaron that God would bee sanctified in them that come neere

him, and be glorified before all the people: and then the text saith,Levit. 10.3. 
               but Aaron helde his peace. When Peter had taught the Gentiles, and after returned to Hierusalem, they of the circumcision contended with him: he then rendreth a reason of his fact, which being made, they were silent. For so the text is, When they heard these thinges,
               Act. 11.18. 
               they helde their peace, and glorified GOD. When Gods judgementes befall men among us, if wee speake any thing we must judge charitable. Blessed is hee that judgeth wisely of the poore,
               Psal. 41.1. 
               the Lorde shall deliver him in the time of trouble.
            
            Thirdely, the infirmities and sinnes of our neighbours are alwayes to bee concealed, unlesse it be in the case before named, that wee finde our selues called of God to speake. He that covereth a transgression seeketh love.
               Prov. 17.4. If God in mercie cover his sinnes, why shouldest thou reveale them. Salomon saith, It is the glorie of a man to passe by an infirmitie.
               Prov. 19.11.
            
            
               Fourthly, all unseemely matters, all thinges unknowen, thinges which concerne us not, things above our reach are in silence to be buried.
            The persons before whome silence must be used, are these. I. Malitious enemies of religion: Give not that which is holy unto dogges,
               Mat. 7.6. 
               neither cast your pearles before swine. This was among the rest one cause of the silence of Christ before Caiaphas and Pilate.
               Mat. 27.14. II. Secondly, before Magistrates in their open courtes: where such as come before them are not to speake till they bee bidden. Then Paul after that the governour had beckened unto him that he should speake,
               Act. 24.10. 
               answered. III. In the presence of our elders and betters, who must have leave and libertie to speake first,Ecclus 32.8. and must of others be heard with silence. The practise of this was in Elihu to Elithaz and Bildad.
               Iob. 32.6. Ecclus 7.5, 11 A companie of men (as some say) is like to the Alphabet, in which are vowels, halfe vowels, and mutes: vowels are olde men, learned, wise, expert: halfe vowels, are

young men and women, who are then onely to speake when they are asked; mutes, are the same parties, who beeing not occasioned, are in silence to heare their betters.Tit. 2.9. And here all servants and children must remember when they are justly reprooued, to be silent, and not to answere any thing againe. IIII. Fooles and pratlers are not to be answered, unlesse it be to let them see their follie.
         
         
            CAP. XII An exhortation to keepe the tongue.
            
               THVS have I in parte set downe howe the tongue is to be governed: and I heartily desire, that 
                  〈◊〉
                Christians woulde put these rules in practise. Reasons. I. If any man seeme to bee religious, and restraine not his tongue,
               Iam. 1.26.
               
               he deceiveth himselfe, and his religion is in vaine. II. The man of an euill tongue, is a beast in the forme of a man; for his tongue is the tongue of a serpent▪ under which lyeth nothing but venime and poison: nay, hee is worse then a serpent: for it can not hurt, unlesse it be present to see a man,Psal. 140.3. or to bite him, or to strike him with his taile: but he which hath not the rule of his tongue, hurteth men as well absent as present, neither sea nor land, nor any thing can hinder him. And againe, his throate is like a graue that hath a vent in some parte, and therefore sendeth foorth nothing but stinke and corruption. III. As the holy men of God when they preached,Isa. 6.6 had their tongues, as it were, touched with a cole from the altar of God:Matt. 3.11. and as godly men when they speake gratiously, haue their tongues inflamed with the fire of Gods spirite: so, contrariwise, when thou speakest euill, thy tongue is kindled by the fire of hell, and Sathan comes from

thence with a cole to touch thy lippes,Iames 3.6. and to set them on fire to all manner of mischiefe. Chrysostome saith, that when men speake good things,
                  Chrys. hō. 79. in Mat.
                their tongue is the tongue of Christ: but all manner of ungodly and cursed speaking is the deuils language. IIII. The moderating of the tongue is a matter of great difficultie. S. Iames saith,Iames 3.7, 8. 
               The whole nature of beasts and of birdes, and of creeping things, &c. but the tongue can no man tame: it is an unruly evill. Pambus, one without learning, came to a certaine man to be taught a Psalme: who when hee had hearde the first verse of the 38. Psalme, I said, that I will keepe my wayes that I offend not in my tongue,
               
                  Histor. Tripar. l. 8. c. 1. would not suffer the next verse to be read, saying, this verse is ynough, if I coulde practise it. And when his teacher blamed him, because he sawe him not of sixe moneths 
                  〈◊〉
               , he answered, that hee had not yet done the verse. And one that knewe him many yeres after, asked him whether he had yet learned the verse▪ I am fourtie yeeres olde (sayeth hee) and have

not yet learned to fulfill it. Now then, the harder it is to rule the tongue, the more care is to be had therein. V. The straunge judgements of God,Gods Judgement for the abuse of the tōgue▪ Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 8. for the abuse of the tongue especially in blasphemies and perjuries are many and fearefull. Three men conspired together against Narcissus Bishoppe of Hierusalem, a man that ledde a godly and blamelesse life, and they charged him with a most heynous crime, all three confirme their accusation by othe: the first wisheth, if it were not so that he were burnt. The second, that hee might die of the jaundise: the third, that he might loose his eyes. Afterward in processe of time, the first had his house set on fire in the night, and hee with all his family was burnt. The second had the jaundise from the head to the sole of the foote and died thereof. The third seeing what was befallen these twaine, repented, and confessed the conspiracie against Narcissus, and yet for all that hee lost his eyes. Againe, In the dayes of Q. Mary as Iames Abbes was ledde by the sheriffe to execution,
                  Foxe Act. Mon.
               
               
diuers poore people stoode in the way and asked their almes: he then having no money to give them, did pull off all his apparell saue his shirte, and gave it unto them, to some one thing, to some another in the giving whereof hee exhorted them to be strong in the Lorde, and to stande steadfaste to the trueth of the Gospell. While he was thus instructing the people, a seruant of the sheriffes going by, cryed out alowde and blasphemously saide: Beleeue him not good people, he is an heretique, and a mad man out of his witte: beleeue him not, for it is heresie that hee saieth: And as the other continued in his godly admonitions, so did this wicked wretch blowe foorth his blasphemous exclamations, untill they came unto the stake where he shoulde suffer. But immediatly after this martyr was bounde to the stake and fire put to him, such was the fearefull stroke of Gods justice upon this blasphemous railer, that hee was there presently in the sight of all the people stricken with a frensie, wherewith hee had

before railingly charged that good martyr of God: who in this furious rage and madnesse, casting off his shoes and the rest of his clothes, cryed out unto the people and saide: thus did Iames Abbes the true servant of God, who is saved, but I am damned: And thus ranne hee rounde about the towne of Burie, still crying, that Iames Abbes was a good man, and saved, but I am damned.
            
               
                  Act. Mon. Fox.
               
               Againe, Children sitting in companie together, fell into communication of God, and to reason what God was. And some saide one thing, some another▪ among the rest, one saide, He is a good olde father, to which another named Dennis Benfielde replyed with a most outragious blasphemie: What, he (said shee) is an old doting foole. But shortly after this young gyrle was so stricken, that all the one side of her was blacke, and shee became speechlesse, and died.
            
               
                  Jdem.
               
               Againe, One Leav
                     ••
                  
                a ploughman, railing, said, that he saw the 
                  〈◊〉
                favoured knaue Latimer, when he was burned: and also in despite, saide, that hee had teeth

like an horse. At which time and houre, as neere as could be gathered, the sonne of the saide Leaver most wickedly hanged himselfe.
            
               Againe, in the time of K. Edwarde,
               
                  Idem.
                a young gentleman of Cornwall being in companie with other moe gentlemen togither with their servants, beeing about the number of twentie horse-men, among whome this lustie yonker entred into talke, and began withal to sweare, and use ribauld speech: being gently reprooved, the young gentleman tooke snuffe, and said to the reproover, why takest thou thought for me? take thought for thy winding sheete: well, quoth the other, amend, for death giveth no warning: for he soone commeth a lambs skinne to the market, as an old sheepes skinne. Gods wounds, (saith he) care not thou for me: raging still in this maner worse and worse in wordes, till at length passing on their journey, they came riding ouer a great bridge, standing ouer a piece of an arme of the sea, upon which bridge this gentleman swearer spurred his horse in such

sorte as hee spring cleane over with the man on his backe, who as he was going, cried, saying, Horse and man, and all to the devill.
            
               P. Stubbes book printed 1581.
               Againe, there was a serving man in Lincolnshire, who had still in his mouth an use to sweare, Gods pretious blood, and that for very trifles: being often warned by his friendes to leave the taking of the Lords blood in vaine, did notwithstanding still persist in his wickednesse, untill at the last it pleased God to acite him first with sicknesse, and then with death: during which time of the Lordes visitation, no perswasion could moue him to repent his foresaid blaspheming, but hearing the bell to towle, did most hardly in the 
                  〈◊〉
                anguish of his death, start up in his bed, and sware by Gods blood this bell towled for me. Whereupon immediatly the blood abundantly from all the joynts of his body, as it were in streames, did issue out most fearfully from mouth, nose, wrestes, knees, heeles, and toes, with all other joyntes, not one left free, and so dyed. These and such like judgements must be as warnings

from heauen to admonish us, and to make us afraid of the abuse of the Tongue: especially when it tendeth to the dishonour of God. And we are to imitate the example of Policarpe the Martyr, who, when hee was bidden to take his othe, and curse Christ, answered, Fourescore and sixe yeeres haue I beene his seruant, yet in all this time hath he not so much as once hurt me: how then may I speake euill of my King and Soueraigne Lorde, which hath thus preserued me? VI. Lastly, God hath honoured thy tongue with the gifte of speech and utterance: and the great excellencie of this gift thou shouldest perceiue, if thou werest stricken dumme for a time. Therefore let thy tongue be applyed to the honouring of God, and to the good of thy neighbour.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            Errata sic corrigenda.
            Pag. 29. in marg. Act. 11.26. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . sic Rom. 11.4. pag. 34 in marg. August. for Arist.
            
            
            
         
      
   