
      
         
            
            
               
AN APPROVED TREATISE OF Hawkes and Hawking. Diuided into three Bookes.
               
                  The firſt teacheth, How to make a ſhort-winged Hawke good, with good conditions.
                  The ſecond, How to reclaime a Hawke from any ill condition.
                  The third, teacheth Cures for all knowne griefes and diſeaſes.
               
            
            
               By EDMVND BERT, Gentleman.
            
            
            LONDON, Printed by T. S. for Richard Moore, and are to be ſold at his ſhop in S. Dunſtans Church-yard. 1619.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE HENRY, Earle of Oxenford, Viſcount Bulbecke, Lord Sanford and Scales, and Lord Great-Chamberlaine of ENGLAND.
            
               MY Honourable Lord, I neuer affected flattery, if I had I ſhould now haue beene much diſappointed; for your noble worth exceeds what I can ſay. To particularize your honourable Titles, or here to blazon your excellencies were needleſſe, and ſhall rather be printed in my faithfull heart, then publiſhed by my ruder pen; eſpecially vpon the dedication of ſo ſlight a ſubiect. Sir, I haue long waited

for opportunity, & this great while whipt occaſion on, whereby I might tender ſome open teſtimonie of my loue, before I dye, which may remaine as a perpetual memoriall of my euerdeuoted ſeruice. To that end (my Lord) I haue runne backe into my younger yeares, to ſummon the delights of my able youth, together with the fruits of my more experienced age, (compriſed within a few leaues) to attend your Lordſhips leaſure, and humbly to craue your Honours patronage. To arrogate to my ſelfe by an immoderate commendation of the Worke, were poore: to derogate too much from it through modeſty, were as ſilly: Therefore (not to be exceſsiue in the one, nor too liberall in the other) I would (with your honourable fauour) doe you thus much to vnderſtand: As for the ſubiect it is not waighty (being but a Treatiſe of ſport) and to attend and to giue place to your Lordſhips honourable affaires, and more ſerious imployments; but as for the handling of the Subiect (I dare, and will boldly ſay and auerre) it is good: Nay, I will ſubmit my ſelfe to partiall cenſurers

vpon due triall, and bazard my reputation vpon true iudgement. My Lord, I frame not my wauering ſurmizes vpon probabilities of ſic dicunt; but I ground my conſtant opinion vpon certainty of probatum eſt: Nor can I quote any Author but my ſelfe; and out of my owne induſtrious experiments I (firſt) extracted my owne concluſions: I reape no mans harueſt, but plough with my owne Heifer. In fine, I here dedicate to your Lordſhip the delights of my Childe-hood, the pleaſures of my youth, the experiments of my age, my faithfull (though painefull) labours, my fruitfull (though ſlight) indeauours, myſelfe, my continuall ſeruice and obſeruance to your truely-noble Selfe, humbly requeſting your Honour not to be aſhamed to Patronize that which your ſeruant is not afraid to preſent: And that ſhall crowne my poore indeauours, and giue my labours an eternall ſufficit; and make me euer reſt
            
               Your Lordſhips humbly deuoted, EDMVND BERT.
            
         
         
            
            To the friendly Reader.
            
               FRiendly Reader, I did neuer purpoſe to publiſh in common theſe my labours, but to haue giuen them priuately to whom they are dedicated, and to whom I ſtand deuoted: but being diſcouered to ſome of my friends, and by them made knowne to many of the reſt, there importunities and earneſt perſwaſions haue made mee put it to the preſſe, whereby I ſhal be ſenſured of ſuch as haue leſt Iudgement, but let it anſwere for it ſelfe; I haue not ſet down any thing ſo erronious, but being well examined, it will proue iudicious: and although this ſubiect hath already beene dealt withall, and well handled by a Gentleman of good experience, whoſe good and probable diſcourſe might be a meanes to hinder my proceeding herewith, yet a great many gentlemen to whom the goodneſſe of my hawkes haue beene knowne to be ſuch as that they could not be bettered, doe

ſtrongly inforce it, that my Skill, Art & knowledge muſt be in the ſame degree: In truth I haue not kept any hawke aboue three yeeres, but I haue put them off for much money, beſides many thanks, and much loue. I had for a Goſhawke and a Tarſell a hundeed Marks, both ſolde to one man within ſixteen moneths. I know there are many of good experience will ouerlooke this my booke, and ſome that are young profeſſors, and ſome that would learne to profeſſe, but whatſoeuer he be that vndertaketh this profeſſion, I will wiſh him an able body, a quicke ſpirit, and moſt of all, an earneſt loue and delight thereunto; to ſuch a man a hawke will quickly teach knowledge, but of him that wanteth wit ſhee will make a foole, and of a dull-ſpirit a true pack-horſe: If theſe good properties ſhall be wanting in a man, he is hardly to be made a good Auſtringer, and it will be hard for him to make a good hawke. I would I were able to deliuer plainely what I vnderſtand, I will ſet downe as familiarly as I can, the beſt inſtructions I am able, but knowledge and vnderſtanding, louing practitioner muſt be gotten by thy diligent and carefull obſeruing thy hawke, in her ſundry paſſions and ſudden toyes, ſuch vigelance, ſuch diligence, and ſuch carefulneſſe will worke ſuch an apprehenſion in thee, as in a little time thy knowledge and vnderſtanding will bring forth ſuch effect, as that thou wilt be able to preuent

all her ill intendments. I cannot ſet downe what thy experience will teach thee; but I reſt to giue thee fullerſatisfaction, by conference, then I haue herein or can poſſibly publiſh: Farewell.
            
               From my houſe at Collier-Row, neere Rumford
               

               Thine to his power. EDMVND BERT.
            
         
         
            
            THE CONTENTS OF the ſeuerall Chapters of this BOOKE.
            
               The firſt part, teacheth how to make a ſhort-winged Hawke good, &c.
               
                  CHAP. I. 
                  THe Authours opinion of the Goſhawke and Tarſell, and of their defference; which hee writeth to them that are of ſmall practice, and would haue their labours put to the beſt profit.
               
                  II. Wherein the Tarſell differeth from the Goſhawke.
               
               
                  III. Of the ſeuerall kindes of the Goſhawkes and Tarſels, viz. the Haggart, the Rammiſh, and the Eyes Hawke; (I will diſtinguiſh no further)

and of their differing diſpoſitions: And firſt of the Haggart.
               
               
                  IV. The deſcription of the Rammiſh Hawke.
               
                  V. The deſcription of the Eyas, vpon whom I can faſten no affection, for the multitude of their follies and faults.
               
                  VI. A pre-admonition to the Reader.
               
                  VII. The manner how I have vſed the Rammiſh-ſore-Goſhawke, after I haue taken her from the Cage vnto my fiſt, vntill ſhee hath beene flying.
            
            
               
               The Contents of the ſecond Booke. Wherein is ſet downe, how to reclaime a Hawke from any ill condition.
               
               
                  CHAP. I. 
                  HOw to make a Hawke hoode well that will not abide the ſight thereof, and (how diſorderly ſoeuer ſhee be) it ſhall be effected in forty eight houres, with leſſe then forty bates.
               
                  II. How to bring a Hawke that will royle, and ſeeke for Poultrey at a houſe, to good perfection: And how to winne her loue, in whom an ill keeper hath wrought ſuch careleſneſſe.
               
                  III. How to reclaime a Hawke that will carry, and not ſuffer her keeper to come vnto her.
               
                  IV. To reclaime a Hawke that will carry a Partridge into a Tree.
               
                  
                  V. How to vſe that Hawke, that aſſoone as ſhe hath a Partridge will breake it, and gorge her ſelfe vpon it.
               
                  VI. How to vſe a Hawke that will carry a Partridge into a Tree, and will not be driuen to the ground, but will there aſſuredly eate it: And (it may be) not be taken vp vntill the next night.
               
                  VII. How to reclaime a Hawke that will neither abide horſe-men, ſtrangers, Carts, or Women, or ſuch like.
               
                  VIII. How to vſe a Hawke that will ſit vpon the ground at marke, and by miſsing many flights, beate out her ſelfe from her true ſtying.
               
                  IX. That the Tarſell is more proane to theſe ill conditions then the Hawke, and how to reclaime him that will ſeeke for a Doue-houſe.
            
            
               
               The Contents of the Third Booke. Wherein is ſet downe, Cures for all knowne diſeaſes.
               
               
                  CHAP. I. 
                  FIrſt, for the beake, mouth eyes, head and throat, and of the ſeuerall griefes and diſeaſes there breeding, and offending.
               
                  II. A medicine for a wet Canker in the mouth or beake, which will eate into her eyes and braine; and (vnleſſe it be killed) will kill her; and this is more common with the long-winged then ſhort-winged Hawke.
               
                  III. A medicine for the Frounce, whereunto the long-winged Hawke is much more ſubiect then the ſhort.
               
                  IV. A remedy for the kirnels, whereunto the long-winged Hawke is not ſubiect, but it much followeth the ſhort winged Hawke.
               
                  
                  V. There is a diſeaſe in the head, of ſome called Vertego, a ſwimming of the braine, and the cure followeth.
               
                  VI. The Pinne in the throat, of all other the moſt deſperate and vncurable diſeaſe: I haue not knowne a long-winged Hawke troubled therewith, but to a ſhortwinged Hawke it brings death.
               
                  VII. An excellent medicine for a blowe or laſh in the eye.
               
                  VIII. An excellent water for a hot rhume that runneth out of the eye, the heate whereof ſcaldeth all the feathers from that part vnder the eye, and maketh it bare.
               
                  IX. For a Snurt, or colde in the head of the Hawke, or the Rye.
               
                  X. For the Mytes, wherewith I haue knowne many Hawkes that haue not onely beene troubled about

the beake, but the very Ieukes haue beene left without feathers, and eaten the very skin off.
               
                  XI. A receipt beyonde all other, to take out Lyme from the feathers of a Hawke.
               
                  XII. A powder to be giuen to a Hawke that bloweth, and is ſhort-winded.
               
                  XIII. A medicine for the Wormes, wherewith all Hawkes are troubled, and other Creatures alſo.
               
                  XIV. A receipt for a Hawke that hath lost her courage, and ioyeth not.
               
                  XV. To diſtill a water wherewith to ſtrengthen a weake Hawke.
               
                  XVI. To diſtill a water, whoſe property is to kill any vnnaturall heate in the mouth or body; a great cleanſer and increaſer of the breath; and the beſt

that euer was for the Liuer that is hot, and nothing better for a field hawke that flyeth in Sommer.
               
                  XVII. An excellent approued medicine for a dangerous bruiſe, to be giuen preſently after the hurt.
               
                  XVIII. A medicine for a Hawke that hath receiued a wound by ſome ill accident.
               
                  XIX. A medicine for the Cray.
               
                  XX. A receipt for a ſtreine or bruiſe in the foote.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            AN APPROVED TREATISE OF Hawkes and Hawking.
            
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  The Authors opinion of the Goſhawke and Tarſell, and of their difference; all which hee writeth vnto them that are of ſmall practiſe, and to them that would haue their labours put to the beſt profit.
               
               
                  THe Goſhawke is moſt able to indure much, and is more profitable then the Tarſell, not onely with bringing home many quarries, but with bringing diuerſity and variety of quarries: Her diſpoſition is meeke and gentle, if ſhe be mildely delt with, and not ſo apt to ill conditions as is the Tarſell, ſhe is ſubiect to ſeeke for poultry, into which fault ſhe will neuer fall, except it be through want of knowledge in her keeper; which fault to preuent,

as alſo how to reclaime a Hawke from that euill condition, or any other, I will hereafter giue moſt plaine and true inſtruction in his proper place.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  Wherein the Tarſell differeth from the Goſhawke.
                  
               
               EXcept it be for his practiſe, I would not aduiſe him that cannot rightly effect all things in a Goſhawke, to meddle with the Tarſell, for hee is apt to ill conditions, which euery good Auſtringer (if he will) is able to preuent: He will take diſlike at many things, or at any thing; he is apt to royle, and ſometimes may finde poultry that is fit for his turne; and if he once take a liking, and ſtand well affected that way, there is none vnfit for him: Hee will quickely know a Doue-houſe, and too ſoone learne to finde the way into it, and then he hath wit enough to pleaſe himſelfe; but theſe faults and many more follow ſuch Hawkes as are not well handled, but are harſhly and vnkindely delt with in their firſt manning: He is light-headed and nimble winged, the quicke handling of them in his flying pleaſeth more then the Goſhawke, and therein the Spar-hawke exceedeth the Tarſell, and the Marlin therein exceedeth both Goſhawke, Tarſell & Spar-hawke. They may fitly be compared vnto a A compariſon. large Gelding, and a ſmaller, the firſt hauing a large and long ſtroke goeth faſter then he ſeemeth, the other In either kinde this holdeth not generally. that gathereth ſhort and thick ſeemeth to goe much faſter then he doth; the larger ſhall inforce

the leſſer to ſtrike thriſe for the ground that he will almoſt at twice performe; my opinion is, hee that riddeth moſt ground, with moſt eaſe, ſhall longeſt endure. Iudge your ſelfe the difference betweene the Goſhawke, Tarſell, and Spar-hawke.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  Of Goſhawkes there are three ſeuerall kindes, and ſo of Tarſels, the Haggart Hawke, the Ramiſh, and the Eyas, much differing from the reſt.
               
               I Onely write now the differing diſpoſitions of theſe Hawkes, of their ſeuerall properties, and the inconueniences that followeth them in particular: and firſt of the Haggart in generall. She hath liued long at liberty, hauing many things at her command, and ſhe is therefore the harder to be brought to ſubiection and obedience: In her firſt manning ſhe is apt to take euery accidentall occaſion that giueth offence to come from her keeper; A compariſon. As a yong horſe in his firſt riding, if he ſhall bogge or be afraid of ſomething, if his rider ſhall then ſpurre him vpon it, the horſe may thus thinke that the thing whereon now in feare all his thoughts are placed, is the true moouer of the ſpurres that torment him; ſo the Haggart tyed to her Maſters fiſt, that bateth, and then findeth her reſtraint, the obiect taken away, ſhe will ſtare her keeper in the face, and thinke all the offence came from him, to whoſe fiſt ſhe was tyed, otherwiſe ſhe had beene at liberty, and ſo could haue freed her ſelfe from whatſoeuer

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
feared her. But let mee ſpeake this now more A caueat. than I purpoſed, leſt hereafter in his proper place I may forget to giue that caueat, if thy Haggart be ſo angry as that ſhe ſtare thee in the face vpon any ſuch accidentall occaſion, or ſodaine thought of her preſent bondage, owne it not, ſee it not, and by all meanes poſſible carry thine eye from looking vpon her, for that will worke her more diſlike towards thee; which if you obſerue, you ſhall the ſooner finde her pacified. She ſeldome meweth timely or orderly; and although ſome can ſay that A great inconuenience. they haue had a Haggart Goſhawke mewed well and faire, fit to draw at Bartholomew; I anſwere, one Swallow maketh not a Summer.
               When the Haggart is flying, nature is altered, and therefore I muſt not here ſpeake of her good or bad properties at that time, for they are wrought in her through the good or bad diſcretion of her keeper, when ſhe was in making, or after ſhe was made, as her keeper thoght. I will leaue thoſe to their proper place, onely I ſay & ſo conclude, that your Haggart is very louing and kinde to her keeper, after that he hath brought her, by his ſweet and kinde familiarity, to vnderſtand him; but if ſhee fall into any vice, ſhee is moſt hardly reclaimed from it, and brought to good perfection againe; if it ſhall be hoped for, it ſhall ſooneſt be gotten and performed, by exchanging her keeper, if his skill may equall her former keeper.
            
            
               
               CHAP. IV.
               
                  The deſcription of the Rammiſh Hawke.
               
               THere is ſmall difference betweene the Haggart and the Rammiſh, onely the Rammiſh Hawke hath had leſſe time (by preying for her ſelfe then the other) to know her owne ſtrength and worth, but in manning and making her I will ſet downe my whole practiſe, with my friendly aduiſe to others that will enter into the ſame courſe, for in the Rammiſh Hawke is my eſpeciall delight, for in them my labours haue proued moſt ſucceſſefull.
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  Of the Eyas Hawke, vpon whom I can faſten no affection, for the multitude of her follies and faults.
               
               I Feele it moſt burthenſome to ſpend my time idlely; I thinke the difference little, either to be idle, or ſpend the time to no purpoſe, or be long of doing a little, and ſuch effect his trauell will giue him for reward that medleth with an Eyas, except a long expectation of good will giue him ſatisfaction; For they are ſo fooliſh as the firſt yeare they will hardly be taught to take a bough well, and if that cannot be effected, there can no proſperous ſucceſſe be expected. I haue knowne ſome that haue not prooued very excellent the ſecond yeare in taking a bough, and then it is a foule fault, to doe

nothing the firſt yeare, and not very much the ſecond; for I haue ſeene diuers entermewers hang I will not affirme that all will prooue thus. with their head downward, holding a bough faſt in her foote or feete. I haue knowne ſome of them likewiſe that would ſooner catch a dogge in the field then a Partridge, and although ſhe had flown a Partridge very well to marke, and ſat well, yet ſo ſoone as a dog had but come in to the retroue, ſhe would haue had him by the face. One other as ill a fault as this, if ſhe flye well, yet it is oddes you Neither is this generally to be vnderſtood. ſhall finde her ſitting vpon the ground at marke, when although you keepe your dogs quietly behinde you, and though you vſe ſome courſe to terrifie her, or take her betweene your hands and You ſhal finde hereafter a remedy for this. throwe her vp, you may perhaps finde her folly giue her leaue to fall againe vpon the ground within twelue or twenty yards of you; feare the worſt, the beſt will helpe it ſelfe, it may be ſhe will not goe to a tree at all, (this is grieuous.) Neither will moſt of them like the hoode well, and many of them will cry as loud to you, as you will ſpeake to them. Neither can I hope to buy a ſound Hawke of them from the Cage, who knoweth not that they are hot and ſcratching vpon the quarry: Art will eaſily amend that fault, which I will not faile Eaſie to be amended. to deliuer in his place. But this I ſay, if a man haue the patience to endure their impatience, and attend a long time for their good proofe, if at the laſt ſhe ſhall prooue well, ſhe may be ranked among the beſt in the higheſt degree: She will euer mewe orderly and timely, and except ſome euill accident

ſhorten her dayes, ſhe will liue longer then any of the reſt, ſhe is not apt to be ſicke, or ſurfeit ſo ſoone as the other, yet if a ſickneſſe ſhould befall her, ſhe will out-grow it with leſſe danger then the other. In this diſcourſe I haue altogether ſpoken of the Eyas-Hawke, but the Tarſell is not ſo vnapt to take a bough, neither is hee apt to catch dogges, if hee prooue well: there can no attribute be giuen to the Rammiſh Tarſell (but all qualities examined) he ſhall owne as good, or better. And thus much as concerning my opinion of the Eyas Hawke.
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  To the friendly Reader.
               
               FRiendly Reader, before I beginne to treate of the Rammiſh Hawke, and to ſet downe the courſes whereby I haue made ſo many and ſo extraordinary good Hawkes, as they could not be bettered both for flying and good conditions, I muſt tell you, and ſo farre explaine my ſelfe, that I doe not therein ſo much arrogate to my ſelfe, as to thinke my courſes are not to be equalled, but they may be bettered, euen by men that liue in obſcurity, but for what I write, is my opinion; from which (although it ſhall mooue others but little) I cannot be drawne, becauſe I haue had thereby ſo good, ſo proſperous, and ſo profitable ſucceſſe: Some may contrary my opinion, who can for themſelues ſay but as I doe, that their opinion is ſuch; if I cannot

ſet downe ſufficient reaſons for my proceedings, my Hawkes ſhall teſtifie for me, it hath long laine by me, and that I haue not beene forward to publiſh this but in a Manu-ſcript, is very well knowne to many of my friends, Gentlemen that haue come to viſite and comfort me in the time of my ſicknes (which hath continued with me for the moſt part theſe three yeares, in all which time I haue made but onely one Hawke, but diuers haue beene brought vnto me to be cured of diuers diſeaſes, and ſome to be reclaymed from ill conditions) and by theſe Gentlemen I haue been ouer-powred (deſiring that my knowledge might not be buried with mee) to thruſt out my labours to publike view. And although my memory hath eſcaped ſome ſecret, yet I am aſſured the skilfulleſt ſhall finde ſomething herein ſet downe, that neither he nor any man hath made vſe of, either in making his Hawke of good and faire condition, or in reclayming her, or any other of their kinde, from any ill condition. And thus followeth my direct courſe for the reclayming, manning, and making of my ſhort-winged Hawke.
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  The manner how I haue vſed the Rammiſh-ſore-Goſhawke, after I haue taken her from the Cage vnto my fiſt, vntill ſhe hath beene flying.
               
               I Muſt ſpeake ſomething of the time wherein vſually I make choyſe to buy my Rammiſh Hawke,

about the latter of Michaelmas terme; or if I can learne that there are more Hawkes comming before Chriſtmas, I will tarry their comming, for thoſe Hawkes doe not ſhew themſelues out of the great couerts vntill after Saint Iames: And to buy one of them in the beginning of Michaelmas terme that hath beene ſo long taken, and done ſo little for her ſelfe, I like not, but I will hope for a more late taken Hawke, which when I haue, I follow How I begin with my Hawke. in this manner. I continue her vpon my fiſt tenne dayes or a fortnight, (vnleſſe in a ſhorter time I finde her a ſound Hawke) which I ſhall the ſooner vnderſtand, becauſe I ſee how ſhe putteth ouer This muſt be eſpecially obſerued. her meate, how ſhee doth in due it; and if there be any doubt of her well-doing, there ſhall hardly a mute eſcape my ſight whoſoeuer doth carry her for mee, for ſhe ſhall be well aſſured to finde no other perch then the fiſt, from that time I riſe vntill Thus you may recouer her strength, that in ſo long a iourney is made weake. I goe to bed, when ſhe ſhall goe with me; and if in this time I finde it fit, ſhe doth not faile to haue caſting. I finde no time loſt in this courſe, for in this time I will raiſe my Hawke and giue her ſtrength, and ſhe will be the leſſe time after ſhe is vnhooded before ſhee doth flye; my caſtings that My manner of caſtings in the beginning. I giue, are Thrums, gotten of the Weauer, I get them waſhed, but not with Sope, I cut the threads an inch long or leſſe, and I ſize them out for a ſmall caſting, and giue them loſe with her meate; or otherwiſe, I tye vpon the thrids two or foure ſmall knots, leauing ſome thrids open at the end of either knot; otherwiſe I giue plumage and ſome ſmall

bones, if the fowle like me, the bones of that part of the wing that is vſually broken from the Partridge. Flannell I could neuer approue of, neither did I euer vſe the iukes and feathers of a houſe-Doue, The Feathers of the Houſe-Doue not good. for they (by reaſon of their owne dung they ſit in) are hot and ſtrong in ſauour. I am carefull not to make my caſting too great; I thinke there is no man but hath that care if hee but vndertake to feed a Hawke. When I find my Hawke in ſtrength of body and ſtomacke bettered, I proceed to peppering, (for I will let nothing eſcape me vnſet downe in the whole practiſe of my Hawke, vntill For peppering. I haue made her flying) and although peppering be as common with euery man as feeding, yet becauſe I haue knowne and heard of many Hawks that haue dyed vpon peppering, when I had younger experience, I grew very carefull thereof, and I tooke this courſe: Firſt, I made my water ſeeth, and then I put thereto a quantity of pepper, and a leſſe quantity of Staueſ-acre pounded ſmall; I put in the leſſe of both, becauſe I ſeeth them in the water, which maketh the water ſtrong: When the water had ſod a while, I did ſtreine it through a fine linnen cloth, which ſhould ſuffer neither Pepper nor Staueſ-acre to goe through, and therein I would then waſh my Hawke. My reaſon why I doe not alow of, nor vſe the common courſe of A reaſon why thus. peppering, is this; The water not ſtrained through a cloth, the Pepper hangeth in the Hawkes feathers, and when ſhe falleth to pruning of her ſelfe, ſhee oftentimes getteth it into her beake, and ſo it

hangeth either vpon the tongue or in the mouth of the Hawke, and ſetteth it on fire, the heate and diſlike whereof maketh many Hawkes to caſt Eſpecially ſuch as are not perfectly ſound. their gorge, and ſo their ſickneſſe encreaſing, they dye. Beſides, I haue come many times to ſome places foure or fiue daies, or a weeke after that they haue peppered their Hawkes: And I haue ſeene the backe part of their wings red ſo long after their peppering: There may thereupon grow (although not ſodainely) an incurable bliſter, which will lame his Hawke, and her Maſter ſhall neuer know how it commeth; but with the roughneſſe An office ill performed. of the Pepper, and with the ill handling of them that haue executed that office, I haue many times ſeen the skin in that place rubbed off. If any man will follow my courſe he may, if not, let this warne him of the inconueniences that follow the other, many Hawkes hauing dyed vpon peppering, Auoyde euery inconuenience. my reaſon can finde no other cauſe than what is aforeſaid, or elſe a great fault in her keeper, that would put his Hawke to ſuch a hazard, A fault in her keeper. before he had made her body able and fit for it. My place of peppering ſhould be in a very warme roome, although the fire were not very great I cared not, my time ſhould be in the euening, and for my company I cared not how many both men and dogs, the more the better, for The earneſtlier ſhe looketh at many things, the leſſe ſhe will feare any. then the Hawke ſeeing ſo many things, that any one of them might giue offence alone, there is now ſo much change, men, dogges, fire-light, and candle-light, that ſhe looketh at all, and knoweth

not which to be afraid of. Beſides, ſhe hath a deſire to dry her ſelfe, and ſo let her continue vntill ſhe be dry, and hath picked her ſelfe, by that time I would thinke it time to giue her ſome meate, & that ſhould be but a little: ſhe had none aboue one houre before I beganne to pepper her; my Let her haue no meate aboue when you pepper her. hoode is layd away with no purpoſe to handle it before foure and twenty houres were ſpent, that night ſhe neuer went from my fiſt, but when I entreated my friend to eaſe me. But note, I ſeldome did ſit ſtill with her, but I would walke, and Sit not ſtill in manning your Hawke. when I walked, or whether I ſat ſtill, I would entreate my Hawke not to be idle, but in this manner to walke and trauell with me, very often turning my hand gently, forward and backeward, A good meanes to man your Hawke. whereby my Hawke ſhould be made, leiſurely, to remooue her feete one after another, forward and backeward. I had rather ſhe ſhould gently remooue a foote, then with anger ſtrike a wing, and the often remoouing her foote will ſaue her many a bate. It may be your Hawke (good friend) ſhall want that attendance that mine hath had for a fortnight before, if you faile in the beginning, looke for no ſuccesfull ending, it is very like Obſerue this. you ſhall finde it at this time, when ſhee will diſtemper and ouer-heate her ſelfe with bating, which my former courſes taken with my Hawke, aſſureth me that I neede feare no ſuch thing. To proceede, I with my Hawke vpon my fiſt walke, and I entreate her to doe ſo likewiſe, by the gentle remoouing her feete, which ſhe ſhould practiſe

that night either vpon my fiſt, my friends, or my mans; towards the morning (if the weather Loſe not the morning. would giue me leaue) I walke abroad with ſome company, both men and dogs: and howſoeuer the weather was, I would euer be abroad at the breake of the day, and ſo continue ſo long as I could conueniently. If my Hawke were vnquiet, All Hawkes are then naturally diſpoſed to ſtirre. it would be about, or rather before, the Sunne riſeth, it is a time wherein all creatures ſpirits are quickened: Although my Hawke hath been thus truely watched, yet I ſhould finde in her a naturall working and ſtirring, as though ſhe had ſomthing to doe; then to put her out of that humor, I would haue either the wing of a Mallard, Pullet, or ſuch like, to ſet her a-worke, and put-by thoſe thoughts which nature taught her, and teach her to alter nature. All this while I haue both company and dogs with me; as I finde cauſe I goe into the houſe, where I and my Hawke walke, ſhe walking vpon her feet as well as I vpon mine, I would tend her many times with tyring and plumage: And thus either vpon my fiſt or vpon ſome mans elſe, ſhe ſhould ſit and walke all that day, for I thinke that is the day of marring or making; and this I thinke that if ſhe ſhould be ſet down vpon a pearch but whileſt I ſhould change Allow her no eaſe but vpon the fiſt. my Gloue, ſhe would be more impaired thereby then ſhe would profit in tenne dayes trauaile, being compared to my courſe herein taken, and which I vſe, and will take two nights and two daies together. I aſſure you that I haue neuer

met with that Hawke that hath ſhewed her ſelfe froward, or vnruly, no not this firſt day, neither ſhall I euer doe, if I order her after this manner. Well this day is ſpent in this manner, euening approacheth, and bid'deth the Hawke take her reſt, which I haue euer found her very ready and willing vnto, & faſhion her ſelfe to take her vp lodging vpon my fiſt, neither owning nor looking for other pearch. Now ſhe is conformable vnto my will, ſhe is euen already become familiar and ſociable, Already ſociable. and ſo I will continue her. Now I ſhew her the hoode, which my care hath before-hand prouided, and made very large, I thinke ſomewhat larger then is vſuall, but much larger at the top of the beake then I euer ſaw vſed. My hoode made fit and eaſie, I would offer to put it on, Take care to haue a very eaſie hood. which at that time I could neuer haue my Hawke diſlike. Thus I would vſe her with hooding and vnhooding that night; and then would I bethinke mee whereof my Hawke was likelyeſt to diſlike or be afraid; I would now ſeeke out the Smiths Forge, and there ſhee ſhould endure the blowing of the fire, and knocking of the Anuill, and the ſparkes flying about the ſhop. I pray you marke, it is not long ſince ſhee was begunne with, and what I haue done to her I haue deliuered plainely, belieue me within this little time, and with this my ſmall paines, I haue made my hawke ſuch as ſhe would not be diſtempered, diſorderly, Who will not take this courſe? froward, or more vnruly, but that I haue ſeene flying Hawkes much worſe. It will be no hard

matter to watch her this night, but it will be almoſt vnpoſſible to keepe her waking. I haue heard of ſome that haue watched their Hawkes ſeauen nights and as many dayes, and ſtill ſhe would be wilde, Rammiſh, & diſorderly. Know (good Reader) that a little ſleepe will ſuffice nature in any creature, and when a Hawke is vpon the fiſt, the man ſpending his time with ſitting ſtill, talking, or at Tables, hee may be vertuouſly ſpending his time in reading the Scripture; in this time his Hawke ſits ſtill, ſhe hath no exerciſe, and there is little difference in this, either to be vpon a pearch or his fiſt: hee may ſay, if I ſhould ſet her vpon a pearch, whenſoeuer it were in her ſight ſhee would bate to goe to it; I aske what is the difference betweene bating to goe to the pearch, or I doe not allow that ſhe ſhould be ſet vpon a pearch. bating to flye from all things elſe? And thus you ſhal neuer haue her a well-manned Hawke. What are the diſcommodities that follow a Hawke thus manned? She will endure nothing, becauſe ſhee hath not beene made acquainted with any thing; for when her Maſter or keeper ſhould ſee her to take offence or diſlike, hee will auoyde that becauſe ſhe ſhall not bate: Another-while he cryeth All which I would haue my Hawke vſed vnto. out, come not in the taile of my Hawke; but whoſoeuer ſhall vndertake the courſe that I haue vſed, he ſhall finde his Hawke ſeldome apt to take any offence at all. In a mans much ſitting ſtill in the time of manning his Hawke, an eaſie apprehenſion will finde a great errour, for when the man ſitteth ſtill, the Hawke ſitteth ſtill, and if ſhe To ſit ſtill an ouer-ſight.
                  
hath been truely watched, although ſhe doth not winke or ſhut her eyes, yet her heart may be faſt ſleeping; or if it be in the day, ſo long as her keeper ſitteth ſtill, ſhe will be quiet, but let him but ſtirre and walke, ſhe liketh not that, ſhe hath ſitten quietly vpon his fiſt, and ſhe is very loath to haue that cuſtome broken. Euery Auſtringer of any experience knoweth, that a Hawke thus vſed will thus bate. Why is it ſo? Not becauſe her eyes meete with that which ſitting ſtill ſhee ſaw not, but becauſe now ſhe meeteth labour, ſhee is angry and diſcontent, becauſe ſhee is not as ſhee was ſitting at eaſe. A Hawke before ſhe is truely manned (that hath been ſet & vſed vnto a pearch) will perpetually bate to be there. I hold it a great He is in an errour that ſetteth downe his Hawke hooded before ſhe be well manned. error to ſet her hooded, becauſe ſhe ſhould not ſee whereon ſhe ſitteth; for ſure I am this faſhion will breed more than a little inconuenience, and yet hereby there is no loue gained from his Hawke.
               I haue obſerued that it is much walking with my Hawke that hath wrought ſuch good effect in her; for in my walking and turning, her eye The Authors obſeruation. doth ſtill behold change of obiects, and the ſtirring of her feete doth worke as much or more good in her, for that maketh her deſirous to ſit ſtill, and deſirous of eaſe, which bating doth not giue, and in the firſt making ſaueth her many a bate. As at my firſt beginning I labor to acquaint her with whatſoeuer a Hawke may diſlike; ſo my manner of working this, is by that meanes, which The meanes is moſt neceſſary. otherwiſe ſhe would diſlike, and that is carriage,

and in this beginning to make my fiſt her pearch, vntill ſhe be ſuch as I would haue her, which this night and the next day ſhall make her, for this night is but the ſecond night; and now my chiefeſt practiſe is the vſing her to the hoode, which ſhe will as familiarly take as the Faulcon. I will ſhew you my manner therein: I ſhew her the hoode, put it to and ouer her head many times, I finde her ſo truely manned, as that ſhee will no more diſlike the ſtroaking therwith, then the bare hand, I put it on gently and very leiſurely, and I could neuer meet with any diſlike hereof in my Hawke; I would either put it on with my full hand, or elſe holding it by the taſſell, whereby Obſerue this. you may know that it was leſurely & gently done, which will be a means that ſhe ſhal neuer hereafter be coy of it: But if my fine Auſtringer will ſhew his dexterity and nimbleneſſe of the hand, and with his finger in her necke thruſt her head into the hoode, if he miſſe the right doing it, the next time he commeth in ſuch a manner, he may peraduenture finde her diſlike, this is the next way to make her thinke her head ſhall be pulled off; for the putting it on in ſuch a quicke manner, or thruſting her head into the hoode with the finger Auoyde all ſuch vnkindneſſe. behinde, will make the Hawke vnderſtand that it is no kindneſſe, but violence and churliſh vſage, which muſt neuer be offered a Hawke, and then you ſhall perhaps finde her diſlike your hand and hoode comming to her, and ſo being a little coy or angry, neuer be content to carry her beake

right, but turne it in the hood; and ſo my fine quicke hand bobbeth his Hawke, and maketh her vtterly diſlike the hoode.
               There is no way but gentleneſſe to redeeme a Beware of haſty hooding. Hawke ſo bobbed, and therefore I aduiſe thee not to truſt to the quickneſſe of the hand, but rather to holde the hoode by the taſſell to her head, & then to put it on leiſurely, with a light carriage. You may ſay ſhe will not ſuffer this; ſo thinke I alſo, after ſhe hath once taken a diſlike thereof; but I ſpake in the beginning how to vſe your hoode, ſo as ſhe ſhall neuer with ſuch vſage take diſlike thereof: vſe her as I haue vſed mine, and you ſhall finde yours as I finde mine; Admit your Hawke ſhall turne her head away from the hoode, I know ſhe will not bate from it, perhaps ſhe will I could neuer finde more diſtemper. likewiſe turne her body by the remoouing one or both of her feete; vpon the putting her head aſide, I would ſtill holde my hoode within an inch of her head, vntill ſhe ſhould turne her head, and then to put it on leiſurely; but if ſhe ſtirre her body and remooue her feete, then pull backe your hand, and by turning your body and your fiſt whereon ſhe ſitteth, ſet her right and fit, and then holde the hoode gently to her noſe, which ſhe will be willing to put her head into, rather then ſtirre any more, for ſhe knoweth there is no hurt enſueth. I could with ordering of my hawke She will finde no hurt in leiſurely hooding. (as I haue already ſet downe) neuer finde any Hawke at a worſe paſſe then ſo. Well, ſhe is now wel made acquainted with the hood, the morning

commeth, which I haue ſaid before, reuiueth all her ſpirits, which before were heauie and dull, at Morning and euening are the times to make a hawke well conditioned. the breake of day getting company and dogges with mee, or in the Towne, or rather where I ſhould meete moſt paſſengers, there would I be walking, hooding my Hawke, and ſometimes let her feede after her hooding: After one or two houres being abroad I would into the houſe againe, where my Hawke ſhould ſhew her ſelfe as ſociable and familiar as a Lanner. I vſe altogether a lowe pearch, which ſet in the middeſt, or in ſuch place of the roome wherein I was, as that both men, women, children & dogs ſhould goe by her, Their deſire of eaſe will make them endure all things, and their ſo ſitting, man them with all things. I did not feare although they did wipe their Gownes againſt her, I euer found them ſo glad of their eaſe.
               The ſecond day, I know my hawke is as wel manned as I can deſire, it may be I will ſet her downe vpon ſuch a lowe pearch, and in ſuch a place as I haue foreſaide, and I know there ſhee would ſit, not fearing any thing, and not making one bate in two or three houres, (if I would let her ſit ſo long, which as yet I muſt not) vnleſſe hunger ſhould enforce her to ſtirre. I make no doubt but Haue ſomething to pleaſe her howſoeuer. ſhe would be very gentle to take vp, if ſhe doe not iumpe to the fiſt. Now I follow her with caſtings, and I keepe her vpon my fiſt vntill I goe to bed, and now I am able to gouerne her, not needing any more helpe, and yet I pray thinke, A Hawke muſt be kept to her good perfection. that I know if ſhee be not held and kept in this good perfection, ſhe will fall againe: But all this

I am able to doe, onely with late ſitting vp and early riſing. I feede her ſo as that I know ſhe ſhall caſt betimes, which I will carefully looke for one houre before day; and when I take her vp I will ſurely pleaſe her with ſomething, then I fall to my olde Trade againe, walking abroad as I did before, vſing her hoode as I finde cauſe. I neuer call her aboue eight or tenne yards, vntill I finde that ſhee is bolde enough and not fearefull, and that ſhe be farre in loue with my voyce, which I neuer faile to giue her, euen from the beginning of her feeding, vntill ſhee is flying, and that is lowde enough, as if I were to call her thirty or forty ſcore, although I call her but ten yardes. Well, when I beginne to call her in cranes, although it be for ſo ſmall a diſtance, it ſhall be done from the hoode, and from the fiſt of another man, in manner as your long-winged Hawke is lewred: and when I call her twice or thrice at a time, betweene euery calling I put on her hoode, and ſo ſtill I haue her let in from the hood: Who knoweth not that a Hawke ſet downe vpon a ſtile, blocke, or any other conuenient thing, when ſhe ſhall with the often ſeeing the Cranes drawne at length, and her keepers accuſtomed manner in calling her, ſoone learne to know that now ſhee After ſhe is once called and ſet downe againe, ſhe will not let him goe fiue yards. ſhall be fed, & will be ready to follow him before he can get twenty yards from her? But all this is not to the true purpoſe. I haue ſeen a Haggart with foure dayes calling, not ſuffer the going from her fiue yards, but ſhe would haue been at his elbow,

after ſhe had beene once ſet downe, and yet ſhe was far enough from the perfection of comming; for it is the voyce that muſt not onely in this, but The voyce is the Miſtreſſe of knowledge to your Hawke. in greater matters, worke a good effect in my Hawke. As I am thus calling my hawke in cranes, it is very certaine ſhe will ſoone come to that vnderſtanding as that ſhe will bate vpon hearing my voyce, before ſhe be vnhooded, I then ſtay my voyce vntill ſhe be quiet; then I call againe, and then ſtay my voyce vntill ſhe be vnhooded: and againe, I giue my voyce, not holding out my fiſt, vnleſſe I ſee her comming: My experience hath taught mee to ſtay her, and not to let her come vntill ſhe be quieted, becauſe I haue ſeene long A reaſon. winged hawkes, (with which profeſſion I haue made an end thirty yeares ſince) let into the lewer in the time of their bating, when they haue had their eye preſently ſetled vpon ſome other farre remote from the lewer, whether they haue preſently gone, and then not come to the knowledge, could not finde the lewer, and ſo haue beene loſt. I ſpend two, three, and often foure times of the day thus in calling my Hawke, then I call my Hawke often. for the day, for the moſt part my fiſt is her pearch, and if I ſet her downe, it ſhall be euer vpon a owe pearch, where all ſorts of people and dogs ſhall How I beſtowe my Hawke. trauell by her, and where ſhe ſhall ſee the fire ſtirred and blowen, and wood brought thereto, and diuers other ſuch like obiects: She will not for any, or all of theſe make a bate. In this manner I haue trained my hawke, that when ſhee hath

beene a flyer. I durſt ſet her downe vpon a Veluet ſtoole, in a cleanely kept dyning-Chamber or Parlour, as the place was whereunto I went, for I would haue my Hawke as much in my eye as could be; perhaps I ſhould ſee the Lady or Miſtreſſe of the houſe looke diſcontentedly hereat, ſo well haue I beene acquainted with my Hawkes good diſpoſition, that I haue promiſed if my Hawke ſhould make a mute in the roome, I would licke it vp with my tongue; Anger and vnquietnes is the cauſe of many mutes. for well I knew no angry mute ſhould come from her, otherwiſe ſhe would not mute; And I knew well (vnleſſe I were negligent, which I would neuer be) that ſhe would not ſtirre vntill hunger did prouoke it: This for the day.
               In the euening when I had called and ſupped her, then I would no more let her part from my fiſt, but continue her vntill I fed my ſelfe, it may be if I had ſuch meanes ſhe ſhould be vpon the fiſt for that ſeaſon alſo, and ſo vntill I went to bed, (which the loue to my Hawke would not haue me haſten.) In the morning before day I would aſſuredly haue her vpon my fiſt, and follow her in ſuch manner as I haue formerly done, thinking that I could neuer be too frequent with There cannot be too much familiarity betweene the man and Hawke. my hawke, nor ſhe with me. My inducements to carry her thus in the euening, and night, would make her loue me as her perch, and by my taking her vp ſo early in the morning, I would perſwade her that there had beene her pearch all night: But whether my hawke will haue this louing apprehenſion,

or no, I know not, yet I am aſſured it worketh this benefit, that ſhe will indure as much or more than any other hawke not ſo delt with; And it is this that maketh her ſo willing to ſit ſtill and take her eaſe, and not take offence, although there ſhould fly about the houſe fire, diſhes, trenchers, and any thing elſe that would mad other hawkes, they ſhall not mooue her. Me thinkes I heare ſome man ſay, I haue taken a very painefull courſe in making my hawke. I aske who will not faſt one-day to be aſſured that hee ſhall feele no A queſtion. want ſo long as hee liueth? Worke but out your taske in this faſhion, and you ſhall during your A ſweet ſatiſfaction. hawkes life finde none but playing-dayes. Let me not omit any thing in my proceedings; As for the hoode, I neuer in the houſe let her ſit hooded at all, and when ſhee is a flying hawke, neuer vnhooded in the field. Bee not negligent towards your Hawke at no time, but eſpecially whileſt ſhe is in manning, if you be, ſhee will pay you for it in her flying. I am afraid to be tedious, and I cannot more briefly deliuer my practiſe and my experience, I would gladly walke plainly, and giue vnto euery man full ſatisfaction.
               I ſhould haue forgotten one ſpeciall benefit By theſe meanes if ſhe be found taken from the Cage, ſhe will be made flying in twenty dayes. that is gained by your three nights painefull following your Hawke, that is, ſhe ſhall not at all weaken her ſelfe with many bates: alſo her familiarity will be ſuch, as that you may thereby better her dyet in her calling, and of a poore Hawke

from the cage, make her ſtrong and full of fleſh, the contrary no doubt followeth thoſe Hawkes that are by fits dealt withall; one while carefully watched and manned, and to another time neglected, and then their dyet ſhortned to make The fruits of negligence. them conformable at a keeper without forme. Hence proceed the marring of many hawkes, that when they ſhould be entered and flye, they are ſo weake, as they are not able to ſhew what they would doe if they had ſtrength. If this be not motiue enough to make you haue a care of your hawkes decaying ſtrength, and her falling of fleſh, then know that pouerty is the mother and If you will haue your Hawke flye well, let her be full of fleſh. nurſe of all diſeaſes: I haue followed aduiſing too long, and left the deliuering of my practiſe. Now to proceede therewith, my hawke is to be called loſe, ſhe ſhall not be weakened or hanged with draging her cranes aboue eight or nine ſcore, and my manner is to call her thirty and forty ſcore before I put her into a tree, and I vſe to call her at all houres in the day, I feare not her comming home vnto me; but admit what I haue not met with, that ſhe falleth off and goeth to a tree, it muſt be want of a ſtomacke that maketh her doe ſo, or want of weathering, or bathing, which I will be ſure ſhe ſhall not want, neither do I thinke ſhe ſhould want a ſtomacke, which if ſhe ſhould want, that want will make her ſit quietly, Patience is an excellent vertue in an Austringer. and I had rather attend her pleaſure with patience now, then when I am in ſport. I will tell you ſomething touching this point: when I am

trauelled with my flying hawke, that is as louing as ſociable & conformable to my wil in all companies and times as I can deſire; yet, I do beare her bare-fac'd for the moſt part all my iourney, and when I perceiue ſhe groweth hungry, then I put on her hoode, and if there be no preſent hope of a flight, I ſet her vpon the fiſt of one that knoweth what doth thereunto belong, then I pray him to ride hind-moſt of the company, and I put my ſelfe formoſt; then I call my hawke, when her I call my Hawke alwayes when I feed. hoode being pulled off, ſhe commeth by all the company merrily to the fiſt; Vſe maketh perfectneſſe, thus I vſe my hawke, and ſhe neuer receiues meate from me, but I call her. It may be you will be aduiſed hereby to doe the like, if you once finde the benefite thereof, you will hold the greateſt paine in effecting it, ſweet contentment and Paine is rewarded with pleaſure. pleaſure: But to my hawke which doth not ſo, (but granted ſhe ſhould do ſo) make me waite her pleaſure; I am not haſty to call her vntill ſhee hath taken her pleaſure: which with my obſeruation, I will ſoone diſcerne, and then when I call her, I know ſhe will ſoone pleaſe me, and ſo conclude, we are both pleaſed: but if ſuch an accident ſhould befall me three or foure nights before I went to flye her, I would now not faile but ſhew her a Partridge the next night, if I could get a You ſhall find a reaſon for this elſewhere. hand Partridge it would pleaſe me, if not, I would not be at all ſorry; but ſuch a chance hath ſeldome befallen me, & therfore to hold on with my true proceeding: when I haue my hawke perfectly

comming, ſtrong and in all points fit to flye, the night before I ſhew her a Partridge, at Sunne-ſet, I ſet her downe vpon ſome ſtile, gate, or raile, and walke from her; I would chuſe a place where there ſhould be many high trees, I would not giue her my voyce vntill ſhe went to a tree, but I would keepe my ſelfe with my company twenty-ſcore from her, vnleſſe I ſhould haue one, whoſe eye ſhould attend her remoue, leſt ſhee ſhould goe from me another way, thereby I ſhould know the better what I had to doe: when ſhe doth remoue and let vp and downe, then I giue her my voyce, which ſhee is glad to heare; hauing taken her downe, I ſup her, not putting her vp any more, my reaſon for this courſe, ſo taken, is this; when my hawke is in a tree, that hath beene long kept This my reaſon for my former flying. and man'd by me, and a longer time bene kept in bondage before ſhe came to me, now ſhe beginneth to know her ſelfe, and thinke of what ſhee hath formerly done for her ſelf, ſhe would get her ſupper, and it is ſo late that ſhee ſeeth nothing A Hawke may be ſotted with long calling and drawing after a man. whereon to prey, and therefore when ſhe ſhall ſee the next night, what is in her power to command; you ſhall not need to bid her goe, but ſhee will giue you cauſe of ioy, to ſee with what mettall and ſpirit ſhe flieth. No Partridge in the world can flie from a good ſhort-winged hawke, and the Pur in her ſpringing will make any hawke flie therto, When you enter your Hawke looke ſhe hath all her rights. if ſhe haue been rightly ordered, and in ſtrength. I aduiſe you once more, be ſure your hawke hath all her rights, let her not haue any ſmacke of

wildeneſſe, nor want either weather or water. It is to be vnderſtood, that I haue ſhewed my hawke water within two or three dayes after ſhe hath beene peppered, but it ſhould be at a brooke, or ſome other grauelly place, fit for that purpoſe, holding my firſt to the water, and the end of my lines in my right hand, if ſhe did not bathe at my firſt or ſecond day ſhewing her water, but refuſed, it ſhould be that ſhe had no deſire to bathe, and that when ſhe refuſed ſo to doe, wildeneſſe or Rammiſhneſſe ſhould not be the cauſe thereof: Let her not bate to flye from you, which although you haue nothing in your fiſt ſhe will doe. if ſhe did iumpe to the water, I would haue ſomething in my fiſt ready to ſhew her, when ſhe made ſhew of comming from the water; which ſhould make her euer after, when ſhee had done, looke for the fiſt, where ſhe ſhould dry, prune, and oyle her ſelfe, and as yet ſhe neuer had other pearch to weather vpon then my fiſt, neither ſhal ſhe vntil ſhe be a true flying hawke. Now for the place where I would firſt ſhew her a Partridge, it ſhould be in a champion, where Partridges will aſſuredly flye The place to enter my Hawke champion. to a hedge, then my hawke muſt needs take ſtand vpon a buſh in the hedge, for it is great oddes that ſhe ſhall not haue it in the foote, & although ſhe be farre behinde it, yet ſhe will aſſuredly goe to the place, becauſe the loue of the Partridge inviteth Hereof I cannot make any doubt, becauſe I neuer knew it worſe. it, & it is ods, that neerer then that ſhe ſhall haue no place fit to goe vnto; Well at the retroue, there is no doubt but ſhee will haue it; but ſay that my hawke either hath it in the foote, or otherwiſe, that ſhe was ſo neere it that ſhe hath

with ſtriking at it, in the fall beate it cleane through the hedge, and there my Hawke ſitteth vpon the ground, it can prooue no worſe; if ſhee haue it in the foote we are all well pleaſed. If ſhe ſit vpon the ground I ſtay both men and dogs, for it may be it is not flicked. A Hawke that hath thus ſhewed her mettle will not ſit long ſo, but vp vnto a A Hawke that hath that mettle is not ſo dull as to ſit long vpon the ground. bough; then I ride in quietly, if the Partridge be there, it is very lucky, if not, I hold it no ill lucke to haue ſo hopefull a young Hawke; but I goe preſently about to pleaſe her, hauing a browne Chicken in my bagge, the necke I pull in ſunder, but breake no skinne, and tyed to my Lewers or Cranes, holding the end in my hand, I throw it out fluttering, and thereupon pleaſe her as well as if ſhe had killed a Partridge: I doe not tye it A preuention of euill. to my Lewers, as fearing her dragging, or offring to carry it, out of a wilde, Rammaiſh, or any other ill diſpoſition; for I haue before this tyed a dead Vſe the ſame courſe. Foule to my Cranes, and throwne it out vnto her, amongſt men, dogs, and Horſes, walking about her, and thereon I let her take all her pleaſure, but by little bits of warme meate I ſup her from my hand, letting her wholly ſee all that I doe, vntill I ſee her ready to forſake the quarrie to catch my hand, then I deliuer vp more couertly, vntill I haue her iumpe to my fiſt, where with plumage or tyring I end her ſupper. You ſhall hereafter finde a better benefit to many purpoſes Expect a better benefit. by your dealing with your Hawke thus. Thus I reward my Hawke vpon her Partridge, and the

commodities thereof exceed their vnderſtanding that haue not made vſe thereof.
               As I haue tolde you that I would chooſe a champion-Countrey wherein to enter my hawke, yet it ſhould be ſo as that there ſhould be ſome ſmall hedges: And I haue alwayes this conſideration that I will well know, that whither I ride there ſhould haue beene no ſtore of hawking, and then I know they can flye no better then a hand Partridge, and they will flye worſe at that ſeaſon Chooſe ſuch Partridges as are heauy flyers. then ſome Partridges doe that haue beene well flowne too, three weekes before Michaelmas. I haue ridden out of Eſſex into Suſſex, vnto the Eaſt part of the Downes there, to enter my Hawkes; Where I haue not failed to doe it, to the great woonder of the worthy Knights and Gentlemen in thoſe parts, and ſome (right Worſhipfull) in the Weſt parts of thoſe Downes can witneſſe, that in their company I haue killed for the moſt part of a moneth together with an entermured Goſhawke, eight, nine, and tenne Partridges in a day. The day of my going thither, and the day of my returne to London, was iuſt fiue weeks, and it was a fortnight or more in Michaelmas terme when I came backe. I killed in that time with that one Hawke foure-ſcore and odde Partridges, fiue Pheaſants, ſeauen Rayles, and foure A note of a large quarry. Hares againſt my will. This is not vntrue, for I will preſent that much honoured Knight with one of my Bookes, who ſaw all this done: And euery man may know that we loſt ſome time with

fogges and raigne, and my going and comming ſpent foure dayes.
               I haue in the Eaſt part ſhowne ſuch Hawkes, as there was neuer ſeene the like there, and all of them made in this manner, as I haue deliuered. If they had fallen in Fearne, or among ſome ſmall ſhrubbed Purzes, I would when I came in but holde vp my hand, and ſhe would preſently be there; or if any man elſe got in before me, if he did not hold out his fiſt, ſhe would light vpon his head. Is not this a ſweet comfort, A ſweet comfort. for ſo little paines? If your Hawke be followed with flying as I vſe mine, you ſhall haue no cauſe to complaine of the ſhort-winged Hawke, that if they fit ſtill but one houre they are preſently wilde, and care not for their keeper; you ſhall rather haue a care to giue her eaſe, ſetting her ſtill (as I haue vſed mine) vpon a lowe pearch, and in the greateſt aſſembly, neuer hooded in the houſe; and ſo when ſhe is to weather abroad vnhooded, vpon a lowe pearch, neuer putting her in a corner to take weather and eaſe in, for neither all nor none of my Hawks will be diſeaſed, except of purpoſe foule play be offered, which I hope I ſhall neuer meet with. If it hath rayned, then you ſhall be enforced to ſet her high, for if ſhe ba
                     •
                  e to come to The vſing of her to a little meate as ſhe doth ſit vpon the pearch will make her loue you, and looke for it. you, either when you come to take her vp or otherwiſe, ſhe ſhall wet her wings, ſo is ſhe ſhall haue more neede to weather, then when ſhe was ſet out. So neere as I can remember I will omit nothing of my practiſe. The manner of giuing

my caſting was ouer hand without any meate My manner of giuing caſting. when I went to bed, although ſhe had much meate aboue, it did not hurt: Caſting thus giuen could not hinder the putting ouer her meate, nor ſhould lye in her pannell with her meate, but after the meate is gone then commeth the caſting that maketh cleane, and carryeth away what is left; Thus I doe before ſhe is flying, but after ſhe is flying ſhe will vpon euery flight take ſome plumage, and She prouideth caſting for her ſelfe. therefore with the bones and feathers of a Partridge wing I conclude her ſupper. I neuer faile giuing her caſtings, for I can finde the perfect or imperfect eſtate of my Hawke no better then by the knowledge of her caſtings: And I thinke it will giue the beſt inſtructions to a young beginner, A helpe for a yong Auſtringer. euen to know the times of feeding his hawke, and ſo by his diligent obſeruation come to better vnderſtanding; I thinke caſtings are as naturall as meate: For mine owne part, from the beginning of Hawking, vntill after Michaelmas, I haue giuen two caſtings, and receiued two euery day from my Hawke, and ſometimes three.
               I muſt explaine my ſelfe thus; When I haue An explanation that I may not be miſ-vnderſtood. early in the morning killed a Partridge, and giuen my Hawke the head in her foote, which I ſuddenly get againe, for if I ſhould giue her leaue to eate all the heads, I muſt not flye ſo often as I doe, but ſo ſoone as ſhe hath the head, I quickly pull out the heart, and breake off the wing, and then holding the heart to her, and bruiſing it betweene my finger and thumbe, ſhe receiueth it at three or

foure bits, I continuing my hand ſtill in his place, and then cunningly I take vp the head, letting her iumpe to my fiſt, where ſhe ſhall plume vpon the wing, vntill I haue bitten the skull from the braines, that ſhe may haue them without bones. But it hath thus fallen out, when I haue ſo early flowne my hawke, that ſhe hath eaten the head, which I haue beene willing to let her doe, and I haue giuen the heart withall, becauſe there were other hawkes to flye, and no great ſtore of Partridges; An obſeruation. by which meanes it would be long before my turne would be to flye againe, and it hath ſo prooued that I haue not flowne at all; but ryding homeward, for ſuch is my manner, euer to call my hawke, I ſet her looſe vpon a paire of barres, going from her, preparing meate for her dinner, when I had walked about fifty or threeſcore paces, I gaue her my voyce, ſhe made no reſpect About tenne of the clocke I called my Hawke. of it, that vſually vpon my firſt call, would be at my elbowe; I ſtayed and maruelled, and becauſe the day was glorious, and the time dangerous to tempt a hawke to play the wanton, I went backe (I muſt confeſſe) in ſome feare, giuing the faireſt words I could to ſtay her, leſt ſhee ſhould remooue; good hawke ſhe had no ſuch thought, but when I came neere her, ſhe gaue mee a ſmall caſting that ſhe had taken in the morning, and then I gaue her another, which ſhee repayde at three of the clocke in the afternoone.
               I haue many times (and lately) ſeene olde and ſuch as went for moſt expert Auſtringers, when

we haue had a hawking iourney, beene afraid to haue any thing ſtirre in their Chamber, for hindring This hath beene in the beginning of hawking. their hawkes from caſting, and to keepe the curtaines drawne before the windowe, not ſuffering the leaſt light to appeare ſo neere as they can, for that would be another hindrance to their Fall not into this inconuenience. caſting, all this while they lye in bed and giue aime, and when they are vp they are driuen to ſeeke darke corners, wherein to ſet their hawkes vntill they caſt, when it were more fit they were in the field to flye.
               I dare not reprooue, I know they know their owne errours. I was neuer yet inforced to ſtay for my hawkes caſting, neither doe you make any doubt, if you will follow your hawke with that familiarity as I haue followed mine, either in the field, or in the houſe, carryed bare-faced in either If ſhe be wild and fearefull, it may make her put it ouer againe. places, ſhe will caſt, or in any of them, to pull off her hoode when ſhe offereth to caſt. Not long after my hawke hath caſt I vſually giue her a little meate; There is nothing but ſickneſſe, (a barre againſt all good perfections) or wildenes, or rammiſhnes which maketh her ſtare and looke about her, which makes her afraid to performe thoſe duties, which otherwiſe ſhe would do: The hawks no better manned then ſo, are many other ways more defectiue and diſorderly then ſo. Thus much for ordering my hawke with caſtings for her dyet.
               I haue flowne a hawke all one ſeaſon, and neuer fed but vpon the beſt meate I could, ſhe neuer My manner of feeding, and with what I feede. taſted Beefe, neither was her feathered meate (but

very ſeldome colde; and to helpe her better, a night did hardly eſcape me but I thruſt out the marrow of the wings of either Ducke, Pheaſant, Partridge, Doue, Rooke, or ſuch like, breaking the bone off at either end, and ſo with a feather the end cut off, driue it whole without breaking into a diſh of faire water, ſetting my hawke looſe vpon the Table, I would giue it her betweene This will keepe your hawke-ſtrong and able. my thumbe and finger, which ſhe would much deſire, & very much ioy in, & would expect ſuch kindneſſe at my hands. The better the meate is the leſſe will ſerue; your practiſe will ſoone tell you that there is difference betweene the wing of an The difference of meat is to be reſpected. olde Doue, and the wing of a young Pigeon, and ſo much is the difference betweene the wings of a Doue flying abroad for his foode, and the Doue long kept in a mewe for prouiſion; although you ſhall finde the one leane, yet you ſhall finde it tender and moyſt; and the Doue in the mewe, although it be extreamely full of fleſh, and with his eaſe and good feed layd with fat vpon the necke, and vnder the wing, yet this pulled in peeces you ſhall finde it hard and extreamely drye.
               Now you vnderſtand how I made my hawke flying to the field, and if you will now ſuppoſe her to be truely flying, and that ſhe will tend vpon the Dogs for a retroue; for nature will quickly teach her to know what good ſeruice the Spantell doth her: Say by ſome ill accident I miſſe a flight, the Partridge may be runne into a Conyhole;

it is in Kent a ſafe and common reſcue: or the hawke may ſtrike at it in the fall, and ſo the Nature teacheth the Partridge to ſaue her life by any means. Partridge flicke. In Suſſex I haue ſeene two flights in one after-noone loſt, the Partridge would fall vpon the hedges which were a rod broad in ſome place, very thicke, and neuer come to the ground; If (I ſay) one of theſe or other ſuch like accident ſhould befall me, otherwiſe I held it a very hard matter to miſſe a flight, and although I know (if I would let my hawke alone, and beate to ſerue her with one other Partridge) that ſhe would tend vpon the Dogs, and ſo kill it.
               I dare do no ſuch thing, for I know if I ſhould Worthy to be well marked. vſe her much to that, ſhe would fall better in loue with my Dogges then with me, for they anſwere her attendance with ſpringing a Partridge vnto her, and after a few times ſo ſerued, although for want of Partridges they cannot doe it, yet ſhe will expect it with ſuch deſire, as that ſhe will neglect my calling her, and ſo in the end prooue an ill commer, and then want no ill conditions; there Let your care preuent ſuch miſchiefe. is no readier way to teach her to catch a Henne; one fault begetteth another: If ſhe ſhould in this following the Dogs light vpon an Hen, get ſome in your company to runne and catch her by the legs, letting the Henne goe, if you haue none in your company that can doe it handſomely, doe it your ſelfe; in ſuch manner, and then ſetting her downe vpon ſome conuenient place, call her and giue her ſome meate and plumage, and ſo ſhe will be well reconciled, and not at all the more vnfit Make a reconcilement.
                  
to flye againe. Now I haue my hawke at this paſſe I deſire to goe to the couert, if the couert be large I hawke to the Couert. I put vp my hawke, not making queſtion but ſhe will draw after the Dogs, although I ſhould ſtand ſtill (the field hath taught her that;) If I ſerue her not in a quarter or halfe an houre, I take her to my fiſt, and giue her ſomething, and then I put her vp againe, and this bettereth my hawkes conditions: But it I ſhould with a vaine hope let her ſtill drawe, and not ſerue her, I feare very hunger The hawke free from blame. will make her looke out to ſaue her life. The hawke is not herein to be blamed, for extreame hunger will make her keeper forget himſelfe. I pray you note hereby, and by what I haue formerly ſaid, that your voyce, be it high or lowe, neither your action in the couert, is that ſhe looketh for, for ſhe will giue diligent attendance vnto the Dogs.
               If I ſpring a Pheſant, I cannot in the couert haue my Dogs at that commaund that I haue them in the field. Let me make all the haſt I can after my hawke, I might miſſe of the quick finding her, if by The field hath taught her better. my dogs queſting I were not drawne where ſhe is; it is ten to one ſhe will not hunt for it vpon the ground, if ſhe ſhould it will teach her wit; but it is more likely that ſhe will, if the couert with Broome or Furzes be not thicke in the bottome but that ſhe may ſee it, ſhe will as it runneth tend it, flying ouer it from tree to tree, and when the Dogs doth ſpring it, ſhe is ſo ouer it, as that it will neuer riſe to goe to a high pearch, if it ſhould the

hawke would haue it before it come there, and I haue ſeene diuers hawks ſpoyled with Dogs. then falling amongſt the Dogs they ſtriue who is moſt worthy: All this is quickely done, and before the Faulconer can get in to them; it may be you ſhall finde your hawke to enioy it, if it be with ſome contention all the better for my hawke, for it will forbid her not to be too hot of a Pheaſant vpon the ground, and you ſhall with your practiſe finde the profit of it as I haue done; for in the killing of more Pheaſants then I will name, and I thinke in ſeauen yeares hawking to the Couert, I neuer had cauſe to cry, Here ret: For if my hawke hath it not in the foote the firſt flight, when I know my Dogs will not meddle with it, then I ſhall before I can get to them aſſuredly here a baye, and my hawke ouer the head of it, when hauing beene well flowne, the feare of the hawke, maketh the Pheaſant ſit faſt: An Eyas hawke would be hotter, and it may be ſtrike at it, and miſſe it, and ſo ſtrike her ſelfe vnder the Pheſant, Thus may a Rammiſh hawke loſe a Pheaſant. and then if the Pheaſant goeth our vpon that aduantage, it is loſt without great lucke. Your Rammiſh hawke will not often loſe a Pheaſant thus, ſhe partly forbeareth, becauſe the Dogs are ſo hotly baying, and it may be ſhe hath met with ſome rough dealing amongſt them before, but Which I wiſh ſhe ſhould as the firſt flying. ſhe will ſo tend it as that ſhe will challenge it for her maſter: And I haue euer had ſuch ſucceſſe with ſuch hawkes, as what with their true flying and diligent attendance at the retroue, I ſhould ſeldome finde the Pheaſant but ſo high as that I

might take it downe with my hand, or elſe ſhake it downe in my armes; which done, I would goe to a conuenient place, whether my hawke would diligently wayte vpon me, and there holding it by the legs, I ſhould ſoone haue my hawke vpon the body, but I would cleanely put her to the head, couering the body with my Hat or Gloue, I would not ſticke to pleaſe her well: Notwithſtanding, ſome mens opinions are, that if they be well rewarded, and kindely pleaſed vpon a Pheaſant, they will forbeare the true ſtiuing Partridge: I know not whether my diſcretion hath ſo preuailed with my hawkes, or their own good diſpoſitions haue wrought ſuch vnderſtanding in them; but aſſuredly I neuer had hawke that I haue had the handling of from the beginning, but they haue loued a Partridge much better then the Pheaſant. Loue a Partridge better then a Pheaſant.
               
               It may be a wonder to ſome why I deſire not to haue my hawke take a Pheaſant from the pearch, and further wondred at, why I ſhould allowe of ſome contention betweene my hawke and Dogs. I vnderſtand that generally all dogges are hotter in the couert then in the field, and I may meete with dogs, that if ſhe ſhould not be coye of them they would endanger her life, eſpecially if ſhe ſhould catch a Hare, and ſo might my owne dogs doe againſt their will. I haue ſeene a Pheaſant when the hawke hath come to ſtrike at him at the pearch, chop to another bough with ſuch skill, as that hee hath gotten a long bough

betweene him and the hawke, and with his cunning remoues beate the hawke out of breath, and in all this conflict would ſtriue to get aboue the hawke; and when he hath had this aduantage, goe proudly away, and leaue the hawke out of breath, or vnable to follow.
               It may likewiſe be ſaid that I am too peremptory in my opinion, in preſuming my hawke ſhal kill the firſt Partridge: For my opinion to the couert, hauing my hawke ſo familiarly made, as that in the field ſhe is wel pleaſed with my louing dealing with her, and will attend my comming in to her, not fearing any thing ſo I be by her: ſo would I haue her in the couert wholly to relye vpon mee, and be confident that when I ſhall come vnto her, ſhee ſhall haue her deſire ſatisfied; ſhe will ſoone vnderſtand thus much, with vſing her in ſuch manner as I haue fore-tolde; and as for my hawke I am moſt confident in her entring her ſelfe, ſhe hath no way beene weakened, ſhe is familiar, Make her louing and familiar, or elſe her ſtrength and ability are Tutors to ill conditions. ſtrong, and able, and I know nature hath taught her to doe the beſt ſhe can.
               You haue formerly been told how and where I would enter my hawke, at Partridges that had not beene flowne at, and in faire flying; I aduiſe you what to doe, by telling you what I haue done.
               I was entreated to flye a Goſhawke of my neighbours, that would not kill a Partridge, nor had killed one that yeare; I flew her to the couert,

where I ſo encouraged my hawke, as that Winter The couert hindreth not a hawks flying in the field. ſhe proued a good Partringer. This approoueth that the flying to the Couert doth not hinder a Hawkes mettle in the field.
               I did know Sir Edward Suliard, a Knight of high eſtimation in that Art, as well as otherwiſe, for his worthy diſpoſition, flye a fooliſh Goſhawke at Blacke-bird and Thruſh, and hee was glad when he had gotten her to that perfection, to beate it into a hedge or buſh: he did it to make her know that ſhe had a commanding power ouer Fowle, if ſhe would put her ſelfe to it; ſhe proued a very good Hawke.
               I know many will ſay they haue had Hawkes, Hawkes that are once flown to the Pheaſant will flye no more to the Partridge. that if they had once ſeene a Pheaſant, that then they would kill no more Partridges that yeare: It is very like there haue beene many ſuch; and as I confeſſe that, ſo I pray you giue mee leaue to thinke that the fault was not in them, but in the vnskilfulneſſe of their Keeper.
               Some men ſo ſoone as their Hawkes giue vp a Partridge, doe preſently worke vpon them with ſcourings, and then pinch them and ſhorten their dyet, by which meanes they are vnable to kill a How they are made vnable to kill a Partridge. Partridge, or thereby their courage is ſo taken from them, that they will not ſhew what they are able to doe.
               I would aduiſe you herein, but all is in the practiſe and handling; I will tell you my courſe, if I meete with ſuch a Hawke, and my reaſon for

it, contrary to moſt mens opinions. I ſet vp my reſt that in tenne dayes I will flye my Hawke no more; but I ſtriue with all the Art I haue, to Reſt increaſeth ſtrength and courage. bring her to as much courage and ſtrength as euer ſhe had, with good meate, and ſome other deuices I would practiſe vpon her, (where with you ſhall meet amongſt my receits, ſet forth for cures.) I would now haue more care in making this Hawke, for it is credite to make of a Herein true Art is ſhewed. Buſſard a good Hawke.
               It is not my meate and dyet I giue her muſt alone effect this in my Hawke, but a diligent care ouer her for other wants, as manning, bathing and weathering, all ſpeciall meanes to make a hawke ioy in her ſelfe; and ſhe ſhall bate as little as I can, for weakning her.
               When I haue brought my Hawke to ſuch perfection, I dare promiſe to my ſelfe ſhe ſhall then doe as well and better then euer ſhe did. Although I haue beene tedious, and at large ſet downe my manner of practizing with the ſore Rammiſh Hawke; yet I doe not thinke there is any thing ſet downe but ſome will be content to haue the reading thereof: and let mee deliuer this as my laſt requeſt.
               When you haue made a perfect good A Hawke well made aſketh ſmall tendance. Hawke, let her not be neglected, but keepe her ſo; the keeping is much eaſier then the making her ſo.
               I aſſure you in all my proceedings, from

the firſt to the laſt with my Hawke, I neuer I was her friend, ſhe my playfellow. found it painefull, but the comforts I had of a good concluſion fedde mee with ſweete contentment and pleaſure. It now followeth that I ſhew how to reclaime any ſhort-winged Hawke from any euill condition.
            
         
         
            
            THE SECOND TREATISE, OF Hawkes and Hawking: Wherein the Austringer is taught to reclaime his Hawke from any ill-condition.
            
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  How to make a Hawke hoode well, that will not abide the ſight of the hoode, but bite at it, and with her feete ſtrike at thy hand and hoode, bate, ſhricke, hang by the heeles, and will not ſtand vp. on the fiſt; and this ſhall be done within fortie eight houres, with leſſe then fortie bates.
               
               
                  THe greateſt motiue that ſet my thoughts a-worke to finde out a ſecret, whereby a hawke ſhould be brought to like of that which ſhe did moſt deteſtably hate, was that in my hearing, it hath been often and many times ſaid, by many Gentlemen, of which, ſome would ſay they

would giue forty ſhillings, ſome would giue fiue pounds, and ſome other would giue ten pounds that their hawke would hoode well.
               Many experiments I tryed, wherewith I could haue hooded ſuch a hawke well, which I will not publiſh, becauſe they brought as much ill to the hawke in ſome other kinde, as the wellhooding would profit them. At length I thought of feeding a hawke through the hoode, cutting the hole for her beake very wide, it is but the marring of a hoode. I would haue the hole ſo wide, as when I did holde it by the taſſell, ſhe ſhould very eaſily (when it was layd vpon the meate) feede through it. I would continue feeding her ſo three or foure dayes, neuer offering in all that time to put it on. But now that ſhee was growne familiar with the hoode, all feare thereof forgotten, which ſhe would ſhew by her bould feeding therein, and that ſhe ſhould make no ſhew of diſliking my putting it ouer the meate, and my taking it backe.
               When I found her thus ſecurely feeding, and her head in the hoode, I would then gently and lightly raiſe my right hand, a very ſmall motion will ſerue, and ſo leaue the hood vpon her head; Take heed you giue her no diſlike by the ſodain putting it on, and by the too high raiſing your hand in this your beginning with her; & haue as great a care that ſhe be throughly imboldened with the hoode, before you offer to put it on: with this practiſe, putting on her hood & pulling

it off, oftentimes in her feeding, you ſhall effect her taking the hoode to your deſire; prouided alwayes your practiſe be with patience and leiſure: for if you ſhall pop it on ſodainely, and with haſte, you may thereby put her in minde that thereby ſhe tooke her firſt offence: You cannot wrong her by any other meanes; remember alſo to leaue her with the hoode vpon her head when ſhe is ſeeding.
               This I did priuately deliuer to ſome of my friends, by word of mouth, aboue twenty yeares ſince, and ſome did carefully follow my direction, and did not faile, but brought their hawkes to ſuch perfection, as when ſhee was moſt diſcontented, with a ſtumpe of a Partridge wing he would readily hoode her.
               Others, whoſe patience could not endure the time whileſt they were throughly emboldened with the hoode, and would feede ſecurely and gently in it, would be offering to put it on; and then what through her feare, and his haſty carrying his hand, which encreaſed her feare, brought her to that paſſe, that ſhee would not feede any more through the hoode, but with ſuch a cautill feare as that ſhee would not be hooded, but was then as ill as euer ſhe was, and ſo much worſe, becauſe he had now bobbed her with this tricke, whereby ſhe might haue beene taught.
               Swolne big with deſire to effect this by ſome more ready & eaſie meanes, which might more

ſpeedily be done, and truely performed. I had an imagination of this courſe, which here I will deliuer, by which meanes I brought fiue hawks and Tarſels to as good perfection as I could deſire in the time of keeping my houſe and chamber, being at that time very weake, and all of them were as much diſordered as hawkes could be, and I deliuered them as gently hooding as could be deſired. After they came vnto mee, and that I had beſtowed them vpon the fiſt of one of my people, I kept them vpon the fiſt, that day they came vnto me, and that night they were truely watched, after the former manner of watching my hawkes, both man and hawke to walke, or at the leaſt the hawke to walke. So ſoone as it was faire and light, I did male them vp in a handkercher, (I pray you vnderſtand thus much, that it is not good ſhee ſhould be fed before ſhe be maled) making it very cloſe about the ſhoulders and body: I would not male vp the tops of her flying feathers, leſt I ſhould thereby marre the web of the feather; her legs they were laid along vnder her traine, but to ſaue her traine from breaking any feather, becauſe her legs and it muſt be tyed together, I plaite a large handkercher ſixe times double, and lay that vpon her legs vnder her traine, by which meanes, by binding her vp you, cannot bruiſe or cracke a feather. There is nothing but all ſafety in this courſe.
               My hawke thus maled vp, I lay her vpon

a cuſhion, and carry her vp and down vnder my arme; She is now faſt ſhe cannot rebell, I offer the hood, whereat although ſhe ſhrike, and ſtriue to ſtirre, ſhe cannot: ſo ſoone as ſhe is quiet, holding the hoode by the taſſell, I gently put it on; ſhe cannot forbid it: thus I follow her hooding and vnhooding; I lay her vpon a Table, I walke by her, I put it on, and pull it off very often; and if I ſhall be made acquainted with any thing that ſhe cannot endure, I will then preſent her with that: Say ſhe will not abide the fire, or not the blowing or ſtirring thereof; I walke vp and downe before the fire, which ſhee ſhould heare blowne, and ſee it ſtirred and ratled together, ſhe cannot bate nor hurt her ſelfe; and when ſhe ſhall patiently lye ſtill, and finde that it doth not hurt her, ſhee will be the leſſe afraid therof, & in al this time I loſe nothing about my other practiſe: It may be ſhee is coye and fearefull of the dogs, I lay her vpon the ground with her cuſhion, where ſhe ſhall for that time haue familiarity enough with them: lying ſo, walking by her, I ply her with the hoode, and ſo I continue vntill night: When night commeth I vnmale her; I haue had a hawke thus maled, that in a winters day ſhe hath not made a mute; admit ſhee doth mute, it is great oddes ſhee ſhall, ſhe fouleth none but a few of her ſmall feathers about her tewell, which are preſently waſhed with a ſpunge without any hurt.
               
                  
When ſhe is now vnmaled, and ſitteth vpon my fiſt, ſhe will take the hoode by Candle-light, as well as ſhe did when ſhe was maled, which it may be ſhe would do before ſhe came vnto me, for many hawks will hood by Candle-light that will not abide the ſight of it in the day.
               But for your better inſtruction, it muſt be with holding it gently to her beake, which ſhe muſt be as willing to put into the hoode, as you are to put it on. I pray you let your owne reaſon guide you thus farre; haſtineſſe to hoode her, when ſhe would not be hooded, brought her to this imperfection; therefore keepe you as farre from that as may be, and in this practiſe to doe it with as much leiſure as may be. It is not to be belieued how the leaſt haſty motion will put her in minde of what ſhe hath formerly met with. I watched her this night with the often vſing the hoode, and whether I did ſit ſtill or walke, I would be ſure ſhe ſhould not be idle; belieue it, all this night ſhe will take the hoode as well as you can deſire, but the queſtion is for the morning: Therefore I would be without faile walking abroad in the morning before day, and then and there follow my practiſe, when it may be I ſhall not finde him contrary my deſire: As I feede often in the night, ſo now I faile not, leſt hunger ſhould make him ſtur, if he be not coye of the hoode, at or a little before the Sun riſeth, if they be carefully handled they are for euer made well hooding. I neuer had any

but one Tarſell, but with the night and day before, were made very gentle to the hoode, onely that one Tarſell I was driuen to male vp againe the ſecond day; I muſt let none of them all haue their full reſt that night; but when they are thus made, they muſt be followed, for feare they fall againe: Be ſure to be abroad early in the morning, following her with the hoode; I hope this is ſenſibly to be effected by any man; But if my hawke turne her head from the hoode, I patiently attend her patience, holding my hoode to her head, and with turning my hand ſet her right and fit to take it; but if ſhe will be wilde Her watching hath broken her from that. or angry, ſhe cannot vnderſtand me.
               He that will vſe violence with a Horſe already diſtempered, and with ſpurre or chaine adde fury to furie, may perhaps at that time be deceiued of his expectation: So, he that ſhall deale with a man in the time of his impatience, may An example or compariſon. peraduenture at that time want of a reaſonable hearing; but giue the man time vntill that humor be ſpent, and ſo thy Horſe, and Hawke, and they will all mildely attend thee.
               If your Hawke be diſtempered, and you know no reaſon why, vſe her not otherwiſe but with a louing reſpect, and aſſoone as may be make a peaceable loue and reconcilement betweene you; there is no indifferent hooding to be looked for by this manner of vſing her, for ſhe muſt doe it well in the higheſt degree. Hereof I conclude, and ſo I proceede to

the recouery of all other ill conditions. And firſt for a Hawke that will royle and houſe.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  How to bring a Hawke that will royle and ſeeke for Poultry at a houſe, to good perfection and ſtaidneſſe, and how to get that Hawkes loue in whom an ill Keeper hath bred ſuch careleſnes.
               
               IF a man ſhould deliuer among many Auſtringers, (and ſuch that would ſcorne that any man ſhould exceede them in knowledge) that there were a man that would and could recouer a hawke to good perfection that were plentifully furniſhed with all faults, and wanted no ill condition, I know they would laugh at him, and ſay it were a lye, and vnpoſſible: But I auouch it, and am warranted through my practiſed experience, not to bluſh or care for what they ſay; but this I aduiſe them that ſtand affected to company and good-fellowſhip, to haue care how to order their hawkes, for now their maſters ſhall finde, that diligence will effect any thing, and not vſing carefull diligence there is no good to be gotten at their Hawkes hands. But now to make proofe of my Art, and for thy inſtruction (good Friend) you are to note, you are to deale with hawkes that haue beene ill handled, and not to beginne with them as with hawkes from the Cage, for ſhe will royle

and houſe, which at the firſt did come by her not comming, and her not comming was want of loue to her keeper; for if ſhe had ſo loued her keeper as that ſhe would haue come to him, hee had beene out of his wits, if hee would haue let her alone to royle, and houſe.
               I cannot otherwiſe thinke, that hauing this fault, but ſhe is withall wilde & rammiſh, which might be a ſecond meanes to make her trauell in this ſort, and therefore your firſt courſe muſt be by watching & manning to make her very gentle & familiar, and in that time you muſt labour to get her a good ſtomake. It is not ſhort meales alone breede a hungry deſire in your hawke, but continuall carriage, caſtings, and often and cleanely feeding, with cleane and light meate drawne through water, but after drye your meate, for if the hawke ſhall be fat and in greaſe when ſhe doth come vnto thee, your care muſt be the more for her dyet; for if ſhe want meate wherewith to carry away her greaſe, the breaking of her greaſe will take away her ſtomacke, and her greaſe too faſt broken, will not onely make her ſickely, but truely ſicke, and kill her, or breed diſeaſes, ſuch as ſhee had as good be dead: Therefore let her not laſt, nor doe not ouer-feede, which fault is as dangerous as faſting; for with her meate in her mutes ſhee will ſpend more greaſe then ſhe can bring vp with her caſting.
               Her greaſe gone, and your hawke made gentle,

your Hawke will quickely ſhew a good ſtomake, Wildenes will not ſuffer a hawke to ſhew her hunger. let not your haſty deſire hinder your good concluſion herein.
               When your hawke is come to a good ſtomake and perfect gentleneſſe, as I did reclaime my ſore Rammiſh hawke, calling her to the fiſt out of the hoode, from the fiſt of another man, in manner as the long-winged hawke is lewred; you muſt obſerue the ſame courſe, onely differing herein, for you muſt call her to a catch or lewer, and therevnto take her as the long-winged hawke is vſed, wherewith thou muſt make her much in loue with thy ſweet and milde vſing her, and in doing thus, it will make her loue thee better then euer ſhe loued houſe: Let her pleaſe her ſelfe vpon the catch, offer not to meddle with it, but let her freely and peaceably inioy it; and when ſhe is pluming vpon it, feede her with bits of good meate from thy hand, it wil make her look for that ſweetnes not only then when ſhe is vpon the catch but it will likewiſe make her loue thee when ſhe is vpon the quarry. If thou ſhalt ply her thus with thy hand, it will bring her to ſuch paſſe as ſhe will readily iumpe to your fiſt from the catch, and the ſweet and often vſing hereof, will make her leaue the quarry in ſuch manner, & ſo preſerue her fethers from wetting. At the firſt beginning of calling her. I hope your vnderſtanding will aduiſe you to haue her in cranes, wherewith if ſhe would checke ſhe ſhall be preuented, and wherewith

ſhee ſhall be ſtaied if ſhee offer to drag or carry the catch; for the want of loue to her former keeper, could not but breed theſe as well as other ill conditions: but I hope your gentle vſing & manning her, before you did euer ſhew Catch or Lewer, hath freed her from theſe, and your now kinde dealing with your hawke, feeding her ſo from the hand vpon the catch, will giue her ſuch contentment, that neuer met with ſuch content before, as that I am perſwaded ſhee will be made thereby more truely louing vnto thee, then a hawke ſhall be made, bought from the cage.
               I pray let vs admit that ſhee was a good conditioned hawke once, and would come to the fiſt very familiarly; how ſhould ſhee then loſe this, by her keepers negligence, being not often or ſeldome called, and then vpon her comming ſlightly rewarded, ſuppoſing if hee ſhould giue her any meate, it would hinder her well-flying, which might fall out to be preſently, but ſuch reward as would pleaſe her, will worke no ſuch ill effect; and now thou haſt her moſt readily comming to the catch, if thou wilt handle her; with no better reſpect, but onely caring how for that preſent to get her to your fiſt, and thereby pleaſe your ſelfe, and not at all her; ſhe will be weary of it, and ſuch vſage, and fall to her olde trade; which being handled as I haue directed, I would not doubt but to put her vp amongſt hens, when at any houre in the day ſhe

ſhould leaue them all for loue of mee, and the catch, which asketh no longer time then throwing it out; which I would vſeher vnto euery houre, if I were not ſure of my flight.
               And this I hope will ſuffice for this: But if you will haue me graunt that which I cannot yeelde vnto, that hauing flowne a Partridge to a houſe, notwithſtanding all theſe kinde courſes taken with her, ſhee hath caught a Hen, then let ſome one in the company, that can tell how to doe it, make haſte vnto her, taking vp both Hawke and Hen, and runne to a pond or pit of water (there is no dwelling houſe inhabited, and where hens are, but you ſhall find ſome water) and thereinto ouer head and taile waſh them both together three or foure times; then hauing the hawke vpon his fiſt, let not her keeper ſhew himſelfe vntill he that hath her, hath with her lines faſtened her calling-cranes vnto her; then I would aduiſe her keeper to giue her his voyce out of her ſight, but the hawke to be ſtill held although ſhee doth make a bate to goe to him: Hee is to giue his voyce but once or twiſe, and that is where ſhe ſeeth him not; after when hee commeth neere her let him giue her his voyce cheerefully; and let her in cranes be let goe to him, when he throweth out the catch in cranes, leſt beeing wet, ſhee ſhould deſire to flye to a tree to weather and drye her ſelfe; her cranes forbid it. And now you muſt not thinke ſhee hath committed a fault, for ſhee hath done

pennance for it, and comming to you ſhe looketh to be much made of; ſatisfie her expectation, giuing her all the contentment you may: It is not poſſible there ſhould be a hawke ſo ill but by this meanes ſhe will be recouered.
               It may be ſome young profeſſor in this Art is poſſeſt, that if his hawke be very hungry and ſharpe, ſhe will the ſooner come vnto him: He is herein much deceiued; for vnleſſe ſhe loueth him very well, hunger is the ſpeciall meanes that draweth her from him, for hunger muſt be ſatisfied, and her little loue to him will make her the better pleaſed with that ſhe prouideth for her ſelfe, and make her looke out for her owne prouiſion: But if ſhe be truely louing him, then there is no doubt but ſhe would come the readilyer. Marke then, if this be not the onely maine A ſpeciall and maine poynt to be looked vnto. poynt, for an Auſtringer to haue his hawke in loue with him.
               There be many that will neuer affect my doctrine, becauſe my courſe herein ſet downe is painefull; but what is any thing worth that is eaſily gotten? but he is deceiued that holdeth it paineful, for his hawke once well made, ſhe will not aske halfe the paines or attendance in the time of her flying, as other hawkes, that are but halfe, for halfe made hawkes muſt be followed with. Whenſoeuer thou calleſt thy hawke giue her ſome reward vpon the catch, and likewiſe pleaſe her vpon the fiſt.
               If I may be ſo bolde without reprehenſion,

for my recreation, to thinke of a more worthy delight, I will reſt thankfull, I will ſpeake of the Horſeman and his horſe, the Auſtringer and his hawke; alwaies vnderſtand that I acknowledge the one to exceede the other as much as golde exceedeth droſſe; but what I intend is this, both horſe and hawke are as they are taught. If a horſe prooue hard-mouthed, a run-away, carry an vnſteady head, his necke awry, or his body vn-euen; nay ſometimes he may and will refuſe to turne of the one hand, and ſome other time diſlike ſome part of the ground wherein he is ridden, and there will flye out, or perhaps ſtop of his forefeet, without either rucking behinde, or aduancing before, vntill after his ſtop, and other ſuch vices, can it be ſaid that that horſe hath gotten ſuch a fault or faults, otherwiſe then through the vnskilfulneſſe of his rider, when the true Artiſt is not onely able to amend theſe faults, but in ſome parts to amend what nature hath made defectiue? The hawke is ſeldome ſeene to haue any naturall defect, and therefore asketh no ſuch Art: Neither doe I queſtion the ſhapes of horſes and hawkes, for in both kindes their ſhapes much differ, but what I write is for the manner of their making, for the ill ſhape of either of them cannot excuſe their ill conditions; the worſt you can ſay by an hawke for her ſhape is, that ſhee is a long, ſlender and beeſome tailed hawke. I ſay all feathers flye, as horſes of ſeuerall races, are of

lighter, quicker, or duller diſpoſition: So are your hawkes out of ſome Countrie and eayrie, of much more ſpirit and mettle then the other; and will aske ſhorter or longer time in making; but for their vicious making, therein reſteth the compariſon. If thy hawke will not come, or not abide company, or a ſtranger in the company, perhaps not a woman, a basket, a horſe or Cart, or will royle or houſe, or any of theſe vices; can the Auſtringer haue a leſſe imputation layd vpon him, then the ill-ridden horſe hath giuen his rider, which is, he was ignorant and wanted knowledge? Alas, ſimple Auſtringer, how ſhallow is thy Art in reſpect of Horſeman ſhip? and ſo much the more art thou worthy of blame: The excellent horſeman will make and ſhew his horſe without any vice; and ſo will the exquiſite Auſtringer ſhew his hawke without any ill condition: In euery Trade wherein a man is moſt exerciſed, he is moſt excellent; Then ſtriue and labour to exceede them in ſome meaſure that haue little skill, for the ordinary Handicrafts-man paſſeth by with leſſe then ordinary or no reſpect, when the skilfull is deſired and much ſought after. Who vnderſtandeth not that the loue of one Hawke is more readily gotten, then the loue of another & that it is not ſo eaſie to get the loue of a hawke that hath beene dealt with and bobbed, as to haue it from a hawke that hath not beene dealt with? And therefore in your practice haue

patience, and neuer thinke ſhe doth well vntill ſhee be wholly at your commaund, thy paines will be anſwered with pleaſure; worke out the weeke, and Sunday will be holy-day. I will now proceede and examine what other ill quality a hawke may haue. There is an excellent hawke will fly and kill a Partridge very well, but ſhee will carry it from her keeper when he commeth in. The remedy.
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  How to ſtay that Hawke that hauing killed a Partridge, will very unwillingly ſuffer her keeper to come vnto her, but will carry it.
               
               HE was an vnkinde keeper, and handled his hawke very ill, ſo to get her hatred, from whom but through loue he could not hope to receiue any good; otherwiſe hee was very vnskilfull, Diſlike of her keeper, or rammiſhnes to flye his hawke ſo wilde and ſo ill manned; for one of theſe muſt be the cauſe, then by working the contrary in her, ſhee is faultleſſe and will flye the better: If ſhee will come well, then it is not meerely out of diſlike of her keeper; and ſo much the ſooner brought to good perfection: But it may be partly ſo, and partly wildeneſſe and rammiſhneſſe, and there may be a third diſlike, which ſtronglier poſſeſſes her then any of the other, which preſently ſhall be deliuered vnto you. Before a hawke be truely

manned and made gentle, ſhe will neuer learne good, or leaue bad conditions; for ſo long as ſhe is wilde, ſhee is altogether angry, froward, vnruly, and diſorderly, therefore be ſure to vſe ſuch patience and gentleneſſe, as that ſhe may vnderſtand thee: then put her in cranes, and ſet her vpon ſome mans fiſt; haue a dead doue or ſome other foule, it mattereth not although you ſtand not aboue twenty or thirty paces from her, giuing your voyce as though you would call her, throw the fowle as farre from you, as you can, which when ſhee hath in her foote and doth offer to carry, which the cranes Now ſhe diſcouereth the cauſe of her fault. forbid, then know, that it is not wildeneſſe or rammiſhneſſe, for before this with carriage in company thou hadeſt made her gentle, neither can it be that ſhe feareth thee, for thou haſt laboured before this to a better purpoſe; if you haue not, I haue ſet downe my directions in vaine: If then you haue ſo carefully manned her, as that ſhe neither feares you, nor is in feare of any man elſe; yet it is feare that cauſeth this, not fearing thee, but ſhee feareth the quarry ſhall The third cauſe of her carrying. be taken from her by thee, and ſhee would be glad to giue her ſelfe a better reward therevpon then you will alow of, and the ſmall rewards you haue giuen her, when you haue taken her from the quarry hath bred this fault; but this fault ſheweth the hawke hath mettall and ſpirit It is a good ſigne to haue a Hawke loue the quarry. enough. Well now that ſhee is vpon the catch, and ſo long as ſhe ſtands ſtill, fearing ſhee know

not what, ſtand you ſtill, not offering to goe neerer then you are, vntill ſhee fall to be buſily pluming, houlding the cranes faſt, and continually giuing her your voyce: When ſhe fails to plume, walke gently to her, ſtill giuing her your voyce; and whereas her feare was the quarry ſhould be taken from her, let her finde altogether the contrary, let her inioy it; and take this courſe, whereby you ſhall ſoone winne her fauour, that at any other time ſhee will not onely giue you leaue, but louingly expect your comming vnto her, haue in readineſſe her ſupper or breake faſt, or at any or euery time of the day ſuch meate as is warme and good, (her taſte is very good, although it cannot compare with her ſight) feede her therewith by little bits out of your hand. If ſhe look at you for more, forbearing what is in her foote, then doe you forbeare to giue any more vntill ſhe fall againe to plume, then giue her your voyce, and feede her ſo againe. If you will doe thus, you ſhall finde her looke as earneſtly at your hand for reward, as a hungry Spaniell will looke for a cruſt, and ſhe will be ſo pleaſed with your voice, as when ſhe hath a Partridge in her foote, ſhee will diligently attend and ſtay your comming, when I thinke hereby you are well taught how to vſe her: And now for this fault I may conclude, and inquire what other fault may diſgrace a hawke: She will carry it to a tree.
            
            
               
               CHAP. IV.
               
                  To reclaime a Hawke that will carry a Partridge into a Tree.
               
               IT is ſo lately ſet downe how to ſtay a hawke, and make her louingly expect your comming vnto her, as it is freſh in memory. Your hawke being brought to that paſſe, this fault wil ſoone be left, I haue approoued it: So ſoone as your hawke is gone into the tree, get all the The remedy. company to goe vnder her, vſing as fearefull noyle as they can, ſhewing Hats and Gloues, which will ſoone make her remoue, but it may be to an other tree, follow her againe with the like noyſe, there is no doubt but it will remoue her, if not, they muſt vſe ſome more violent meanes, as ſtriking the tree with ſticks, or throwing cudgells vp, ſhe may peraduenture remoue twice or thrice before ſhe come to the ground, but ſo ſoon as ſhe is come to the ground, wherof you ſhall not haue ſo great cauſe of ioy, but ſhe will ioy more to heare your louing voice, which I would then haue you freely and familiarly giue, when ſhe will ſoone vnderſtand ſhe ſhall enioye what ſhe hath with ſweet content and quiet.
            
            
               
               CHAP. V.
               
                  For a Hawke that ſo ſoone as ſhe hath caught a Partridge, will breake and gerge her ſelfe vpon it.
               
               THe cauſe of a griefe knowne, the diſeaſe is ſoone cured; and ſo it muſt be enquired how ſhe came by this foule fault, and then it is ſoone remedied. I cannot vnderſtand it ſhould be any otherwiſe then thus, at the firſt when ſhe had caught a Partridge, and before you come vnto her had begunne to feede, and peraduenture fed ſo much as you feared it would hinder your whole dayes ſport, it could not but moue ſome paſſion in you, which you ſhould haue diſſembled; but it could not be but with ſome The Cauſe. impatience you take her from the quarrie, not ſuffering her to eate any more, which now at the firſt ſhe did fall vnto by chance, but now ſhe hath found the ſweet therof, and the wrong you offered her in ſo ſodaine taking her vp, will make her the next time more earneſtly and with the more haſte to feede, remembring how ſhe was taken from it before, leſt ſhe now be ſo ſerued againe: The beſt remedy is this, when The remedy. ſhe ſhould flye to the next Partridge and kill, if you come in vnto her before ſhe breake (it may be ſhe may catch it neere you at the retroue) let her alone with it, and feede her with your hand, ſhe ſitting vpon it, as I taught you before: If

by chaunce ſhe happen of a bare place, be not diſcontented, but plye her with giuing her meat from your hand, and let her eate in ſuch abundance vntill ſhe doth forbeare to eate any more; In her pluming put on her limes. it ſhall not be amiſſe when you haue put on her limes to pyne her downe at length, and whether ſhe hath it in a ditch, buſh, or hedge, neither reward her, nor any other hawke, vntill you haue her in the plaine, and that will make them ſo ſoon as they haue a Partridge get out with it into the plaine; then if ſhe bate vpon any extraordinary occaſion, ſhe ſhall not goe away gorged. You muſt not now be ſparing of your labour, for if you ſpend three or foure houres in thus feeding her, (ſhe will not be ſo long in feeding) yet with the Partridge in her foote, whereon although ſhe will not feed, ſhe will be vnwilling to part from, let her enioy it, & be often offering her meate, and when you finde that ſhe is careleſſe of the quarry, take her to your fiſt; it may be A ſuppoſition. in your firſt entring, you were too ſparing in your reward, but howſoeuer ſhe commeth by this, in following this practice but twice or thrice, you ſhall with kinde handling her in her rewards, which ſhould be much from the hand, you ſhall haue her handle a Partridge, as that you may at any time take a liue Partridge out of her foot, to enter one withall. And thus I conclude for this, vnleſſe you will ſay ſhe hath almoſt eaten the Partridge before you come to her, I ſay let her eate, and feede her ſtill with the

moſt prouocation you can, no doubt it will make her very choyce how ſhe feedes after ſhee hath beene ſo ouer-fed, and after ſhe hath been twiſe or thriſe ſo dealt with take leiſure. A hawke loueth her keeper very well ſhee will draw after him and come at his pleaſure, ſhe will in her drawing be ſtill vpon the head of the dogs, but when ſhe hath killed it, will carry very fouly.
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  How to vſe that Hawke that will carry for feare of the dogges.
               
               I Muſt herein ſuppoſe that ſhee will draw after the dogges, or otherwiſe after her keeper; but ſo ſoone as ſhee hath the Partridge, and as ſoone as the dogges come to her, ſhe carryeth away the quarry; this can be but to the next hole to hide her ſelfe; but then if the dogges ſhall follow her thither, and thruſt her out from thence, herein the hawke is not to be blamed but the Examine by which, it ſoone amended. Spaniels, that better deſerue a haulter then a cruſt. It muſt be thought vpon how ſhee came to be thus fearefull of the Spaniels, it could not be in the field, becauſe the Faulcknour ſhall be at the retroue, and then hee is onely to be blamed, that hath not taught his Spaniels better; if by neither of theſe, then this muſt be gotten by very foule dogges in the couert, where if the

Spaniels be but a little hot in their ſport, it My obſeruation. teacheth the hawke more wit then knauery; for as I haue partly ſaid before, ſhee will not be too Not to hunt for the Partridge vpon the ground. hot vpon the game for feare of them, but will truſt to my helpe, and will tend it ſo as that ſhe will not loſe it, ſo that I ſhall be ſure to haue it of my owne catching. I reape this benefit by her feare, that ſhe will not ſtrike at the Pheaſant vpon the ground; for if ſhee ſhould ſo doe, it is A diſcommodity. great ods but ſo ſhee miſſeth it, and if it then ſpringeth, it is more ods, but it is cleane loſt; but if ſhe tend it, and the doggs, as I haue foreſaid, it is great ods but it goeth to pearch, from whence it is likely it will neuer flye, but by my hands is to be deliuered to her; I doe not as I haue ſeene ſome doe, toſſe it vp high, that thereby ſhee ſhall catch it, and ſo fall among the dogs, which as they ſay, doth imbolden her vpon the dogs, Some mens opinion. it muſt be there ſo, becauſe ſhe knoweth ſhee is not able to carry it from them, but when ſhee is in the field, and hath a lighter matter in her foote, it may then worke a worſe effect, and hauing field-roome & ſight whether to carry it in ſafety, ſhe wil remoue. The diſcommodities that I haue met with in hauing my hawke take a Pheſant from pearch, ſome I haue before ſet downe, in the ſeauenth chapter, & this is an other; Many times ſhee hangeth of one ſide of the bough, hauing faſt holde vpon the Pheaſant, and the Preuent what you finde may worke any ill. Pheaſant vpon the other: whether your hawke receiueth hurt hereby or no iudge you; and the

like miſchiefe muſt needs befall, when a Pheaſant is toſſed high vnto her; for when ſhe catcheth it ſo high, ſhe will not fall plumme downe therewith, but will a little ſtriue to ſhew her ſtrength, and then the Pheaſant hitting a bough neuer ſo little, although the twig be very little, if the hawke letteth it not goe, ſhe muſt needs hang as before: I deſire not to make my hawke hot in the couert, my reaſons before expreſſed may ſuffice; but theſe inconueniences may aduiſe other men how to deale in this caſe: But in my practiſe I am ſure there is no inconuenience No inconuenience. by carrying it into a plaine, and there to ſerue her as I vſed my rammiſh hawke; I am well aſſured that thereby I make my Hawke as truely to loue mee, as a Hawke can poſſibly loue a man; and this benefit thou ſhalt finde it worke in thy Hawke that will carry, it will make her ſo to loue This good inſueth. thee, and to aſſure her ſelfe in thee, as that if ſhee doth carry a Partridge for feare of the dogges, yet hearing thy voyce ſhee will be ſo confident and ſecure in thee, as ſhee will ſtirre no more; for ſhe knowes ſhe ſhall haue her reward with quietneſſe. If your Spaniells will not leaue to follow her, but be more ready to beat her out of the country then otherwiſe; if you will not part from them, God ſend him ſorrow that loueth it.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  How to vſe a Hawke that will carry a Partridge into a tree, and will not be driuen to the ground, but will there aſſuredly eate it.
               
               THere is no Hawke trayned as I haue done mine, and as I haue taught to vſe yours, will ſuffer ſuch a vice to take hold of her: but I muſt not ſtand vpon, if ſhee had beene thus, or thus dealt with, this would neuer haue beene, but now wee muſt ſeeke to amend it; and ſay ſhee doth it neither for feare of man nor dog, but out of a naturall diſpoſition, and accuſtomed practiſe, let her be ſhort coped, ſo I would aduiſe all ſhort-winged hawkes to be vſed, for the ſafty An obiection. of thy owne hands: It may bee obiected, how ſhall ſhee then hold a Pheaſant? How haue my hawkes done that would hardly miſſe a Pheaſant, Anſwere. and all of them ſhort coped? I will now deliuer a truth, for the affirming whereof I am willing to take my oath; I had a Tarſell of a Goſhawke, that one after an other, let two Pheaſants ſlip out of his foote; I was thereat much perplexed, I found many of their feathers, but I feared the ſpoyling my Hawke. neither of their bodies: ſtanding with my hawke vpon my fiſt not knowing what to doe, whether I ſhould flye any more or no, the wood was large, but the groath of two or three yeares; as I ſtood ſtill, a Cocke did ſpring very neere mee,

my Hawke did neither ſodainely nor earneſtly bate at him, yet when he did bate I did let him flye, when he ſhewed he neuer meant to catch it, but flew to marke, and I ſaw him darte vp into a ſpeare, I made haſte vnto him, and I did ſpring the Pheaſant iuſt vnder him, hee turned vpon his ſtand, and then flew after, not loſing any ground of him, but when he plained to fall, he caught him by the head, and did hang almoſt a yard from the ground, I came to him, layd him in the plaine, and couered his body, ſo hee had as much pleaſure and as good a reward as I could giue him vpon the head and necke: After this I aſſure you in all the time I kept him, & in the killing of very many Pheaſants, which then were very plentifull, hee neuer made mee a retroue, but would moſt aſſuredly haue him by the head at the fall, when the Pheaſant would lye ſtretched out at length and neuer ſtirre feather. His nature not to ſtringe, if ſo caught. If when I had drawne a couert, a Pheaſant had gone to pearch, hee would come and ſit neere him, but not in that tree; put him out, he would take an order with him, he ſhould neuer fall more, but when he had him by the head. It hath beene ſaid that hee killed one olde Cocke that had beaten an excellent Goſhawke of olde Sir Robert Wroths, & Maſter Rainefords hawke. I could neuer meete with any Pheaſant that euer ſerued me ſo; and I deliuer this vpon heareſay. Now your Hawke is thus coped, take a leather in all poynts faſhioned like a bewet, put

it about her hinder tallent, and then button it The practiſe. to her bewet, whereon her bell hangeth, and it will ſo holde vp her tallent that ſhee cannot at all gripe with it, then ſhee cannot ſit vpon a bough, holde a Partridge, and feede. For a plainer demonſtration, make your leather in all poynts like your bewet, for the length, that you muſt make fit to holde vp her tallent in ſuch place as you ſhall ſee cauſe, I aduiſe you make it not too ſhort, leſt it ſhould hinder her truſſing a Partridge, and ſo be diſcomfited; cut a little ſlit in the midſt of it, or neerer the button then the midſt, as you doe in the leather wherewith you couple your Spaniels, and as you faſten that about the ring of your couples, ſo faſten that about the tallent of your Hawke, and ſo faſtened, button it about the bewet, as you button the couples about the Spaniels necke: Herein you are ſatisfied; let vs now enquire for more ill properties.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  How to reclaime a Hawke that will neither abide Horſe-men, Strangers, Carts, Foote-men or Women, and ſuch like.
               
               LEt it be enquired how ſhe came by this coyneſſe, and why ſhee ſhould not endure all theſe, or any of theſe, as well as other Hawkes: There can be nothing ſaid for it, but that ſhee

hath not beene well and orderly manned; then it ſhould appeare that well and orderly manning them ſhould make them familiarly endure theſe or any of theſe, and ſo it will; but now it muſt be done by other meanes. You well vnderſtand the courſes I haue vſed in manning my hawkes, which truely practiſed vpon them, there ſhall no ill condition follow them: But when a hawke is but halfe made, then ſhee falls from bad to worſe, and ſo ſhe is harder by much to be reclaimed then ſhe was at the beginning, and will aske more tendance and reſpectiue care to holde her well at the ſecond making, then a caſt of hawkes, wellmade, in their firſt handling. Before you beginne to practice vpon her let her be watched, and carried a day or two, when you haue ſo done, if ſhee haue a good ſtomake, you may the ſooner beginne with her, and yet ſhee may haue a good ſtomake, but rammiſhnes will not ſuffer her to ſhew it. There is nothing to be done with ſuch a hawke, vntill by watching and manning ſhe be brought to patience, which done, beginne thus; finde out ſome place where there is ſome great aſſembly either at bowles, or ſome ſuch other exerciſe, and hauing her in cranes there, ſet her vpon ſome mans fiſt, & let her iumpe to a catch, and thereupon dandle the time with her: This muſt be done many dayes, and many times in the day. I would be neere ſome Market-Towne, where vpon a Marketday I would find ſome conuenient place, where

Women with their Baskets, Horſes with loads vpon them, Carts with their carriage, variety of coloured Horſes, and paſſingers-by in diuers paces ſhould come by her, there I would be ſure to ſpend the whole day in playing with her in ſuch manner vpon the catch. If you will aske me how long ſhe will be in making familier with all theſe things, I ſay you will neuer do it, if ſo ſoone as you haue ended your practice, you goe and ſet her downe to growe wilder, and be the ſecond day as ill as ſhe was at the firſt; but in the continuance hereof three or foure dayes, and thy carefull attendance ouer her day and night, will greatly preuaile with her: I would not doubt but to make ſuch a Hawke with my diligence and paine (vſing her as I haue herein taught you) to ſit vpon the pelt in the Market-place, nor fearing nor caring for any thing, (aſsidua ſtilla ſaxume xcauat) hath not God made all Creatures? haue not wilde Stags by watching & manning been driuen like cattel vpon the way? What is it that Man cannot effect, if he wil thervnto apply himſelfe? If one day will not ſerue the turne, take two; if not two, then ten, and twenty more, but I would haue my trauell ſatisfied with a ſweet concluſion. There is ſomething elſe to be thought vpon, and therefore I will proceede.
            
            
               
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  What courſe is to be taken with a Hawke that hath flowne a Partridge, and will continually ſit vpon the ground at marke, and thereby is likely to beate out her ſelfe from her true flying, by miſsing of many flights.
               
               A Speciall care is to be had herein how you flye your Hawke, which muſt be as the Countrie is where you flye your Hawke, as thus; if it be in the Champion, then you muſt In the Champion flie farre off. let flye farre from the Partridges, there ſhe cannot loſe ſight of them, and yet it may be ſhee ſhall not ſee the fall ſo well, but being farre behinde, if ſhe be in ſtrength and courage ſhoote vp to a tree, for ſhe is more then a dull-ſpirited Hawke, and I thinke there is not ſuch a hawke will flye home a Partridge, but ſhe will ſtirre or hunt for it if ſhe be neere it at the fall, or ſoone learne to goe to a tree, which I ſaid before I would haue you preuent, by flying farre from the game, when ſhe ſhall not be inticed by being neere to them to fall vpon the ground. If this pleaſe you not, goe hawke in the Wood-land, and make choyſe to fly at ſuch Partridges as will flye to a woode: Here your courſe muſt A contrary courſe in the Woodland. be, not as you did in the Champion, but to flye as neere them as may be, for feare, if ſhe ſhould be farre behinde, ſhee ſhould loſe the ſight of

them, but being neere, they then tempt her to fall in the wood vpon the ground; then let her ſet and hunt vntill ſhe be weary of ſo doing, be carefull not to ſuffer a dogge to goe vnto her, neither let her heare your voyce at all; at length ſhee will finde that there is no good to be gotten by walking, and then ſhee will vp to a tree; now your owne knowledge aſſureth you that It is the ſtrength, and ſafety deſired. out of the wood the Partridges will not flicke, and that putting your dogs into the wood you ſhall be ſure to ſhew her a flight, wherewith if ſhee fall againe, I would without queſtion let her alone vntill ſhe ſhould wiſh ſhe had her ſupper: if in the wood-land you ſhall ſometime make her draw after you, and ſerue her with the Draw not neere houſes. Spaniels, it will doe her good; but the generall practiſe will very quickly worke wit in her. And thus much for this, hauing a little ſpoken of it before.
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               
                  That the Tarſell is more prone to theſe ill conditions then the hawke, and how to reclaime him that will ſeeke out for a Doue-houſe; with which fault I neuer knew Goſhawke tainted.
               
               ALl my proceeding and direction hath been wholly intended for the reclayming and making the hawke, which is all one for the Tarſell, who is to be practiſed vpon for ſuch faults

in the ſame manner as is the Goſhawke, but there is one vile quallity that I haue heard a Tarſell would often practiſe; wherewith I neuer yet knew Goſhawke tainted, and whereunto a Tarſell would neuer fall, if he be handled in that forme that I haue ſet downe. Some Tarſell after a Haggourtly or Rammiſh diſpoſition, will vpon the miſſing of a flight, not ſtay at The keepers fault. marke your comming to ſerue him; ſome other will ſit faſt vntill ſome ſtranger ſhew himſelfe, and then he is gone: Theſe quallities follow ill manned hawkes, as well as the Tarſell; this is nothing but wildeneſſe; want of true manning brought him vnto this; & he is of this fault to be reformed as is the hawke, by feeding often, and many times in the day amongſt a multitude of people in cranes, vpon a catch, where you muſt make a true practiſe, with feeding him from the hand: It may be ſaid he will kill himſelfe before he will be quiet in ſuch an aſſembly, he muſt be then watched and carryed bare-faſte vntill he be ſo gentle, as that he will indure all company, and then vpon the catch thou ſhalt make him ſo in loue with thee, with thus vſing him vpon it, as I haue formerly ſet downe that hee will indure all things whatſoeuer. I haue heard, but I thinke it was more then truth, that a Tarſell royled from marke, and was that night taken in a doue-houſe earneſtly feeding vpon a Doue, twenty miles from the place from whence hee was flowne: It is beyond all

vnderſtanding, that louing and knowing a doue-houſe well, as he did, he ſhould trauell ſo farre before he ſhould finde one ſhould pleaſe him, and this ſhould be in a country that of my knowledge affordeth plenty of doue-cotes: But truth is, ſuch was his fault, that vpon euery little diſcontent, he would ſo pleaſe himſelfe; from which hee is thus eaſily to be reclaimed, but be ſure by watching and manning he be made very gentle before you begin thus to practiſe, then As gentle as a Parrot. call him in cranes to a catch, as I haue taught you to doe a Goſhawke that will houſe, feed him in the ſame manner, and call him vntill you finde that hee will come ſo ſoone as the catch is throwne out, it may be a doue that hee loueth ſo well, but it is not much to the purpoſe what foule it be, although it be a Lewer well garniſhed, for he will ſoone fall in loue with any thing wherewith he ſhall be ſo well pleaſed. When he is brought to that paſſe that he is truely in loue with thee and the catch, comes readily, and will indure all company, then vſe him to draw after thee all times of the day, and take him downe very often: I would aduiſe that in the euening hee might be called neere vnto a doue-houſe, where ſome of purpoſe ſhould ſhew and ſtirre the Doues, that if hee went into the houſe, one of your company, rather then your ſelfe, might be quickely with him, hauing in a readineſſe prepared a boxe filled with beaten Pepper, and where hee hath broken the Doue,

ſtrewe Pepper aboudantly, and ſo haue a care that ſo ſoone as hee ſhall bare a new place, that you preſently plye that place with ſtrewing more pepper, which will ſoone make him diſlike ſuch and ſo hote a dyet, and make him ſo much the more to loue him who ſhall or hath ſo kindly vſed him. I would ſhew my ſelfe a little negligent, and not with much haſte to take him downe, when he were ſo neere that he loueth ſo well, for now you are ſo neere him, as you would quickely be with him to giue vnto him more than hee would cate, and thereby make him out of loue with a Doue-houſe. It may be ſaid this is the next way to kill him; no, he will caſt his gorge, wherein there is no danger or cauſe of feare; when a Hawke caſteth his gorge vpon diſlike of his meate; for ſometimes the lying of a bone awrye will make him caſt his meate, or part of it: but if a hawke caſteth his gorge, and the meate ſtinketh, this is of an other cauſe, he is then ſicke, his ſtomake cannot digeſt what nature deſireth, and ſo the continuing thereof, with a deſire to put it ouer and cannot, putrifieth the meate and ſtinketh, and maketh that hawke in a deſperate eſtate. Your ſeruing your Tarſell thus ſhall not affect any ſuch matter, but hee will finde a difference betweene ſuch a diſtaſtfull ſupper, and a ſweet pleaſing breakefaſt, which I would aduiſe ſhould the next morning be giuen in Cranes, where the ſweet hand and kinde dealing with him

vpon the catch will ſtay him or any hawke from royling. When he is thus made, keepe him ſo, and that muſt be with continuall familiarity: If I thought a hawke ſo gentle and familiar could be drawne by any meanes from her keeper, then I would ſet downe another courſe, which although you ſhall neuer haue neede of, I will ſet downe. When he is at the height of this familiarity, cut out of either wing three of his beſt flying feathers, and put to his heeles a knocking paire of bels, and ſo traine him when his want of power will hinder his deſire to trauaile further, then you may with eaſe follow him; and I would wiſh you to follow him ſo as he ſhould not ſee it, but be continually thirty or fortie ſcore from him, and ſometimes giue him your voyce. If you finde him not inclined to heare you (which ſhould be more ſtrange to me then any thing belonging to a hawke, if hee be made gentle and in cranes well-comming as aforeſaid) then get one with you that may follow him, but neuer offer to take him downe, but let him be as neere the Tarſell as may be, who when hee the hawke remoueth, by his voyce he may giue you knowledge thereof, when I would aduiſe you to giue him your voyce, and call him, but goe no neerer vnto him. When it groweth to that houre that you thinke hee will remoue no more, then let a liue Doue, by him that is with him, be throwne out in a paire of cranes, and ſo ſoone as he hath it, let him be beſtowed vpon

his fiſt, vntill he commeth home, where let him faſt vntill you goe to bēd; then for his ſupper giue him a ſet of ſtones and knots, (the number and ſize I will deliuer hereafter, with their profits:) The next morning carry him abroad with you an houre before you call him, then let him goe at liberty: You haue your friend if neede be to follow him, whereof there ſhall be no need; then let him ſee you kill and pull off the feathers of a Pidgeon, and before you call he will come ſo ſoone as you throw out the catch, and if he could ſpeake, thanke you. When you haue made him ſuch as you would haue him, then put in his feathers againe, which I hope were ſo carefully cut out, and well preſerued in a booke vntil you ſhould haue this vſe for them, that hee may be better imped with his owne feathers then it is poſſible to impe a hawke with any other then his owne, and he will not fly one pinne the worſe. I cannot in my vnderſtanding thinke of any other fault that my Hawke hath, and therefore hereof I muſt of neceſſity leaue further to ſpeake; and ſo proceed with my cures, which follow in this third and laſt Treatiſe.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            THE THIRD TREATISE, OF Hawkes and Hawking: Wherein is contained Cures for all knowne Diſeaſes; all which haue beene practiſed by my ſelfe, more vpon worthy mens Hawkes that haue beene ſent vnto me, then vpon any of my owne.
            
               Firſt, for the beake, mouth, eyes, head, and throat, and of the ſeuerall griefes there breeding and offending.
               
                  IN the Beake there is a drye Canker, whereof I haue little deſire to write, becauſe it is ſo common, and the cure as eaſie; but to him that knoweth it not, this ſhall giue him ſufficient vnderſtanding: That it ſheweth it ſelfe white in that part of the Beake where it is, it may haue a cracke or ſlawe

in it before you ſhall diſcouer it, vnder that white it eateth into the beake. With a knife pare the white off ſo farre and ſo deepe as it hath eaten into the beake: with a piece of glaſſe new broken you may ſcrape it, and make it more ſmooth then you can with a Knife. After you haue faſhioned the beake ſo well as you can, waſh it either with the iuice of a Lemmon, or with a little Wine-vinegar, and it will require to be no oftener dreſſed.
            
            
               A Medicine for the wet Canker in the mouth or Beake, which will eate into her eyes and braine, (and vnleſſe it be killed) it will ſoone kill her: And this is more common with the long-winged then the ſhort winged Hawke: This of my owne practiſe, and how dangerous ſoeuer it ſhall appeare to him that hath not made vſe thereof, belieue me, in the adminiſtring thereof there is nothing but ſafety.
               TAke Aqua fortis, you ſhall haue it at the Goldſmiths, for there is moſt vſe made of it; there is ſome of it made more ſtrong then other, but how ſtrong or weake ſoeuer it be, you ſhall quallifie them in this manner.
               Haue in a readineſſe a porringer of ſpring-water, and a feather in it, then poure ſome of your Aqua fortis into the deep ſide of an Oyſter-ſhell, where you ſhall ſee it preſently boyle, as if it were ouer a fire, and would ſoone eate

through the Oyſter-ſhell, take your feather in the ſpring-water, and therewith of the ſame water, drop into the Aqua fortis that is boyling, by drops, drop after drop, vntill you ſhall ſee it leaue ſeething, then for your vſe put it into a violl, and we call it Aqua fortis quallified. Now you are prouided of Aqua fortis in his vigour and ſtrength, and you haue it alſo quallified. For the Canker, I would aduiſe you to take the moſt ſpeedy and moſt ſure courſe to kill it: And therefore for cure thus proceede: With a quill made fit for the turne, ſearch the ſore well, and take off the roofe (that couereth and groweth faſt to the ſore,) as cleane as may be; and leſt the bleeding ſhall hinder the true ſearch, haue in a readineſſe a ſticke with a little clout tyed to the end, which wet in faire water, you may therewith wipe away the bloud ſometimes, whereby you may the better ſee what you haue done to the ſore; you may perhaps finde a little core feeding within the ſore, pull and get out of it as much as is poſſible, and then hauing a little ſticke, with a little clout, to the bigneſſe of a ſmall Peaſe faſtened to the end thereof, and wet in the Aqua fortis, and not to haue it otherwiſe then wet, not that it ſhall drop; herewith doe but touch the ſore once or twiſe that it may be wet, and it will ſoone kill it: Dreſſe it once in foure and twenty houres; and if it be not in a very deſperate eſtate when you beginne therewith, twiſe or thriſe dreſſing ſhall be the moſt

it ſhall neede; and if the core ſhall be at the firſt taken cleane out, it will not aske more dreſſing: You may feede within one houre, or an houre and a halfe after ſhe is thus dreſſed.
            
            
               A Medicine for the Frounce, whervnto the long-winged Hawke is much more ſubiect then is the ſhort-winged Hawke.
               I Haue heard many men of this opinion, that the Frounce & Canker are all one; and ſuch they were as held themſelues very skilfull: But ſuch as haue skill & iudgement know that they were diſceiued in their opinions. The Frounce proceeding out of a heate and drynes in the body, or of a bruiſe, and it followeth moſt your freſh Haggard. Although the ſore-Hawke or Tarſell is not free, but are vpon heats ſubiect to that infirmity, the older a Hawke is ſhee is the more hote & drye; and you ſhall haue ſodainly growe vpon an olde Haggart, although ſhee be well kept, for it will growe vpon that Hawke ſooneſt that is of a fretfull diſpoſition. A Faulconour of iudgement will hereupon worke to ſeeke out meanes to amend the cauſe, and then Heate and drineſſe. euery ſmall matter will cure the griefe, when it is but little and newe bred. I haue knowe it killed with waſhing her mouth with the iuice of Lemmon, and ſo giuing her ſtones out of the ſame iuice; this worketh as well in the body as the mouth: But Aqua fortis to be vſed for the

Frounce, as I haue directed for a Canker, is beyond all other receits.
            
            
               Otherwiſe for the Frounce.
               TAke of your Aqua fortis that is quallified, and with a quill made for that purpoſe, take off the ſcabbe or roofe from the ſore, then with a ſticke and a cloth at the end thereof, well wet in your quallified water waſh the ſore: and although there be ſo much water as ſome of it doth goe into her body, I haue found no hurt but profit thereby; for without doubt it hath had an extraordinary working in her body, without making any ſhew of ſicknes, but there hath come from her droſſie mutes that haue ſtoode full of bubbles: I haue herewith recouered Hawkes troubled with a ſore Frounce, and made them ſound.
            
            
               An approued medicine for the Frounce, that is to be had in euery Towne.
               TAke a piece of good Roche-Allum, and burne it leiſurely, and then pound it to as fine powder as may be, then take a little Engliſh Honie, and a little of the powder, let them be wrought together with a kniues point, and then your Hawke caſt, and the ſcab cleane taken away to the bottome, (feare not to make it bleed, which you may wipe away as you are

formerly taught) and this receipt clapped vpon it, without doubt with leſſe then ſixe times dreſſing, it ſhall kill it; and let it be dreſſed once in foure and twenty houres; let her not be fed in two houres after ſhee is dreſſed. I could ſet downe forty common receipts more for this griefe, and all needleſſe, for any one of theſe three laſt ſhall kill any Frounce. I would not haue ſet downe this laſt receipt butthat Aqua fortis is not to be had in euery place.
            
            
               A remedy for the kirnells whereunto the long-winged Hawke is not ſubiect, but it followeth much the ſhort-winged hawke.
               THe kirnells beginne and breede vnder the eye, betweene the eye and chap, outwardly appearing, and will very ſoone ſhew it ſelfe as bigge & long as the halfe of an ordinary Beane, and will ſoone grow greater and ſwell vp the eye, and kill her if it be not preuented. For cure thereof doe thus, launce the place ſwelled longwaies, and with a quill take out the kirnells as you can, they are white as kirnells in cattell, (but I pray vnderſtand) that they are of a very ſmall ſize; without any danger you may cut the hole large enough, ſeeth ſome ſpring water, and when it hath ſod, put into it a peece of Roach-Allum, and ſome Engliſh-honey, let it ſeeth no more, but let the ingredients diſolue therein; then hauing a linnen cloath faſtened to the end

of a ſticke, wet in the water, the water not being otherwiſe then the colde taken off, waſh the place very cleane within, and then put into it ſome powder of burnt Allum; you ſhall neede to put your Allum into it but once, and once it muſt be, otherwiſe it will be in foure and twenty houres cloſed vp againe, and ſhew it ſelfe healed, and ſo the kirnells increaſe againe, and very ſoone be as ill as it was at the firſt; but the Allum once applyed, and the place waſhed three mornings together, feare it not, for it is cured and ſound.
            
            
               There is a diſeaſe in the head of ſome, called Vertego, it is a ſwimming of the braine, and thus followeth the cure.
               THis griefe is very dangerous, and it appeareth too plainely, for very ſeldome the hawke holdeth ſtill her head, but continually putteth her head ouer her ſhoulder, and ſo letteth it fall to his proper place againe, it proceedeth of a colde cauſe in the body. Take a quantity of Butter out of the Churne, doe not waſh it, take a Gloue of the middle ſize, and as much Mace, let them be bruiſed, not beaten, and ſap them in a little of your Butter, to the bigneſſe of a ſtone, ſuch as you gaue that hawke; (although it it be very large it will be a caſting litlittle enough) put it into a fine peece of Lawne, and then tye it faſt; giue it vnto your hawke, and

after it, giue vnto her, her ſupper; in the morning ſhee will caſt the Lawne againe, with the Cloue and Mace therein, the Butter paſſing through her, then giue vnto her a cloue of ſodden Garlicke. And becauſe euery man hath not made vſe thereof, I will therefore ſet downe the manner how to ſeeth it, for it is very profitable for very great vſes; take the cloues out of the head, but doe not pill them, ſeeth them in faire water, & with a ſpoone feele of them very often, leſt they ouer ſeeth, for they muſt be ſoft, and yet no ſofter, but that if your Hawke will not take them in meate, they may be put into her without breaking, but now the huske and thin white filme muſt be taken off, giue vnto her, her breakefaſt before, or therewith, ſhe will not onely indew it, but that will worke good digeſture for her other meate; at night giue her Butter, Cloue & Mace againe, as aforeſaid, and ſo euery night, and euery third morning a cloue of ſodden Garlicke, vntill ſhee be cured, keepe her warme and continually hooded, if ſhee will not ſit quietly let her be maled vp.
            
            
               The Pinne in the throat a moſt deſperate and vncurable diſeaſe, I haue neuer heard of a long winged hawke troubled therewith, but I haue knowne many ſhort-winged hawkes killed with it.
               THis diſeaſe is plainely diſcouered, for vpon any bate ſhe wil heaue & blow, and rattle in

the throat. In my very friends houſe, I found a Goſhawke at that paſſe, it is ten yeares ſince, and they did not perceiue it vntill that day; my aduiſe was deſired, which I deliuered, and thus put in practiſe; they did cauſe preſently ſome Butter to be made, which I tooke, not waſhing it; but I laped or noynted a wing feather of a Henne therewith, and ſo twiſe or thriſe in a day put it vp and downe her winde pipe, and twiſe or thriſe at a time. Whether this was the Pinne, or no, I know not, or the Pinne breeding; but I am ſure that in three or foure dayes the Hawke did well, without any other thing adminiſtred. And by others it was thought to be the Pinne. One Sparhawke had the Pinne this laſt yeare in her ſore-age, and I tolde her Maſter of the happy proceeding I had with the Goſhawke, and he did practiſe the ſame: But I beleeue he rather put the feather which was but ſmall into the throat, then into the winde-pipe, for within one fortnight or tenne dayes after it begun, ſhe dyed thereof.
               One other Goſhawke was brought vnto me in her rufter-hoode, to be made flying, as hee ſaid that brought her, ſhee had beene drawne three weeks, and for a fortnight & more ſhe had taken euery night a caſting; the Hawke I knew for her goodnes & good conditions could not be bettered. I was glad of her comming, my houſe being full of my friends: I imparted ſo much vnto them in the euening, hauing formerly

beene well acquainted with her good conditions, I pulled off her hoode, after awhile ſitting quietly ſhee made a ſtout bate, but ſo ſoone as ſhe had done ſo, ſhe gaped, and ratled ſo in the throat, as that ſhee might eaſily be heard into the next roome. If this were not the Pinne, then no hawke hath the Pinne; but the ſight hereof did very much perplexe mee. To be ridde of her I could not, for her Maſter was ridden into the Countrey a hawking iourney, as his owne letter that day ſent did teſtifie: Seeing in what deſperate eſtate the hawke was in, I would willingly haue giuen forty ſhillings I had not medled with her; Hee was a worthy Knight that ought her, and to him I ſtoode bound for many former kinde guifts, which was in truth the moſt eſpeciall cauſe that encreaſed my griefe, rather fearing her death, then hoping for life. The next day by ſome occaſion there were two Knights, both of them very iudicious Auſtringers, and two Gentlemen of the ſame family, though dwelling tenne miles a ſunder, and diuers others; all which, for my colde comfort, ſaid ſhe was a hawke not to be recouered. Then I practiſed vpon her in this manner: Firſt, I put on her rufter-hoode againe, and then with a large feather lapped about with butter, I did twiſe or thriſe together, and three times in a day put vp and downe her throate, (I pray you remember that it was butter out of the Churne, & not waſhed.) Whileſt I was in this practiſe, I

muſt tell you that ſhee did not thereupon leaue her ratling in the throat at all, but it did encreaſe a while after ſhe was dreſſed, and made a greater noyſe; and great reaſon for it, for ſhee had in her dreſſing ſtriued very much, and now labouring in the body, her throat full of butter, ſhee muſt needes make the noyſe the greater, which after ſhe ſtoode ſtill a while and was quiet, ſhee neuer made ſhew of: After a weekes pract
                     •
                  ſe thus, I tyed two feathers together, in ſuch manner, as ſome Arrowes and Bolts for Crolbowes haue their feathers lapped about, then did I clip off halfe the deepe ſide of the feather, and being drye, I put that into her winde-pipe, putting it vp and downe, and turning it round, inſomuch that the feather was bloudy, (it troubled mee much, but the cure being deſperate, I thus followed on my practiſe, I confeſſe I neuer had that experiēce before) I had then two other feathers lapped together with ſilke as the other two were, about and into which I had laped and wrought, the powder of burnt Allum and Engliſh Hony, prepared as I taught you for the Frounce, and with that I did well rubbe her winde-pipe vp and downe once a day, for three daies together, and ſo left, knowing that it had wrought much in ſo ſhort a time vpon a ſore Frounce. I continued this Hawke one weeke longer in her hoode, when ſhe gaue mee aſſured knowledge that ſhe had no Pinne, neither would ſhe blowe for one bate, or two,

or thrce, if they were not great, and for that blowing I doe not thinke it was the Pantiſe, but rather a faintneſſe and weakeneſſe after her ſickneſſe, as it is very commonly approued amongſt our ſelues after a long ſickneſſe; and her diſeaſe was none of the lea
                     ••
                  : I met with the meſſenger that brought her vnto me, (within one weeke after I had her) vnto whom I imparted my griefe for the hawke, when he did confeſſe vnto mee ſhee had met with two or three miſchances, by ſcratching of her hood before ſhe came vnto me, which might be a cauſe of breeding the Pinne, which being the greater griefe, would not ſuffer the leſſer to be ſeene vntill that was cured, which was the Pantiſe, if it ſo proue: You haue herein heard my opinion; but for the Pantiſe I cannot meddle with, for therein my diſcourſe would proue very tedious, as to deliuer the cauſe thereof, &c. I ſhould compare it to the Tiſſicke in a man or woman, or to a Horſe, which ſome ſay is broken-winded, and I ſhould contrary that opinion: And although I ſhould haue many againſt mee, yet I ſhould haue many maintaine my opinion. And thus I leaue that vndiſcourſed of, becauſe it would proue very tedious to ſet downe the reaſons, pro & contra. But for this vncurable diſeaſe, I am perſwaded, that if it ſhall be rubbed with two drye feathers, lapped together and clipped, as I haue before ſaid, See the Frounce Capt. and afterward to wet them in Aqua fortis that is

quallified, and ſo thruſt the feather vp and downe her throat, I muſt needs thinke it ſhould eate away the Pinne, and cure it, hauing had ſo good experience of the working thereof, which doth confirme my opinion, and not to danger the Hawke: Admit it ſhould endanger her life, ſhee can be in no greater daunger then the Pinne putteth her in. I leaue the vſe thereof to your owne conſideration.
            
            
               An excellent medicine for a laſh in the eye.
               TAke white Sugar-Candy, burne it as you burne your Allum, then bruiſe or beate it to a very fine powder, and thereof morning and euening put ſome of it into her eye, let her be alwaies hooded, vntill ſhee be well, which will be in a very ſhort time; yea, although a filme beginne to growe ouer it, becauſe it hath not beene looked vnto in time; yet reſt aſſured it will cure it.
            
            
               A Medicine for a ſalt or hot humour that runneth out of the eye, and ſcaldeth all the feathers from that part vnder the eye, and maketh it bare.
               THis diſeaſe will make the one eye ſeeme bigger then the other, and at all times ſeeme to be full of water, it may be both the eyes be in that ill eſtate, the often wiping of the eye againſt the wing, putteth off the feathers, and maketh

the eye the worſe. For cure, take the ſtalke of Fennel and cut it off at one ioynt, and into that part of the ſtalke which you leaue long, being ſtopped with the ioynt at the other end, you ſhall put or fill with the pouder of white ſugercandie, very finely pounded, and then with waxe make very cloſe that end, and ſo doe three or foure, and then bury them in the earth two or three dayes, and your pouder will be diſſolued into fine water, which you ſhall drop into your hawkes eye, or your owne, if you ſhall haue neede: It is approued very good.
            
            
               For the ſame otherwiſe.
               TAke a piece of Gum-draggon, and let it lye in three or foure ſpoonefulls of ſpring-water, vntill it diſſolue and grow ſoft, then drop of that water into the eye; it is very good for our ſelues if we haue neede.
            
            
               For a ſnurt or colde in the head of any hawke, it is moſt properly to be learmed thus in long-winged hawkes, for ſhort-winged hawkes the Rye, and yet they differ.
               I Haue known Faulcons that haue been waſhed at the brooke in colde and froſty weather, or ſo wet with raine, that therevpon they haue beene ſo troubled with a colde in the head, as that in a moneth or ſixe weekes they could not

be brought againe to true flying: The Rye in a ſhort-winged will grow as well vpon her, and ſooner, by being ill kept without tyring or plumage, or by being in pouerty, as through colde or wet. Notwithſtanding ſhee is the tenderer hawke; yet if ſhee be full of fleſh and haue naturall meanes, good and warme dyet, with plumage and tyring enough, and kept warme, ſhee will ſoone outgrow it; but for the Faulcon and ſuch like, a wilde Primroſe roote dryed in the Ouen after the bread is drawne, and made ſo drye as that it may be beaten to a fine pouder, and ſo blowne into her Nares, will very ſoone break it▪ If you will take the leaues, be ſure they be of the wilde primroſe in the field or wood, ſtampe & ſtraine out the iuice and put ſome of it into her Nares, and it ſhall worke the like effect. It ſhall not be idleneſſe for mee to deliuer, nor yet vnprofitable for you to heare; that one did lye in his bed ſo troubled with paine in the head, that vpon the leaſt motion or ſtirring hee would cry out in ſuch manner, as that he ſhewed hee ſuffered much torment. I was talking to one of this receipt for my hawke, where vpon the parties petitions were ſo piercing, as that there muſt be no denyall but that ſome leaues ſhould be ſought for and gotten, and which was done, the iuice taken out, I thinke hee did ſnuffe vp into his noſe one ſponefull, but hee was for halfe an houre after ſo tormented, as that I for my part wiſhed that I had neuer

ſpoken of the receipt, but that little ſeaſon ſo borne out, the party was preſently as wel as euer he was in his life; this was ſudden and this was ſtrange, adminiſter neither of theſe to your hawke but when ſhe is empty, and feed not too ſoone after it, but be ſure to keepe her warme; for otherwiſe her powers being ſo open, ſhee is more apt to increaſe the colde ſhee hath already taken then to breake it.
            
            
               A medecine for the Mites, ſome hawkes haue beene ſo ill looked vnto, that they haue not onely beene troubled about the beake and eyes, but the nicks of the wings and hinder parts of them haue beene eaten to the quicke.
               HIs iudgement ſhould much faile him that will not thinke that hawkes ſo ill furniſhed haue beene neither cleanly kept nor carefully looked vnto; by both which meanes a hawke may haue them, and they are ſooneſt gotten from the pearch or blocke where an other hawke hath ſate that haue had the mites: If they be timely diſcouered, and that they haue not ouer-runne the whole body, Aqua vite and Staueſacre will kill them, onely rubbing her Nares therewith when you ſet her downe for all night, and ſo will Vinegar and Staueſacre.
               
               The Iuice of Hearbe-graſſe, the leaues ſtamped and ſtrained, and the parts offended about the head rubbed therewith, when you goe to

take your reſt, is as good as any of the reſt: Take heede where you ſet your hawke, for if ſhee ſit by a hawke that hath the Mites, ſhee will too ſoone finde that ſhee hath met with too many ill neighbours. Maſter Batcheler that was Maſter of all the Faulconers by Powles, to whom my loue then was ſuch as that I could ſpeake much good of him now; hee I ſay had a ſparhawke, all her body ouer-runne with ſuch vermine, which he could deſtroye by no meanes vntill hee did vndertake this courſe; Hee got Staueſ-acre, and beate it ſmall, and then boyled it in faire water, making it ſtrong, and then ſtreined it gently through a fine cloath, ſuffering none of the Staueſacre to goe through; and in that he did well waſh his hawke; and when hee had her out of the water, helapped hervpin a Lambs skinne that was made warme and ready for that purpoſe, and therein kept her vntill ſhe was very neere dry, when hauing another skinne warmed, he put that about her, and ſo continued two houres, into which Lambes skinnes the vermin did runne, and ſo the hawke was made cleane and freed from her death.
            
            
               A receipt beyond all other, to take out the Lyme out of a Hawkes feathers.
               TAke Neates-foote oyle, any oyle elſe will neuer be gotten out of the feathers, and annoynt the place lymed therewith; that

done, draw the webbe of the feather euen as it groweth from the quill, betweene the fleſh of your fore-finger and the naile of your thumbe; with the naile neuer leaue working, vntill therewith you haue drawne the Lyme cleane out, and then you ſhall finde the feather looke with as good a gloſſe as any of the reſt, and ſtand ſmooth as you draw them.
            
            
               A receipt to be giuen to a Hawke that bloweth, and is ſhort or thicke-winded.
               I Was once asked by one of my friends what was good for ſuch an infirmity, I tolde him the tops of Roſemary leiſurely dryed betweene two warme Tyles, either made warme, and ſet vpon hot embers to continue them ſo; or in an Ouen, ſo ſoone as the bread was taken out; and when they were ſo well dryed as that they would be beaten to a fine powder, to giue of the powder in good aboundance to his hawke with her meate. I made it knowne vnto him that this was taught mee by one that was an ancient and skilfull Auſtringer; and withall tolde him, that I had made no vſe thereof, neither could I alleadge a reaſon why it ſhould be good; As he was a Faulconour, ſo was he a Cocke-maſter, and he tolde mee he had made vſe of it in ſuch manner for his Cockes; ſince when, for a hawke ſo troubled I haue made proofe of, and found it very profitable.
            
            
               
               A Medicine for the Wormes, wherewith all creatures (I thinke, as well as Hawkes) are troubled.
               
                  FLos ſulphuris giuen in her meate is very good, and ſo is Corolinum, otherwiſe called Seamoſſe dryed, and in powder giuen the Hawke with her meate. Puluis contra vermis is to be had at ſome Pothecaries, giuen with her meate in the morning, ſhee will not at all flye the worſe at night. Lauender-Cotten, minced and made into a pill with butter, and rouled vp in Sugar, is good. Caſtings of Wormewoode, and Saintuary are very good. Sodden Garlicke in my practiſe is better then any of theſe. There can no better thing be giuen to a long-winged hawke for the Fillenders; if ſo, it muſt then be granted, nothing can helpe digeſture better. You ſhall finde how it is ſodden in the Chapter for the diſeaſe in the head. I haue giuen euery night a Cloue to a ſhort-winged hawke, ſixe nights together. Wormeſeed giuen with meate, or Wormeſeede with Aloes, Butter, and two or three chiues of Saffron giuen in a pill, is very good. And I thinke ſo are a hundred more medicines for this diſeaſe; and there are more Hawkes dye hereof, then of all other diſeaſes beſides.
            
            
               
               A Medicine or Pill to be giuen to Hawke that hath the Wormes, whereof I make the beſt allowance.
               TAke Engliſh-Honie and clarifie it, take off the ſcumme with a feather when it hath boyled a little, and then it is clarified; let it boyle leiſurely vntill it groweth ſo ſtiffe as that you may make it vp in pills, which you ſhall thus approue; take a little out of it vpon a kniues poynt, and drop it vpon a Trencher, when it is cold you ſhall ſee whether it be ſtiffe enough, or no; then beate ſome Wormeſeede and put into it, and ſo make it vp in pills. I will tell you how I doe vſe to giue them; I lappe them vp in a ſingle white paper, of the thinneſt paper I can get, and then I put therein my pill, and tye the paper cloſe about with a thrid. I am very carefull not to touch the out-ſide of the paper, after I haue handled the pills before I waſh, for feare ſhe ſhould take any diſlike in the taſte. I put it into ſo thinne a paper that it may the ſooner diſſolue; for if it be in a thicke paper that will not ſo ſoone take moyſture. (I haue approued both) and then if ſhee offer to caſt it, ſhe may with ſo ſtrong paper caſt all: Which to preuent, if I know any thing my Hawke will diſlike, I ſhew her that, it will be a meanes to make her keepe it; otherwiſe I will haue in a readineſſe a wing of ſome Fowle, wherewith I

will tend her, ſometimes with ſhewing it, and ſometimes ſuffering her to plume, by which meanes you ſhall haue your pill or pils worke kindely. You may giue two as bigge as a ſmall Hazell-Nut to a Goſhawke, one to a Tarſell; it is a good ſcouring, beſides the benefit of killing Wormes. I haue heard very experienced Auſtringers ſay, that there is no killing of Wormes with any ſuch receipt as I haue mentioned; but their aduice is to beate a ſmall flint-ſtone to ſmall pummis, and to giue it her with her meat: And this they ſay muſt firſt breake the bed of Wormes, and then any of theſe receipts will kill them. I cannot vnderſtand where theſe wormes ſhould lye, that muſt haue this helpe, and without which the other cannot profit. I haue ſeene a ſmall grub worme in long-winged Hawkes, and eſpecially in the blancke Tarſels, that haue beene muted daily, ſometimes two, ſometimes three, and ſomtimes foure in a mute and more. And to kill theſe I haue laboured, but I will neuer approue it more, for I cannot doe it; and beſides, I thinke they rather benefite a hawke then doe any hurt: For I flew a Tarſell ſo troubled all his ſore-age, and when he was an entermewer, vntill after Chriſtmas at the Cocke, hee was a very high flyerthat yeers remain; & three yeares after he was a lead Hawke at the Brooke in Leiceſter-ſhiere, and all this time had theſe wormes, and hee was called by that name Wormes. I am put in minde of giuing a Hawke

Brimſtone, by ſpeaking of the pounded flint, and I haue very often approued it, to giue it in this manner to any hawke, broken like ſmall grauell, & at night giue it with her meate, & ſhe will in the morning bring it vp in her caſting: It will helpe greatly to cleane a Hawke, and breed a good ſtomacke. There is not ſo common a diſeaſe followeth a hawke as the wormes, and I haue found them in moſt feathered Fowles, but neuer any within the bowels, but in the body moſt aboundantly, and without all doubt the backe-worme, if a man were certaine his Hawke were ſo diſeaſed, both the pill and ſodden Garlicke with continuance would deſtroy it.
            
            
               A receipt for a Hawke that hath loſt her courage, and ioyeth not, or is lowe in fleſh.
               TAke a wilde and a well-fleſhed houſe Doue, and draw out a wing, you know what to pare away, and how to prepare it fit for your Hawke: Take a new-layed egge, whileſt it is warme, and warme a Porringer or Pewter-diſh againſt the fire, then breake the egge, and put the yolke thereinto, let it be broken a little with a ſpoone, and then drawe your meate through it, and as your Hawke is feeding, with a feather lay on more. I would haue this ſo quickly done, as that the Doue nor Egge ſhould loſe but little of their naturall heate, & by making it more hot

you make it worſe then the loſing of the heate. Vſe this but two or three mornings, & you ſhall finde your Hawke growe brauely vpon you. For a hawke to be proude and full of fleſh, is but a ſpurre or whetſtone to put her into all ill conditions if ſhee be wilde: But let her be gentle and not wilde, ſhee is able to kill any thing that is fit to be flowne vnto.
            
            
               Another receipt very good for the ſame purpoſe.
               TAke a pound of Beefe of a young beaſt, or more Beefe if you will, make it very cleane, not leauing either fat or ſtring therein: You may the better doe it becauſe the Beefe muſt be ſliced very thin, which when it is ſo ſliced, and well picked, lay it in a ſtill, and put thereto as much Claret wine, of the beſt high Country wine you can get, as may couer the Beefe, put thereto one or two ounces of white Suger-Candy, beaten to fine powder, and then ſtill them together, but let the ſtill be very temperately kept, and through this you may often drawe your Hawkes meate.
            
            
               
               How to draw a water that is cooling, and the propertie thereof is to kill any vnnaturall heate in the mouth or body, it is a great cleanſer, and increaſeth breath; it will keepe the body in good temper, and helpe the body diſtempered with heate.
               I Would gladly ſet down euery thing ſo plainly, as that there might neither be queſtion made of my meaning, nor that there ſhould be any thing miſtaken, for want of a true diſcription. Prim, of ſome called Prim-priuet, it is that which is planted in ſome Orchards, and in ſome Gardens, to beautifie the walls, and is kept with cutting, it doth carry a white flower, which when they are blowne, I would haue cleanely picked, taking nothing but the flower, let not your fire be kept ouer-raſh or ouer-hot, but let them be carefully diſtilled, and then put it into a glaſſe vntill you haue vſe of it, no hawke will diſlike the taſte of the water, and the water thus ſtilled hath a very good ſmell, but it leaueth a moſt ſtinking Still. If you ſhall giue her this water with her meate, you ſhall finde admirable profit therein: It is very good wherewith to enſayme a hawke of any kinde, for a long-winged hawke that is in ſummer flowne to the field, there neuer was or can be vſed any thing better, it is moſt true that in giuing ſomething to heate the ſtomacke, you may therewith ouer-heate

the liuer; and it is ſo for the liuer, giue ſomething to coole that, and ſo you may ouer-coole or kill the ſtomacke. But there is ſuch an excellent propertie in this water, as notwithſtanding it cooleth the liuer, yet it bettereth the ſtomacke, the vſe of this water will preuent many diſeaſes, for infirmities and ſickneſſe doe continually follow ſuch hawkes, as are not cleanely fed; but flowne fowle before they be well enſaymed, it will keepe thy Goſhawke and Tarſell in continuall health, if you be carefull in the enſayming of them, and not flying of them before they be cleane; If you will not be carefull, but thy ouerhaſty deſire of ſport, ſhall make thee flye them before they be fit to flye; then you ſhall haue from them for a little ſeaſon ſome ſport, but then the concluſion will be confuſion: to be weake and ſickly is the beſt hope can be had of a hawke het or flowne before ſhe be cleane, but to be het or flowne when ſhe is more then foule, ſo ſoone as colde weather doth come, be aſſured of the Pantiſe, and other diſeaſes which will fall into her feete and legges, and then as good pull off her head as keepe her. I know not any man that hath had the vſe thereof but my ſelfe, and I haue vſed it, this ſixteene or ſeauenteene yeares, and I did neuer impart to any man, but one Knight what it was, who to my knowledge did neuer cauſe it to be drawne.
            
            
               
               A very excellent medecine for a dangerous bruiſe, preſently to be giuen after the hurt.
               TAke Engliſh honey and clarefie it, and ſo ſoone as you haue ſo done, before it boyleth any more put into it halfe ſo much ſtonepitch or ſomething leſſe then there is honey, and then let it boyle againe: It ſhall not neede to boyle long, becauſe the pitch will make it ſtrong and faſt enough to make vp in pills; as ſoone as you can, giue her a large pill thereof, and although ſhee faſt aboue twelue houres after the receiuing, it is the better: I pray let mee make all plaine vnto you, for this is worthy to be had in good eſtimation, both of the Faulconer and Auſtringer. It is a practiſe of my owne deuiſing; and thus I vſed the ſame: I haue had diuers Tarſells flying at the Cocke, ſo hurt themſelues that they haue not beene able to ſtand or holde vp a wing, I haue preſently maled them, to keepe them warme vntill I came home, (I tell you this becauſe you ſhall vnderſtand that it is very dangerous to let them take colde before the receipt of this pill or pills, for making of them ſomething leſſe, you may giue two,) when I came home, I would keepe her ſtill maled vp, leſt ſhe ſhould catch colde vntill I had made her pills ready, when I would not yet vnmale her if I found it a dangerous bruiſe, but kepe her ſo all night or day, and I would be ſure that when

I did vnmale her to feede, or to ſee how ſhee could ſtand, it ſhould be in a very warme Chamber, where there ſhould be a good fire.
               I did flye a Goſhawke that was not my own, for which hawke I was offered fortie pounds, I could not, and her Maſter would not ſell her; the next yeare ſhee had ſuch a bruiſe vpon her body againſt a ſmall tree, not much bigger then my leg, croſſing to catch a Pheaſant-Cocke, that ſhee lay there to the beholders dead, and there ſhe had beene dead but that this accident happened very neere vnto one that was with me, when I came vnto her I ſaw her eyes ſtirre a little, I opened her mouth, and put my finger downe her throat, ſhee ſtirred no part of her body, I lapped her vp in a good-fellowes Ierkin that was with mee, and ſo I carryed her vnder my arme to a houſe two miles from thence, I found ſhe had life in her, & then I had hope; I gaue her two pills, ſuch as I haue formerly ſpoken of, ſhe did lye ſo lapped vp at the leaſt ſixteene houres, and when I did vnmale her to ſee her ſtrength, ſhe was very vnable to ſtand, and hardly able to offer to ſtand, I fed very ſhort, but with my care in one week I deliuered her to her Maſter, with ſome directions; in all the time I had her after her bruiſe ſhe neuer caſt any meate, but after I parted from her, ſhe would once in three or foure meales caſt part or all of her meate, my conſent was asked when I came thether, that her Conſulecum vinis.
                  
head might be pulled off, I would not yeeld to that: but vpon eaſie tearmes I tooke her home with mee.
               In the Strand I met with that worthy Barron who before had made meanes to buy her, and he asked mee, if I would not helpe him to that Goſhawke; I tolde him truly in what deſperate caſe ſhee was in, and all the truth. Hee ſaid you will recouer, you will recouer that; I promiſed if ſhe did recouer, he ſhould haue her, and at Eaſter-tearme (ſhee receiuing her hurt, neere Shrouetide) I did deliuer her a very ſound hawke, and I had for her thirty pounds, and her well-prouing was worth twenty pounds more vnto mee. One other Goſhawke I recouered, that wanted not much of her danger, and her Maſter ſolde her in Suſſex for fifteene or ſixteene pounds, and a young Goſhawke cleane mewed out of the mew. I dare write no vntruth, for this muſt be ouer-viewed by the actors: what ſhall I neede to ſet downe any more for this, knowing this to be ſo approued good? and which maketh it the more excellent, it is to be had in euery place, ſo is neither Parmaſite, nor Mumma, I could mention more but all worthleſſe in reſpect: If you will giue any thing elſe, let it be Mumma beaten into powder and ſo giuen with her meate, you ſhall finde it in the morning in her caſting, and it is very good where the other is vnknowne.
            
            
               
               A receipt for a wound or hurt taken either by a Dog, or the clawes of a Hare, or otherwiſe.
               HAue a ſpeciall care that the winde or colde enter not into the wound before you haue wherewith to dreſſe it; If it be where you can haue ſoueraigne Balme, there is nothing better, that is to be had but in few places: And therefore for want thereof, take a quantity of Springwater, and let it ſeeth, then take it from the fire, and put into it a peece of Roche-Allum, and ſome Engliſh-Honey, and ſo let them diſſolue in the water, the water being bloud-warme; therewithall waſh the ſore, it will keepe it cleane from putrifying, and heale it, but ſtill be carefull that it doth not take cold.
            
            
               A medicine for the Cray.
               THis griefe proceedeth of a hot & dry cauſe, and it is a dainty cure. Hawes diſtilled, and the meate drawne through the water is very good. To drawe your hawkes meate thorough Cowes-milke warme from the Cowe, is very good, and ſo approued.
            
            
               
               Another for the ſame.
               MIlke from the Cowe diſtilled is excellent good for that griefe; but thus followeth the diſcommodity, it cooleth and hurteth the ſtomacke. I haue knowne this water vſed for the ſtone, but the diſcommodity was ſoone found. But if you will diſtill a pinte and halfe of milke, and withall an ounce of white Suger-Candy finely pounded, it will rectifie all, it hindreth not its property for the Cray, and yet it doth now comfort the ſtomacke.
            
            
               Another for the ſame, and the beſt of any for the ſame.
               I Haue knowne ſome pare the end of a Candle to a ſmall quantity, and ſo put it into her tewell gently▪ and it hath doone good. But I vſe Caſtle-ſope, and thereof cut a peece an inch long in manner of a Suppoſita, and ſo put it vp, and ſo leaue it, this is very good: But withall I haue pared a little of ſuch Sope, and conueyed it into the gut of a Foule, being very carefull of the cleanely doing it, not knowing whether the taſte might offend, or no; ſo doone, I caſt my Hawke, and put it downe, and then I feede vpon it, to make her the better to put it ouer; this with the Suppoſita will ſo open & make glibbe

the paſſages, that you ſhall ſoone finde amendment in your Hawke.
            
            
               Otherwiſe for the ſame.
               I Was taught to put vp in the manner of a gliſter oyle of Roſes, with a Syrren.
            
            
               A receipt for a ſtraine or bruiſe in the foote.
               TAke a handfull of Mallowes, and boyle them either with Neates-foot-oyle, Gooſegreaſe, Capons-greaſe, or Hogges-greaſe, when they are well boyled, ſtreine them through a cloath, and then mingle with them good Aquavite, and let them boyle all together a little, and therewith annoynt the place.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   