
      
         
            
            
               
THE ARTE OF PROPHECYING: Or A TREATISE CONCERNING the sacred and onely true manner and methode of Preaching.
            
            First written in Latine by Master William Perkins: and now faithfully translated into English (for that it containeth many worthie things fit for the knowledge of men of all degrees) by Thomas Tuke.
            
            
               Nehem. 8. 4. 5. 6.
               And Ezra the Scribe stood vpon 
               1 
               a pulpit of wood, which hee had made for the preaching. And Ezra opened the booke before all the people: for he was aboue all the people: and when hee opened it, all the people stood vp. Moreouer, Ezra praised the Lord the great 
               2 
               God, and all the people answered, Amen, Amen,—vers. 7. In like manner Ieshua and Bani 
               3 
               &c. vers. 8. And they read in the booke of the law of God distinctly: and gaue the sense, and 
               4 
               caused them to vnderstand the reading.
            
            Imprinted at London by Felix Kyngston for E. E. and are to be sold in Pauls Churchyard at the signe of the Swan. 1607.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR WILLIAM ARMIN Knight.
            
               SIR, many and excellent benefites hath the Lord in mercy vouchsafed to vs these eight and fortie by-past yeeres together: of which this is not the least, if not the greatest, that hee hath dispelled the duskie clowdes of Popish darknesse as palpable as that of Egypt, and hath caused the Sunlight Exo. 10. 21. of the Gospell to shine cleerely in all our coasts. Hee sheweth his



word vnto vs, as he did vnto Iaacob, 
               Psa. 147. 19 his statutes and his iudgements, as he did sometimes to Israel. He hath giuen vs his Prophets and Embassadours, which doe serue like that cloude and pillar of fire to direct vs Exo. 13. 22 in our pilgrimage through the wildernesse of this wicked world into celestiall Canaan. Hee hath thrust forth many faithfull and industrious labourers into his Vineyard to prune and to dresse the vines of our soules, that we may bring foorth the grapes of pietie and the clusters of iustice; (vnlesse we will needs be like to the Cypresse, which, as Plinie saith, can indure no husbanding, but maketh that her maladie, which is a medicine to other trees) Amongst whom the Author of this learned Tractate did shew himselfe with the formost; carrying alwaies with him a Light of learning, and a Lampe of godly



liuing. And, qualis vita, finis ita; As he was a Lampe whiles he liued, so like a Lampe, alijs inseruiens seipsum consumpsit. His whole life was labour, seribenda dicens & legenda scribens. One whereof was this present discourse and platforme concerning the true vnderstanding and vsing of the Scriptures, written in his yonger yeeres: which I am bold to present and dedicate to your Worship in this plight you see; partly because it is a Thesaurus and store-house of excellent precepts, (as Domitius Piso saith that bookes should bee such) hauing in it 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , sufficient furniture to further perfection in that sacred science: and partly to demonstrate my gratitude, and deuoted affection to you, who haue alwaies bin a constant patrone (etiam minitante Fortuna) to my neerest and dearest friends.
            
               
Thus I take my humble leaue, desiring your kinde acceptance, and so commend your Worship with your whole progenie to the protection of the Lord. London, Ian. 1. 1606.
            
               Your Worships in all dutie
Thomas Tuke.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE FAITHFVLL MINISTERS OF THE GOSPELL: AND to all that are desirous of, and doe labour for the knowledge of Holy learning.
            
               THat common place of diuinitie, which concerneth the framing of Sermons, is both weightie and difficult, if there be any other throughout all that sacred science. For the matter, which it is to explicate and treate on, is Prophecie; an excellent gift indeede, whether we consider it in respect of dignitie, or of vse. The dignitie thereof appeareth, in that like a Ladie



it is highly mounted and carried a loft in a Chariot: whereas all other gifts, both of tongues and arts, attend on this like handmaides a loofe off. Answerable to this dignitie there is also a two folde vse: one, in that it serueth to collect the Church, and to accomplish the number of the Elect: the other, for that it driueth away the Woolues from the foldes of the Lord. For this is indeede that Flexanima, that allurer of the Soule, whereby mens froward mindes are mitigated and moued from an vngodly and barbarous life vnto Christian faith and repentance. This also is that Engine, which as it hath shaken (the foundation of) auncient heresies, so it hath in these few by-past yeares, cut asunder the sinews of that great Antichrist. Wherefore if it be demaunded which is the most excellent gift of all, doubtlesse the praise must be giuen to Prophecying. Now by how much the more excellent euery thing



is, by so much the more diligently it ought to be adorned with varietie and plentie of precepts. Therefore, when I saw this common place so handled of many, as that it would remaine naked and poore, if all other arts should call for those things, which are their owne: I perused the writings of Diuines, and hauing gathered some rules out of them, I haue couched them in that methode, which I haue deemed most commodious: that they might be better for vse, and fitter for the memorie. I doe also publish them, that they might be approoued, if they bring with them that which is good: if any euill, that they may receiue their deserued punishment. And whosoeuer thou art that pleasest to reade them, where thou art perswaded of this order of Preaching, which here I handle, walke on with me: where thou standest at a stay, inquire with me: or when. where thou perceiuest thine owne errors, returne to me: where thou



seest mine, call me back to thee. For that, which now liketh me, shall dislike me, if it like not gadlie and moderate minded men. But if any man shall carpe at this my trauaile, though very small, let him know, that my onely meaning is to benefite the Church of God: and that the conscience of my fact is a sufficient mu
               
                  ••
               ment against all calumnies. I doe now betake you to God, and this (tractate of the) art of Prophecying, both to you and to God. Anno 1592. Decemb. 12.
            
               WILLIAM PERKINS.
            
         
         
            
            
            The Analysis of the whole booke.
            
               The Arte of Prophecying. The parts thereof are two,
               
                  
                     
                        
                           1. Preaching: in which consider
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       1. The obiect, which is the word of God: in it note,
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             1. The excellencie thereof.
                                             
                                             
                                                
                                                   2. The parts, which are the two Testaments,
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            
                                                               1. The Old, whose bookes are,
                                                               
                                                               
                                                                  
                                                                     
                                                                        Historicall.
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                        Dogmaticall.
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                        Propheticall.
                                                                     
                                                                  
                                                               
                                                            
                                                         
                                                         2. The New.
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       2. The parts, which are
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   1. The preparatiō or prouision of the Sermon, cō
                                                         sisting of
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            
                                                               Interpretation of the Text
                                                               
                                                                  
                                                                     
                                                                        Analogicall and plaine. or,
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                        Crypticall and darke.
                                                                     
                                                                  
                                                               
                                                            
                                                         
                                                         
                                                            
                                                               The cutting or diuiding of it aright, consisting of
                                                               
                                                                  
                                                                     
                                                                        The resoluing or vntwisting of it.
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                        
                                                                           The applying of it
                                                                           
                                                                              
                                                                                 7. Waies of applying it.
                                                                                 
                                                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                       The parts, which concerne
                                                                                       
                                                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                                
                                                                                                   The vnderstanding by
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                            Doctrine.
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                            Redargution, or improouing.
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                                
                                                                                                   The Practise by
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                            Instructing.
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                            Correcting.
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
                                                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                           
                                                                        
                                                                     
                                                                  
                                                               
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                             
                                                
                                                   2. The vttering of the Sermon
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            The hiding of humane wisdome.
                                                         
                                                         
                                                            
                                                               The demōstration of the spirit, in
                                                               
                                                                  
                                                                     
                                                                        
                                                                           The speech, which must be
                                                                           
                                                                              
                                                                                 
                                                                                    Spirituall.
                                                                                 
                                                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                       Gracious: grace is of,
                                                                                       
                                                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                                
                                                                                                   1. The person, to wit, holinesse,
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                         1. An inward feeling.
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                         2. A good conscience.
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                         3. The feare of God.
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                         4. A loue of the people.
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                                
                                                                                                   2. Of the Ministerie,
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                            Authoritie.
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                            Zeale.
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
                                                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                           
                                                                        
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                        
                                                                           The gesture and action of
                                                                           
                                                                              
                                                                                 
                                                                                    The voyce.
                                                                                 
                                                                                 
                                                                                    The bodie.
                                                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                           
                                                                        
                                                                     
                                                                  
                                                               
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           2. Conceiuing of publique Prayer: in which note
                           
                           
                              
                                 1. The matter.
                                 
                                 2. The forme.
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       3. The parts,
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                Meditation.
                                             
                                             
                                                Ordering.
                                             
                                             
                                                Vttering.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
            THE ARTE OF PROPHECYING.
            
               CHAP. 1.
               
                  THe Arte or facultie of Prophecying is a sacred doctrine of exercising Prophecie rightly.
               Prophecie (or Prophecying) is a publique and solemne speech of the Prophet, pertaining to the worship of God, and to the saluation of our neighbour. 1. Cor. 14. 3. But he that prophecieth speaketh vnto men to edification, to exhortation and to consolation. Verse 24. But if all prophecie, and there come in one that beleeueth not, or one



vnlearned, he is rebuked of all men, and is 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  iudged of all men, Rom. 1. 9. God is my witnes, whom I serue (or worship 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) in my spirit in the Gospell of his Sonne.
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  Of the Preaching of the Word.
               
               
                  THere are two parts of Prophecie: Preaching of the Word, and Conceiuing of Prayers.
               For in speaking there are onely two duties of the Prophet, that is of the Minister of the word; to wit, Preaching of the word, and Praying vnto God in the name of the people. Rom. 12. Hauing prophecie, let vs prophecie according to the 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  proportion of faith. Gen. 20. 7. Deliuer the man his wife againe, for he is a Prophet: and when he shall pray for thee, thou shalt liue. For this cause the word (Prophecie) is giuen also to prayers. 1. Chron. 25. 1. The sonnes of Asaph,



and Heman and Ieduthun, who were singers, prophecied with Harpes, with Uials, and with cymbals. 1. King. 18. 26. The Prophets of Baal called vpon the name of Baal from morning to noone. 29. And when mid-day was passed, and they had prophecied vntill the offering of the euening sacrifice.
               
               And euery Prophet is partly the voyce of God, to wit, in preaching: and partlie the voyce of the people, in the acte of praying, Ier. 15. 19. If thou take away the precious frō the vile, thou shalt be as it were My Mouth. Nehe. 8. 6. And Hezra blessed the Lord the great God, and all the people answered Amen.
               
               Preaching of the word is Prophecying in the name and roome of Christ, whereby men are called to the state of Grace, and conserued in it. 2. Cor. 5. 19. And hath committed to vs the word of reconciliation. 20. Therefore wee are Embassadours for Christ: as though God did beseech you by vs, we pray you in the name of Christ, that ye be reconciled to God. 2. Thes. 2. 13. 14. God hath from the beginning elected you to saluation, through sanstification of the Spirit, and faith embracing the trueth: whereunto



he called you by our Gospell. Rom. 1. 16. The Gospel is the power of God to saluation to euery one that beleeueth. Prou. 29. 18. When there is no vision the people are naked. Rom. 10. 14.
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  Of the Word of God.
               
               
                  THe perfect and equall Or, the word of God is the whole and onely matter, about which preaching is exercised: it is the field in which the Preacher must containe himselfe. obiect of Preaching is the Word of God. Lok. 16. 29. They haue Moses and the Prophets, let them heare them. Mat. 23. 2. The Scribes and Pharises sit in Moses chaire, that is, they teach the doctrine of Moses which they doe professe. 3. All therefore whatsoeuer they bid you obserue, that obserue and doe.
               
               The Word of God is the wisedome of God concerning the trueth, which is according vnto godlinesse descending from aboue. Iam. 3. 17. But the wisedome, which



is from 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  aboue is first pure, &c. Tit. 1. 1. Paul a Seruant of God—according to the acknowledging of the trueth, which is according vnto godlines.
               
               Admirable is the excellencie of the Word, which is euident partly by the nature thereof, partly by the operation.
               The excellencie of the nature is either the perfection thereof, or the eternitie.
               The perfection is either the sufficiencie or the puritie. The sufficiencie is that, whereby the word of God is so compleat, that nothing may be either put to it, or taken from it, which appertaineth to the proper end thereof. Psal. 19. 7. The Law of the Lord is perfect, conuerting the soule. Deut. 12. 32. Whatsoeuer I commaund you, take heede yee doe it: thou shalt put nothing thereto, nor take ought therefrom. Reuel. 22. 18. 19.
               The puritie thereof is, whereby it remaineth entire in it selfe, voide of deceit and errour, Psalm. 12. 6. The words of the Lord are pure words, as siluer tried in a furnace of earth fined seuen times.
               
               The eternity of the word is that, whereby



it abideth inuiolable, and cannot passe vntill all that, which it commandeth, bee fully accomplished, Matth. 5. 18.
               The excellencie of operation is that, wherby it is endowed with virtue; first to discerne the spirit of man, Heb. 4. 12. For the word of God is liuely, and mightie in operation, and sharper then any two-edged sword, and entreth through euen to the deuiding asunder of the soule and spirit, and of the ioynts and the marrow, aad discerneth the thoughts and intents of the heart. Secondly, to bind the conscience. Iam. 4. 12. There is one Law-giuer, who is able to saue and to destroy. Esa. 33. 21. The Lord is our Iudge, the Lord is our Law-giuer, the Lord is our King, he will saue vs. To bind the conscience is to constraine it either to accuse vs or to excuse vs of sinne before God.
               The Word is in the holy Scripture.
               The Scripture is the word of God written in a language fit for the Church by men immediately called to be the Clerks or Secretaries of the holy Ghost. 2. Pet. 1. 21. For prophecie came not in old time by the will of man, but the holy men of God



spake as they were carried and mooued by the 
                  * 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  holy Ghost.
               
               It is called Canonicall, because it is as it were a Canon, that is to say, a Rule or Line of the Master workman, by the helpe whereof the truth is both first to be found out, and also afterwards to be examined. Gal. 6. 16. And as many as walke according to this 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  Canon or Rule. Therefore the supreame and absolute determination and iudgement of the controuersies of the Church ought to be giuen vnto it.
               The Summe of the Scripture is conteined in such a syllogisme (or forme of reasoning, as this is which followeth.) The Maior, or Proposition. 
                  The true Messias shall be both God and Man of the seede of Dauid; he shall be borne of a Uirgin; he shall bring the Gospell forth of his Fathers bosome; he shall satisfie the Law; he shall offer vp himselfe a sacrifice for the sinnes of the faithfull; he shall conquer death by dying and rising againe; he shall ascend into heauen; and in his due time hee shall returne vnto iudgement. But 
                  The Minor or Assumption. 
                  Iesus of Nazaret the Sonne of Mary is such a one; He 
                  The conclusion. 
                  therefore is the true Messias.
               
               In this syllogisme the Maior is the scope



or principall drift in all the writings of the Prophets: and the Minor in the writings of the Euangelists and Apostles.
               The Scripture is either the New Testament or the Old.
               The old testament is y• first part of the Scripture, written by the Prophets in the Hebrew tongue, or at least in the Chaldie, vnfolding chiefely that old couenant of works. Luk. 16. 29. and 24. 27. And he began at Moses, and at all the Prophets, and interpreted vnto them in all the Scriptures the things which were written of him.
               
               It is distinguished by bookes, which are either Historicall, or Dogmaticall, or Propheticall.
               The Historicall bookes are stories of things done, for the illustration and confirmation of that doctrine which is propounded in other bookes. 1. Cor. 10. 11. Now al these things came vpo them for 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  ensamples: and were written to admonish vs. Rom. 15. 4. For whatsoeuer things were written afore-time, are written for our learning.
               
               These books are in number fifteene.
               1 Genesis, which is an historie of the creation, fall, promise, and of the state of



the Church conserued (and shut vp) in priuate families.
               2 Exodus, which is an historie of the deliuerance of the Israelites from the Aegyptians, of their going out of Aegypt, of the promulgation of the Law, and of the Tabernacle.
               3 Leuiticus, which containeth a storie of the Ceremoniall worship.
               4 Numbers, which is an historie of their martiall marching into the land of Canaan.
               5 Deuteronomie, which is a commentarie repeating and explicating the Lawes out of the fore-said bookes.
               6 The booke of Ioshua, which declareth their entrance into, and possession of the land of Canaan vnder Ioshua.
               7 The book of the Iudges, which comprehendeth an historie of the corrupt and miserable condition of the Church and Common-wealth of Israel from Ioshua to Eli.
               8 The booke of Ruth, which is an historie concerning the mariages and posteritie of Ruth.
               9 The first and second booke of Samuel,


                  
which is a storie of things done vnder Eli and Samuel Priests, and vnder Saul and Dauid Kings.
               10 The first and second booke of Kings, which maketh a narratiō of things atchieued in the daies of the Kings of Israel and Iudah.
               11 The first and second booke of Chronicles, which is a methodicall historie of the beginning, increase, and ruine of the people of Israel, seruing to explaine and shew the Line or Linage of Christ.
               12 The booke of Ezra, which containeth an historie of their returne from captiuitie in Babylon, and of the beginning of the Restoring of the citie.
               13 The booke of Nehemiah, which speaketh of the restoring of the city which was to be finished.
               14 The booke of Hester, which is an historie of the preseruation of the Church of the Iewes in Persia by Hester.
               
               15 The booke of Iob, which is an history intreating of the causes of tentations, as also of his manifold conflicts, and lastly of his happie issue.
               The Dogmaticall bookes are those,



which teach and prescribe the Doctrine of Diuinitie.
               These are foure in number.
               1 The booke of Psalmes, which containeth sacred songes to be fitted for euerie condition both of the Church and the particular members therof, and also to be sung with grace in the heart, Col. 3. 16.
               2 The booke of Prouerbes, which is a treatise of Christian manners, teaching pietie towards God, and iustice towards our Neighbour.
               3 The Eeclesiastes. booke of the Preacher, which discloseth the vanity of al humane things, so farre forth as they are vsed without the feare of God.
               4. The 
                  The booke of Canticles. 
                  Song of Songs, which speaketh of the mutuall communion of Christ with the Church, vnder an allegorie of a Or husband and spouse. Bridegroome and his Bride.
               The Prophetical books are Predictions, either of the iudgements of God for the sinnes of the people, or of the deliuerance of the Church, which is to bee perfited at the comming of Christ.
               But with these predictions That is, the Prophets they doe mingle the doctrine of repentance, and



doe almost alwaies vse consolations in Christ to them that doe repent.
               It is their custome also for the helping of their hearers memorie and vnderstanding to propound their sermons brieflie, which they made at large. Esa. 8. 1. Moreouer the Lord said vnto me, take thee a great roule, and write in it with a mans penne. Hab. 2. 2. Write the vision, and make it plaine vpon tables, that he may run that readeth it.
               
               Prophecies are either greater or lesser.
               Greater are such as do more plentifullie deliuer all those things that are foretold; as the prophecie of Esay, Ieremie, Ezekiel, Daniel.
               
               Hitherto belong the Lamentations of Ieremie, touching the miserie of the people of the Iewes about the time of the death of Iosiah.
               Lesser prophecies are those, which intreate more sparinglie or briefely of all those things that are foretold, or at least of some of them; as the prophecie of Hosea, Ioel, Amos, Obediah, Ionas, Michah, Nahum, Habakuk, Zephanie, Hagge, Zacharie, Malachie.
               
               Thus much for the Old testament.
               
                  
The New Testament is the second part of the Scripture written in the Greeke tongue by the Apostles, or at least approued of them, propounding plainely the doctrine of the new couenant. Eph. 2. 20. And are built vpon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles.
               
               Peter approued the Gospel of Marke, at whose motion and appointment it was written by Marke, as it pleaseth Nicephorus to auerre, Lib. 2. cap. 45. And Iohn, that wrote the Gospell, approued the Gospell of Luke. It is of small moment, which is reported by Eusebius; to wit, that it is apparent by two places (2. Tim. 2. 8. and Rom. 2. 16.) that Paul was the author of that Gospell, which is called Lukes. For Paul doth not here speake of any one booke, but of his whole ministerie: for hee addeth, In * which I suffer trouble as an euill doer euen vnto bonds, 2. Tim. 2. 9. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
               
               The new Testament containeth partly Histories, and partly Epistles. The Histories are:
               1 The foure Gospels of Matthew, Marke, Luke, and Iohn: which are an history



of the life, deedes, and doctrine of Christ exhibited vnto the world, continuing from his conception euen vntill his ascension into heauen.
               And there are foure writers: two that were hearers, and two that were eye-witnesses, that they might giue greater assurance of the truth of the historie.
               The difference betwixt the Euangelists is on this wise: Matthew layeth open the doctrines which Christ deliuered. Marke sets downe the historie briefly: yet did he not make an abridgement of the Gospell which Matthew wrote, as Hierome supposed. For hee begins his discourse in a diuers manner, and proceedes in another order, partly intreating of things more largely, and partlie interlacing of new matters. Luke aimeth at or frameth a perfect historie, and described in a certaine order. Iohn is almost wholy taken vp in laying open the Godhead and benefit of Christ, which is deriued from his Godhead vnto vs.
               Hierome distinguisheth the Euangelists by their beginnings or entrance. He saith Matthew is like a man, because hee



begins with the Man-hood of Christ. He likens Marke to a Lion, because hee begins with the preaching of Iohn, which was like the roaring of a Lion. He compares Luke to an Oxe, because he beginneth with Zacharie the Priest offering his sacrifice. He compareth Iohn to an Eagle, because he doth (as it were) so are vp aloft and begin with the Godhead of Christ.
               2 The Acts of the Apostles, which is an orderly historie, specially relating the deeds of Peter and Paul: that there might be an ensample of gouerning the Church extant. 2. Tim. 3. 10. 11.
               3 The Reuelation which is a propheticall historie concerning the condition of the Church from the age in which Iohn the Apostle liued vnto the ende of the world.
               The Epistles follow. 1. thirteene Epistles of Paul.
               
                  1 To the Romanes, of iustification, sanctification, and the dueties of Christian life.
                  2 The first to the Corinthes, concerning the reforming of the abuses of the Church of Corinth.
                  
                     
3 The second to the Corinthes, containing chieflie the defence of himselfe and of his Apostleship against his aduersaries.
                  4 To the Galatians about iustification by faith without the workes of the Law.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 5 To the Colossians,
                                 
                                 6 To the Philippians
                                 
                                 7 To the Ephesians
                                 
                                 8 The 1. to the Thes.
                                 
                                 9 The 2. to the Thes.
                                 
                              
                           
                           Which cōfirme the Churches in doctrine, and in the dueties of Christian life.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 10 The 1. to Timothie:
                                 
                                 11 The 2. to Timothie:
                                 
                              
                           
                           Which prescribe the forme of ordering the Church aright.
                        
                     
                  
                  12 The Epistle to Titus, of ordering the Church of the Cretians.
                  13. To Philemon, of receiuing Onesimus.
               
               The Epistle to the Hebrewes, concerning the person and offices of Christ, and of faith bringing foorth fruit in good workes.
               The Epistle of Iames, concerning works to be ioyned with faith.
               The first and second Epistle of Peter, touching sanctification and the works of new obedience.
               
                  
The first Epistle of Iohn, concerning the signes of fellowship with God.
               The second Epistle of Iohn to the elect Ladie, about perseuerance in the truth.
               The third Epistle of Iohn to Gayus, concerning hospitalitie and constancie in that which is good.
               The Epistle of Iude, of constancie in the faith against false Prophets.
               
                  And thus the Canonicall Scripture is distinguished by her bookes.
               
               Now there are verie strong proofes, which shew that she alone is the word of God, and no other besides.
               Of these proofes one doth make a man certainelie to Probatio 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , & 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . know the same, the other doth but declare or testifie it.
               Of the former kind there is onelie one, namely the inward testimony of the holy Ghost speaking in the Scriptures, and not only telling a man within in his heart, but also effectually perswading him that these bookes of the Scripture are the word of God. Isai. 59. 21. My Spirit, that is vpon thee, and my words which I haue put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth—from henceforth euen for euer.
               
               
                  
The manner of perswading is on this wise: The Eelect hauing the Spirit of God doe first discerne the voyce of Christ speaking in the scriptures. Moreouer, that voyce, which they doe discerne, they doe approoue: and that which they doe approue, they doe beleeue. Lastly, beleeuing they are (as it were) sealed with the seale of the Spirit. Ephe. 1 13. Wherein also after that ye beleeued, yee were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise.
               
               The Church also may beare witnesse of the Canon, perswade she cannot. For by this meanes the voyce of the Church should be of greater force then the voyce of God: and the whole state of mans saluation should depend vpon men; than which what can be said to be more miserable?
               
                  Obiect. The Scripture is the word of God by it selfe, but it is not so to vs, but by the iudgement of the Church. Ans. 1. The distinction is vaine. For, the first part thereof sheweth the manner, whereby the Scripture is the word of God: the latter part sheweth not the manner how, but the person to whom. 2. The Scripture doth



also testifie the same thing with that kind of testimonie, which is surer euen then all the oathes of men. For we haue the voyce of the holy Ghost speaking in the Scripture: who doth also worke in our hearts a certaine (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) full perswasion of the Scriptures, when we are exercised in hearing, reading and meditating of thē. Neither doe we beleeue a thing, because the Church saith it is to beleeued: but therefore we doe beleeue a thing, because that which the Church speaketh, the Scripture did first speake. Yea the Church cannot stand, nor yet be imagined without faith: faith is not without the word: which word is the Rule or Obiect of faith: and not the iudgement, though it be of most holy men. 3. He which doubteth of the Scriptures, will doubt as well of the testimonie of the Church.
               
                  Obiect. 2. The Church hath a iudgement to determine of matters, Act. 15. 28. It seemeth good to the holy Ghost and to vs. Ans. 1. The soueraigne or supreame iudgement concerning matters of faith belongeth to the holy Ghost speaking in the Scriptures. The ministerie of iudgement



(or a ministeriall iudgement) is only giuen vnto the Church: because she must iudge according to the Scriptures: and because she doth not this alwaies, but sometimes faileth. 2. The Apostles were present at that Councell which was held at Ierusalem, who were men that had authoritie which was * of it selfe to be beleeued, 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . which authoritie the Ecclesiasticall ministery now hath not.
               The proofe of declaration or testification is that, which doth not demonstrate or perswade, but only testifie, and by certaine tokens approue the true Canon. This proofe is manifold.
               First, the perpetuall consent of the Church: of the ancient Church of the Iewes. Rom. 3. 2. For chieflie, because vnto them were of credit committed the Oracles of God. And of the new and latter Church. 1. From Christ and the Apostles, who cited testimonies foorth of those bookes.
               2. From the Fathers.

                     First, Origen, as Eusebius testifieth, Lib. 6. 18. & 23.
                     2. Melito, as the same Eusebius witnesseth;



                        Lib. 4.
                     3. Athanasius.
                     
                     4. Cyril, Serm. 4.
                     5. Cyprian, or rather Ruffine in his exposition of the Creed.
                     6. In his preface vpon the first Psalme.
                     7. Hierome, in Prologo Gal. and in his preface vpon the bookes of Salomon.
                     
                     8. Epiphanius, in his booke of weights and measures.
                     9. Damascene in his fourth booke of faith, chap. 18.
                     10. Gregorie, Moral. on Iob. lib. 9. chap. 27.
                  
               
               3. In Councels, the Nicene, and Laodiccan. Can. 59.
               With these agree Hugo de Sancto Victore in his first booke of Sacraments, chap. 7. N. Lyra in his prologue vpon the bookes of Aprocrypha. Hugo Cardinalis in prologo in Iosuam.
               
               Secondly, the consent in part made by the Gentiles, and enemies affirming the same things, which are deliuered in holie Scriptures.
               1. Of the creation spake Homer, and Plato in Timaeo.
               
               
                  
2. Of Christ, Iosephus lib. 20. Antiquit. cap. 6. & 8. and in his sixt booke of the warre of the Iewes, chap. 8. and booke the 6. chap. 25. 27. 28. 47.
               3. Of the Redeemer of the world, who was to be exhibited in the last times, prophecied the Sibylls, as Lactantius recordeth, lib. 4. cap. 6. and Cicero, lib. 2. de Diuinat. and Virgil in the fourth Eclogue.
               4. Of the miracles of Christ, Suetonius speaketh in Nero: and Tacitus, lib. 5. & 20.
               5. Of the Wisemens starre, Plin. lib. 2. &. 25.
               6. Of the slaughtering of the infants, Macrobus in Satur.
               
               7. Of the death of Herod Agrippa, Iosephus in his 19. booke of Antiquities, chap. 7.
               8. Of the flood, Berosus in those fragments which are extant. Iosephus Antiq. booke 1. chap. 3. And the Poets.
               9. Of the tower of Babel Eupolemus speaketh, as Eusebius testifieth, De praeparat. Euangel.
               
               10. Of the Doue which Noe sent out, Plutarch mentioneth, Lib. quod Bruta



sunt rationalia.
               
               11. Of Iaphet the sonne of Noe the Poets fable many things.
               12. Of Abrahams sacrifice, Alexander Polyhist.
               
               13. Of the miracles of Moses, Plinie speaketh: though he do ill in calling him a Magitian.
               Thirdly, the Antiquitie of the word, for it cōtaineth in it a narration of things done from the beginning of the world. But the most ancient humane Historie whatsoeuer was not written by any before the daies of Ezra and Nehemiah, who were about the yeare of the worlds creation 3500. three thousand and fiue hundreth.
               Fourthly, the most certaine accomplishment of the prophecies: as are these, of the calling of the Gentiles: of Antichrist: of the apostasie of the Iewes, &c.
               Fiftly, the matter thereof: which is of one true God, of the true worship of God, and that God is the Sauiour.
               Sixtly, the consent of all the parts of the Scripture.
               Seauenthly, the miraculous preseruation of the Scriptures in the perils of the



Church, and in the time of generall reuolting.
               Eightly, the operation thereof: for it conuerteth men, and though it bee flatlie contrarie to the reason and affections of men, yet it winneth them vnto it selfe.
               Ninthly, it is full of maiestie in the simplenes of the words. Lastly the holy penmen set downe their owne corruptions: and Moses commendeth himselfe, saying that he was the meekest of all men; which argueth that they were led by the holie Ghost. And Christ, who is described in the Gospell, affirmeth very plainely that he is the sonne of God, and that he is one with God the father, and challengeth all the glorie of God vnto himselfe. Which if it had not bin right and true, he should haue felt the wrath of God with Adam and with Herod, who would needes bee like vnto God. But on the contrarie, God hath reuenged his death both vpon Herod, and vpon the Iewes, and vpon Pilate, and vpon those Emperours that persecuted the Church.
               And thus we haue seene the 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . tokens of the Scripture. Whereby it appeareth that



the booke of Tobit, the prayer of Manasses, the boooke of Iudith, the booke of Baruch, the Epistle of Ieremy, the additions to Daniel, the third and fourth booke of Ezra, the additions to the book of Hester, the two bookes of Machabees, the booke of Wisedome, and Ecclesiasticus are not to be reckoned in the Canon. Reas. 1. They are not written by the Prophets. 2. They are not written in Hebrew. 3. Christ and his Apostles alledged in the new Testament no testimonies out of those bookes. 4. They containe some feigned things, and contrarie to the Scriptures.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  Of the interpretation of the Scriptures.
               
               
                  HItherto hath been spoken of the obiect of Preaching. The parts thereof are two. Preparation for the sermon, and the Promulgation or vttering of it. Matth. 13. 52. Then said he vnto them, therefore euery Scribe, which is



taught vnto the kingdome of heauen, is like vnto an housholder, which bringeth forth out of his treasure both new and old.
               
               In preparation priuate studie is with diligence to be vsed. 1. Tim. 4. 13. Till I come giue attendance to reading, to exhortation, and to doctrine. 1. Pet. 1. 10. Of the which saluation the Prophets haue inquired and searched, which prophecied of the grace that should come vnto you. Dan. 9. 2. In the first yeere of his raigne I Daniel vnderstood by bookes the number of the yeeres.
               
               Concerning the studie of Diuinitie take this aduice. First, diligently imprint both in thy mind and memory the substance of Diuinitie described with definitions, diuisions, and explications of the properties. Secondly, proceede to the reading of the Scriptures in this order. Vsing a grammaticall, rhetoricall, and logicall Opening of the text. analysis, and the helpe of the rest of the arts, reade first the Epistle of Paul to the Rom. after that the Gospell of Iohn (as being indeed the keyes of the new Testament) and then the other books of the new Testamēt. will be more easie when they are read. When all this is done, learne first the dogmaticall



bookes of the old Testament, especiallie the Psalmes: then the Propheticall, especially Esay: Lastly the historicall, but chieflie Genesis. For it is likelie that the Apostles and Euangelists read Esay and the Psalmes very much. For there are no bookes of the old Testament, out of which we can reade more testimonies to be cited, then out of these. There are about threescore places alledged out of Esay: and threescore and foure out of the Psalmes. Thirdly, out of Of sound iu de ement: or sound, & iudicious, and consonant to Gods word. orthodoxall writings, we must get aid not onely from the latter, but also from the more ancient Church. Because Sathan hath raised vp from the dead the old Heretiques, that he might hinder the restoratiō of the Church, which is begun to bee made in our time. For the Antitrinitaries haue newly varnished that opinion of Arius and Sabellius. The Anabantists renew the doctrines or sects of the Essees, Catharists, Enthusiasts, and Donatists. The Swenkseldians reuiue the opinions of the Eutychians, Enthusiasts, &c. Menon followeth Ebion: and the Papists resemble the Pharisies, Encratites, Tatians, Pelagians. The Libertines



renew the opinions of the Gnosticks and Carpocratians. Seruetus hath reuiued the heresies of Samosatenus, Arrius, Eutyches, Marcion, and Apollinaris. Lastly, the Schismatiques, that separate themselues from euangelical Churches, receiue the opinions, facts, and fashions of Pup
                        •
                     anus in Cyprian, of the Audians, and Donatists. Therefore in like manner, wee must not so much seeke for new repealings and confutations of these heresies, as wee are for our vse to fetch those ancient ones out of Councils and Fathers, and to accompt them as approued and firme. Fourthly, those things, which in studying thou meetest with, that are necessarie and worthie to be obserued, thou must put in thy tables or Common-place books, that thou maiest alwaies haue in a readines both old and new. Fiftly, before all these things God must carnestly be sued vnto by prayer, that hee would blesse these meanes, and that he would open the meaning of the Scriptures to vs that are blind. Psalm. 119. 18. Open mine eies, that I may see the wonderfull things of thy Law. Reuel. 3. 18. I aduise thee to buy gold for thee—and



to annoint thine eyes with eye-salue, that thou maist see.
               
               Hitherto pertaineth the framing of Common-place bookes. Concerning which obserue this slender counsel. 1. Haue in readinesse common-place heads of euery point of diuinitie. 2. Distinguish the formost pages of thy paper booke into two columnes, or equall parts lengthwise. In euery one of those pages set in the top the title of one head or chiefe point, the contrarie side remaining in the meane while emptie, that fresh paper may be put to. 3. All things, which thou readest, are not to be written in thy book, but those things that are worthie to bee remembred, and are seldome met with-Neither must thou put the words of the Author in thy common places, but briefly note downe the principall points of stories and of things, that thou mayst know from what author to fetch them, when thou shalt haue vse: and make a point in the author himselfe, that thou mayst know, that the thing is there handled, which thou wrotest in thy common-place booke. 4. Because some things do



very often offer thēselues with a doubtful signification, so as that thou canst not tell, if thou write thē in thy common places, from whence to fetch them, therefore to thy common places thou must ioyne an alphabeticall table. 5. Alwaies prouided that thou trust not too much to thy places. For it is not sufficient to haue a thing written in thy booke, vnlesse it be also diligentlie laid and locked vp in thy memorie.
               Preparation hath two parts, Interpretation, and right diuision or 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  cutting.
               
               Interpretation is the 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  Opening of the words and sentences of the Scripture, that one entire and naturall sense may appeare.
               The Church of Rome maketh 4. senses of the scriptures, the literall, allegoricall, tropological, & anagogicall, as in this her example. Melchizedek offered bread and wine. The literall sense is, that the King of Salem with meate which he brought, refreshed the souldiers of Abraham being tyred with trauell. The allegoricall is, that the Priest doth offer vp Christin ye Masse. The tropologicall is, therefore something



is to be giuen to the poore. The Anagogicall is, that Christ in like manner being in heauen, shall be the bread of life to the faithfull. But this her deuice of the fourefold meaning of the scripture must be exploded and reiected.
               
                  There is one onelie sense, and the same is the literall. An allegorie is onely a certaine manner of vttering the same sense. The Anagoge and Tropologie are waies, whereby the sense may be applied.
               The principall interpreter of the Scripture is the holy Ghost. 2. Pet. 1. 20. So that ye first know this, that no prophecie in the Scripture is of any priuate 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  interpretation. Moreouer, he that makes the law, is the best and the highest interpreter of the law.
               The supreame and absolute meane of interpretation is the Scripture it selfe. Nehem. 8. 8. And they read in the booke of the Law of God distinctly, and gaue the sense, and caused them to vnderstand by the Scripture it selfe, per Scripturam ipsam.
               
               The meanes subordinated to the scripture are three; the Analogie of faith, the circumstances of the place propounded,



and the comparing of places together.
               The analogie of faith is a certaine abridgement or summe of the Scriptures, collected out of most manifest and familiar places. The parts thereof are two. The first concerneth faith, which is handled in the Apostles Creede. The second concerneth charitie or loue, which is explicated in the ten Commaundements. 2. Tim. 1. 13. Keepe the true 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  paterne of the wholsome words, which thou hast heard of me, with faith and loue which is in Christ Iesus.
               
               The circumstances of the place propounded are these: Who? to whom? vpon what occasion? at what time? in what place? for what end? what goeth before? what followeth?
               
               The collation or comparing of places together, is that, whereby places are set like parallels one beside another, that the meaning of them may more euidentlie appeare. Act. 9. 22. But Saul increased the more in strength, and confounded the Iewes, which dwelt at Damascus, confirming (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , that is, conferring or conioyning of places of Scriptures, as Artificers



being about to compact or ioyne a thing together are wont to fit all the parts amongst themselues, that one of them may perfectly agree with each other) that this was that Christ.
               
               Collation of places is two-fold. The first is the comparing of the place propounded with it selfe cited and repeated else-where in holy writ. Esa. 6. 10. Make the heart of this people fat, make their eares heauie, and shut their eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and heare with their eares, and vnderstand with their hearts, and conuert, and he heale them. This place is sixe times repeated in the new testament. Mat. 13. 14. Marke 4. 12. Luke 8. 10. Iohn 12. 40. Act. 28. 27. Rom. 11. 8.
               Places repeated haue often alterations for sundrie causes. These causes are, first exegeticall, that is, for exposition sake, as
               Psal. 78. 2. compared with Mat. 13. 35.
               
                  
                     
                        I will opē my mouth in a parable: I will declare occulta. things hidden from of old.
                        I will opē my mouth in parables, and will vtter the things which haue been kept secret from the foundation of the world.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           Psal. 78. 24.
                        
                        
                           Iohn 6. 31.
                        
                     
                     
                        He gaue them of the wheat of heauen.
                        He gaue the bread from heauen to eate.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Isai. 28. 16.
                        
                        
                           Rom. 9. 33.
                        
                     
                     
                        Behold I will lay in Sion a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foū
                           dation. He that beleeueth shall not make bast.
                        Behold, I lay in Sion a stumbling block, and a rocke to make men fal, and euery one that beleeueth in him shall not be ashamed.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Psal. 110. 1.
                        
                        
                           1. Cor. 15. 25.
                        
                     
                     
                        Sit thou at my right hand vntill I make thine enemies thy foot stoole.
                        He must raigne till he haue put all his enemies vnder his feet.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Psal. 116. 10.
                        
                        
                           2. Cor. 4. 13.
                        
                     
                     
                        I beleeued, quia. because I did speake.
                        I beleeued, and therefore haue I spoken.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Gen. 13. 15.
                        
                        
                           Gal. 3. 16.
                        
                     
                     
                        All the land which thou seest, will I giue vnto thee, and to thy
                        Now to Abraham and to his seede were the promises made.
                     
                     
                        

                           
seede for euer.
                        He saith not vnto the seedes, as speaking of many: but, and to thy seed, as of one, which is Christ.
                     
                  
               
               A second cause is diacriticall, or for discerning sake, that places, and times and persons might bee mutuallie distinguished.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Michah 5. 2.
                        
                        
                           Mat. 6.
                        
                     
                     
                        And thou Bethlehem Ephrathah art little to be among the Princes of Iudah: out of thee shall hee come forth to me, that shall be the ruler in Israel.
                        And thou Bethlehem in the land of Iudah art not the least among the Princes of Iudah: for out of thee shall come the gouernour, that shall feed my people Israel.
                     
                  
               
               Thirdly, these causes are circumscriptiue: or for limitation sake, that the sense and sentence of the place might be truelie restrained, according as the minde and meaning of the holy Ghost was.
               
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Deut. 6. 13.
                        
                        
                           Mat. 4. 10.
                        
                     
                     
                        Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and shalt serue him.
                        Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him onelie shalt thou serue.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Isai. 29. 13.
                        
                        
                           Matth. 15. 8.
                        
                     
                     
                        This people draweth neere with their mouth and honor me with their lips: but their heart they reremooue farre from me: and their reuerence towards mee is by the commandemēt of men.
                        When this people draweth neere vnto me, they honour mee with their mouth and with their lippes, but they remooue their heart farre from me. 9. In vaine doe they worship me, teaching for doctrines the cō
                           mandements of men.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Gen. 2. 24.
                        
                        
                           Mat. 19. 5.
                        
                     
                     
                        Wherefore a man shall leaue his father and his mother, and shall cleane vnto his wife, and they shall be one flesh.
                        Wherefore a man shall leaue father and mother, & shal cleane vnto his wife, & they which were two shall be one flesh.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        

                           
                           Isai. 50. 20.
                        
                        
                           Rom. 11. 26.
                        
                     
                     
                        And the Redeemer shall come vnto Sion, and vnto them that turne from iniquitie in Iacob, saith the Lord.
                        The Deliuerer shall come out of Sion, and shall turne away the vngodlines from Iacob.
                     
                  
               
               A fourth cause is for application sake, that the type might bee fitted vnto the trueth: and the generall to a ceretaine speciall, and so contrariwise.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Ionas 1. 17.
                        
                        
                           Matth. 12. 39.
                        
                     
                     
                        Now the Lord had prepared a great fish to swallow vp Ionah. And Ionah was in the bellie of the fish three daies, and three nights.
                        An euill and adulterous generation seeketh a signe, but no signe shall be giuen vnto it, saue the signe of the Prophet Ionas. 40. For as Ionas was three dayes and three nights in the whales bellie: So shall the Son of Man be, &c.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           Esay 61. 1.
                        
                        
                           Luk. 4. 18.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           The Spirit of the Lord God is vpō me: therefore hath the Lord annointed mee: hee hath sent mee to preach good tidings vnto the poore to bind vp the broken hearted, to preach libertie to the Captiues, and to thē that are bound the opening of the prison: 
                           
                              verse 2 
                           To preach the acceptable yere of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our god.
                        
                        
                           The Spirit of the Lord is vpon mee, therefore he hath annointed mee that I should preach good tidings to the poore, hee hath sent me to heale the broken in heart, that I should preach deliuerance to the Captiues, &c. 
                           
                              verse 21 
                           This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your eares.
                        
                     
                  

                  
                     
                        
                           Psal. 69. 27.
                        
                        
                           Iohn 19. 28.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           They gaue me gall for my meate, and in my thirst they gaue me vineger to drinke.
                        
                        
                           That the Scripture might bee fulfilled hee said, I thirst. 
                           
                              verse 29 
                           Therfore there was set a vessell full of vineger: and they filled a sponge with vineger,



and put it about an bysope stalke, & put it to his mouth.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Exod. 12. 46.
                        
                        
                           Ioh. 19. 36.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Neither shall yee breake a bone thereof.
                        
                        
                           These things were done, that the Scripture might bee fulfilled, which saith, there shall not a bone of him be broken.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Psal. 69. 25.
                        
                        
                           Acts 1. 20.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Let their habitations be voyd, and let none dwell in their tents.
                        
                        
                           It is written in the booke of the Psalmes; Let his habitation be void, and lēt no man dwell therein.
                        
                     
                  
               
               Fiftly, some things are omitted for breuitie sake: or because they do not agree with the matter in hand.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Zach. 9. 9.
                        
                        
                           Matth. 21. 5.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Reioyce greatly O daughter Sion: shout for ioy O daughter
                        
                        
                           Tell ye the daughter of Sion, behold thy King commeth vnto
                        
                     
                     
                        

                           
                           Ierusalem: behold thy King commeth vnto thee: He is Iust, and saued himselfe, poore and riding vpon an Asse, and vpon a colt the foule of an Asse.
                        
                        
                           thee, meek and sitting vpon an Asse, and a colt the foale of an Asse vsed to the yoke.
                        
                     
                  
               
               The second collation is of the place propounded with other places: and those againe are either like or vnlike.
               Places that are alike are such, as by certaine waies or in some sort agree one with another. And places doe agree either in their phrase and manner of speech, or in sense.
               Places that agree as concerning the phrase, are such as these.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Gen. 28. 12.
                        
                        
                           Iohn 1. 51.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Then he dreamed, & behold there stoode a ladder vpon the earth, and the top of it reached vp to heauen, and loe, the Angels of God went vp
                        
                        
                           And he said vnto him, Uerilie, verilie, I say vnto you, hereafter shall yee see the heauen open, And the Angels of God ascending & descending
                        
                     
                     
                        

                           
                           and downe by it.
                        
                        
                           vpon the Son of man.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Gen. 3. 15.
                        
                        
                           Rom. 16. 20.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           I will also put enmitie betweene thee and the woman, and between thy seede and her seede. Hee shall break thine head, and thou shalt bruise his heele.
                        
                        
                           The God of peace shall breake (
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           ) Sathan vnder your feete.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Gen. 8. 20.
                        
                        
                           Ephes. 5. 2.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Then Noah built an Altar to the Lord, and tooke of euerie cleane beast, and of euery cleane foule, and offered burnt offerings vpon the Altar. 21. And the Lord smelled a sauour ofrest, and said.
                        
                        
                           Christ hath loued vs, and giuen himself for vs an offering and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling sauour to God.
                        
                     
                  
               
               For the finding out of these places the Greeke and Hebrew concordances serue very fitlie.
               
                  
Places, which agree in sense, are those that haue the same meaning. Here excelleth the comparing of a generall place with a special exāple in the same kind: as
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Prou. 28. 13.
                        
                        
                           Psal. 32. 3. 4.
                        
                     
                     
                        He that hideth his sinnes, shall not prosper, but he that confesseth and forsaketh them, shall find mercy.
                        When I held my tongue my bones consumed, &c. 5. I acknowledged my finne vnto thee, neither hid I mine iniquitie. I said, I will confesse against my selfe my wickednes vnto the Lord, and thou forgauest the punishmēt of my sinne.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           2. Sam. 15. 25.
                        
                        
                           1. Pet. 5. 6.
                        
                     
                     
                        The King charged Zadok saying, carrie the Arke of God againe into the citie. If I shall find fauour in the eies of the Lord, he wil bring me again, and shew mee both it, and the tabernacle thereof.



                           
                              verse 26 But if he thus say, I haue no delight in thee, Behold, here am I, let him doe to mee, as seemeth good in his eyes.
                        Humble your selues therefore vnder the mightie hand of God, that he may extol you in due time.
                     
                  
               
               Thou shalt haue readie very manie places of this kind in the Common-places of Marlorate gathered together with diligence. And thus much for places that are alike.
               Places that are vnlike, are those, which in shew doe not agree, either in respect of the phrase, or in regard of the meaning. As,
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Rom. 3. 28.
                        
                        
                           Iam. 2. 24.
                        
                     
                     
                        Therefore we conclude that a man is iustified by faith without the workes of the Law.
                        Yee see therefore how that of works a man is iustified; and not of faith onlie.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           1. King. 9. 28.
                        
                        
                           2. Chron. 8. 18.
                        
                     
                     
                        And they came to Ophir, & they fetched from thence foure hundred and twenty talents of gold, and brought it to King Salomon.
                        And they went with the seruants of Salomon to Ophir, & brought from thence foure hundred and fiftie talents of gold, and brought them to King Salomon.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Acts. 7. 14.
                        
                        
                           Gen. 46. 27.
                        
                     
                     
                        Then sent Ioseph, and caused his father to bee brought, and all his kindred, euen threescore and fifteen soules.
                        All the soules of the house of Iacob, which came into Aegypt are threescore & ten.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Act. 7. 16.
                        
                        
                           Gen. 48. 22.
                        
                     
                     
                        And were remooued into Sychem and were put in the Sepulcre, that Abraham had bought for monie of the sonnes of Emor, sonne of Sychem.
                        I (that is Iacob) haue giuen vnto thee one portion aboue thy brethren, which I gat out of the hand of the Ammorite by my sword and by my bow.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           Zach. 11. 13.
                        
                        
                           Matth. 27. 9.
                        
                     
                     
                        And I tooke the thirtie peeces of siluer, and cast them to the potter in the house of the Lord.
                        Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Ieremie the Prophet, saying, and they tooke thirtie siluer peeces, &c.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  Of the waies of expounding.
               
               
                  THe manner or waies of Interpreting are according to the places of scripture, which are to be handled.
               Places are either Analogical & plaine, or Crypticall and darke.
               Analogicall places are such, as haue an apparent meaning agreeable to the analogie of faith, and that at the first view. Concerning these places receiue this Rule:
               
                  If the naturall signification of the words



of the place propounded doe agree with the circumstances of the same place, it is the proper meaning of the place. As for example;
               Act. 10. 43. To him also giue all the Prophets witnes, that through his name, all that beleeue in him, shall receiue remission of sins. The significatiō of the words of this place is very manifest, to wit, that Iesus Christ doth giue righteousnesse and euerlasting life to those that doe beleeue in him. And this sense wee doe presently admit without any delay, because wee see that it doth agree with the analogie of faith and with the holy scriptures.
               We must further know, that euery article and doctrine concerning faith and maners, which is necessary vnto saluation, is very plainely deliuered in the Scriptures.
               Crypticall or hidden places are those, which are difficult and darke: for the expounding of them let this be thy Rule and leader.
               
                  If the natiue (or naturall) signification of the words doe manifestly disagree with, either the analogy of faith, or very perspicuous places of the Scripture: thē the other meaning,



which is giuen of the place propounded, is naturall and proper, if it agree with contrarie and like places, with the circumstances and wordes of the place, and with the nature of that thing, which is intreated of. As for example; 1. Cor. 11. 24. This is my body, which is broken for you.
               
               The sense that is giuen by some:
               This bread is indeed and properlie the bodie of Christ; namely by conuersion. Or, the body of Christ in, vnder, or with the bread.
               The vnfitnesse of this sense.
               The 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   letter or words vsed in this place being retained (or expounded accordingly without any alteration) doth disagree with an article of the faith, He ascended into heauen, and with the nature of a Sacrament, which ought to be a 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   Memoriall of the bodie of Christ absent. Therefore a new exposition is to be sought for.
               A new or second sense.
               In this place the bread is a signe of my



bodie: by a Metonymie of the subiect for the adiunct.
               The fitnes of this exposition.
               First, it agrees with the analogy of faith, 1. He ascended truly into heauen, that is, he was taken vp out of the earth into heaued locally and visibly. Therefore his bodie is not to be receiued with the mouth at the Communion, but by faith 
                     〈…〉
                  prehending it in the heauen. 2. Borne of the Uirgin marie, &c. Therfore he had a true and naturall bodle, being long, broad, thicke, seated and circumscribed in some place. Whereby it appeareth that the bread in the Supper cannot bee properly his very bodie, but only a signe or pledge thereof.
               Secondly, this sense consenteth with the circumstances of the place propounded:
               1. He tooke, he brake it. Here it is not likely that Christ sitting amongst his disciples did take and breake his owne bodie with his hands. Therefore the bread is no more then a signe and seale.
               
                  
2. Deliuered (or giuen) for you. The bread can in no wise be said to bee giuen for vs, but the bodie of Christ: therefore the bread is not properly the bodie, but symbolically or by way of signification.
               3. The Cup is the new Testament, not properly, but by a Metonymie: therefore nothing hindreth, but that a Metonymie may be as well in these words, This is my bodie.
               
               4. Christ himselfe did eate of the bread; but he did not eate himself.
               5. Doe yee this in remembrance of me: therefore Christ is not corporallie present to the mouth, but spiritually to the faith of the heart.
               6. Untill he come: therefore Christ is absent in his bodie.
               7. Christ said not, Vnder the forme of bread, or in the bread: but he said, This, that is, This bread is my bodie.
               
               Thirdly, this sense accords with the nature of a sacrament: in which wee must make a proportion and resemblance betweene the signe and the thing signified: which here can bee none, if the bread bee properly the bodie.
               
                  
Fourthly, it agrees with like places.
               Gen. 17. 10. This is my couenant, which yee shall keepe betwixt you and me—.11. Ye shall circumcise the fore-skin of your flesh, and it shall be a signe of the couenant between me and you.
               
               1. Cor. 10. 4. They dranke of the spirituall Rocke, that followed them: and the Rocke was Christ.
               
               Rom. 4. 11. Hee receiued the signe of Circumcision, which might seale the righteousnes of faith.
               
               Exod. 12. 1. The Lambe is the Lords Passeouer. Verse 13. It is a signe of his passing ouer.
               
               Act. 2. 38. Be baptised for the remission of sinnes.
               
               Ioh. 6. 35. And Iesus said vnto them, I am the bread of life: he that commeth vnto me shall not hunger, and hee that beleeueth in me shall neuer thirst.
               
               1. Cor. 10. 16. The cup of blessing which wee blesse, is it not the Communion of the bloud of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? that is, a signe of the communion.
               Fiftly, it agreeth with the lawes of Logique.



For one disparate is not spoken or predicated of another but by a borrowed speech.
               Sixtly, it is agreeable to the common custome of speaking. So we put the Fasces or bundle of rods (vsed to bee caried before Magistrates) for gouernement it selfe: the gowne we put for peace: and the laurell garland for a triumph: as in Tully,
               
               
                  Cedant armatogae, concedat laurea linguae.
               
               Therefore this other sense is proper.
               Now from this fruitfull Rule doe arise many consectaries or conclusions necessarie for the vnderstanding of the Scriptures.
               
                  
                     Consectary 1. The supply of euery word, which is wanting, is fitting for the place propounded, if it agree with the analogie (or squire) of faith, and with the circumstances and words of the same place. As for example:
                  
                  Ephes. 3. 1. For which cause, I Paul the prisoner of Iesus Christ for you Gentiles. The sentence is defectiue: therefore a supply must be made. And let this bee the supplie [I will be an Embassadour] for you Gentiles. This is not fit, because Paul was



not an Embassadour for the Gentiles, but for Christ. Let another bee giuen. [haue boasted] for you Gentiles. But this seemeth to be something too bold, neither is any such like speech to bee met with in any part of the scriptures. Therefore the sentence may be fitly supplied after this maner; For which cause I Paul am the prisoner of Iesus Christ for you Gentiles.
                  
                  
                     
                        The same may be said of the rest.
                        
                           Defectiue Speeches.
                           Their Supplie.
                        
                        
                           
                              
                                 Esay 1. 13.
                           
                            
                        
                        
                           I cannot iniquity.
                           I cannot (beare) iniquitie.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 Luk. 13. 9.
                           
                            
                        
                        
                           And if it beare fruit: if not, then after thou shalt cut it downe.
                           And if it beare fruit (thou shalt let it stand): if not, then after thou shalt cut it downe.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 Exod. 4. 25.
                           
                            
                        
                        
                           Then Zippora took
                           Then Zippora took
                        
                        
                           

                              
a sharpe, and cut away the foreskin of her sonne.
                           a sharpe (knife) and cut, &c.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              2. Sam. 21. 16.
                           
                            
                        
                        
                           Isbi Benod, which of the sonnes of a certain Giāt, the weight of whose sword the weight of three hundred shickles of steele: and he girded with a new.
                           Isbi Benod, who (was) of the sonnes of a certaine Giant, the weight of whose sword (or speares head, mucronis) [was] the weight of three hundred shiekles, of steele, and he was girded with a new sword.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              1. Cor. 9. 25.
                           
                            
                        
                        
                           And euery man, that prooueth masteries, is continent in al things: and they to obtaine a corruptible crowne, but we for an vncorruptible.
                           And they (are continent) to obtaine a corruptible crowne, &c.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 Exod. 19. 4.
                           
                            
                        
                        
                           You haue seene how
                           [as it were] vpon
                        
                        
                           

                              
I haue carried you vpon Eagles wings.
                           Eagles wings.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Consect. 2. If that other exposition giuen of the place propounded doe change one nowne (or name) for another, then the words of the place containe in them a trope, or berowed speech.
                  Hence arise many cautions concerning sacred tropes.
                  1 An Anthropo-pathia is a sacred Metaphor, wherby those things, that are properly spoken of man, are by a similitude attributed vnto God. Hence it is that the soule of God is put for his life or essence. Ierem. 5. 29. Or shall not my soule be auenged of such a nation as this? Head is vsed for prince, or aboue. 1. Cor. 11. 3. God is the head of Christ. His face is put for fauour or anger. Psal. 30. 7. Thou didst hide thy face, and I was troubled. Psal. 34. 16. The face of the Lord is 
                     irata. 
                     angrie at those that doe euill. His eyes are vsed for grace and prouidence. Psal. 34. 15. The eyes of the Lord are vpon the iust. The apple of his eye signifieth a thing very deare. Zach. 2. 8. He



that toucheth you, toucheth the apple of mine eye. His eares are put for his accepting of mens prayers. His nostrils for indignation. His hands for power and protectiō. His arme for strength and fortitude. His right hand for authoritie and power. His finger for vertue. His foote for gouernement and might. Psal. 110. 3. His smelling for his acceptation of something. Genes. 8. 21. He smelled the sauour of rest. Repentance is vsed for the alteration of things and actions made by God.
                  2 A sacramentall Metonymie is that, whereby the name of the adiunct, as also of the helping cause is put for the thing represented in the Sacrament: or, whereby the signe is put for the thing signified, or contrarily. Genes. 2. 9. The tree of life: the tree of the knowledge of good and euill; that is, the tree which is a signe of these. Gen. 22. 14. Abraham called the name of that place, The Lord will see or prouide, that is, it is a signe that the Lord will doe so. Gen. 28. 22. The stone is called Gods house. Exod. 12. The Paschall Lambe is the passing ouer. Exod. 17. 15. The Altar is called, The Lord is my 
                     Vexillum. 
                     standard or banner. Ezek.



48. 35. Ierusalem is named, The Lord is there. Leuit. 16. The Priest is termed a satisfier. Ioh. 1. Christ is called a Lambe: Behold the Lambe of God which taketh away the sinnes of the world. The Paschall Lambe is called Christ. 1. Cor. 5. 7. Our Passeouer Christ is sacrificed for vs. And in the same place Christians are said to bee vnleauened. Rom. 3. 25. Christ is termed the propitiatorie (
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ) or the couer of the Arke of the Couenant. 1. Cor. 10. Christians are said to be one 
                     loafe. 
                     bread. And the Rocke is called Christ. Tit. 3. 5. Baptisme is named the washing of the new birth. 1. Cor. 11. The Cup is called the new Testament: and the bread is said to be the bodie of Christ.
                  3 The 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . communication of the properties is a Synecdoche, by the which by reason of the personall vnion, that is spoken of the whole person of Christ, which doth properly belong to one of his two natures. Act. 20. 28. To feede the Church of God, which he hath purchased with his owne blood. Ioh. 3. 13. For no man ascendeth vp to heauen, but he that hath descended from heauen, the Sonne of man which is in heauen.


                     
1. Cor. 2. 8. For had they knowne it, they would not haue crucified the Lord of glorie. Ioh. 8. 58. Iesus said vnto them, Uerily, verily I say vnto you, before Abraham was I am. Luk. 2. 52. And Iesus increased in wisedome, and in stature, and in fauour with God and man.
                  
                  This communication of the properties hath place only in the concrete, and not in the abstract. Concrete is the name of the whole person, as God, Man, Christ, &c. Abstract is a name of either of the two natures considered apart, as the Godhead, Manhead &c.
                  4 Things spoken of God, which carrie with them the shew of euill, must be vnderstood in regard of his operatiue or working permission. Nehem. 9. 37. And it yeeldeth much fruit vnto the Kings, whom thou hast set ouer vs because of our sinnes: and they haue dominion ouer our bodies, and ouer our cattell at their pleasure, and we are in great affliction. Isa. 19. 14. The Lord hath mingled among them the spirit of errors: and they haue caused Aegypt to erre in euerie worke thereof. Exod. 4. and 9. and 11. and 14. God doth harden the heart of Pharaoh.


                     
Deut. 2. 30. The Lord thy God hath hardened his spirit, and made his heart obstinate, because hee would deliuer him into thine hand, as appeareth this day. Iosh. 11. 20. It came of the Lord, that their heart was hardened, that they might come against Israel in battell, to the intent that they should destroy them vtterly, and shew them no mercie, but bring them to nought. 1. Sam. 2. 25. They hearkened not to the voice of their father, because the Lord meant to destroy them. 2. Chron. 22. 7. The destruction of Ahaziah came from God. Psal. 105. 25. He turned their heart to hate his people, and to worke craftily against his seruants. Rom. 1. 28. God deliuered them vp to a reprobate minde. 2. Thess. 2. 11. God will send them strong delusions, that they may beleeue lies. Ezek. 14. 9. And when that Prophet shall be inticed to speake a prophecie, I the Lord will intice that Prophet, and stretching out mine hand against him, I will destroy him out of the middest of my people.
                  
                  5 Things spoken (completiuè) as if they were alreadie finished, if they be not as yet finished, they are to be vnderstood (inchoatiuè) as being begun, and in the



way to be fulfilled. Gen. 5. 32. And when Noah was fiue hundred yeeres old, hee begot Shem, Ham, and Iapheth, that is, he began to beget them. Genes. 11. 26. Terah liued seuentie yeeres, when he begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran. 1. King. 6. 2. 37. Psal. 119. 8. I will obserue thy statutes, do not forsake me. It is to be vnderstood of his endeuour to doe so, as in Phil. 3. Not as though I had alreadie attained to it, or were alreadie perfect: but I follow on, if that I may comprehend that for whose sake also I am comprehended of Iesus Christ. Vers. 15. Let vs therfore as many as bee perfect be thus minded. Luk. 1. 6. And they were both iust in the sight of God, walking in all his commandements and ordinances without blame.
                  
                  6 Morall commandements or lawes vnder one sinne by name expressed, doe signifie and meane all the sinnes of that kinde, their causes, occasions, and allurements to them, and command the contrarie vertues. For so Christ expounded morall lawes, Matth. 5. 2. to the end of the chapter. 1. Ioh. 3. 15. Hee that hateth his brother is a manslayer.
                  
                  7 Threats and promises are to be vnderstood



with their conditions. Those are to bee conceiued with the condition of faith and repentance: and these, specially if they bee corporall, with the exception of chastisement and the crosse. Ezech. 33. 14. When I shall say vnto the wicked, Thou shalt die the death: if he turne from his sin, and do that which is lawfull & right,—15. he shall surely liue, and not die. Reuel. 21. 8. But the fearfull and vnbeleeuers &c. shall haue their portion in the lake, which burneth with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. But in the sixt verse hee annexeth a promise, saying, I will giue vnto him that is a thirst of the well of the water of life freely. Ionah 3. 4. Yet fourtie daies, and Nineue shall be subuerted. By those things which follow it appeareth that a condition is to be vnderstood. Ierem. 18. 19.
                  Like to these there are particular examples. Esay 38. 1. of Hezechiah: Giue commaundements to thy familie, for thou shalt shortly die, and shalt not liue. The condition of Gods will is to bee vnderstood. Gen. 20. 3. The Lord saith to Abimelech, because hee had taken Abrahams wife to himselfe: Behold, thou shalt die for the woman



which thou hast taken; except, vnlesse thou restore her.
                  
                  Hence arose ye distinction in the schooles of the Signi. Beneplaciti. Signifying will, and the will of Gods Good-pleasure. The wil of Good-pleasure is that, whereby God doth will something absolutely and simply without any condition, as the creation and regiment of the world, and the sending of his Sonne. The Signifying will is that, whereby he willeth somethings for some other thing and with condition: and so wee say, because that the condition annexed is a signe of the will, that God doth so will.
                  8 A superlatiue or exclusiue speech vsed of one person, doth not exclude the other persons of the Deity, but only creatures and fained gods: to which the true God, whether in one person or in moe, is opposed. Ioh. 17. 3. This is life eternall to know thee to be the only true God, and Iesus Christ whom thou hast sent. He calleth the Father the onely true God, that he might oppose him to all false gods. Rom. 16. 27. To the onely wise God bee glorie by Iesus Christ. 1. Tim. 1. 17. Ioh. 10. 29. The Father


                     
                     is greater than all: not than the rest of the persons, but than the creatures. Mark. 13. 37. The Father alone knoweth the day of iudgement. All the outward works of the Trinitie, and all attributes are to be vnderstood inclusiuely, that is, without exception of any of the persons.
                  9 When God is considered absolutely, or by himselfe, the three persons are comprehended: when the word (God) is conferred or set with a person of the Trinitie, it signifieth the Father. 2. Cor. 13. 13. The grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, and the loue of God, and the fellowship of the Holie Ghost be with you all.
                  
                  10 A generall word is taken specially, and so on the contraric; as All (saith August. lib. 6. cont. Iulian cap. 12.) for Many, and Many for All are oftentimes vsed in the Scriptures. Gen. 33. 11. God hath had mercie on nice, therefore I haue all things. Iere. 8. 6. All are turned to their owne race, that is, the greater part. Matth. 21. 26. All men counted Iohn as a Prophet, that is, the most. Phil. 2. 21. All seeke their own things, and not the things of Christ. Deut. 28. 64. And God shall scatter thee among all people,


                     
that is, many. 1. King. 12. 18. And all the Israelites stoned him, that is, all that were present. Exod. 9. 6. All the liuing creatures of Aegypt died. Ierem. 26. 9. Then was gathered together all the people against Ieremie in the house of the Lord, that is, all wicked people. Matth. 4. 23. Healing euery disease, to wit, that was offered to him. Iohn 14. 13. Whatsoeuer yee shall aske the Father in my name, that is, whatsoeuer yee shall aske according to his word. 1. Cor. 6. 12. All things are lawfull for mee, that is, all (adiaphora) things that are indifferent and not simply euill.
                  
                     Nothing is put for little or small. Ioh. 18. 20. I haue spoken nothing in secret, that is, little. Act. 27. 33.
                  
                     None is vsed for few. Ierem. 8. 6. There is none that repenteth of his wickednes, that is, but a few. 1. Cor. 2. 8. Which wisedome none of the Rulers of this world knew, that is, very few.
                  
                  
                     Alwaies is taken for often or long. Prou. 13. 10. Amongst the proud there is alwaies contentions, that is, often. Luk. 18. 1. Hee spake vnto them a parable that they ought to pray alway. Luk. 24. 53. And they were alwaies



in the Temple lauding and praising of God. Ioh. 18. 20. I alway taught in the Synagogue, and in the Temple.
                  
                  
                     Eternall is vsed for a long time agreeing with the matter in hand. Gen. 17. 8. All the land of Canaan is giuen vnto Abraham for an euerlasting possession. Leuit. 25. 46. Ye shall vse their labours for euer. Deut. 15. 17. If thy seruant be thy brother an Hebrew, and will not goe from thee, then shalt thou take an aule, and pierce his care thorough against the doore, and he shall be thy seruant for euer, in aeternum. 1. Chron. 15. 2. God hath chosen the Leuites, that they might minister for euer vnto him. Esay 34. 6. And beasts shall possesse Idumea and Bozra eternally. Dan. 2. 4. O King liue for euer. Ierem. 25. 9. I will make Iudea and the regions bordering vpon it an amazement, a hissing, and a perpetuall desolation.
                  
                  
                     Vbi
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         passim. 
                     Euery where is vsed for Here and there, without respect of place. Mark. 16. 2. And they went out and preached euery where the Lord co-working. Act. 17. 30. The Lord admonisheth all men euery where to repent.
                  
                  [Non. 
                     Not] is restrained to some speciall matter. Psalm. 7. 4. Iniquitie is not in mine



hands, that is, in my cause against the complices of Saul. Ioh. 17. 13. Neither haue his parents sinned, that is, that this man should be borne blind for their sinnes: I will haue mercie, not sacrifice. Not is put for seldome, scarsely, or hardly. 1. King. 15. 5. Dauid declined not from any of the things which the Lord had commanded vnto him, sauing in the matter of Vriah, that is, seldome. Luk. 2. 37. She was a widow, and went not out of the Temple.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Consect. 3. Grammaticall and Rhetoricall proprieties of words signifie diuersly with those words: As,
                  An That is, when one or moe words are wanting. 
                     Ellipsis signifieth either breuitie, or the swiftnes of the affectiōs. Gen. 11. 4. Let vs build vs a citie and a tower, whose top [may reach] vnto heauen, that wee may get vs a name. Act. 5. 39. But if it bee of God yee cannot destroy it, [ac nescio, and I know not] whether ye shall be found fighters also with God. Psalm. 6. And thou O Lord how long? Exod. 22. 20. He that sacrificeth to strange gods, let him bee destroyed as a thing execrable: sauing him [who sacrificeth]


                     
                     to Iehouah. Genes. 3. 22. Now therefore [we must looke] lest that stretching out his hand, he take of the tree of life. 1. Chron. 4. 10. If thou wilt blesse me effectually [I will doe this or that] If thou vexe the fatherlesse child [I will vexe thee].
                  
                  The Enallage of the preter perfect tense, whereby the time past is put for the time to come, signifieth in the oracles of the Prophets the certentie of the thing that is to come. Gen. 20. 3. Thou hast died because of the woman, that is, thou shalt die. Isai. 9. 6. Vnto vs a child is borne, vnto vs a sonne is giuen. Isa. 21. 9. It is fallen, it is fallen Babylon, &c.
                  
                  A VVhen some words abound. 
                     Pleonasme, which is manifold, when it is of the substantiue repeated in the same case, it doth signifie, 1. A force and It is when vvords signifie more then shew for or seem. emphasis. Psalm. 133. 2. As the ointment which descended vnto the beard, The beard of Aaron. Luk. 6. 46. Why call ye me Lord, Lord? 2. A multitude. Gen. 32. 16. Hee gaue into the hands of his seruants droues, droues, that is many droues. Ioel. 3. Troupes, troupes in the vally of concision, that is, many troupes or multitudes. 3. Distribution, At the gate and gate,


                     
1. Chr. 16. that is, in euery gate. Leuit. 17. 3. A man & a man, that is, euery man. 2. Chr. 19. 5. Thou shalt appoint Iudges in a citie and in a citie, that is, in euery citie. 4. Diuersitie and varietie. Psalm. 12. They speake with an heart, and an heart, that is, with diuers or a double heart, Prou. 20. 20. A weight and a weight are abominable vnto the Lord.
                  
                  There is a Pleonasme of the Substantiue when one is gouerned of another. 1. In the singular number it is very significant and argues certentie. Exod. 31. 15. One the seuenth day is the Sabbath of Sabbath. Mich. 2. 4. And they shall lament the lamentation of lamentation. 2. In the plurall number it signifieth Excellencie. Psal. 136. 2. The God of Gods, that is, the most high God. Dan. 3. The King of Kings. Eccles. 1. 2. Vanitie of vanities. A Song of Songs. A Seruant of Seruants.
                  
                  The Pleonasme of the Adiectiue, and sometimes also of the Substantiue repeated, signifieth exaggeration or increasing. Ierem. 24. 3. I see good figges, good. Esay 6. 3. Holy, holy, holy the Lord God of hosts. Exod. 34. 6. The Lord passing before his



face cried, Iehouah, Iehouah, the strong God. Ier. 7. 4. Trust not in lying words saying, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, this is the temple of the Lord. Ier. 22. 29. O earth, earth, earth, heare the word of the Lord. Ezek. 21. 28. Say thou the Sword, the sword is drawne, and furbished for the slaughter. Prou. 6. 10.
                  The Pleonasme of the Verbe doth either make the speech more emphaticall and significant, or else signifieth and sheweth vehemencie, or certentie, or speedines. Gen. 2. 17. In dying thou shalt die. Esay. 50. 2. Is mine hand shortned in shortening? Esay. 56. 3. By separating God hath separated me from his people. Psalm. 50. 21. Thou thinkest me by being to bee like thee. Psalm. 109. 10. Let his children in wandering be wanderers (or vagabonds) and let them beg. Iere. 12. 16. And it shall come to passe if in learning they shall learne the waies of my people. &c. 2. King. 8. 10. Prou. 27. 23. Exod. 13. 17. Isai. 6. 9. Isai. 55. 2. 2. King. 5. 11. Genes. 46. 4. 2. Sam. 15. 30. Ierem. 23. 29.
                  The Pleonasme of the Coniunction sometimes argueth earnestnes. Ezek. 13. 10.



                     Therefore, therefore because they haue made my people to erre.
                  
                  Wherefore a Coiunctio. Coniunction doubled (otherwise than it is in Latine) increaseth the deniall. Exodus 14. 11. Hast thou brought vs to die in the wildernes, is it because therewere No No graues in Aegypt? that is, None at all? Matth. 13. 14. By seeing ye shall see and shall Not Not (
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ) perceiue.
                  
                  The Pleonasme of the sentence signifieth first, distribution. A court was in the corner of the court: a court was in the corner of the court: a court was in the corner of the court; that is, in euery corner of the court there was one court. Secondlie, it makes an emphasis. Exod. 12. 50. The Israelites did as Moses and Aron commanded, so did they. Psalm. 145. 18. The Lord is neere vnto all that call vpon him: to all that call vpon him in trueth. Psalm. 124. 1, Vnlesse the Lord had been on our side may Israel now say: vnlesse the Lord had been on our side. Thirdly, the repetition of the sentence, which is done in other words, is for exposition sake. 2. King. 20. 3. I beseech thee, O Lord, remember now how I



haue walked before thee in trueth and with a perfect heart, and haue done that which is good in thy sight, Psalm. 6. 9. 10. The Lord hath heard the voyce of my weeping, the Lord hath heard my prayer: the Lord hath receiued my supplication. Esay 3. 9. They haue declared their sinne, and haue not hidden it. Iohn 1. 3. All things were made by him, and without him nothing was made.
                  
                  All tropes are They inlarge the sense. emphaticall, & besides delight and ornament they doe also afford matter for the nourishment of faith: as when Christ is put for a Christian man, or for the Church of God. Mat. 25. 35. 1. Cor. 12. As the bodie is one, and hath many members: and all the members of one bodie, though they bee many, are yet but one bodie: so also Christ, that is, The Church. Act. 9. 4. This trope doth comfort a faithfull soule, and nourish saith.
                  An It is when the contrarie to that which was spoken is meant, it is used in slouting sometimes. Ironie signifieth a iust reprehension of sinne. Iudg. 10. 14. And the Lord said to the children of Israel: Goe ye, and crie out to your gods, whom yee haue chosen: let them saue you in the time of trouble. Mark. 7. 9. And hee said vnto them, Well ye abrogate the commandement of God,


                     
                     and obserue your owne traditions. 1. King. 22. 15. The king said vnto him, Michaiah, shall we goe against Ramoth Gilead to battell? or shall we not? and he answered, Go vp and prosper: doubtlesse the Lord shall deliuer it into the hand of the King. 1. King. 18. 27. And at noone Elijah mocked them, and said, Crie aloud, for he is a God: either he talketh, or pursueth his enemies, or is in his iourney: or it may bee hee sleepeth, and must bee awaked. 1. Cor. 4. 8. Now are yee full, now are ye enriched, without vs yee haue gotten a kingdome.
                  
                  Figures of a word in the repetition of a word or sound, haue for the most part an emphasis in them. Psalm. 66. 7. Let God, euen our God blesse vs. Isai. 48. 11. For mine owne sake, for mine owne sake will I doe it. Iohn 1. 51. Uerilie, verilie I say vnto you. Psalm. 67. 6. The people shall prayse thee, O God; all the people shall praise thee. In the 136. Psal. there is a repetition made in euerie verse for this cause.
                  An Interrogation signifieth, 1. an earnest affirmation, or asseucration. Gen. 4. 7. Is there not remission, if thou shalt doe well? Iosh. 10. 13. Is not this written in the booke



of the iust? Iohn. 4. 35. Doe ye not say that it is yet foure moneths to haruest? Iosh. 1. 9. Gen. 37. 13. 1. King. 20. 27. Mark. 12. 24. Iohn 6. 7. Secondly, it signifieth a deniall: Gen. 18. 4. Shall any word bee hard vnto God? Rom. 3. 3. Shal their incredulity make the faith of God of none effect? Mat. 12. 26. If Satan shall vanquish Satan, how shall his kingdome continue? 3. It signifies a forbidding. Psal. 79. 10. Helpe vs, O God, why shall the Gentiles say, where is their God? 2. Sam. 2. 22. And Abner said to Asahel, depart from me: wherefore should I smite thee to the ground? 4. It argueth sundrie affections, as admiration, compassion, complaining, and finding of fault. Psalm. 8. 10. O Lord, how admirable is thy name in all the earth! Isai. 1. 21. How is the faithfull citie become an Harlot! Psalm. 22. My GOD, my GOD, why hast thou forsaken me?
                  
                  Concession (or yeelding) signifieth a deniall and reprehension. 2. Cor. 12. 16. But bee it, that I charged you not, but because I was craftie, I tooke you with guile. 17. Did I pill you by any of them, whom I sent?
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Consect. 4. If the Opposition of vnlike places shalbe taught to be, either not of the same matter, but of name onely, or not according to the same part, or not in the same respect, or not in the same manner, or not at the same time, a reconciliation or agreement is made.
                  
                     
                        
                           Examples.
                           
                              
                                 Psalm. 7. 8.
                              
                              
                                 Esay 64. 6.
                              
                           
                           
                              Iudge me, O Lord, according to my righteousnesse.
                              Wee haue all been as an vncleane thing, and all our righteousnes is as filthie clouts.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The Reconcilation.
                     It appeareth by the scope and circumstances of both the places, that this contradiction is not in the same respect. Distinguish therefore. There is one righteousnes of the cause or action: and an other of the person; the first place speaketh of the former: and the second of the latter.
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 Mat. 10. 10.
                              
                              
                                 Mark. 68. 9.
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 Nor a scrip for the iourney, neither two coates, neither shooes, nor a staffe.
                              
                              
                                 And commanded them, to take nothing for their iournie, saue a staffe onely, neither scrip, neither bread, nor money in their girdles, but that they should bee shod with sandales.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The Reconciliation.
                     Distinguish the respects. Matthew meaneth such a staffe, as may be a burthen to the bearers thereof. Marke vnderstandeth such a one, as may sustaine and ease those that trauell; such a one as Iacob vsed, Genes. 32. 10. Moreouer, the shooes that Matthew mentioneth are new, such as are with care and diligence prepared for to trauell in. The sandales in Marke are not new, but such as are daily worne on the feete.
                     
                        From this fourth Consectarie many Prouisoes or Cautions arise meete to be obserued in the reconciling of places.
                     
                     
                        
1 The holy Writers speaking of things and persons, that are past, doe anticipate, that is, they speak of thē according to the custome of that place and time, in which they wrote. Genes. 12. 8. Afterward remouing thence vnto a mountaine East-ward from Bethel. The place was so called in the daies of Moses: but in Abrahams time it was not called Bethel, but Luz. Gen. 28. 19. Gen. 13. 1. Abram went vp out of Aegypt—towards the South; not in respect of Aegypt, but of that place wherein Moses was. 1. Pet. 3. 19. Christ in his spirit preached to them that are in prison. They are said to be in prison in regard of the time, in which Peter wrote this Epistle, and not of that wherein Noah liued. Psal. 105. 15. Touch not mine annointed. Abraham, Isaak, and Iacob are said to be annointed in respect of the manner and fashion of the time wherein Dauid liued. For they had no externall annointing.
                     2 Allegories are to be expounded according to the scope or intent of the place. So Chrysostome saith vpon the 8. of Matth. Parables must not be expounded according to the letter, left many absurdities



doe follow. Aug. vpon the 8. Psalme speaketh on this sort: In euery allegorie this rule is to be retained, that that be considered according to the purpose of the present place, which is there spoken of vnder a similitude.
                     
                     3 Places and persons in the Scriptures haue very often two names: Gideon was called Ierubbaal, Iudg. 6. 32. and also Ierubesheth, 2. Sam. 11. 21. Abimelech, 1. Samuel 21. 3, and Abiathar, Mark. 2. 26. Salomon, 1. Samuel 12. 24, and Iedidiah, 25. Zimri, 1. Chron. 2. 6, and Zabdi, Iosh. 7. 1. Hazariah, 2. Chron. 22. 6, and Ahaziah, 1. Chr. 3. 11, & Iehoahaz, 2. Chr. 21. 17. Iohanan, 1. Chr. 3. 15, & Iehoahaz, 2. King. 23. 30, and also Shallum, Ierem. 22. 11. Iehoiachin, 2. King. 24. 6, and Iachoniah, 1. Chro. 3. 16, and Coniah, Ierem. 32. 24. Mephibosheth, 2. Sam. 4, and Meribbaal, 1. Chro. 8. 34. Abinadab, 1. Chron. 10. 2, and Ishui, 1. Samuel 14. 49. Eliachim and Iachim, 2. King. 23. 24. Ozias & Azarias, 2. King. 15. 1. 2. Chr. 26. 1. Hester, Edissa, Hest. 2. 7. Simon, Peter, Iohn 1. 42. and Cephas and Bariona: Ioses and Barnabas, Act. 4. 36. Saul and Paul, Act. 13. 6. 8. Matthew and Leui. Herusalem is called Iebus & Salem.
                     
                     
                        
Moreouer, the name, which is indeede one, receiueth many times changes and differences. As Salmon, Ruth. 4. 21. is called Salma, 2. Chron. 2. 11. Abigal, 2. Sam. 17. 25. is named Abigail, 1. Chron. 2. 16. Tiglath-pilezer, 2. King. 15. 19. is tearmed Tilgath-pilneezer, 1. Chr. 5. 6. Aram, Mat. 1. 3. is the same with Ram, 1. Chr. 2. 9.
                     Againe, on the contrarie, distinct persons, and diuers places haue one name: Matth. 1. 11. Iosiah begat Iecboniah and his brethren about the time they were carried axay into Babylon. 12. And after they were carried away into Babylon Iechoniah begat Salathiel. Heere now, because Iechoniah doth both finish the That is, the second foureteenth generation, mentioned in Mat. 1. 17 in vvhich place three fourteeene generations are set down second tesseradecade, and begin the third, one of them wil be wanting to one of those tesseradecads, vnlesse we say that there were two Iechoniases both father and sonne. Succoth is a name of three places. The first is in Aegypt, Exo. 12. 37. The second in the tribe of Gad, Iosh. 13. 27. The third in the tribe of Manasses, 1. King. 7. 46.
                     4 In sacred accounts, by reason of the wickednes of the Prince, either his name or the number of yeeres, in which hee



reigned wickedly, are omitted and left out. 1. Sam. 13. 1. Saul reigned two yeeres ouer Israel; that is, lawfully, or as Lyra speaketh, 
                           De iure. according to law or equitie. rightly: but otherwaies hee reigned longer. Matt. 1. 8. Ioram begat Ozias. Here three are left out for their wickednes, to wit, Ahaziah, Ioas, and Amaziah.
                     
                     5 The time spoken of is taken either That is, as fully finished, or as but in the finishing. compleatly, or vncompleatly: and the parts thereof are vnderstood either inclusiuely or exclusiuely; As, 1. Kings 15. 9. And in the twentith yeere of Ieroboam Asa reigned ouer Iudah.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 1. King. 15. 25.
                              
                              
                                 1. King. 15. 28.
                              
                           
                           
                              Nadab the son of Ieroboam [began to reigne ouer Israel the second yeere] of Asa King of Iudah: and reigned ouer Israel [two yeere.]
                              Euen in the [third yeere of Asa King of Iudah] did Baasha slay Nadab, and reigned in his stead.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The Reconcilement.
                     
                        Nadab, who began to reigne in the second



yeere of Asa, might reigne 2. yeres, although Baasha succeed him in the third yeere of Asa; because the last yeeres of Vltimi ann
                              •
                           . the Kings of Israel and Iuda are not fully expired, but some of them (as in this place) doe scarsely containe moneths in them: the rest of the yeeres being put compleately.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Mat. 17. 1.
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Luk. 9. 28.
                              
                           
                           
                              And the sixt day after Iesus tooke Peter, and Iames, and Iohn his brother, and brought them vp vnto an high mountain.
                              And it came to passe about an eight daies after, that hauing take to him Peter, and Iames, and Iohn, he went vp into a mountaine.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The Reconcilement.
                     
                        Matthew puts exclusiuely onely the daies that were betweene, which were altogether accomplished: Luke puts in the reckoning the two outtermost daies also.
                     The parts of time are put sometimes inclusiuely, and sometimes exclusiuelie. 1. That the number may be more perfect.



                        Augustine saith, quaest. 47. on Exodus. In a perfect number oftentimes that, which is either wanting or abounding, is not counted. Iudg. 11. 26. Israel dwelt in Heshbon and Aroer and their townes three hundred yeeres. These yeeres are to bee reckned from the departure of the Israelites out of Aegypt, after this manner. The time of their abode in the wildernes was 40. yeers. The time of the gouernment of Ioshua was 17. yeeres: of Othoniel, 40. yeeres. Iudg. 3. 11. Of Ehud and Samgar, 80. yeres. Iudg. 3. 30. of Barak, 40. yeers. Iudg. 5. 51. of Gideon, 40. yeers. Iudg. 8. 28. of Abimelech, 3. yeers. Iud. 9. 22. of Tolah, 23. yeers, Iudg. 10. 2. of Iair, 22. yeeres. Iudg. 10. 3. The whole in all is, 305. yeeres. Here therefore the fiue odde yeeres are not named; it may be because this euen number of three hundred is fitter both for the computation and the speech. 2. For breuitie sake: Iudg. 20. 46. There were slaine of the Beniamites twentie fiue thousand. Heere an hundred are not counted, as appeareth, verse 35. The Israelites slew that day of the tribe of Beniamin fiue and twentie thousand and a hundred men.
                     
                     
                        
5. The King being hindred either with forraine warre, or with old age, or by reason of some disease doth whiles he yet liueth appoint his sonne to bee King in his stead: and therefore with the computations of the yeeres of father and sonne raigning at one time, the yeeres of the raigne are reckoned sometimes ioyntlie, and sometimes apart.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 2. King. 1. 17.
                              
                              
                                 2. King. 3. 1.
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 Ahaziah died, and Iehoram raigned in his stead [in the second yeere of Iehoram the son of Iehosaphat] King of Iudah.
                              
                              
                                 Ichoram the sonne of Ahab raigned in the [eighteenth yeere of Iehosaphat. Chap. 8. 16. In the [fift yere of Ioram the sonne of Ahab] Iehoram the sonne of Iehoshaphat began to raigne, and raigned eight yeeres.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The Reconciliation.
                     
                        Iehoshaphat determining in the seuenteenth yeere of his reigne to helpe King Ahab against the Syrians appointeth his



sonne Ioram to be Vice-roy. In the eighteenth yeere of his owne reigne, and in the second of his sonnes, Ioram the sonne of Ahab reigned. Afterwards in the fift yeere of this Ioram the sonne of Ahab, Iehosaphat being strucken in age confirmeth his kingdome to his sonne Ioram: who is said to haue reigned eight yeeres, foure whilst his father was aliue, and foure alone by himselfe after the death of his father.
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 2. King. 15. 30.
                              
                              
                                 2. King. 15. 33.
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 And Hoshea the son of Elah wrought treason against Pekah the sonne of Remaliah, & smote him, and slew him, & reigned in his roome [in the twentith yeere of Iotham] the sonne of Vzziah.
                              
                              
                                 Iotham the sonne of Vzziah was fiue and twentie yeere old when hee began to reigne [and hee reigned sixteene yeeres] in Ierusalem.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The Reconciliation.
                     He reigned sixteen yeeres alone after



his fathers death: he reigned also twentie with his father: for he gouerned the kingdome for his father who was diseased with the leprosie.
                     6. The East-country men doe diuerslie distinguish their artificiall day, both into twelue equall houres (commonlie called planetarie houres) and into quadrants, hauing their name of the houre going next before. Beroald. Chronol.
                     
                     
                        The Easterne mens accounting: 
                        
                           〈 math 〉
                        .
                     
                        The manner of our counting: 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 Mark. 15. 25.
                              
                              
                                 Ioh. 19. 14.
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 And it was [the third houre] whē they crucified him.
                              
                              
                                 And it was the preparatiō of the Passeouer, [and about the sixt houre] and hee said vnto the Iewes, Behold your King.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     The Reconciliation.
                     The opposition is not in the same respect: therefore distinguish the manners of accompting the houres of the day, and then it will appeare that Christ might bee crucified at the third houre and about the fixt.
                     7. The lesser number is to be counted vnder the greater and the more compleat. Iudg. 3. 11. The land had rest fortie yeeres when Othoniel died. Vnder this number are all the yeeres comprehended from the death of Ioshua to the death of Othoniel, as also the eight yeeres of seruitude vnder the Syrians. Iudg. 3. 30. The land had rest 80. yeers. Here from the death of Othoniel are numbred also the yeeres of Ehud and Samgar. For Ehud could not be Iudge 80. yeeres: for when these yeeres are expired the whole time of man is run out. The like we meete with, Iudg. 5. 31. and 8. 28. and 9. 22. and. 10. 2. 3. and 11. 26. Where, in the three hundred yeeres are included the fortie yeres of their tarrying in the desert.
                     8. Filiation or Son-ship is either naturall



or legall. Naturall is by generation: legall is by adoption, which is to be testified by education and bringing vp, and by succession in the kingdome, and in To vnderstand this, reade Deut. 25. 5. 
                        Leuiration by the law of redemption.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 2. Sam. 21. 8.
                              
                              
                                 1. Sam. 18. 19.
                              
                           
                           
                              And the King took the fiue sons of Michal the daughter of Saul, whom she beare to Adriel the sonne of Barzilli the Mehalohite.
                              When Merab Sauls daughter shuld haue been giuen to Dauid, she was giuen vnto Adriel a Mehalohite to wife.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The Reconciliation.
                     They are the naturall sonnes of Merab, and the legall sonnes of Michal; and therefore (to beare) doth onely signifie to bring vp, to feede and to nourish. For thus the sonnes of Machir, Gen. 50. 23. are said to be borne (nati) on Iosephs knees, that is, brought vp.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Mat. 1. 12.
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Luk. 3. 27.
                              
                           
                           
                              Ieconias begat Salathiel.
                              Salathiel the sonne of Neri.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     The Reconciliation.
                     
                        Salathiel was the sonne of Neri by nature: and the sonne of Ieconias legally in regard of succession in the same kingdome. After this manner Zedekias is the brother of Ieconias or Iehoiakin, 2. Chron. 36. 10. and vncle, 2. King. 14. 17. and son, 1. Chro. 3. 16. His brother by generation, and his sonne by the right of succession. On this maner Matthew and Luke are reconciled in the genealogie of Christ. For the one followes the naturall order, as Luke, and the other the legall.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Consect. 5. When the naturall sense of the place (propounded) is giuen by the fore-said helpes, a signification of a word signifying diuers things (
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ) shall bee giuen, which is fitting to the place.
                  Thus the significations of Uau the prefixe or copulatiue are (as Brunerus hath obserued in his Hebrew Grammer) distinguished according to the diuersitie of



the places. It signifieth, I. At, Isa. 9. 10. These Aduerbs and Coniunctions I doe of purpose not translate, as being fittest in Latin. Gen. 42. 10. II. Quoniam, Isa. 53. 11. III. Quin, Isa. 9. 11. Psalm. 73. 4. IIII. id est, Isa. 9. 14. 1. Sam. 17. 40. V. Idcirco, Prou. 1. 18. VI. Ita vt, Psal. 18. 39. Isa. 24. 20. VII. Sic etiam, Isa. 10. 10. & 51. 11. VIII. Et tamen, 1. Chron. 5. 2. Nehe. 9. 19. IX. Atqui, Psal. 73. 2. & 19. 6. X. Posteà tunc, Isa. 16. 12. Gen. 3. 5. XI. Autem, Isa. 1. 21. Nehe. 2. 9. XII. Etiam, 2. Reg. 3. 8. XIII. Num, Isa. 37. 11. XIIII. Sicut, sicm Psal. 125. 2. Dan. 7. 2. XV. Qui, quae, quod, Isa. 43. 8. XVI. Quum, Psal. 50. 17. XVII. Vt, Isa. 49. 6. XVIII. Quamuis, Iere. 31. 35. XIX. Inquam, Isa. 55. 1. XX. Id
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , Psal. 105. 12. XXI. At
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ita, Prou. 3. 4. XXII. Et vt Isa 58. 5. 6. XXIII. Quoniam, ideo, Psal. 109 17. XXIIII. Imò, Psal. 109. 18. XXV. Nec non, Psal. 72. 16. XXVI. Verùm, Psal. 73. 23. XXVII. Etiamsi, Iob. 19. 26. XXVIII. Aut, Psal. 139. 7. XXIX. Quòd, id
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , Psa. 139. 14. XXX. Et verò, Psal. 139. 17. XXXI. Tum, Nehe. 12. 27. XXXII. Simulat
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , Iere, 50. 43. XXXIII. Si sin, 2. Reg. 5. 17. XXXIIII. Nec, Isa. 41. 8. XXXV. Hoc igitur, Prou. 17. 33. XXXVI. Vnà cùm, Prou. 8. 18. XXXVII. Quòd, Gen. 47. 6.
                  
                     
Thus it appeareth that (Berech) signifieth contrary things, as to blesse & to curse. Iob. 1. 5. 1. King. 21. 10. and 11. 2. 9.
                  To conclude, hence it is euident that (Huchal) Gen. 4. 26. doth not signifie Prophaned, but Begun. Reason. 1. when Chalal signifieth to profane, it ought to be ioyned with a nowne, and to gouerne it; but here it doth immediately follow Rara a verbe infinitiue. Reason. 2. Amongst many causes of the Deluge Moses reckoneth not the prophanation of Gods worship, which notwithstanding should haue been chiefly noted, if so bee that it had raigned among the people of God.
               
               
                  
                     Consect. 6. If a word giuen in the Bible, whether it bee an Hebrew word or a Greeke, if first it do agree with Grammaticall construction, and with other approued copies: if also it doe agree in respect of the sense with the circumstances and drift of the place, and with the analogie of faith, it is proper and naturall.
                  I lay downe this rule, not because I



thinke that the Hebrew and Greeke text is in all copies corrupted through the malice of the Iewes, as Lindanus doth wickedly calumniate, and after him all Papists: but that the diuers readings, which in some places haue crept in, either by reason of the vnskilfulnesse or negligence and ouersight of the Notaries, might be skanned and determined. As, Psal. 22. 16. In ordinary copies the words runne thus; Caari, that is, As a Lion my hands and my feete. In other copies the reading is diuers, after this manner: Caaru, They haue digged (or pierced) my hands and my feete. Now the rule propounded doth teach that this latter reading is to be followed. For it agreeth. 1. with Grammaticall construction: 2. with the circumstances of the Psalme: 3. with some ancient copies: yea euen by the testimonie of the Iewes.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  Of the right Diuiding of the word.
               
               
                  HItherto wee haue spoken of Interpreting the word. Wee are now come to speake of the 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   
                  right cutting or the right diuiding of it.
               
                  Right cutting of the word is that, whereby the word is made fit to edifie the people of God. 2. Tim. 2. 15. Study to shew thy selfe approued vnto God, a workeman that neede not to be ashamed, diuiding (or 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  cutting) the word of trueth aright. It is a Metaphor taken it may bee from the Leuites, who might not cut the members of the sacrifices without due consideration. Isai. 50. 4. The Lord hath giuen me the tongue of the learned, that I might know to minister a word in due season to him that is wearie. The partes thereof are two: Resolution or



partition, and Application.
               
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  Resolution is that, whereby the place propounded is, as a weauers web, resolued (or vntwisted and vnloosed) into sundrie doctrines. Act. 18. 28. Mightilie he confuted the Iewes, with great vehemencie publikely shewing by Scriptures that Iesus was that Christ.
               
               Resolution is either Notation, or Collection.
               
                  Notation is, when as the doctrine is expressed in the place propounded. Rom. 3. 9. We haue alreadie proued that all both Iewes and Gentiles are vnder sinne. 10. As it is written; there is none righteous, no not one. 11. There is none that vnderstandeth, none that seeketh God. 12. All are gone out of the way: they haue been made altogether vnprofitable: there is none that doth good, no not one. Act. 2. 24. Whom God hath raised vp, and loosed the sorrowes of death, because it was impossible that he shuld be held of it. 25. For Dauid saith concerning him, I beheld the Lord alwaies before me: for he is at my right hand, that I should not bee shaken. 26. Therefore did mine heart reioyee, and my tongue was glad, and moreouer also



my flesh shall rest in hope. 27. Because thou wilt not not leaue my soule with the dead, neither wilt suffer thine holy one to see corruption.
               
               
                  Collection is, when the doctrine not expressed is soundly gathered out of ye text. This is done by the helpe of the nine arguments, that is, of the causes, effects, subiects, adiuncts, dissentanies, names, distribution, and definition. For example.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              A place.
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              The collection.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Iohn 10. 34. Iesus answered them, Is it not written in your law, I said yee are Gods?
                        
                           From the comparison of the lesser. 35. If hee called thē Gods, vnto whom the word of God was giuen, and the Scripture cannot bee broken: 36. Say yee of me, whom the Father hath sanctified and sent into the world, thou blasphemest, because I said I am the Sonne of God?
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              A place.
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              The collection from the lesser.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        1. Cor. 9. 9. For it is written in the law of Moses, thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the oxe, that treadeth out the corne. What, hath God care of oxen?
                        
                           Vers. 4. Haue we not power to eate, and to drinke?
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           A place.
                        
                        
                           The collection from the contrarie.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Gal. 3. 10. For so many as are of the workes of the law are vnder a curse: for it is written, Cursed is euery one, that continueth not in al things which are in the book of the law to do them.
                        
                           Vers. 9. Therfore those which are of faith are blessed with faithfull Abraham.
                     
                     
                        
                           Vers. 11. For the iust shal liue by faith.
                        
                           Vers. 11. And that no man is iustified by the law before God, it is euident.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           A place.
                        
                        
                           A collection from the Adiunct.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Heb. 8. For in rebuking them he saith, Behold, the daies will come, saith the Lord, when I shall make with the house of Israel & with the house of Iudah a new testament.
                        
                           Heb. 8. 13. In that he saith a new testament, hee hath disanulled the old: now that which is disanulled and waxed old is readie to vanish away.
                     
                  
               
               In gathering of doctrines we must specially remember that an example in his owne kind, that is, an Ethique, Oeconomique, Politique, Ordinarie, and Extraordinarie example hath the virtue of a general rule in Ethique, Oeconomique, Politique, Ordinarie, & Extraordinarie matters. The examples of the fathers are paterns for vs. 1. Cor. 10. 11. Rom. 15. 4 
                  And whatsoeuer is written, is written for our learning. And it is a Principle in Logique, that the Or general. 
                  Genus is actually in all the Or specials and particulars of that kind or generall. 
                  species: and a rule in the Optiques, that the generall species of things are perceiued before the particular.
               
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           A place.
                        
                        
                           The Collection from the Species.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Rom. 9. 7. Neither are they all children, because they are the seede of Abraham: but in Isaac shal thy seed be called. 10. Neither he only felt this, but also Rebecca, when shee had conceiued by one, euen by our father Isaac.
                        
                           Vers. 8. That is, they which are the children of the flesh, are not the children of God: but the children of the promise are counted for the seede.
                     
                     
                        
                           Rom. 4. 18. Which Abraham against hope, beleeued vnder hope, &c. 21. Being fully assured that hee which had promised was also able to doe it. 22. And therefore it was imputed to him for righteousnesse.
                        
                           Rom. 4. 23. Now it is not written for him onely, that it was imputed to him for righteousnes, 24. But for vs also, to whom it shal be imputed for righteousnesse, which beleeue in him, that raised vp Iesus our Lord from the dead.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
That also I adde, that collections ought to be right and sound, that is to say, deriued from the genuine and proper meaning of the Scripture. If otherwise, wee shall draw Aduerb. any thing out of any thing, quidlibetè quolibet.
                   any doctrine from any place. Prou. 8. 22. the Greeke translation of the Seuentie Interpreters is (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) The Lord hath created me; it is the speech of Wisedome, that is, of Christ speaking of himselfe. Whence the Arrians collect very wickedly, that the Sonne was created. But in the Hebrew it is (Iehouah kanneni) The Lord hath possessed mee. Now the Father possesseth the Son, because hee begat him from eternitie, and because the Father is in the Sonne, and the Sonne in the Father. And so, Gen. 4. 1. When a Sonne was borne vnto Adam, he saith, I haue possessed a man from the Lord. The error perhaps came of this, that 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , he hath created. 
                  Ectise was either through ignorance or malice put for 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , be hath possessed. 
                  Ectese. Augustine also vpon the tenth verse of the 39. Psalme, readeth on this wife: I held my peace because thou hast made me, fecistime. From whence hee doth wittily gather, that it is a marueile that he should holde his tongue, that hath receiued a



mouth to speake: whereas (me) is neither in the Hebrew nor in the Greeke. And vpon the 72. Psalme and 14. verse he disputeth much about vsuries, and proueth that vsuries are sinnes: whereas there is no such matter in that text. For the words are; He shall deliuer their soule from deceit and violence, so precious is their blood in his eyes.
               
               It shall be lawfull also to gather Allegories: for they are arguments taken from things that are like, and Paul in his teaching vseth them often. 1. Cor. 9. 9. But they are to bee vsed with these cautions: 1. Let them be vsed sparingly and soberly. 2. Let them not be farre fetcht, but fitting to the matter in hand. 3. They must be quickly dispatcht. 4. They are to bee vsed for instruction of the life, and not to proue any point of faith.
               Any point of doctrine collected by iust consequence is 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   simply of it selfe to bee beleeued, and doth 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . demonstrate. Act. 18. 24. And a certaine Iew, named Apollos, borne at Alexandria, came to Ephesus, an eloquent man and mightie (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) in the Scriptures. 28. For mightily he confuted the



Iewes publikely with great vehemencie, demonstrating (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) by the Scriptures, that Iesus was the Christ. From hence it followeth:
               First, that humane testimonies whether of the Philosophers or of the Fathers are not to be alleaged. Augustine vpon the 66. Psalme saith thus: If I speake, let no man heare: if Christ speake, woe bee to him that doth not heare. So againe he saith (De vnitat. Ecclesiae) Let vs not heare, These things I say, These things he saith: but let vs heare, These things the Lord saith. Yet with this exception, Vnlesse they conuince the conscience of the hearer. Thus Paul alleaged the testimonie of Aratus; Act. 17. 28. For by him wee liue, and moue, and haue our being, as one of your owne Poets hath said; For wee are all his progenie (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ). 29. Forasmuch then, as we are the progenie of God, &c. As also a saying of Menander, 1. Cor. 15. 33. Be not deceiued, euill 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  conuersations corrupt good manners. And of Epimenides, Tit. 1. 12. As one of their Prophets hath said, the Cretians are alwaies liars, euill beasts, and slow bellies. And then also it must be done sparingly, and with leauing



out the name of the prophane writer.
               Secondly, that a few testimonies of Scripture are to be vsed for the proofe of the doctrine: and that sometimes there is neede of none.
               Lastly, hence it followes that the Prophets deliuering their doctrine thus, are not to bee reprooued of other Prophets. 1. Cor. 14. 32. And the spirits of the Prophets are subiect vnto the Prophets. Yet afterwards hee addeth, vers. 37. If any one seeme to be a Prophet or spirituall, let him acknowledge that those things, which I write vnto you, are the commandements of God.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  Of the waies how to vse and applie doctrines.
               
               
                  
                     APplication is that, wherby the doctrine rightlie collected is diuerslly fitted according as place, time, and person doe require. Ezek. 34. 15. I will feede my sheepe, and bring them to their rest, saith the Lord. 16. I will seeke that



which is lost, and bring againe that which was driuen away, and will bind vp that which was broken, and will strengthen the sicke. Iude 22. And hauing compassion of some in putting difference. 23. And saue other with terror, pulling them out of the flame.
               
               The foundation of Application is to know whether the place propounded be a sentence of the Law, or of the Gospell. For when the word is preached there is one operation of the Law, and another of the Gospell. For the Law is thus farre forth effectuall, as to declare vnto vs the disease of sinne, and by accident to exasperate and stirre it vp: but it affords no remedie. Now the Gospel, as it teacheth what is to be done: so it hath also the efficacy of the holy Ghost adioyned with it, by whom we being regenerated, we haue strength both to beleeue the Gospell, and to performe those things which it commaundeth. The Law therefore is the first in the order of teaching: and the Gospell second.
               It is a sentence of the Law, which speaketh of perfect inherent righteousnes, of eternall life giuen through the works of



the Law, of the contrarie sins, and of the curse that is due vnto them. Gal. 3. 10. So many as are of the workes of Law, are vnder the curse; for it is written, cursed is he whosoeuer abideth not in all things, which are written in the booke of the Law to doe them. Matth. 3. 7. O generation of Vipers, who hath fore-warned you to flee from the anger to come? 10. And now also is the axe put to the roote of the trees: therfore euery tree, which bringeth not forth good fruit, is cut vp (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) and cast into the fire.
               
               A sentence of the Gospell is that, which speaketh of Christ and his benefits, and of faith being fruitfull in good workes: as, Iohn 3. 16. So God loued the world, that hee gaue his onely begotten Sonne, that whosoeuer beleeueth in him, should not perish but haue euerlasting life.
               
               Hence it is that many sentences, which seeme to belong to the Law, are by reason of Christ to bee vnderstood not legally (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) but with the Euangelicè. qualification of the Gospell. Luk. 11. 28. Blessed are those which heare the word of God and keepe it. Deut. 11. This commandement which I command thee this day, is not hidden, nor set



a farre off, but it is by thee in thy month and in thine heart. This sentence which is legall in Moses, is euangelicalll in Paul: Rom. 10. 8. Psalm. 119. 1. Blessed are those that are perfect in the way, who walke in the law of Iehouah. 2. Blessed are they that keepe his testimonies and seeke him with their whole heart. Iohn 14. 21. Hee that hath my commandements, and keepeth them, is he that loueth me: he that loueth me shall be loued of my father. 23. If any man doe loue me, hee will keepe my word: and my father doth loue him, and we will come vnto him, and wee will dwell with him. Gen. 6. 9. Noah was a iust and vpright man in his time: Noah walked with God 
                  Indefinenter. 
                  continually. Gen. 17. 1. I am the strong God, omnipotent, walke alway before me and be vpright.
               
               The waies of Application are chieflie seuen, according to the diuers condition of men and people, which is seuenfold:
               
               
                  I. Vnbeleeuers who are both ignorant and vnteachable.
                  These men in the first place are to bee



prepared to receiue the doctrine of the word. 2. Chro. 17. Iehosaphat sent Leuites throughout the cities of Iudah to teach the people and to bring them from Idols.
                  This preparation is to be made partly by disputing or reasoning with them, that thou maist throughly discerne their manners and disposition, and partly by reprouing in them some notorious sinne, that being pricked in heart and terrified, they may become teachable. Act. 17. 17. Hee disputed in the Synagogue with the Iewes, and with them that were religious, and in the market place with whomsoeuer he met. Act. 9. 3. Now as hee iournied it came to passe, that, as hee was come neere to Damascus, suddenly there shined round about him a light from heauen. 4. And hee fell to the earth and heard a voyce saying to him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? 5. And he said, Who art thou Lord? And the Lord answered, I am Iesus of Nazaret, whom thou doest persecute: it is hard for thee to kicke against the pricks. Act. 16. 27. Then the keeper of the prison awoke out of his sleepe: and when he saw the prison doores open, he drew



out his sword, and would haue killed himself, supposing the prisoners had bin fled. 28. Then Paul cried with a loud voice, saying, Doe thy selfe no harme, for we are all here. 29. Then he called for a light, and leaped in, and came trembling, and fell downe before Paul and Silas. 30. And brought them out, and said, Sirs, what must I doe to be saued? 31. And they said, Beleeue in the Lord Iesus and thou shalt be saued, and thine household. Act. 17. 22. And Paul stood in the midst of Marsstreete, and said, Ye men of Athens, I see that in all things ye are 
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     too superstitious. 23. For as I passed by and beheld your deuotions, I found an altar, wherein was written, Unto the vnknowne God; whom ye then ignorantly worship, him shew I vnto you. 24. God, that made the world and all things in it, seeing that he is Lord of heauen and earth, dwelleth not in temples made with hands.
                  
                  When now there is hope that they are become teachable and prepared, the doctrine of Gods word is to be declared to them generally in some common termes or ordinarie points. Act. 17. 30. And the time of this ignorance God regarded not, but now he commandeth (
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ) all men euerie



where to repent. 31. Because hee hath appointed a day, in which hee will iudge the world in righteousnes by that Man whom he hath appointed, whereof hee hath assured all men, in that hee hath raised him from the dead.
                  
                  If they shal approue this doctrine, then it is to be opened to them distinctly & in euery particular; but if they shall remaine vnteachable without hope of winning them, they are to be left. Matth. 7. 6. Giue not that which is holy vnto dogges: neither cast your pearles before swine, lest they tread them vnder their feete, and turning againe all to rent you. Prou. 9. 8. Reprooue not a scorner, lest hee hate thee. Act. 19. 9. But when certaine men were hardned, and would not obey, speaking euill of the way of the Lord before the multitude, he departed from them, and separated the Disciples from them.
                  
               
               
                  
                     II. Some are teachable, but yet ignorant.
                  To these men the Catechisme must bee deliuered, Act. 18. 25. Apollos was catechized (
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ) in the way of the Lord. And



he spake feruentlie in the spirit, & taught diligently the things of the Lord, knowing only the baptisme of Iohn. 26. And hee began to speake boldlie in the Synagogue. Whom when Aquila and. Priscilla had heard, they tooke him vnto them, and expounded vnto him the way of God more perfectly. Luk. 1. 4. That thou maist know the trueth of those things, whereof thou hast been catechized (
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ) or instructed.
                  
                  The catechisme is the doctrine of the foundation of Christian religion, brieflie propounded for the helpe of the vnderstanding and memorie in questions and answers made by the liuely voyce.
                  
                  The matter therfore of the Catechisme is the foundation of religion.
                  The foundation is a certaine summe of the principles of Christianitie, Heb. 5. 12. For when as concerning the time ye ought to be teachers, yet haue yee neede againe that we teach you the [first principles of the word] of God.
                  
                  A principle is that which doth directly and immediatly serue both for the saluation of men and for the glorie of God, which being also denied and ouerturned



no saluation can be hoped for.
                  There are especiallie sixe principles: Repentance, Faith, Baptismes, that is, the Sacraments, Imposition of hands, that is, the ministerie of the word by a Synecdoche, the resurrection, and the last iudgement, Heb. 6. 1. 2. 3.
                  The forme of the Catechisme is to handle the elements or grounds plainelie by asking and answering, 1. Pet. 3. 21. To the which also, the figure that now saueth vs, euen baptisme agreeth (not the putting away of the filthines of the flesh, but the stipulation or 
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     interrogation of a good conscience). Act. 8. 37. What doth let me to be baptized? And Philip said vnto him, if thou beleeuest with all thine heart, thou maist. Then hee answered saying, I beleeue that Iesus Christ is the Sonne of God. Tertullian de resurrect, carnis saith: The soule is not purged with washing, but with answering.
                  
                  And here wee must hold a difference betweene Milke and strong meate, which are the same indeede, but do differ in the manner and fashion of deliuering.
                  
                     Milke is a certaine briefe, plaine and generall explication of the principles of



the faith: as when a man doth teach yt we must beleeue one God and three persons, Father, Sonne & holy Ghost; and that we must relie only vpon the grace of God in Christ; and that wee ought to beleeue the remission of sinnes; and when wee are taught that we ought to repent, to obstaine from euill, and to doe that which is good.
                  
                     Strong meate is a speciall, copious, luculent and cleere handling of the doctrine of faith: as when the condition of man before the fall, his fall, originall and actuall sinne, mans guiltinesse, free-will, the mysteries of the Trinitie, the two natures of Christ, the personall vnion, the office of Christ, the imputation of righteousnes, faith, grace, and the vse of the law, are deliuered out of the word of God distinctly and exactly.
                  Moreouer, milke must bee set before babes, that is, those that are rude or weak in knowledge: strong meat must be giuen to such as are of ripe yeres, that is, to them that are better instructed. 1. Cor. 3. 1. Moreouer, brethren, I could not speake vnto you as to spirituall: but I haue spoken vnto



you as to carnall, that is, to infants in Christ. 2. I haue fed you with milke, and not with meate. Heb. 5. 13.
               
               
                  III. Some haue knowledge, but are not as yet humbled.
                  In such the foundation of repentance ought to bee stirred vp, that is to say, a certaine sorrow which is according to God. 2. Cor. 7. 8. For though I made you sorrie with a letter, I repent not, though I did repent: for I perceiue that the same Epistle made you sorie, though it were but for a season. 9. I now reioyce, not that yee were sory, but that ye sorrowed to repentance: for yee sorrowed according to God (
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        ) so that in nothing ye were hurt by vs. 10. For sorrow, which is according to God (or godly) causeth repentance vnto saluation not to bee repented of: but worldly sorrow causeth death.
                  
                  Sorrow according to God, is a griefe for sinne, euen because it is sinne.
                  To the stirring vp of this affection, in the first place a man must vse the ministerie of the Law, which may beget contrition



of heart, or the horrors of conscience, which though it bee not a thing wholesome and profitable of it owne nature, yet is it a remedie necessarie for the subduing of a sinners stubbernnesse, and for the preparing of his minde to become teachable.
                  Now, that this legall sorrow may be wrought, it is fit to vse some choyce parcell of the law, which may reprooue some one notable sinne in men that are not as yet humbled. For sorrow for, and repentance Or, though but. euen of one sinne is for substance (
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ) sorrow for and repentance of all. Act. 8. 22. Repent therefore of this thy wickednes, and pray God, that if it be possible, the thought of thine heart may be forgiuen thee. Act. 2. 23. Him haue yee taken by the hands of the wicked, being deliuered by the determinate counsell, and foreknowledge of God, and haue crucified and slaine. Psalm. 32. 5.
                  Yea further, if any man being afflicted with the crosse, and with outward calamities haue only a worldly sorrow, that is, if he mourne not for sinne as it is sinne, but for the punishment of sinne, hee is not by and by to be comforted, but first this sorrow



is to be turned into that other sorrow which is Godly. according to God: as is the counsell of Physitians in the like case. For if a mans life be in danger by reason of bloud gushing out at his nose: they commaund also that bloud bee let out in his arme or in some other place as the case requireth, that they might stay the course of the bloud which rusheth out at the nostrils, that so they might saue his life, who was readie to yeeld vp the ghost.
                  Then let the Gospell be preached, in the preaching wherof the holy Spirit worketh effectually vnto saluation. For whilst he reneweth men, that they may begin to will and to worke those things that are pleasing to God, he doth truely and properly bring forth in them that sorrow which is according to God and repentance vnto saluation.
                  To the hard-harted the Law must bee vrged, and the curse of the Law must bee denounced with threatning, together with the difficultie of obtaining deliuerance vntill they bee purified in the heart. Matth. 3. 7. And when hee saw many of the



Pharises and of the Sadduces come to his baptisme, he said vnto them, O 
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     progeny of Vipers, who hath forewarned you to flie from the wrath to come? Matth. 19. 16. Good Master, what shall I doe that I may haue eternall life? 17. And he said vnto him—if thou wilt enter into life, keepe the commaundements. Mat. 23. 13. Woe vnto you Scribes and Pharisies, hypocrites, because ye shut vp the kingdome of heauen before men: for yee your selues goe not in, neither suffer ye those that are entring in (
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        ) to go in, &c. Vers. 33. O Serpents, and progeny of Vipers, how shall ye escape the damnation of hell?
                  
                  But when the beginning of compunction doth appeare, they are presently to be comforted with the Gospell.
               
               
                  
                     IIII. Some are humbled.
                  Here we must very diligently consider whether their humiliation bee compleat and sound, or but begun and but light or slight: lest that hee or they, receiuing comfort sooner than is meete, should afterwards wax more hard; like iron, which being cast into the fornace becomes exceeding



hard, after that it is once cold.
                  Let thy proceeding bee after this manner with those, that are humbled in part. Let the Law bee propounded, yet so discreetly tempered with the Gospell, that being terrified with their sinnes, and with the meditation of Gods iudgement, they may together also at the same instant receiue solace by the Gospell. Act. 8. 20. Then Peter said vnto him, thy monie perish with thee, because thou thinkest that the gift of God may be obtained by monie. 21. Thou hast neither part, nor fellowship in this busines, for thine hart is not right in the sight of God. 22. Repent therefore of this thy wickednes, and pray God, that if it be possible the cogitation of thine heart may bee remitted. 23. For I see that thou art in the gall of bitternes, and in the bond of iniquity. Gen. 3. 9. And the Lord God cried vnto Adam, and said vnto him, where art thou? And God said, who hath shewed thee that thou art naked? What, hast thou eaten of the fruit of that tree, of which I forbad thee to eat? 13. And the Lord God said to the woman, what is this which thou hast done? And the woman said, this Serpent hath seduced me,



and I haue eaten. 15. Moreouer, I will put enmitie betwixt thee and this woman, and likewise betweene thy seede and her seede: this shall breake thine head, and thou shalt bruise his heele. 2. Sam. 12. Nathan being sent from God, by a parable which hee doth propound, he recalleth Dauid to the conscience of his fact, and pronounceth pardon to him being penitent.
                  The doctrine of faith and repentance and the comforts of the Gospell ought to be promulged and tendred to those that are fully humbled. Luk. 4. 18. The Spirit of the Lord is vpon me, therefore he hath annointed mee to preach glad tidings to the poore: he hath sent me to heale the contrite in heart, to preach deliuerance to the Captiues, and to the blind the recouerie of their sight, and to set at libertie those that were broken. Act. 2. 37. When they heard these things, they were pricked in heart, and said vnto Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, Men and Brethren, what shall wee doe? 38. And Peter said vnto them: Repent and bee baptised euerie one of you in the name of Iesus Christ for the remission of sinnes. Matth. 9. 13. I came not to call the iust,



but sinners vnto repantance.
                  
               
               
                  
                     V. Some doe beleeue.
                  To these must be propounded. 1. The Gospell of iustification, sanctification, and perseuerance. 2. The law without the curse, whereby they may be taught to bring forth fruites of new obedience beseeming repentance. Rom. 8. 1. There is no condemnation to those that are in Christ Iesus. 1. Tim. 1. 9. The law is not appointed for the righteous. Let the Epistle of Paul to the Romans be the example. 3. Howsoeuer the curse of the law is not to be vrged against the person that is righteous and holy in the sight of God, yet it is to be vrged against the sinnes of the person, which are remaining. And as a father doth oftentimes set his yron rods that are appointed for the seruants before the eyes of his sonnes, that they may be frayed: so the meditation of the curse is to be stirred vp very often in the faithfull themselues, left they should abuse the mercie of God to licencious liuing, and that they may be more fully humbled. For sanctification is



but in part: therefore that the remainders of sinne may bee abolished, wee must alwaies begin with the meditation of the law, and with the feeling of sinne, and make an end in the Gospell.
               
               
                  
                     VI. Some are fallen.
                  Those that are fallen are they, which doe in part fall from the state of grace.
                  
                     Falling is either in faith or in manners.
                  Falling in faith is either in the knowledge of the doctrine of the Gospell, or in the apprehending of Christ.
                  Falling in knowledge is a declining into error, whether lighter or fundamentall.
                  Now vnto those that fall thus, that doctrine which doth crosse their error, is to be demonstrated and inculcated (or beaten vpon them) together with the doctrine of repentance, and that with a brotherly affection. Take for an example the Epistle of Paul to the Galatians. 2. Tim. 2. 25. Instructing them with meekenes that are (
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ) contrarilie affected: if God at any time will giue them repentance that they may know the trueth.
                  
                  
                     
The fall which is in apprehending Christ, is desperation.
                  For the restoring of those that doe despaire, there are to be vsed a Triall, and the Remedie.
                  
                  The Triall or Search is either of the cause of the temptation, or of their estate.
                  The triall of the Cause is made fitly by priuate confession. Iam. 5. 17. Confesse your sinnes one to another, and pray for one another that ye may be healed. But lest that confession should bee made a kinde of racke or torture, it must be limited with these prouisoes. 1. It ought to be free, and not compelled: because saluation depends not vpon it. 2. It must not be of all sinnes, but of those onely which wring the conscience, which vnlesse they doe reueale, greater danger may hang ouer their heads. 3. Let it chiefely be made to Pastours; yet so as that we must know that it may be safely made to other faithfull men in the Church.
                  The Triall of their estate is, whereby we make diligent inquirie whether they be vnder the law, or vnder grace.
                  That this may manifestly appeare, we



must by asking of questions first draw out of them, whether they be displeased with themselues, because they haue displeased God, that is to say, whether they hate sinne as it is sinne: which is the foundation of repentance vnto saluation. Secondly, we must demaund of them, whether they haue or doe feele in their heart a desire to be reconciled with God, which is the ground of a liuely faith.
                  When Triall is made, the Remedie must be applied vnto them out of the Gospell, which is double. First, some euangelicall meditations are to bee often inculcated and pressed vpon them: as 1. That their sinne is pardonable. 2. That the promises are generall in respect of beleeuers, and that they are indefinite in respect of particular men, and doe exclude no man. 3. That the will to beleeue is faith, Psalm. 145. 19. Reuel. 21. 6. 4. That sinne doth not abolish grace, but rather (God turning all things vnto the good of those that are his) doth illustrate it. 5. That all the works of God are done by contrarie meanes. Secondly, they must be intreated to stirre vp in them in the very bitternes of



the temptation, their faith which hath lien in a swoune, and bin Sopitam fidem. couered (as it were with ashes) and that they would certainely set downe with themselues that their sinnes are forgiuen them, and that it would please them to struggle manfully in prayer either alone or with others against carnall sense and humane hope. And that they may performe these things, they must be very earnestly beaten vpon, and those that are vnwilling must in a manner bee constrained. Psalm. 130. 1. Out of the depths haue I called to thee, O Lord. 2. Lord listen vnto my voyce: let thine eares attend to the voice of my praiers. Psalm. 77. 1. My voice came to God when I prayed, my voice went to God, that hee would turne his eare (vt aduertat aurem) vnto me. 2. In the day of my distresse I besought the Lord. Rom. 4. 18. Who (Abraham) against (
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ) hope beleeued vnder hope, that he should be the father of many nations.
                  
                  Now that these medicines may be of force, that ministeriall power of binding and loosing is to be vsed according to the forme prescribed in the word. 2. Sam. 12.



13. Then Dauid saidto Nathan, I haue sinned against the Lord: Wherefore Nathan saied to Dauid, Godhath also forgiuen thy sinne: thou shalt not dye. 2. Cor. 5. 20. Therefore wee are Embassadours in the name of Christ, God as it were beseeching you by vs: Wee pray you in the name of Christ that yee would be reconciled to God. And if perhaps Melancholie trouble the minde, the helpe of the medicine must be in priuate sought for.
                  
                     Falling in manners is, when any faithfull man falleth to the committing of some actuall sinne in life. As Noahs drunkennesse, Dauids adulterie, Peters deniall &c.
                  To those that are fallen thus, forsomuch as grace remaining in respect of her vertue and habit may be lost for a time in respect of sense and working; the Law must bee propounded being mixed with the Gospell: because a new acte of sinne requires a new acte (or worke) of faith and repentance. Isa. 1. 4. Ah, sinfull nation, a 
                     Isa. 1. 1, 2, 3, 4. 
                     people laden with iniquitie, a seede of the wicked, corrupt children: they haue forsaken the Lord: they haue prouoked the holy one of Israel to anger, they are gone backeward.


                     
16. Wash you, make you cleane, take away the euill of your works from before mine eyes, &c. 18. Come now, and let vs reason together, saith the Lord; Though your sinnes were as crimsin, they shall bee made white as snow: though they were red like skarlet, they shall be as wooll.
                  
               
               
                  
                     VII. There is a mingled people.
                  
                     Amixt people are the assemblies of our Churches. To these any doctrine may be propounded, whether of the Law or of the Gospell: if the 
                        i. If it be limited and meant to them. limitation and circumscription of the doctrine be made to those persons, for whom it is conuenient. Iohn 7. 37. Now in the last and great day of the Feast, Iesus stoode and cried, saying, If any man thirst let him come vnto mee and drinke. And this was the manner of the Prophets in their Sermons, to denounce iudgements and destruction to the wicked: and to promise deliuerance in the Messias to those that do repent. A 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . doubt. If any man shall despaire in the publike congregation, when the rest are hardened, what ought to be done? 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Ans. Let those



that are hardened, heare the Law circumscribed within the limits of the persons, and of the vices: and let the afflicted conscience heare the voyce of the Gospell applied in speciall manner vnto it.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  Of the kinds of Application.
               
               
                  
                     APplication is either 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Mentall or 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Practicall.
               
                  Mentall is that, which respecteth the minde: and it is either doctrine or Improouing, confuting. Redargution. 2. Tim. 3. 16. The whole Scripture is giuen by Gods inspiration, and is profitable for doctrine (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) for Redargution or improouing, (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) for correction (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) and for instruction (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) in righteousnesse. 17. That the man of God may be perfect, being perfectly instructed vnto euery good worke.
               
               
                  Doctrine is that, whereby doctrine (or teaching) is vsed for the information of the minde to a right iudgement concerning things to be beleeued.
               
                  
                  Redargution is that, whereby teaching is vsed for the reformation of the minde from error.
               In confutations, which are made publikely before the assembly, these cautions must be vsed. 1. The thing that is determined (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) or the state of the question that is to bee discussed must bee throughly vnderstood. 2. Let those errors onely be reprooued, which trouble the Church, in which we liue: all other being altogether let alone, which doe either lie dead, or are externall: vnlesse some daunger bee readie to ensue of them. Matth. 16. Beware of the leauen of the Pharisees and Saduces. Mark. 9. Take heede, and beware of the leauen of Herod. Reue. 2. The men of Pergamus are warned to beware of the Nicolaitans, to whom some of them did assent. 3. If the error be out of the foundation of faith, the confutation must not onely be Christianlike, as it should be euer: but also a friendly, a gentle and brotherly dissention.
               
                  Practicall application is that which respecteth the life and behauiour. And it is instruction (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) and correction, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               
                  
                  Instruction is that, whereby doctrine is applied to frame a man to liue well in the Or gouernment of the familie, oiconomia.
                   family, common-wealth, and Church. To this place belong consolation and exhortation. Rom. 15. 4.
               
                  Correction is that, wherby the doctrine is applied to reforme the life from vngodlines and vnrighteous dealing. Hitherto belongs admonition. This must be done, first generally, the circumstances of the persons being omitted. 2. Sam. 12. Nathan brings Dauid to the knowledge of his sinne by the helpe of a generall parable. Act. 19. 26. Ye see and heare, that not onely at Ephesus, but almost throughout all Asia, this Paul hath perswaded and turned away much people (because he saith that those are not Gods which are made with hands.) 35. Then the Towne Clerke, when hee had stayed the people, said, Ye men of Ephesus, &c. 37. Ye haue brought hither these men, which haue neither committed sacriledge, neither [doe blaspheme] your goddesse. Afterwards, if the former reproofe preuaile not, it must be vrged after a more speciall manner. 1. Tim. 5. 20. Them that sinne, rebuke openly, that the rest may also



feare. But alwaies, in the very hatred of sinne, let the loue of the person appeare in the speeches: and let the Minister include himselfe (if he may) in his reprehension, that it may bee more milde and gentle. Dan. 4. 16. Then Daniel—said, My Lord, the dreame be to them that hate thee, and the interpretation thereof to thine enemies. 17. The tree, which thou sawest—it is thou, 19. Gal. 2. 15. We that are Iewes by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles. 1. Cor. 4. 6. These things, Brethren, I haue by a kinde of figure translated to my selfe, and to Apollo for you, that yee might learne by vs not to be wise aboue that which is written.
               
               Now these foure kinds of application doe offer themselues in euery sentence of the Scripture. I will also set downe that example, which Illyricus hath propounded.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Illyricus in his booke of the way to vnderstand the Scriptures. Tract. 1.
                           
                              
                                 Matth. 10. 28.
                                 Feare yee not them which kill the bodie, but are not able to kill the



soule: but rather feare him, which is able to destroy both soule and bodie in hell. 29. Are not two Sparrowes sold for a farthing, and one of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father? 30. Yea, and all the haires of your head are numbred. 31. Feare yee not therefore, yee are of more value than many Sparrowes.
                              
                           
                           
                              It were easie to draw from hence many doctrines: partly of the confession of the faith: and partly concerning (Gods) prouidence.
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                                    . 
                                 Doctrine 1. That it is needfull for vs publikely to professe the doctrine which we know, so often as there is need. 2. That wee must make confession also with the hazzard of goods and life. 3. That our life should bee contemned in comparison of Christ and his trueth. 4. That eternall punishments to be suffered both in soule and bodie are prepared for those that are not affraid to denie Christ, and his trueth. 5. That God is intent and readie to gouerne vs, that we might make our confession aright. 6. That the prouidence of



God is not onely generall, but also speciall, which is diligently occupied about all our smallest matters, yea euen the haires of our head.
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                                    . 
                                 Redargution. 1. Those doe erre, who thinke it to bee sufficient, if in heart they doe embrace the faith and a right opinion concerning religion: and that it is at a mans choise in the meane season to graunt or affirme any thing before men, as the condition of the place, time, and persons requireth; especially when the life seemeth to be in imminent danger to be lost. 2. The Epicures erre, in that they denie the diuine prouidence: because they thinke it too base for the Maiestie of God to take care of humane affaires. 3. The Stoicks doe erre, who imagine that all things are gouerned by the fate, (or an vnresistable & violent necessitie.) 4. They doe erre who make chaunce and fortune, without any wise ordination of the diuine prouidence. 5. The Pelagians do erre in giuing more than is due to mans strength, as if it were put in mens power to embrace the faith at their pleasure, to continue constant in the same, and to confesse



it to the end without feare. 6. They doe erre, who doe leane more vpon outward things and inconstant riches, than vpon the power and goodnesse of God.
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                                    . 
                                 Instruction. 1. Thou must to the vtmost of thy power labour to haue the true feare of God before thine eyes: because thou now hearest that one God is to be feared aboue all men.
                              2. Thou must learne such a contempt of humane things, as that thou maist alwaies desire, hauing forsaken them, to depart hence, and to bee ioyned together with Christ in the heauens. 3. The consideration of (Gods) speciall prouidence doth cause thee to thinke of the presence of God that Beholder, to craue his helpe, and also to beleeue that thou art helped in all things, and finally that there is no danger so terrible, but hee both can and will deliuer thee from, when it is fit.
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                                    . 
                                 Correction. 1. These words of Christ correct their negligence, who in their prayers do not craue of God sincere loue, that being inflamed with it they may not refuse to lay downe their life for his name. 2. The negligence of those men is also



taxed, which doe not acknowledge and behold the prouidence of God shewing it selfe in all things. 3. Those are reproued, who giue not God thanks for vouchsafing to gouerne and defend vs and all things that belong vnto vs by his prouidence. 4. Those are reprooued, that abuse the good creatures of God, seeing that it is manifest that God hath care of all things.
                              Thus any place of Scripture ought to be handled: yet so as that all the doctrins be not propounded to the people, but those onely, which may bee fitly applied to our times and to the present condition of the Church. And they must not onely be choice ones, but also few, lest the hearers bee ouercharged with their multitude.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  Of Memorie in Preaching.
               
               
                  BBecause it is the receiued custom for Preachers to speak Memoriter. 
                  by heart before the people, some thing must bee here annexed concerning memory.
               Artificial memorie, which standeth vpon places and images, will very easilie without labour teach how to commit sermons to the memorie: but it is not to be approoued. 1. The animation of the image, which is the key of memory, is impious; because it requireth absurd, insolent and prodigious cogitations, and those especially, which set an edge vpon and kindle the most corrupt affections of the flesh. 2. It dulleth wit and memorie, because it requireth a threefold memorie for one: the first of the places: the second of the images: the third of the thing that is to be declared.
               
                  
It is not therefore an vnprofitable aduise, if he that is to preach doe diligentlie imprint in his mind by the helpe of dsposition either axiomaticall, or syllogisticall, or methodicall the seuerall doctrines of the place he meanes to handle, the seuerall proofes and applications of the doctrines, the illustrations of the applications, and the order of them all: in the meane time nothing carefull for the words, Which (as Horace speaketh) will not vnwillingly follow the matter that is premeditated. Uerba
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      praeuisam rem non inuita sequentur.
               
               Their studie hath many discommodities, who doe con their written sermons word for word. 1. It asketh great labour. 2. He which through feare doth stumble at one word, doth both trouble the congregation, and confound his memorie. 3. Pronunciation, action, and the holie motions of affections are hindred; because the mind is wholly bent on this, to wit, that the memorie fainting now vnder her burthen may not faile.
            
            
               
               CHAP. X.
               
                  HItherto hath bin spoken of the preparation or prouision of the sermon: the Promulgation or vttring of it followeth.
               In the Promulgation two things are required: the hiding of humane wisedome, and the demonstration (or shewing) of the spirit.
               
                  Humane wisedome must bee concealed, whether it be in the matter of the sermon, or in the setting forth of the words: because the preaching of the word is the Testimonie of God, and the profession of the knowledge of Christ, and not of humane skill: and againe, because the hearers ought not to ascribe their faith to the gifts of men, but to the power of Gods word. 1. Cor. 2. 1. When I came vnto you brethren, I came not with the eminencie of eloquence or of wisdome, declaring vnto you the testimonie of God. 2. For I did not decree



to know any thing among you but Iesus Christ, and him crucified. 5. That your faith should not consist in the wisedome of men, but in the power of God.
               
               If any man thinke that by this meanes barbarisme should bee brought into pulpits; hee must vnderstand that the Minister may, yea and must priuatly vse at his libertie the artes, philosophie, and varietie of reading, whilest he is in framing his sermon: but he ought in publike to conceale all these from the people, and not to make the least oftentation. Artis etiam est celare artem; it is also a point of Art to conceale Art.
               
               The Demonstration of the spirit is, when as the Minister of the word doth in the time of preaching so behaue himselfe, that all, euen ignorant persons & vnbeleeuers may iudge, that it is not so much hee that speaketh, as the Spirit of God in him and by him. 1. Cor. 2. 4. Neither was my speech and my preaching in the perswasiue words of mans wisedome, but in the demonstration of the spirit and of power. And 14. 42. If all prophecie, and there enter in an vnbeleeuer, or one that is ignorant, hee is reprooued



of all, be is iudged of all. 25. And so the secrets of his hart are disclosed, & so falling vpon his face, he willworship God, returning word that God indeed is amōg you. And 4. 19. I wil come vnto you shortly—and I wil know not their 
                  Non verba, sed virtutem. 
                  words that are puffed vp, but their power. 20. For the kingdome of God is not in words but in power. Mich. 3. 8. I am filled with power by the spirit of the Lord, and with iudgement and might to shew Iacob his defection, and to Israel his sinne. This makes the ministerie to bee liuely and powerfull. Luk. 11. 27. And it came to passe, when he had spoken these things, that a certaine woman of the multitude lifting vp her voyce said vnto him, Blessed is the wombe that bare thee, and the breasts that gaue thee sucke.
               
               This demonstration is either in speech or in gesture.
               
               The speech must be spirituall and gracious.
               
               That speech is spirituall, which the holy Spirit doth teach. 1. Cor. 2. 13. Which things also we speake, not in the words, which mans wisedome teacheth, but which the holy Ghost teacheth, comparing spirituall things



with spirituall things. And it is a speech both simple and perspicuous fit both for the peoples vnderstanding and to expresse the maiestie of the spirit. Act. 17. 2. Paul disputed with them three sabbath dayes out of the Scriptures. 3. Opening (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) and shewing that Christ must suffer and rise againe. Gal. 3. 1. O yee foolish Galatians:—to whom Iesus Christ before was described in your sight, and among you crucified. 2. Cor. 4. 2. But wee haue cast from vs the clokes of shame, and walke not in craftines, neither handle we the word of God deceitfullie: but in declaration of the trueth wee approoue our selues to euery mans conscience in the sight of God. 3. If our Gospell be then hid, it is hid to them that perish. 4. In whom the God of this world hath blinded the mindes, that is, of the infidels. &c.
               
               Wherefore neither the words of arts, nor Greeke and Latin phrases and quirks must bee intermingled in the sermon. 1. They disturbe the mindes of the auditours, that they cannot fit those things which went afore with those that follow. 2. A strange word hindreth the vnderstanding of those things that are spoken.



3. It drawes the mind away from the purpose to some other matter.
               Here also the telling of tales, and all profane and ridiculous speeches must be omitted.
               The speech is gracious, wherein the grace of the heart is expressed. Luk. 4. 22. And all bare witnes of him, and wondred at the gracious words, which proceeded out of his mouth. Iohn 7. 46. The Officers answered, neuer man spake like this man.
               
               Grace is either of the Person, or of the Ministerie.
               Grace of the person is the holines of the heart, and an vnblameable life: Which howsoeuer it makes not a Minister, yet is it very necessarie. 1. Because the doctrine of the word is hard both to bee vnderstood and to bee practised, therefore the Minister ought to expresse that by his example, which he teacheth, as it were by a type. 1. Pet. 5. 3. Not as though yee were Lords ouer Gods heritage, but that yee may be examples (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   types) to the flocke. 1. Tim. 4. 12. Be an example to the faithfull, both in word and conuersation. Phil. 4. 8. Furthermore, brethren, whatsoeuer things are true,



whatsoeuer things are honest—thinke on these things. 9. Which yee haue both learned, and receiued, and heard, and seene in me, those things doe, and the God of peace shall be with you. 2. He that is not godly, howsoeuer he may vnderstand the scriptures, yet doth he not perceiue the inward sense and experience of the word in his heart. Psalm. 25. 8. The Lord is good and right, therefore he teacheth sinners his way. 9. He maketh the meeke to walke in the Law, and teacheth the meeke his way. Amos 3. 7. Surely the Lord God will doe nothing, but he reuealeth his secret to his seruants the Prophets. Gen. 18. 17. And the Lord said, Shall I hide from Abraham the thing which I am about to do? 18. Seeing that Abraham shall be indeede the father of a great and mightie nation, &c. 29. For I know him that he will command his sonnes and his household after him, that they keepe the way of the Lord to doe righteousnes and iudgement. 3. It is a thing execrable in the sight of God that godly speech should bee conioyned with an vngodly life. Psalm. 50. 16. 17. Vnto the wicked God saith, what hast thou to doe to declare mine ordinances, and to take my



couenant into thy mouth, seeing thou hatest to be reformed. It is a strange sight to see him, that is the guide of the way to others, to wander out of the way himselfe, and to see a Physitian of others to be full of botches himselfe in the meane while, as Nazianzene speaketh. 4. It is an ecclesiasticall secret: That the Minister ought to couer his infirmities, that they bee not seene. For the simple people behold not the ministerie, but the person of ye Minister. Herod heard Iohn Baptist willingly, not because hee was a good minister, but because he was a good man. Mark. 6. 20. Well saith In verse. 
                  Nazianzene, He that teacheth sound doctrine, and liues wickedly, reacheth that with one hand, which he cleeketh away with the other. Chrysostome vpon the 25. of Matthew saith: The doctor of the Church by teaching well and by liuing wel instructeth the people how they ought to liue well: but by liuing ill he doth instruct God how to condemne him. And in his 30. Hom. in Act. It is an easie matter to shew wisedome in words, teach me to liue by thy life: this is the best teaching. For words make not such an impression in the soule as workes doe.



5. A Minister, that is wicked either openly or secretly, is not worthie to stand before the face of the most holy, and the almightie God. Ier. 15. 19. Therefore thus saith the Lord, If thou returne, then will I bring thee againe and thou shalt stand before me. Isai. 6. 6. Then flew one of the Seraphims vnto me with an hot coale in his hand, which hee had taken from the Altar with the tongues. 7. And hee touched my mouth and said, Loe, this hath touched thy lips, and thine iniquitie shall bee taken away, and thy sinne shall bee purged. 8. Also I heard the voyce of the Lord, saying, Whom shall I send? and who shall goe for vs? Then I said, Here am I, send me. Leuit. 10. 3. Then Moses said to Aaron, This is that which the Lord said, I will be sanctified in them that come neere vnto me, and I will bee glorified before the sight of all the people. And hence it is that the iudgements of God remaine for wicked Ministers to tremble at. 1. Sam. 2. 17. Therefore the sinne of the young men was very great before the Lord: for men abhorred the offering of the Lord. &c. ver. 25. They obeyed not the voyce of their father, because the Lord meant to slay them.
               
               
                  
The parts of sanctitie are especially, 1. A good conscience. 2. Cor. 1. 12. For our reioycing is this, the testimonie of our conscience, that in simplicitie and godly sinceritie, and not in fleshly wisedome, but by the grace of God, wee haue had our conuersation in the world. 1. Timothie 1. 19. Keeping faith and a good conscience, which some hauing put away as concerning the faith haue made Ship-wreck. Act. 24. 16. And herein I endeauour my selfe to haue alway a cleere conscience towards God, and towards men. If this bee wanting, the mouth of the speaker is shut. Isai. 56. 10. Their Watchmen are all blind: they haue no knowledge, they are all dumbe dogges, they cannot barke, they lie and sleepe, and delight in sleeping. 2. An inward feeling of the doctrine to be deliuered. Wood, that is capable of fire, doth not burne, vnles fire be put to it: and he must first be godly affected himselfe, who would stirre vp godly affections in other men. Therefore what motions a sermon doth require, such the Preacher shall stirre vp priuatly in his owne mind, that hee may kindle vp the same in his hearers. 3. The feare of God,



whereby, being throughly strucken with a reuerent regard of Gods Maiestie, hee speaketh soberly and moderately. 4. The loue of the people. 1. Thess. 27. But were gentle amōgst you, as a nurse that cherisheth her children. And that this affection may appeare, the Ministers dutie is to pray seriously and feruently for the people of God. 1. Sam. 12. 23. God forbid that I should sin against the Lord and cease praying for you. 5. The Minister must also be (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) venerable, that is, such a one as is to be reuerenced for constancie, integritie, grauitie and trueth-speaking, who also knoweth how to performe reuerence to others either priuatly or publikely, as is befitting the persons of all his hearers. 6. Hee must bee (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) temperant, who restraineth inwardly his ouer vehement affections, and hath his outward fashions and gestures moderate and plaine, by the which dignitie and authoritie may bee procured and preserued. Therefore hee must be neither couetous (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   a louer of siluer) nor (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) a follower of wine, nor litigious, nor a striker, nor wrathfull: And let the young men exercise themselues



to godlines, and flie the lusts of youth. 1. Tim. 4. 7.
               The grace of the ministerie is. 1. to be apt to teach (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) 1. Timothie 3. 2. Now Pauls meaning is, that it is not only decent and laudable if this gift be had, but also that it is so necessary, as that may not be wanting. For this consideration Nazianzene refused a bishopricke: and Theophylact vpon this place saith, that this dutie of teaching is especially of all other necessarie to be found in Bishops. In the Nicene and Miletian Councell, this was imposed in stead of a punishment, to hold the name of a Minister, but not to preach the Gospell. 2. Authoritie, whereby he speaketh as the Embassadour of the great Iehouah. Tit. 2. 15. These things speake and exhort, and rebuke with all authoritie. 1. Pet. 4. 11. If any man speake, let him speake as the oracles of God. 3. Zeale, whereby being most desirous of Gods glory he doth endeuour to fulfill and execute the decree of election concerning the saluation of men by his ministerie. Iob 32. 18. I an full of matter, and the spirit within me compelleth me. 16. Behold, my



bellie is as the wine which hath no vent, and like the new bottels that brast. 2. Tim. 2. 25. Instructing them—prouing if God at any time will giue them repentance, that they may know the trueth. Col. 1. 28. 29. Admonishing euery man—that wee may present euery man perfect in Christ Iesus.
               
               Gesture is either in the action of the voyce or of the bodie.
               The voyce ought to be so high, that all may heare. Isai. 58. 1. Crie aloud, and spare not: lift vp thy voyce like a trumpet. Iohn 7. 37. In that last and great day of the feast Iesus stood vp and cried, Act. 2. 14. And Peter standing with the eleuen lift vp his voyce and said.
               
               In the doctrine hee ought to bee more moderate, in the exhortation more feruent and vehement.
               Let there be that grauitie in the gesture of the body, which may grace the Messenger of God. It is fit therefore, that the trunke or stalke of the bodie being erect and quiet, all the other parts, as the arme, the hand, the face and eyes haue such motions, as may expresse and (as it were) vtter the godly affections of the heart. The



lifting vp of the eye and the hand signifieth confidence. 2. Chron. 6. 13. Salomon made a brazen scaffold, and set it in the middest of the court—and vpon it hee stoode, and kneeleddowne vpon his knees before all the congregation of Israel, and stretched out his hands towards heauen. 14. And said, O Lord God of Israel, &c. Act. 7. 55. And Steuen being full of the holy Ghost, bending his eies vp to heauen beheld the glory of God. The casting downe of the eyes signifieth sorrow and heauines. Luk. 18. 13. But the Publican standing afarre off would not so much as lift vp his eyes vnto heauen, but hee smote his breast saying, God be mercifull to me a sinner.
               
               Concerning the gesture other precepts cannot be deliuered; only, let the ensample of the grauest Ministers in this kind be in stead of a Rule.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XI.
               
                  Of conceiuing of Prayer.
               
               
                  HItherto hath bin spoken cōcerning Preaching of the word: it remaineth now to speake of the conceiuing of praiers: which is the second part of Prophecying, whereby the Minister is the voyce of the people in calling vpon God. Luk. 11. 1. One of his Disciples said vnto him, Lord, teach vs to pray, as Iohn also taught his Disciples. 1. Sam. 14. 24.
               Here are to be considered:
               1. The matter thereof, first the wants and sinnes of the people: and then the graces of God and the blessings they stand in neede of. 1. Tim. 2. 1. I exhort therefore aboue all things, that supplications—be made for all men. 2. For Kings and those that are in authoritie. Tertul. Apolog. saith, Wee doe all pray for all Emperours, that they may obtaine a long life, a quiet raigne, a safe familie, couragious armies, a



faithfull Counsell, loyall subiects, a peaceable world, and whatsoeuer things are desired of a man and of Caesar, Againe: Wee pray for Emperours, for their ministers and powers, for the state of the time, for the quietnes of their affaires, and for the delaying of their death. The Lords prayer reduceth this matter to sixe heads, which are Gods glorie, kingdome, obedience, the preseruation of the life, the remission of sinnes, and the strengthning of the spirit.
               2 The forme thereof. 1. Let there be one voyce, and that the Ministers alone, the people being in the meane while silent, and shewing their assent at the end, by saying Amen. Act. 4. 24. Who when they had heard these things, they lift vp their voyce with one accord vnto God, and said, &c. Nehem. 8. 6. And Ezra praised the Lord the great God, and all the people answered, Amen, Amen. 1. Cor. 14. 16. Else, when thou blessest with the spirit, how shall he that supplieth the place of the vnlearned say Amen at thy giuing of thankes. Iustine in his 2. Apolog. to Antoninus, saith: When the (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) President hath finished his prayers and thankes-giuings, all



the people that are present, crie out with a fauourable approbation, saying, Amen. Athanasius Apolog. ad Constant. Imp. Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 8. Ierome Prooem. 2. in Gal.
               
               2. Let the voyce bee vnderstood. 1. Cor. 14. 15. I will pray with the spirit, I will pray also with the vnderstanding: I will sing with the spirit, I will sing with the vnderstanding also.
               
               3. Let the voice be continued, not iagged and abrupt, that idle repetitions may be auoided, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Matth. 6. 7.
               4. The parts, which are three: Consideration, Ordering, and Vttering of it.
               Consideration is that, whereby fit matter for the framing of prayers is diligently searched for.
               Ordering is that, whereby the matter being found out is disposed in the mind in a certaine order.
               Prolation or vttring of it is that, whereby it is orderly pronounced in publike to the edifying of the people.
               Trin-vni Deo Gloria.
            
         
         
            
            THE ORDER AND SVMME of the sacred and only methode of Preaching.
            
            1. To read the Text distinctly out of the Canonicall Scriptures.
            
            2. To giue the sense and vnderstanding of it being read, by the Scripture it selfe.
            
            3. To collect a few and profitable points of doctrine out of the naturall sense.
            
            4. To applie (if he haue the gift) the doctrines rightly collected to the life and manners of men, in a simple and plaine speech.
            
            The Summe of the Summe.
            
               Preach one Christ by Christ to the praise of Christ.
            
            The Writers which lent their helpe to the framing of this Arte of Prophecying are:
            
               Augustine, Hemingius, Hyperius, Erasmus, Illyricus, Wigandus, Iacobus Matthias, Theodorus Beza, Franciscus Iunius.
            
            Soli Deo gloria.
            
         
      
   