
      
         
            
            
            Ε'ΠΙΕΙ'ΚΕΙΑ
OR,
A TREATISE OF
Christian Equitie and
moderation.
            Deliuered publikely in Lectures by M. W. Perkins,
and now published by the consent of his
Assignes in Cambridge
by
a Preacher of the word.
            
               Eph. 4. 31.
               Forgiue one another, as God for Christs
sake doth forgiue you.
            
            PRINTED BY IOHN LEGAT,
Printer to the Vniversitie of Cambridge. 1604.
            And are to be sold in Pauls Church-yard at the signe of
the Crowne by Simon 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
         
         
            
            
            To the right Honourable
the L. Sheffeild, Lord Lieuetenant, and
L. President. Sir Tho. Heskith, S. Iohn Benet
Knights. Charles Hales, R. William, Cutbert
Pepper, Iohn Ferne, Esquires, and the
rest of his Maiesties Hon. Councell, established
in the North parts, and vnder his
Highnes the highest Patrons of Equitie:
Grace and peace
from Iesus Christ.
            
               RIght Honourable and W.
how famous in all writers
the yeare Eightie eight, and
how fatall it was made by
all the old and later Coniecturers,
is not vnknown
to any of you: but how the issue answered
the expectation, I see not, saue only in that
notable ouerthrow of the enemies of god,
the Papists: whereupon our reuerendFulk. in pr
                     ••
                   in T
                     •
                  st. Rhe
                     ••
                  
                countreyman, and Christs Champion
for England, said very well:
Octogesimus octavus, mirabilis annus
               
               Clade Papistarum, faustus vbi
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   pijs.
            
            But if euer yeare deserue to be famous in
English Chronicles, it is this yeare, I cannot
tell whether I should say 1602, or
1603: wherein, whether Gods anger was
more, in taking from vs such a Queene (as
for ought I reade) the world neuer had: or
his mercie, in giuing vs such a King, as
England neuer had, I leaue it to better
heads to be determined. How is the name
of our God to be magnified, by whose
mercie so great a losse is made no losse,
but a gaine vnto vs? for who seeth not, that
all her Princely vertues, doe not only liue
in him, but are also in him (beeing a man)
more perfect and accomplisht. Shee is
dead, but her Heroicall zeale and loue to
Religion is aliue; shee bequeathed it with
her kingdome to his Highnesse, who
doubtlesse will make both her Religion,
and her Kingdome, to flourish as
much more, as a man doth excell a womā.
And who knoweth not, that the enemies
of our Religion, and our peace, (notwithstanding
all their politik dissembled brags
to the contrarie) doe finde his Maiestie so
little for their purpose, that now they
would sing a thousand Masses to haue
her aliue againe, against whom they thundred

outPius Grego
                     ••
                   Sixtus 
                     •
                  
                so many Curses and Excommunications,
and after whose blood they
so thirsted whilst shee liued: what straights
are they driuen into? who would wish her
aliue againe, at whose hands (though a woman)
they neuer gained, nor got one inch
of ground in 44 yeares;Paulus 
                     •
                  ius 4. Pius 5. Gregor Sixtus 5 Vrbanu
                     •
                   Gregor. Innocen Clement though nine or
ten Popes, and 10000 of their slaues, wrastled
with her all the while, with all the
power, and policie, craft, and trecherie,
which the Deuill could lend them. Nay,
her end was as glorious as her beginning,
and her last Proclamation against them,
was more to their shame, and lesse to their
comfort, then euer any, in her life before:
and so farre was shee, from allowing them
a Toleration, of their intolerable religion,
in her old, and therefore weakest age, as
that it neuer entred into her royall heart:
nor euer thought shee it worthie to be
made a question, whether it should be or
no. No, shee halted not betwixt two religions:
but to her Baal was Belial:1. King. 18▪
                & therfore
shee banisht him; and God was the
Lord, and therefore shee serued him. Shee
was resolued that Dagon must downe,1. Sam. 5. 2▪
                if
Gods Arke stand; or els if Dagon stand,
the Arke must away. For both together
cannot stand vpright. Shee held that as,

when the enemies themselues brought the
Arke into Dagons temple, Dagon fell
downe: so if the Israelites should haue admitted
Dagon into Gods temple, that the
Lord himselfe would haue remooued his
Arke from them. Blessed was shee in her
life, & twise blessed in her end: she lost not
her first loue,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   4, 19. and her works were more at
the last, then at the first: and blessed are
we that enioyed her so long: and more
blessed, who vnder her enioyed such 44
yeares, as all the bookes in the world cannot
shew vnder a woman: but most blessed
of all, in that after such a Dauid, God
hath sent vs such a Salomon, after such a
woman, such a man, after such a Queene,
such a King,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                who will make an ende of
many a Ioab, and many a Shimei, which
shee could not so well doe, and finish that
Temple which shee so well beganne:
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                and
who (I doubt not to affirme it) doe the
Deuill, and the craftie Papist, all they can,
is the chiefe Champion of Christ Iesus
vpon the face of the earth.
            And how happie a yeare shall this be, if
the losses which learning hath sustained
be as well recompenced. Iunius of Leiden,
Tossaine of Heilderberg, Perkins of Cambridge,
haue this yeare bin taken from vs,

besides many other, of inferiour note:
happie should those three famous Vniuersities
be, if the like were seated in their
roomes. Let vs leaue the first, to the lower,
the second to the higher Germanie, to
praise them, to lament them, and to make
supply for them. It is the third who especially
concerneth vs: what losse the Church
of God, and in the Church, England: and
in the Church of England, the Ministery:
and in the Ministerie, the Vniuersities: &
in the Vniuersities, the younger students
haue sustained by the vntimely death of
that Reuerend man, I thinke is not vnknowne
to any of you. For how should he
be vnknown to any (of any note) in England;
whose name and estimation is such in
other natiōs, as that at oneNund ver. 603. Mart we find,
that in one halfe yeare, two ofCatho reforma de mort de vita. Prophet his books
were translated into Latine, & foure were
were printed beyond the seas. The best recompence
of this losse, is the fruit of his labours,
which he hath left behind him,
whereof some were written by himselfe,
and others taken by other men from his
mouth: all which, at least so many of them
as may be perfected, there is hope we shall
intime inioy. Had not Iohan. Budaeus,
               Calr. in. and
Carolus Ionvillaus done so to Calvin: Vitus

Theodorus, Ioh. Frederus, and Iustus
Ionas done so to Luther, many worthy
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
workes of those two great instruments of
God had vtterly perished: and had not
some done so to this worthy mā, no doubt
many sweet blasts of that siluer trumpet
of God, had vanished away. For my part,
though time be pretious vnto me otherwaies,
yet thinke I that time well spent,
which I may bestowe in preparing to the
Presse, any thing of his. This discourse of
Equitie now made readie, as a child borne
after his fathers death, I present to your
Honourable viewe and patronage. If any
aske why I dare tender so small a gift, to so
great personages, my onely answer is, I
make the Iudges of Equitie, the Patrons
of Equitie. God graunt you a long and
Honourable state, vnder our worthy Salomon.
Amen. From my studie, Sept.
10. 1603.
            
               Your Honours, and
Worships in the
Lord:
W. Crashawe.
               
            
         
         
            
            To the Christian Reader
whosoeuer.
            
               I Doe here present vnto
thee, (Christian brother)
a small discourse of Equity,
deliuered by that faithfull
labourer in the haruest
of God, Mr. William Perkins, in a fewe
Lectures. The discourse is litle, and briefe,
but the matter is pithie, and the vse profitable.
Equitie and Christian moderation
whether publike or priuate, is the true
badge of Christianitie. Without publike
Equitie, what is the court of Iustice, but
turned into the seate of Iniquitie? and
without priuate Equity, what is mans life,

humane societie, neighbourhood, nay
friendship, nay kindred, nay marriage it
selfe, but euen a potion of poyson in a golden
cuppe? Art thou therfore a Magistrate?
here is taught thee, howe to discharge
thy place, in the execution of the
lawes, as shall neither be vnbeseeming
the lenitie of a Christian, nor the seuerity
of a Magistrate. Art thou a priuate man?
here is taught thee howe to carrie thy
selfe, in all dealing and bargaining with
another: howe to demeane thy selfe towards
thy wife, thy seruant, thy child, thy
friend, thy neighbour, in such manner, as
if thou hadst all the comforts and contentments
of this earth, yet the practise hereof,
shall make them all ten times more
comfortable: and the want hereof, shall
turne all their sweetnesse into gall and
wormewood. When therefore thou readest
this little booke, and withall, (laying it to
thy life) doest finde the truth of it in thy
course & conuersation, then acknowledge
the spirit of God in this holy man, (who
now sleepes in peace) praise God for him,

be waile his losse, and helpe me and others
with thy holy praiers, that wee may still
goe forward in this good worke, of publishing
these his godly labours: and in deliuering
out to the church of God these Iewels:
which the Lord from his mouth, gaue vs
to keepe, not for our owne, but for the common
good.
            
               Thy brother in
Christ Iesus,
W. C.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               Philip. 4. 5.
               Let your moderation of mind
be knowne to all men: the Lord
is at hand.
            
            
               THe Apostle in this chapter,
giues sundry exhortations, to
many Christian duties. In the
first verse, to perseuerance in
faith and true religion. In the
2. and 3. to mutuall concord. In the 4. to a
spirituall ioy in the Lord.
            In this 5. verse, he exhorteth to the vertue
of Equitie, or moderation of minde. Our
English translations commonly read it thus.
Let your patient minde be knowne to all men.
which though it be truly and well said, yet
the wordes translated haue a larger and fuller
signification. Therefore according to the

nature and force of the wordes, I rather
chuse to read it thus: Let your equitie or moderation
of mind be knowne &c.
            
            The wordes containe 2. partes.
            1. An exhortation, Let your equitie be
knowne to all men. 2. An excellent reason
to enforce it: the Lord is at hand.
            
            The drift and scope of the exhortation is,
to perswade the Phillippians, and in them
the whole Church, to the practise of Equity.
            
            Now this Equitie, wherevnto the holy
Apostle so earnestly exhorteth, is, a worthy
christian vertue, so excellent, as the carefull
practise thereof, is the marrow and strength
of a common weale, and where it is, there
cannot but be peace, and contentment in all
estates: and so necessarie: as without the
practise of it, no house, familie, society, cittie,
common-welth, kingdome, or Church
can stand or continue. Indeed a kingdome
may be established by force and armes, by
violence and crueltie: but it cannot stand or
continue, without this equitie, and christian
moderation betwixt man and man. Nay ciuill
society, and common dealing betwixt

man and man cannot continue, vnles one
man yeild to an other. In a word, there can
be no peace in families, no sound nor lasting
loue, betwixt man & wife, nor any comfortable
quietnes, where one doth not yeild to
the other, and one beare with an other in
many things. And if it be so in marriage,
which is the neerest coniunction, and the
most excellent and perfect societie, which is
in this world: then is it much more true, in
all other societies of men, that there can be
no peace, no christian neighbour-hood, no
true frendship, vnles one beare with another,
and one towards another do carry himselfe,
in an euen and moderate course.
            Seeing therefore this is so necessary and
excellent a vertue, I haue purposed to speake
of it at large. Let vs then examine these
two points 1. the nature of it, 2. the kindes of
it.
            For the first; Christian Equitie, is a rare
and excellent vertue, whereby men vse a
true meane, and an equall moderation, in all
their affaires and dealings with men, for the
maintaining of iustice and preseruation of

peace. This I take to be the true description
of the generall nature of this vertue: and
herein, First, I say it is a vertue, which is
conuersant about practising of a moderation,
in all our courses and dealings with men.
For we men can vse no meane nor moderation
with God, but if we do euill, it is all to
much, and if we do good, it is all to little: Againe,
equitie and moderation, is to be performed
of God towardes men, and not of
men towardes God. For if men deale not equally
towardes God, the fault is theirs and
not his, God is not worse for it; but if God
dealt not moderately with men: the world
would not last one houre, And lastly. where
there are no faults, there is no forgiuenes:
where no infirmities, there needes no moderation:
but in God there is no want, no
errour, no imperfection: but his loue, his
mercy, and his workes of loue and mercy
towardes mankind, and to his Church especially,
are most perfect, therefore there
needes no moderation, nor forbearance
towardes God, but towardes men, who being
flesh and bloud, and full of infirmitis,

(from which regeneration it selfe doth not
fully free vs) do therfore stand in need of this
vertue, to be practised amongest them: els
their societie and fellowship cannot endure.
And further, all men in this case are alike, and
therfore one hath good cause, to beare with
another. The Prince is flesh and bloud as
well as his subiects: the husband is flesh and
bloud, as well as the wife is; the Pastor is a
man as his people and hearers are. Hence it
followeth, that therefore one is subiect to
infirmities, as well as an other: and therefore
I conclude, that in all our courses & dealings
of man with man in this word, there must be
practised a christian moderation.
            
            Secondly, I say in the description, that the
end of this vertue, is to maintaine Iustice, &
to preserue peace; which two are the very
sinewes and strength, of a Christian kingdome;
for where we do not to other men,
as we would others should do to vs: there is
no iustice. And where we will not passe by
small faultes, and forbeare infirmities, there
can be no peace: such is the excellency of this
vertue, as it serues to maintaine two other

such great and principall vertues, as are euen
the harte, and the braine of the commonwealth,
namely: Iustice and Peace.
            But for the more exact, and particular
knowledge of the nature of this necessary
vertue: let vs descend to the particular branches,
and kindes of it.
            Christian Equitie therefore, is either publicke
or priuate.
            Publicke equitie is that, which is practised
in publicke metings and assemblies of
men, as in Courts of iustice, Assises, Sessions,
Counsells, Parliments, and such like.
            The matter, where about this publicke equitie
is conuersant: is the right and conuenient,
and the moderate and discrete execution
of the lawes of men.
            
            Lawes of men, made by lawfull authoritie,
according to Gods law, and for the common
good are, and are to be estemed, bones
and sinewes to hold to gether, proppes and
pillers, to vphold the common-wealth, and
all societies. God therefore hath giuen to
Kings, and to their lawfull deputies: power
and autoritie, not onely to commaund and

execute his owne lawes, commanded in his
word: but also to ordaine and enact, other
good and profitable lawes of their owne,
for the more particular gouernement of
their people, and to be helpes for the better
executing of the lawes of God. And also to
annexe a punishment and penaltie, to the
said lawes: which penaltie is to be according
to the qualitie of the fault, greater or lesse:
in so much that they may in many cases, (if
the common good so require) inflict euen
death it selfe. And further God hath giuen
these goddes vpon earth, a power as to
make these lawes, and annexe these punishments:
so also vpon mens defaults and breaches,
hath he giuen them authoritie to execute
the law so made, and to inflict vpon the
offender, the punishment annexed.
            Now because this point is of great moment,
in a common wealth: and the true
knowledge and due practise thereof, is the
glory and bewtie of a kingdome: therefore
for the better directiō herein, both of prince
and people, magistrate and people gouerned:
let vs enter further into the consideration

thereof.
            In the lawes of common-wealthes, two
things are to be considered, the sight whereof
will giue great light, to know more perfectly,
what this publicke equitie is.
            
            These are 1. the extremitie of the law. 2.
the mittigation of the law.
            Both these, are put into the hand of the
Magistrate by God himselfe, to be ordered
according to his discretion, and as the circumstance
requireth; and of them in order.
The extremitie of the law, is, when any
law of man, is vrged and executed straightly
and precisely, according to the literall sence,
and strict forme of the wordes, and the exactest
meaning, that can be made out of the
wordes, without any manner of relaxation,
at that time, when there is good and conuenient
cause of mittigation, in regard of the
person offending.
            This point cannot well be expressed in
sewer wordes.
            The principall and most materiall clause
in this discription of extremitie, is in those
wordes. At that time, when there is iust

cause of mittigation, in regard of the person
offending. For if there be no good cause of
mittigation: then it is not called, extremitie:
but iustice of the law: but when there is
good cause, why in a Christian consideration
of some circumstances, this iustice should
be mittigated, and yet is not, but contrariwise
is extremely vrged, and pressed to the
furthest: then it is extremitie. Now this
extremitie of the law, is in this case so farre
from iustice, as indeed it is flat iniustice. And
herein is the prouerbe true. Summum Ius
summa iniuria; that is, the extremitie of
the law, is extreme iniurie. And of this doth
the holy ghost meane, Eccles. 7. 8. be not
ouer iust, that is, presse not iustice to farre,
nor vrge it to extremely in all cases, least
sometimes you make the name of iustice, a
couer for crueltie.
            Now besides this, there is a second thing in
the hand of the Magistrate, namely the moderation,
relaxation, or mitigation of this
extremitie: and that is, when the proper
forme of the wordes, and the strictest meaning
of the law is not vrged, and the punishment

prescribed in the law, is moderated, or
lessened, or deferred, or (it may be) remitted,
vpon good and sufficient reason; and in such
cases, as whereof the lawe speakes not directly,
nor the law-maker did purposely aime
at. The ground of this mittigation is, because
no lawe makers beeing men, can foresee, or
set downe, all cases that may fall out. Therefore
when the case altereth, then must the
discretion of the lawemaker shew it selfe,
and doe that, which the law cannot doe.
            This mitigation is in the hand of the Magistrate,
as well as the extremitie: nay it is a
part of his dutie as well as the former: and he
offends as well, that neglects to mitigate the
extremitie, when iust occasion is: as he that
neglects to execute the extremitie, when
there is neede. As therefore, he is no way fit
to be a Iudge, who hath no knowledge, or
care to execute the lawe: so he is but halfe
a Iudge, who can doe nothing but vrge the
lawe, and the plaine words of the lawe, and
is not able also, to mittigate the rigour of
of the lawe, when neede so requireth.
Therefore euery Magistrate, is to practise

this with the other, and not to separate
those things which God hath ioyned.
            But now least this moderation, and mittigation
of mans lawes, (which is the practise
of publike equitie) should turne to the maintenance
of malefactors, the abolishing of
lawes, the despising or weakening of authoritie,
(which in these daies little needeth) we
must therefore nowe remember this caution.
That there must be no mittigation, but
honest, profitable, and conuenient. If any
man aske, when is it so? I answer in three
cases.
            First, when the mittigation stands with
the lawe of nature.
            Secondly, when it agreeth with the morall
lawe, or any part of the written word.
            Thirdly, when an inferiour law is ouer-ruled
or countermanded by a higher lawe.
            In these three cases, the moderation of
mens lawes and the mittigation of the punishment
due, by the extremitie of these lawes,
is honest and good, and may and ought to be
practised.
            But if it be contrarie, and not warranted

by some of these: then that mittigation is
flatt iniustice, and a manifest wrong vnto the
law.
            That the difference of these two, the extremitie
and mittigation, may better be
discerned, let vs consider it in some examples.
            It is the law of England, and many other
countries, that the theife shall die.
            Now though the word of God, hath not
the same punishment in plaine tearmes: yet
is the law good and warrantable, as shall appeare
in the sequell, and I thinke is doubted
of by none.
            The drift of this law is, to represse that
common and generall sinne of the euerie, a
preuailing sinne, as any other, and so farre
preuailing; as the rigour of good lawes is necessarily
required, for the repressing of it: so
that this lawe was made, for the cutting off
of such rotten members, as doe but corrupt
others, and of whose amendment there is no
hope.
            Now, suppose a young boy pinched with
hunger, cold, and pouertie, steales meate, apparell,

and other things for releife, beeing
pressed to it by want, and not hauing knowledge,
or grace to vse better meanes: to put
this person to death, for this facte, is the extremitie
of the law, in respect of the circumstances
of the person, who did it, beeing a
childe: and of the end, for which he did it, to
releiue his wants.
            Now the moderation in this case is, when
vpon these considerations, that first, he is not
an olde, nor a practised theife: but young and
corrigible; one that beeing reformed, may
liue long, and prooue a good member in
the common wealth: and secondly, that his
theft was not hainous, but the things he
stole were of small value: and thirdly, that
he did it not vpon a malitious, cruel, and iniurious
intent, but to releiue his hunger
and want. The equitie or moderation, I say
in this case, is not to inflict death, (for that
were extremitie) but to determine a punishment,
lesse then death: yet such a one,
as shall be sufficient, to reforme the partie
from his sinne, to punish the fault, to terrifie

others, and to satisfie the law.
            Thus in this example, it apeares manifestly
what this moderation is, and what is extremitie,
which is contrary to it: and the same
might we see in many more.
            Now hauing thus considered these two together,
here vpon we may see what this publicke
equitie is, namely nothing els, but a
moderation and mittigation of the extremitie
of a law, vpon honest and conuenient
reasons, and in such cases, as were not directly
intended in the law. The obseruation
and due practise of this equitie, is the glorie,
credit and honour of all publicke assemblies,
as assises, sessions and all courts of iustice, and
without the obseruation of this when
need is, all that they do is flat iniustice in that
case. For they lame and maime the lawe, they
fulfill but the one part of the lawe: for in euery
lawe there are these two thinges; the extremitie
in plain tearmes, and the mittigation
implied: and these two together make
the lawe perfect: and the glory of the lawe,
standes as well in practising of mittigation,
as in the execution of extremitie, nay sometime

it standes in the mittigation, and not in
the extremitie, insomuch as the moderation
is then the equitie of the lawe, and the extremitie
is more iniustice. And as this is the
glory of the lawe, so is it the glory of Iudges
and Magistrates, thus to execute the lawes,
and to temper them with such discretion, as
neither too much mittigation, do abolish the
law, nor too much extremitie leaue no place
for mittigation. Therefore (to make an end
of this point) two sortes of men are here reproueable.
First such men, as by a certain foolish
kind of pittie, are so carried away, that
would haue nothing but mercy, mercy, and
would haue all punnishments, forfaitures,
penalties, either quite taken away, and remitted,
or at least lessoned, and moderated,
they would also haue the extremitie of the
lawe executed on no man. This is the high
way to abolish lawes, and consequently to
pull downe authoritie, and so in the end to
open a dore to all confusion, disorder, and to
all licentiousnes of life. But I need not to say
much herein, for there are but few that offend
in this kind, mans nature beeing generally

inclined, rather to crueltie then to mercie:
This fault proceedeth either from a
weakenes of witt, and an effeminatenes of
minde; and then a man is vnfit to be a Iudge;
or else from vaine glorie, and a base and affected
popularitie, and such a man is vnworthy
to be a Iudge.
            But in the second place, this doctrine and
the very scope of this text, condemnes another
sort of men, which are more combersome;
that is to say, such men as
haue nothing in their mouthes, but the
lawe, the lawe: and Iustice, Iustice: in the
meane time forgetting, that Iustice alwaies
shakes hands with her sister mercie, and that
all lawes allowe a mittigation. The causes of
this euill are two.
            1. The generall corruption of mans nature,
which is alwaies readie, to deale too
hardly with other men: as also too mildely
with themselues, and partially in their owne
causes.
            2. And secondly, for the most part, such
men doe gaine more by lawe, then by equitie,
more by extremitie, then by mittigation:

as the souldier liues better by warre, then
by peace; and as the flesh-flie, feedes on the
wound, that cannot feede on the sound flesh:
so these men gaine by law, that which they
can neuer get by equitie: for equitie and moderation
breede vnitie, and if all men were at
vnitie, what should become of them? but extremitie
breeds variance: for (in reason) one
extremitie drawes on an other, and so in
mens variances they are set on worke: and
the more the better for them. These men
therefore, sticke so precisely on their points,
and on the very tricks and trifles of the law,
as (so the law be kept, and that in the very extremitie
of it,) they care not, though equitie
were troden vnder foote: and that law may
raigne vpon the earth, and they by it: they
care not, though mercie take her to her
wings, and flie to heauen. These men (for all
their goodly shewes) are the decayers of our
estate, and enemies to all good gouernment.
For though they haue nothing in their
mouthes, but Iustice, Iustice, and haue banished
mercie, yet let them know, that Iustice
will not stay where mereie is not. They are

sisters, and goe alwaies hand in hand: they
are the two pillars, that vphold the throne of
the Prince: as you cannot hold mercy, where
Iustice is banished, so cannot you keepe Iustice
where mercie is exiled: and as mercie
without Iustice, is foolish pitie, so Iustice
without mercie, is crueltie. So that as these
men haue banished mercie, so within a short
time, they will send Iustice after her, and crueltie
and oppression will come in their
rooms, which are the very ouerthrow of all
estates.
            These men, when they are made practisers
of the law, Iudges, or Magistrates, are
to learne this lesson, which the holy Ghost
here teacheth, Let you Equitie be knowne to
all men: and let all Magistrates thinke it their
honour, to be counted mercifull Iudges: let
them reioyce, as well to shew mercie when
there is cause, as to execute extremitie when
there is desert: and let them labour for that
Christian wisdome and discretion, wherby
they may be able to discerne, when mercie
and mitigation should take place, and when
extremitie should be executed. If inferiour

Iudges or Magistrates be negligent herein,
then must we haue recourse to the Prince,
the highest Iudge on earth, and vnder God
the first fountaine of Iustice and mercie:
whose care must be, that as Iustice and mercie
(not one of them, but both together) doe
vphold his throne, and fasten the Crowne
vpon his head: so he likewise see them both
maintained, and take order, that in the execution
of his owne lawes, there be alwaies
a roome as well for mercie and mitigation,
as for Iustice and extremitie. This must he
doe, because his lawes cannot be as Gods
lawes are. Gods lawes are perfect, and absolute,
and of such an vniuersall righteousnes,
as that at all times, and in all places, they are
of equall strength, and of the same equitie in
all cases: and therefore are to be executed
without dispensation, relaxation, or any mitigation,
which cannot be offered vnto thē,
but with iniurie and violation. But mens
lawes, comming from their owne wits, are
imperfect, and so in all cases, they doe not
hold the same equitie, and therefore must
needes be executed with a discreet and wise

moderation. This moderation is publike equitie,
and this publike Equitie, is the scope
of this text, and the due practise of it in the
execution of mans lawes, is the glorie of all
Christian Commonwealths.
            Hitherto of the first and principall branch
of Publike Equitie.
            
            To proceede further. As this publike Equitie
principally stands, in the moderation
of the laws of men; so it descends more specially
euē to all the publike actions of a mans
life: so that by the rule and direction of this
Equitie, thus described, men may know
how to guide themselues, in suing bondes,
and taking forfeitures: and how men may
with good conscience, carrie themselues in
suretyships, in taking of fines, in letting of
leases, and in all manner of mutuall bargains,
betwixt man and man. By vertue of this, a
man may see how to frame all these and such
like actions, in such sort, as himselfe shall
reape credit, and gaine ynough, & his neighbour
helpe and succour by him.
            For in forfeitures of bonds, forfeitures of
lands, or leases, in suretyships, in rents, in fines,

and all other dealings of men togither, there
are these two things.
            First, the extremitie, that is, that which
the law will affoard a man in that case: and
there is secondly, the moderation of the extremitie,
vpon good and conuenient reasons:
let vs consider of them in some fewe
examples.
            A man is bound to another, in an hundreth
pound, to pay fiftie at a day. The same
man, not by negligence, but by some necessitie,
breakes his day, and afterwards brings
the principall debt. Now to take the forfeiture,
is in this case, extremitie: though the
law doth yeeld it. And if a man stand vpon
this extremitie, he deales not honestly and equally,
but hardly and extremely with his
neighbour: and the law cannot free him in
this case, from manifest Iniustice.
            What is then the moderation in this case?
Euen this, to take thine owne and remitte
the forfeiture: the reason is, because the cause
& groūd of appointing a forfaiture, was not
for aduantage, but only for the better securitie
of the principall: which seeing thou hast,

thou hast that which the law did intēd thee.
            Againe, his breach was not wilful, or with
purpose to hurt thee, but against his will. If
therefore thou beest directly damnified by
his missing thy day, (without all aequiuocation)
then take thy reasonable dammages,
out of his forfeiture, if not, then remitte
the vvhole forfeiture; and this moderation is
publike equitie. And without this, there can
be no buying nor selling, borrowing nor
lending, betwixt mā & man. See another example.
One takes a lease of thee, for yeares,
to pay thee such a rent; & for not paiment of
that rent, his lease to be voide. The poore
man misseth his rent day, now what saith the
lawe? his lease is forfeited, but to take this aduantage,
is the extremitie of the lawe: the
moderation is, to remit the same forfeiture,
in part, or in whole, as thou shalt see reason
in equitie and conscience: This moderation
is in this ease, Publike equitie, and without
this, there can be no letting of lands, betwixt
man and man.
            So for fines and rents, the lawe saith, Thou
maiest make the most of thine owne, if thou

stretch this law as farre as the very wordes
will beare, then maiest thou make such fines
and rents, as may grinde the faces of the
poore, so as no man shall liue vnder thee: but
thus to doe is Extremitie, and beyond the
purpose of the lawe.
            
               The moderation in this case is, not to take
all thou maist get, but so to fine and rent thy
lands, as he that takes them, may liue of thē:
The reason of this Mittigation is, because
enuie and hatred, may often make many
men offer more for a farme, then it is worth,
to crosse and hurt their neighbour, or to get
all into their owne hand. Here therefore,
though the lawe doeth yeild thee all that,
which a man doeth willingly offer, yet must
thine owne conscience be a lawe vnto thee,
to make thee a moderator of that extremitie.
            Let these three examples serue for many.
Now in these and all other publike dealings
betwixt men in the world; a man obserues
Publike equitie, when he dealeth not with
his neighbour, according to that extremity,
which the strickt wordes of the lawe will

beare: but according to that Moderation,
which good conscience requireth: & which
the lawe it selfe in some cases doth admit. By
the knowledge of these two, a man that
hath any conscience, may see howe to carrie
himselfe, in all these ciuill affaires, in an euen,
vpright, and equall course, and warrantable
not onely by the lawe of the land, but euen
by the law and word of God.
            And I make this distinction of the lawe of
the land, and the word of God, because we
are to knowe this for a rule: That euery extremitie,
which a law in the strictest acception
doeth affoard, is not warrantable to be
vrged by the word of God: and yet notwithstanding
it is good, conuenient, and requisite,
that the extremitie be warranted by the
lawe, because in some cases, it must needes be
executed. The lawes of men, may ordaine
and appoint extremities: but the law of God
must tell vs, when to vrge them, and when
to moderate them: So then, when a man
takes the extremitie, he doeth that, that is alwaies
warrantable by the lawe: but in some
cases, is not warrantable by Gods word,

which commandeth a Mittigation, when
there is good reason for it. But he that taketh
the extremitie, when there is no iust cause
of mitigating it, and againe doth mittigate
it, when there is cause, his course is not onely
warrantable by the lawes of men, but euen
by the lawes of God also. For it is the dutie
of euery Christian man, to remember in all
his bargains and dealings, that his manner of
dealing, must not onely be warranted by the
lawes of the land, but euen by Gods word also:
and this is to be knowne and taken for a
generall rule in all this treatise. And he that
will duely consider the true difference of extremitie
and moderation, as they are here described,
may see how to carrie himselfe in all
his dealings, so as they may be warrantable:
both by our owne lawes, and by the word
of God.
            To returne then to the matter, and to end
this point of publike equitie: If any man shall
obiect, that this moderation is a wrong to
the law: I answer, it is not: for it is neither against
the lawe, nor altogether besides the
lawe, but onely beside the stricttest meaning

of the lawe. Nay it is included in the
lawe, as well as the extremitie is, though not
in the same manner: for the extremitie is
warranted by the law, mitigation is but tollerated:
the lawe alloweth extremitie, but
it onely admitteth a mitigation. So then,
both extremitie and mitigation, are within
the lawe, but it is in the hand principally of
the Magistrate, and in some cases, of other
men also, to discerne the seuerall circumstances,
when the one is to be executed, & when
the other: for sometime one is the iustice of
the lawe, and sometime the other: and according
as these two are iustly and wisely executed
or neglected, so is the iustice of the
lawe executed or neglected.
            The want of this equitie in mens publike
actions, is the cause of much crueltie, oppression,
and inequalitie in dealings betwixt man
and man: because extremitie is for the most
part onely regarded, and mitigation is banished
out of all bargains. And it is impossible,
to keepe good conscience in forfeitures of
bonds, and in forfeiture of lands, suretiships,
fines, rents, and such kind of actions, vnlesse

there be due regard had to the practise of
this publike equitie. Men therefore, must
consider that they are Christians, and liue in
a Christian commonwealth: And they must
not stand onely vpon the lawe, and the aduantage
that the law giues. As they are men,
they haue a lawe of the countrie, which
may allow extremitie: but as they are Christians,
they liue vnder a law of God, the eternall
lawe, which must iudge them at the last
day: the righteous lawe, which no creature
shall euer be able to blame of iniustice, or of
extremitie: and men must know, that God
himselfe commands this equitie of one man
to another.
            But if men, for the feare of God, will not
deale equally and moderately, with them that
are in their power: but stand strictly vpon
forfeitures and other extremities: then
must the godly Magistrate exercise his power,
and by the force of his authoritie, cause
them to mitigate their extremitie, and to
put in practise that equitie which becommeth
Christians. And let euery Iudge and
Magistrate knowe, that by the lawe of the

euerlasting God, he not onely may, but is
bound thus to doe to them, who will not
doe it of themselues. It may be therefore
good counsell to all men, rather to practise
this Christian equitie of themselues, thē to be
compelled to it by authoritie: for euery vertue
and good worke, the more free and
voluntarie it is, the more acceptable is it to
God, and more commendable before men:
and let all men remember, that whereas the
strict words of mens lawes, seeme to giue
them leaue to vrge the extremitie, yet cannot
that excuse them, nor free them from
the danger of Gods law, which commands
them to practise Christian equitie and moderation.
            
            Now before we make an ende of this
Publike Equitie, one point is necessarie to be
handled in few words. Some may obiect, If
moderation be intended, and included in our
law, as well as Extremitie, why then is extremitie
onely mentioned in the law, and not
this mitigation, which they so much doe
vrge vnto vs? The answer is readie. The law
expresseth and vrgeth the extremitie, to fray

men thereby, from comming within the
danger of the extremitie; and concealeth the
mitigation, least it should be an encouragement
to offend: yet intending it as well as
the extremitie, and leauing it in the hand of
the Magistrate, to put in practise, when iust
occasion is offered, as well as the extremitie.
Herein appeareth the great wisdome of the
lawmakers, our auncient forefathers, who
well and wisely foresaw, that though mitigation
be as necessarie as extremitie, and
oftentimes more: yet because of the ill consciences
of the most men, and the readines of
all men to offend, thought it fitter to expresse
the extremitie in plaine tearmes;
thereby to keepe ill men within the compasse
of obedience, and closely to leaue the
mitigation to the discretion of the Magistrate.
So then our lawegiuers concealed the
mitigation, and expressed it not in their laws,
in good pollicy, and to good purpose. If
we therefore doe onely take the extremity,
we take onely one part of their intent, and
shew our selues vnwise, and shallow witted,
who cannot see the wisedome, which they

closely concealed, in wise and Christian pollicie.
            He is not worthie the name of a lawyer,
at least of a Christian lawyer, much lesse
worthie the place and seat of a Iudge, who
knoweth not this. For if the law contained
not both these, it were vnrighteous, and so
no law. For mitigation is for the good man,
and extremitie for the euill, the carelesse, and
vnconscionable man: if there were no extremitie,
how could the euil man be kept within
compasse? and how should the poore honest
man liue, if there were no mitigation?
So then, it is warrantable by the word of
God, and good conscience, that extremitie
should be in force, and should stand by law,
but so as it alwaies admit of mitigation, whē
neede is.
            Let therefore our conclusion be, to exhort
euery man, into whose hands is put the
execution of lawes, to shew himselfe as wise,
in executing them, as were our forefathers
in the making of them: that is, as well to regard
the Mitigation which is concealed, as
the Extremitie which is expressed: so shall

the lawmakers wise intent be performed,
publike equitie preserued, and much Iniustice
and hard dealing preuented.
            
            Now in regard of this, that hath beene
deliuered touching publike Equitie, lawyers
must not thinke, that I haue gone beyond
the compasse of my calling, and encroched
vpon their liberties. For they are to know,
that the laws of men, are policie, but Equitie
is Christianitie. Now Christianitie was, before
there were any laws of men: and therefore
they must be ordered according to the
rules of Christianitie. Againe, Diuines must
take lawyers aduise, concerning Extremitie,
and the letter of the law: good reason then
that lawyers take the Diuines aduise, touching
Equitie which is the intent of the law.
Moreouer, their law is but the minister of
equitie; but our law the word of God is the
fountaine of Equitie: therefore the principall
rules of Equitie, must they fetch from
our law: considering that law without equitie,
is plaine tyrannie. Lastly, in the first
Christian Commonwealth that euer was,
namely, the Iewes, the Diuines, that is, the

Priests of those daies, were the onely lawyers:
for their positiue lawes were the Iudiciall
lawes, giuen by God himselfe, whose
interpreters were the Priests and Leuites. If
therefore, once the Diuines had so much to
doe with positiue lawes, it may not nowe
be thought amisse, if they giue aduice out of
the word of God, touching the equall execution
of the lawes of men.
            And so much touching the doctrine of
publike Equitie, grounded vpon the word
of God.
            Now followeth the second kind of Equitie,
called priuate; namely that, which is to be
exercised betwixt man and man, in their priuate
actions.
            But ere we goe further, some may demande
the difference betwixt publike and
priuate actions. Priuate actions of men are
such, as are practised amongst men, without
any helpe of the lawe: as contrariwise, Publike
actions are such, as cannot be performed
but by the helpe of the lawe, and the hand of
the Magistrate. Wherevpon it followeth,
that publike actions may be betwixt priuate

men, and priuate actions betwixt publike
persons: there is a publiknes and a priuatenes
(as I may tearme it) both of men and actions.
A man is priuate, vntill he be exalted
vnto some authoritie, in Church or Commonwealth:
then he is a publike person. An
action is priuate, as long as it is begunne and
handled betwixt two men, and needeth not
the publike voice, nor censure of the law to
determine it, and then it is publike. For example:
a Magistrate may haue dealing with
an other man, or two Magistrates together.
If they determine it together betwixt themselues,
it is a priuate action, because they doe
it, not as they are Magistrates, but as they are
men: and so there is a priuate action betwixt
publike persons. So a priuate man no Magistrate,
may haue a trespasse, a debt, a forfeiture,
or any other action or demand against
another man: wherein (because he cannot
come to a reasonable and equall ende, by priuate
meanes) he craues the helpe of the law,
and the voice of the Magistrate: and so here
is a publike actiō betwixt priuate men. Now
this vertue of Equitie respecteth not the

publiknes or priuatenes of the persons, but
of the actions: therefore as that is Publike Equitie,
which is exercised in the determining
of publike actions, which come to the iudgement
of the law: so that is Priuate Equitie,
which is practised in the managing of Priuate
Actions, which are begun and concluded
priuately betwixt man and man, and
neuer come to publike hearing, nor triall of
the law.
            Now let vs come to search more neerely
into the nature of this vertue. Priuate Equitie
is a moderate, euen, and equall carriage
of a mans selfe, in all his priuate wordes and
deedes, towards all other men, and all their
words and deedes. First, I say, it is [a moderate
carriage] of a mans selfe, that is, betwixt both
extreames, neither bearing all things, nor
reuenging euery thing. Secondly, I say towards
all other men: wherein I comprehend
all men, & all sorts of men: husbands, wiues:
Magistrates, subiects: teachers, hearers: masters,
seruants: Parents, children: men, women,
neighbours in townes, fellows in societies,
in seruice, in labour. In a word, none

are excepted, who any way doe liue or conuerse
together, but of them all it is true, that
if there be not a moderation, and a forbearance
one of another, there can be no peace
amongst them, but their liues shall be all (as
it were) a hell vpon the earth.
            Seeing therefore, the necessitie and excellencie
of this vertue is such, that the due practise
of it is the ornament of families, and
societies, and the comfort of a mans life in
this world; let vs enter into more particular
consideration thereof. Priuate Equitie hath
foure degrees, or principall duties.
            First, to beare with naturall infirmities.
            Secondly, to interpret doubtfull things in
the better part.
            Thirdly, to depart from our owne right
sometimes.
            Fourthly, to forgiue priuate and personall
wrongs.
            Of all these briefly, and in order.
            The first dutie of priuate Equitie, is to
beare with the defects and infirmities of
mens natures, with whome we liue, as long
as they breake not out into any great inconuenience,

or enormitie. These infirmities
are manifold: as for example: frowardnes or
morositie of nature; bastines; slownes of conceit;
dulnes of wit; suspitiousnes; desire of
praise, and such like. These and many other
naturall infirmities, must a Christian man
beare and tolerate patiently, in those with
whome he conuerseth, as with his wife, his
child, his seruant, his friend, his neighbour,
&c. And so long must he beare with them,
as they are kept within a meane, and breake
not out into extremitie. Of these the holy
Ghost speaketh, Prou. 19. 31. It is the glorie
of a man to passe by an infirmitie: that is, if
he seeth in his brother weakenesses of nature,
which doe not arise from setled malice,
or cankred corruption, it is a mans glorie
and praise, alwaies so farre to moderate
himselfe, as not to see them, nor to take notice
of them, at least not to be mooued, nor
disquieted at them: and oftentimes, so litle to
regard them, as though they were not done.
To this end saith the Apostle, 1. Cor. 13. Loue
suffereth all things, that is, all things that may
be borne with good conscience, & are done

by them whome we loue. Now any thing
may be borne with good conscience, which
is either so priuate, or so small, that the wrōg
is onely ours, and no dishonour thereby
ensueth to Gods glorie, nor ill example to
the Church: all such things loue suffereth.
And indeede it is the propertie of true loue,
to passe by many wants: and the more that a
Christian is rooted in true loue, the more
infirmities will he passe by, in them whome
he loues: he setteth no limits to himselfe,
how many or how long to beare, but euen
all that are infirmities of nature: many hard
words, many angrie fits, many needles surmises,
many vnkindnesses, will he put vp, and
(as it were) not see them, whose heart is possessed
with true loue, wisdome, and the scare
of God: and thus must euery one doe that
will practise Christian Equitie. For this is a
mans glorie, and commendation. Let vs lay
this doctrine neerer to our consciences, by
cōsidering the nature of this vertue in some
few examples.
            A man hath a wife, or a woman a husband,
in whome there is the feare of God,

and honest and faithfull loue, but he or shee is
subiect to anger or to hastines, or to an austeritie
in their behauiours, or it may be it is
not in their natures, to practise those outward
complemēts of kindnes, which others
can doe with great facilitie. These and such
like, are but weaknesses of nature, in them
that feare God: therefore must loue couer
them and beare them, and oftentimes not
take notice of them; and the rather, because
he or shee that hath not such, hath either the
like or greater weaknesses, all which if one
forbeare not in another, it is not possible to
liue in peace and comfort. But if this part of
Equitie were practised, it is scarce credible,
how much it would augment the happines,
and adde to the comfort of them, that are
married.
            Againe, a man hath a seruant carefull and
willing ynough to obay and please his master,
also trustie and faithfull: but he is slow
in his busines, and doth not dispatch things
appointed him, to the minde of his master,
not so speedily, not so readily, nor with that
facilitie, as his master requireth. What is to

to be done in this case? to see it, and alwaies to
checke him for it, and to gall and gird him
with it, and euer to be casting it in his teeth,
and threatning him for it, is the extremitie
which here the Apostle condemneth. The
Equitie then in this case to bee performed,
is, in consideration that it is not a fault
of malice, but of nature, not of idlenesse, nor
carelesnesse, but of a naturall weakenesse, the
Master must gently tell him of it, and priuatly
and seldome: and aduise him, what are the
best helps for nature in this case. And though
he see not that speedie amendment, which
he desireth, yet is he to beare with him, as
long as he is trustie, diligent, dutifull, and willing,
and for those so many good properties,
he must beare with his wants, and not be too
sharp, either in reproouing, or in correcting
him for them.
            In the the third place: A man hath occasion,
to confer often with another man, by
reason that they are neighbours, or speciall
friends, or of the same calling, and course of
life: but one of them is hastie, and soone angrie,
and it may be in his talke, either for the

matter or the manner of it, he cannot but
shewe his anger. Extremitie in this case is, for
a man to deale roughly with him, to contradict
and crosse him, to denie what he saith,
to stand stifly to our our owne opinion, &
to be angrie againe with him.
            But on the other side, Christian Equitie
teacheth a man not to see it, nor take notice
of it, nor to be angrie againe, nor to checke
him for it; but to put it off by gentle words,
soft demaundes, and other talke: and to yeild
to him, as farre as a man may doe, in good
conscience, without betraying of the trueth.
And by the way, in conference hold it alwaies
for a rule of Christian wisedome, and
priuate Equitie, neuer to sticke stiffely to any
opinion, vnlesse it be in a plaine trueth, and of
great moment. Now thus doing to our brother,
and sparing his weaknes, and continuing
on our speech, as though we sawe not
that he was angrie: hereby the conference
holds on, and loue is continued as afore. But
if contrariwise, we take the aduantage of his
infirmitie, and display it, and rub him for it,
if we be as short as he, and stand stiffely vpon

points, then the conference is broken off
without edification, and heart-burning riseth
betwixt them, in stead of true loue.
Thus we see in these examples, how in a
Christian moderation, we are to beare, and
to forbeare the naturall weakenesses of our
brethren, if we purpose to liue in any comfort
with them in this world.
            Yet this forbearance must be with two
conditions. First, that these wants be wants
of nature, not of malice, nor of old, rooted,
setled, and cankred corruption. Secondly,
if they whome wee forbeare, containe
thēselues within conuenient bonds, and doe
not exceede, nor breake out into any outrage,
or extremitie: for then they are not to
be forborne, but to be tolde, and reprooued
for them, and a mans dutie is not to winke
at them, but to take notice of them, and to
shewe open dislike of them. But in as much
as these are wants of nature, as it is infirmitie
in the one to shewe them, so it is the glorie
and praise of the other, to pardon them: yea
it is a token of wisedome, and good gouernment,
and a signe that a man is a louer of

peace, and consequently of religion, and of
God himselfe, to passe by them. The practise
of this dutie, maintaines peace in kingdoms,
countries, states, cities, colledges, families, and
all societies of men. Thus much for the first
dutie.
            The secōd dutie of priuate equity is, to constru
& interpret mēs sayings that are doubtfull,
in the better part, if possibly it may be:
this is to be vnderstood of all men, though
they be our enemies and this must a man do,
if he will liue in peace in this world.
            Our nature is giuen to take men at the
worst, to depraue mens deeds and words, &
to peruert them to the worst sense, that may
be: and this is commonly the cause of debate
and dissention in the world.
            But the dutie of Christian Equitie is contrary
hereunto; namely, to thinke the best
they can of all men, to construe all doubtfull
actions in the better part, and to make the
best sense of all doubtfull speeches, if we haue
any probable reason to induce vs to it. The
Apostle makes this the propertie of loue. 1.
Cor. 13. Loue thinks not euill, that is, not onely

then, when there is manifest and good
cause to thinke well, but when it is doubtful,
if it may by any meanes haue a good meaning,
if by any means, it may be well thought
of, loue will make a man thinke well of it: &
the more specially a man loues another, the
more equally, indifferently, and Christianly,
will he interpret all his sayings and doings.
The want of this dutie, and the practise of
the contrarie, is the cause of more troubles,
tumults, garboiles, fallings out, and heartburnings,
in kingdomes, countries, societies, and
families, betwixt man and man, then any one
thing in the world besides. Dealing thus
with the wordes of Christ cost him his life:
for when Christ said, Destroy this temple &
I will build it in three daies, they interpreted
it of the temple of Ierusalem, when as he
meant of the temple of his bodie. And the
wrong and sinister interpretation of Dauids
ambassage, by his neighbour king Hanu
                  •
               ,
was the cause of that great war betwixt two
mightie kingdomes, the Israelites, and the
Amonites, which cost so many thousands
their liues. For when Dauid sent Embassadours

to comfort him after his fathers
death, he and his wicked counsellers interpreted
it, that he sent spies, and intelligencers,
to find out the weaknesse of the land. It cannot
be spoken, what broiles, hurliburlies and
confusions in kingdomes, what contentions
in eommon-wealthes, what factions and diuisions
in colledges & societies; what disquietnesse
in families, what vnkindnesse and
falling out amongest old friends, and what
separation euen amongest them that should
be neerest, are daily in the world, by reason
of this sinister interpretation, of mens words
and deeds. We therefore that doe professe
our selues the children of peace, must learne
to make conscience of this, the due practise
whereof, is the conseruation of peace.
            And further in this dutie, one thing more
is to be remembred, namely, that we must
not giue too sharpe a censure, euen of the
open and manifest euill sayings, or doings
of our brother: we must not iudge them to
be done carelesly, when it may be they are
done ignorantly: nor deliberately, when it
may be they are done rashly: nor presumptuously,

when it may be they are done vpon
infirmitie: nor to be done vpon hatred
or malice to vs, when it may be they are
done for an other cause: nor may we iudge
an euill thing, to be done for want of conscience,
when it may be, it is done for want of
heedfulnesse: but alwaies we must remember,
to make the best we can, euen of another
mans infirmities. And as, if our brother
doe well, we are to acknowledge it, and
commend him for it: So if he doe amisse, we
must not make it worse then it is.
            But the world is farre too blame herein:
for they can extoll their owne well-doing,
and twentie waies excuse their euill doing:
but as for other men, they can debase their
well doing, and aduance their euill doing;
nay it is a common thing, to make a badde
man worse then he is, and to speake of an
euill action, and of mens faults worse then
they are; yea to speake worse, euen of ill
men then they deserue. But it is flat Iniustice,
not onely to speake euill of that that is good,
but euen to make an euill thing worse then
it is. Many cases there are, wherein a man

is bound, to make the best he can, of a bad
action: but to make it worse then it is, there
is no case, wherein a man may doe it, without
plaine iniurie to his brother. If any man
replie, and say, I am not to spare my selfe, nor
excuse my owne faults, but to iudge as hardly
of my owne sayings and doings, as they
deserue, why then should I not also doe so
to another? The answer is readie. Because a
man knoweth not another man, so well as
himselfe. Words and deedes are knowne
to other men, but a mans heart is knowne
to himselfe alone: therefore for thy owne
sayings and doings, thou art also able to
iudge of thine owne heart, and of thy purpose
and intent in so speaking and doing: but
of another mā, thou canst say he spake or did
thus or thus: but his heart, his purpose, & intēt
in so doing, thou canst not iudge: & therefore
thou maist not iudge so sharpely of another
mans sayings and doings, as of thine
owne. To make an ende of this point: in
the performance of this dutie, two cautions
must be remembred: first, that we speake
not of continued courses, in doing or speaking

euill, but of particular speeches and actions:
for not an action or a speech, but the
course of life shewes what a man is: one euill
speach or action may be excused, but a continued
course in doing or speaking euill,
may be by no meanes coloured or excused.
Secondly, we speake not of manifest & publike
enormities, as of treasons against the
Prince or state: for therein it may be dangerous
to the Prince, and hurtfull to the state,
to haue any thing coloured, concealed, or
excused. In such cases, we must set aside our
dutie to our brother, and remember our dutie
to the head and whole bodie: and better
it is, that one member be cut off, then that
the whole bodie perish: but we speake of
priuate euill words or deeds, the euill and
hurt whereof redoundeth to priuate men.
And in them we speake not of manifest,
grosse, and palpable crimes, wherein not only
the action is plainely euill, but the intent
also: for to excuse or conceale, or to extenuate
such, is to make our selues accessarie to
the euill of them. But we speake of doubtfull
words or deeds, wherein either the action

it selfe, or at the least, the intent of it, may receiue
a likely excuse, and a probable interpretation
of good.
            And vnto these two cautions, adde thus
much further, that the practise of this dutie,
for the most part ceaseth, when the Minister
is to worke vpon the conscience of an
impenitent or a presumptuous sinner: for
then he is not to moderate or mitigate, to
colour or excuse, to lessen or extenuate his
sinnes, but to speake of sinne as it deserues,
and to lay out his sinnes in their owne colours,
that so he may humble him, and cast
him downe.
            But out of these three cases, this dutie lieth
vpon all men, at all times to interpret euery
thing in the better part. So then the conclusion
of this second dutie is this: Actions apparently
good, are to be commended,
doubtfull are to be construed in the best
sense, apparently euill are to be made no
worse then they are, but rather to be excused,
and let a man alwaies rather speake
too well, then too euill of another man, &
rather speake better, then worse then be

deserues and rather iudge too mildlie and
mercifully then too sharply: for if a man be
deceaued either waie, that is the safer waie
wherein to be deceiued: Thus to do, is to
performe that Christian equitie which is
here commanded, and to maintaine peace
which is the comfort of a Christian life. And
thus much of the 2. dutie.
            The third dutie and degree of Priuate Equitie
is, In sundry cases to depart from a
mans owne right: that is to yeild oftentimes
in such things, wherein by lawe he might
stand; and oftentimes to forgoe such things,
which by law he might require. Without
this Equitie, Iustice and peace cannot stand.
Christ our sauiour, gaue a notable example
hereof in paying toll: Math. 17. 27. Christ
needed not to haue done it, nor could any
lawe haue compelled him to it, yet because
he would not trouble the publick peace, nor
giue them occasion of contention, he yeilds
from his right and paies them toll: al Christian
men must learne by his example, not to
stand alwaies vpon their right, if they will
continue peace in the Church of God. It is

not sufficient in Christianitie, nay it is a very
wicked speach, which we often heare men
speake. It is my right and therefore I will
not loose it: so might Christ haue said, and if
you looke the place, you shall find, that he
first of all argueth the case, and concludes
that he is free, and not bound to paie, and
yet saith Christ, rather then I will offend
them, or giue them cause to thinck worse of
me, or my doctrine I will paie it. Euen so
must a Christan man, in many cases go from
his right, and that for the maintenance of
publick peace in the common wealth, and
of priuat peace one man with another.
            For the maintenance of publick peace,
thus must men do in Publick Conferences,
as in Parlaments and Counsels, and such like
generall assemblies▪ wherein the seuerall opinions
of men are to be deliuered, and thus
must men doe in bonds, forfeitures, borrowing,
lending, loosing, finding, buying, selling,
in leases, fines, rents, and all manner of bargaines.
            And for the maintenance of priuate peace,
men must in their most priuate actions, one

yeild to another in such things, wherein they
might stand, and oftentimes be contented to
loose that, 
                  •
               hat is their owne; and in conferences
must a man oftentimes, suffer himselfe
to be crossed and ouerthwarted in that, of
which he is most certaine, and to grant that
to be, which is not, and that not to be which
he knowes to be, if the matter be of small
moment, and concerne not religion nor the
state: many such things must a Christian
man put vp daily, at the hands of his brother,
for the maintenance of peace and loue amongst
them. This is a doctrine little
knowne, and lesse regarded in the world▪ for
its a generall opinion that a man may take
his owne, and may lawfully stand vpon his
owne right, (which if it be ment generally
in all cases, is most false) nay this is a commō
speach of all men, I demaund but my right,
and I will not loose my right, and this is
thought a reasonable speach, and he is esteemed
a good man, who takes no more then
his right: for oftentimes men stand so strictly
vpon their right, that they go further then
their right reacheth. But this is a very carnall

practise, and controlled by the Scripture,
and by the example of Christ, as we heard
afore. But if any man obiect, that the example
of Christ is not to binde vs, because he is the
Mediatour, and therefore was to performe
extraordinary obedience? I then answer, that
not onely Christ, but other holy men, haue
practised this duty, for he payeth toll not only
for himselfe, but for Peter also. And there
is a notable example of this dutie in Abraham,
who when his brother Lot and his
sheapheards could not agree, was content to
depart from his right: for whereas he beeing
the elder, might haue chosen first, he notwithstanding,
stands not vpon that, but bids
his brother Lot choose whether he will, and
he will take what he leaueth. A most equall,
Christian, brotherly part of that holy Abraham,
whose faith is so much commended
in the Scriptures. If we therefore will be
called the children of Abraham, then must
we be followers of him in his workes, and
namely in this, we must oftentimes depart
from our owne right.
            In the practise of this dutie, one caution

onely must be remembred, namely, that we
must distinguish of anothers right and our
owne. In thy owne right thou maiest yeild,
but when thou art to deale for another man,
thou must not yeild too much, nor be too lauish
of another mans right: but this caution
holdeth especially, whē the cause is not ours,
but Gods, or his churches, for when it is such
a trueth, which directly concerneth the honour
of God, or the good of his Church, thē
must a man take heed he yeild not, without
warrant from Gods word. For as it is equitie,
often to yeilde thy right, so to yeilde in
Gods causes, is to betray the trueth. If therefore
thou maiest not giue another mans
right frō him, without his cōsent, much lesse
maiest thou without warrant from God,
yeild any thing at all of his right from him.
This dutie therefore is to be performed in
actions that concerne our selues, and wherein
the losse is not Gods, or his churches, but
our own. But it is lamentable to see many
men, howe lauish they are in giuing from
God, and care not how much they loose of
his glorie: but stand most strictly vpon their

owne points, and will not yeild one inch, nor
loose one foote of their owne right. And
from hence come so many suites in law, and
other brabling contentions in the world, all
which, or many of them, might be staied, if
men had but consciēce to practise this Christian
Equitie, to yeild one to another, in matters
of their owne, and of small moment: &
it is certaine, that if men in the world were
not perswaded, some by religion and conscience,
some by naturall reason, and pollicie,
to practise this dutie, it were not possible for
the societie of men long to continue vpon
the earth. So much for the third degree.
            The fourth and last degree of Priuate Equitie,
is to forbeare and to forgiue wrongs
and iniuries done vnto vs in word or deed.
The scripture is plaine for this, and so is naturall
reason, which teacheth, that euery one
that beares the name of a man, should forgiue
another, because he beeing a man, may
deserue and stand in neede of the same himselfe,
and therefore is to doe as he would be
done vnto: But especially a Christian man,
who lookes for forgiuenesse at Gods hand,

for his owne sinnes, must needs forgiue his
brother. So that to a Christian man, there is
a double bond or reason, to tie him to this
dutie. One is, as he is a man, therefore must
he forgiue him that offends him, that so another
man may also forgiue him, when he offendeth.
For there is none, but beeing a man,
and liuing amongest men, he must needs offend.
Another more forcible reason is, as he
is Christian, therefore must he forgiue, because
else, how can he in reason demaund or
praie for forgiuenesse at Gods hand for many
thousand offences of his owne, and those
exceeding great, when another man cannot
obtaine forgiuenesse at his hands, for a fewe
small offences. This dutie is of greater necessitie
then all the former: for vpon the practise
of this, depends the preseruation of peace: but
where this is not practised, there is no religion,
no conscience, nor saluation: for where
there is no forgiuing of another man, that
man is not forgiuen at Gods hands. And he
whose sinnes are not in Christ forgiuen, and
taken away, that man is in the state of damnation,
and till he be forgiuen, he can neuer

be saued: but he can neuer be forgiuen, till he
forgiue his brother: and so it is plaine, that euen
saluation it selfe, in some sort, depends
vpon the practise of this dutie, yet not as a
cause, but as a signe, or an effect of saluation.
For this is not true, that euery one who forgiues
is forgiuen of God, but this is true, that
whosoeuer is forgiuen of God, will forgiue
his brother. So then, neither in reason, nor
in religion, can a man looke for forgiuenesse
himselfe, vnlesse he make conscience to forgiue
another. Yea God hath made euery
man a Iudge in this case, to condemne himselfe,
if he doe it not, when he praieth euery
day, that God would forgiue him euen so, as
he doth forgiue others.
            Yet in this dutie of forgiuing outward iniuries,
two cautions are to be remembred 
                  •
               .
That there is a time, when a man is not to
forbeare and suffer, but may stand vpon his
guard, and defend himselfe from the iniurie:
and that is, when his life is indangered, as
when a man is assaulted by a theife, or by his
deadly enemie, who seekes his life, and can
haue no helpe, he is in that case to helpe himselfe,

when he must either kill or be killed,
then reason and religion biddes him defend
himselfe: & being in that case, that a man cannot
haue the Magistrates helpe, that beares
the sword for his defence, Gods puts for that
time the sword, into a mans owne hand, and
makes him a Magistrate for that time, and
occasion. For in cases of such extremitie, god
allowes euery man to be a Magistrate, not
onely to defend himselfe, but euen to kill his
enemie, if it be impossible, any way els to
saue his owne life: and this defence of a mans
selfe, hinders not the dutie of forgiuing, for
so farre must a man forbeare and forgiue,
that he be sure to defend his owne life.
            In the second place, though a man forgiue
the Iniurie and wrong done vnto him, yet
may he safely in some cases, goe to lawe for
recompence of that wrong. It is a deuilish opinion
in the world, that a man cannot goe
to lawe, and be in charitie: we must knowe,
that a man may goe to law, & yet be in charitie:
for to forgiue the malice, and to sue for
recompence are things indifferent; It is not
so much charitie, to forbeare the recompence,

as it is to forgiue the malice. If therefore
a man forgiue not the malice, he is out
of charitie, but he may sue for satisfaction,
and be in charitie. The scripture forbids not
mens going to lawe, but tels them how they
should doe it: lawe is not euill, though contentious
men, and vnconscionable lawyers,
haue vilely abused it: but it Gods ordinance,
and may lawefully be vsed, so it be on this
manner.
            First, it must not be for euery trifle, euery
trespas, euery ill worde; but in these cases, a
man is both to forgiue the malice, and to remit
the recompence, because he is little or
nothing at all hurt by it. For example, A
poore man steales a little meat from thee in
his hunger, let the law take hould on him,
but pursue thou him no more for it, then by
the law thou needs must▪ Againe thy neighbours
cattell doth trespasse thee, thou must
not go to lawe for it, the malice be it more
or lesse, thou must forgiue in Christianitie &
for conscience sake, and the damage is so
small, as that therefore thou maist not go to
lawe for it. For the law is abused, in beeing

executed vpon trifles, and those lawyers
shame themselues, and dishonour their profession,
who are willing that euery trespasse
of sixpence damages be an accion in the law▪
this is one of the causes of the base and vile
names, that are giuen to the lawe and lawyers
in these daies, because the law is imployed
vpon sueh trifles. And it is to be wished,
that the supreme Magistrate would take order
to restrain this generall euil: that contentious
men & vnconscionable lawyers might
not conspire together, to pester the law with
these trifles: and though men be so vnconscionable,
as to run to the law for euery trespasse,
yet should lawyers be so conscionable
and so wise, as they should driue them from
the law againe. Thirdly, thy neighbour giues
the ill woords, raiseth or carrieth euill tales
of thee: Equitie is, not to go to law for euery
euill woord, but to consider that for the
malice, thou art to forgiue it, and for the
damage it cannot be great, because many
mens tongues are no slander, neither art thou
any thing worse for it, especially when he
dare not stand to that he hath said, as for the

most part they do not.
            The second caution in going to law, is that
it must not be the first but the last meanes of
peace. Law is a kind of warr, as therefore
warr is to be the last meanes of publick
peace, so should the law be the last meanes to
be vsed, for the attaining of priuat peace. All
meanes must be tried, ere thou goe to lawe,
and if none will serue, then is the law ordained
for thee, whereby to recouer thy right
and to maintaine equitie, for as to go to law
for a trifle, or at the first, is extremitie, and
so Iniury: so to go to the lawe, for a cause
sufficient, and after other meanes vsed in
vaine, is Iustice and equitie, and no extremitie.
            Here therefore let all Christians learne,
how to go to law; and the rather I do vrge
this point, because the law is notoriously abused:
and it is almost incredible, what infinit
sommes and masses of money, are daily
spent in it most vnnecessarily: insomuch as
the lawyers do exceed in welth, any other
sort or calling for men in this whole realme.
            For reformation whereof, let men but

learne, and practise the two former rules:
1. lawe is not ordained to be a Iudge of euery
trifle: It is a shame to our lawe that men
be suffered in the common wealth to arreast
each other for debts of small value, so as
tenne times, and otherwhiles twenty times
as much is spent, for the recouery of them as
the principal is. Are not we a Christian commonwealth?
why then haue we not the wisdome
to appoint another, an easier, and a
directer waie for the recouery of such debts,
and if there be no other way, why doth not
a Christian man stay for it, or loose it rather
then goe to law for it? It is a shame for our
nation, that there should be at one Assises
ouer England, so many hundreth actions of
trespasses, wherein the dammage is little or
nothing. To reforme these is a worke worthie
of a Prince, and euery man should put
to his helping-hand to it.
            Secondly, let law be thy last remedie. This
rule controlls another foule misorder in our
land. Men are sued, when they would gladly
compound: when they would willingly
satisfie by priuate order, they are compelled

to answer by law. And yet there is a worse
thing then this: the law which should be
the last, is not onely made the first meanes,
but whereas it should be open and publike,
it is vsed as a close & secret meanes: it steales
vpon men (as the phrase is.) For men are sued
afore they know, and great charges come
vpon them, ere they are told of it, by them
that sue them. Is this equitie? yea is it not rather
extremitie? And yet (alas) how commō
is it in most places. Let therefore euery
Christian man, remember his lesson here
taught by the Apostle, Let your equitie be
knowne to all men. But it seemes then, will
some say, that men may not goe to lawe. I
answer, thou maiest goe to lawe, though not
for trifles, yet for things of waight, as for the
pursuit of a notorious theife, to his due and
iust triall: for the title of thy lands: for the recouerie
of thy iust and due debts of value:
and of thy childs portion: for the making
straight of great accounts, for the triall of thy
good name, when thou art so slaundered,
and by such, as that thy credit is publikely
indangered: for these and such like causes,

thou maiest goe to law, whē by other more
easie meanes, thou canst not procure a reasonable
satisfaction. For then it is vnlawfull to
sue for the greatest cause in the world.
            The trueth of all this doctrine doeth Paul
teach the Corinths, whome he reprooueth
of three faults. 1. that they went to lawe before
heathē Iudges. 2. for euery cause. 3. they
vsed no priuate meanes of satisfaction, but
ranne to the lawe at the first.
            The first of these cannot be our sinne, for
we haue no heathen Iudges, in as much as
our state and gouernment, by the mercie
of God is not heathenish, but we haue
a Christian commonwealth. But the other
two are the generall sores of this land;
let vs therefore labour to heale them and to
couer our shame: let vs remember that not
Extremitie but Equitie becomes a christian;
and let euery man take heed of this, as he
would be knowne to be a Christian: for the
knowne badge of Christianitie is mercifullnes:
the more mercifull the better Christian.
For he hath tasted deeper of Gods mercies
to himselfe, and therefore he is mercifull to

his brother, and the worse Christian, the
lesse mercifull, for he neuer felt Gods mercies
to himselfe, therefore he cannot be mercifull
to his brother. Now to go to law for
euery trifle, or to steale lawe vpon thy brother,
or to sue him before thou offer him
peace, it argueth a hard hart and vnmerciful,
and farr from this dutie of forgiuing: but to
be loath to go to lawe, and to put it of as
long as may be, and first to giue warning,
and to offer peace, and not to doe it, but in
matters of weight, it argueth a mercifull
heart, and such a one as is readie to forgiue,
and such a one in whome the spirit of God
doth dwell.
            And thus I hope I haue opened this dutie
of forgiuing, and forbearing, in such sort; as
a Christian may see how to practise it, with
comfort to his conscience, also without any
great losse in this world, or hurt to his estate.
            And thus much for the foure seuerall duduties
and degrees of Priuate Equitie.
            Now hauing opened the nature & kinds
of Christian Equitie, let vs proceede further
in the text. Let your Equitie (saith the Apostle)

               be knowne to all men. The words import;
that it is our dutie, not onely to knowe
this vertue and the nature of it, and to be able
to talke of it, but in all our affaires publike
and priuate, and in all our dealings with men,
so to put it in practise, that men may see it, and
that it may be knowne to other men: and that
they may be able to auouch for vs; that our
dealing is vpright, equall, and indifferent, ioyned
with equitie and moderation, and free
from extremitie and oppression: this is the
meaning of that which we are here cōmanded
by the Apostle. And the reason why the
Apostle vrgeth vs to make it known, is, because
there is a priuie hypocrisie in our natures,
whereby we are giuen to make shew
of more then is in vs. Against which vice
we doe truely labour, when we labour to
make our vertues manifest and knowne to
the world, that so the tree may be knowne
by his fruites: he is a holy and religious man,
not who knoweth, and can talke well, but
he whose religion and holinesse is knowne
in the world, and seene of men: he is a mercifull
man, of whose mercie men doe taste: So

he is an equal & vpright mā, whose Equitie is
felt, & found by thē who deale with him. Let
therefore our actions with men, testifie the
vertues of our heart, that mē who liue with
vs, and deale with vs, may be able to say for
vs, that we are possessed with those vertues;
for this is to be truly good, not when a man
can speake well, or tell of his owne goodnes,
but when other men see it, feele it, and speake
of it.
            Hitherto of the meaning of the words.
            Nowe that which was Pauls exhortation
to the Philippians, shall be mine to all true
Christians: Let your equitie be knowne to all
men. You haue learned what it is, and howe
it is to be practised: it nowe remaines, that
we content not our selues, with the bare
knowledge, but take notice of it, as of a doctrine
belonging to vs, and put it in practise
all our dealings, publike and priuate, yea and
make it manifest to the consciences of all
men▪ good and bad: so that euery man, with
whome we deale, may taste and feele of our
equitie, and be able to testifie of vs, that equitie
beares rule in all our actions: thus if we

doe, we are Christians not in name, and profession
onely, but in deed and truth.
            And to perswade vs all to this holy duty,
let vs vse some fewe reasons to inforce it: and
amongst all the reasons that might be
brought, there is none better, then this here
vsed in the text (The Lord is at hand.)
            But before we come to speake of it, let vs
consider of one other, which doth most naturally
enforce this exhortation: and it is
this.
            God sheweth most admirable Equitie and
moderation towards vs, therefore ought we
to shew it, one towards another: It is the reason
of the holy Ghost, Be yee mercifull, as
your heauenly father is mercifull. Wonderfull
is the moderation, that God sheweth to
man, & it appears especially in foure things,
whereof two belong to all men, and the other
two concerne his Church.
            The first Action of God, wherein he sheweth
great moderation towards all men, is
this. A lawe was giuen to our first parents,
Eate not of this tree, if you doe, you die for it:
and that a double death, both of body and

soule. But they ate and so brake the lawe, and
thereby did vndergoe the penaltie annexed▪
by force and vertue whereof, they should
haue died presently, the death both of bodie
and soule, and this had beene no Extremitie
but Iustice, for this was due vnto them by
the Iustice of that lawe, which was giuen
them. But nowe, behold Gods Equitie, and
moderation of the Iustice of that lawe, he
strooke them not presently, as the tenour of
the lawe, and their desert required, neither
with the first nor second death, but deferres
the full execution, laying vpon them (for
the present) a lesse punishment, namely a subiection
to the first death, and a guiltinesse of
the second, that is, of damnation. Beholde a
marueilous mitigation: by the tenour of that
law, their bodies and soules should both haue
presently died, and beene cast into hell, but
God in mercie suspends and deferres the execution
of it, and onely strikes Adams body
with mortalitie, whereby he was subiect to
the first death, and his soule with guiltinesse,
whereby he was subiect to the second
death: by which mitigation it came to passe,

that as Adam by his repentance, afterward
quite escaped the second death, so he tasted
not of the first death till nine hundred yeares
after. If a prisoner counts it a mercifull fauour
of the Prince, or the Iudge, when after
his iudgement to die, he is repriued but one
yeare, then what a mercifull mitigation was
this in God, to repriue our first parents
for so many hundred yeares? This was the
first action of Gods mercie to man, and this
concernes all mankinde generally, but especially
Adam and Eve.
            But the second doeth more neerely concerne
all men. So soone as man commits
any sinne, euen then is he guiltie of eternall
damnation, because he hath broken the law:
for the curse of the lawe, is not onely a guiltinesse,
but a subiection to the wrath of god,
presently to be inflicted vpon the sinne committed,
without any intermission: so that so
oft as a man sinneth, so oft doth he deserue to
be plunged soule and body into hel, without
beeing spared one houre. If therefore the
Lord did cast ten thousand into hell in one
houre, he did but Iustice, for so the lawe requireth:

but see the mercifull moderation of
the Lord: thogh we deserue euery houre to
be cast into hell, yet is euery houre and minute
of our liues, full of the mercie and moderation
of the Lord: so as though our
sinnes crie for damnation presently, yet God
staieth his hand, and doeth not execute the
sentence of damnation vpon the sinner, instantly
after his sinne, no not in one of ten
thousand, but spareth euery man many
yeares, some more, some lesse, but all more
then their sinnes deserue, or the lawe requireth.
We often reade, and alwaies finde,
that God heares the crie of sinners: but we
seldome reade, that God heares the crie
of sinne, for if he alwaies heard it, when sin
cries for vengeance to him, he should turne
vs all into hell in one houre: this is a wonderfull
patience and moderation in God, and
yet behold a greater.
            For whereas we by our sinnes, doe euery
houre plunge our selues into hell, as a man
that violently castes himselfe into a gaping
gulfe: see Gods wonderfull mercie, we thrust
our selues in, and he puts vs backe: he staieth

vs with his own hand, and so keepes vs out.
See what a sea of mercies the Lord doth
power vpon man: for how can that but be
an infinite sea of mercies, which is shewed
to so many thousands of men, so many thousand
times in one houre. If his mercie did
not moderate the extremitie of his lawe,
there should not be one man left vpon earth,
but all in one houre cast into hell: but God
staieth his Iustice, and staieth his lawe, yea
stayeth vs, who our selues would execute
the law vpon our selues and so cast our selues
into hell, hee keepes vs out and giues vnto vs
a longer time to repent. And this is true in
all men: to some, he giues longer, to some
shorter, but to euery one some, where as the
law giues not one houre to any man, nay the
law is so far from giuing time torepent, that
it admits no repentance at all, no though a
man should sinne but once, and instantly after
that one sinne, humble himselfe in repentāce
and craue fogiuenes, the law will not accept
him to fauour, nor yeild forgiuenes, nor allowe
his repentance: for the law can do nothing
but this: either iustifie and reward

him that fulfills it, or condemne and punish
him that breakes it, further then this the law
by it selfe goeth not.
            It is the gospell which commandeth vs, &
teacheth vs to beleeue and repent; and to the
Gospell are we beholding for accepting
our repentance, which the law would neuer
doe: which indeede is so farre from accepting
repentance, as it neuer intendeth nor aimeth
at repentance directly in it selfe: and
therefore in it selfe, it is worthily called the
ministerie of condemnation. So then behold
a most straight law, and a most mercifull
God: so straight a law, as (if that mercy were
not) it would neuer giue vs one houre to repent
in, nor receiue vs to fauour though we
repented presently, but presently vpon our
sinne cast vs into hell. O therefore tast and
see how good and gratious the Lord is: the
law cannot haue his extremitie, nor the deuill
his will vpon vs, who is the Iayler of the
law; and is malitious, though the law be iust:
and so by the extremitie of the Iustice of the
one, & the extremitie of the mallice of the other,
no man should liue one houre in the

world, were it not for the wonderfull mercie
and mittigation of God, who contrary
to the course of the law, both accepteth men
when they repent, and giues also time to repent,
and thus hath God done, as in the beginning
with Adam, so in all ages: To the
old world, after many preachers sent, and
many hundred yeares patience, and many
thousands of sinnes ripe for vengeance, yet
God giues 120. yeares more: O how many
millions of sinnes did they commit against
him in that time? and yet had they repented
at the last, they had beene saued, but all was
in vaine, and therefore in the end God sent a
flood, and swept them all away. Euen so, and
more patiently hath God suffered vs, in these
latter daies. But how comes it to passe then,
will some say, that we haue not a flood as
well as they? Surely because his mercie was
great to them, but wonderfull to vs, we are
as euill as they, yea if we iudge aright, and
consider duely all circumstances, our sinnes
are farre more, yea farre more hainous then
theirs were: so that we deserue a flood tenne
times more then they did, and if God dealt

but iustly with vs, where he brought one
vpon them, he should bring and hundred on
vs: and if Iustice bare the sway, she should vs
sweepe away, one generation after another,
with a continuall flood. But marke the moderation
of God, more to vs then to them,
who deserue worse then they. He gaue vs
not an hundred and twentie, but many hundreth
yeares, and brings no floods of Iudgements,
but spares vs from yeare to yeare, and
from age to age, that so we may either repent
and escape hell: or when our time is
come, drowne our selues in damnation, and
so be the principall cause of our owne destruction.
            It may not vnfitly be noted in this place,
that sometime God may be said to cast a mā
into hell, and sometime man himselfe. God
throwes a man into hell, when for some
monstrous and contagious sinne, he takes away
a wicked man in the midst of his wickednesse,
by some suddaine Iudgement, and
so sends him to hel. But a man plungeth himselfe
into hell, when God giues him leaue to
liue, and libertie and time to repent, but he

continueth carelesly in his sinnes till he die,
and so casteth himselfe violently into damnation.
Nowe such is the mercifull moderation
of God, that for one man whome he
casts into hell (as he did Iudas presently vpon
his sinne) a hundred wicked men cast themselues
into hell, abusing that time and libertie,
which he gaue them to repent in, and so
bringing vpon themselues swift damnation.
Let euery man therefore euery day of his
life, when he considereth the thousands of
sinnes that are committed that day, and seeth
no flood of water, fire nor brimstone to
come vpon vs, let him wonder at gods mercie,
and say with the Prophet, It is the Lords
mercie that we are not consumed. Furthermore,
this moderation of God to all men,
hath another branch. Euery mans ill conscience
is to him like the fire of hell, and doubtlesse
the torment of conscience, is a part of
the very reall torment of hell: now if euery
man had but Iustice, he should feele presently
after euery sinne, the very torment of hell,
namely the sting and torment of a guiltie accusing
conscience: but see the mercie & moderation

of God, he inflicts it not presently,
but onely giues the sinner a pricke, or a little
pang (as it were) when he hath sinned, but the
raging furie of the conscience, (which is the
greatest hell that is vpon earth) he deferres
till the houre of death, or the day of Iudgement.
When therefore thou hast done euill,
and feelest a pricke in thy conscience, and a
cheeke, but no more, remember that euen
then, if God did not moderate his Iustice,
thou shouldest feele the extreame horrour
of thy conscience, which would ouerwhelm
thee as a burden, which is to heauie for thee
to beare.
            Thus then we see the marueilous mercy
of God: wicked men are his sworne enemies,
for sinne is that which offends him aboue all
things in the world, yet so great is his mercy,
and so large is his moderation, that euen his
enemies tast of it euery day and houre.
            Thus much of Gods Equitie and moderation
to all men.
            Now secondly, this moderate & mild dealing
of the Lord, is more speciall to his
Church and children: and that also shewes it

selfe in two actiōs. First of al, Iustice requireth
that euery mā should pay his debt: & cōmon
reason tells vs, that words & promises cannot
passe for paiment, but due debt must be satisfied.
Now euery Christian man is in a great
debt to God: that debt is obedience to his
lawe, for Christ came to saue vs from the rigour
of the lawe, not to free vs from obedience
to it: but how doe we pay that debt? euen
as he doth, who oweth ten thousand
pounds, and craueth to pay it by a penny a
yeare, for so we owing perfect obedience in
thought, word, and deed, and also puritie of
nature, the root of all: we (I meane the best
& holiest mē of all) haue nothing to tēder to
God, but a fewe good desires and grones of
the heart, and a seely poore endeauour: all
which is vnto that which the law requireth,
like vnto one penny to ten thousand pound.
Yet behold the mercie of God and his compassion
to his children: these our desires, and
that our indeauour comming from the truth
of our hearts, doth he accept for perfect payment,
and that man who hath an heart fearing
God, and a care and desire to please god

in all things, and in his place and calling endeuoureth
it accordingly, is the man, whome
God loues, and embraceth in the armes of
his mercie, though he be far frō that, which
in debt and dutie he oweth to God. Thus
doth God testifie of himselfe in Malachie: I
will spare you, euen as a father spareth his
owne sonne that serueth him. Now wee
knowe there is no sparing, nor forbearance
like vnto that. A father bids his little sonne
do this or that, which is farre aboue his
strength, the child not cōsidering the difficultie,
but looking only at his dutie, and desiring
not only to please his father, goeth about it,
and doth his best, and yet when all is done,
he can do nothing to it at all: now the father
reioyceth in this willing obedience of his
sonne, and approoueth in his child the will
and indeauour, though he cannot doe the
thing he bids him. Euen so doeth the Lord
spare his children; he commaundeth vs to
keepe his lawe, and it is no more then out
dutie, which notwithstanding of our selues
we can doe no more, then a little child is able
to carrie a milstone: yet if we willingly goe,

when God commaunds vs, and doe our indeauour,
and all we can, and grone vnder the
burden, and desire to doe more, this our desire
and indeauour, proceeding from faith, &
from a son-like willingnesse, doth the Lord
accept for the perfect deede. This is no small
moderation, but great and wonderfull: For
whereas we owe perfect obedience, and he
might iustly challenge it, and for want of it,
make vs pay it with soule and all, he is is cō
               tent
to take a will, a desire and indeauour,
which is all we can, and is in effect nothing
at all. In this world, that man would be extolled
for his mercie, who will take of his
debter a penny a weeke, who oweth him
100. pound: or that takes all he can pay, and
accepts his good minde for the rest: Oh then
howe mercifull is our God, who for so great
offences, and so huge a debt, as ours is to his
Maiestie, is content to accept of our indeauour,
and heartie desire? the heart & tongue
of man cannot sufficiently magnifie so great
a mercie. Thus much for the first.
            Againe the mercie and moderation of
God towards his children appeares thus.

There is not the best man, but he sinneth, &
there is not a sinne so little, but in Iustice it
deserueth a whole world of punishments,
yea all those curses denounced in the lawe,
euen all those plagues threatned, Deut. 28. all
which in Iustice should ouerwhelme him,
presse him downe, & crush him to nothing.
But behould the mercifull moderation of
God, he is content to lay no more crosses on
his children, then by his owne grace, (which
he also giues them) they shall be able to vndergoe,
and in the end to ouercome also.
When his children sinne, (as when do they
not?) doth he punish them according to the
proportion of their sinne? no: for then all
the curses of his lawe should be heaped on
them for one sinn; and if he did so, he did but
Iustice: nay he deales so with them, as it is
not to be called a punishment at all, but rather
a chastisement: for a punishment must
be in some sort, proportionable to the offence,
but that which he laieth on his children,
is nothing at all to their sinne: and therfore
it is no punishment properly, but (as it
were) the chastisement or correction of a

father, to teach his sonne his dutie, and to reforme
him, and bring him home from his
euill waies: and therefore not in the rigour
of a Iudge, but in the loue and wisdome of a
father, he first considereth, what we are able
to beare: and then laieth no more on vs, then
we may well beare: and which is most wonderfull
of all, he giues vs strength to beare
them. To this ende speakes the Apostle to
the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 10. There hath no
temptation taken you, but that which befalls
the nature of man. Wherby he imports thus
much, that there are temptations, and crosses
in Gods Iustice due for sinne, and which he
hath in store, readie at his pleasure, which are
so great, so heauie, and so fearefull, as the nature
of man could not possibly beare them, but
should sinke vnder them, and perish, as did
Cain and Iudas, and such like. Amongst these
an euill conscience is one, which is so intollerable,
as the wise man saith, Prou. 14. 18. A
wounded spirit, who can beare it? But the
crosses he laieth on his children, are alwaies
such, as they beare with comfort for a time,
and at last with ioy doe ouercome them. A

notable example hereof we haue in Salomon,
of whome God saith to Dauid, If he
sinne, I will chastise him with the rod of men:
as if he shold haue said, I could in my iustice,
for Salomons great sinnes, beate him with
scorpions, and bring him to nothing, by my
heauie hand, but I will consider, he is my
child, and but a man: therefore will I lay vpon
him no more, then the nature of man is able
to beare. As God dealt with his sonne Salomon,
so this is Gods voice to all his sonnes:
vnto all my Church and Children, will I vse
such lenitie and moderation, and in my chastising
of them, I will so abate the rigour of
my Iustice, that by my hand and rodde, they
shall not be pressed downe, but rather raised
vp in new obedience, and learne thereby to
feare and loue me more then before.
            This should euery Christian man seriously
consider of, and thinke with himselfe, how
much this bindes a man to deale moderately
with his brother, when the Lord deales so
moderately with him. Thou sinnest, & God
chastiseth thee most mildly, and laieth not on
thee the thousād part of these crosses, which

in Iustice he might doe. Shall the Lord deale
thus moderately with thee, for thy many▪
and so great sinnes, and wilt thou deale so
hardly with thy brother, in his fewe and
small offences against thee? remember therefore
in thy dealing with thy brother, this
dealing of God with thee, and certainely
thou canst not forget the one, if thou hast
tasted of the other. Shew thy selfe therefore,
that thou hast beene partaker of Gods fauour,
and that thou hast felt in thy soule, the
sweetnesse of his mercies, by beeing milde &
mercifull to thy brethren: out of that great
sea of mercies, which God lets flowe ouer
thee all thy life long, let fall some droppes of
mercie on thy brother, and remembring
how God deales with thee, deale not thou
with thy brother alwaies so hardly, nor so
straitly, as thou maiest, or he deserues. Let
these foure mercifull actions of god towards
thee, be foure strong bonds, to tie thee to the
obedience of this dutie, to be milde and mercifull
to thy brethren, remembring euery
day, how moderately God deales with thee,
and howe farre from that extremitie, which

thou deseruest. And to mooue vs hereunto,
let euery man be well assured, that the more
he hath tasted of Gods mercie, the more shall
men taste of his mercie; and the more sinnes
that a man hath forgiuen him at gods hands,
the more will he remit and forgiue in his
brother; and the more he feeles in his owne
soule Gods loue and mercie to him, and the
more neere he is to God by his faith and repentance,
the more carefull will he be, to
deale gently with his brethren: and the reasons
hereof are these.
            First, God forgiueth not a man his faults
but vpon condition, that he shall forgiue his
brother, God is not mercifull to a man, but
vpon cōdition he shall be so to all men with
whome he deales. Secondly, the mercie of
God to vs, in forgiuing our sinnes, is not
made knowne to the world by any meanes
more, then this, when a man is not hard and
extreame, but equall and mercifull in his dealing
with men. Whereupon therefore it
followeth, that the further a man is from
God, and the lesse that he hath felt of Gods
loue to him, the lesse moderation will he

performe to his brother. Let euery man
then be ashamed, by these his extreame courses
with his brethren, to make it known to
the world, that he is an Impenitent sinner,
himselfe vnreconciled to God, and his sinnes
vnpardoned: and let no man thinke he shall
escape that censure, if he be an vnmercifull
man; for certainely it is imprinted in mens
dealings, whether they be in Gods fauour,
and their sinnes are pardoned, or no. Let
therefore euery man, when his owne crooked
nature, or the deuill makes him boyle against
his brother in anger, and vrgeth him
to vse him hardly and extreamely, consider
with himselfe, and say; I liue vnder God, I am
more in Gods hand, then this man in mine: I
haue offended God more, then he me: and if
I had my desert, I had now beene in hell for
my sinnes: but yet I liue, and by his mercie I
am spared, and am here still. But hath God
spared me, that I should pinch others? hath
he beene mercifull to me, that I should be
cruell to others? surely therefore I will be
mercifull and moderate to my brethren,
more then they deserue, least God take his

mercy from me: and then what shall become
of me, but to be throwne suddainly into hell,
which I deserued long agoe: nay I will by
my equitie and moderation towards my
brethren, mooue the Lord to be still more
mercifull to me, without which his mercie, I
cannot liue one day in the world.
            Hitherto of the Exhortation of the Apostle,
and of the great moderation of God to
man.
            Now followeth the Apostles reason, The
Lord is at hand. These wordes beare two
senses, or meanings. The first, of the last
iudgement: the second, of Gods presence.
The first, is thus framed, if the holy Ghost
meant of the last iudgement: Be you equall
and moderate one towardes an other, for
God is readie in his great and generall iudgment,
to iudge all men, and then happie is he
that findes not Iustice, but tasts of mercie:
and who shall tast of mercie then, but he that
shewed mercie in this world? But if secondly,
the holy Ghost meant of Gods presence,
then is the argument framed thus: God is
present with euery man, and at euery action,

to testifie and iudge of it, and either to approoue
it and reward it, if it be vpright, equall,
and mercifull: or to correct and punish
it, if it be extreame, and void of equitie: therefore
let your equitie be knovvne to all men.
Both senses are good, but we will cleaue vnto
the latter. It is then all one, as if the holy
Ghost had said; Vse equitie and moderation
in your dealings, and remember who is at
your elbow, stands by and lookes on, readie
to iudge you for it.
            Surely there can be no better reason then
this, if it be setled in a mans heart: for a theefe,
or a cut-purse, if he saw the Iudge stād at his
elbow, and looked vpon him, he would not
doe euill, he would stay his hand, euen because
he seeth that the Iudge seeth him, who
can presently hang him. A strong reason
with men, and it keepes euen bad men from
leud practises. Consider therefore when the
Iudge of Iudges, the Lord of heauen and
earth, stands by and seeth, and markes all thy
actions, whether they be towards thy brother,
as his is towards thee. This ought to
make the greatest man on earth, feare how

he deales cruelly or hardly with his brother.
But worldly men will not be perswaded of
this, but when they are laying their plots to
deceiue their brother, and when by iniustice,
and extremitie, they pinch and wring him,
they thinke in their hearts, God seeth them
not, nor doe they euer thinke of God, but
labour that God may be out of all their
thoughts. This is the cause of all sinne in the
world: for thence is it that mens hearts are
hardned, and that they care not how extremely
they deale with men, because they
thinke God seeth them not, nor wil cal them
to account for it, and doe with them as they
haue done with their brother. Hence comes
all iniustice, crueltie, extremitie, suits in law
for trifles, taking forfaitures of leases, and of
bonds, and taking all aduantages. Hence
comes it, that one man will not spare an other
one day, nor forgiue one fault, nor
passe by any infirmitie, nor put vp the least
iniurie, nor yeelde one inch from his right:
but if his brother offend neuer so liule, vpon
neuer so apparent weaknes, he shall heare of
it on both sides, as they say: and if he deserue

ill, he shall haue his deserts to the full. Thus
hearts are hardened, affections are immoderate,
bowells of compassion are shut vp, loue
and pitie are banished, and in their roomes
raigne crueltie, and iniustice. Moderation
dwells in corners, but extremitie is that,
which beares sway ouer all the world: what
is the cause of all this? Surely, first, because
men are vnsanctified, and haue not repented
of their sinnes, & so they feele not, that God
is moderate, and mercifull to them. Secondly,
they perswade not themselues, that God
seeth them▪ therefore against this blasphemous
thought the roote of all euill, and cause
of all sinne, arme thy selfe with this reason of
the Apostle, and resolue of it, that this is the
eternall trueth of God, and shall stand for euer.
The Lord is at hand: and seeth and obserueth
thee, & all thy doings. Therefore as
thou wilt escape his mightie and fearefull
hand, season thy doings and dealings with
moderation: and if thou hadst noō cscience,
nor no mercie in thee, yet be mercifull, remē
               bring
who seeth thee; and deale moderately
and equally in the sight and presence of so

moderate, so milde, and so mercifull a God:
so mercifull a rewarder of him that deales
moderately, and so powerfull a reuenger of
him that deales hardly, and extreamely with
his brother. Let vs then ende with the Apostle
as we began: Let your Equitie and Moderation
be knowne to all men, for God is at
hand.
            
            And thus much out of Gods word, of
Publike and Priuate Equitie: wherein I haue
not spoken all I might, but giuen occasion
to others, to enter into further consideration
thereof.
            Trin-vni Deo gloria.
            
         
      
   