
      
         
            
            
            TWO TREATISES. 
                  I. Of the nature and practise of repentance.
                  II. Of the combat of the flesh and spirit.
               
            
            Printed by IOHN LEGATE Printer to the Vniversitie of Cambridge. 1593. And are to be sold at the signe of the Sunne in Paules Church-yard in London.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE READER whosoever.
            
               GOD hath bestowedon vs great prosperitie and peace with plenty of all temporall blessings that heart can wish for many yeres in this land.
            Prosperity abused hath bin the occasion of many grievous sinnes against the first and secondtable: specially of Atheisme, neglect of Gods worship, contempt of the word, prophanation of the Sabbath, abuse of the Sacraments, &c.
            These and such like sinnes have long called downe for iudgements from heaven upon us: & the rather, because the preaching of the worde hath litle prevailed to bring vs to any amendment of life.
            
               Whereupon God hath now begun to cause his iudgements to seaze upon vs, specially by plague and pestilence: & that even in the very principall part of this land: whereby he him selfe doth (as Iob saith) round us in the eare,
               Iob. 36. 15. and preach repentance to vs.
            Wherfore it stands vs now in hand if ever, to looke about vs: and if we have not repented to begin to repent: if we have in former time repented, to doe it more earnestly.
            If so be that we shall harden our hearts both against his word and iudgements, & put farre from vs the evill day: undoubtedly we must needs looke for iudgements far more terrible then ever we felt as yet; if not eternall destruction. Let vs be advised by the old world, who made light of Noahs warning, and were drowned in the flood: by Lots sonnes in law, whoGen. 19. 14. tooke their fathers counsell for mockage and were burnt with fire and brimstone from heaven: by the foolish virgins, who were sleeping when they should have bene furnishing their lampes, and were shut from the mariage of the lambe.
            And to direct thee somwhat in the practise

of repentance, I haue penned this small treatise: vse it for thy benefite, and see thou be a doer of it: vnlesse thou wilt be a wilfull murderer & shed the blood of thine owne soule.
            And whereas there have bin published here to fore in English two sermons of Repentance, one by M. Bradford Martyr, the other by M. Arthur Dent: sermons indeed which haue done much good: my meaning is not to adde thereunto, or to teach any other doctrine, but only to renew & revive the memory of that which they have taught.
            Neither let it trouble thee that the principall divines of this age, whom in this treatise I follow, may seeme to be at difference in treating of repentance. For some make it a fruite of faith containing two parts, mortification, & vivification: some make faith a part of it, by deviding it into contrition, faith, new obedience. The difference is not in the substance of doctrine, but in the logicall maner of handling it. And the difference of handling ariseth of the divers acception of repentance. It is taken two wayes generally & particularly. Generally for the whole conversion of a sinner,

and so it may containe contrition, faith, and nevv obedience under it. It is taken particularly for the renovation of the life and behavicur: and so it is a fruite of faith. And this only sense do I follovv in this treatise.
            I have added hereto a fevv lines of the combat betvvene the flesh and the spirit: because repentance and this combat are ioyned togither, & the one is not practised vvithout the other, as appeares by resolving Psalme 51.
            
               Spirit.
               Haue mercy on me, O God, accordingvers. 1. to thy louing kindnes.
            
            
               Flesh.
               Yea, but this thine adultery comprehends infinite sinnes: therfore looke for no pardon.
            
            
               Spirit.
               According to the multitude of thy compassions put away mine iniquities.
            
            
               Flesh.
               This sinne hath taken such deepe place in thee: that it will be hardly pardoned.
            
            
               Spirit.
               Wash me throughly from minevers. 2. iniquity, and clense me from my sinne.
            
            
               Flesh.
               Thy speciall trespasse is against man.
            
            
               Spirit.
               Against thee, against thee, only hauevers. 4. I sinned, &c.
            
            
               Flesh.
               Except this one sinne, thy life is unblameable.
            
            
               
               Spirit.
               Behold I was borne in iniquity, &c.vers. 5.
               
            
            Yea, the best man that is, in the practise of godlinesse often appeares to be unlike himselfe: the cause is this spirituall combat. The flesh other whiles makes him waile and mourne and goe drooping: presently after the spirit puts into him (as we say) the heart of grasse, and makes him triumph against the flesh, the devill the world. Moses was couragious at theExod. 14. 13. Num. 20. 11, 12. Iob. 1. 21. & 3. 1. Psalm, 6. 1, 8. & 10. 17. & 41. 9, 10, 11. red sea; but he failed at the waters of strife. Iob first praiseth God, and after blasphemeth. David is often fainting in miserie, yet by and by revived. Wherefore there is good cause why the consideration of repentance and the combat should go togither: that no man, after he hath begun to repent, might dreame of ease to his flesh; as though we should goe to heaven in beds of downe: but rather that we might be resolved, that when we begin to doe any thing pleasing unto God, then wee must looke for nothing but continuall molestations from our vile and wicked natures.
            
               
               Written Anno 1593. the 17. of November, which is the Coronation day of our dread Soveraigne Queene ELIZABETH; whose raigne God long continue. 
               William Perkins.
            
         
         
            Faults amended.
            Pag. 73. lin. 16. for, this first, read, this sense. p. 75. l. 3. speake. p. 83. in marg. place Zach. 7. 11. with Eph. 4. 19. p. 87. l. 23. for, and yet, read, and the.
         
      
      
         
            
               
               
                  CAP. I. WHAT REPENtance is.
               
                  REpentance is a worke of grace arising of a godly sorow: wherby a man turnes frō all his sinnes unto God, and brings foorth fruites worthie amendement of life.
               I call repentance a work: because it seemes not to be a qualitie, or vertue, or habit: but an action of a repentant sinner. which appeares by the ser mons of the Prophets and Apostles, which runne in this tenor, Repent, turne to God, amend your lives, &c. Whereby they intimate, that repentance is a worke to be done.
               Againe, Repentance is not every kinde of

worke, but a worke of grace. because it can not be practised of any, but of such as be in the estate of grace. Reasons are these. I. No man can repent, unlesse he first hate sinne, and loue righteousnes; and none can hate sinne, unlesse he be sanctified; and he that is sanctified is iustified: and hee that is iustified must needes haue that faith which unites him to Christ, and makes him bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh. Wherefore he that repentes is iustified and sanctified, and made a member of Christ by faith. II. Hee that turnes to God must first of all be turned of God: and after that we are turned, then we repent. Surely
                  Ierem. 31. 19. 
                  after I was converted I repented: and after that I was instructed I smote upon my thigh: I was ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I did beare the reproch of my youth.
               
               Some may obiect, that repentance goes before all grace, because it is first preached. The first sermon that ever was made was of repentance preached by God himselfe in paradise to our first parents. And ever since the sermons of al the prophets and Apostles and of all faithful ministers haue had repentance for their beginning

and scope. The answere hereto may be this. If we respect the order of nature, there be other graces of God which goe before repentance▪ because a mans conscience must in some part be setled touching his reconciliatiō with God jn Christ, before he can begin to repent. wherfore iustificatiō & sanctification in order of nature go before repentāce. But if we respect time, grace & repentance are both togi ther. So soone as there is fire so soone it is hot: & so soone as a man is regenerate, so soone he repents. If we respect the outward manifestation of these twaine, repentance goes before all other graces: because it first of all appeares outwardly. Regeneration is like the sap of the tree that lies hid within the barke: repentance is like the bud that speedily shews itself, before either blossom, leaf, or fruit appeare: yea, all other graces of the heart which are needfull to salvation, are made manifest by repentance. And for this cause Repentance (as I take it) is first preached.
               I adde further, that repentāce riseth of a godly sorow in the heart, as Paul teacheth. Godly sorow
                  2. Cor. 7. 10. 
                  causeth repentance unto salvation never to be repented of. It is called a godly sorow, or

a sorrow according to God, that it may be distinguished from worldly sorrow: which is a griefe arising of the apprehension of the wrath of God and other miseries; as feare of men, losse of good name, calamities in goods and other things, which in this life follow as punishments of sinne: whereas the godly sorrowe causeth griefe for sinne, because it is sinne. And it makes any man, in whome it is, to be of this disposition and minde, that if there were no conscience to accuse, no devill to terrifie, no iudge to arraigne and condemne, no hell to torment, yet he would be humbled & brought on his knees for his sinnes, because he hath offended a loving, mercifull, and long suffering God.
               Further I say, that repentance standes in turning againe to God. Man at the first was made a goodly creature in the image of God having fellowshippe with him, whereby hee dwelt in God and God in him. By sinne there is a partition made betweene God and man: who is alienatedIsa. 59. 2. eph. 4. 18. and estraunged from God, and is become the child of wrath, a firebrand of hell, the prodigall child going from his father into a far

countrey, the straying nay the lost sheepe. Now when men haue grace to repent, then they begin to renew this fellowship, and turne againe to God. And the very essence or nature of repentance consistes in this turning. Which Paul doth seeme to intimate, when he saith, That he shewed both to Iewe and Gentile,
                  Actes. 26. 20 
                  that they should repent and turne to God, and doe workes worthy amendment of life. In which wordes he sets downe unto us a full description of repentance.
               Againe I say, that repentance is a turning from sinne, because it doeth not abolish or change the substance of body or soule, or any of the faculties thereof either in whole or parte: but onely rectifie and amend them by remooving the corruption. It turnes the sadnesse of melancholy to godly sorow, choller to good zeale, softnesse of nature to meekenesse of spirit, madnesse and lightnesse to christian mirth: it reformes every man according to his naturall constitution, not abolishing it but redressing the faultes of it.
               Further I put downe, that repentance is a turning from all sinne to God, that I may exclude

many false turnings. The first, when a man turnes from God to sinne▪ as when one of a protestant becomes a papist, an Arrian, a Familist. The second, when a man turnes from one sinne to another. As when the riotous person leaves his prodigalitie, and gives himselfe to the practise of covetousnesse: this can be no repentance: because it is a going from one extreame to another, whereas repentance is to leave the extreames and keepe the mean. The thirde is, not when a man turnes from sinne, but sinne turnes from him and leaves him. As when the drunkard leaves drunkennesse because his stomacke is decayed: the fornicatour his uncleannesse, because the strength of nature failes him: the quareller his fighting, because he is maimed on legge or arme. The last is, when men turne from many sinnes, but will not turne from all. As Herod did many things at the advertisement of Iohn baptist, but coulde not be brought to leave incest, in having his brother Philips wife. This repentance is nothing. For as he which is truly regenerate, is wholly in body, soule, & spirit regenerate: so he which truly repents, turnes

from all sinne, and turnes wholly to God.
               Neither is this to trouble any, that they can not know all their sinnes: for sound repentāce for one speciall sinne brings with it repentāce of all sinne. And as God requires particular repentance for knowen sinnes, so he accepts a generall repentance for such as be unknown.
               To proceed further, the conversion of a sinner in repentance, hath three partes. The first, a purpose and resolution in the mind: the second, an inclination in the will and affections: the third, an indeavour in life and conversation, to abandon and leave all his former sinnes, and to imploy himselfe in obedience to Gods commandements.
               Lastly, this repentance must bring foorth fruites worthy amendement of life: because it can not be knowen to be sincere, vnlesse it bring forth fruit. Repentant sinners are trees
                  Isa. 61. 3. 
                  of righteousnesse of Gods owne planting: and they grow by the waters that flow out of the
                  Ezee. 47. 12. 
                  sanctuarie, and therefore they must beare fruite that may serve for meate, and leafe for
                  Mat. 3. 10. 
                  medecine: otherwise the axe of Gods iudgement is laid to there rootes to stocke them vp.
            
            
               
               
                  CAP. II. Of the causes of Repentance.
               
                  THe principall cause of Repentance is the Spirite of God, as Paul saith, Instructing
                  2. Tim. 2. 25. 
                  them with meekenesse that are contrarie minded, prooving if God at any time wil give them repentance. And Ieremie, Convert thou me,
                  Ier. 31. 18. 
                  and I shalbe converted.
               
               The instrument of the holy ghost in working repentance, is the ministerie of the Gospell onely, and not the Law. Reasons hereof are these. I. Faith is ingendred by the preaching not of the Law, but of the Gospell, as Paul saith, The gospell is the power of God to
                  Rom. 1. 18. 
                  salvation to all that beleeve from faith to faith: therefore repentance which followes faith as a fruite thereof, must needes come by the preaching of the gospell only. II. The Lawe is the ministerie of death and damnation:
                  2. Cor. 3. 7. because it shewes a man his wretched estate;

but shewes him no remedie: therfore it can not be an instrumentall cause of that repentance which is effectuall to salvation. III. The doctrine of repentance is a part of the gospell: which appeares in this, that the preachingLuc. 9. 6. cum Marc. 6. 12. of repentance, and the preaching of the gospell are put one for another. And our Saviour Christ divides the gospell into two partes: the preaching of repentance, and remissionLuc. 24. 47. of sinnes in his name. IIII. That part of the worde which workes repentance, must reveale the nature of it, and set out the promise of life which belongs unto it. But the law neither reveales faith nor repentance: this is a proper worke of the gospell. If it bee said, that the law is a schoolemaster to bring us to Christ, the answere is, it brings men to Christ a
                  vrgēdo non alliciēdo. not by teaching the way, or by alluring them: but by forcing and urging them.
               Neither do we abolish the law, in ascribing the worke of repentance to the gospell only: for though it be no cause, yet is it an occasion of true repentance. Because it represents unto the eye of the soule our damnable estate, and smites the conscience with dolefull terrours

and feares, which though they be no tokens of grace (for they are in their owne nature the very gates and the downe-fall to the pit of hell) yet they are certen occasions of receiving grace. The Phisition is otherwhiles constrained to recover the health of his patient by casting him into some fits of an ague. So man, because hee is deadly sicke of the disease of sinne, he must be cast into some fittes of Legall terrours by the ministerie of the law, that he may recover his former estate, and come to life everlasting.
               Repentance also is furthered by calamities. Iosephs brethren, when they were in distresse in Egypt said one to another, We have verily
                  Gen. 42. 21. 
                  sinned against our brother in that we sawe the anguish of his soule when hee be sought vs and we would not heare him, therefore is this trouble come upon vs. And the Lorde saith in Oseah, I will goe and returne to my place till
                  Ose. 5. 15. 
                  they acknowledge their fault & seeke me; in their affliction will they seeke me diligently. And, The Israelites say, my soule had them
                  Iam. 3. 20. (namely afflictions) in remembrance, & is humbled in me. Example of Manasses. And
                  
                  when hee was in tribulation hee prayed to the
                  2. Chr. 33. 12. 
                  Lord his God, and humbled himselfe greatly. And David saith, It is good for me that I have
                  Psalm. 119. 71. 
                  ben afflicted, that I might learne thy statutes.
               
            
            
               
                  CAP. III. Of the partes of Repentance.
               
                  REpentance hath two parts: Mortification, and Rising to newnesse of life.
               Mortification is the first part of repentance which concernes turning from sinne.
               Men turn from sinne, when they do not only abstaine frō actuall sinne, but also use all means whereby they may both weaken & suppresse the corruption of nature. Surgeons, whē they must cut of any part of the body, use to lay plai sters to it, to mortifie it, that beeing without sense and feeling, it may be cut off with lesse paine. In the same maner, wee are to use all helpes & remedies prescribed in the worde, which serue to weaken or kill sinne, that in death it may be abolished.
               
                  And it must not seeme strange that I say we must use meanes to mortifie our owne sinnes. For, howsoever by nature we can not doe ane thing acceptable to God, yet' beingActia gimus. quickened and moved by the holy ghost, we stirre and moove our selves to doe that which is truly good. And therefore repentant sinners haue grace in them, whereby they mortifie their owne sinnes. Paul saith, I be at down my body and bring it in subiection. And,1. Cor. 9. 27. Gal. 5. 24. 
                  They which are Christes haue crucified the flesh with the affections and the lustes thereof. And, Mortifie therefore your earthly members, fornication, uncleannesse, the inordinate
                  Col. 3. 5. 
                  affection, evill concupiscence and covetousnesse. And, If any man purge himselfe from
                  2. Tim. 2. 21. 
                  these, he shall be a vessell unto honour. And S. Iohn saith, Everyone which hath this hope in
                  1. Ioh. 3. 3 
                  him, purgeth him-selfe, even as hee is pure. And, He which is begotten of God preserveth
                  cap.. 5. vers. 18 
                  himselfe, and the wicked one toucheth him not.
               
               Mortification hath three partes. A purpose in minde, an inclination in will, and an indeavour in life and conversation to leave all sinne.
               
                  Rising to newnesse of life, is the second part of repentance concerning sincere obedience to God.
               And it hath also three partes. The two first are a resolution in the minde, and an inclination or lust in the will to obey God in all things. Barnabas exhorts them of Antiochia, That with purpose of heart they would cleave
                  Actes 11. 23. 
                  vnto the Lord. Examples of both these are many in scriptures. Of Ioshua. If it seeme
                  Iosh. 24. 15. 
                  evill vnto you to serve the Lord, chuse you this day whome yee will serve, whether the gods which your fathers served, or the gods of the Amorites, &c. but I and my housholde will serve the Lorde. Of David, O Lorde
                  Psalm. 119. 57. 
                  thou art my portion, I have determined to keepe thy commandements. And, I have
                  v. 106. 
                  sworne, and will perfourme it, that I will keepe thy righteous iudgements. And, When thou saidst, Seeke ye my face, mine heart answered
                  Psalm. 27 8. Psalm. 119. 112. 
                  unto thee, O Lord I will seeke thy face. And, I have applyedmine heart to fulfill thy statutes alwayes even to the end.
               
               The third parte, is an indeavour in life and conversation to obey God. Example of Paul.
               
                  
                  And herein I take paines to have alwayes a
                  Actes 24. 16. 
                  cleare conscience towardes God & towardes men. Of David, I have respect vnto all thy
                  Psalm. 119. 6. v. 30. 
                  commandements. And, I haue chosen the way of truth, & thy iudgements have I laid before me. And, I have cleaved to thy testimonies.
                  31 And, Direct me in the path of thy commandements:
                  35. 
                  for therein is my delight.
               
               No man must here thinke, that a repentant sinner fulfilles the lawe in his obedience: for their best workes are faultie before God. And whereas the faithfull in scriptures are said to be perfect: we must know that there be two degrees of perfection: perfection in substance, and perfection in the highest degree. Perfection in substance is, when a man doth sincerely indeavour to perfourme perfect obedience to God not in some but in all his commandements. And this is the only perfection that any man can have in this life. A Christian mans perfection is to bewaile his imperfection: his obediencee more consistes in the goodwill then in the worke, and is more to be measured by the affection, then by the effect.
            
            
               
               
                  CAP. IIII. Of the degrees of repentance.
               
                  REpentance hath two degrees. It is either ordinarie or extraordinary.
               Ordinary repentance is that which every christian is to per forme every day: for as men fall daily either more or lesse: so the graces of God are proportionally weakened day by day. wherefore the continuall reparation therof must be made by a daily renuing of repentance. A christian man is the temple & house of Gods spirit: hee must therfore once a day sweepe it, that it may be sit to entertaine so worthy a ghest.
               Extraordinary repentance is the same in nature with the former: it differs onely from it in degree and measure of grace.
               And this is to be put in practise, when men fall into any enormous, capitall, or grievous offences, whereby they doe very grievously wound thir owne consciences, & giue great offence to the Church. Of this sort was the repentāce of Peter when he went forth & wept bitterly: & Davids repentāce, after that he had committed adultery & murdered Vriah.
            
            
               
               
                  CAP. V. Of the persons which must repent.
               
                  MEn be of two sortes: the naturall man, and the regenerate. Repentance is needefull for both. For the naturall man, that hee may be brought frō his sinnes, and the Image of God renewed in him. Some may say, that many naturall men live civilly, absteining from all outragious behaviour, and therefore neede no repentance. I graunt indeede, they doe so: yet repentance must goe withall. For civil life without grace in Christ, is nothing else in Gods sight, but a beautifull abomination. The Pharises were civill, yet Christ saith of them, Except your righteousnesse exceede the righteousnesse of the Scribes and Pharises, yee shall not see the kingdome of heaven. Repentance is also required in the

regenerate: because they have many knowen and privie corruptions in them, which must be mortified: and otherwhiles they fall greevously: and therefore that they may rise againe, they must be daily practised in the spirituall exercises of repentance.
            
            
               
                  CAP. VI. Of the practise of Repentance
               
                  IN the practise of Repentance foure speciall duties are required. The first is a diligent and serious examination of the consciēce by the Lawes & commandementes of God, for all manner of sinnes both originall and actuall. Example of theLam. 3 39. 40. children of Israel. Wherefore is the living man sorowfull? man suffereth for his sinne: let vs search & trie our wayes, & turne againe to the Lorde. Of David. I considered
                  Psalm. 119. 59. 
                  my wayes, & turned my feete to thy testimonies.
               
               
                  Touching Originall sinne, this must be well remembred, that one man hath not one part onely of originall sinne, and another man an other: one man this corruption, another that: but every man as he received from Adam the whole nature of man: so also he received originall sinne wholly. And therefore every man, (not one excepted, saving Christ who was extraordinarily sanctified by the holy ghost in the womb of the virgin) hath in him from his parents the corruption and seede of all sinne, which is a naturall disposition & pronesse to commit any sinne whatsoeuer. Take a view and consider all the horrible sinnes that be practised in any part of the world, either against the first or second table: whatsoeuer they are, the spawne and seede of them all is euen in that man that is thought to be best disposed by nature. Some may say, that experiēce shewes the contrary; because among men that want all maner of religion some are more civill & orderly: some againe more lewdly disposed. I answere, that this comes to passe, not because some men are by nature lesse wicked then others: but because God, by his providence

doth limit and restraine mens corruption more or lesse, which he doth for the good of mankind. For if men might be wholly left to themselves, corruption woulde so exceedingly breake out into all maner of sinnes, that there should be no living in the world.
               Touching actuall sinnes, they shalbe found by examinatiō to be innumerable as the haires of a mans head, & as the sands by the sea shore: if any will but search themselves a litle by the ten commandements of the Decalogue, for all their sinful thoughts, words, and deeds against God and man.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           A DIRECTION FOR EXAmination of the conscience.
                           
                              
                                 I. COM. Thou shalt have none other gods, &c.
                              He breakes this commandement,
                              
                                 THat knowes not the true God, Ier. 4. 22.
                                 That denies God in his hart, by denying his presence, iustice, mercy, &c. Ps. 14. 1.
                                 That hates God, and shewes it by disobedience. Exod. 20. 5. Rom. 1. 30.
                                 
                                    That doe not feare God and stand in awe of him.
                                 That feare men or other creatures more then God. Matth. 10. 31. Apoc. 21. 8.
                                 That liue in open sinnes securely, not fearing Gods worde or iudgements. 1. Thess. 5, 6, 7.
                                 That is sorrowfull for his sinnes onely in respect of the punishment. 2. Cor. 7. 10.
                                 That feares God by mens traditions. Isa. 29. 13.
                                 That doe not beleeue Gods word but call the Canonicall scripture in question.
                                 That despaires of Gods mercie.
                                 That hath a dead faith without works. Iam. 2.
                                 That puts faith in the devill and his workes, as seekers to wisardes doe.
                                 That loues the creatures, as riches & honour, and his owne filthy pleasures more then God. Ephes. 5. 5.
                                 That puts confidence in his strength, wisdom, riches, phisitions. 2. Chron. 16. 9, 11.
                                 That is impatient under the crosse. Mat. 10. 38.
                                 That temptes God. Matth. 4. 7.
                                 That seekes for the things of this life, more then for Gods kingdome. Matth. 6. 33.
                                 That murmures against God. 1. Cor. 10. 10.
                                 
                                    That disputes and holdes there is no God.
                                 That holdes and maintaines opinions against the auncient faith set downe in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles. As did the Maniches, Donatistes, Arrians, Anabaptists, &c.
                                 That so holdes one religion, as he is ready to follow another. 1. King. 18. 21.
                                 That is full of presumption of Gods mercy. Isa. 7. 12.
                                 That falles away from the knowen trueth. 2. Pet. 2. 20.
                                 That addes to Canonicall scripture. Deut. 12. last ver.
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 II. COM. Thou shalt make to thy selfe no graven Image. &c.
                              He breakes this commandement,
                              
                                 THat represents God in an image. Exod. 32. 6, 8.
                                 That worships God in or at images, as crucifixes, and such like, 2. King. 18. 4.
                                 That kneles downe before an image.
                                 That is bodily present at Masse keeping his

heart to God, 1. Cor. 8. 9.
                                 That reteines the monuments of idolatrie. Exod. 23. 13.
                                 That marrieth with infidels or such like. Gen. 6. 2.
                                 That makes leagues of amitie with such. 2. Chron. 19. 1.
                                 That worships God according to his owne fantasie. Col. 2. 23.
                                 That worships God with lip-service. Isa. 29. 13
                                 That hath the power of godlinesse but denies the force of it, 2. Tim. 3. 5.
                                 That gives Gods worshippe to creatures, as Saintes and Angels. Psal. 115. 8.
                                 That refuseth to heare the preaching of the Gospell. Luk. 14. 19.
                                 That negligently worships God. Rev. 3. 16.
                                 That omits invocation of Gods name. Isai. 64. 7.
                                 That heares sermons but when he is reprooved, railes, and rages, and profits nothing, Amos. 5. 10.
                                 That changes the worship of God in whole or in part. Deut. 12. 32.
                                 That makes either open or secret league with

the devill, Psal. 58
                                 That useth witchcraft, sorcery, or inchantments, Deut. 18. 11. Lev. 19. 26.
                                 That consults with wisards. Lev. 20. 6.
                                 That weares Amulets or Characters about his necke, and puts confidence in them.
                                 That hinders schooles of religion and good learning.
                                 That seekes not (within the compasse of his calling) the good estate of Gods Church: but seekes his owne things. Psal. 132. 3, 4.
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 III. COM. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord, &c.
                              He breakes this commandement,
                              
                                 THat doth unreuerently use Gods titles in his talke. Phil. 2. 10.
                                 That sweares to doe a thing lawfull & good, and yet doth it not. Mat. 5. 23.
                                 That sweares rashly. Ierem. 4. 2.
                                 That useth customable swearing in his common talke. Matt. 5. 37.
                                 That blasphemes the name of God. Levit. 24. 16.
                                 
                                    That sweares falsly. Ioh. 8. 44.
                                 That sweares against pietie and honestie.
                                 That useth cursing and banning.
                                 That findes fault with the creatures of God, 1. Cor. 10. 3.
                                 That sweares by the creatures. Mat. 5. 34, 35.
                                 That useth lots in sporting. Pro. 16. 33. & 18. 18.
                                 That makes and useth charmes of hearbes and other things. Deut, 18. 11.
                                 That makes iestes of the sentences and phrases of scripture. Isa. 66. 2.
                                 That useth figure casting. Isa. 47. 13.
                                 That doth lightly regard Gods iudgements. Heb. 3. 16.
                                 That living dissolutely in religion, makes Gods name evill spoken of. 2. Sam. 12. 13. 1. Pet. 3. 15.
                                 That makes a vowe of continencie or of any thing not in his power.
                                 That makes a lawfull vowe and keepes it not. Deut. 23. 21.
                                 That receives blessings from God, and is not thankfull. Luc. 17. 8.
                                 That teacheth the truth but doth not practise it. Mat. 23. 2.
                              
                           
                           
                              
                              
                                 IIII. COM. Remember the Sabbath day to &c.
                              He breakes this commandement,
                              
                                 THat labours in the servile workes of his ordinarie calling. Nehem. 13. 15.
                                 That travels abroad on his ordinary busines, Exod. 16. 24.
                                 That keepes faires and markets on this day. Nehe. 13. 15.
                                 That workes harvest worke on this day. Exod. 34. 21.
                                 That useth sportes and recreations causing distraction. 1. Cor. 10. 7.
                                 That spendes the day in idlenesse. Isa. 58. 13.
                                 That keepes the Sabbath only in outward fashion. Isa. 1. 13.
                                 That prophanes it by gluttonie and drunkennesse.
                                 That gives servants libertie to doe what they list.
                                 That brings not his family to the congregation to heare Gods word, and to receiue the sacraments.
                                 
                                    That sanctifies not the Sabbath in his family privately.
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 V. COM. Honour thy fathtr, &c.
                              He breakes this commandement,
                              
                                 THat mockes or reviles, or beates his superiours, Gen. 9. 22.
                                 That disobeyes their lawfull commaundements, Rom. 
                                       •
                                    
                                    ▪ 30▪
                                 
                                 That is unthankefull to parents, and will not 
                                       •
                                    elieve them if need be. 2. Tim. 3. 3.
                                 That disobeyes God to obey them. Act. 4. 19.
                                 That exaltes him selfe aboue the magistrate. 2. Thess. 2. 9.
                                 That serves his master with eye-service. Coloss. 3, 22.
                                 That governes his family and those which are under him negligently. 1. Tim. 3. 4.
                                 That is slacke in punishing faults. 1. Sam. 2. 22.
                                 That is too rigorous in speeches and punishments. Eph. 6. 9.
                                 That marieth without parents consent.
                                 That chooseth his calling without parents

consent. Num. 30.
                                 That thinkes better of himself then of others, Rom. 12. 10.
                                 That despiseth aged persons. Lev. 19. 23.
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 VI. COM. Thou shalt not kill.
                              He breakes this commandement,
                              
                                 THat beares malice to another. 1. Ioh. 3. 15.
                                 That is given to hastinesse. Mat. 5. 22.
                                 That useth inwarde fretting and grudging. Iam. 3. 14.
                                 That is frowarde of nature, harde to please, Rom. 1. 31.
                                 That is full of rancour and bitternesse. Ephes. 4. 31
                                 That derides and scornes others, Genes. 21. 9. Gal. 4. 29.
                                 That useth bitter words and railings, Prover. 12. 18.
                                 That useth contending by wordes or deedes, Gal. 5. 20.
                                 That useth chiding and crying out. Ephes. 4. 31.
                                 That is given to make complaintes of his

neighbour in all places, Iam. 5. 9.
                                 That is a fighter. Iam. 4. 1.
                                 That hurtes or maines his neighbours bodie. Exod. 21. 24.
                                 That will not forgive an offence. Matth. 5. 23.
                                 That will forgiue but not forget.
                                 That doeth fare well him selfe, but giues not almes to relieve the poore. Luc. 16. 19.
                                 That useth cruelty in punishing malefactours. Deut. 22. 6.
                                 That denies the servants or labourers wages, Iam. 5. 24.
                                 That holdes backe the pledge. Ezech. 18. 7.
                                 That sels by divers weights and measures.
                                 That remooves the land marke. Prov. 22. 18.
                                 That gives his goods vpon usurie: which is simply to binde a man to returne both the principall and the increase. Ezech. 18. 8.
                                 That by his loosenesse of life is an occasion why other sinne.
                                 That mooves contention and debate. Rom. 1. 29.
                                 That being a minister teacheth erroneously.
                                 That teacheth slackly. Ierem. 48. 10.
                                 That teacheth not at all. 1. Tim. 3. 2.
                                 
                                    That hinders mens salvation any way. Matt. 23. 13.
                                 That seekes private revenge.
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 VII. COM. Thou shalt not commit, &c.
                              He breakes this commandement,
                              
                                 THat lookes on a woman to lust after her. Mat. 5. 28.
                                 That commits incest. Levit. 18. 22.
                                 That commits Sodomie. 1. Cor. 6. 9.
                                 That commits fornication with married or single, or contracted folkes. Deut. 22. 22.
                                 That useth mariage bed intemperately.
                                 That lyeth with a menstruous woman, Ezech. 18. 6.
                                 That useth wantonnes. 1. Cor. 6. 9.
                                 That useth occasions and provocations to lust. Gal. 5. 9.
                                 That is given to idlenesse.
                                 That weares wanton and light attire. 1. Tim. 2. 9. 1. Pet. 3. 3.
                                 That useth light talke and reading of louebookes. 1. Cor. 15. 35.
                                 
                                    That frequents lascivious places. Eph. 5. 3.
                                 That delightes in wanton pictures. 1. Thess. 5. 23.
                                 That useth the mixt dansing of men and women, Mar. 6. 22.
                                 That keepes company with light and suspected persons. Pro. 7. 22.
                                 That neglectes to dispose his children in marriage in convenient time. 1. Cor. 7. 37.
                                 That makes mariages of young children.
                                 That punisheth adultery with small punishments.
                                 That marieth more wiues then one at once. Gen. 2. 24.
                                 That loues his pleasures more then God. 2. Tim. 3. 4.
                                 That takes care to fulfill the lustes of the flesh. Rom. t3. 14.
                                 That maintaines and frequents stewes. Deut. 23. 17.
                                 That is giuen to drunkennesse and surfetting, Eph. 5. 18.
                                 That gives himselfe to wine, sleepe, and ease. Prov. 20. 13.
                                 That for the avoiding of fornications maries

not. 1. Cor. 7. 2.
                                 That puts away his wife for other causes then for fornication, Mat. 19. 9.
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 VIII. COM. Thou shalt not steale.
                              He breakes this commandement,
                              
                                 THat liues in no calling. 1. Thess 3. 11.
                                 That neglects his calling. Ierem. 48. 10.
                                 That spends his wealth in riot, and provides not for his familie. 1. Tim. 5. 8.
                                 That is not content with his estate, but seekes to be rich. 1. Tim. 6. 10.
                                 That selles the goods of the Church, or buyes them. Mal. 3. 8.
                                 That selles such things as are meanes to further idolatrie, or any other sinne.
                                 That useth powdering, starching, blowing, darke shops to set a glosse on his wares and make them more saleable.
                                 That conceales the fault of his wares.
                                 That useth false weightes and measures. Levit. 19. 35.
                                 That useth wordes of deceit, Prov. 20. 14,
                                 
                                    That takes more for his wares then the iust price. Matth. 7. 12.
                                 That oppresseth his tenants by racking his rents. Habac. 2. 11.
                                 That useth ingrossing of wares.
                                 That raiseth the price, onely in consideration of a day of payment.
                                 That either giues or takes bribes. Isa. 1. 33. Psal. 82.
                                 That writes letters of affectiō in wrong sutes.
                                 That holdes backe things borrowed. Ezech. 18. 7.
                                 That holdes backe things found or pawned. Levit. 6. 3.
                                 That being lustie liues by begging.
                                 That releeveth such. 2. Thess. 3. 10.
                                 That for gaine defendes bad causes.
                                 That layes burden on the people without measure. Isa. 1. 23. Ezech. 22. 27.
                                 That spends the Church goods in riot. 1. Tim. 6. 9.
                                 That makes marchandise of Gods word and sacrament. Mich. 3. 11. 2. Cor. 2. last.
                                 That gets goods by gaming.
                                 That gets his living by casting of figures and

by playes, Eph. 4. 28.
                                 That is rash in surety-ship. Prov. 11. 15. & 17. 18.
                                 That steales mens children to dispose them in mariage. 1. Tim. 1. 10.
                                 That takes by stealth the least pin, though it be for the best end.
                                 That is a receiver of things stolne, and gives consent to the fact any way. Rom. 1. 29.
                                 That useth deceit in bargaining. 1. Thess. 4. 6.
                                 That restores not things evill gotten. Ezech. 33. 15.
                                 That keeps back goods given to the Church. Acts 5. 3.
                                 That waites for a dearth, to sell his things dearer. Amos. 8. 5.
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 IX. COM. Thou shalt not beare, &c.
                              He breakes this commandement,
                              
                                 THat envies at the prosperity of his neighbour. 1. Tim. 6. 4.
                                 That seekes only his own good report.
                                 That is suspicious. 1. Cor. 13. 5.
                                 That gives rash or harde sentence against others. Matth. 7. 1.
                                 That takes mens sayings & doings in worse

part. Matth. 26. 60.
                                 That accuseth one salsly. 1. King. 21.
                                 That maketh or reporteth tales openly or in a whispering manner. Levit. 19. 16.
                                 That receiveth tales, Exod. 23. 1.
                                 That speakes the truth of malice. Psal. 52. 1, 2.
                                 That blazeth abroad mens infirmities. Matth. 18. 17.
                                 That useth quipping and taunting. Eph. 5. 4.
                                 That useth flattery, Prov. 26. 19.
                                 That lyeth though it be for neuer so good an end Zach. 13. 3.
                                 That defends an euill cause and impugnes the contrary.
                                 That writes or spreds libels.
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 X. COM. Thou shalt not lust.
                              He breakes this commandement,
                              
                                 That thinkes an euill thought against his neighbour though he meane not to doe it.
                                 That conceives some inward delight in some euill motion, though he give not consent to practise it.
                              
                           
                           
                              
                              
                                 SINNES DIRECTLY Against the Gospell.
                              He sinnes against the Gospell,
                              
                                 That denies either directly or by consequent that Christ is come in the flesh. 1. Ioh. 4. 3, 8
                                 That treads under foote the blood of Christ. Hebr. 10. 29.
                                 That beleeves not the remission of his owne sinnes and acceptation to life everlasting. 1. Ioh. 3. 23.
                                 That repents not but hardens himselfe in all his bad wayes. Rom. 2. 4. 5. Ierem. 8. 6.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               Thus much of examination: now followes the second duty, which is confession of sinne unto God, which is very necessary. For the right way to haue our sinnes covered before God is, to uncover and acknowledge them unto him. For hee will iustifie vs if we condemne our selues, he will pardon us, if we, as being our owne enemies, accuse our selues: he forgets our sinnes if wee remember them: when we are vile in our owne eyes, wee are pretious in his: and when we are lost to our selues, we are found of him.
               
                  That confession may be rightly performed, a notable duety is to be put in practise in it: namely, the arraignment of a repentant sinner, whereby he iudges himselfe that he may
                  1. Cor. 11. 31. 
                  not be iudged of the Lord.
               
               This arraignment hath three speciall pointes in it. For first of all, hee must bring himselfe forth to the barre of Gods iudgement. which thing hee doeth when he sets himselfe in the presence of God, as though even now the day of iudgement were. As Saint Hierome did, who alwayes thought with himselfe that hee heard this voice sounding in his eares, Rise yee dead and come to iudgement.
               
               Secondly, he must put up an inditement against himselfe: by accusing him-selfe before God, by acknowledging his knowne sinnes particularly and his unknowen generally, without any excuse, or extenuatiō, or defence, or hiding of the least of them. Example of David. I know mine iniquitie and my sinne is
                  Psal. 51 3, 4, 5. 
                  ever before me: against thee, against thee only have I sinned, and done this evill in thy sight, &c. behold, I was borne in iniquitie, and
                  
                  in sinne hath my mother conceived me. And,1. Chr. 21. 8. 
                  I have sinned greatly, because I have done this thing: but now, I beseech thee, remoove the iniquitie of thy servant: for I have done very foolishly. Of Ezra, O my God, I am ashamed &
                  Ezra. 9. 6. 
                  confounded to lift up mine eyes vnto thee, my God: for our iniquities are increased over our heads, & our trespasse is growen vp vnto heaven.
               
               Thirdly, he must with heavinesse of heart give sentence against himselfe, acknowledging that hee is worthy of everlasting hell, death, and damnation. As the prodigall child, Father, I have sinned against heaven, & against thee, & am not worthy to be called thy child, And Daniel, Wee haue sinned and committed
                  Dan▪ 9. 7. 
                  iniquitie, & have done wickedly: yea, wee have rebelled & have departed from thy precepts, & from thy iudgements, &c. O Lord, righteousnesse belongeth vnto thee, & vnto vs open shame. Of Iob, Beholde, I am vile,
                  Iob. 39. 36. & 42. 6 
                  what shall I answere thee. I will lay my hande upon my mouth. And, I abhorre my selfe, & I repent in dust & ashes. Of the Publicane,Luke 18. 13. 
                  Who standing a farre off, woulde not lift up so
                  
                  much as his eyes to heaven, but smote his brest saying, Lord be mercifull to me a sinner.
               
               As for confession of sinne to men, it is not to be used but in two cases. First, when some
                     
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     4. Mat. 5. Iam. 5. 16. offence is done to our neighbour: secondly, when ease and comfort is sought for, in trouble of conscience.
               The third dutie in the practise of repentance is Deprecation, whereby we pray to God for the pardon of the sinnes which haue bene confessed with contrition of heart, with earnestnesse and constancie, as for the weightiest matter in the world. And here we must remember to behaue our selues to God as the poore prisoner doth at the barre, who when the iudge is about to giue sentence, cries unto him for favour as for life and death. And we must doe as the cripple or lazar man in the way: sit downe, vnlappe our legges and armes and shew the sores of our sinnes; crying to God continually as they doe, (Looke with your eye, and pity with your heart:) that wee may finde mercy at Gods handes, as they get almes at the hands of passengers. Thus OseahOse. 14. 2. instructeth the people, O Israel, returne unto
                  
                  the Lord thy God: for thou hast fallen by thine iniquitie: take unto you words, and turne vnto the Lord, and say unto him, Take away all iniquitie and receive vs graciously: so wee will render thee the calves of our lips. Of Daniel,Dan. 9 18. 19. 
                  Wee doe not present our supplications before thee for our own righteousnes, but for thy great tender mercies. O Lord heare, O Lord forgive, O Lord consider and doe it: defer not for thine owne names sake, O my God. Of David, Have
                  Psalm. 51. 1. 
                  mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindnesse: according to the multitude of thy compassions put away mine iniquities.
               
               The last duty is to pray to God for grace & strength, whereby wee may be inabled to walke in newnesse of life. Of David, Behold, I
                  Psalm. 119. 40 
                  desire thy commandements, quicken me in thy righteousnesse. And, Teach me to doe thy will,
                  Psalm. 143. 10. 
                  for thou art my God: let thy good spirit lead me into the land of righteousnes.
               
            
            
               
                  CAP. VII. Of legall motives to repentance.
               MOtives to repentance are either Legall or Evangelicall. Legall are such as are borrowed from the law: & they are 3. especially.
               
                  The first is, the misery and cursed estate of euery impenitent sinner in this life by reason of his sinnes.
               His miserie (that I may expresse it to the conceit of the simplest) is seven-fold.
                     1. within him.
                     2. before him.
                     3. behind him.
                     4. on his right hand.
                     5. on his left hand.
                     6. over his head.
                     7. vnder his feete.
                  
               
               His miserie within him is twofold. The first is a guiltie conscience: which is a very hell vnto the ungodly man. For hee is like a silly prisoner, and the conscience like a Iayler which followes him at the heeles, and dogges him whither soever he goes, to the end he may see and observe all his sayings and doings. It is like a register, that sits alwaies with the pen in his hand, to record and inrole all his wickednesse for everlasting memory. It is a litle iudge, that sittes in the middle of a man even in his very heart, to arraigne him in this life for his sinnes as he shall be arraigned at the last iudgement.

Therfore the pangs, terrors, and feares of all impenitent persons, are as it were, certaine flashings of the flames of hell fire. The guiltie conscience makes a man like him, which lies on a bedde that is too strait and theIsa. 28. 20. covering too short: who would with all his heart sleepe, but can not. Belshazzar when heDan. 5 6. was in the middest of his mirth, seeing the hand-writing on the wall, was smitten with great feare, so as his countenance changed, & his knees smote togither.
               The second evill within man, is, the fearefull slaverie and bondage vnder the power of Satan the Prince of darkenesse: in that his mind, will, and affections are so knit and glued to the will of the devill, that he can doe nothing but obey him, & rebell against God. And hence Satan is called the prince of this2. Cor. 4. world: which keepes the hold of the heart as an armed Captaine keepes a sconse or a castle with watch and ward.
               The misery before man, is a daungerous snare which the devill layes for the destruction of the soule. I say it is dangerous: because he2. Tim. 2. 25. is in setting of it twentie or fortie yeres, before

he strikes; when as (God knowes) men do little thinke of it. It is made of three cords: with the first, he brings men into his snare: and that he doeth by covering the miserie and the poyson of sinne; and by painting out to the eie of the minde, the deceitfull profits & pleasures thereof. With the second, he hopples and insnares them: for after that a man is drawen into this or that sinne, the devill hath so sugered it over with fine delightes, that he can not but needes must live and lye in it. By the third, he drawes the snare and indevours with all his might to breake the necke of the soule. For when he seeth a fitte opportunitie, especially in grievous calamities; and in the houre of death, he takes away the vizar of sinne, and she weth the face of it in the true fourme, as ouglie as him selfe: then withall he beginneth (as we say) to shewe his hornes: then he rageth in terrifying & accusing, that the soule of man may be swallowed up of the gulfe of finall despaire.
               The miserie behinde him, is the sinnes past. The Lord saith to Cain, If thou doest not well,
                  Gen. 4. 7. 
                  sinne lyeth at the doore. Where sinne is compared

to a wilde beast, which followes a man whither soever he goeth, and lyeth lurking at his heels. And though for a time it may seeme to be hurtlesse, because it lyeth asleepe: yet at length, unlesse men repent, it will rise up, sease on them, and rent out the very throtes of their soules. Iob in his afffliction saith, Thou writest
                  Iob. 13. 26. 
                  bitter things against me, and makest me possesse the sinnes of my youth. And David prayeth,Ps. 25. 7. 
                  Forgive me the sinnes of my youth. If the memorie of sinnes past be a trouble to the godly man, oh what a racke? what a gibbet wil it be to the heart of him that wants grace?
               The miserie on the right hand is prosperitie and ease: which by reason of mans sinne is an occasion of many iudgements. In it menEzec. 16. 49. practised the horrible sinnes of Sodome: it puffes up the heart with divelish pride, so as men shall thinke themselves to be as God him selfe, as Senacherib, Nebuchad-nezzar, Antiochus, Alexander, Herode, Domitian did. It steales away mans heart frō God, & quenches the sparkes of grace. As the Lord complaineth of the Israelites. I spake unto thee when
                  Iere. 22. 21. 
                  thou wast in prosperitie: but thou saydest, I will not heare: this hath bene thy manner from
                  
                  thy youth. It is like the Ivie that embraces the tree and windes rounde about it, but yet drawes out the iuice and life of it. Hence is it that many turne it to an occasion of their destruction. Salomon saith, Prosperitie of fooles destroyeth them. When the milt swelles, theProv. 1. 32. rest of the body pines away: and when the heart is puft with pride, the whole man is in danger of destruction. The sheepe that goes in the best pasture, soonest comes to the slaughter-house; and the ungodly man fattes himselfe with continuall prosperity, that he mayRom. 9. 22. the sooner come to his owne damnation.
               The misery on the left hand is Adversitie, which stands in all manner of losses and calamities, in goods, friends, good name, and such like. Of this read at large. Deut. 28.
               The miserie over his head is, the wrath of God, which he testifies in all maner of iudgements from heaven, in danger of which every impenitent sinner is every houre. And the danger is very great. The scripture saith. It is
                  Hebr. 10. 31. Deut. 32. 34. Ezec. 7. 6. 
                  a fearefull thing to fall into the hands of the living God. He hath store-houses full of all maner of iudgements: and they watch for secure

sinners that they can not scape. Gods wrath is 
                     •
                  s a fire making havocke and bringing to nought whatsoeuer it lights on: yea, because he is slow to anger, therefore more terrible: as a man therefore stayes his hand for a time, that he may lift it higher and fetch a deeper blowe. When the dumb creatures melt as wax and vanish away at his presence, when heNah. 1. 4, 5, 6. Psalm. 97. is angry, as the huge mountaines and rockes doe, fraile man must never looke to stand. If the roaring of a lyon make men afraid, and the voice of thunder be terrible: oh, how exceedingly should all be astonished at the threatnings of God.
               The misery under his feete is, Hell fire: for every man till he repent, is in as great danger of damnation as the traitour apprehended, of hanging, drawing, and quartering. A man walking in his way falles into a deepe dungeon that is full of vggely serpents and noisome beastes: in his fall he catches hold of a twigge of a tree that growes at the mouth of the dungeon, and hangs by it: afterward there comes a beast both leane and hungerbitten, which having cropt the whole tree, is ever and anon

knapping at the twigge on which he hanges. Nowe, what is the daunger of this man? surely he is like to fall into the pit, over which he hangeth. well, this man is every impenitent sinner: the pit is hell, prepared for the devill and his angels: the twig is the brickle and fraile life of man: the hungerbitten beast is death, that is ready every houre to knap our life asunder: the dāger is fearful: for mā hanging as it were over the mouth of hel, whē life is ended, unlesse he use good meanes before he die, he then falleth to the very bottome of it.
               If this be the miserie wherewith the careles man is sieged & cōpassed about every way, & that for his sinnes, why do men lie in the dead sleepe of security? ô! it stands them in hand to take up the voice of bitter lamentation, & for their offences to howle after the manner of dragons. If men could weepe nothing but teares of blood for their sins, if they could dye a 1000 times in one day for very griefe, they could never be grieved ynough for their sins.
               The second motive to draw men to repentance, is the consideration of the wretched estate of an impenitent sinner in his death,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   which is nothing but the wages & allowance

that he receives for his sinne: and it is the veryRom. 6. 23. suburbs, or rather the gates of hel. S. Paul compares death to a scorpion, who carieth a sting in his taile, which is sinne. Now then whē impenitent1. Cor. 15. 55, 56. & prophane persons die, then comes this scorpion & gripes them with her legs, & stabs them at the hart with her sting. Wherfore the best thing is before death come, to use meanes to pull out the sting of death. And nothing wil do it, but the blood of Christ: let mē therfore breake off their sinnes by repētāce: let thē come to the throne of grace, & crie: yea let them fil heaven & earth with cries for mercy. oh! pray, pray, pray for the pardō of thy sinnes. If thou obtaine but one drop of Gods speciall mercie in Christ, all danger is past. For death hath lost his sting: and then a man without danger may put an ougly serpēt in his bosom.
               The third motive, is the consideration of his estate after death. When the day of the last judgement shalbe, he must be brought and set before the tribunal seat of christ: he shal not be able to escape or hide himself: then the bookes shalbe brought out, & all his sins shalbe discovered before Gods saints & angels: the devil & his own conscience shal accuse him: none shall be

aduocate to plead his cause: hee himselfe shall be speechlesse; hee shall at length heare the dreadfull sentence of damnation, Goe ye cursed into hell prepared for the divell & his augels. This thing might moove the vilest Athiest in the world to leaue his wicked wayes and come to amendement of life. Wee see the strongest theefe that is, when he is ledde in the way from the prison to the barre, leaves his theeving and behaues himselfe orderly. And indeed if hee woulde then cut a purse, it were high time that he were hanged. All men by nature are traitours and malefactours against God: whiles we live in this worlde, wee are in the way going to the barre of Gods iudgement. The wheele of the heavens turnes one bout every day, and winds up somwhat of the threed of our life: whether wee sleepe or wake we are alwayes comming neerer our end: wherfore let all men daily humble themselues for their sinnes, and pray vnto God that he would be reconciled unto them in Christ: and let them indeavour themselves in obedience to all Gods commandements, both in their lives and callings.
               
                  Againe, after the last iudgement there remains death eternal appointed for him: which standes in these three things. I. A separation from all ioy and comfort of the presence of God. II. Eternall fellowship with the divell and all his angels. III. The feeling of the horrible wrath of God, which shall seaze upon bodie, soule, and conscience, & shall feed on them as fire doth on pitch and brimstone: and torment them as a worme crawling in the bodie and gnawing on the heart: they shall alwaies be dying, and never deade: alwayes in woe, and neuer in ease. And this death is the more grievous, because it is euerlasting. Suppose the whole worlde to be a mountaine of sande, and that a birde must carrie from it a mouthfull of sand euerie thousande yeeres: many innumerable thousands of yeres will be expired before she will haue caried away the whole mountaine: well, if a man should stay 
                     •
                  n torment so long and then haue an ende of his woe, it were some comfort: but when the bird shall haue caried away the mountaine a thousand times: alas, alas, a man shall be as far from the ende of his anguish and torment as

ever he was. This consideration may serve as an yron scourge to drive men from their wicked lives. Chrysostome would have men in their meetings in tavernes and feastes, to talke of hel, that by often thinking on it, they might avoyde it. A grave and chaste matrone, being mooved to commit folly with a lewd ruffian; after long discourse, she called for a panne of burning coales, requesting him for her sake to holde his finger in them but one houre; he answered, that it was an unkinde request: to whome she replyed, that seeing he would not holde so much as one finger in a fewe coales for one small houre, she could not yeeld to do the thing, for which she should be tormented body & soule in hell fire for ever. And so shold all men reason against themselves. None will be brought to doe a thing, that may make so much as their finger or tooth to ake: therefore we ought to have great care to leave our sinnes, whereby we bring endlesse torment to bodie and soule in hell.
            
            
               
               
                  CAP. VIII. Of motives Evangelicall.
               
                  EVangelicall Motives are two especially. The first is taken from the consideration of mans redemption. He that redeemed mankind is God him selfe. As Paul saith, that God was in Christ, reconciling
                  2. Cor. 5. 19. 
                  the world to him selfe. Mans sinne is so vile and hainous in the eyes of God, that no Angell nor creature was able to appease the wrath of God for the least offence. But the Sonne of God himselfe must come downe from heaven, and take mans nature on him: and not onely that, but he must also suffer the most accursed death of the crosse, and shed his most pretious heart blood to satisfie the justice of his Father in our behalfe. If a Father should be sicke of such a disease, that nothing would heale but the heart blood of his owne childe, he would presently judge his owne case to be dangerous; and would also vowe if ever he recovered, to use all meanes whereby he might avoid that disease. So likewise,

seeing nothing could cure the deadly wound of our sinne but a plaister made of the heart blood of Christ: it must make us acknowledge our pitifull case, and the hainousnesse of the least of our sinnes, and stirre us up to newnesse of life.
               Againe, considering the end of the redemption wrought by Christ, was to deliuer us from our euill conuersation in sinne and unrighteousnesse, we are not to continue and as it were lie bathing our selues in sinne; for that were, as if a prisoner, after that he had bin ransomed and had his boltes taken of, and were put out of the prison to go whither he would, should returne againe, and desire to lie in the dungeon still.
               The second motive is, that God hath made a promise to such as truly repent. I. Of remission of sinnes. Wash you, make you cleane, take away the evill of your workes from before
                  Isa. 1. 16. 18. 
                  mine eyes: cease to doe evill, &c. though your sinnes were as crimsin, they shall be made a
                        •
                      white as snow: though they were red like scarlet, they shal be as wooll. And, Seeke the Lorde
                  Isa. 55. 6. 7. 
                  while he may be found, call upon him while he
                  
                  is neere. Let the wicked for sake his wayes, & the vnrighteous his own imaginations, & returne vnto the Lord, and he will have mercie on him, for hee is very plentifull in forgiving. II. Of life everlasting. I will not the
                  Ezech 18. 
                  death of a sinner, but rather that hee repent and live. And, Thus saith the Lord vnto the house of Israel, Seeke yee me, & ye shall
                  Amos. 5. 4. 
                  live. III. Of mitigating or remooving temporall calamities. Stand in the courte of the Lordes house & speake vnto all the cities
                  Ierem. 26. 3. 
                  of Iudah, &c. If so be they will hearken and turne every man from his evill way, that▪ I may repent me of the plague which I have determined to bring upon them, because of the wickednesse of their workes.
               
               As God hath made these mercifull promises to penitent sinners, so he hath faithfully perfourmed them, so soone as they have but begun to repent. Exāple of David, Then David
                  2. Sam. 12. 12. 
                  said to Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord. And Nathan said to David, thy sinne is forgiven thee. Of Manasses. When he was in tribulation he prayed vnto the Lord his God,
                  2. Chr. 33. 12. 
                  & humbled him selfe greatly before the Lord
                  
                  God of his fathers, and prayed unto him: an
                        •
                      God was intreated of him, & heard his prayer Of the Publicane. The Publicane &c. smot
                        •
                     
                  
                  Luke 18. 13. 
                  his breast, saying, O God be mercifull to me sinner: I tell you, this man departed iustified t
                        •
                      his house, rather then the other. Of the thiefe▪ 
                  He said unto Iesus, Lord, remember me, when
                  Luke 23. 42. 43. 
                  thou commest to thy kingdome. Then Iesus sai
                        •
                      unto him, verely I say unto thee, to day shall thou be with me in paradise.
               
               Having such notable promises made to Repentance, no man is to drawe backe from the practise of it, because of the multitude o
                     •
                   his sinnes: but rather to doe it. The Pharise
                     •
                   said to Christs disciples, why eates your master
                  Matt. 9. 12. 
                  with Publicanes and sinners. When Iesu
                        •
                      heard it, he said unto them, the whole need no
                        •
                      the Phisition, but they that are sicke. And I am come not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.
                  Matt. 21. 31. And Verely I say unto you, that Publicanes and harlots shall goe before you into the kingdome of God.
               
            
            
               
               
                  CAP. IX. Of the time of Repentance.
               
                  THe time of repentance is the time present, without any delay at all: as the holy Ghost saith, To day if ye will heare his voyce. And,Heb. 3. 7, 13. 
                  Exhort one another daily, while it is called to day; lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfullnesse of sinne. Reasons hereof are these. I. Life is uncerten: for no mā knowes at what houre or moment, & after what manner he shall goe forth of this world. Be ye also prepared therefore,
                  Luke 12. 40. 
                  for the sonne of man wil come at an houre when ye thinke not. This one thing should make a man to hasten his repentance; and the rather, because many are dead, who purposed with them selves to repent in time to come; but were prevented by death, and shall never repent. II. The longer a man lives in any sin, the greater danger: because by practise sin gets heart & strēgth. Custome is of such force, that that which men use to do in their life time, the

same they doe and speake when they are dying. One had three pounds owing to him to be paid three seuerall yeres: when he was dying, nothing could be got of him, but three yeres, three pounds. Againe, by deferring repentance, men treasure up wrath against the day of wrath. As if a malefactour for his punishment, should be appointed to cary every day a sticke of wood to an heape, to burne him twentie yeeres after. III. The more the time is prolonged, the harder it is to repent: the longer a man goes in his sicknesse without phisicke, the harder is the recoverie. And where the devill dwells long, hee will hardly be remooved. The best way to kill a serpent, is, to cruse it in the heade when it is young. IIII. It is as meat and drinke to the devill to see men liue in their sinnes deferring repentance: as on the contrary, there is great ioy among the angels of god in heaven, when a sinner doth repent. V. Late repentance is seldome or never true repentance. For if a man repent when he cannot sinne as in former time, as namely in death: then hee leaves not sinne but sinne leaves him: wherefore

the repentance which men frame to them selues when they are dying, it is to be feared least it die with them. And it is very iust, that hee should be contemned of God in his death, who contemned God in his life. Chrysostome sayeth, that the wicked man hath this punishment on him, that in dying hee shoulde forget himselfe, who when hee was living did forget God. VI. We are with Abel to giue unto God in sacrifice even the fatte of our flocke: now they which deferre repentance to the end do the contrary. Late repenters offer the flower of their youth to the deuill: and they bring the lame and broken sacrifice of their old age to God.
            
            
               CAP. X. OF CERTAINE CASES in Repentance.
               
                  I. Case of a revolt.
                  WHether a man that hath professed Christ and his religion, yet afterwarde

in persecution denies Christ, and forsweares the religion, may repent and be saved. Answere. It is a grievous estate: yet a man may come to repentance afterward. Manasses fell away to idolatry and witchcraft: and yet was received to mercie. So did wise Salomon:2. Chr. 33. and yet no doubt recovered and is received to life everlasting. My reason is, because God vouchsafed him to be a pen-man of some parts of holy scripture. And the sctiptures were written not by such as were men of God only, but by such as were holy men of God. Peter denyed Christ of knowledge against his2. Pet. 1. 
                           •
                        1. owne conscience, and that with cursing and banning: and yet came to repentance afterward, as appeares by the testimony of Christ, I have prayed for thee that thy faith faile not;
                     Luke 22. 32. 
                     therefore when thou art converted strengthen thy brethren.
                  
                  
                     Obiect. I. Matth, 10. 33. Whosoever shall denie me before men, him will I denie before my father which is in heaven. Answere. The place is only to be understood of such a deniall of Christ which is finall.
                  
                     Obiect. II. Hebr. 6. 4. It is impossible
                     
                     that they which were once lightened: and haue tasted of the heavenly gift &c. if they fall away should be renewed by repentance. And Heb. 10. 26. If we sinne willingly after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remaines no more sacrifice for sinne. Answere. These places must be understood of the sinne which is to death: in which men of desperate mallice against Christ, vniuersally and wholly fall away from religion. For the holy ghost saith not, if they fall, but a
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     if they fall away. and it is added, that they crucifie the sonne of God, and make a mocke of him, thatHeb. 6. 6. 
                     they trample vnder foote the sonne of God, that they accompt the blood of the new testament
                     Hebr. 10. 29. 
                     an unholy thing; that they despise the spirit of God. And the word translated a
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     Willingly, imports somewhat more, namely, to sinne because a man will, that is, wilfully.
               
               
                  
                  II. Case of Recidivation.
                  WHether the child of God, after repentance for some grievous sin, do fall into the same again, & come to repentance the second time. Answere. The case is daungerous as we may see by comparison in the body. If one fall into the relapse of an ague or any other stronge disease, it may cost him his life: and the recovery will be very hard. Christ said to the man that had bene sicke 38 yeeres, after that he had healed him. Beholde, thou art whole, sinne no more,
                     Iohn. 5. 14. Luke 11. 26. 
                     lest a worse thing befall thee. And the unclean spirit returning takes to him other seven spirits worse then himselfe. Indeed we finde no particular example of recovery after a relapse, in the scriptures: yet no doubt a recovery may be. Reasons are these. I. Promise is made of remission of sinnes in Christ without any tearme of time: without any limitation to any number or kindes of sinne: saue only the blasphemie against the holy Ghost. TherforeActes. 10. 43. there may be repentance and salvation

after a relapse. II. Christ tells Peter that he must forgiue not till seven times only (which peradventure hee thought to be very much) but seventy seven times, and that in one day,Luke 17. 4. if one returne seventie times and say, it repents me. Now if wee must doe this, which haue not so much as a drop of mercie in us in comparison of God: he will no doubt often forgive, even for one sinne, if men will returne and say, it repents me: considering that withPsalm. 130. 7. Isa. 56. 7. him is plentifull redemption, and he is much in sparing.
                  
               
               
                  III. Case Of Restitution.
                  WHether he that repents is to make restitution if hee haue taken any thing wrongfully from his neighbour. Answere. Yea: Zacheus, when he repented and received Christ, gaue halfe of his goods to the poore, and if he had taken any thing by forged cavillation, he restored it foure
                     Luke 19. 8. 
                     fold. It is but a badde practise when a man on his death-bedde will very devoutly bequeath his soule to God, and his goods euill gotten

(as his conscience will often cry in his eare) to his children and friends, without either restitution or amends making. Question. But what if a man be not able to restore. Answere. Let him acknowledge the fault, and God will accept the will for the deed. As Paul saith in the like case If there be a willing minde, it is accepted
                     2. Cor. 8. 12. 
                     according to that which a man hath & not according to that he hath not. Question. When a man by restoring shall discredit him selfe: how shall he both restore and keepe his credite. Answere. Let him (if the thing to be restored be of small moment) make choise of some faithfull and honest frend: who may deliver the thing in the behalfe of the partie, concealing his name.
               
               
                  IIII. Case of Teares.
                  WHether doeth repentance alwayes go with teares or not. Answer. No: For very pride and hypocrisie will draw foorth teares, for some there are, that can weepe for their sinnes in the presence of others: whereas being alone, they neither will

nor can. Some againe are of that constitution of body, that they haue teares at commaund. And a godly man with drie cheekes may mourne to God for his sinnes, and intreat for pardon, and receive it. Yet in all occasions of deeper griefe for sinne, teares will follow: unlesse men haue stony and flinty hearts. And yet againe, though the greatest cause of sorow be offered, the softest heart that is, sheds not teares at the first: but afterward it will. When the body receiues a deepe wound, at the first yee shall see nothing but a white line or dint made in the flesh, without any blood: stay but a while, then comes blood from the wound in great aboundance. So at the first the mind is astonished and gives no teares: but after some respit and consideration, teares follow.
               
               
                  V. Case of death.
                  WHether the repentant sinner can alwayes shevve him-selfe comfortable, on his death bedde. Answere. Though the comfort of Gods spirite shall never be abolished from his heart: yet hee

can not alwayes testifie it. For he may die of a burning ague: and by reason of the extremitie of his fits, be troubled with idlenesse of head, and breake out into raving speeches & blasphemies. Likewise hee may die of sicknesse in the braine, and be troubled with grievous convulsions: so as his mouth shall be writhen to his eares, his necke turned behind him: and the very place where he lyes shall shake through his trembling, as daily experience will testifie. Neither is any to thinke this strange. For Salomon saith, All things (in outward matters) come alike to all & the same
                     Eccle. 9. 2. 
                     condition is to the iust & to the wicked: to the good and to the pure, and to the polluted, and to him that sacrificeth, and to him that sacrificeth not.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  CAP. XI. Of the contraries to Repentance.
               COntrarie to Repentance is Impenitencie: whereby men continue in one estate, neither sorowing for sinne, nor

turning from it.
               It is one of the most grievous iudgements that is if it be finall. For as a sick man, then is most sicke, when he feeles the lest sicknesse, & saith he is well: so miserable man is in most misery when he feeles no misery, and thinks himselfe in good estate.
               This sin befalls them that iudge themselves righteous, needing no repentance. As the Pharises in the daies of Christ, the Catharists in the Primative Church, & the Anabaptistes in our age. Adde unto these, such as haue hardened their hearts: so as they can not discerne between good and euill; nor tremble at Gods iudgements, but rather fret and rage against them: till God in his wrath either destroy them or cast them to finall despaire. As it befell Iulian the Apostata, who died blaspheming, and casting his own blood into the aire.
               Between the two extremes Repentance & Impenitencie, is placed counterfeit repentance. For the wicked nature of man can dissemble & counterfeit Gods grace. As the Lord complains of the Iewes. Her rebellious sister Iudah, hath not returned vnto me with her whole
                  
                  heart, but fainedly saith the Lord. Ierem. 3. 10.
               Counterfeit repentance is either Ceremoniall or Desperate.
               Ceremonial, when men repent in outward shew, but not in the truth of heart. As Saul. Then said Saul to Samuel, I haue sinned: for I
                  1. Sam. 15. 24, 30. 
                  haue transgressed the commandements of the Lord, & thy words: because I feared the people & obeyed their voice. Now therfore I pray thee take away my sin, & turn again with me, that I may worship the Lord &c. Again, I haue sinned, but honour me I pray thee before the el
                     
                        •
                     ers of my people. Of Ahab. When Ahab heard these words 
                        •
                     e rent his clothes and put on sackcloath,
                  1. Kin. 21. 27, 29. 
                  & fasted, & went softly. And the word of the Lord came to Elijah saying, seest thou how Ahab is humbled before me.
               
               Dissembled repentance may be discerned because men after a time returne to their old byas againe. Pharao king of Egypt said unto Moses & Aaron, Pray unto the Lord that he
                  Exod. 8. 8. 
                  may take away the frogges from me & from my people. And, when Egipt was smittē with haile he saide: I have now sinned: and the Lorde is righteous: but I and my people are wicked: pray
                  
                  ye unto the Lord, that there be no more mighty
                  Exod. 9. 27. 
                  thunders and baile. Againe, troubled with grashoppers, he said, I have sinned against the Lord your God, and against you, and now forgive
                  Exod. 10. 16. 
                  me my sinne onely this once, &c. Now marke the issue of all: when Pharao saw that he had rest given him, he hardened his heart. and harkened not unto them, as the Lorde had
                  Exod. 8. 15. 
                  said. This is the ordinary & common repentance that most men practise in the world.
               Desperate repentance is, when a man hauing only gods iudgements before his eyes, is smitten with horrour of conscience: & wanting assurance of Gods mercy despaires finally. This was Iudas Repentance, who when he had brought again the 30. peeces of silver confessed
                  Matt. 27. 3. 
                  his fault, & went and hanged himselfe.
               
            
            
               
                  CAP. XII. Of corruptions in the doctrine of Repentance.
               THe Church of Rome at this day hath corrupted the ancient doctrine of repentance

being one of the speciall points of religion. The corruptions are specially sixe.
               The first, that they make repentance or penance to be a sacrament, which can not be: because it wants an outward signe. And though some say, that the words, which the priest rehearseth in absolution, are the signe: yet that can not be: because the signe must be not only audible, but also visible.
               The second, that a sinner hath in him a naturall disposition, which being stirred-up by Gods preventing grace, he may and can work togither with Gods spirit in his owne repentance. But indeed all our repentance is to be ascribed to Gods grace wholly. The soule of man is not weak but starke dead in sinne: &Eph. 1. 
                        •
                     . therefore it can no more prepare it selfe to repentance, then the body being dead in the grave can dispose it self to the last resurrectiō.
               The third corruption, that contrition in repentance must be sufficient. A thing impossible. For sinne doth so greatly offend Gods maiesty, that no man can ever mourne enough for it.
               The fourth, that contrition doth merit remission

of sinne. An opinion that doth derogate much from the all-sufficient merites of Christ.
               The fift that he that repents must confesse all the sinnes, that he can remember with all their circumstances to his owne priest, or one in his stead, if he will receive pardon. This kind of confession is a mere forgery of mans brain. I. There is neither precept nor example of it in the Scriptures. II. David and others haue repentedPsalm. 32. 3. 2. Sam. 12. 1
                        •
                     . and haue receiued remission of their sinnes without confessing of their sinnes in particular to any man.
               The last, that the sinner by his workes and sufferings must make satisfaction to God for the temporall punishment of his sinnes. A flat blasphemie. The scriptures mention no other1. Ioh. 1. 7. & 2. 1. satisfaction but Christs; and if his be sufficient, ours is needlesse: if ours needful, his imperfect. Papists write that both may stand togither. Christs satisfaction (they say) is as a plaister in a boxe unapplyed: mans satisfaction as a meanes to apply it: because it prepares us to receiue it. Ah, good divinity: for euen in common sense the satisfaction of Christ must first

be applyed to the person of man that it may please God: before the workes (which they terme satisfactions) can any way be acceptable to God.
               To conclude, the Romish doctrine of repentance, is the right way to hell. For when a sinner shall be taught that he must haue sufficient sorow for his sinne: and withall that he must not beleeue the remission of his owne sinnes particularly: when sorow comes upon him and he wants sound comfort in Gods mercy, he must needs fall into desperation without recovery. Therfore the papists in the houre of death, (as we haue experience) are glad to leaue the trumpery of humane satisfactions, and to rest only, for their iustification, on the obedience of Christ.
            
            LAVS DEO.
         
         
            
            THE COMBAT OF THE FLESH AND SPIRIT.
            
               Gal. 5. 17.
               For the flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh; & these are contrary one to another, so that ye can not doe the things which ye would.
            
            
               THe Apostle Paul from the beginning of this chapter to the 13. verse exhorts the Galatians to maintaine their christian liberty: & frō thēce to the end of the chapter he perswades thē to other speciall duties of godlines. In the 13. verse he stirs them up to be serviceable one to another by loue: in the 15. verse he disswades them frō contentions & doing of iniuries. In the 16. verse he shewes the remedy of the former sinnes, which is to walk according to the spirit. In this seventeenth verse he renders a reason of the remedie, the force whereof is this. The flesh and the spirit are contrary:

wherfore if ye walke according to the spirit, it will hinder the flesh, that it shall not carry you forward to do iniuries & liue in contentions, as otherwise it would.
            In this verse we haue to obserue 5. points. The first that there is a combat betwene the flesh & the spirit in these words, The flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh. The second is the maner of this combat, which stands in the contrary lusting of the flesh and the spirit. The third is the cause of the combat in these words, and these are contrary. The fourth is the subiect or person in whō this: combat is, noted in these words, So that yee, the Galatians. The last is the effect of the cōbat, in the last words, that they cānot do, &c.
            
            Touching the combat it selfe, diuers points are to be cōsidered. The first, what these two, which make combat, namely, the flesh and the spirit, are. They haue diuers significations. First of all, the spirit is taken for the soule, and the flesh for the body. But so they are not taken in this place. For there is no such combat betwene the body & the soule: both which agree togither to make the person of one man.

Secondly, the spirit signifies naturall reason, & the flesh the natural appetite or concupiscence. But they cānot be so understood in this place. For the spirit here mentioned doth fight euen against naturall reason: which though it serue to make a man without excuse, yet is it an enemy to the spirit. Thirdly, the spirit signifies the godhead of Christ, and the flesh the manhood: but it must not be so taken here. For then euery man regenerate should be deified. Lastly, the spirit signifies a created quality of holines, which by the holy ghost is wrought in the mind, will, & affections of man: & the flesh, the naturall corruption or inclination of the mind, will, and affections to that which is against the law. In this first these twain are taken in this place.
            Secondly it is to be considered how these twain, the flesh & the spirit can fight togither, being but mere qualities. And we must know, that they are not severed asunder, as though the flesh were placed in one part of the soule, & the spirit in another: but they are ioyned & mingled togither in al the faculties of the soul. The mind or understanding part, is not one

part flesh, and an other spirit, but the whole mind is flesh and the whol mind is spirit; partly one and partly the other. The whole will is partly flesh and partly spirit: the flesh and the spirit that is grace and corruption, not seuered in place but distinguished. As the aire in the dawning of the day is not wholly light or wholly darke as at midnight and at nooneday: neither is it in one part light, in another part darke: but the whole aire is partly light, and partly dark throughout. In a vessell of lukewarme water, the water it selfe is not onely hot or only cold; or in one part hot & in another part cold: but heat and cold are mixt togither in every part of the water. So is the flesh and the spirit mingled togither in the soule of man: and this is the cause why these two contrary qualities fight togither.
            Thirdly in this combate we are to consider what equality there is betweene these two combaters, the flesh and the spirit. And we must know, that the flesh usually, is more in measure then the spirit. The flesh is like the mighty gyant Goliah: and the spirit is litle and small like young David. Hence it is, that Paul

calls the Corinthians which were men iustified and sanctified, carnall. I could not (saith he)1. Cor. 3. 1. 
               breethren spkake unto you as unto spirituall, but as unto carnall, as unto babes in Christ. And none can come to be tall men in Christ accordingEphes. 4. to the age of the fulnesse of Christ, till after this life. And the speech which is used of some divines, that the mā regenerate hath but the reliques of sin in him, must be understood warily, els it may admit an untruth. As for the measure of grace, it can be but smal in respect, whereas we do receiue but the first fruites of
               Rom. 8. 23. 
               the spirit in this life; & must wait for the accomplishment of our redemptiō till the life to come. For all this, the power & efficacy of the spirit is such, that it is able to prevaile ordinarily against the flesh. For the flesh receiues his deadly wound at the first instant of a mans conuersion, and continually dyeth after by litle & litle: & therfore it fights but as a maimed soldier. And the spirit is continually confirmed & increased hy the holy ghost: also it is liuely & stirring & the vertue of it is like musk; one graine wherof wil giue a stronger smell, thē many unces of other perfumes. Some may

say, that the godly man doth more feele the flesh then the spirit: & therfore that the flesh is euery way more then the spirit. I answer, that we must not measure our estate by feeling which may easily deceiue us. A man shall feele a paine which is but in the top of his finger more sensibly then the health of his whol body: yet the health of the body is more thē the pain of a fingar. Secondly we feele corruption not by corruption but by grace: & therfore men, the more they feele their inward corruptions, the more grace they haue.
            Thus much of the combat it selfe: now let us come to the maner of this fight.
            It is fought by Lusting. To lust in this place signifies to bring forth & to stir up motions & inclinations in the hart, either to good or euil.
            Lusting is twofold: the lusting of the flesh, & the lusting of the spirit.
            The lusting of the flesh hath two actions: the first is, to ingender euill motions & passions of selfe-loue, envy, pride, unbeliefe, anger, &c. S. Iames saith, that men are enticed and
               Iam. 1. 14. 
               drawen away by their own concupiscēce. Now this inticing is only by the suggestion of bad

cogitations & desires. This action of the flesh made Paul say that he was carnall solde under
               Rom. 7. 14. 
               sinne.
            
            The second action of the flesh is to hinder, & quench, & overwhelm all the good motiōs of the spirit. Paul found this in himselfe, when he said, I see another law in my members rebelling against the law of the mind, & leading
               Rom. 7. 23. 
               me captive to the law of sinne. By reason of this action of the flesh, the man regenerate is like to one in a slumber troubled with the disease called Ephialtes or the mare: who thinks that he feeles something lying on his breast as heavy as a mountaine: & would faine haue it away, wherupon he striues & labours by hāds and voice to remoue it, but for his life can not doe it.
            On the contrary, the lusting of the spirit containes two other actions. The first is to beget good motions, inclinations, & desires in the mind, will, & affections. Of this David speaketh,Psalm. 16. 8. 
               Myreines teach me in the night season. That is, my mind, affection, and will, and my whole soule being sanctified and guided by the spirit of God, do minister unto me consideratiōs

of the way in which I ought towalk. Isaias prophecying of the Church of the new testament, saith, When a mā goeth to the right
               Isa. 30. 22. 
               hand or to the left, he shal he are a voice, saying, here is the way walke ye in it. Which voice is not only the outward preaching of the ministers, but also the inward voice of the spirit.
            The second action of the spirit is to hinder aud suppresse the bad motions and suggestions of the flesh. S. Iohn saith, he that is borne of God sinneth not, because his seed remaineth
               1. Ioh. 3. 9. 
               in him, that is, grace wrought in the heart by the holy ghost, which resisteth the rebellious desires of the flesh.
            That the manner of this fight may more clearely appeare, we must examine it more particularly. In the soule of man there be two speciall parts, the mind and the will.
            In the mind there is a double combat. The first is betweene knowledge of the word of God, and naturall ignorance or blindnes. For seeing we doe in this life knowe but in part: therefore knowledge of the truth must needs be ioyned with ignorance in all that are inlightned: & one of these being contrary to an

other, they striue to ouershadow and ouercast ech other.
            Hence we may learn the cause why excellēt divines do vary in divers points of religiō: and it is, because in this cōbat, naturall blindnes yet remaining, prevailes more or lesse. Men that are dim sighted & cannot discerne without spectacles, if they should be set to discry a thing a far off, the most of them would be of divers opinions of it. And men inlightened & regenerate in this life do but see as in a glasse darkly.
               1. Cor. 13. Again, this must teach all studēts of divinity often to suspect themselues in their opinions and defences: seeing in them that are of soundest iudgemēt the light of their understanding is mixed with darknes of ignorāce. And they can in many points see but as the man in the Gospell, who when our Saviour Christ had in part opened his eyes, saw men walking, not as men, but in the forme of trees. Also this must teach all that read the scriptures to invocate & cal upō the name of God, that he wold inlighten thē by his spirit, & abolish the mist of natural blindnes. The prophet David was wor thily inlightned with the knowledge of Gods

word, so as he excelled the ancient and his owne teachers in wisdom: yet being privy to himselfe touching his owne blindnes, often prayeth in the Psalms, Inlighten my eyes that I may vnderstand the wonders of thy law.
            
            By reason of this fight, when naturall blindnes prevailes, the child of God truly inlightened with knowledge to life everlasting, may erre not only in lighter points, but euen in the very foundation of religion, as the Corinthians & the Galathians did. And as one man may erre, so an hundred men may also: yea a whole particular Church: and as one Church may erre, so an 100. more may. For in respect of this combat, the estate and condition of all men is alike. Whence it appeares that the Church militant upō earth is subiect to error. But yet as the diseases of the body be of two sorts: some curable, and some incurable which are to death; so likewise errours are. And the Church though it be subiect to sundry fals, yet it can not erre in foundation to death: the errours of Gods children be curable. Some may here say, If all men & Churches be subiect to errour, then it shall not be good to ioyne

with any of them, but to separate from them all. I answer, though they may and do erre, yet we must not separate from them, so long as they do not separate from Christ.
            The second combat in the mind is, between faith & unbeliefe. For faith is imperfect, and mixt with the contrary unbeliefe, presuming, doubting, &c. As the man in the Gospell saith, Lord I beleeve, help mine unbeliefe.
            
            By reason of this fight, when unbeliefe preuailes, the very child of God may fal into fits & pangs of dispaire: as Iob & David in their tēptations did. For David once considering the prosperity of the wicked, brake out into this speech, Certenly I have clensed mine heart in
               Psalm. 73. 13. 
               vaine, & washed mine hands in innocencie. yea, this dispaire may be so extreme, that it shal weakē the body & consume it, more then any sicknes. No man is to think this strange in the child of God. For though he dispaire of his election & saluation in Christ, yet his desperatiō is neither total nor final. It is not totall, because he doth not dispaire with his whol heart, faith euen at that instant lusting against dispaire. It is not finall, because he shall recouer before the

last end of his life.
            To proceed, the combat in the will is this. The will partly willeth and partly nilleth that which is good at the same instant: & so likewise it willeth & nilleth that which is evill: because it is partly regenerate & partly unregenerate. The affections likewise, which are placed in the wil, partly imbrace & partly eschew their obiects: as loue partly loueth and partly doth not loue God and things to be loued: feare is mixed & not pure (as schoolemē haue dremed) but partly fili
                     •
                  l partly servil, causing the child of God to stād in awe of god not only for his mercies, but also for his iudgements & punishments. The will of a man regenerate is like him that hath one leg sound, the other lame: who in every step which he makes, doth not wholly halt or wholly go upright, but partly go upright & partly halt. Or like a man in a boate on the water: who goeth upward because he is caried upward by the vessell: & at the same time goes downward, because hee walkes downward in the same vessell at the same instant. If any shall say that contraries cā not be in the same subiect. The answer is, that

they cā not, if one of them be in his full strēgth in the highest degree: but if the force of themIn gradibus remissis non in summis. both be delaied & weakned, they may be ioyned togither.
            By reason of this cōbat, whē corruption prevails against grace in the wil & affectiōs, there ariseth in the godly a certain deadnes or hardnes of heart, which is nothing els but a wāt of sense or feeling. Some may say, that this is a fearfull iudgement: but the answer is, that there be 2. kinds of hardnes of heart: one which possesseth the heart, & is never felt: this is in them, who haue their cōsciences seared with an hotEphes. 4. 19. iron, who by reason of custome in sin are past all feeling, who likewise despise the meanes of softning their harts. And indeed this is a fearful iudgement. There is another hardnes of heartZach. 7. 11. which is felt: & this is not so dangerous as the former: for as we feele our sicknes by contrary life & health: so hardnes of hart when it is felt argues quicknes of grace & softnes of hart. Of this Dauid often cōplained in the Psalmes: of this the childrē of Israel speak when they say,Isai. 65. 17. 
               Why hast thou hardned our harts frō thy waies.
            
            Thus much of the maner of the c
                  •
               mbate in

particular: before we proceed any further, let us mark the issue of it, which is this.
            The spirit prevailes against the flesh at two times: in the course of a mans life, and at his end; but yet with some foiles receiued.
            I say the spirit prevails not in one instant, but in the whol course of a mans life. So S. Iohn saith, He which is begotten of God sinneth not:
               1. Ioh. 5. 19. 
               for he preserveth himselfe: the grace of God in his heart ordinarily prevailing in him. And Paul makes it the property of the regenerate man to walk according to the spirit, which isRom. 8. 1. not now & then to make a step forward, but to keep his ordinary course in the way of godlines. As in going from Barwick to London, it may be a man now and then will go amisse: but he speedily returnes to the way againe, & his course generally shall be right.
            Again, the spirit prevails in the end of a mās life. For then the flesh is utterly abolished & sanctification accōplished: because no uncleane thing can enter into the kingdom of heaven.
            This further must be conceived, that when the spirit prevailes, it is not without resistance & striving. As Paul testisieth, I do not the good
               
               which I would, but the evill which I would not that do I. which place is not to be understood only of thoughts & inward motions (as some would haue it) nor of particular offences: but of the generall practise of his duty or calling, through the whol course of his life. And it is like the practise of a sickman, who having recovered of some grieuous disease, walkes a turn or twain about his chamber, saying, ah, I would fain walk up and down but I cannot: meaning not that he can not walke at all, but signifying that he cannot walke as he would, being soone wearied through faintnesse.
            I added further, that this prevailing is with foyles. A foile is, when the flesh for the time vanquisheth & subdueth the spirit. In this case, the man regenerate is like a soldier, that with a blow hath his brain-pan cracked, so as he lyes groueling astonished not able to fight: or like him that hath a fit of the falling sicknes, who for a time lies like a dead man. Hence the question may be mooued, whether the flesh preuailing doth not extinguish the spirit, & so cut off a man from Christ, till such time as he be ingrafted again. The answer is this. There be

two sorts of christians: one who doth only in shew & name professe Christ: & such an one is no otherwise a member of Christs mystical body, then a wooden leg set to the body is a mēber of the body. The second is he that in name & deed is a liuely part & mēber of Christ. If the first fall, he cānot be said to be cut off, because he was never ingrafted. If the secōd fall, he may be & is cut off from Christ. But marke how: he is not wholly cut of but in some part, namely in respect of the inward fellowship & communiō with Christ, but not in respect of coniunctiō with him. A mans arme takē with the dead palsie, hangs by & receives no heate, life, or sense frō the rest of the members, or frō the head, yet for all this, it remains still united & coupled to the body, & may again be recovered by plaisters & phisicke: so after agrievous fall the childe of God feeles no inward peace and comfort but is smitten in conscience with tbe trembling of a spirituall palsie for his offence: and yet indeed remaines before God a member of Christ which shall be restored to his former estate after serious repentance.
            And God permits these foiles for weighty causes: first that men might be abashed & confounded

in thēselves with the consideratiō of their vile natures & learne not to swell with pride, because of Gods grace. Paul saith that after he had bin rapt into the third heaven, the angell Satan was sent to buffet him, and (as we said) to beat him black & blew, that he might not be exalted out of measure. The secōd, that we may learn to deny our selues & cleaue unto the Lord frō the bottom of our hearts. Paul saith that he was sick to death, that he might
               2. Cor. 1. 9. 
               not trust in him selfe, but in God who raiseth the dead.
            
            Thus much of the maner of the combate: now followes the cause of it.
            The cause is the contrariety that is between the flesh and the spirit. As Paul saith, The wisdome
               Rom. 8. 5. 
               of the flesh is enmitie to God.
            
            Hēce we are taught, that since the fall, there is no free wil in mā, in spiritual matters cōcerning either the worship of God or life everlasting. For flesh is nothing els but our naturall dispositiō: & mā is nothing els but flesh by nature: for the spirit comes afterward by grace: & yet flesh is flat contrary to the spirit which makes us do that which is pleasing unto God. wherfore the wil naturally is a flat bōdslaue unto sin.
            
               Again, hence we may learne: that it is not an easie matter to practise religiō: which is to liue according to the spirit, to which our naturall disposition is as cōtrary as fire to water▪ wherfore if we will obey God, we must learne to force our natures to the duties of godlines: yea, even sweat and take paines therein.
            Lastly here we may learne the nature of sin. The spirit is not a substance but a quality: and therfore the flesh which is nothing els but originall sinne, and is contrary to the spirit, must also be a quality: for such as the nature of one contrary is, such is the other. There is in euery man the substance of body and soule, this cannot be sin, for then the spirit also should be the substance of man. There is also in the substance the faculties of body & soule: & they can not be sinne, for then euery man should haue lost the faculties of his soule by Adams fall. Lastly in the faculties there is a contagion or corruption which carieth them against the law: and that is properly sinne and the flesh, which is contrary to the spirit.
            The fourth point is touching the persons in whom this combat is. Paul shewes who they

are, whē he saith, So that ye can not, &c. where it appeares that such as haue this cōbat in them must be as the Galatians, men iustified & sanctified: And yet not all such, but only they that be of yeres: for the infants of the faithfull, how soeuer we must repute them to belong to the kingdom of heauen, & therfore to be iustified & sanctified: yet because they do not commit actuall sin, they want this cōbat of the flesh and spirit, which stāds in actiō. As for those which be unregenerate, they neuer felt this fight. If any say that the worst man in the world, when he is about to cōmit any sinne, hath a strife & fight in him. It is true indeed: but that is another kind of cōbat, which is between the conscienceand the heart. The cōscience on the one part terrifying the man frō sinne: the will and the affections haling & pulling him therunto: the will & the affections wishing & desiring that sin were no sin, & Gods commandement abolished: wheras contrariwise the conscience with a shril voice proclaimes sin to be sin. This fight was in Pilat, who by the force of his conscience feared to condemne Christ: & yet was willing, and yeelded to condemne him that he might please the people.
            
               Furthermore, this cōbat is in the regenerate but during the time of this life▪ for they which are perfitly sanctified feele no strifte. If any shal say, that this cōbat was in Christ whē he said, Father, if it be thy will let this cup passe from me, yet not my will but thine be done. Indeed here is a cōbat, but of another sort: namely the fight of two divers desires: the one was a desire to do his fathers will in suffering the death of the crosse: the other a natural desire (which was no sinne but a meere infirmity of humane nature) whereby he in his manhood desires (as the maner of nature is to seek the preseruation of it selfe) to haue the cursed death of the crosse remooued from him.
            The fift point is the effect of this combat, which is to make the man regenerate, that he can not doe the things which he would: and this must be understood in things both good & ill.
            And first he can not do the evill which he would for two causes. First because he cannot commit sin at what time soeuer he would. S. Iohn saith, He that is borne of God sinneth not,
               1. Ioh. 3. 9. 
               neither can he sin, because he is borne of God, that is, he can not sin at his pleasure or when he

will. Ioseph when he was assaulted by Putiphars wife to adultery; because the grace of God abounded in him, wherby he answered her, saying, Shall I doe this, & sin against God, he could not then sin. Lot, because his righteous heart was grieved in seeing and hearing the abominations of Sodom, could not then sin as they of Sodom did. Hence it appeares, that such persons as liue in the daily practise of sin against their own consciences, (though they be professours of the true religion of Christ) haue no soundnes of grace in them.
            Secondly, the man regenerate can not sin in what manner he would: And there be two reasons therof. First, he can not sinne with full consent, of will or with all his heart: because the will so far forth as it is regenerate, resisteth and draweth back: yea, even then when a man is caried headlong by the passions of the flesh, he feeles some contrary motions of a regenerate cōscience. It is a true rule that sin doth not reigne in the regenerate. For so much grace as is wrought in the mind, will, affectiōs: so much is abated proportionally of the strength of the flesh, wherfore whē he cō
               mits

any sin, he doth it partly willingly, & partly against his wil. As the mariners in the tēpest, cast Ionas into the sea willingly: for otherwise they had not done it: & yet against their willes too: which appeares because they prayed, and cast their goods out of the ship, & laboured in rowing against the tempest, & that very long before they cast him out. And herein lies the difference betweene tvvo men cōmitting one & the same sinne, the one of them being regenerate, the other unregenerate. For the latter sins with all his heart & with full consent, & so doth not the first. Secōdly, though he fall into any sin, yet he doth not lie lōg in it, but speedily recouers himself, by reason of grace in his hart.
            Hence it is manifest, that sinnes of infirmitie are cōmitted only of such as are regenerate. As for the man unregenerate he cannot sin of infirmity whatsoeuer some falsly think. For he is not weak but stark dead in sinne. And sinnes of infirmity are such only as rise of constraint, feare, hastines, & such like sudden passions in the regenerate. Aed though they sin of weaknes often by reason of this spirituall combat, yet they do not alwaies: for they may sinne against knowledge & cōscience of presumptiō.
            
               To come to the secōd point: the regenerate mā cannot do the good which he would: because he cannot do it perfitly & soundly according to Gods will as he would. Paul saith, To will is
               Rom. 7. 18. 
               present with me, but I find no means (
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ) perfitly to do that which I would. In this point the godly man is like a prisoner that is gotten forth of the gayle, & that he might escape the hand of the keeper, desires & striues with all his heart to run an 100 miles in a day: but because he hath strait and weighty boults on his legs, cannot for his life creep past a mile or twain, & that with chafing his flesh & tormenting himselfe. So the servants of God do hartily desire, & indeavour to obey God in all his commādements: as it is said of king Iosias, That he turned to God with all his heart, with
               2. king. 23. 25. 
               all his soule, with all his might, according to all the lawes of Moses, &c. yet because they are clogged with the boltes of the flesh, they perfourme obedience both slowly and weakely, with divers slips & falles.
            Thus much of the combat: now let vs see what use may be made of it.
            First of all by it we learn what is the estate of a christian man in this life. A christiā is not one

that is free frō al evil cogitations, frō rebellious inclinations & motiōs of will & affections, frō all maner of slips in his life & cōversation: for such an one is a mere deuise of mans brain & not to be found upō earth. But indeed he is the sound christiā that feeling himselfe laden with the corruptions of his vile & rebellious nature, bewailes them frō his hart, & with might and main fights against them by the grace of gods spirit. Againe here is ouerthrown the popish opinion of merit & iustificatiō by workes of grace, on this manner. Such as the cause of works is, such are works thēselves. The cause of works in man, is the mind, will, & affectiōs sanctified: in which, the flesh & the spirit are mixt togither, as hath bin shewed before. Therfore works of grace, euen the best of them are mixt works, partly holy & partly sinfull. wherby it is euidēt to a man that hath but cōmon sense, that they are not answerable to the righteousnes of the law: & that therfore, they can neither merit life, or any way iustify a mā before God. If any reply, that good works are the works of Gods spirit, & for that cause perfitly righteous: I answer, it is true indeed, they come frō the holy ghost that can not sin, but not only or immediatly. For they come

also from the corrupt mind and will of man, and in that respect become sinfull, as sweete water issuing out of a pure fountaine, is by a filthy channell made corrupt.
            Thirdly, we do hēce learn that concupiscēce or originall sin is properly & indeed sin after baptism, though it please the councel of Trent to decree otherwise. For after baptism it is flat cōtrary to the spirit, & rebels against it. Papists obiect that it is takē away by baptism. Ans. Original sin or the flesh is takē away in the regenerate thus. In it there be 3. things, the guilt, the punishment, the corruptiō: the first 2. are quite abolished by the merit of Christs death in baptisme: the third that is the corruptiō remaines still: but mark in what manner: it remains weakened, it remaines not imputed to the person of the beleeuer.
            Lastly hereby we are taught to be watchfull in prayer. Watch & pray (saith Christ, &c. for the spirit is ready but the flesh is weak. Rebecca, when 2. twins stroue in her wombe was troubled & said, why am I so? wherefore she wēt to ask the Lord, namely by some prophet. So when we feele this inward fight, the best thing is to haue recourse to God by prayer,

and to his word, that the spirit may be strengthened against the flesh. As the children of Israel by compassing the city of Ierico 7. daies, and by sounding rammes hornes overturned the walles thereof: so by serious invocation of Gods name the spirite is confirmed, and the turrets and towres of the rebellious flesh battered.
            
               The voice of a man
               1. Carnall of

                     
                        Evill. I doe that which is evill and I will doe it.
                     
                        Good. I doe not that which is good and I will not doe it.
                  
               
               2. Regenerate of

                     
                        Evill. I doe the evill, which I would not.
                     
                        Good. I doe not doe the good which I would.
                  
               
               3. Glorified of

                     
                        Evill. I doe not that which is evill, and I will not doe it.
                     
                        Good. I doe that which is good and I will doe it.
                  
               
            
            LAVS DEO.
            
         
      
   