
      
         
            
            
            SATANS
SOPHISTRIE
ANSVVERED BY OVR
SAVIOVR CHRIST, AND
in diuers Sermons further manifested
by that worthy man Maister
William Perkins. To which is added, a Comfort for the feeble
minded: wherein is set downe the
temptations of a Christian.
            In that he suffered, and was tempted, he is able to succour
them that are tempted. 
                  Heb. 2. 18.
            
            
               LONDON,
Printed by Richard Field for E. E. and are
to be sold at the signe of the Swanne
in Paules Church-yard.
1604.
         
         
            
            
            
               ❧To the right Honorable
Sir William Russell,
Lord Russell, Baron of Thornehaugh,
yonger sonne to that most Christian
and Honorable Earle, Frauncis
Earle of Bedford, with the vertuous
Ladie his wife: Grace
and Peace.
            
               RIGHT Honorable, as Iohn
the Baptist was in one desert,Mat. 3.
so our Sauiour Christ he was
in an other:Mat. 4. 1. but as these two
differed in their being in the
world: so did they not accord
in their being in the wildernesse. Iohn was with
some men, Christ with none; Iohn was with wild
men, Christ with wild beasts; Iohn was preaching,
Christ praying; Iohn was baptizing, Christ
fighting; Iohn was feeding, Christ fasting; Iohn
was encountring with Diuels incarnate, Christ
did encounter with the Prince of those Diuels.
From Iohn preaching in the desert, learne we

diligence in our callings: from Christ tempted
in the desert, see we troubles at our calling:
Psa. 34. 19 Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the
Lord deliuereth them out of all.
            If it please you to giue these after-lines the
reading, you shall see set downe that monomachie
or single combat, which was hand to hand
betwixt Christ and the Diuell. And as for
Christ Iesus, you shall see him fasting, fighting,
conquering. Fasting and an hungry, to shew he
was man: fighting & encountring, to shew he was
Messiah; and conquering and triumphing, to
shew he was God. And as for the diuell, you shall
see him obiecting, answering, flying. Obiecting,
thatMat. 4. 3. Christ might despaire;Mat. 4. 6. answering, that he
might presume; andMat. 4. 11 flying, when he could not ouercome.
            In Christs temptations, we see the estate of
the1. Pe. 2. 21 Church; in Satans assault, we see his malice
to the1. Pet. 5. 8 Church. Is Christ tempted? thinke it not
strange if we fall intoIoh. 15. 20 tēptations. For the griefe
of the head, is the griefe of the1. Cor. 12▪ 26. members: & the
temptations of Christ, shew the temptations of
Ioh. 15. 20▪
                Christians. It is true of Christ, thatAct. 14. 21 by many
tribulatiōs he did enter into the kingdom of God:
thatHeb. 2. 10 our High Priest was consecrated by afflictions,
that so he must suffer and enter into his
Luk. 24. 26. glory.
            
               
He is no sooner borne into the world, but he is
Mat. 2. 14 hunted by Herod; baptized at Iordan,Mat. 3. 16▪ 4. 1. but Satan
sets on him; a Preacher for repentance, but
theIoh. 7. 1. Scribes proscribe him; toLuk. 11. 15. worke miracles,
but the Pharisees slaunder him. He is no sooner
to suffer, butIoh. 12. 27 the Diuell assaults him; apprehē
               ded,
but theIoh. 18. 28 Iewes deliuer him; deliuered, but
Luk. 23. 11. Herod derides him; derided, butLuk 23. 24. Pilate condemnes
him; condemned, but the souldiersMat. 27. 27. abuse
him. Is he on the crosse? theMat. 27. 39. people will not
pitie him: is he risen? the high Priests willMat. 28. 15. belie
him. In a word, is he vpon earth? he is tempted
in hisLuk. 11. 16. person; is he in heauen? he isAct. 9. 4. tempted
in his members. Thus the life of Christ was
a warfare vpon earth, and the life of Christians
must be a warfare vpon earth. We liue here in a
sea of troubles: the sea is the world, the waues
are calamities, the Church is the ship, the anker
is hope, the sailes are loue, the Saints are passengers,
the hauen is heauen, and Christ is our Pilot.
When the sea can continue without waues,
the shippe without tossings, and passengers not
be sicke vpon the water, then shall the Church
of God be without trials. We begin this voyage
so soone as we are borne, and we must saile on
till our dying day.
            We do reade in Gods word of many kinds of
temptations: God, Satan, Man, the World, &

the Flesh, are said to tempt. God tempteth man
to trie his obedience, Satan tempteth man to
make him disobedient: men do tempt men to try
what is in them: and man tempteth God, to trie
what is in him. The world is a tempter, to keepe
man from God: and the flesh is a tempter, to
bring man to the Diuell. So God tempted Abraham
Gen. 22. 1 in the offering of his son: Satan
               Iob. 1. 18 tempted
Iob in the losse of his goods: a1. King. 10. 1. 
               Queene tempted
Salomon in trying his wisedome: men
               Ex. 17▪ 3. tēpted
God by distrust in the desert: the world
tempted Demas,1. Tim. 4. 10. when he forsooke the Apostles:
and the flesh tempted Dauid,2. Sa. 11. 4 when he
fell by adulterie. Doth God tempt vs? take heed
of hypocrisie: doth Satan tempt vs? take heed of
his subtiltie: doth man tempt man? take heed of
dissembling: doth man tempt God? take heed of
inquiring: doth the world tempt man? take heed
of apostacie: doth the flesh tempt man? take heed
of carnalitie. But do we so? are we warie of these
tempters? No, we are not, and therefore we fal.
We fal on the right hand, by temptations in prosperitie,
and we fall on the left, by temptations
in aduersitie. Of the one it may be said, it hath
slaine1. Sa. 18. thousands: of the other, that it hath
slaine ten thousands.
            When we come and see cities dispeopled, houses
defaced, and wals pulled downe, we say, the

souldier hath bene there: and when we see pride
in the rich, discontent in the poore, and sinne in
all, we may iustly say, the Tēpter hath bin there.
            Now of all other temptations, it pleaseth God
to suffer his Church to be tempted with afflictions.
It is neuer free either from the sword of Ishmael:
which isGen. 21. 9 a reuiling tong: or the sword of
Esau, aGen. 27. 41. persecuting hand. Neither was there
yet euer Christian man found, who had not his
part in the cup of affliction. We must drinke of
theMat. 20. 23. same cuppe our maister did:Mat. 10. 24. the disciple is
not aboue his maister.
            The reasons why God doth visit vs thus with
afflictions,Reasons why God doth afflict his children▪
                are: 1. To humble vs. 2. To weane
vs. 3. To winow vs. 4. To preuent vs. 5. To teach
vs. 6. To enlighten vs. 7. To honour vs. 8. To
cure vs. 9. To crowne vs. 10. To comfort vs.
11. To protect vs. 12. To adopt vs. And last of
all, to teach & comfort others. ToEc. 3. 10. humble vs,
that we be not proud:Psal. 119. 67. to weane vs, that we loue
not this world:Luk. 22. 31. to winnow vs, that we be not
chaffe:Psal. 119. 71. to preuent vs, that we do not sinne:Psal. 39. 9 40. 1. to
teach vs, that we be patient in aduersitie: toGe. 42. 21 enlighten
vs, that we see our errors: toIam. 5. 11 honor vs,
that our faith may be manifest: to cure vs, that
weDeu▪ 32 15. surfet not of securitie: to2. Tim 4. 7. crowne vs, that
we may liue eternally: toIoh. 6. 33 comfort vs, that he
may send his spirit:: toAct. 12. 7 protect vs, that he may

guide vs by his Angels: toHe. 12. 7. adopt vs, that we may
be his sonnes:2. Pet. 2. 5 and to teach others, that they seeing
how sin is punished in vs, they may take heed
it be not found in them: that they2. Cor. 1. 6 seeing our
comforts in troubles, may not be discouraged in
the like trials.
            Thus a Christian mans diet is more sowre thē
sweet: his physicke is more aloes then honie: his
life is more a pilgrimage then a progresse: & his
death is more despised then honoured. This if
men would thinke of before, afflictions would be
as welcom to the soule of man, asRuth. 2. 8 afflicted Ruth
was to the field of Boaz. But because we looke
not for them before they come, think not on Gods
doing when they are come, and do desire to be
happie both here and hereafter: therfore we can
away with the name of Naomi, but in no case
would we be calledRuth 1. 20. Mara. WeIon. 1. 15. see the sea, not
the whale: theExod. 14 11. Egyptian, not the saluation: the
Dan. 6. 16 22. Lions mouth, not him that stoppeth the Lions
mouth. If we could see God in our troubles, as2. King. 6. 16. Elisha
did in his, then would we say: There are
more with vs, then there are against vs. But because
we do not, therefore at euery assault of the
Assyrians, we say, as the seruant to2. King. 6. 15. Elishah did:
Alas maister, what shall we do? and with the disciples:
Mar. 4. 38 Carest thou not maister that we perish?
Yet it is good for vs to suffer affliction.Iam. 1. 12. Iob. 5. 17 Blessed is

the man that endureth temptation: for when he
is tried, he shall receiue the crowne of life which
the Lord hath promised to thē that loue him. It
isPro. 3. 11 commanded by God,Mat. 4. 2. practised by Christ,
2. Tim. 3. 12. yeelded to by the Saints,Psal. 119. 71. assigned by Gods prouidence,
and good for vs each way. We are Gods
Psal. 1. 4. trees, we shall grow better by pruning: Gods pomander,
smell better by rubbing: Gods spice, be
more profitable by bruising: and Gods conduits,
we are the better by running. Let vs suffer afflictions,
they are2. Cor. 4. 17. momentanie in respect of time:
Phil. 1. 29 fauors, if we respect Gods loue, and a meanes to
bring vs to the kingdome of God. If they did consume
vs, we might wish them an end: but they do
purge vs, let vs be content. TheyAct 14. 21. 1. Pet. 1. 5. are Gods fan,
we are Gods wheate: they are Gods boulter, we
are Gods meale: they are GodsExod. 3. flame, we are
Gods bush: they are GodsGe. 22. 9. cords, we are Gods sacrifice:
they are Gods f
                  •
               rnace, we are Gods gold.
The wheate will not be good without the fan, nor
the meale without the bolter, nor the bush without
the flame, nor the sacrifice without the cords,
nor the gold without the fornace: they are trials,
not punishments, if we be sons: punishments, not
trials, if we be slaues. Let vs then beare thē, they
Psal. 37. 37. will haue an end: ioyPs. 126. 5 will follow: theyIsa. 38. 10 shew vs
our weaknesse: theyHos. 5. 15. moue vs to pray: theyLuk. 24. 26. shew
we are in the path way to heauen: andEcc. 1. 2. make vs

contemne this present world. By them we2. Sam. 24. 17. learn
to repent vs of sin past,Ge. 39. 9 to take heed of sinne present,
and to foresee sin to come. By them weAct. 2. 2. receiue
Gods spirit,Phi. 3. 10 are like to Christ: are acquainted
D 23. 17 with Gods power: haueExod. 15. 1. ioy in deliuerance:
know benefite of prosperitie: made more
hardie to suffer: and1. Pet. 1. haue cause to practise
many excellent vertues. They cause vs (as one
saith) to seeke out Gods promise: the promise to
seeke faith: faith to seeke prayer: and prayer to
find God.Mat. 7. 7 Seeke, and ye shall find:Iob. 22. 27. call, and he
will answer:Hab. 2. 3 waite, & he wil come. I am to write
an Epistle, I must not be long. IobsIob 2. messengers
came not so fast on him: but Iobs afflictions may
come as fast vpō vs. Hath Dauid slaine1. Sam. 17. 37. a Bere?
he shall encounter with a Lion: hath he killed a
Lion?1. Sa. 18. 27. he must fight with Goliah: hath he subdued
Goliah? he must make a r
                  •
               ad vpon the Philistims:
are the Philistims conquered?1. Sa. 21. Saul wil
assault him. Remēber Dauids troubles, and foresee
what may be our troubles. The more righteous
we are, the more manifold are our troubles:
and the better we are, the better we may indure
them.
            But as our troubles are many, so are our deliuerances
many: God will deliuer vs out of all. He
that deliueredGen. 7. Noah frō the floud,Gen. 19. L
                  •
               t frō Sodome,
Gen. 33. Iacob from Esau,Gen. 41. 14. Ioseph from Potiphar,

Moses from Pharaoh,Exod. 9.
               Exod. 12▪
                Israell frō Egypt,1. Sa. 19. Dauid
from Saul,1. King. 21. Eliah from Acab,2. Kin. 6. Elysha from
the Syrians,2. King. 5. Naaman from his leprosie,Isa. 38. Hezechiah
from the plague,Dan. 3. the three children from
the fire,Dan. 6. Daniel from the Lions,Mat. 6. Ioseph from
Herod, the ApostlesAct. 5. from the Iewes,Mat. 4. and Christ
from the Diuell: he, euen he will either deliuer
vs frō trouble, or comfort vs in trouble, or mitigate
troubles when they come vpon vs.
            He,Ro. 4. 21 he hath promised to do it, and he that
hath promised, is able to do it. And this he doth
sometimes by no meanes, sometimes by small
means, sometimes by ordinarie means, sometimes
by extraordinarie, sometimes contrarie to all
meanes. By noIoh. 5. 9. meanes he cured a creeple at
Bethesda: byIoh. 6. 12 small meanes he fed fiue thousand
in the desert: byMat. 4. 7 ordinarie meanes he was
brought from the pinnacle: by meanes extraordinarie
he was prouided for in hunger:Mat. 411▪
                and contrarie
to all meanes were theDan. 5. three children
preserued in the fornace of fire.
            I haue good cause to thinke of Gods gracious
deliuerance, being my selfe deliuered frō a great
trouble.Saint Andrewes in Norwich. Since the time I was vnkindly dismissed
from my poore charge, where I would haue continued,
if malice had not hindred me, I haue liued
in an end of this City: dangerously in respect
of the sicknesse; poorely, in regard of maintenāce;

and painfully, in respect of my ministerie: yet ti
                  •
               
this time hath the Lord deliuered me: and 
                  〈◊〉
               
Paule said:2. Tim. 1 18. he will deliuer me, if that he se
                  •
               
it be best for me.
            Let man therefore1. Sam. 30. 9. comfort himselfe in the
Lord:Hos. 6. 2. after two dayes he will reuiue vs, and
the third day he will raise vs vp againe:Psal. 30. 5 Heauinesse
may endure for a night, but ioy will come in
the morning.Psal. 58. 11. Doubtlesse there is a reward for
the righteous: verily,Mica. 7. 8. God retaineth not his
wrath for euer. Could he ouercome the world,
and can he not ouercome many troubles in the
world? Yea, let one plague follow another, as one
quaile sings to another: yet as theAct. 28. 3 viper leaped
on Paules hand, and forthwith leaped off again,
so one trouble shall leape vpon the righteous,
and anon leape off againe:Ps. 37. 
                     •
                  4. though he fall, he
shall rise againe, the righteous shall not be forsaken
for euer.
            If he hath deliuered vs from the guilt of our
sinnes, he will deliuer vs from the punishment of
our sins. Let vs then therefore be patient in trouble,
constant in hope, rooted in loue: let vs waite

                  〈◊〉
                he will come, call and he will heare, beleeue
and he will performe, repent vs of our euill committed
against him, and he will repent of his euils
intēded against vs. He is ouer vs by his prouidence,
about vs by his Angels, in vs by his spirit,

with vs by his word, vnder vs by his power, and
vpon vs by his Sonne. In him is our helpe, from
him is our comfort, by him is our victorie, and
for him is our trouble.Psal. 25. In thee haue I trusted,
saith a king:Iob. 5. who euer was confounded that
trusted in the Lord, said a friend? and as El
                  •
               anah
was to1. Sam. 1. 8. Hannah in stead of many sons, so God is
to his in stead of many comforters. Of other comforters,
we may say as Iob did of his friends:
Iob. 16. 2. Silly comforters are you all. They wil leaue vs,
as mice do a ruinous house: but the Lord (like
Ruth 1. 16. Ruth to Naomi) will neuer leaue vs, nor forsake
vs. Especially in the houre of death,Ecc. 41. 1. which is in
remēbrance bitter to great men: in that houre of
death he will be with vs, and command hisLuk. 16. 26. Angels
to take charge of our soules, theIsa. 57. 2. earth to be
as a bed for our bodies: that so the oneLuk. 23. may go into
glorie, the other reserued in hope of like glorie,
Phil. 3. 20 and be made one day like vnto the glorious
bodie of Christ Iesus. Thus right Honourable
you haue seene the righteous in afflictions: asPsal. 137. Israel
was in Babylon: and that the Lord likeZac. 4. 6. Zorobabel
is readie to deliuer them. Though in trobles
Christ seemes as in theMat. 8. 24. ship to sleepe, yet in
deliuerance he awakes as a man out of sleepe, and
as a Giant refreshed with wine. He will rebuke
the waues and winds of trobles and persecution,
and they shall flie before him as Sysera did before

               
                  
                     •
                  ud. 17. 4 Debora, & the1. Sam. 14. Philistims before Ionath
                  •
               
and his seruant. And as Christ asking the wom
                  ••
               
of her accusers, she answered:Ioh. 8. There was none: 
                  〈◊〉
               
in the end aske a Christian of his troubles, & h
                  •
               
will say, There are none. He is a buckler for ou
                  •
               
left hand, and a sword in our right: he is an helmet
on our head, and harnesse for our bodie. We
shall look vpon troubles, asExo. 14. Israel did on the Egyptians,
as the1. Sam. 17. 52. Iewes did on Goliah, and as the
Grecians did on Hector, to triumph ouer them:
and as the Angell said to Ioseph:Mat. 2. 20 They are dead
that sought the childs life, so the Spirit shal say to
the afflicted, They are dead that did seeke your
life. A day of deliuerance, a yeare of Iubile will
come, and thenGen. 41. Ioseph shall be out of prison,
Gen. 31. Iacob out of seruitude, andIob 41. 12 Iob shal lie no more
in the dust of the earth:1. Thes. 4. 18. Let vs comfort our
selues with these words.
            I haue exceeded an Epistle, especially to such a
small booke. If the wals seeme too great for this
citie: abundans cautela non nocet. It is vsuall
for Students not onely to present their owne
labours, but also other mens to great personages,
especially such Works wherin they haue bene either
Translators or ouerseers. It were infinit to
instance this point. I am bold to do the like to
your Honour at this time. This Copie it was
brought vnto my hand, I haue conferred it with

another, I haue perused it at the Presse, I heard
diuerse of the Sermons, I haue added nothing of
mine owne: and I desire, that of thoseIoh. 6. 22 many baskets
ful of most delicate diet, which this worthie
man hath now left behind him, there may not so
much as any one be lost. If any such come vnto
my hand, surely they shall not be lost. By his life
had I much comfort, and I will seeke to honor
him after he is dead. I was twentie yeares acquainted
with him:The Golden chaine. I at his request made the first
fruites of his labours to speake English. And now
I am bold to present this his posthume to your patronage.The Earle of Bedford. The Countesse of Bedford.
Your honorable Nephew, his vertuous
Lady, your worthy sister, haue heretofore accepted
the labours of this man. If it shall please your
good Honour to do the like,The Countesse of Cil
                  
                     •
                  erland. this Preface of mine
shall remaine as a perpetuall testimonie of my
dutie to you: and the booke following as fully armed
against all such aduersaries as shall speake
against it. The God of heauē, who hath made you
honorable in your most honorable Progenitors,
make you thrice honorable in your future successors:
that the memoriall of the righteous may
be euerlasting,Pro. 10. 7. when as the name of the wicked
shall r
                  •
               t. 
            
               Your Honors at commandement,
ROBERT HILL, Fellow
Of S. Iohns Coll. in Cambridge.
               
               
                  London, S. Martins in the fields. 
                  
                     Ian. 12. 1604.
               
            
         
         
            
            The Printer to the Reader.
            GEntle Reader, in the life of that worthie man
Master Perkins, his books for the most part were
printed at Cambridge. The onely reason was,
his desire to be Corrector to his owne bookes. Since
he departed this life, some good men haue brought
me certaine labours of his. I desire not to print them
to make gaine to myselfe, but because I would not
haue his labours to be lost. He was heard of many by
his speech, read of many in his writings, and his works
haue bene translated into many languages. Mislike
not this booke, because it was printed at London, his
auditors can tell it was as he spake it. If you say, it was
hard to write as he spake: know this, that he obserued
his auditors, and so spake, as a diligent Baru
                  •
                might
write verbatim al that was spoken by this Ieremiah.Ier. 36. 18. Vse
this, and communicate that which thou hast of his.
         
      
      
         
            
            SATANS SOPHISTRIE
ANSWERED BY OVR
SAVIOVR CHRIST.
            
               MATH. 4. 1.
               Then was Iesus led aside of the Spirit, &c.
            
            
               IN the eleuen first verses of
this Chapter, are recorded
and set downe vnto vs the
seuerall temptations of our
Sauiour Christ: and in them
we are to consider three especiall
points: First, the preparation vnto
the combat▪ vers. 1. and 2. Secondly, the
combat it selfe in three seuerall temptations,
vers. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. Thirdly, the issue and
effect of this combat, vers. 11.
            The preparation hath two parts: first, the
going forth of Christ into the wildernesse, in
the first verse. Secondly, his abode and conuersation
in the wildernesse, in the second
verse.
            The going forth of Christ into the wildernesse,

is set out by sundrie circumstances:
first, the time, then. Secondly, the mouing
cause, whereby he was caried thither, namely
he was led of the spirit. Thirdly, the place,
the wildernesse. Fourthly, the end, to be tempted
of the diuell.
            
            
               Then was Iesus led] In the Chapter going
before is set downe the baptisme of our
Sauiour Christ, as also the great honour of
his Baptisme. And it pleased him to be baptized,
to shew that he was now installed into
the office of a Mediator: and for the greater
solemnitie of his baptisme, he was proclaimed
by the voice of God the Father
from heauen, to be the chiefe Doctor, and
the true Prophet of the Church of God: for
chap. 3. 17. it is said: There came a voice from
heauen, saying, this is my welbeloued Sonne, in
whom I am well pleased. And also it is said,
that the Spirit of God in the likenesse of a Doue
descended and light vpon him. Now so soone
as Christ was installed into his office of Mediator,
and thus solemnely baptized, and
proclaimed, euen from heauen, to be the
sole Doctor and Prophet of the Church of
God, presently without delay, as is Marke
1. 12. he was led aside to be tempted of the
Diuell.
            
            
               
In that Christ is no sooner baptised,Doctr. 1. but
he is presently tempted, it sheweth vs, that
all those which haue bene baptised, and giuen
vp their names to Christ, must make account
to be tempted, and looke for temptations.
For if Satan durst be so bold to set vpon
Iesus Christ the head, who was not onely
man but very God; how much more will
he be bold to set vpon vs, who be but weake
and sinfull men? And therefore so soone as
we haue truly giuen vp our names to God,
and become the faithfull souldiers of Christ,
and refuse to serue sinne and Satan, then will
the diuell incounter vs, and set vpon vs▪ and
we must looke for to be tempted, preparing
our selues to this spirituall battell, and put
vpon vs the whole complete armour of God. Ephes.
6. 11.
            But most men will say, this doctrine is not
true: for they neuer felt any such combat in
themselues, though they haue bin baptized
many yeares.
            I answer; such men whatsoeuer they be,
they haue onely the outward baptisme of
water, and neuer receiued the inward baptisme
of the Spirit: and such men do indeed
weare Christs liuerie, but do seruice to the
Diuell his enemie. And therefore let such

persons reforme them selues, turne from
their wicked and sinfull liues, and seeke to
serue the Lord, and then they shall find this
doctrine most true. For the children of Israel
so long as they liued vnder Pharaoh in Egypt,
they were not persecuted by Pharaoh:
but when they did set their faces towards
the land of Canaan, then presently he pursued
them with all his malice and might. So
all the while men liue in Egypt▪ that is, in sin
and wickednesse, and serue the diuell, he will
let them be at quiet: but if euer we once set
our hearts on that heauenly Canaan, and
giue our selues to the seruice of God, then
he will with open mouth pursue vs, follow
vs with many armies, and cast an hundred
temptations in our way. And as a poore bird
which cometh to the shop, and when she
thinketh to get away, then cometh all her
paine, and the net is spread ouer her: so when
men begin to leaue their euill courses, and to
set themselues to serue the Lord, presently
the Diuell doth spread his net to intangle
them. This must teach vs to watch and pray,
that we enter not into temptation.
            Secondly,Doctr. 2. in that our Sauiour is no sooner
baptized, & ordained to be the great Doctor
of the Church, but he is presently tempted

and encountred by Satan: hence we learne,
that all those which be appointed of God to
any speciall office in the Church or common-weale,
they must make account they
shall be tempted, and looke for Satans temptations
one way or other: it was that which
befell the head, and therefore let vs all that
be his members reckon of it. Example of this
we haue in Moses,
               Exod. 2. 14. who so soone as he was
new called to be the guide and deliuerer of
the children of Israel, he was faine to flie
when he had killed the Egyptian.1. Sam. 18. And Dauid
was no sooner appointed by God to be
King of Israell, but Saule did persecute him.
As soone as our Sauiour Christ had called
the Apostles to that office, he brought them
to the sea, and there by his diuine power raised
a storme,Math. 8. 23. so as they cried out, Maister,
saue vs, or else we perish.
            
            And this the Lord doth in great wisdome:
for by this meanes he sheweth a man that he
is not able of himselfe to execute the duties
of his particular calling without the speciall
grace of God: and by these temptations and
trials, the Lord stirreth vp a greater loue of
his Maiestie in the hearts of his children, and
with it many other graces, as prayer, patience,
&c. and maketh these graces the better

to shew themselues.
            Seeing that our Sauiour Christ begins his
propheticall office of teaching the Church
of God with temptations:Doctr. 3. this should admonish
the Ministers of the word of God, that
they of all other men are subiect to Satans
temptations, because they be the Lords
Standard-bearers, and his Lieutenants, against
whom Satan and al his souldiers bend
all their forces, as souldiers often do against
the standard-bearer. When as Iehoshua the
high Priest stood before the Lord, Satan
stood at his right hand to hinder him, Zach.
3. 1. He was a lying spirit in the mouth of
foure hundred false Prophets:2. King. 22. and this old
red Dragon, Reu. 12. with his taile draweth
downe the third part of the stars of heauen:
he desired to winnow Peter, and to trie him
by temptations, Luke 22. And as the king
of Aram said of Acab:
               1. King. 22. 31. 
               Fight not against small
or great, but against the king of Israel: so Satan
fighteth not against any so much, as the Prophets
of Israel, the Ministers of the Church.
            So then we may see, that temptations are
necessary for the Ministers of the word, that
they may both know what they be, and also
learne how to comfort others in time o
                  •
               
temptation. Also to teach vs the true vse

of the word of God, and the force of it in resisting
temptation. For certaine it is, that
temptations teach men many things which
they could neuer learne by bare studie. So
that one sayd well: Reading, meditation,
prayer, and temptations, these foure make a
Diuine.
            The second point to be considered, is,
what was the cause which moued our Sauior
Christ to go into the wildernesse: which was
the leading of the Spirit: Iesus was led aside of
the spirit: Luke. 4. 1. or as the word signifieth,
he was caried apart, Mark. 1. 12. not by a forced,
but a voluntary motion. This was not a
locall transportation of the bodie of Christ,
as that of Eliah, and of Philip from the Eunuch:
but by the inward instinct of the holy
Ghost he was mooued and made willing to
go,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . as the word which Luk. 4. 1. vseth, sheweth
plainely.
            And by the Spirit here, is not meant the
Diuell or an euill spirit, but the holy Spirit of
God, euen the third person in the Trinitie.
And so we see that Christ may both guide
the Spirit, and be guided by the Spirit: for
Christ as he is man is led and guided by the
Spirit; but as he is God, he doth guide and
send his Spirit.
            
               
               Obiection. Christ sendeth the holy Ghost,Obiection.
therefore cannot be led by it.Ansvver. 
               Ans. As Christ
was man he was guided by Gods spirit, as he
was God he sent the Spirit.
            Hence we may behold the exceeding holinesse
of the manhood or humane nature of
Christ,Doctr. 1. who as he was man was guided by
the Spirit of God, euen in his mouing from
one place to another. And it is that which
euery one should desire, to be like vnto our
Sauiour Christ in this, viz. to suffer our selues
to be guided & directed by Gods holy spirit
in all our thoughts, words and deeds: for this
is a true note of Gods children, Rom. 8. 14.
but as many as are not led by the Spirit of God,
the same are none of his, Rom. 8. 9. And therefore
let vs all become plyable to the motions
and directions of Gods blessed spirit, so as
we can say as Dauid saith: When thou saydst,
Seeke ye my face:
               Psal. 27. 8. 
               my heart answered vnto thee:
O Lord, I will seeke thy face.
            
            Againe,Doctr 2. from this that Christ was led vnto
temptations by the spirit of God, we learne,
that temptations come not by chance, nor
yet by the diuels will and appointment: for
he could not touch Iob or any thing he had,
till he had leaue giuen him by the Lord: and
he could not so much as enter into swine, till

Christ gaue him leaue; but they come by his

                  •
               ust permission, and the speciall prouidence

                  •
               nd appointment of God. For as God de
               
                  •
               reed,
that he which had ouercome all mankind,
should be ouercome by Christ: so he

                  •
               ath appointed this combat by temptations

                  •
               o all men:1. Cor. 4▪ 9. the place where it is tried, is the
world as a theater: the persons as souldiers
tried, are Christians: the person tempting, is
Satan our aduersarie: the beholders are men
and Angels: the Iudge or vmpire is the Lord
himselfe, so that the issue shall be good. And
therefore when we be tempted, we must not
thinke it strange: but rather as Iam. 1. 2. Accompt
it exceeding ioy when we are tempted for
the triall of our faith and obedience. And also
seeing they come by Gods appointment, it
should moue vs all to endure them patiently,
seeing they cannot be auoyded.
            Seeing Christ was led to be tempted:Doctr. 3. hence
we learne, that no man must wittingly of his
own head, cast himself into places of danger:
for Christ went not into the place of temptation
til he was led by the spirit of God. And
so indeed, if a man find himselfe moued by
some extraordinary motion and instinct of
the spirit, he may offer himselfe vnto danger.
So Paul went bound in the spirit to Ierusalem:
               Act. 20. 22.
               
that is, he did willingly follow the motion 
                  〈◊〉
               
Gods spirit, which inforced him to go to Ie
                  •
               rusalem.
And so many of the Martyrs, thoug
                  •
               
they might haue fled, yet being moued 
                  〈◊〉
               
the inward motion of the holy Ghost, di
                  ••
               stand
to the truth, abide the danger, and en
                  •
               dured
the fire. But otherwise no man is wittingly
to cast himselfe into danger; yet if the
Lord send any danger vnto a man in the performance
of his calling and vocation, walking
according to Gods word, he is patiently
to endure it, and may not seeke to auoide the
same.
            Here may be demaunded,Question. whether a ma
                  •
               
may with good conscience and safely, abid
                  •
               
in such places where it is certainely known
                  •
               
that euill spirits do haunt and vse to be?
            Although some be so venturous and bold
that they feare nothing,Ansvver. yet it is no wisdome
neither is it lawfull for men to frequent and
abide in those places, but rather to shunn
                  •
               
them, seeing the Lord hath deliuered them
vp into the power of the Diuell. And therefore
such men as frequent such places know
                  •
               
to be possessed, do wilfully tempt God, and
cast themselues into needlesse danger, vnlesse
they haue extraordinary warrant from
God.
            
               
This may serue to reprooue those men
who say they care not into what companie
they come, for they perswade themselues
that no companie can hurt them: but let
such men beware; for how can it be but
they shall be infected with the sinnes of
those whose companie they vsually do haunt
and vse?Pro. 14. 20. 1. 6. 
               He that walketh with the wise, shall
be wise: but a companion of fooles shall be like
vnto them. He that toucheth pitch, shall be
defiled: and if sinners intice thee, yeeld not vnto
them.
            
            Againe,Doctr. 3. here we see that so long as Christ
liued a priuate life at home with his father
in his trade, all this while the Diuell lets him
alone; neither hath he these gifts of the holy
Ghost: but after he was once installed to the
office of a Mediator, presently the Diuell sets
vpon him: and when he must now be another
kind of man in teaching the people of
God, he is led now by the spirit of God,
and furnished for this high and excellent
calling.
            Hence then we must learne, that when we
are appointed of God to any speciall office,
either in Church or Common-weale, we
must then become new men fit for those places,
and carie our selues sutable to our callings.

Thus when Saul was annointed to b
                  •
               
King, he became another man; thus whe
                  •
               
               Dauid became of a shepheard a King, he be
                  •
               
haued himselfe as a King; thus the Apostle
at the first were poore ignorant fisher-men
but being called to be Apostles, they le
                  ••
               
their old trade and became new men, eue
                  •
               
messengers of Christ to preach the Gospel
to all nations.
            This confuteth those which pleade extraordinary
callings,Vse 1. as those men who ca
                  •
               
themselues Elias, Iohn Baptist, &c. for if thes
                  •
               
were such men, and had such extraordinari
                  •
               
callings, they should be endued with extraordinarie
gifts fit for their calling; but they are
not, nay we see they be but ordinary men.
            
                Againe, by nature we be all borne the children
of wrath and enemies to God, but by
grace are called to be Christians: now the
                  •
               
it behoueth vs all to become new men, to
leade new liues fitting and sutable to our holy
calling, giuing our selues wholy to the seruice
and worship of God. Now if any aske
                  •
               
how Christ was furnished with these gifts: 
                  •
               
answer out of S. Luke, that he was filled with
the holy Ghost, chap. 4. vers. 1. If any furthe
                  •
               
obiect, that if he were so filled after his baptisme,
then he was not filled before: I answer
                  •
               
               
againe, that as in his infancie he had a mea
               
                  •
               ure
of gifts fit for that age; so from time to

                  ••
               me he increased in grace, and after his bap
               
                  ••
               sme
had a greater appearance and measure

                  •
               f gifts then before his calling to preach.
            It followeth,3. Circumstance. 
               Into the wildernesse. Here is

                  •
               he third circumstance, namely the place, into

                  •
               he wildernesse or desert place: which place
Christ did of purpose choose to be tempted

                  •
               n. There be diuers opinions concerning this
place, some thinke it to be a litle wildernesse
betwixt Ierusalem and Iericho; others iudge

                  •
               t to be the desert of Arabia, where Elias fa
               
                  •
               ted
fortie dayes and fortie nights, and where

                  •
               he children of Israel wandred fortie yeares.
But seeing the holy Ghost doth not shew
what wildernes it was, we are not curiously

                  •
               o inquire after it, but onely know it was a
desert and solitary place.
            Let vs rather seeke the reasons wherefore
he was tempted in the wildernesse:Reasons why Christ went into the wildernesse. first, because
Christ comming into the world to be

                  •
               ut Mediator,1. Reason. tooke vpon him the base estate
of a seruant, and came in humiliation: therefore
when he was now baptized, he would
not go to Ierusalem to publish his honour,
but he went into the desert, a solitary wildernesse.
            
               
                Againe, he went into the wildernesse, tha
                  •
               
he might not onely the more easily incounter,
but more victoriously ouercome his enemie
the Diuell: for if Satan had seene him i
                  •
               
his glorie, he durst not so fiercely and so eagerly
haue set vpon him; and therefore dot
                  •
               
as the fisherman, who hideth the hooke and
sheweth onely the baite: so Christ he sheweth
his manhood, but couereth as it wer
                  •
               
with a mantle his Godhead, so that the Diu
                  ••
               
seeing him in the base estate of humiliation
might be the more fierce in his temptation
                  •
               
and he might get a more glorious victorie.
            Another reason why Christ was tempte
                  •
               
                in the wildernes, was this, that he might giu
                  •
               
the Diuell the aduantage of the place, and 
                  〈◊〉
               
ouercomming, might giue him the greate
                  •
               
foyle: for in the wildernesse we want the societie
and fellowship of men to comfort v
                  •
               
and such places be noted as solitarie an
                  •
               
voide of comfort, and such Satan will choo
                  ••
               
especially:Eccl. 4. 9. 10 for when a man is alone and solitarie,
it is that which is fittest for the Diuel
                  •
               
purpose; for when the woman was alon
                  •
               
how soone had the Diuell ouercome her
And therfore our Sauior Christ in going in
                  ••
               
the wildernes, graunts the Diuel that he 
                  〈◊〉
               
desired, to haue him alone by himselfe.
            
               
Fourthly,4. Reason. Christ would be tempted in the
wildernesse, where was none to help him nor
to assist him, because the whole praise of the
victory belonged to himselfe alone.
            Lastly,5. Reason. Christ went into the wildernesse,
that so after he might returne againe with
greater authoritie and reuerence to preach
the Gospell: for we know that when one
hath liued with vs, and departs for a season,
and after returnes againe, we do receiue him
with greater reuerence, and make more account
of him.
            From this practise of Christ his going
into the wildernesse,Against popish eremits and Monks. the Papists gather that
men may liue monasticall liues, in cloisters,
woods, dens, cels, &c. from the societie and
companie of men: but this their collection

                  •
               is but fond, as may appeare by these reasons:
first, Christ did this by the speciall motion
and direction of Gods spirit: they go into
their cels without any warrant from God.
Secondly, he went but once for a certaine
time: they continue alwaies there. Thirdly,
Christ during his abode in the wildernesse
fasted and abstained from all sustenance;
but those amongst the Papists that liue monasticall
and solitarie liues, enioy all their
pleasure and delights in eating and drinking,

And therefore though solitarinesse at some
times is commendable, to fit vs for meditation,
prayer, repentance, &c. yet to liue continually
without the company and societie 
                  〈◊〉
               
men, is neither commendable nor warrantable.
            
               To be tempted of the diuell:]
               4. Circumstance. Here is the en
                  •
               
wherefore Christ was led of the Spirit int
                  •
               
the wildernesse,Temptation. namely, to be tempted of th
                  •
               
diuell.
            Now this action, to tempt, is ascribed t
                  •
               
God,1. Of God. to man, and to the diuell. The Lord 
                  〈◊〉
               
said to tempt, when he proueth and maket
                  •
               
triall of his children, to make manifest wha
                  •
               
hidden thing is in their hearts, Gen. 22. 1. Abraham
was tempted by God when he offered
his sonne.
            Secondly,2. Of man. man is said to tempt God, wh
                  ••
               
as he shall by vnlawfull meanes trie the prouidence,
power, mercy and iustice of God.
            Thirdly,3. Of Satan. the diuel is said to tempt, when 
                  〈◊〉
               
he allures by some suggestion inwardly, 
                  〈◊〉
               
by some obiect outwardly; and in this thi
                  ••
               
sense it is vnderstood here, that the diuell di
                  •
               
               tempt
Christ, that is, sought to allure him 
                  〈◊〉
               
some meanes to sinne. And though Chri
                  ••
               
could haue confounded Satan by a word 
                  〈◊〉
               
his mouth, yet notwithstanding he did wi
                  ••
               lingly

permit and suffer him to tempt him,
because now he stood in our stead: and this
was a part of his sufferance to be thus tempted
of the diuell.
            But how could Christ be tempted,Question. seeing
he was most holy,Ansvver. euen as he was man? Ans.
For all that he might be tempted, as our first
parents were before they had sinned.
            The Diuel tempts men either by conueying
into their minds some secret suggestion,
or else moues them by some outward obiect,
that he may put into them some conceipt of
that sin which he would haue them commit:
as vnto Iudas, the Diuel cast this vile thought
into his heart, Iudas betray thy maister, Iohn
13. 27. So here the Diuell suggests vnto the
mind of Christ these motions, to moue him
to vnbeleefe, idolatrie and couetousnesse.
But here is the difference: first, that Christ his
most holy heart withstands all Satans temptations.
Againe, as these wicked motions
disquiet and trouble mens minds, and bring
molestations vpon them; so it befell our Sauiour
Christ, for he was moued with these
temptations, but yet without all sin. Thirdly,
men when they are tempted, though they do
not altogether receiue and approoue of the
temptations, yet they be tainted with them:

but yet Christ was neuer so much as any whi
                  ••
               
tainted, nor his holy heart did euer approue
of them in any sort, but constantly repelled
them. As if a man cast a match into tinder, 
                  〈◊〉
               
will catch fire and burne; but cast it into water,
it will quench it: so temptations coming
into our hearts which be like vnto tinder, we
are easily tainted with them, though we d
                  •
               
not altogether entertaine them: but the most
holy heart of Christ was as water to quench
them at the first.
            The Diuell tempts men with sundry blasphemous,
horrible, and vncleane thoughts.
Now that we may discerne them, and keepe
our selues from despaire when we find them
in vs, we must know that in the mind there
be many cogitations which arise of the flesh,
and from our owne corrupt hearts, and these
be sinne. Besides these there be other cogitations
conueyed aud suggested vnto vs by th
                  •
               
Diuell, and these be the Diuels temptations▪
but no sinnes to vs, vnlesse we entertain
                  •
               
them, receiue and approoue of them: they b
                  •
               
indeed our crosses, but Satans sinnes: fo
                  •
               
Christ was tempted by the Diuell, but with
standing and repelling his temptations, an
                  •
               
not giuing the least approbation of them, h
                  •
               
was free from sinne, and remained holy aft
                  ••
               
               
he was thus tempted.
            The causes wherfore Christ was tempted,Reasons 
                     〈◊〉
                   Christ vvas tempted.
are these:
            First, because he was to vanquish the diuel
in his owne kind,1. Reason. and at his owne weapon:
and as the first Adam was ouercome by his
temptations, so now the second Adam Christ
Iesus might vanquish him in the midst of all
his most fierce temptations.
            Secondly,2. Reason. he was tempted, that by his example
he might teach vs how to resist temptations,
as also to shew what temptations
are, and the power of them. And therefore
that common opinion, that if any be grieuously
tempted, men thinke they be notorious
sinners, and hauing forsaken God, he
now hath forsaken them: it is a false and erronious
opinion: for here we see, that the
most holy Sonne of God himselfe was tempted.
            Againe, seeing Christ the head was tempted,3. Reason.
no member of Christ must looke to be
free from temptation, but we must euen make
account to be tempted.
            Lastly,4. Reason. our Sauiour Christ was tempted,
that so feeling the waight and daunger of
temptations, he might be a mercifull high
Priest to helpe vs in our temptations: as the

Apostle doth witnesse.Heb. 2. 18.
            
            The next point to be noted, is the cause
and author of his temptation: He was tempted
of the diuell. This name Diuell, signifieth
a cauililer, a slaunderer, a priuie accuser: for he
accuseth God to man, as he did to Euah. Gen.
3 
                     •
                  . Hath God said indeed ye shall die?
               Gen. 3▪ 5. Nay, but
it is because God loues you not: for when ye
eate of the tree, God knoweth ye shal be like
vnto God.
            Secondly, the Diuel accuseth man to God,
and is therefore called the Accuser of the
brethren;Reu. 12. 9. 10 one which ceasseth not to put vp
bils of accusation against vs, and to accuse vs
vnto God, as he dealt with Iob.
            
            Thirdly, the Diuell accuseth one man to
another, by raising suspitions and bad surmises
and by backbiting one another. And seeing
the holy Ghost calleth Satan an accuser,Doctr. 1.
let vs all beware of accusing our brethren, of
slaundering and backbiting: for such men
become like vnto the Diuell. Againe, it must
admonish al men to beware that they do not
by any accusations or slanders, seeke to draw
men from embracing the Gospell: for they
which take this course make themselues Diuels
incarnate. Of this sort was Elyma
                     •
                  
                the
sorcerer, Act. 13. 10. whom Paul therefore

calleth the child of the Diuel. And thus much
of the first part of the preparation.The second part of Christs preparation to temptations. Now followeth
the second part, viz. the abode of
Christ in the wildernesse: which is set out by
three circumstances. First, by his fasting forty
daies and forty nights. Secondly by his companie
there, namely, the wild beasts, Manke
1. 12. Lastly, by those temptations wherewith
the Diuell did incounter him within the
space of those fortie dayes, Luke 4. 2. though
the particulars be not set downe by the Euangelists.
            The first point, is Christs fasting in the
wildernesse the space of fortie dayes.
            There be three sorts of fastings:Three kinds of fasts. First, a
dayly fast, which is nothing else but the vertue
of sobrietie, or a moderate vsing of the
creatures of God with abstinence: and this
kind of fasting all men must vse continually,
and we must take heed of the abuse of Gods
creatures by surfetting and drunkennesse.
Rom 13. 12.
            The second kind of fasting is a religious 
fast, when we abstaine from meate and drink
for a certaine time, that we may be more fit
for the exercises of repentance, prayer and
duties of religion: and this kind of fasting,Iud. 20. 26. the
Iewes vsed sometimes for one meale,Hest. 4. 16. sometimes

for two or three, sometimes for many,
as 1. Sam. 31. 13. they fasted seuen dayes.
            
                The third is a miraculous fast, when any
one shall fast many dayes, and that beyond
the course of nature:Exod. 34. 28. thus Moses fasted fortie
daies and fortie nights in the mountaine; and
so fasted Elias. Now there is no man able to
fast so long by the course of nature. Indeed
Paul did fast three dayes after his conuersion;
and those which were with Paule in
the ship in that dangerous voyage, Act. 27.
33. are said to haue fasted foureteene dayes,
which though some thinke is not meant of
abstaining from all sustenance, but that they
did eate very litle; yet the words are plaine,
that they did eate nothing for the space of
foureteene dayes. And though it be true that
Phisitions affirme, that a man may liue seuenteene
dayes without meate, yet he cannot
endure longer, as twentie or thirtie dayes.
Now our Sauiour Christ fasted fortie dayes,
and fortie nights, and for all this his complexion
was not changed, nor the strength of his
bodie weakened; nay he was not hungrie till
the end: though men cannot fast a short time,
but it wil weaken them and make them hungry,
which doth proue this fast of Christ was
miraculous.
            
               
Now there be some reasons why Christ
fasted so long and no longer.Reasons why Christ fasted so long. First, that when
he came to preach the Gospell, he might
come with more authoritie and reuerence: as
when Moses had fasted fortie dayes, and
brought the two tables, the people receiued
him with greater reuerence.1. King. 19. 8 So likewise Elias
when he was to restore Religion, he fasted
forty dayes and forty nights.
            Secondly, he fasted so long, that he might
answer vnto the time that Moses and Elias
fasted.
            Thirdly, he fasted no longer, lest any man
should call into question his humanitie, whether
he was true man yea or no, if he had fasted
threescore or an hundred dayes.
            From this miraculous fast of Christ,Against popish fast in Lent. the
Papists fondly gather their superstitious fast
in Lent; being but an apish imitatiō of Christ:
and in truth their fasting is no fast, but a plaine
mocke-fast, seeing they eate as liberally, and
fare as daintily then, as at any other time of
the yeare: whereas Christ abstained from all
vse of meate and drinke.
            Secondly, Christ was moued thereunto by
the instinct of Gods holy spirit; they haue no
word to warrant them.
            Thirdly, Christ did thus fast but once in

all his life: but their fast is continuall, euery
yeare, and therefore these reasons proue that
their collection is friuolous.
            The second speciall point to be marked in
the abode of our Sauior Christ in the wildernesse,
is his conuersing with the wild beasts,
Marke 1. 13.
            Some say the cause of his conuersing among
the wild beasts,VVhy Christ vvas vvith vvild beasts. was, that they might
do him that homage which is due to the
Creator: but this opinion hath no warrant
out of the word of God, and litle truth in it:
for though it be true that Iesus Christ is worthy
of all homage, yet he came not to this
end into the world, but rather to take on him
the shape of a seruant.
            But the true cause is this: whereas there be
two kinds of wildernesses, one which was inhabited,
and where Iohn Baptist did baptize
& preach: and another not inhabited, where
liued all kinds of wild beasts, as Lions, Tygers,
Beares, &c. Christ made choise of that
which was without the societie of men,
wherein were onely the wild beasts to beare
him companie, that so in this great combat
against the Diuell, he might shew he had no aide
nor comfort of any man; but that he ouercame
by his owne power, and therefore 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
the honour and praise of the victory belonged
to Christ Iesus alone.
            And besides, in the person of Christ we
may behold the estate of Gods church here
vpon earth, that she liueth here with wicked
men, which be no better then wild beasts, as
Esay 11. 6. doth testifie.
            The third circumstance whereby the abode
of Christ in the wildernesse is described,3. Circumstance. be
those temptaions which befell him within
the compasse of the forty dayes, for before
the three great conflicts, Luke 4. 2. there is
mention made of other temptations, which
though they be not specified, yet it is very
likely that the Diuell did set vpon Christ by
sundrie, small, light and weaker temptations,
thereby making an entrance to his fiercer
and stronger temptations. For it is the diuels
maner to go on, and to proceed by degrees
in his temptations. As first he cast into Cains
mind an angry thought against his brother
Abel: after he preuailed, and Caine had conceiued
displeasure against his brother, then

                  •
               he proceedeth to tempt him to murther, and
there he did not stay till he had brought him
to vtter despaire. So he dealt with Iudas, first
he put into Iudas mind this thought; Iudas
betray thy maister: which though Iudas did

receiue at the first, yet after he letteth it ta
                  ••
               
place, and then the Diuell proceedeth by d
                  •
               
               grees
with him, till he had brought him to h
                  ••
               
purpose. And it is the diuels subtiltie, first 
                  〈◊〉
               
get if it be but a talent in, then he will thr
                  ••
               
in his foote, yea his head, and wind in hi
                  •
               
whole bodie.
            Out of this subtile dealing of the Diuel
                  •
               
that he begins with lesser temptations,Vse. an
                  •
               
proceeds by degrees, it must teach vs to b
                  •
               
wise, and to labour, that we may stop the fir
                  ••
               
motions and inclinations to sin, to resist th
                  •
               
very beginnings to euill. For if Satan preuail
                  •
               
in them, he will proceed to more forcibl
                  •
               
temptations.
            The fourth and last point in the abode 
                  〈◊〉
               
Christ in the wildernesse,4. Circumstance. is in these word
                  •
               
               He was afterward an hungrie: that is, when h
                  •
               
had by the diuine power and vertue of h
                  ••
               
Godhead fasted forty daies and forty night
                  •
               
he was at the last hungry. And this Christ di
                  •
               
for our sakes: for though Christ was the So
                  •
               
of God, yet for our good he was content t
                  •
               
take our nature vpon him, and became tru
                  •
               
man like vnto vs in all things excepting sin
                  •
               
and had not onely the will, mind, affection▪
and conscience of man, but also tooke vpon
him the infirmities of humane nature, so

farre foorth as they be without sinne: and
therefore he was subiect to hunger and
thirst.
            The causes wherefore our Sauiour Christ
was hungrie,VVhy Christ was hungry. are these: first, that he might

                  •
               hew himself to be true man, and that he had

                  •
               he infirmities of humane nature: and so we
see he would stop the mouthes of such as
should say, it was a small matter for him to
last so long being the sonne of God. But least
we should doubt of his manhood, he is here

                  •
               s we see touched with hunger, a true infirmitie
of mans nature.
            Secondly, he was thus hungrie, that by this
meanes he might cast vnto the diuell an ob
               
                  •
               ect
to worke on, and giue him occasion to
be more fierce in his assaults.
            
               Then came to him the Tempter,
               Verse 3. 
               and said.
Here begins the first combat betweene the
Diuel and Christ,The first combat. and in it we are to consider
three especiall points: First, the diuels preparation:
Then came to him the Tempter, and
said.
            
            
               Secondly, the temptation it selfe, in these
words: If thou be the Sonne of God, commaund
that these stones be made bread.
            Thirdly, the answer and repulse of Christ,
vers. 4.
            
               
In the preparation note, first the author,
the Tempter: secondly, the time, then: thirdly
the occasion of this temptation, namely, the
hunger of Christ: fourthly, the diuels coming
vnto Christ.
            The author is here intituled the Tempter,
               Satan vvhy a Tempter. s
                  •
               
1. Thess. 3. 5. and the cause why he is so called
is, because it is his desire, his studie and continuall
practise to tempt men, and to seeke as
much as he can, to draw men from God to
his kingdome: and to this purpose he sparet
                  •
               
no paines night and day, assaulting and tempting
men to bring them to destruction. He
goeth about as a roring Lion,1. Pet. 5. 8. seeking whom
he may deuoure.
            Well then, seeing we know it is the diuels
study night and day to tempt vs,Doctr. 1. it should
teach vs all, as we loue our soules, to watch
and pray continually, least we be led into
temptations, and so be ouercome of Satan.
            
                It is our dutie to seeke to be as vnlike the
Diuell as possibly we can, because he is the
patterne of al euill. Now we see it is the diuel
                  •
               
study to hinder men from the kingdome of
heauen, and so to bring them to hell: then o
                  •
               
the contrary, seeing he labours to draw me
                  •
               
from seruing of God, we should quicken vp our
selues in the seruice and worship of God▪
               
and to be more careful to seeke the kingdom
of God our selues, and to draw others to the
same.
            We must beware, that we be no meanes to
draw any from embracing of true religion,
and from the seruice and worship of God;
for if we do, we become euē diuels incarnate.
When Christ went vp to Ierusalem to performe
the worke of mans redemption, Peter
he begins to disswade him from it, and bids
him fauour himselfe:Mat. 16. 23 but Christ turneth him
backe, and saith, Get thee behind me Satan.
            2. The second thing is the time when the
Diuell sets vpon Christ,VVhen Satan assaults Christ. 
               Then, namely when
he perceiued Christ most weake, and as he
thought, not able to resist him. Herein appeareth
the pollicie of Satan, when he seeth
Christ most weake, the Diuell taketh occasion
to lay his strongest assaults. So then in the
example of Christ we may see the exceeding
pollicie of the Diuell in tempting of men,
namely, he maketh choise of the fittest time
to broach his temptations; for he marketh &
prieth into men and women, and when he
findeth vs most weake and most vnable to
resist him, then is he the most strong in tempting
vs, especially at the houre of death, and in
the time of afflictiōs, he bendeth the force of

his temptations against vs.
            Oh then,Vse. how should this admonish vs al to
prepare our selues against the day of afflictiō
               ▪
and the pangs of death; to be stedfast in the
faith, to make our calling and election sure
that so we may neuer finally fall away; and to
intreate the Lord that then when we seeme
to be most weake, he would aide and strengthen
vs by his holy spirit, to resist Satan
                  •
               
assaults.
            The third point in the diuels preparation,The occasion of Satans assault. i
                  •
               
the occasion wherby the diuel was especially
moued to tempt Christ, which was his hunger.
Such was Satans malice against the Lord
Iesus, that when he could find no sin in him▪
then he takes aduantage of Christs infirmity,
and seeing him now hungry, begins to tempt
him to vnlawful means to satisfie his hunger.
            Now then seeing the diuell takes occasion
to tempt Christ, euen from the infirmitie of
his humane nature, as he was man: hence we
learne whence the diuell hath the ground of
all his temptations, namely from our selues▪
and from our own nature, and we our selue
                  •
               
affoord him the matter of his temptations; h
                  •
               
brings the fire and bloweth it, but we affoord
him the fewell to set it a work. The diuell obserueth
the nature of men, their dispositions

inclinations and behauiours, and continually
prieth into their dealings, and like vnto a prudent
Captain, who besieging a citie, marketh
where it is most weake and of least resistance,
and there he bends all his forces, and placeth
his greatest ordinance, Euen so the diuel watcheth
vs and our behauiours, to obserue vnto
what sin we be most addicted, and by nature
most inclined, & then he followes our humor
and feeds vs in our owne vaine. As if a man
be impatient of pouertie, he will egge him to
stealing, and to vnlawfull shifts to helpe himself:
if a man be couetous, he wil help to prick
him forward that way, that he may by hook
or crooke inrich himselfe: and so in other sins
according as he finds men affected, he will fit
his temptations.
            Nay, the diuell is so skilfull by the experience
of so many hundred yeares, that he will
be prying into mens complexions, and the
very constitutious of their bodies; and finding
what humour doth most a bound, he can giue
a shrewd guesse, to what sinne a man is inclined.
As if he perceiue a man to be of a cholericke
complexion, then the diuell will stirre
him vp to quarrelling, fighting and killing.
If he find a mans complexion to be sanguine,
then he seeketh to allure him to be delighted

with vaine and vngodly mirth and wantonnes,
or at the least with immoderate mirth. 
                  〈◊〉
               
a man be subiect to melancholy, then he wil
                  •
               
feare a man with heauy & dumpish thoughts
and great feares and cares in his mind. And
thus he dealt with the poore man that wa
                  •
               
lunatick:Mat. 17. 15. for the Diuel tooke occasion by the
course of the Moone, and the humour of hi
                  •
               
bodie, to moue him to cast himselfe into the
fire and into the water. And in a word, look
                  •
               
how many infirmities & weaknesses we haue
we do as it were giue the diuel so many dar
                  •
               
to wound vs withall: for we giue him the
matter of all his temptations, and he taket
                  •
               
aduantage of our weaknesse and infirmities▪
            
            This being Satans cunning & his dealing▪
it must warne euery man to search his own
                  •
               
heart,Doctrine. to find what be his speciall infirmities
and corruptions, to which he is most pron
                  •
               
by nature: and when we know them, we mu
                  ••
               
labour against them, to represse and subdu
                  •
               
them; otherwise they will be so many dart
                  •
               
and weapons which Satan will turne against
our owne selues, to hurt and wound vs: and
therefore it must be our wisdome to weake
                  •
               
these infirmities, and to labour by all goo
                  •
               
meanes to preuent the Diuell in these hi
                  •
               
temptations.
            
               
The fourth point in the preparation of the
Diuell vnto his temptations,The fourth point of Satans preparation. is his coming
vnto Christ. And by this that it is said, the
Tempter came vnto him, it appeareth that he
came in some visible forme: as he did come to
Euah in the shape of a Serpent: so it is very
likely he came in some bodily shape to our
Sauiour Christ, seeing it is said here, that he
came and spake vnto him.
            
               If thou be the Sonne of God, &c.] The Diuel
hauing made this solemne preparation, and
hauing made choise of the fittest place and
time, and taken aduantage of the infirmitie
of our Sauiour Christ, now he sets vpon him,
and incounters Christ with his first temptation:
wherein the cunning Diuel disputeth like
a subtill Sophister, and disputeth very syllogistically;
and his syllogisme may be framed
thus: If thou be the Sonne of God, then thou
canst commaund that these stones be made
bread; but thou canst not make these stones
bread, therefore thou art not the son of God.
            The maine scope of the diuels disputation
in this his first temptation, was this, to bring
Christ to distrust of his Fathers prouidence,
to ouerturne the faith of Christ, that is, that
gift in Christ, whereby he as he was man did
beleeue in God his father, and depend vpon
him.
            
               
And in this dealing of the diuel with Christ,
we may behold what is the maine and principall
end of all Satans temptations in the
children of God, viz. he labors to bring vs if
it be possible, to this, to make shipwracke of
faith, whereby we beleeue the word of God
                  •
               
to be true: and thus he dealt with Euah. Gen. 
                     •
                  
               
he did labor to bring her to call Gods word
into question, and so to deny credence to it▪
And thus he dealeth with all men, seeking to
keepe them in ignorance and blindnesse, o
                  •
               
else in errors and wickednesse, that they may
not beleeue the truth of Gods word, and 
                  〈◊〉
               
performe obedience to it.
            The special part of the word of God which
the Diuell aymed at, and which he labored to
                  •
               
bring Christ to deny credit too, is that voice
of God the Father coming from heauen: This
is my beloued Sonne in whom I am well pleased.
               Mat. 3. 17.
            
            And here let vs see the practise of Satan against
all the faithful children of God; namely,
as he dealt with our Sauior Christ, to perswade
him if he could, that he was not th
                  •
               
Son of God: so he labours to perswade God
                  •
               
children that they are not the sonnes and
daughters of God: he labours to make m
                  •
               
doubt of their adoption.
            
               
And therefore seeing the Diuel aimeth at
this one thing especially,Vse. to ouerturne our
faith in Gods promises, it should stir vs all vp
to an earnest care to make our calling and
election sure,2. Pet. 1. 10. euen to haue it sealed vp by
comfortable assurance to our soules: and this
will be a most sweet comfort vnto vs in time
of affliction, if we can find this blessed and
setled perswasion, that we are the sonnes and
daughters of God. And the diuell he careth
not what men professe no though they haue
all the common gifts of Gods spirit, to heare
the word, to vnderstand, to giue assent vnto
it, so that they want this blessed assurance of
Gods speciall loue in Christ.
            Againe, in this first temptation the Diuell 
tempts Christ to practise a worke of vnbeleefe.
For now Christ wanting bread, the Diuell
tempts him in the absence and want of
bread, to make bread of stones, and so by vnlawfull
meanes to help himselfe. And as the
Diuell dealt here with Christ, seeking to
tempt him to practise a work of vnbeleefe: so
doth he deale with vs, to moue men and women
in time of distresse to vse bad and vnlawfull
shifts to helpe themselues. As in time
of pouerty and want, when men see not ordinary
means, such as they desire, he will tempt

them to shift for themselues, to filch and pilfer
from their neighbors, and to get bread by
bad meanes. In time of sicknesse, when men
cannot find help in the lawfull vse of phisick,
then he labours to draw them to seeke to the
diuell for helpe, by sending men to wise men
and women (as they call them) and so by wicked
meanes to seeke recouery of their health.
            
               If thou be the Sonne of God] What moued
the Diuell to moue this question vnto Christ
rather then any other?Question. 
               Ans. First,Ansvver. because the
Diuel knew right wel, that if Christ were the
Son of God, then he was that promised Messiah
and Sauiour of the world; and if he were
that promised Messiah, then he knew it was
he that should bruise the Serpents head,Gen. 3. 15. 
               Gen.
3. 15. Now of all things the Diuell could not
abide to heare of that, and therfore he makes
choise of this question before all other, to
proue, or at least to go about to proue, that
Christ was not the Sonne of God.
            
                Another reason may be this: since the diuel
                  •
               
fell, and for his pride was cast downe out of
heauen, he beares a deadly hatred against the
                  •
               
Lord God himselfe, and we shall see that 
                  〈◊〉
               
this question he doth notably bewray hi
                  •
               
spite against God: for when as the Lord ha
                  •
               
spoken from heauen, saying, This is my 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
beloued Sonne in whom I am well pleased: here
the Diuell comes and contradicts the voice
of God, nay, goeth about to proue God a lier,
in that he would make Christ beleeue
that he was not the true Sonne of God.
            Hence we may by this practise of Satan
learne to discerne false teachers.Vse. There haue
bene many both excellent and learned men,
which haue denied Christ to be the sonne of
God, as Ebeon, Cerinthus, and others, onely
affirming that Christ was an excellent man,
and a worthy Prophet. Now seeing they denie
Iesus Christ to be the true Son of God,
they shew themselues to be false teachers,
and such as be the diuels scholers, for so saith
the Apostle Iohn, 1. Iohn 4. 1, 2, 3.
            Again, in that the diuel seekes to perswade 
Christ that he is not the son of God, (though
God by his owne voice from heauen had immediatly
before proclaimed him to be his
Son:) hence we may perceiue the impudent
malice of Satan, who seeketh in all things to
contradict God himself. For if the Lord pronounce
a blessing vpon any man, the diuell he
wil presently pronounce cursing and damnation.
If God testifie to a mans soule that he is
the child of God, the Diuell he wil labour to
perswade him that he is not the child of God.

If the Lord affirme a wicked man to be out
of Gods fauor, and no child of God; the diuel
will labour on the contrary, to perswade him
that he is in good estate, & shal be saued, and
so fils his heart with extreme presumption, &
maketh him more bold then he ought to be.
            
               Commaund] That is, as if Satan should
haue said to Christ, Bid this, or do but speake
the word and it shall be done. And herein appeareth
the maruellous pollicy of Satan, who
in these few words (the better to bring his
purpose to passe) toucheth three especiall
points of Diuinitie: First, that he which is the
son of God, is true God equal to the Father,
which many heretickes haue denied, and the
Pharisies also did not graunt; for to worke a
miracle, it is the proper and peculiar work of
God alone. Secondly, the diuell confesseth,
that God is able to make all things of nothing,
and that without all meanes, matter or
helpers, by his almightie power. Thirdly, he
confesseth that God can effect a true miracle,
and that is proper to God alone, neither can
any creature whatsoeuer worke a miracle.
            Now when the diuel acknowledged al this,
one would haue thought he should haue intended
no harme in these words: but the
truth is, we shall see that in the propounding

of these points, his pollicy was to ouerthrow
the faith of Christ; and he in propounding of
the truth, doth it not for any loue or liking to
it, but that he might more easily deceiue our
Sauiour, to bring him to doubt whether he
was indeed that Sonne of God or not.
            This must admonish vs to take heed that
we do not alwayes giue credit to the diuel, &
listen vnto him though he speake the truth:
for such is Satans pollicie, that when he wold
seeme most to speake the truth, then he meaneth
to deceiue vs most; and by speaking the
truth, he seeketh most to ouerthrow our faith
in the truth. But as our sauiour Christ did refuse
their testimonie, though the diuels spake
the truth;Mar. 1. 24. 25. and as Paul did not suffer the Diuel
to speak in the maid,Act. 16. 17. 18. though he did acknowledge
the Apostles to be the seruants of the
true God: so we must beware how we listen
to Satan, euen when he speakes the truth; for
he neuer speakes the truth because he loueth
the truth, but that speaking the truth he
might be sooner beleeued, and more easily
deceiue vs, and do vs the greater harme.
            
               That these stones] S. Luke saith this stone,
               Luke. 4. 3. in
the singular nomber. To reconcile these two
places, whereas Mathew speaks in the plural
number of many stones, this we must vnderstand

that he speakes of Satans temptations,
as he first set vpon Christ, and then in the beginning
of his temptation, he bids Christ to
turne all these stones into bread. Luke, he saying
this stone, speaking but of one, must be
vnderstood as the Diuell vrged and inforced
his temptation, the better to perswade Christ
to yeeld vnto it: as if the Diuell should haue
said, It may be thou thinkest it too much to
turne all these stones (being so many) into
bread, do but turne this one stone into bread,
because I would not trouble thee ouermuch,
that so I may beleeue thou art the son of God.
            By this dealing of the diuel with Christ,Doctr. we
may learne, that when the diuell hath once
begun his temptation, then he will be more
instant in vrging of it, he is very loth to haue
the repulse, and therefore will vrge it and follow
it: but if he can gaine but a litle ground,
at least in some smaller matter, he would be
content; as here to perswade Christ, though
he would not turne many stones into bread,
that he would turne but this one stone into
bread. And therefore we must learne, that as
the diuell is very instant to inforce and vrge
his temptations, so we must be as instant to
resist them, and yeeld no not in the least matter
that he tempts vs to.
            
               
Vers. 4. But he answering, said, Man shall

                     •
                  ot liue by bread onely, but by euerie word that

                     •
                  roceedeth out of the mouth of God. These
words containe the most wise and heauenly

                  •
               nswer of our Sauior Christ to the first temptation
of the diuell; and in this answer of his,
note three points: first the answer it self, And
Iesus answering said: secondly, whence our Sauior
Christ took his answer, It is writtē: thirdly
the words of his answer, Man shal not liue, &c.
            
            First the Spirit of God sets downe the answer
of Christ, to shew that he was not onely
willing to incounter the Diuell, but that he
was most able to vanquish & foile the diuell.
            Now what a singular comfort is this to
Gods Church and children,Vse. to remember
that our Lord and Sauior Christ Iesus, was in

                  •
               his base estate of a seruant whē he liued here
vpon earth, able to incounter with Satan, to
ouercome the diuell, notwithstanding all his
might and malice! how much more is Iesus
Christ able now being aduanced vnto the
right hand of God his Father in heauen, hauing
all power and maiestie, and being King
of Kings, and Lord of all Lords, how much
more able is he now to confound Satan, & to
destroy al the works of the diuel in his members!
And this may be a great comfort vnto
euery beleeuer in the midst of temptations.
            
               
               It is written] Here we see whence our Sauior
Christ tooke his answer: though that 
                  〈◊〉
               
could haue confounded Satan by the lea
                  ••
               
word of his mouth, and could (if he had 
                  〈◊〉
               
pleased) called for many legions of Angel
                  •
               
from heauen to haue guarded him, being th
                  •
               
true and onely son of God: yet he mak
                  •
               
choise of this weapon, It is written. And th
                  •
               
he did to teach vs, that the most sufficien
                  •
               
weapon to beat back all Satans temptation
                  •
               
and to quench all the fierie darts of the diue
                  •
               
is the word of God written: & therefore 
                  〈◊〉
               
bids vs take vp the sword of the spirit, whi
                  •
               
is the word of God, both to defend our selu
                  ••
               
and also to put Satan to flight, Ephes. 6. 16.
            Hence from the example of Christ we ma
                  •
               
learne sundry instructions:Vse. 1. First, seeing th
                  •
               
he made choise of the word of God, as th
                  •
               
most sufficient weapon to repel Satan: it condemneth
that vaine and vile practise of th
                  •
               
Church of Rome, who instead of this, 
                  〈◊〉
               
into mens hands other weapons not wor
                  •
               
a rush, as holy water, the signe of the cross
                  •
               
&c. and affirmeth that these be sufficient we
                  •
               
               pons
to skarre away the Diuell. Alas, th
                  •
               
Diuell is not so childish to feare a drop 
                  〈◊〉
               
water, or the shaking of a straw: but our Sa
                  •
               iour
Christ shewes what is that which is ab
                  •••
               
               
               
                  〈◊〉
                a most sufficient weapon to beate back all

                  •
               atans temptations which he can hurle a
               
                  •
               ainst
vs. And therefore wicked is the pra
               
                  •
               tise
of the Papists, who locke vp the word of
God from the people, keeping it in an vn
               
                  •
               nowne
tong, and so betray the poore soules

                  •
               f the people into the hands of the Diuell.
            We see here the miserable estate of all such 
               
                  •
               en or women, which do either contemne

                  •
               r neglect the knowledge of the word of
God: they do wilfully betray themselues in
               
                  •
               o
the hands of the Diuell, lay themselues o
               
                  •
               en
as a prey vnto him: so as they hauing no

                  •
               eapon to defend themselues, nor to repell

                  •
               atan, thus he smites them & wounds them,

                  •
               ea euen cuts the throat of their poore soules

                  •
               efore they be aware.
            We may hēce gather what is the cause why 
               
                  •
               o many sins abound in euery place, namely,

                  •
               e vile and grosse ignorance of the word of
God, Hos. 4. 1. 3. The want of the knowledge
of the Gospell and the word of God, is the

                  •
               ery cause that sin so abounds in al places: for

                  •
               he word of God should be vnto vs as Sauls
               
                  •
               eare which he vsed to set at his beds head,

                  〈◊〉
                that if any enemy set vpō vs on the sodain,

                  •
               ur weapō might be euer at hand in readines

                  •
               hat we might answer the Diuel in his instruments

if he tempt vs to any sin whatsoeu
                  ••
               
that as here Christ said, It is written; so 
                  〈◊〉
               
must say, I may not lie, sweare, commit ad
                  ••
               
               tery,
&c. for it is written. &c.
            
                Seeing Christ by his own practise, teache
                  •
               
vs that the word of God written, beleeue
                  •
               
vnderstood, & truly applied, is the most al
                  •
               
and all-sufficient weapon to resist the diue
                  •
               
how ought this to stirre vp all men to serio
                  ••
               
studie of the word of God? How should
moue euery man as he loueth his soule, to 
                  ••
               
bor for a sound knowledge & vnderstanding
of the holy Scripture, seeing this is the b
                  •
               
weapon to foile the diuell? If we knew th
                  •
               
any man had vowed our death and sough
                  •
               
our liues, how careful wold we be to proui
                  •
               
the best weapons we could get, and also 
                  〈◊〉
               
learne how to handle them and to vse the
                  •
               
so as we might be able to defend our selue
                  •
               
when we meet with our enemy? Wel, we 
                  〈◊〉
               
not be ignorant that the diuell is the swo
                  ••
               
enemy of our soules, he lies in waite conti
                  ••
               
               ally
seeking our bloud: oh then if men 
                  〈◊〉
               
that care of their poore soules that they oug
                  ••
               
to haue, how prouident would it make the
                  •
               
to store themselues with this most sufficie
                  ••
               
weapon, euē the true knowledge of the w
                  ••
               
of God! and therfore it must moue all of v
                  •
               
               
               
                  •
               eare the word continually, to study it, to lay

                  •
               t vp in our hearts against the time of need,

                  •
               o resist the diuell when he assaults vs.
            It is lamentable to consider how poore ignorant
people deceiue them selues; they

                  •
               ooth themselues, and say, they defie the di
               
                  •
               uel,
they spit at him: but alas, what if two men
that be enemies meet together, the one well
appointed with weapons of death, the other
hauing nothing in his hand to defend himself,
but defies his enemy, spits at him; wil this
do him any good, will not the other wound
him and kil him? And so though poore ignorant
people say they defie the diuell, & spit at
him, he wil shew them no pity, but giue them
their deadly wound, and they shall neuer
know who hurt them till it be too late.
            Now follow the words of Christs answer:
Man shall not liue by bread onely, &c. This answer
of Christ is taken out of Deut. 8. 3. where
Moses shews the children of Israel, who were
now in great extremitie, pinched sore with
famine, and had nothing to eate, that the
Lord fed them with Manna, to teach them
that man liues not by bread only, but by euery
word that proceedeth out of the mouth
of God.
            
               Man shall not liue] That is, man shall not

preserue his naturall or temporall life in t
                  ••
               
world: I say his natural or temporal life, fo
                  •
               
is not meant of his spiritual life, by bread 
               
                  〈◊〉
               
that is, all things necessary for the naturall
                  •
               
of man, as meate, drinke, clothing, sleep, p
                  ••
               
sick, &c. euen all naturall and ordinary mea
                  •
               
vsed of man for his temporall life, is meant b
                  •
               
bread.
            
               But by euery word] He saith not in genera
                  •
               
by the word, but by euery word. Now 
                  〈◊〉
               
hath diuers acceptions in the scriptures: first
it is takē for the second person in the Trinity
Iohn. 1. 1. Secondly, for the word of God, Is
                     •
                  
40. 6. but neither of these is vnderstood i
                  •
               
this place. Thirdly, the word is taken for th
                  •
               
decree and wil of God, for his prouidence 
                  〈◊〉
               
the good wil & pleasure of God: and so m
                  ••
               
we vnderstand it in this place, where our sauiour
Christ saith, man shall liue by eue
                  ••
               
word, that is, euery decree and blessing o
                  •
               
God for the life of man: so it is taken Heb. 1. 3▪
               
where Christ is said to beare vp all things by
his mightie word, that is, as the Lord ha
                  •
               
created al things, so doth he vphold and preserue
them by his decree and prouidence.
            Now Gods word and decree concerning
the life of man, may thus be distinguished▪
namely, that God hath decreed that some

men should liue by bread, that is, by ordinary
meanes: secondly, some should liue without
ordinary bread, that is, without all ordinary
meanes: thirdly, that some should liue without
any means at al, either ordinary or extraordinary,
as Moses, Eliah, our Sauiour Christ,
in their fortie dayes fast: fourthly, that some
should liue against meanes, and contrary to
the course of nature, as Daniel in the Lions
den, & the three children in the fiery fornace.
            
               Which proceedeth out of the mouth of God:
That is, by euery decree of God, by euery
blessing & decree that God giueth out concerning
the life of man. So then we see the
meaning of the words.
            If any say,Question. It seemes we must liue onely by
the word of God, & without meate or drink,
euen by the scriptures and the written word.
I answer,Ansvver. No: but we must liue and preserue
our liues by euery word, that is, euery decree
that God giueth out to preserue the life of
man: so that without the speciall decree and
blessing of God, nothing could preserue and
maintain the life of man: our meat could not
norish vs, our apparel could not warm vs, &c.
            Now let vs see how this answer of Christ
is applied to the diuels temptation. The diuel
had labored to proue that Christ was not the

sonne of God, his argument was this: If th
                  ••
               
be the sonne of God, commaund that the
                  ••
               
stones be made bread; but thou canst no
                  •
               
make these stones bread, therefore thou 
                  〈◊〉
               
not the sonne of God.
            Our Sauior Christ doth alleage this plac
                  •
               
of Scripture, and doth deny the proposition
or first part of the diuels argumēt: for where
                  •
               as
the diuell takes this for graunted, that if 
                  •
               
man be hungry, he must haue bread by an
                  •
               
meanes to preserue his life: Christ answers, 
                  〈◊〉
               
is not necessary, because a mans life is no
                  •
               
preserued by bread onely, but it is maintained
by the special decree & blessing of God▪
And indeed this is a speciall point and wo
                  •
               
thy lesson to be learned, as may appeare i
                  •
               
that the Lord was no lesse then fortie yeares
teaching it to the children of Israel, Deu. 8. 3.
            The vse of this doctine is manifold:Doctr. first▪
hence we learne to consider aright of th
                  •
               
creatures of God, namely, that we do no
                  •
               
content our selues to looke vpon the substance
of them; but besides the outward substance,
we must consider the secret blessing o
                  •
               
God vpon his creatures proceeding from hi
                  •
               
word, that is his decree. As for example, 
                  〈◊〉
               
must not onely looke vpon the outward substance
of bread, but besides that, we m
                  ••
               
               
consider the blessing and decree of God, that
bread should be the meanes to nourish man:
for besides the bread, there is the staffe of
bread, that is, that power and facultie whereby
it nourisheth and maintaineth life,Ez
                     •
                  ch. 4. 16. which
it hath from the decree and blessing of God
vpon it. And as we see an old weake man,
take away his staffe and he wil soone fall to
the ground: euen so if the Lord take away
the staffe of bread, that is, his secret blessing,
though a man had all the dainties vnder
heauen, his life would faile in the midst of
thē all; for the weake life of man must needs
fal & decay, if once the Lord take away the
staffe of bread.
            For what reason is there, that bread which
hath no life in it, should nourish our bodies,
giue life & strēgth to vs: and that that which
hath no heate in it, as our clothes, should
keepe vs warme, were it not for Gods word
and decree, and his blessing vpon them? And
that we may know, that it is not so much
bread that preserueth mans life, as Gods
blessing vpon bread by vertue of his word
and decree, we may see it plainely, in that
the poore mans child which fareth hardly, &

                  •
               is but meanely clothed, is as well legged and

                  〈◊〉
               , and likes as well, euen as the child of

the Prince: now the reason is, because God
                  •
               
blessing is all in all vpon the poore fare of the
poore mans child, aswell as the Kings.
            2 Againe, seeing it is not so much bread,
as Gods blessing vpon bread, that preserueth
mans life, it should teach vs al sobriety in the
vse of Gods creatures: for neither meate, nor
drinke, nor clothing, can do vs good, vnlesse
the Lord send out his word and decree, and
giue a blessing vnto them, euen to euerie b
                  ••
               
of bread we put into our mouthes. Now if
we abuse the good creatures of God, in sur
               
                  •
               etting
and excesse, how can we looke that
the Lord should blesse them vnto vs? nay we
may rather feare he will curse them for our
abuse and intemperancie, so that they shall
hurt, yea choake vs rather then do vs good.
            3. We must learne from hence, to vse the
creatures of God with inuocation vpon his
name for a blessing vpon them; for seeing it
is not the substance of bread that nourisheth
vs, but the blessing of God vpon the bread▪
who seeth not, that we ought before we vse
the creatures of God, to craue a blessing 
                  〈◊〉
               
God vpon them?
            4. This should teach vs to be content with
our estate, to moderate our affections, and to
take heed we do not so eagerly desire & see
                  •
               
               
for abundance: for the blessing of God is riches
enough,Pro. 10. 22. & hath not these cutting cares
with it: & he which hath but a meane estate,
may be as wel blessed of God, as he that hath
the greatest abundance: nay this immoderate
seeking for abundance, it argueth great
distrust and vnbeleefe in the prouidence of
God.
            5. If mans life stands not in abundance,
and our life is not preserued by bread alone,
though a man had all the bread in the world,
vnlesse God infuse a blessing into it: this teacheth
vs, that we may not be so much intangled
with the things of this life: we must not
so eagerly seeke after meat, drinke, clothing,
lands, liuings, gold, siluer, &c. for in taking
too much care for these things, we see many
mens harts are so caried away, that no grace
can take place in them.
            But you will say,Obiection. meate, drinke, cloathing,
and such things, they be my liuing, I cannot
liue without them.Answer. I aunswer, that our
liues do not stand in these things alone, but
especially in the blessing of God vpon these
meanes: without which, though we had
all the world at commaund, it could doe
vs no good. Againe, the Lord can not
onely preserue our liues by bread, but euen

without all meanes, yea, if so it please him
against meanes. Now then seeing our liues
stand not in these meanes, but especially in
the blessing of God vpon them, we must first
seeke for the blessing of God, without the
which all these meanes shal become vnprofitable
vnto vs and do vs no good: and it is
not wisedome, too greedily to seeke for the
things of the world, seeing our life is not
preserued by them alone. Mans life standeth
not in abundance, saith Christ, Luk. 12.
            6 Seeing man liues not by bread alone,
that is, mans life is not maintained by these
outward meanes, but by Gods blessing vpon
them: this must teach vs all to be content
with that estate the Lord sends vs, though it
be poore and meane: and we must learne patience
in extreame miseries and afflictions.
And if the Lord should deal
                  •
                with vs as he
did with his seruant Iob, euē
               
                  〈◊〉
                all from vs,
yet we must be content, and take heed that
we do not suffer our selues to be swallowed
vp of too much griefe. For our life is not
maintained by these outward meanes of
themselues, but by Gods blessing vpon thē,
which is all in all: and when all meanes faile,
the Lord can preserue our life euen without
bread▪ and against meanes too, if he please▪
               
Indeed if a man wāted the outward meanes
and the inward meanes too, namely, Gods
blessing, then he had some cause to be
grieued: but seeing the Lord can saue our
liues both without all outward meanes, and
against meanes: though we want bread, yet
let vs cast our selues vpon the Lord, and neuer
distrust his mercie; but say with Iob:
Though the Lord kill me,
               Iob. 13. 15. 
               yet will I trust in him.
And let vs know, the Lord can increase the
poore womans cruse of oile,2. King. 4. and make it last
as well as the rich mans abundance,
            7 This should teach vs all to moderate
our affectiones, and to carrie an euen saile, so
as neither in the estate of wealth and abundance,
we be not puffed vp with pride: nor
yet in pouertie to be ouerwhelmed with
sorrow. For though a man haue abundance,
it followes not that he is therefore blessed;
nor if he be poore and want riches, that he is
therfore cursed, and wants the blessing of
God: but in wealth and pouertie, the blessing
of God is all in all to make men happie.
            8 Lastly, this should teach euery one of
vs to labour all our life long to know the
prouidence of God, and to depend vpon it
in all estates of life, whatsoeuer the Lord
shall send vs: and when we can see this prouidence

of God, we must then hang vpon it,
as well in aduersitie as prosperitie, in sicknes
and health, in life and death. True it is, men
can acknowledge Gods prouidence in prosperitie:
but we must learne to see the prouidence
of God aswell in aduersity, and then
to hang vpon it with both the hands of faith,Pro. 16. 3.
so as we can roule our selues vpon it, and can
euen wholly depend vpon it, and commit
our selues and all our waies to the Lord. The
children of Israel were fortie yeares learning
this lesson: which shewes it is an excellent
point, and not easily learned. And therefore
seeing it is of so great vse, and so necessarie,
let vs studie to know the prouidence of God,
and shew the true vse of it in our liues and
conuersations.
            
               Then the diuell tooke him into the holy citie,
&c.] Now followeth the second conflict betwixt
the diuell and Christ, in the 5. 6. 7. verses.
Now though S. Luke chap. 4. 9. placeth
this temptation in the last place, yet doth
this breede no great difference betwixt the
Euangelists: for Luke in pēning of the words
and deeds of Christ, sets them downe as the
Spirit of God directed him, not regarding
precisely the time when they were done, but
sometime setting that first which was done

last: but Mathew he sets thē down in order as
they were performed by our Sauiour Christ.
            
               Then the diuell tooke him, &c.] In this second
cōflict, we are to consider three points.
First, the diuels preparation to the combat,
vers. 5. Secondly, the temptation it selfe,
vers. 6. Thirdly, the answer of Christ, vers. 7.
            In the diuels preparation: first, the time,
then: secondly, the parts of his preparation,
which be two. First, he tooke Christ from the
wildernesse, and caried him to the holy citie.
Secondly, he setteth him there vpon a pinnacle
of the temple.
            First, in the circumstance of time, then: that 
is, as soone as Satan had taken a repulse and
was foiled of Christ in the wildernesse, he
presently setteth vpon him afresh, and caries
him to the holy citie to tempt him there.
            By this we may perceiue the malice of the
diuell,Doctr. who as soone as he hath ended one
temptation ceasseth not there, but presently
prouideth another. The diuell neuer maketh
truce with man, but either he is busie in tempting
of vs, or else he is deuising and plotting
new temptations; for he is neuer idle.
            Againe, hence we learne, that when we
haue ouercome in one temptation, we must
presently prepare our selues for another: we

must not look to be at ease when we haue
giuen the diuell the foile: for he will set vpon
vs afresh, and tempt vs againe and againe.
Nay, our life is a continuall warfare against
sinne and Satan: & therfore we must euer be
in a readines to encounter with our enemie.
            And if this lesson were well learned, and
as well practised, men would not be so impatient
in temptations when they befall thē:
then temptations would be farre more easie
to them, so as a man wold willingly and
chearefully indure them, & vndergo them
though neuer so many.
            
               The diuell tooke him to the holy citie: Here
is the first part of the diuels preparatiō. Now
by the holy citie is meant Ierusalem, as Luk.
4. 9. it is plaine.
            But how did the diuell carie our Sauiour
Christ from the wildernesse to Ierusalem?How Christ was caried by Satan. He
might do this three waies: first, in vision:
Secondly, by the ordinarie way: Thirdly, cary
him in the aire,
            First, by vision, as it was vsuall in the time
of the prophets.Ier. 13. 4. So Ieremiah was caried in
vision to the riuer Euphrates: but Christ
could not thus in vision be caried from the
wildernesse to Ierusalem; for then it should
haue bene no temptation vnto him in vision

onely to cast▪ himselfe from the top of the
temple.
            Secondly, our Sauiour Christ might be led 
by the ordinarie way, and so indeed the
words will beare it: but I take it, it is not the
sense and meaning of this place. For if the
diuell led our Sauior from the wildernesse to
Ierusalem, then either with or against his
will; either of his owne accord, or else at the
perswasion of the diuell. But he went not of
his owne accord: for seeing he was led into
the wildernesse, and came to be tempted
there, he now being in the conflict, and it being
not yet ended, he would not of his owne
accord depart thence to Ierusalē. Secondly,
he would not go at the perswasion of the
diuell: for we neuer reade that he would do
any thing at the diuels perswasion, though
in it selfe lawfull.
            Thirdly, the Diuell might conuey and carie 
the bodie of our Sauiour Christ in the aire,
from the wildernesse to Ierusalem: and this
is the opinion of the best Diuines, that the
diuell had power by Gods permission, to
transport the bodie of Christ in the aire, from
the wildernesse to the holy citie: and this
seemeth to be confirmed by the words
following, where it is said, that the diuell set

him on a pinnacle of the temple. Now it is as
likely that he caried Christ from the wildernesse
thither, as that the diuel had power to
place and set him on the top of the temple.
            Now then if the diuell had permission to
transport the bodie of Christ from the wildernesse
to Ierusalem:Doctr. 1. this makes for that
opinion which is common in the world, that
the diuell can carrie a man or woman from
one countrey to another, if God giue him
leaue: but so as he cannot do it with such
celeritie and expedition as men imagine.
Some foolishly thinke, he can carrie one
many hundred miles in an houre, which is a
thing impossible: for such a violent motion
would stop a mans breath; as we see if a man
fall from the toppe of an high steeple, his
wind is gone ere he come halfe the way to
the ground.
            
                Againe hence we see, that the diuell may
by Gods permission haue power ouer the
bodies of godly men, and those which haue
greatest graces, and strongest faith in God.
For seeing he had power ouer the bodie of
Christ, to transport it from place to place by
the permission of God, why may he not if
God giue him leaue, haue power of any mās
bodie, though he be neuer so true a beleeuer?

If he had power in the head, why not in the
mēbers? if he had power to annoy Iob, to kill
his childrē & destroy thē, though they were
no doubt the holy seruants of God, why may
not the diuell haue power ouer our bodies,
to carie a mā frō one place to another? If the
Diuell could by Gods permissiō tormēt the
bodie of one that was a daughter of faithfull
Abraham,
               Luk. 13. 10. and euen 18. yeares afflict her, so
as she was bruised and bowed together by
Satan; then no doubt he can do the lesse, to
remoue mens bodies from place to place.
            And this may serue to admonish those,Vse.
who thinke their faith is so strong, that the
diuel cannot annoy thē or any way bewitch
them. But if the diuell haue power by Gods
permission to torment the bodies of the
faithfull, yea to destroy the bodies of Iobs
childrē, who no doubt were the true seruants
of God, he may if God giue him leaue,
bewitch the godliest man that liueth. For
we know what the holy Ghost faith: that all
things fall out,Eccles. 9. 2. and all things come alike to
good and bad; and there is no difference in
outward things oftentimes betweene the
children of God and the wicked.
            
               To the holy citie] That is Ierusalem,Ierusalem citie holy.
               Luk. 4. 9. Now this citie was called holy for

sundrie causes. First, because in Ierusalem
was the temple of the Lord where were the
sacrifices and other ceremonies prescribe
                  •
               
by God for his own worship. Secondly, i
                  •
               
the temple they had the law of God and the
bookes of Moses and the Prophets read an
                  •
               
expounded vnto them. Thirdly, becaus
                  •
               
Ierusalem was a mother Church, frō whenc
                  •
               
religion did flow and was dispersed into
many places of the world. Now for these
considerations Ierusalem is called the holy
citie.
            This church at Ierusalem though it hao
many corruptions in it,Vse 1. yet our Sauiour
Christ cals it holy: and it was a true Church
of God. Then hence I conclude, that the
Church of God in England, though there be
in it many blemishes & corruptions, yet
may it be, and in truth is the true Church
of God. For the Church of God in England
is proprotionable to the Church at Ierusalē
for as they had Moses and the Prophets
read and expounded, so haue we: nay, we
haue the Gospell now soundly preached▪
which they then had not in so plaine and
plentifull manner as we haue. They had the
Sacraments of the old Testament: so we
haue Baptisme and the Supper of the Lord.

Their Church was a mother church to
deriue Religion to many other: and though
our Church cannot be called a Mother
church, yet it may be truly called a nourcing
Church to many neighbour churches round
about vs.
            As Christ and his Apostles did not therfore
separate themselues, or refuse to ioyne 
with them in the seruice of God, because of
the corruptions in this church at Ierusalem,
but did teach and preach in the Temple: so
none may therefore separate themselues,
and refuse to ioyne with the people of God
in his seruice and worship, because of some
few corruptions that remaine in it. Nay, such
as for these do separate themselues from
Gods people, do cut themselues from Christ
himselfe, seeing they seuer themselues from
the Church of God.
            If any shall say, that the church of Rome
is the true Church of God, as well as the
Church of Ierusalem, seeing the Romish
church hath as many priuiledges as the
Church at Ierusalem; I answer, By examining
the particulars it will appeare to the
contrarie.Rome no true church. As first, the Church of Rome
braggeth, that she hath her succession from
the Apostles: but I answer, succession from

persons, without succession in the Apostles
doctrine, can be no true note of the Church.
Secondly, the Church of Rome hath the
sacrament of Baptisme, yet that proues he
                  •
               
not the true Church: for in Samaria they had
the Sacrament of circumcision, and so in
other places, and yet it cannot be proued
that they were the true Churches of God.
Besides, I answer, the church of Rome hath
baptisme no otherwise then a theefe hath a
true mans purse: now it cannot be said, that
a theefe is therefore a true man, because he
hath a true mans purse. Lastly, though the
Church of Rome haue the outward baptisme,
yet she in doctrine ouerturnes the
inward baptisme: namely, the true imputed
iustification and inherent sanctification of
Christ by the spirit.
            3 The Church of Rome holdeth the
Apostles Creed, but it is onely in word: for
the truth is, their God whome they worship
is an Idoll, and their Christ is a false & counterfeit
Christ, forged by their owne braine,
as may appeare to all that will search their
doctrine.
            4 She saith, that they hold the word of
God, and the writings of the Apostles: but it
will appeare in their writings, that they hold

it but in shew, not in truth: for in the maine
grounds of religion they ouerturne the
doctrine of the Prophets & Apostles. Againe,
they hold the Scriptures but as a lanthorn
holds the candle, not for it selfe, but for those
that passe by: so the Church of Rome haue
the word of God, not for themselues, but for
the good of Gods children, which euer lye
hid in the middest of Poperie.
            5 She brags that she is the mother-church
of many Churches: I answer; we
must consider that citie, as Rome is, and as
Rome was: the old Rome which was in the
time of Paul, was the true Church of God;
but as for that old Rome, it is dead and
buried, and this new Rome is that whore of
Babylon, & no mother-church, but a cruell
step-mother to Religion. By al this we may
see, that the present church of Rome, is no
Church of God, but onely in name and
outward shew.
            And seeing that the Diuell tempts our
Sauiour Christ in the holy citie, we learne
that there is no place so holy; but the Diuell
can broach his temptations in it, as we may
see Zach. 3. 1. 2. and therfore this condemnes
that dotage and sorcery of the Church
of Rome, who teach that their charmed

holy water, their coniured bread, and the
signe of the crosse, and such stuffe can driue
away the Diuel from their houses, and from
their persons: and yet we see here, that
neither the holinesse of Christs person, nor
yet of the place, could hinder Satan, but he
did tempt him
            Againe, we see it is to small purpose, to
the ende wee may bee freed from temptations,
to change the place, or to change the
aire; for what place is there so holy, or so
sound and wholesome, where Satan cannot
and will not set his temptation on foote and
assault vs? Indeed to remoue the diseases of
the body, these may be of some force, to
change the ayre, &c. but to cure the conscience,
and to help the diseases of the soule,
this and such like can do nothing at all.
            
               And set him on a pinnacle of the temple.]
Here is the second part of the Diuels preparat
                  •
               on,
who hauing caried Christ from the
wildernes to Ierusalē, now he placeth him
vpon a pinnacle of the temple, or a litle wing
of the tēple. Some think that it was a sharpe
broach gilded to some especiall vse: but it is
either the battlements which were made by
Gods commaundement, least any should
fall, because their houses had flat roofes, o
                  •
               
               
else some corner of the temple; howsoeuer,
it was a dangerous place.
            
               If thou be the sonne of God, cast thy selfe
downe, &c.] In this verse is set downe the
second temptation, and in a syllogisme it
may be thus concluded▪ If thou be the sonne
of God, then cast thy selfe downe: but thou
sayest, and art perswaded that thou art the
sonne of God, therefore thou mayest cast
thy selfe downe.
            Here we must marke the scope of the
Diuell in this second temptation, which is
this, to tempt our sauiour Christ to presumption,
to perswade him to presume of Gods
mercy, and to bring him to a vaine confidence
in his fathers protection, without
vsing lawfull meanes.
            And in this second temptation we may
obserue one especial thing,Doctr. which the Diuel
aimes at in his temptations, namely, to perswade
him to a vaine presumption of Gods
mercy. And surely we see the diuel preuails
much in these days by this argument: for we
see how some men crie, God is mercifull,
God is mercifull, and so presume & grow
secure in sinne, and take occasion of Gods
mercie to sooth themselues in their sins.
Others, they say, I am either elected or reiected,

and if I be elected, I am sure I shal
be saued howsoeuer I liue; if I be reiected
I am sure I shall perish, though I liue neuer
so well: and thus men liue as they list. Others
say, I know the Lord will prouide for me,
and therefore refuse to liue in any calling.
And as for those which make profession of
the Gospell, the Diuell he labours to perswade
them, that it is sufficient to professe
religion, though they practise not the duties
of religion: as the fiue foolish virgines,
who held out their blazing lampes, yet
wanted the vessel of oile to maintaine their
lampes.
            This being so,Vse. it should admonish vs al to
take especiall heed, that we be not ouer com
                  •
               
of Satan in this kind, seeing the Diuell knowes
our nature, and seeth that to presume
and thinke well of our selues, it is a thing
very fitting and pleasing our nature: whereas
despaire, it is a troublesome thing, and
brings men often to a greater sight of their
misery: and the truth is, the Diuell preuailes
with a thousand to one more by presumption
then by despaire: despaire kils thousands,
securitie ten thousands.
            And it is to be noted, that when the
Diuell had in the former temptation laboured

to bring Christ to despaire of his
Fathers prouidence, now he labours the
cleane contrary, to bring him to presume
of Gods prouidence. And here we may see
the Diuels exceeding cūning, that he fought
to cary our Sauiour Christ from one extreame
to another. And thus doth the Diuell
deale with all men, he seeks to draw men
either to presumption or else to despaire,
and labors to cary them from one extreame
to another, as from couetousnes to prodigalitie,
and so of the rest. And therefore we
must labour to auoide both the extreames,Vse.
neither to presume too much, nor yet to be
cast downe by despaire, but to keepe the
golden mediocritie, euen as Christ doth in
this place.
            
               Cast thy selfe downe.] He would haue
Christ not to shew by his doctrine, but to
worke a miracle, that he may know him to
be the son of God. This shewes the nature of
all wicked men; they care not for the
doctrine of God, but they crie out for miracles:
as we may see in Herod, he desired to see
our Sauiour Christ worke some miracle, but
he contemned his word and doctrine. And
the Iewes who persecuted Christ and his
Gospel, yet when he was vpon the crosse,

they would haue him worke a miracle, to
come downe when he was nailed hand and
foote. And all wicked men are of the same
nature, more to regard and desire a miracle,
then to heare the blessed doctrine of Iesus
Christ.
            
               Cast thy selfe downe] The Diuel hauing
proued before the faith of Christ to be most
cōstant, that he would not so much as doubt
of his fathers prouidence in his greatest
need, now he takes occasion from the graces
and gifts of Christ to bring him to presume,
and to haue a vain confidence of his fathers
protection. And so wil the Diuel deale with
all the members of Christ; if he cannot preuaile
by our weaknesses to bring vs to despaire,
then he wil take occasiō by the graces
and gifts he sees in vs, to make vs presume: as
often he preuailes by this meanes to make
men swell and thinke highly of themselues
for some grace they haue receiued, of
learning, wit, eloquence, &c. to puffe men vp
with satanicall pride and ouerweening o
                  •
               
themselues.
            
               Then cast thy selfe downe.] The Lord gaue
the Diuel permission to place Christ in a
dangerous place: but yet the Diuell coul
                  •
               
not go any further to hurt Christ there; 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
cast him downe he had no power, but perswades
him to cast himselfe downe. Where
we see, the Diuels power is limited, his power
is not so great as his malice is to mankind;
but the Lord doth limit Satans power, and
in all things hath care of his owne children,
that Satan can do them no harme. For the
Diuel, though he had set Christ vpon the top
of the temple, could not for his life cast him
downe; where we may see, the Diuell for all
his malice can go no further then God giues
him leaue. And this must comfort vs: for
as God the Father limits Satan in respect
of Christ our head, so doth he in vs his
members.
            Now followes the reason which the Diuel
vseth, the better to perswade Christ to yeeld
vnto his temptation: For it is written, he shall
giue his Angels charge ouer thee. When as the
Diuell heard our Sauiour Christ alleage
Scripture; he like an ape imitates Christ, and
begins to alleage Scripture roundly as wel
as he.Doctr. And therfore we must be wary how we
entertaine doctrines of heretikes, and false
teachers, though they seeme to proue them
by the Scriptures: for the Diuel he hath his
scriptum est, it is written, as ready as may be.
But we must learne to proue the spirits, that

is, the doctrines of men, whether they be of
God or not, 1. Iohn 4. 1. lest the Diuel and
wicked men deceiue vs; for we see here how
the Diuel can alleage Scripture, and that
fitly for his purpose. And it is the subtil
practise of the diuel to alleage Scripture,
that so he may perswade men to receiue his
damnable doctrines, and become heretickes
and scismatickes. And to this end he doth
grosly abuse the Scriptures; yea when he
would perswade men to liue in sinne, he
hath his, Scriptum est, very ready, and can tel
them, At what time soeuer a sinner doth repent
him of his sinne, he shall haue mercie: and truly
by his abusing of Scripture he preuailes
with many.
            The wordes which the diuell alleageth
are taken out of the fourescore and eleuenth
Psalme, the eleuenth verse: For he shall giue
his Angels charge ouer thee, to keepe thee in all
thy wayes, &c. Now the Diuell in alleaging
and propounding the words is very precise,
and sheweth himselfe very carefull in repeating
of the words: in so much as he will not
leaue out no not this particle [For] which
might well haue bene left out. Yet in the
end he stickes not to leaue out a whole
clause, which is the maine point and ground

of Gods promise: namely, this: to keepe thee
in all thy wayes. Where we may see, how
the diuell doth most vil
                  •
               ly abuse the Scriptures
of God: and it is vsuall with him in
his allegations, to put in, or to put out
something, or some way or other to depraue
them, or to corrupt the sense and
meaning of the Scriptures, to serue his owne
turne.
            And as this is the diuels manner in his
alleaging and dealing with the Scriptures,
so do the Papists as his scholers. For though
in word they hold the Scriptures, yet it is
vsuall with them to put in, or leaue out, or
by some meanes to corrupt and depraue thē
in the sense and meaning, as might be shewed
by example.
            Well, seeing the diuell is so skilfull in the
Scriptures, and can alleage them so readily
and so fitly for his purpose, and withall is so
malicious to mince them and depraue them,
it should make all men to studie the holy
Scriptures, that so we might be acquainted
with them, and be able to disclose and
to descry Satans fallations and subtilties:
and we should wish with Moses,
               Nu
                     •
                   11. 29 that all
the Lords people could prophecie. But
especially the Ministers of the word, they

must labour to be thorowly acquainted with
the booke of God, to obserue euen the circumstances
of the text, else the diuell will
cast a mist before their eyes, and beguile
them with his subtill fallations: and therefore
they must do as Ezechiel did, eate vp the
book of God.
            And that we might not perceiue Satans
subtilties and deceit, he labours to keepe
men in ignorance of the word, and by all
meanes to haue the Scriptures hid and
darke: and if it were possible, to root out the
schooles of learning, and that the Bible
might be burned. And as he preuailes in
Poperie, to bring men to this, that all religion,
and the Scriptures might hang on
mens deuises and mans learning, as they do
in Poperie ground all vpon Lumbard the
maister of the Sentences, and barre the
common people from the Scriptures, locking
them vp in an vnknowne tong: so with
Christians he taketh the like course, for he
perswades them, that the Scriptures are hard
to be vnderstood, and very obscure and
troublesome, and therfore he drawes men
                  •
               
minds from the studie of them, to reade the
writings of men, because they seeme to be
more pleasant and delectable; that so 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
being not acquainted with the text, might
not descrie his deceipts and subtilties.
            Againe,Doctr. seeing the diuell can alleage the
word of God and say, It is written, and that
he can bring in Scripture fit for his purpose;
what a shame is it for Christians, if they do
not labor so to know the Scriptures of God,
that they may alleage them as occasion shall
serue: & that not as some do, to heape place
vpon place without all reason, but to alleage
them fitly and to the purpose?
            Lastly, seeing this is a diuellish and satanicall 
practise, in alleaging the Scriptures to
depraue and corrupt them, to leaue out and
put in at his pleasure, it must warne vs, that
when we are lawfully called, we do speake
and vtter the words of other men, euen all,
& no more but all, neither putting to them
nor taking from thē, and that without changing
their words or the sense and meaning
of them.
            
               He shall giue his Angels charge ouer thee]
The true sense of the place is this, that the
Lore had a speciall care of his people; and
when he sent any iudgement vpon the Israelites,
he gaue them this comfortable promise,
that in the middest of all their troubles
he himselfe would protect them. And as this

promise was made to them, so it is generall
to the whole Church of God, and belongs to
vs. For in all common iudgements and calamities,
the children of God which walke in
his waies, shal be sure to haue protection and
securitie: for the Angels of God, by his appointment,
do hold them vp, as it were in
their hands. In which words there is a comparison
taken from nurses, who hauing children
committed to their care, do hold them
very charily and tenderly in their hands, and
dare not let them go out of their armes: euen
so the Angels of God by his appointment▪
become euen as nurses to his children in all
their lawful wayes,Vse 3. Psal. 34. 7. and do attend vpō them,
and are very carefull to protect them from
danger, so long as they keepe themselues
within the compasse of Gods word.
            It is true indeed, that iudgement begins at
the house of God, and he often afflicts his
dearest children to trie their faith and patience,
yet is is most certaine, that in commō
calamities the children of God shall haue
protection and security: yea the Angels of
God (as it were nurses) shal hold them in
their hands, and defend them, so long as they
keepe themselues in the wayes of God, and
within the compasse of his will in his word▪
               
But if they leaue the way of Gods commandements,
and wāder in by-paths, and go out
of their lawfull callings, they haue no assurāce
of Gods protection, neither haue Gods Angels
any charge to watch ouer them,
            Seeing then God hath made so mercifull a
promise of protection, to all them that walke
in his wayes, and within the compasse of his
commaundements, it should warne vs all to
beware how we go out of our wayes and
lawfull callings, but that we studie the law
of God, and as we looke for his protection,
to keepe within the compasse of it.
            
               Iesus said vnto him,
               Verse 7. 
               It is written againe, Thou
shalt not tempt the Lord thy God.] In these
words is cōtained the answer of our Sauiour
Christ, to the second temptation of the Diuell;
wherein he doth oppose Scripture against
Scripture. But to expound that place
which the Diuell alleaged, and to shew how
vilely Satan abuseth the word of God, he
alleageth another place of Scripture, wherein
our Sauiour Christ answers the Diuell,
that it is true, God hath made sundry promises
in his word, of protectiō to his people,
but yet so, as if they refuse to walke in the cō
               mandements
of God, and to vse such lawfull
meanes as he prescribeth in his word, he is

not bound to perfome them, for they be
made vpon that condition,
            
               Againe it is written,] Seeing our Sauior
Christ doth alleage another place of Scripture,
to expound that the Diuel brought
against him, and to shew how he abused
Scripture: hence we gather, that the holy
Scriptures are of themselues sufficient to
interprete themselues,Doctr. for so Christ alleageth
another text of scripture to expound
that which Satan alleageth, and to confute
his abusing of it.Nehe. 8. 8. So we find that Ezra did
expound the law of God, and giues the sense
of it by the scriptures, and so expounds the
one by the other, Nehem. 8. 9. (Iunius.) Now
if the seruants of God could do this in the
old Testament, how much more may we in
the new, wherein many things are most
plainely opened and expounded by Christ
and his Apostles?
            But the Papists cannot by any meanes
yeeld to this doctrin, for they hold, that that
which must interprete the scriptures, must
haue iudiciall power and authoritie to iudge
of the sense of the scriptures; but they hold
the scriptures are but a dumbe letter, and
therefore are not able to iudge of the sense
ād meaning of the scriptures. Yet for all that▪
               
we see (by the example of our sauior Christ)
that the scriptures are of sufficient power to
giue the sense of the scriptures, to interprete
thēselues, and to shew what is the true sense
of the scriptures, though they be dumbe.
And as we see, that a mā may aswel shew his
mind to his friend by letters and writing, as
by word of mouth: euen so the Lord God
speakes now to his people by the scriptures,
as well as he did in olde time by his owne
liuely voice from heauen.
            But if the Papists will yet deny the scriptures
to haue power to iudge and determine
of the sense of the Scriptures; then would I
know, who hath this power giuen vnto him?
They answer, the church must giue iudgement,
and determine of the sense of the scriptures:
but that is false, for the Lord hath not
giuen any such power to the Church, to
determine of the sense of the scriptures at
her pleasure, but only he hath giuen to the
ministery of the word, to open and expound
the scriptures by the scriptures thēselues. As
a Lawyer hath not that power to iudge of the
law of his Prince, and to giue what sense he
listeth, but onely to expound the law, and to
giue the sense of it by the words of the law,
and other circumstances cōcerning the same.
            
               
The Church of Rome say further; they 
                  〈◊〉
               
determine of the sense of the scriptures, either
by the rule of faith, or the consent of the
fathers: or, if they faile, then the Pope he is 
                  〈◊〉
               
determine of them, as one that cannot erre.
            1 Concerning the rule of Faith (by which
they vnderstand vnwritten traditions) how
can they be fit iudges to determine of the
sence of the scriptures, vnlesse we will gi
                  •
               e
more authoritie to vnwritten verities then
to the written word of God? Nay onely the
scriptures must be the rule of faith, and only
the scriptures iudge and determine of the
sense of themselues.
            2 Neither is the consent of Fathers a sufficient
rule to giue iudgement, and to determine
of the sense of the scriptures: for we
know that they being men, and many of thē
(hauing not the knowledge of Hebrew and
Greeke, yea and most of all in expounding
the word) are subiect to error, and sometimes
do erre. And by the same reason the Pope is
no meete man to be the iudge of the scriptures,
and to determine what should be the
sense of thē, seeing he is subiect to manifold
errors, and many Popes haue erred in the
foundations of Religion.
            Now follow the words of Christs answer,

taken out of Deut. 6. 16. Thou shalt not tempt
the Lord thy God. First we must search what
this word, to tempt, signifies: secondly, the
maner how God is said to be tēpted: thirdly
the cause and root of this tempting of God.
            First,VVhat it i
                     •
                   to tempt God. To tempt God, is to proue or to
make trial whether God be such a one as the
scriptures report him to be: namely, whether
he be so iust, so mercifull, so mightie as the
word of God describes him to be. So the
Propet Dauid expounds it, Psal. 95. 9. Your
fathers tempted me, and proued me in the desert.
Where to tempt, is to proue Gods iustice
and mercie, whether he were so iust and
mercifull as the word sets him out to be, and
as he promised to be.
            Secondly, for the manner, it is not simply
to tempt and to make triall of God, but to
tempt God, is to make needlesse triall of
Gods power &c. when we haue no cause to
try the Lord: and so it is taken here in the
words of Christ, Thou shalt not tempt, that is,
thou shalt not take needlesse and vnnecessarie
experience and triall of Gods power
and goodnesse.
            Thirdly, the cause which moueth men to
tempt God, is a distrustfull and vnbeleeuing
heart, euē want of faith. So the Israelites tēpted

God, Psal. 78. ver. 18. 22. They tempted
God in their hearts, and required meate for
their lust. And the reason is, vers. 22. because
they did not beleeue in God, and did not
trust in his helpe, because they did not relye
vpon his care and fatherly prouidēce: so that
vnbeleefe was the roote of this their tempting
of God.
            So then to tempt God, is to make needlesse
and vnnecessarie triall and experience of his
mercie, goodnesse, power and iustice, proceeding
from a distrusting heart.
            Now God may be tempted fiue maner of
wayes.Hovv God is tempted. First, when men will take vpon them
to appoint God the time when, the place
where, and the maner how God must helpe
them, and accomplish his promise to them.
Thus the Israelites in the wildernes wanting
water,Exod. 17. 7. they say: Is the Lord amongst it vs or no
                     •
                  
               
shewing, that through the Lord had promised
he would be with them, yet vnlesse he
would at that time giue them water in their
need, they would not giue credit to his promise.
Againe, Psal. 78. 
                     •
                  0 though the Lord
had giuen them water, yet they say: Can he
giue bread also, or prepare flesh for his people
                     •
                  
               
still shewing, that vnlesse the Lord would at
their pleasures, & now presently send them

meate, they were readie to distrust his prouidence.
            And therefore it must admonish vs,Vs
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                that
we must not in our requests and petitions (as
the Bethulianes did) appoint God the time,Iudith. 7. 30
place, or meanes how we would be helped
in pouertie, sicknesse, or other waies; but cō
               tinuing
in prayer, waite vpon the Lords leysure,
and leaue these circumstances to his
good will and pleasure.
            Secondly, God is tempted, when men will
not beleeue his word, but do demaund signes
and wonders from heauen, as the Scribes and
Pharises did (Ioh. 2. 18.) tempt our Sauiour
Christ, not beleeuing his doctrine, vnlesse he
would confirme it by some miracle. And
thus all they tempt God, who refuse to beleeue
the doctrine of God, because it is not
confirmed vnto them at their pleasure by
signes and wonders.
            But some may say:Obiection. What, is it not lawfull
thē to demaund and require a signe at Gods
hands?Answer. Yes we may sometimes: and so we
reade that Gedeon did require a signe of God
and sinned not:Iud. 6. 36. 37. so did Hezechiah. 2.
King. 20. 8.
            In two cases men may aske a signe of
the Lord. First, when the Lord giues a man

commaundement to aske a signe, then we
may aske it lawfully: and thus the Lord bid
                  •
               
               Achaz to ask a signe,Isai. 7. 11. 12. and he sinned in refusing
to do it.
            Secondly, a man may aske a signe of God,
when it is necessarie for the confirmation of
a man in some extraordinarie calling: as we
see in Gedeon being extraordinarily appointed
of God to be the Captaine and deliuerer
of Gods people; he being not fully perswaded
of this his vocation, desired a signe of
God, not of infidelitie, but the better to resolue
himselfe of Gods calling him to that
busines. And so it was in Hezechiah, to perswade
himselfe of Gods extraordinarie deliuerance
from an extraordinarie di
                  •
               ease.
            The third way whereby men tempt God▪
is when men liue in sinne continually without
repentance, and so will trie Gods mercie:
and thus the Israelites tempted God,
Num. 14. 18. And so all those which liue in

                  •
               inne from day to day without repentance,
do indeed tempt God and abuse his patience,
Mal. 3. 15.
            And therefore seeing that this is euen to
tempt God,Vse. to liue in sinne without repentance,
it must stirre vs vp all to take heed how
we runne on in sinne: but that we do wi
                  ••
               
               
speed repent and breake off the course of
our sins: for so long as we liue in sinne without
repentance, we tempt God, and then we
can promise no safetie to our selues, neither
looke for the protection of Gods Angels,
but ly euen naked to all Gods heauie iudgements.
            The fourth manner of tempting God, is 
to inioyne men the obseruations of the ceremoniall
lawe, as it appeareth Ast. 15. 10. the
Iewes are said to tempt God, in that they
vrged the obseruation of the ceremonies of
Moses.
            
            And by this we may iudge of the present
estate of the Church of Rome, and of their
religion; which stands for the most part in
vaine and superstitious ceremonies; and that
which is worse, of Iudaisme and Gentilisme.
            The last way how men tempt God, is, not
to vse the lawfull & ordinarie means which
God hath appointed, either concerning
mens soules, or concerning their bodies:
and this is here vnderstood in this place,
when Christ saith: Thou shalt not tempt the
Lord thy God. When we shal refuse such lawfull
and ordinarie meanes as the Lord hath
appointed, and vse extraordinarie; euen

as a man hauing a readie way ouer a bridge,
should leaue that, and thrust himselfe into
the water, what were this but to tempt God?
Or when a man hath the ordinarie way to
come downe by the steppes or staires, and
refusing that shold cast himselfe downe from
the top of a steeple? So those men who contemne
the word of God, and will not vouchsafe
to heare, what do they else but euen
tempt God; seeing they refuse the preaching
of the word, which is the ordinarie meanes
to saue mens soules?
            And thus Satan tempted our Sauiour
Christ to tempt God. For hauing now set
him on the toppe of the temple, in a dangerous
place, he perswades him to cast himselfe
downe: and he addeth, that he may be bold
to do so, because God hath giuen his Angels
charge to looke vnto him, that he take no
harme. But our Sauiour Christ answers him;
That were to tempt God, seeing he had the
lawfull and ordinary way to go downe by
the staires, and therefore he had no reason to
cast himselfe downe.
            In a word, all those tempt God, which
either refuse the ordinary meanes God hath
appointed, or do wilfully cast themselues into
daunger, being not called thereunto of

God: as Peter hauing no calling of God,
went and thrust himselfe into Caiphas hall, to
see what became of his maister: & the three
Worthies which ventured through the
hoast of the Philistims to fetch water at the
well of Bethell for Dauid, whereas he might
haue had it without danger at home.
            Here some may aske, What we are to
iudge of those which vse to walke on ropes
on high places, and on the toppe of houses:
whether do such men sin or not? Ans. These
men do so either with a calling or without a
calling, Such as do it by vertue of their lawfull
calling, as Mosons and such as build
churches and houses, and so by reason of
their trades work on high places, cannot be
said to tempt God: nay rather so long as they
walke faithfully in their lawfull callings, they
may assure themselues of Gods blessing and
his protection.
            But as for those who to shew their agilitie;
and to make sport, walke on ropes, or
runne vpon the roofe of houses, these men
hauing no calling from God so to do, they
cannot looke for Gods protection; nay, they
in so doing tempt God, casting themselues
vpon daunger. And our Sauiour Christ
might a thousand times better haue done

this which Satan wold haue him here to do
                  •
               
yet would he not put himselfe into needlesse
daunger, lest he should tempt God; much
lesse ought any man else aduenture to do it.
            And in this, that our Sauiour Christ vseth
the ordinarie way, euen the staires, we may
learne, that if any man looke to haue Gods
protection and blessing, he must also make
sure to vse the lawfull and ordinarie meanes
appointed of God, & keepe himselfe within
the compasse of his calling: yea if we desire
to find comfort in any of Gods gracious
promises, we must be wary to keepe our
selues within the compasse of his commaundements:
but if we leaue them, then we find
no true comfort, neither haue we any promise
of protection from God. But so long as
we walke in obedience of Gods commaundements,
and within the compasse of our
callings, we haue this blessed promise from
God, that his Angels shall take the care of
vs, to guard and to defend vs.
            
               Againe,
               Verse. 8. 
               the diuell taketh him into an exceeding
high mountaine.] In the seuen verses
going before, we haue heard of the two first
temptations of our sauior Christ; now followeth
the third. In this third temptation we
are to consider againe three especial points

first, the preparation of the Diuel, ver. 8. Secondly,
the temptatiō it selfe, ver. 9. Thirdly,
Christ his answer, ver. 10.
            And first of all seeing the Diuell doth thus
arme himselfe,Doct. and comes prepared three
times, in three seuerall temptations, it should
teach vs all on our parts to prepare our selues
continually, and to be ready to resist his
temptations.
            In the Diuels preparation note two parts:
first, he taketh him to an exceeding high
monntaine: secondly, he shewes him all the
kingdomes of the world, and the glorie of
them.
            But how could the Diuel cary our Sauiour
Christ to this high mountaine?Obiection. I answer,Answer. he
might do it two wayes: first, by vision: secondly,
by reall transporting of his body from
Ierusalem to this mountaine. Some thinke
that this was onely in visiō: but I rather thinke
our Sauiour Christ was caried locally and
really; for our Sauiour Christ his temptations
are not imaginary, but true and reall
temptations; and the words import no lesse,
but that he was really and locally transported
from the citie to the mountaine.
            The reasons why the Diuell caried our
Sauiour Christ to the mountaine, are these:

First, because the Diuell in all things desire
                  •
               
to imitate God, and to become as it were
Gods ape. Now we reade, that the Lord caried
Moses to the mount Nebo,Deut. 34. 1. to shew him
all the land of Canaan; so the Diuell to imitate
God, and by imitating God, to match
him, and so to disgrace the Lord, carieth our
Sauior Christ to the mountaine, as it is likely,
to imitate Gods dealing with Moses.
            
            Secondly, the Diuell caried our Sauiour
Christ to this high mountaine, as a most fit
and conuenient place to broach this his third
and last temptation now in hand.
            In that the Diuell doth carie our Sauiour
Christ from Ierusalem to this hill locally;
hence we learne, that he may by Gods permission,
haue like power ouer the deare children
of God, not once, but twise, nay thrise,
& oftentimes. We see this true in our sauior
Christ the head: therefore if the Lord permit
Satan, and by his permission giue the Diuell
libertie to transport our bodies from place
to place, we must not be discouraged. Seeing
the same thing befell the head, it may also
befall his members, which we are.
            
                The second part of the Diuels preparatiō,
is this, that he shewes him all the kingdomes of
the world, &c. Now concerning this, we may

not think the Diuell could do this in deed
and truth, to shew Christ all the seuerall
kingdomes of the world, as they be here placed
vpon earth, for that is a thing impossible:
for there is no hill so high, that a man
might see them all. Nay, if a mā were as high
as the Sunne, and could see neuer so clearely,
yet he could but see the one halfe of the
earth; and therefore we must know, he shewed
them in a counterfeit vision.
            Now these visions of the Diuell, they be
either of the outward senses, or else of the
vnderstanding. Of the outward senses, as the
delusions of the Diuel, making men thinke
they see that they do not see indeed. So the
Diuel is said to shew Samuel to Saul in a vision
in his proper habite: and this was indeed
but a coūterfet Samuel,
               1. Sam. 28. not that true Samuel,
who rested in the graue concerning his bodie,
and remained in heauen concerning his
soule.
            Secondly, there be false visions and deludings
of the vnderstanding; as the Lord
speaketh,Zach. 13. 4. that he will make the false prophets
ashamed of their lying visions. And
some of these visions come vnto men sleeping,
called dreames. Deut. 13. 1. some come
waking, as to such as haue their braine

crased, they oftentimes haue visions, and
thinke themselues to be Kings or Prophets,
as Iohn Baptist, &c. Now concerning this
vision of Christ offered by the Diuell, he did
it not onely to the mind of Christ, but also to
his out ward eye, and visibly.
            By this practise of the Diuell we may behold
his wonderfull skill and power, in that
he can resemble to the outward senses in
such a strange manner, euen as he listeth, so
great and wonderfull matters. And the like is
done by Magicians and Coniurers, who by
the helpe of the diuel, can reueale and shew
things done in a farre countrey, or things
that be lost, in a glasse: or for things long passed,
can resemble them to outward sense in
a glasse, or in the aire. So that those are deceiued
who are of mind, that they cannot do
this: for if the diuell could shew Christ all the
kingdomes of the world and the glorie of
them in so short a time, then much more can
he shew some one particular thing to the eye
and sense of man.
            Now let vs marke the diuels drift in this
temptation, & setting before Christs eyes
this goodly and glorious sight: sure it was to
this end, that the diuell might by this meanes
more easily wind himselfe into the heart of

Christ: and therefore he sets this thing before
his eyes, that Christ might be moued by
them, and take some delight in them, and
delighting in them might desire them, and
so Satan might in the end ouercome him
and insnare him.
            And this hath bene the auncient practise
of the diuell, as Genes. 3. first, to moue Evah
to cast her eye vpon the apple, to marke the
beautie of it, then to like it, thē to desire and
lust after it, and so in the end to tast of it. And
thus he dealt with Christ: first, he shewes this
glorious sight, and the beautie of all these
things, that if he could, he might haue moued
him to desire them, and so make his
temptation take place.
            Seeing this is Satans auncient subtiltie,Vse. it
must warne vs to take great heed of our outward
senses, especially the two senses of
learning, namely, seeing and hearing. The
eyes and the 
                  •
               ares be the two windowes of
the Soule: and if the diuell can get in his
head there, he will easily wind in all his bodie,
and poison our soules.
            We had need therefore to counterguard
our hearts,Prou. 4. 23. to keepe them with all diligence,
euen aboue al watch and ward, and euermore
to take heed who, & what enters into

our eyes and eares, and to make sure w
                  •
               
keep carefull watch at those doores. We mu
                  ••
               
pray with Dauid:
               Psa. 119. 37. 
               O Lord set a Watch before
my mouth, and keepe the doore of my lippes: and
with holy Iob,
               Iob. 31. 1. make a couenant with our
eyes that they behold no vanitie. This if we
do, death shall not enter in by these doores
and windowes, but we shall preserue our
soules in puritie.
            Now when the diuell shewes our Sauiour
Christ this goodly shew, let vs mark the maner:
he shewes Christ all the beautie, the glorie
and delight of them: not the troubles,
vexations, calamities and daungers of them.
And thus will the diuel deale with vs; if he
would tempt any one to some sinne, he neuer
shewes but hides the miserie & daunger,
the curses and calamities that will ensue vpō
that sinne: but he shewes the profit, gaine,
pleasure, delight and commoditie that that
sinne will affoord them: that by this meane
                  •
               
he may bring them to his bow, and moue
them headlong to rush into the commiting
of sinne. Indeed when he hath got his purpose,
and preuailed thus farre to bring a man
into sin, then he will lay it open in most vgly
maner, and lay before a poore sinner the horror
and punishment due to his sinne, that so

he may make a poore sinner breake the
necke of his soule in despaire.
            Further, marke how the cunning diuell
shewed not these goodly and glorious sights
in the first or second temptation, but reserued
them for the last, and that in great subtiltie.
For the diuell know very well, that if any
would peruaile, then surely the desire of honor,
of preferment, of profit and pleasure,
would moue the heart of Christ.
            And in this subtiltie he shewes, that this
is a most daungerous temptation which
comes from the right hand, that is, which
proceeds from profit, pleasure, preferment
and honour. And by this temptation he preuailed
more against Dauid, then he could
when he was in great conflict, and persecuted
by Saule.
            
            So prosperitie and ease in the Primitiue
Church in the dayes of Constantine, did more
preuaile with Christians, then persecution
and tribulation could do for the space of
three hundred yeares before. And those
which could be moued by no other meanes,
yet the hope of honor, profite and pleasure
hath ouercome and preuailed with them.
Thus ease slayeth the foolish: prosperitie is
as a slipperie way: and few hauing rest are

edified, and walk in the feare of the Lord, &
the comfort of the holy Ghost, Act. 9. 31.
            
               Luke cap. 4. 5. he addeth the circumstance
of time, that the diuell shewed all this to
Christ in a point or moment of time, in so
short a time as possibly might be, with maruellous
speed & celeritie. And this the diuell
did being subtill, the more to inflame th
                  •
               
heart of Christ to desire them: and therefore
he set his wares open, and as it were in a
glimpse gaue him the beholding of the
beauty of thē. So we see, if mē see some st
                  •
               āg
                  •
               
and beautifull thing, and haue but a blush or
a litle glimpse of it, they desire it with mor
                  •
               
eagernesse, & more greedily affect it. Eue
                  •
               
so he would haue dealt with our Sauiour
Christ, he would haue affected his hea
                  •
               
with this sudden and glorious spectacle.
            
               Now followeth the temptation it selfe, in
these words: And said vnto him, All these
will I giue thee,Ver. 9. if thou wilt fall downe & worship
me.
            In this temptation we must first marke the
scope and drift of the diuell therein. In the
first temptation he laboured to tempt Christ
to distrust and vnbeleefe: in the second, to
puffe him vp with vaine confidence and presumption:
now in this third, he tempted

Christ to commit idolatrie, euen to worship
the Diuell.
            And truly this hath euer bene the practise
of the Diuell, to seeke to ouerturne religion
and good conscience by these three things,
honour, profite, and pleasures. Among Protestants
and Protestant Ministers he hath
preuailed much by these meanes. When as
for the Ministers of the word, many haue in
hope of profit and preferment, forsaken true
religion & cleane abiured it, and taught the
cleane contrarie, euen that which the papists
hold and teach: so we see that protestant
Merchants for hope of gaine, do carrie ouer
to the Church of Rome all such merchandize
of waxe, &c. as the Papistes vse to maintaine
their superstitions and Idolatrie.
            And among common Professors, many of
them to saue their lands, liuings, and places,
haue chaunged as religion hath changed;
now Papists, now Protestants, like to Camelions
into any colour. Of this we had experience
in Queene Maries dayes: few great
men remained Protestants, but yeeded to
the Idolatrie of those times.
            This third temptation hath two parts: first,
a promise: secondly, a condition. And here
the Diuell saith not: I will procure thee

these things at Gods hands; but in his own
                  •
               
name, I will giue thee, all these, to make Chrit
depend vpon him for them, to trust in him,
and to deny his confidence in God, and to
relie vpon the diuell for an inheritance in
this world.
            In which vile practise of the diuell, we may
behold his shamelesse boldnesse, who dares
offer Christ the gift of all these, conditionally,
if he would worship him: whereas indeed
they did all most properly belong to Iesus
Christ himselfe, and were his owne; neither
had Satan any title to them, but onely by
vsurpation.
            And as the diuel here with Christ, so
he dealeth with most men of the world, to
tempt them to depend vpon him for the
wealth of the world, and to make the Diuell
their God. For though mē deny this in word,
and say, All they haue, God hath sent it, they
thanke God: yet their wicked practises shew
the contrarie, that they do indeed depend
vpon the diuell for gaine and profite: seeing
most men get their goods by false waight
                  •
               
and measures, by deceit, fraud, cousinage, by
lying, swearing & forswearing. Now while
they get that they haue thus by such vile and
wicked meanes, it plainly shewes that all

they haue, they haue it of the Diuell, & depend
vpon him for wealth, & so make him
their God, though in word they deny it neuer
so much.
            Secondly, the Diuell knew Christ was a
King, and that his kingdome was not of this
world, but spirituall, exercised especially in
mens consciences: now the Diuel he labours
to tempt Christ to become an earthly King,
which if it had taken place in Christ, he knew
then that he could not be that true Messiah,
who should raigne spriritually in mens consciences.
            And in like maner deales the Diuell with
the members of Christ: for the church of
God hath a kingdome, and that is spiritual
in the word of God. Now the stewardship is
the dispensation and ministery of the word
preached, and against this the Diuell laboureth
that it may become an earthly kingdome,
not spirituall but carnall, not in the
power of the spirit, but in the carnall wisedome
of mans eloquence; and so by all
means to ouerturne the true kingdome of
Christ.
            Thirdly, we see here how the Diuell
maketh very large and liberall promises,
though he meant to performe nothing,

neither could he though he would.
            This must teach vs to study that we may
be contrary to the Diuel, and therefore that
we do warily consider what promises we
make, whether the thing we promise be
lawfull, and in our owne power, and that
we do it with sincere harts, voide of deceit,
and with purpose to be as good as our word:
and when we haue promised, accordingly to
performe our promise;Psal. 15. 4. for that is a marke
of Gods children,Gal. 5. 25. and a fruite of the
spirit and true faith, in doing the duties of
equitie.
            And in that the Diuel shewed all these vnto
Christ, euen the seuerall kingdomes of the
world, it is manifest he knew them all, and
was well acquainted, and had trauelled
through them, as he confesseth, Ioh. 1. 7. And
in that he could shew the chiefest glory and
beautie of them in such a short time, it is
cleare he was cunning in them, and the seuerall
estates and conditions of them all.
            And we see, that the Diuel in propounding
all these glorious kingdomes vn
                  ••
               
Christ, he did tempt him to ambition, tha
                  •
               
he would set his heart on them and so desir
                  ••
               
them. And herein note one of his most principall
practises, which is the ouerturning 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
kingdomes: for the Diuell desireth to do the
greatest harme and most mischiefe that he
can. Now in the ouerthrow of a kingdome,
many go to wracke; and to effect this, he
seekes continually to puffe men vp with
ambition, that they may desire and gape for
preferment and honor. The Lord hath in
mercy placed ouer vs in this kingdome a
gracious Prince and a Christian Queene, &
the Diuell hath long enuied this our prosperitie,
and sought sundry by-plots and
manifold practises to ouerthrowe our state,
to cut off the head, and to cast her crowne
into the dust. And to this purpose he hath
raised vp many wicked and rebellious subiects:
but the Lord hath in mercie brought
all to nought. And therefore the remembrance
of this should moue vs all to thankfulnesse,
for this great mercie of God in defending
both Prince and people, and bringing
to nought all such rebellious wretches,
confounding those ambitious heads, and all
their vile and trecherous plots and deuices:
and we must shew this thankfulnesse in the
duties of repentance and sincere obedience.
            Secondly, this must teach vs to pray vnto
God continually, for the preseruation of

our Prince and kingdome, that he would
euermore confound and bring to nought all
Satans policies, and vile plots and practises
of ambitious heads. And it is our duty, in
token of true ioy and thankfulnesse, to do as
the people did in the dayes of Salomon, who
shouted so loud, and cried out God saue king
Salomon,
               1. Kin 1. 4. that the very earth rang againe: euē
so should all true Christians, to expresse the
ioy of our hearts, pray day and night, God
saue Queene Elizabeth.
            And herein is our comfort, that though
the Diuell with all his malice seekes to destroy
both Prince and people, and the whole
kingdome, and hath his wicked instruments
to effect the same: yet the Lord God hath
his Angels which take care of his Church
and people, and stand round about them, to
defend them both by sea and by land, that all
the Diuels in hell cannot hurt them: but the
Angels of God defend his children at home,
and beate back all our enemies from inuading
of vs.
            
               All these will I giue thee] These words are
the very words of the Pope of Rome, who as
Satans vicar, hath indeed the two hornes of
the lambe, but he speakes like the Dragon:
he makes himselfe equall to God, he can (as

he sayth) send to heauen and to hel, set vp
and pul downe Princes, he can do what he
list, he can open and shut at his pleasure, pardon
sinnes, and I know not what: which shewes
he speakes the Diuels language, the
language of Ashdod, not of Canaan.
            Luke. 4. 6. The Diuell ads a reason further
to perswade Christ: for he saith, All these
kingdoms are mine, and I cā giue them to whom
I will.
            Where first the Diuell tels a loud lie, chalenging
to himselfe the right of all the kingdomes
of the world: for it is the Lord his
right alone, as we may see Dan. 4. 2
                     •
                  . where
the Lord speakes to that proud king N
                     •
                  buchadnezar
by the ministerie of Daniel: I
beare rule ouer the kingdomes, & I alone (sayth
the Lord God) can giue them to whom I please.
So then the Diuell hath no power to giue
them, neither hath any title to them, that he
can bestow them at his pleasure: no, that belongs
to God alone: yet we see Satan will be
an vsurper at large.
            Secondly, marke the Diuels arrogancie
and shamelesse boasting, in that he dares
chalenge all the kingdomes of the earth to
himselfe, as though he were soueraigne
Lord of them, to do with thē at his pleasure.

And let vs all learne by this shamelesse lying
and notorious boasting of the diuel, to take
heed that we be not like him in these sinnes,
but study to be contrary to him: and therefore
we must desire and study to speake the
truth at all times, and take heed of boasting
yea rather let vs thinke as humbly and basely
of our selues as possibly we can, which is a
good meanes to humble and cast downe our
proud hearts: and let such know that are
giuen to these sins, to lying and vaine boasting
of this and that which they haue not, it
argues great pride, and shewes they be very
like the Diuell himselfe in this point.
            
               
               If thou wilt fall downe and worship me.]
Here is the second part of the temptation:
namely, the condition, and the maine drift
of the Diuell in these words, is to bring our
Sauiour Christ to manifest Idolatrie, euen to
worship the Diuell himselfe.
            First, seeing the Diuell durst be so bold to
tempt our sauiour Christ to Idolatrie, and to
worship himself; hēce we see that the maine
scope of the Diuel is especially to deface Religion,
and the true seruice and worship of
God, and therefore he assaults the Church of
God, and tempts men to bring them to embrace
heresies, schismes, idolatry, that he

might destroy the church of God: and thus
he became a lying spirit in the mouth of
foure hundred false prophets at one time.1. King. 22.
And when Iehosuah the high Priest came into
the Temple to performe the worship of
God,Zach. 3. 1. he stood vp to hinder him, when he
was praying for the good of the Church.
And so doth he in these dayes stand vp and
seeke by all meanes to hinder Gods Ministers
in the building vp of Gods Church.
When Christ hath sowne good wheate,Mat. 13. thē
the Diuell soweth tares; and whē 
               Paul would
haue gone to preach the Gospell to the
Thessalonians,1. Thess 2. 18 the Diuell hindred him; and
it is his speciall study to stop the ministery of
the Gospell: and therefore it is said that the
Diuell cast many of Gods ministers into prison,
Reuel. 2. 10.
            
               Reu. 16. 13. 14. there came 3 euill and vncleane
spirits out of the mouth of the beast,
which entred into Kings houses, to turne thē
from the entertaining of the Gospell, because
that Kings be either especiall nurses to
the Gospell, or else if Satan can preuaile
with them, become greatest enemies
to hinder the course of the Gospel. Such
frogges be these Seminarie Priests, Monkes,
Friers, and popish Iesuits, which

lurke commonly in Kings courts, and in the
places of mighty men.
            Then seeing the Diuell is so painefull to
stop the course of the Gospell, to ouerturne
true religion & the seruice of God: it must
stirre vp all the Ministers of the word of
God, to labour and take paines, that their
diligence in defending and vpholding true
religion, and building the church of God,
may counteruaile Satans diligence in hindering
of it.
            
                Secondly, it behooueth all Christians not
onely to pray for themselues, but seeing the
Diuell labours the ruine of the church, specially
in preuailing with Princes and great
men, we must pray for the good of Gods
Church and children, and euery member of
it: by name, for Kings & Queens, &c & good
reasō is there that we should do so: for in the
good and flourishing estate of the church we
all receiue benefite by it, and fare the better
for it.
            Thirdly, if Satan durst set vpon the Sonne
of God, and tempt him to idolatrie and to
worship the Diuell, then much more will he
be tempting vs to the like sinne, and set vpō
sinfull man to moue him to worship him, and
make him his God.
            
               
But you will say,Obiection. there is none so mad to
worship the diuell, to make him our God: oh
we defie him.
            True it is,Answer. men say they defie the Diuell,
and spit at him, but alas if we consider their
dealings, we shall see the Diuell sits in their
hearts, and rules there as God. Do but cast
your eye vpon the three maine Religions
of the world, the religion of the Turke,
of the Iew, and of the Papist; and it will appeare
that most men worship the Diuell and
make him their God: because the Turke he
is ignorāt of the true God: the Iew worships
God the Father, but not by Iesus Christ,
whom they deny: the Papist worships a
false and counterfeit Christ forged by themselues,
and neuer read of in the word of God:
for they make him a Sauior in part, & a Priest
to be creator, or the maker of his Creator.
            That it may appeare, that these three sorts
of people do not worship the true God, but
euen the diuell himselfe, let vs marke these
2 principles. First, that al doctrines set downe
and inuented by man, concerning Gods seruice
and worship, being against the word of
God, they be the doctrines of Diuels: so
saith Paule 1. Tim. 4. 1. 3. that there shall
come false teachers, which shall teach doctrines

of Diuels: and what are these? Vers. 3.
he saith: Such as forbid to marrie: and teach
men that some meates be holy in themselues,
& some vnholy and not lawfull to be
eaten. The second principle is this, all worship
of God deuised by man, being against
the word of God, is the doctrine of Diuels.
So the Gentiles offering to Idols Paule saith
they offered to Diuels:
                  
                     •
                   Cor 10. 22 yet none of them intended
that, but rather by the idols offered
to God. So whatsoeuer worship shall be inuented,
being against the word of God, it
is indeed the worship of the Diuell, not of
God.
            Now by these two principles it appeareth,
that the worship of God performed by the
Turkes, and by the Iewes, it is no worship
of God, but the worship of Diuels: seeing
both of them worship the Father out of the
Sonne. And the worship of God in Poperie,
it is no better then the worship of the Diuel,
seeing they worship God out of the true
Christ, and haue forged to themselues a false
counterfeit Christ. And if Paule might truly
affirme of the Gentiles, that they worshipped
not the true God, but offered to diuels:
then mnch more may it be auouched of that
abominable sacrifice of the Masse, that

it is indeed the worship of the diuell, seeing
it is more vile idolatrie then that of the
Gentiles.
            Now it will be said:Obiection. Though the Diuell
preuaile thus with them, yet he cannot preuaile
so with Protestants, neither can they be
said to worship the diuell.Answer. I answer: That in
truth there be thousands of Protestants in
the world who do worship the Diuel: for
all those which do onely in outward shew
professe true religion, but in heart loue the
world, set their hearts vpon pleasures, profites
and preferments, such professours do in
truth make the diuell their God, and may
be said to worship the Diuell. For to whom
soeuer they giue their hearts, to them they
do giue worship: but while they set their
hearts on these things, they do not loue God
neither do they beleeue in God, and rest
vpon him as their God; and therefore they
make the world their God, and so worship
the Diuell.
            
            Fourthly, by this practise of the diuell, we
see those men confuted, who thinke that the
diuell cannot make a league with men, as
with witches, coniurers, &c. For we reade
and know such things haue bin done, and
here we haue a manifest proofe of it: for the

Diuell offers a league to Christ: there was
nothing wanting but our Sauiour Christ his
cōsent. And if sinfull mā had bene in Christs
stead, questionlesse there had bene a league▪
and for so great gaine he would haue the diuell
his seruice.
            
               Then said Iesus vnto him,
               Vers. 10. 
               Auoide Satan,
&c.] Now followeth the answer of our Sauiour
Christ. And first in Christs answer
marke, in propounding of it he vseth first a
speech of indignation and of defiance to the
Diuell and his offer: Auoide Satan: as though
Christ should haue said: I haue heard thee
blaspheme both me and my Father, & haue
thus long suffered thee, but I will suffer thee
no longer, get thee hence Satan, I will not
vouchsafe to answer to thy temptations any
more.
            Marke here in the answer of Christ, that
he was content to endure the diuels temptations
and reproches, which concerned his
owne person: but when he is so bold to blaspheme
God his Father, he can endure him
no longer. Now when he makes challenge
and claimes title to all the kingdoms of the
world, as though he were Lord of them, and
could bestow them at his pleasure, therin he
blasphemed God his Father.
            
               
Then this teacheth vs,Vse. that if we shall heare
vngodly wretches blaspheme the name of
God, we may not endure it, but haue indignation
& great dislike of it. And if we heare
black-mouthed Rabshekahs blaspheme the
holy name of God, by swearing, cursing, banning,
we must be touched with griefe, to
heare the glorious name of our God dishonoured,
and if time and place require, manifest
our dislike in open reprehension of it.
Whē 
               Ahab and Iezabel being both wicked,
heard that Naboth had blasphemed God,
they rent their cloathes in token of sorrow.
So when Hezechiah heard the blasphemies
of Rabshekah,
               2. Kin. 19. 1▪
                he rent his cloths and was
very much grieued for it. Whē 
               Dauid heard
the Gentiles say,Psal. 42. 3. where is now their God?
this blasphemous speech did greatly affect
him, so as his very teares were his drinke.
And the bad speeches of the men of Sodome,
did much affect Lot, & vexe his righteous
soule, 2. Pet. 2. 8.
            And as all men must be grieued to heare
wicked men blaspheme the name of God, so
especially those that be gouernours of others,
and by name, maisters of families: as
Dauid saith Psal. 101. he would not suffer a
talebearer in his house, much lesse a blasphemer.

And the Magistrate is especially bound
to looke to this, seeing it is the law of God▪
that the blasphemer should be stoned to
death: now this law is perpetuall. And if a
man for speaking a word of disgrace against
the person of the Prince wittingly and willingly,
shall iustly lose his life: then he that
is a blasphemer, and speakes to the disgrace
of the eternall God, is much more worthie
to die a thousand deaths.
            
                Secondly, by this answer of Christ, we
learne how to behaue our selues when any
shall go about to perswade vs to depart frō
his Church, to renounce true religion; we
must accompt of them in that respect as the
instruments of Satan. If the father should
seeke to withdraw his owne child from the
true religion, the sonne must not spare the
father, but must cast the first stone at him,
Deut. 13. And when Peter would haue disswaded
Christ from going to Ierusalem,Mat. 16. 23 he
saith: Get thee behind me Satan: though he
was an excellent Apostle, yet in this Christ
accompts of him as of the very diuell.
            
                Againe, in that Christ bids Satan now
auoide, and will dispute no longer with him▪
we must hereby learne how to answer the
diuell in his temptations: though at the first,

when his temptations be more mild, we may
reply by the word of God, yet when Satan
shall be more violent in his assaults, we must
imitate our Sauior Christ, & bid him auoide,
and dispute no more with him. And whatsoeuer
he shall bring against vs, when we are
not able to answer him, yet let vs hold the
maine conclusion in the word of God, not
vouchsa
                  •
               ing him an answer.
            
               It is written] Seeing our Sauior Christ now
the third time answers the Diuell by the scriptures,
saying, It is written: we learne that the
written word beleeued and vnderstood, is the
most sufficient weapon to confute & to confound
Satan & his vile tēptations, else Christ
wold not now euē the third time haue made
choise of this weapon: It is written againe.
            This confutes the Papists, who make
two Scriptures, one vnwritten and inward,
which is traditions, the consent of the fathers
which haue liued in all ages; & the other
written in the holy scriptures. Now they
do make their vnwritten scriptures, as they
call them, and the consent of fathers, to be
of equall authoritie with the written word
of God, which our Sauior Christ doth shew
here, to be the most powerfull meanes to repell
all Satans temptations. And the holy

scriptures which they call a dead letter, and
make as though it had no power in it, eue
                  •
               
this alone is the sword of the spirit to confound
satan: and therefore damnable is that
their doctrine, which so abuseth the holy
Scriptures, & sets vp the erronious tradition
of sinfull men. For if the written word had
bene but a dead letter, our sauiour Christ
would neuer haue made choise of it abou
                  •
               
all other weapons three seuerall times to
confute Satan, euery time answering, It is
written.
            
            
                Secondly, by this answer of Christ, saying,
It is written, we learne how to behaue
our selues when any shall seeke to turne vs
from true Religion, to embrace false Religion,
though we cannot answer their arguments,
but they set such a colour on them by
their wit and eloquence, and seeme to dazle
our eyes that we can not see their deceits; yet
we must sticke to the scriptures, and clea
                  ••
               
fast to the text of the Bible: and if we find
but one sentence in al the Bible to perswade
vs of the truth of Religion, we must hang
vpon it with both hands, and let not o
                  •
               
hold go; nay it must be of more force & credit
with vs, then a thousand arguments that
tend to the contrary.
            
               
               Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God only,]
In these words is contained the answer of
our sauiour Christ to the third temptation of
the Diuell. The words are takē out of Deut. 6▪
13. where they are read thus, Thou shalt feare
the Lord thy God, and serue him. Now there
may seeme to be some difference in the
words, as they be alleaged by Christ: for in
that place of Deuteronomy it is said, Thou
shalt feare the Lord thy God: our sauiour
Christ saith, Thou shalt worship. Againe, our
sauiour Christ addes a word, which is not added
by Moses in that place, namely, Thou
shalt worship the Lord thy God onely: this
word onely is not in that text of Moses.
            
            But if we vnderstand two points concerning
the alleaging of scripture, there will appeare
to be no difference; the first is this, that
Christ and his Apostles in their alleaging of
scripture, do not so much sticke to the very

                  •
               illables, as aime at the sense of the scriptures
which they alleage. The second thing is
this, that our sauiour Christ in alleaging
scripture, seekes to expound scripture, and
to open it in alleaging of it; and so doing, he
may well adde a word, when as the word
he addeth maketh much for the meaning of
the text.
            
               
And thus Christ in this place chaungeth
the word, not mistaking of it, but rather to
expound Moses; for whereas Moses saith,
Thou shalt feare the Lord, he meaneth that
religious feare whereby we feare God, and
worship him. Now our sauiour Christ he
saith, Thou shalt worship, shewing Moses
meant that feare whereby we do with reuerence
and bowing of the body and adoring
of God worship him, moued thereunto
by religious feare, either in praying for some
mercy we want, or giuing thankes for some
benefite receiued.
            Againe, Christ in alleaging this text of
Scripture, he addes a word, yet so, as he doth
it without any fault: for though this word
(alone) be not in Moses his text expresly set
downe, yet it is included, and in sense it is
vnderstood: for where he saith in the thirteenth
verse, Thou shalt feare the Lord, and
ads no more; in the fourteenth verse he saith,
Thou shalt not walke after any other gods;
so that a mā may easily perceiue he did in sēse
include it, though not expresse it in words:
and thus we see our sauiour Christ cleared.
            In the text of scripture alleaged by Christ,
note two points: first, what this worship and
feare is: secondly, to whom worship is due.
            
               
First, worship taken generally, signifieth
the giuing of honor and reuerence to another.
Now this honour is either ciuill or diuine.
Ciuill honour is that outward reuerence
we giue to men, by 
                  •
               rostrating of the
body, or bowing of the knee; and the end of
this ciuill worship is, that thereby we might
acknowledge another to be our superiour: &
therfore it is giuen of subiects to Princes, or
of inferiours to those that by some meanes
are their superiours. And thus Iacob worshipped,
that is, gaue ciuil worship to Esau
seuen times, Genes. 33. 3. This reuerence
Abraham gaue to the Hittites, Gen. 23. 7. &
Lot to the Angels bowed himselfe to the
ground, Gen. 19. 1. where he gaue them onely
ciuill worship and honour. So then it is manifest
by these examples, that we may lawfully
bow and bend the knee and kneele to
Princes, to giue thē this ciuill honour, thereby
shewing we do acknowledge them to be
placed aboue vs in authoritie and dignitie in
the world by God.
            The second kind of honour is diuine or
religious worship, when we giue such honor
to another, that thereby we do ascribe diuinitie
& diuine power vnto it, acknowledging
thereby that it is some diuine thing aboue

all creatures. And this we do first, when we
ascribe the godhead to it, and make it God:
secondly, when we ascribe Gods attributes
to it, as omnipotencie, prouidence, &c. thirdly,
whē we acknowledge it to be the creator
and maker of all things: fourthly, when we
acknowledge it to be the giuer of those
good things we enioy, and the defender of
vs from euill.
            This diuine worship is either inward in
the heart, or outward in the body. Inward
diuine worship is whē a man giues his heart
to any thing, by beleeuing in it, by louing of
it, and reioycing in it aboue all other creatures;
and that because it hath in it the god-head,
or diuine nature, or is God, because it
hath the attributes of God, because it is the
Creator and defender of all things, or else
because it giues vs all good things, and keepeth
vs from all euill.
            The outward diuine worship, is when a
man any wayes by prostrating himselfe and
bowing of his body, doth it to manifest his
faith, hope, loue, confidence, feare, or any gift
in his hart, thereby confessing it is his Creator,
defender and preseruer.
            So then here is a manifest difference betweene
outward ciuill worship, and that diuine

worship which is outward: because by
that ciuill worship we do only acknowledge
them to whome we do it, to be our superious:
but by this outward diuine worship,
we do acknowledge that to which we do
this worship to be God, Creator and defender
of vs and all other things.
            Now in this place our sauior Christ meaneth
not that ciuill worship, but he vnderstandeth
outward diuine worship.
            There is another seruice mentioned,
which is feare: when we giue & performe obedience
to another, it is either a seruice absolute
or in part: absolute, when we obey the
commandement of another simply without
all exception: when we obey another, not
onely outwardly in body, but inwardly in
soule, will, affections, & with the conscience:
and this is proper to God alone, neither may
this absolute obedience be giuen to any creature,
onely God alone is to haue this absolute
worship, so as we must obey him without
all exceptions or question, and that in
body, soule, will, affections, and in the very
conscience.
            There is a second seruice, which is only
in part, which we may giue to men, as to
the Magistrate being in authoritie aboue vs,

vnder God; for God hath giuen them leaue
to make lawes, and power to giue commandements;
and they must be obeyed in ciuill
things, yet with condition, In the Lord, so
long as their commandements stand & agree
with Gods commandements. Again, they
must be obeyed onely with our bodies: their
lawes cannot reach vnto mens hearts and
consciences, to bind them. And of these two
in this place, we are to vnderstand that obedience
which is absolute, to obey the commandement
of the Lord absolutely and simply
without condition or exception euen in
all things whatsoeuer he commaunds vs:
following herein our father Abraham, who
to performe obediēce to the Lord, forsooke
his natiue countrey, & was ready to offer his
sonne his onely sonne, his beloued sonne, his
sonne Izak the sonne of the promise.
            Now followeth the person to whom this
worship must be giuen. This diuine worship,
whether outward or inward, is due to God
alone, neither may it be giuen to any other
creature, though neuer so excellent. And
this is taught vs plainly by Christ his answer,
and it is agreeable to the first and second
commandements, where we are forbidden
expresly to giue this diuine and religious

worship either to any creature, or to idols,
but we must haue & acknowledge Iehouah
to be our God alone. Reuel. 19, 10. whē 
               Iohn
was about to worship the Angell, and to
giue him some part of this diuine worship,
he forbids him, and tels him that he is but his
fellow seruant, and chargeth Iohn to worship
God alone.
            So then by this which hath bene said, we
see how fitly our Sauiour Christ answered
the diuell, & alleaged this place of Scripture
to stop his mouth. The diuell had shewed
him all the kingdomes of the world and the
glorie of them all: and tels Christ, if so be he
would but acknowledge him to be the giuer
of them, he would bestow them all vpō him.
Now our Sauiour Christ answereth, that he
may not giue that honour to him, which
belongeth to God alone and to none
else.
            First,Vse. we learne from this answer of Christ,
that it is not lawfull for vs to giue this diuine
worship either inward or outward to
any creature, though neuer so excellent; neither
to Angels, nor Saints: because it is peculiar
and proper to God alone. And therfore
if any mā shal prostrate his bodie before
Saints to pray vnto thē, he maketh them no

lesse then Gods, in giuing them that priuiledge
which is proper to God: namely, to
search the heart, that they can heare our
praiers, that they be omnipotent, omni-present,
that is, present in all places at once,
with all things: which can be affirmed of
none but God alone. And yet this is the
common practise of the Papists, to yeeld this
diuine worship to Saints, and dead men
and women, and to adore and worship
them.
            But the Papists answer: They do not
worship Saints with that worship which belongs
to God, neither do they worship thē
as Gods. Why, no more would the Diuell
here haue Christ so to do, neither durst he
presume to tempt Christ to worship him as
God, but to acknowledge him to be the
giuer of all the kingdomes of the earth. And
the Diuell requires no more but outward
worship: and yet our Sauior Christ tels him,
that this outward worship which he demaunded,
was proper to God alone, & none
may or ought to haue it, saue he alone. Now
the Papists do giue that to Saints, which
Christ denyeth to the Diuell: for they auouch,
that Saints can deliuer them from this
disease and that disease. They make them patrons

not onely of priuate men, but of whole
kingdomes & coūtries, as of Italie S. Martin,
of Spaine S, Iames, of England S. George. &c.
Now to giue a kingdome (which Christ denied
to Satan) is a lesse matter then to be
a patron of a kingdome: for one may giue a
kingdome, that cannot defend a kingdome.
            Nay in truth, whatsoeuer they say, they
make the Saints gods: for they pray vnto
them, they make them intercessors for them
vnto God, to procure them fauour in things
concerning the life to come. They call the
Virgin Mary the Queene of heauen, they
make Christ to be her vnderling & a punie:
for they pray her to commaund her sonne,
& to cause him to heare their prayers, which
is to make her euen aboue God himselfe.
And therfore in truth they giue more to
Saints, then the Diuell required of Christ.
            Againe they answer: That which may be
done to earthly Princes,Obiection. may much more be
done to Saints in heauen. Now say they, we
kneele and bow to earthly Princes, and do
reuerence to the chaire of Estate: why then
may we not to Saints?Answer. But we answer them:
It is true, we do kneele and bow vnto earthly
Princes, but all this that we do, we do it

not so much to their persons, as to that authoritie
God hath laid vpon them: and we
do it onely to shew our subiection vnto thē
               ▪
But to kneele to Saints is no token of ciuill
honour, as this is which we giue to earthly
Princes, but a part of diuine honour. For by
that, they do acknowledge, that the Saints
can heare their prayers, search the hearts,
that they be omnipotent, and present in
euery place, which honour is due to God
alone.
            Yet though we may not thus adore Saints
as the Papists do,VVhat honour is due to Saints. we do acknowledge a certaine
honour due vnto them: & this honour
stands in three things: First, by giuing thāke
                  •
               
to God for them, in that the Lord hath giu
                  •
               
his Church in former times such worthy instruments.
Secondly, by a reuerent estimation
of them, in that we accompt of them as the
friends of God. Thirdly, by honouring
them, though not with diuine worship,
yet by imitating their vertues: and this is
all that honour we owe vnto the Saints departed.
            Now if that the adoring of Saints be flat
vnlawfull and forbidden,Vse 1. then it is not lawfull
to appoint and dedicate solemne dayes
vnto them, to fast for them, to worship the
                  •
               
               
to worship their reliques: all these be vnlawfull,
and yet common among the Papists.
Neither can the Church of Rome iustly accuse
vs of the like, though we haue and retaine
the names of Saints dayes in the church
of England; because we dedicate those dayes
not to the worship of Saints as they do,
but to the seruice and worship of God
alone.
            We must mark how our Sauiour Christ in
alleaging and expounding of Moses ioynes
worship and feare together:Vse. 2. to shew, that
none can truly worship God but they that
do truly feare God.
            Men commonly think they haue done enough
if they come to church on dayes appointed,
listen a while to the word, receiue
the Sacraments; they thinke this is all the
worship of God that he requires, though
they want the feare of God in their hearts:
but alas all this is to no purpose, if men want
the feare of God, & practise iniustice in their
particular callings. Reade the first of Esa.
vers. 14. The Lord hates all the seruice and
worship which the Iewes offered him: not
simply, because these things were vnlawfull
in themselues,Mich. 6. 6. for the Lord had commaunded
them: but because they ioyned not

not so much to their persons, as to that authoritie
God hath laid vpon them: and we
do it onely to shew our subiection vnto thē.
But to kneele to Saints is no token of ciuill
honour, as this is which we giue to earthly
Princes, but a part of diuine honour. For by
that, they do acknowledge, that the Saints
can heare their prayers, search the hearts,
that they be omnipotent, and present in
euery place, which honour is due to God
alone.
            Yet though we may not thus adore Saints
as the Papists do,VVhat honour is due to Saints. we do acknowledge a certaine
honour due vnto them: & this honour
stands in three things: First, by giuing thākes
to God for them, in that the Lord hath giuē
his Church in former times such worthy instruments.
Secondly, by a reuerent estimation
of them, in that we accompt of them as the
friends of God. Thirdly, by honouring
them, though not with diuine worship,
yet by imitating their vertues: and this is
all that honour we owe vnto the Saints departed.
            Now if that the adoring of Saints be flat
vnlawfull and forbidden,Vse 1. then it is not lawfull
to appoint and dedicate solemne dayes
vnto them, to fast for them, to worship the
                  •
               
               
to worship their reliques: all these be vnlawfull,
and yet common among the Papists.
Neither can the Church of Rome iustly accuse
vs of the like, though we haue and retaine
the names of Saints dayes in the church
of England; because we dedicate those dayes
not to the worship of Saints as they do,
but to the seruice and worship of God
alone.
            We must mark how our Sauiour Christ in
alleaging and expounding of Moses ioynes
worship and feare together:Vse. 2. to shew, that
none can truly worship God but they that
do truly feare God.
            Men commonly think they haue done enough
if they come to church on dayes appointed,
listen a while to the word, receiue
the Sacraments; they thinke this is all the
worship of God that he requires, though
they want the feare of God in their hearts:
but alas all this is to no purpose, if men want
the feare of God, & practise iniustice in their
particular callings. Reade the first of Esa.
vers. 14. The Lord hates all the seruice and
worship which the Iewes offered him: not
simply, because these things were vnlawfull
in themselues,Mich. 6. 6. for the Lord had commaunded
them: but because they ioyned not

to the seruice of God, the feare of God, but
their hands were full of crueltie & iniustice,
and they practised no mercie to men: and
whatsoeuer men professe in the worship of
God, and shew not the feare of God, & conscience
in their particular callings and dealings
with men, all is but hypocrisie.
            Whereas we teach that a man may be certainely
perswaded by faith of his election
and saluation:Vse. 3. the Papists say, we cannot
proue it out of the word of God. Now what
though we cannot find this sentence in so
many words: (I am elected) yet as our Sauiour
Christ by alleaging Scripture gathered
the sense of it: so may we without blame gather
that out of the word which is the same
in sense, which we hold in this point.
            We see it is our dutie not only to worship
God with outward worship of the bodie,Vse. 4.
but with inward worship in the soule, mind,
will, affections, and in the conscience. Paul
he preached the Gospell of God vnto the
the Corinthians,2. Cor. 10. 4. 5. to bring their very thoughts
into subiection: that is, so to order them, that
they might not thinke any thing but that
which was holy and according to the will
of God.
            
               Then the diuell left him,
               Vers. 11. 
               &c.] In this verse

is set downe the third and last part of the
conflicts of Christ with the diuell: namely,
the issue and euent of them, which is that
glorious victorie and conquest which our
Sauiour Iesus Christ got against the diuell.
And this is the most principall part of all the
rest. For what comfort could we haue had in
Christs temptations, in the preparation, in
the conflicts & seuerall temptations, vnlesse
Christ had vanquished Satan, and got the
victorie? Nay all the comfort of Gods children
stands in this victorie of our Lord and
Sauiour Iesus Christ: because now Christ
stood in our stead, and was tempted for our
sakes: so that he being our head, and getting
victorie ouer the diuel, the Church & euery
member of the Church in Iesus Christ, got
victorie ouer Satan.
            In the victorie we are to obserue two
things: First, that the Diuell departed from
him: Secondly, the Angels ministred vnto
him.Vse. 1. In this departing of the Diuell from
Christ, we may behold the vnspeakable
goodnesse of God to his Church, for that
which befell Christ, befalleth the Church of
God. Now the Diuell hauing tempted Christ
in three seuerall and sore temptations, he encountred
him in all three, and resisted the

Diuell in all his temptations: and then the
Diuell leaueth him, and goeth his way.
Wherein we see the endlesse loue of God, in
that he puts an end to the afflictions of his
Church, though they be many and sore, yet
they shall last but a time and haue an end.
So the Lord speaketh of Salomon:
               2. Sam. 7. 14 If he sinne
I will chastise him with the rods of men and
with the plagues of the children of men: such
as should not be too extreame, but that he
should be able to beare. So the Prophet
Habacuck, he in the first chapter breaketh
out into impatient speeches, for the afflictions
of the Church: but chap. 2. vers. 3. the
Lord bids him waite, and tels him, it shall be
amended, and that he will put an end to
their miseries: the Lord hath promised that
he will not suffer his children to be tempted
aboue that they shall be able to beare, but
shall find a blessed issue of their temptations.
The two Prophets which were slaine for
doing their message,Reu. 11. ver. 11. 12. and for the testimonie
of Iesus, lay vnburied three dayes and an
halfe: but after the Lord puts into them the
spirit of life againe, and they reuiued, and
stood vp before the Lord, and they that saw
them shall be afraid, and see them ascend
vp into heauen. So that we may see, the Lord

in mercie puts an end to all the afflictions of
his children.
            And this we may see by dayly experience,
some of Gods children are visited with
grieuous and fearefull temptations, some
halfe a yeare, some a whole yeare, some, two,
three, foure, ten yeares, yet at length the
Lord giues them a good issue, and puts an
end to their miserie; and in stead of horror of
conscience, sends them comfort; & in stead
of griefe, ioy vnspeakable. And though the
Lord should suffer them to be tempted all
their life long til their dying day, yet then
the Lord would giue them a blessed issue of
all their miseries, and fill their soules with
exceeding comfort.
            Here we see a notable differēce betweene
the first Adam and the second Adam.
               Vse. 2. The
first Adam was tempted, and yeelded to
Satans temptations, and suffered the Diuell
to enter into his hart: the second Adam
Iesus Christ, he was likewise tempted, yet he
yeelded not to the least assault of the Diuell,
neither could he euer enter into his holy
heart, but departeth from him, and is faine
to leaue him.
            In this departure of the Diuell from
Christ, first, marke when he departed:

secondly, for how long he departed.
            For the first, Then the Diuell left him, that
is, after the three temptations were ended,
and Christ had in great indignation bid him
auoide Satan, for his blasphemous speeches,
then the Diuell departed.
            Here we see the best way to put the Diuell
to flight,Vse. 1. and to giue him the repulse:
namely, to resist him at the first, & giue him
no ground. But as S. Iames saith, Resist the
diuell,
               Iam. 5. 
               and he will flie from thee: when as we
depend on Gods word, and the blessed promises
of the Gospell, praying for grace from
God to resist satan; he shal neuer preuaile
against vs, but will depart. And therefore it
is but foolishnesse to thinke or imagine that
he can be put to flight by musick, merry companie,
sports and pastimes, or such like vanities:
but the onely meanes to cause him to
depart, is the word and prayer, by them alone
he is resisted.
            
                They take a bad course, who thinke they
may yeeld to Satans temptations when they
are yong, and purpose in their old age to resist
him: but if we euer yeeld vnto him, we
do set open the doore of our hearts vnto the
Diuel, we do willingly receiue him, and bid
him welcom, and then he will not easily be

driuen away: nay we shal find it a hard matter,
if not impossible, to put him to flight in
our old age. But as men in a dropsie, the
more they drinke, the more they desire: so
the more men yeeld to his temptations, the
more violently will he set vpon them.
            After that our sauiour Christ saith vnto
him, Auoide Satan, presently he departeth,
and is obedient to his commaundement.
What? was this any vertue in the Diuel to
obey Christs commandement? No surely, it
was no vertue in the Diuell: for we are to
vnderstand, there be two kinds of obedience,
one is voluntary and chearfull, the other
by constraint and forced. Voluntary
obedience is that, when any of the creatures
of God do willingly through Gods grace
mouing them, obey the commaundement of
God, as all the good Angels of God, and
Adam before his fall, and all the children of
God that be effectually called, iustified, and
sanctified, do willingly and with chearfulnesse
yeeld obedience vnto God in part. Besides
this, there is a constrained obedience,
when one is vrged and compelled whether
he will or not to obey another; as one that
is a malefactor, being condemned to die, he
is obedient and yeeldeth himself to death, he

submitteth him selfe, because he must neither
will nor choose. So the Diuell here obeyeth
the voice of Christ, and departeth at
his commaundement: but this obedience
in him is no vertue, because he was compelled
to do it, and could do none otherwise.
            And that which here befell the Diuel,
shall befall all wicked & impenitent sinners
if they will not now obey the commandement
of Christ, to repent and beleeue the
Gospell, they shall one day in spite of their
teeth be constrained, will they nil they, to
obey that commandement at the last day of
iudgement, Depart ye cursed into euerlasting
fire, prepared for the diuell and his angels. The
consideratiō of this one point, should 
                  〈◊〉
               
all men now in the time of grace, to yeeld
hearty and willing obedience to the voice of
Christ, in repenting and turning to God, le
                  ••
               
one day we be constrained to yeeld to our
eternall confusion.
            
               Luke 4. 13. he saith, When the diuel 
                     〈◊〉
                  
ended all the temptation, then he departed.
VVhere we may note, that before the Diuel
                  •
               
left our Sauiour Christ, he imployed all 
                  〈◊〉
               
might, skill, subtiltie and fraud in tempti
                  ••
               
of Christ. And from this malicious pract
                  ••
               
               
of the diuell, we may gather, that Christ was
tempted with no smal and easie temptation,
but that he was tempted in the highest degree
that could be: for the Diuell made an
end of his temptations before he left him,
and had his will in tempting of him, and
therefore no question, in these three maine
temptations that we haue spoken of, he tēpted
him as much as he could, and shewed his
greatest extremitie and fraud. And this may
appeare, in that the Angels were faine to
come & comfort our Sauiour Christ: so that
he was not tempted with some light and ordinarie
temptations, but in most extreame
manner, so as his heart within him was in
perplexitie, anguish and griefe, yet without
all sinne.
            And this may minister comfort to the
children of God;Vse. 1. if any man be tempted with
some grieuous temptation, in some wondrous
and fearefull maner, that he is almost
at the point of despaire, yet let him stay himselfe,
and let him not thinke that therefore
he is cast away: for here we see, that Iesus
Christ the Son of God was tempted in the
highest degree that might be, and therefore
the dearest seruants of God may be extreamly
tempted.
            
               
We must learne from hence to suspend
our iudgements:Vse. 2. and if we see any so fearfully
tempted, & their temptations so extreme
and grieuous, that they say of them selues
that they be cast-awayes, or that while they
yet liue they are already in hel; let vs take
heed we be not too rash in condemning of
them, neither let vs speake or thinke of them
as cast-awayes: for our Sauiour Christ was
tempted in the highest measure that could
be, and why thē may not these kind of temptations
befall the dearest children of God?
Therefore that which is written of Francis
Spira, that he was a reprobate & a cast-away,
was penned very inconsiderately, though he
affirmed the same of himself; for there did
nothing befall him, which may not befall a
child of God: for we see that our Sauiour
Christ himselfe was tempted in the greatest
measure that might be, and we haue dayly
experience from time to time, that some of
the deare children of God haue bene in like
sort assaulted to despaire for a time, to thinke
themselues reprobates and cast-awayes, yet
it hath pleased the Lord in time to restore
them to the feeling of his loue, and they
haue continued the faithfull seruants of God
till their dying day.
            
               
And as it is said, the diuel departed as
soone as he had ended all his temptations: we
may gather, that these three wherewith he
assaulted our Sauiour Christ, they be the
most principall temptations of the Diuell, &
the very ground of all other his temptations:
and therefore it shall be good for vs to
learne to know them, and the daunger of
them, that we may arme our selues by the
example of Christ against them especially.
            The second circumstance to be marked in
the Diuels departure, is that which S. Luke
addeth, though it be not expressed in Mathew,
namely, that the Diuell left Christ but
for a season: but we neuer reade that the Diuell
did tempt our Sauiour Christ after this,
but once vpon the crosse: then indeed the
Diuell and all his Angels set vpon him,
Coloss. 2. 15. I answer, the Diuell tempts either
by himselfe, or else by wicked men. It is
true indeed, we reade not that the Diuell
did euer tempt Christ after his departure
from him, but once when he was on the
crosse; but he set wicked men a work in persecuting
of him continually. So he tempted
Euah but once by himselfe, but no doubt he
tēpted her after many times by other means
            Secondly, the diuell tempts by his instruments,

namely, by wicked and vngodly mē:
and thus he tempted Adam, not by himselfe,
but by Euah: so he tempted Iob, not onely
by himselfe, in casting the house vpon his
children, but also by his vile instruments the
Sabeans and Caldeans, whom he set a work
to rob and spoile him, and after by his mistaking
friends.
            So though we reade not that the Diuell
did tempt Christ all his life time after this by
himselfe, yet did he it by his instruments, as
the Scribes and Pharises, the cruell Iewes,
yea by Herod, Pontius Pilate, Annas and Caiphas,
and the rest: he neuer ceased tempting
of him after this; and these temptations by
his vile
                  •
                instruments were very great and
grieuous vnto his sacred soule.
            Seeing the diuell tooke this course to
tempt Christ, and then to depart for a while,
and after to returne againe: we may see what
is the estate of Gods Church in this world,
namely, that the Church of God vpon earth
is in a continuall intercourse of afflictions:
now afflicted; after, the Lord giues it peace
for a time: and then the Lord sendeth afflictions
againe: and as winter followeth sommer,
so doth ioy afflictions.
            This being the estate of the church of God

vpon earth, a continuall intercourse of afflictions,
we must then learne what is our own
particular estate while we liue in the church,
namely, a state that is in a continuall intercourse
of troubles and afflictions. If we now
inioy peace and rest, we must make account
it cannot alwaies indure, but there must
come a change: and therefore we must beware
in time of peace to prepare our selues
against the time of affliction and of triall, and
perswade our selues the Sunne will not alwaies
shine, but this state will change, and
triall will come. It followeth.
            
               And behold the Angels came and ministred
vnto him.] Here is now the second part of
the victorie: when as our Sauiour Christ had
foiled the Diuell, and put him to flight, then
the Angels come and minister vnto him, to
comfort him after this tedious combat.
            
               Behold] This word is a word of wonder,
and it sheweth there is some matter of moment
that followeth: and what is that? the
wonder is, that that person whom the diuell
despised, and would haue troden vnder his
feete, euen this person is here attended vpon
by the good Angels of God, who are readie
to offer him their seruice, and come to
comfort him.
            
               
In this ministerie of these Angels consider,
first the bond which caused them to attend
on Christ: secondly, the number, how
many they were: thirdly, the time when they
came to him.
            First the bond which maketh these glorious
Angels and heauenly spirits to attend
and waite vpon our Sauiour Christ, is this,
that the man Christ, not the manhood of
Christ, but Christ God and man, is Lord of
all creatures, euen of the Angels in heauen.
And the manhood of Christ, though it be
not Lord of Angels, yet it is farre more excellent
then any creature whatsoeuer, yea
then the blessed Angels.
            And here we may behold the great goodnesse
of God, who hath exalted mans nature
which was most vile by reason of sinne, to be
farre more excellent then any Angell in heauen,
as it is ioyned to the Godhead in the
person of Christ.
            So then the Angels minister to Christ not
as simply man, but as God-man, or God
and man: and so they minister to all the true
members of Christ Iesus, which are truly
coupled and vnited vnto his mysticall bodie.
Christ is that ladder of Iacob, whereby
the Angels of God do ascend and descend,

to do seruice to all those which are truly ioyned
vnto Iesus Christ, Gen. 28.
            This ought to make vs all admire the
endlesse and vnspeakeable goodnes of God,Vse. 1.
who hath not onely giuen vs to be Lords of
heauen and earth by the meanes of Christ,
but euen the glorious Angels, which are
farre aboue man in excellencie, to be our
seruants, to minister vnto vs, to comfort and
defend vs.
            This should moue vs all to carrie and behaue
our selues reuerently and holily in all
our actions and speeches,Vse 2. seeing the glorious
and blessed Angels of God do waite and
attend vpon vs. Truly this ought to make vs
haue great regard that no vnseemely speech
or action passe from vs, seeing we be in the
presence of these most excellent creatures of
God, the blessed & holy Angels, to behaue
our selues with greater reuerence then we
would before an earthly Prince, and in the
presence of a mightie Monarch.
            2 The number of them.Luk. 22. It is not said, there
came one Angell, as in the garden: but, the
Angels came vnto him: shewing there were
mo then one. And we find in the word, that
our Sauiour Christ had sometimes one, somtimes
mo to attend vpon him. And so the

wicked Angels come sometimes one alone
as here in Christs temptations: sometimes
many, as when Christ was on the crosse,
Colossians 2. 15. And so it is likewise with
the good Angels of God: sometimes they
come one alone, sometimes moe together.
            Mow if this be true, then that opinion fa
                  •
               
               leth
to the ground, which holds, that euery
man hath his two Angels: an euill Angel
to tempt him, and his good Angell to defend
him. But if God so please, he hath a
legion of bad Angels to torment the bad
                  •
               
and ten thousands of good Angels to comfort
the good.
            
                The third point is the time when the
                  ••
               
Angels came vnto Christ; [Then] when the
diuell had now ended all his temptations
not in the time of the temptations whi
                  ••
               
Christ was tempted, but immediatly after
they were ended.
            True it is, the good Angels of God be 
                  ••
               
               waies
readie to attend vpō Christ & to ob
                  ••
               
his will; yet here it is said, they came not 
                  〈◊〉
               
our Sauiour till after his temptations: 
                  〈◊〉
               
then when he had most need, they are 
                  〈◊〉
               
of God to comfort him: and as it is like
                  •
               
they tooke vpon them some bodily sh
                  ••
               
               
               
                  ••
               the time, as the diuell did, that so they

                  ••
               ght the better do him seruice.
            And here in the person of our Sauiour
Christ we may obserue the dealing of God

                  •
               ith his children, euen as he dealt with
Christ himselfe: namely, that the Lord doth
sometime conceale his fauour, and not

                  •
               hew his accustomed mercie to his children,

                  〈◊〉
                least the comfortable sense and feeling of

                  〈◊〉
                for a time, to trie his children. As here the
Lord with held for a time the comfort of his
Angels from our Sauiour Christ, yet after in
is greatest need sent them to comfort him.

                  •
               o the Lord dealeth with his children, euen

                  〈◊〉
                a nurse dealeth with her child, setteth it

                  •
               owne, and goeth and hideth her selfe for

                  〈◊〉
                time, letteth it sit still, so as the child ta
               
                  •
               eth
a knocke; and it may be hurteth it selfe,
so as it bleedeth againe: now all this she
doth, not because she loueth not her child,

                  〈◊〉
                that when she taketh vp her child againe
into her armes, it may loue her better,
and cling faster vnto her. Euen so dea
               
                  •
               eth
the Lord with his children, he often
withdraweth the comfortable feeling of
his mercie, and doth as it were hide himselfe
for a time, that so we may the better

                  〈◊〉
                what we are without his mercie, and

make more accompt of it, when the Lo
                  ••
               
doth giue vs the feeling of it againe, and 
                  〈◊〉
               
we may loue him euer after more earne
                  ••
               
and more constantly.
            To conclude, most men will say, There 
                  〈◊〉
               
no need of this doctrine of temptations: 
                  〈◊〉
               
they neuer felt any such matter, nor are 
                  〈◊〉
               
acquainted with them: nay, they hope (th
                  •
               
say) neuer to feele any such temptations:

                  〈◊〉
                they thank God that they neuer knew 
                  〈◊〉
               
temptations meant. Indeed these po
                  ••
               
soules may thinke themselues happie, 
                  〈◊〉
               
they be in a most pitifull case, and a mise
                  ••
               
               ble
estate: for whosoeuer belongs to Ch
                  •••
               
he must be made in some measure con
                  •••
               
               mable;
and if they be the true member
                  •
               
Christ, they must be made sutable to th
                  •
               
head,Iam. 1. 2. in suffering temptations. Nay, it is 
                  〈◊〉
               
ioy, and we haue iust cause of reioyci
                  •
               
when we be tempted: especially if we 
                  〈◊〉
               
able (by the power of Christ) to resist 
                  〈◊〉
               
temptations, as he did. So saith the 
                  〈◊〉
               
Ghost, Iam. 1. 2. My brethren (saith 
                  〈◊〉
               
Apostle) accompt it exceeding ioy, when ye 
                     〈◊〉
                  
into diuerse temptations.
            
            And those men which say, they neuer 
                  〈◊〉
               
tempted all their liues, alas they haue a 
                  〈◊〉
               
full iudgement of God vpon them, 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
               
                  •••
               dnesse of heart, which makes them that

                  〈◊〉
                feele no temptations, though they be

                  ••
               yly tempted by the Diuell to a thousand

                  〈◊〉
                and impieties. As the Disciples of Christ

                  〈◊〉
                though they saw the miracle of Christ,

                  〈◊〉
                saw that the bread was multiplied in

                  •
               eir hands, yet vnderstood it not, because 
                  〈◊〉
               
the hardnesse of their hearts: so these blind

                  ••
               les, though Satan tempt them from day

                  〈◊〉
                day, yet they be so blinded & their hearts

                  〈◊〉
                hardned, that they perceiue no such mat
               
                  ••
               .
            But if these men would learne once by the

                  •
               ord of God to see and feele their miserie,

                  •
               nd so repent and be truly humbled for their

                  〈◊〉
               , and become new creatures, they would

                  〈◊〉
                be of another mind. And therefore let

                  〈◊〉
                such men pray to God, that he of his mer
               
                  •
               le
giue them the sight of their wofull mise
               
                  •
               le,
that he would giue them soft and tender

                  •
               earts to be humbled for their sinnes, that so

                  ••
               ey may feele the want of grace; and they

                  ••
               il then confesse it is not an vnneedful thing

                  ••
               or them to know and vndergo temptations,
and that vnlesse they be tempted with
Christ, they can haue no true
ioy nor sound comfort
in Christ.
         
         
            
            Maister Perkins his Prayer before
his Sermons.
            OAlmightie Lord God, most merci
                  ••
               
and louing Father in Iesus Christ, 
                  〈◊〉
               
are here assembled before thy glorious Mijestie,
to be partakers of thy heauenly wor
                  •
               
which of thine infinite goodnesse and mer
                  ••
               
thou hast ordained to be the ordinary me
                  ••
               
to worke our saluation: we beseech th
                  •
               
therefore most mercifull Father, to blesse
                  •
               
               uery
one of vs in the hearing and the sp
                  ••
               
king of thy holy word. Good Lord op
                  ••
               
our blind eyes, that we may be able to vnderstand
it: and whereas our hearts are 
                  〈◊〉
               
of hardnesse, full of sinne, full of manifo
                  ••
               
rebellions: good Lord soften our hard ha
                  ••
               
graunt that thy holy word may be the tw
                  •
               
edged sword of the spirit to cut downe sin
                  ••
               
and corruption in vs, and make vs new 
                  〈◊〉
               
tures in Iesus Christ. And whereas we 
                  〈◊〉
               
troubled with many impediments in h
                  ••
               
               ring
of thy word, as wandring imagination
in our hearts, suggestions of Satan, and the
dulnesse of our owne flesh: good Lord remoue
these impediments, and giue vs eue
                  ••
               
               
               
                  •
               ne grace to heare thy word in feare and

                  ••
               uerence, as in thy presence; and to receiue
the same not as from man, but as from Iesus
Christ: and when we haue heard thy word,
graunt that it may be not the sauor of death
to our deeper condemnation, but the sauor
of life to our eternall comfort and saluation.
For this cause write the same in euery one
of our hearts, and tranforme vs into the obedience
of the same in our life and conuersation.
And because Satan is a deadly enemie
to the ministerie of thy word, good Lord
confound Satan, dissolue in euery one of vs
the cursed workes of the Diuel, worke thine
owne good works, shew thy selfe more merciful
in blessing of thy word, then Satan is or
can be malicious in hindring of the same.
Heare vs, we beseech thee, in these requests,
and graunt these graces to euery one of vs,
not for our owne merits (for vnto vs belongeth
nothing but eternall shame and confusion
for our sinnes) but for the merites of thy
deare sonne Iesus Christ, in whom thou art
well pleased: to whom with thee and the
holy Ghost, be giuen of euery one of vs
all praise, honor and glory, both
now and for euermore.
Amen.
            
               The voice of a person
                  1. Carnall, of

                        Euill: I do it, and will do.
                        Good: I do it not, nor will do.
                     
                  
                  2. Regenerate,
of

                        Euill: I do it, but would not do it.
                        Good: I do not that I would.
                     
                  
                  3. Glorified
of

                        Euill: I do it not, neither 
                              〈◊〉
                           
I do it.
                        Good: I do it, and will do it.
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            To the right Honorable
and vertuous Ladies, the
Countesse of Cumberland, and
the Countesse of Warwicke,
grace and peace.
            
               RIght Honorable, in the former

                  〈◊〉
                is the combat of Christ:
in this latter is set downe the
combat of a Christian. He that
fought with our head, will fight
with the members▪ and he that assaulted Christ,
will assaile all Christians. But Christ did beare
troubles, and was borne out of them: we must
haue troubles, and shall be borne out of them. If
our afflictions were plagues, as to the Egyptians:
curses, as to Cham: destruction, as to Sodome:
desolation, as to Israel: then had we cause to flie
from them, as Moses did from that miraculous
serpent. But since they are but the trials of faith,
corrections of a father, visitations from the Bishop
of our soules: since they are as Phlebotomie
to a Pleurisie, and a purgation to a Plethora,

they are to be endured with all patience. How
Christ did endure them, you may reade in that
Treatise: how a Christian must, you may see in
this. The former Treatise I presented to your
honorable brother: this latter to you most honorable
sisters. I desired to annex this to the former
discourse, because it is sutable to that present argument:
and I know not to whom I may better
present it, then to you who haue experience of this
Christian warfare. If it please you but to reade
these holy meditations, and to entertaine this
poore mite into your rich treasury by the reading
I doubt not but you shal haue much comfort; and
by your entertaining, the church shal haue much
good. Now that good God who hath giuen your
mind to know him, giue you also an heart to lo
                  •
               
him: and as you are Honorable in the eyes of this
world, so he make you most honorable in the eyes
of his Maiestie. And thus crauing pardon, I
commit you to the grace of that God, who will
honor them that loue him, and comfort them
that seeke comfort from him.
            
               Your Honors in the Lord,
Robert Hill.
               
            
         
         
            
            A comfort for the feeble
minded: wherein is set downe
that spirituall combat which
is betwixt a Christian
and Satan.
            
               Lidia.
               
                  SIr, I heard you with much
comfort, when you preached
vpon the temptations
of Christ. I pray you instruct
me concerning the
temptations of a Christian,
and giue me leaue to aske you certaine questic
                     •
                  s.
            
            
               Paul.
               Say on.
            
            
               Lidia.
               What is it which we call Christi
                     ••
                  
warfare?
            
            
               Paul.
               Christian warfare is concerning the
right way of fighting in the spirituall battel.
            
            
               Lidia
               Which be the parts thereof?
            
            
               Paul.
               The parts thereof, are the preparation
to battell, and the combat it selfe.
            
            
               
               Lidia.
               How may I prepare my self vnto it?
            
            
               Paul.
               
                  To the preparation, you must vse the
complete armor of God. Eph. 6. 13. For this
cause, take vnto you the whole armour of God,
that ye may be able to resist in the euill day: and
hauing finished all things, stand fast.
            
            
               Lidia.
               How many parts hath this armor?
            
            
               Paul.
               
                  The parts thereof are especially six:
1. truth: 2. iustice: 3. Euangelicall obedience:
4. faith: 5. the word of God: 6. continuall and
feruent prayer with watching: as you may
reade, Eph. 6. 14. Stand fast therefore, your
loynes girded about with veritie, and hauing o
                     •
                  
the brest-plate of righteousnesse, 15. And your
feet shod with the preparation of the Gospell of
peace. 16. Aboue all, take the shield of Faith,
wherewith ye may quench all the fierie darts of
the wicked. 17. And take the helmet of saluation,
and the sword of the spirit, which is the word of
God. 18. And pray alwayes with all maner of
prayer and supplication in the spirit, and watch
thereunto with al perseuerance and supplication
for all Saints. 1. Pet. 5. 8. Be sober, and watch: for
your aduersarie the diuel, as a roring Lion, walketh
about, seeking whom he may deuoure.
            
            
               Lidia.
               What then is the combat?
            
            
               Paul.
               The combat is a mutuall conflict of
them that fight spiritually.
            
            
               
               Lidia.
               Who are the warriors?
            
            
               Paul.
               
                  The warriors, are the tempter and
the Christian souldier. Ephes. 6. 12. For we
wrastle not against flesh and bloud, but against
principalities, against powers, and against the
worldly gouernors, the princes of the darknesse
of this world, against spirituall wickednesses,
which are in high places.
            
            
               Lidia.
               Whom call you the tempter?
            
            
               Paul.
               The tempter, is the Prince or his
helpers. The Prince is Satan and his Angels,
which are spirituall wickednesses in high
things. His helpers are the flesh and the
world.
            
            
               Lid.
               What is the conflict of these warriors?
            
            
               Paul.
               The conflict of all these, is temptation,
whereby a man is prouoked to commit
such wickednesse as is hurtfull to the saluation
of his soule. 1. Pet. 2. 11. Dearely beloued,
I beseech you as strangers and pilgrimes abstaine
from fleshly lustes, which fight against the
soule.
               
            
            
               Lidia.
               What must I note in this Christian
souldier?
            
            
               Paul.
               In the souldier, two things are to
be considered: his resisting, and his fall.
            
            
               Lidia.
               VVhat is his resistance?
            
            
               Paul.
               
                  Resistance is an action, whereby

the souldier doth withstand temptation,
through grace working inwardly in him. 1.
Iohn 2. 14. I write vnto you babes, because ye
haue knowne the Father: I haue written to you
fathers, because ye haue knowne him that is from
the beginning: I haue written to you yong men,
because ye are strong, and the word of God abideth
in you, and ye haue ouercome the wicked.
1. Pet. 5. 8. Ephes. 6. 16. Psal. 91. 13. Thou shalt
walk vpon the Lion and Asp, the yong Lion and
the Dragon shalt thou tread vnder feete.
            
            
               Lidia.
               How is this resistance confirmed?
            
            
               Paul.
               To confirme this, these preseruatiues
which follow are very necessary.
               1. When you are tempted to sinne, do not
only abstaine from it, but earnestly loue and
follow after the contrary. Iohn 8. 44.
               2. Neuer yeeld or consent to Satans words,
whether he speake the truth, accuse falsly, or
flatter dissemblingly. Iohn 8. 44. Ye are of
your father the diuell, and the lusts of your father
ye will do: he hath bin a murderer from the
beginning, and abode not in the truth, because
there is no truth in him: when he speaketh a lie,
then speaketh he of his owne; for he is a lier, and
the father thereof. Marke 1. 24. And cried
with a loud voice, and said, What haue I to do
with thee, Iesus the sonne of the most high God?

And Iesus said, Hold thy peace, and come out of
him. Act. 16. 17. She followed Paul and vs, and
cried, saying: These men are the seruants of the
most high God, which shew vnto vs the way of
saluation, &c. August. serm. 241.
               3. One temptation is to be looked for after
another, and then especially when our enemie
after he hath set his snares, is at rest:
for the diuel neuer maketh an end of his malice,
1. Pet. 5. 8.
            
            
               Lidia.
               I haue heard how to resist: teach
me (I pray you) what is his fall.
            
            
               Paul.
               
                  The fall is, whereby the souldier
through infirmitie fainteth, being subdued
by the power of the enemie. Gal. 6. 1. Brethrē,
if a man be fallen by occasion into any fault,
ye which are spirituall, restore such a one with
the spirit of meeknesse, considering thy selfe least
thou also be tempted.
            
            
               Lidia.
               If I fall, how may I rise?
            
            
               Paul.
               To this appertaineth the spirituall
remedie: now a remedie, is a thing hauing
aptnesse to restore him which is fallen to his
former estate. Gal. 6. 1.
               And here two things must alwayes be
thought on.
               1. If there be a willing mind, euery one is
accepted for that grace which he hath, not

                  for that which he hath not. 2. Corint. 8. 12,
For if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted
according to that a man hath, and not according
to that he hath not.
               2. In all these things, whosoeuer wil leade
a godly life in Christ, the power of God is to
be made perfect through their infirmitie. 2.
Cor. 12. 9. And he said vnto me, My grace is
sufficient for thee, for my power is made perfect
through weaknesse: very gladly therefore will I
reioyce rather in mine infirmities, that the power
of God may dwell in me. 10. Therefore I take
pleasure in infirmities, in reproches, in necessities,
in persecutions, in anguish for Christs sake, for
when I am weake, then am I strong.
            
            
               Lidia.
               But since Satan is mine aduersarie,
instruct me how many his assaults be.
            
            
               Paul.
               Assaults are three-fold.
            
            
               Lidia.
               VVhich is the first?
            
            
               Paul.
               
                  The first is about the Christian mans
effectuall calling: and the temptation is the
enterprise of the Diuell, to blindfold mans
mind and to harden his hart, lest the word of
God should work in him to saluation. Mat. 1
                        •
                     
4. And as he sowed, some fell by the way side, and
the fowles came and deuoured them vp. 5. And
some fell vpon stonie ground, where they had no
                     •
                  
much earth, and anon they sprang vp, because

they had no depth of earth. 6. And when the sun
rose vp, they were parched; & for lack of rooting
withered away. 7. And some fell among thornes,
and the thornes sprung vp and choked them. 19.
Whensoeuer a man heareth the word of the kingdome,
and vnderstandeth it not, the euill one cometh,
and catcheth away that which was sowne
in his heart: and this is he which hath receiued
the seed by the way side.
            
            
               Lidia.
               How may I resist this assault?
            
            
               Paul.
               
                  A resistance in those that are called,
is wrought by the spirit of God, that causeth
men to lend their eares to heare, and doth
ingraffe the word in their hearts, that the immortall
seed of regeneration may spring in
them. Psal. 40. 6. Ioh. 6. 44. Act. 16. 14. Iam. 1.
21. Wherefore lay apart all filthinesse, and superfluitie
of maliciousnes, and receiue with meeknes
the word that is graffed in you, which is able to
saue your soules. 1. Pet. 1. 22. Seeing your soules
are purified in obeying the truth through the
spirit, to loue brotherly without faining, loue one
another with a pure heart feruently. 1. Ioh. 3. 9.
Whosoeuer is borne of God sinneth not, for his
seed remaineth in him, neither cā he sin because
he is borne of God. A resistance in those that
are to be called, is, when in a sincere heart
they do ioyne the word which they haue

heard with faith. Luke 8. 15. But that which
fell in good ground, are they which with an honest
and good heart heare the word and keepe it,
and bring forth fruit with patience, Heb. 4. 2.
            
            
               Lidia.
               What certaine preseruatiues are to
be noted in this resistance?
            
            
               Paul.
               1. Premeditation of the power and
vse of the word. Eccles. 4. 17. Take heed to thy
feete when thou entrest into the house of the
Lord, and be more neare to heare then to giue
the sacrifice of fooles, for they know not that they
do euil. Cha. 5. 1. Be not rash with thy mouth, n
                     •
                  
let thine heart be hastie to vtter a thing before
God: for God is in the heauen, and thou art 
                     〈◊〉
                  
the earth, therefore let thy words be few.
               2. Diligent attentiō of the mind, Act. 16. 14.
               3. An hungring desire of the heart. Ioh. 7.
37. Now in the last and great day of the feast,
Iesus stood and cried, saying: If any man thirst,
let him come to me and drinke.
               4. Integritie of life. Psal. 26. 6.
               5. The casting away of euill affections
Iam. 1. 22. And be ye doers of the word, and n
                     •
                  
hearers onely, deceiuing your owne soules.
               6. The inward consent and agreement
of the heart with the word preached. Act. 2.
37.
               7. An hiding of the word in the heart lest

we should sinne, Psalm. 119. 11. I haue hid
thy word in mine heart, that I might not sinne
against thee.
               
               8. A trembling at the presence of God in
the assembly of the Church, Esa. 66. 2. For
all these things hath mine hand made, and all
these things haue bene, saith the Lord, and to
him will I looke, euen to him that is poore and
of a contrite spirit, and trembleth at my words.
Act. 10. 33. Then sent I for thee immediatly,
and thou hast well done to come; now therefore
are we all here present before God, to heare all
things that are commaunded thee of God.
            
            
               Lidia.
               The God of power preserue me
from this assault by these preseruatiues: but
how may I fall in this temptation?
            
            
               Paul.
               Your fall, is either by a coldnesse
in receiuing the word, and a neglect therof,
or else by falling into errors.
            
            
               Lidia
               What then must be my remedy?
            
            
               Paul.
               
                  The remedie for this, is subiection,
which must be made to the iudgement
and censure of the brethren and Ministers.
Reuel. 3. 15. I know thy workes, that thou art
neither cold nor hote: I would thou werest cold
or hote. Gal. 6. 2. 1. Tim. 1. 20. Of whom is
Hymeneus and Alexander, whom I haue deliuered
vnto Satan, that they might learne not

to blaspheme.
            
            
               Lid.
               What is the second assault?
            
            
               Paul.
               The second assault is concerning
faith.
            
            
               Lid.
               How may one be thus assaulted?
            
            
               Paul.
               By an illusion, which the Diuell
casteth into the hearts of godly ones: as
when he saith: Thou art not of the number
of the elect: thou art not iustified: thou hast
no faith: thou must certainely be condemned
for thy sinnes, as Mat. 4. 3. Then came to him
the tempter, and said: If thou be the Sonne of
God, command that these stones be made bread.
Now as he dealt with Christ, so will he
with Christians.
            
            
               Lidia.
               What helpes doth the Diuell
abuse, for the strengthening of such illusions
as these?
            
            
               Paul.
               1. He abuseth Aduersitie: as dangers,
losses, persecutions, iealousie, grieuous
offences, &c. So in Dauid, Psal. 73. 12. Loe,
these are the wicked, yet prosper they alway, and
increase in riches. 13. Certainely, I haue cleansed
mine heart in vaine, and washed mine hands
in innocencie. In Iob 13. 23. How many art
mine iniquities and sinnes? Shew me my rebellion
and my sinne. 24. Wherefore hidest thou thy
face, and takest me for thine enemie? 25. Will

thou breake a leafe driuen to and fro, and wilt
thou pursue the drie stubble?
               2 The remembrance of sinnes past. Iob
13. 26. For thou writest bitter things against
me, and makest me to possesse the iniquities of
my youth.
               3 A feeling of death euen alreadie at
hand.
            
            
               Lidia.
               How may I withstand these?
            
            
               Paul.
               
                  By a true faith, applying Christ with
all his merits particularly, after this manner:
I assuredly beleeue that I shall not be condemned,
but that I am elected and iustified
in Christ, and am out of all doubt that all my
sinnes are pardoned. Esa. 53. 11. He shall see
the trauell of his soule, and shall be satisfied: by
his knowledge shall my righteous seruant iustifie
many: for he shall beare their iniquities. Rom.
8. 38. For I am perswaded, that neither death,
nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers,
nor things present, nor things to come. 39.
Nor heighth, nor depth, nor any other creature
shall be able to separate vs from the loue of God,
which is in Christ Iesus our Lord.
            
            
               Lidia.
               Giue me a preseruatiue that I
may resist.
            
            
               Paul.
               
                  Your best preseruatiue is, in temptation,
not to behold faith, but the obiect of

faith, which is Christ. So did Paul, Philip. 3.
12. Not as though I had alreadie attained vnto
it, either were alreadie perfect: but I follow,
that I may comprehend that, for whose sak
                     •
                  
also I am comprehended of Christ Iesus. 13. One
thing I do, I forget that which is behind, and
indeuour my selfe to that which is before. 14.
And follow hard toward the marke, for the
price of the high calling of God in Christ Iesus.
So must all. Ioh. 3. 14. And as Moses lift vp
the Serpent in the wildernesse; so must the sonne
of man be lift vp, that he that beleeueth in him
should not perish, but haue life euerlasting.
            
            
               Lid.
               What is my falling in this assault?
            
            
               Paul.
               
                  Your falling is doubtfulnesse, and
distrust of your election, & of Gods mercie
Psal. 77. 6. I called to remembrance my so
                     ••
                  
in the night: I com
                     ••
                  ned with mine own heart
and my spirit searched diligently. 7. Will in
Lord absent himselfe for euer, and will he shew
no more fauour? 8. Is his 
                     〈◊〉
                   cleane gone for
euer? doth his promise faile for euermore? So
Dauid of himselfe saith: Psalm. 22. 1. My
God, my God; why hast thou forsaken me, and
art so farre from my health, and from the words
of my roaring?
            
            
               Lid.
               What is my remedie?
            
            
               Paul
               The remedie is double:
               
                  
                  First, the operation of the holy Spirit,
stirring vp faith and increasing the same.
Philip. 1. 6. I am perswaded of this same thing,
that he that hath begunne this good worke in
you, will performe it vntill the day of Iesus
Christ. Luk. 17. 5. And the Apostles said vnto
the Lord, Increase our faith.
               The second is, an holy meditation, which
is manifold:
               1 That it is the commandement of God,
that we should beleeue in Christ. 1. Ioh. 3. 23.
This is then his commaundement, that we beleeue
in the name of his Sonne Iesus Christ, and
loue one another, as he gaue commaundement.
               2 That the Euangelicall promises are indefinite,
and do exclude no man, vnlesse peraduenture
any man do exclude himselfe, Esa.
55. 1. Ho, euery one that thirsteth, come ye
to the waters, and ye that haue no siluer, come,
buy, and eate: come, I say, buy wine and milke
without siluer and without money. Mat. 11. 28.
Come vnto me all ye that are wearie and laden,
and I will ease you. Ioh. 3. 15. That whosoeuer
beleeueth in him should not perish, but haue
eternall life. Also the Sacraments of Baptisme
and the Lords Supper, do to euery one
seuerally apply indefinite promises, and
therefore are very effectuall to enforce particular

assurance or plerophorie of forgiuenesse
of sinnes.
               3 That doubtfulnesse and despaire are
most grieuous sinnes.
               4 That contrarie to hope, men must vnder
hope beleeue with Abraham. Rom. 4.
18. Which Abraham aboue hope beleeued vnder
hope, that he should be the father of many
nations: according to that which was spoken to
him, So shall thy seed be.
               5 That the mercie of God, and the merit
of Christs obedience, being both God
and man, are infinite. Esa. 54. 10. For the
mountaines shall remoue, and the hils shall fall
downe: but my mercie shall not depart from
thee, neither shall my couenant of peace fall away,
saith the Lord, that hath compassion on
thee. Psal. 103. 11. For as high as the heauen
is aboue the earth, so great is his mercie toward
them that feare him. 1. Ioh. 2. 1. My babes,
these things write I vnto you, that ye sinne not:
and if any man sinne, we haue an aduocate with
the Father, Iesus Christ the iust. 2. And he is
the reconciliation for our sinnes: and not for ours
onely, but also for the sinnes of the whole world.
Psal. 137. 7. Let Israel waite on the Lord: for
the Lord is mercie, and with him is great redemption.
               
                  
6 That God measureth the obedience
due vnto him, rather by the affection and
desire to obey, then by the act and performance
of it. Rom. 8. 5. For they that are after
the flesh, sauour the things of the flesh, but
they that are after the spirit, the things of the
spirit. 7. Because the wisedome of the flesh, is
enmitie against God: for it is not subiect to the
law of God, neither indeed can be. Rom. 7. 20.
Now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that
do it, but the sinne that dwelleth in me. 21. I
find then by the law, that when I would do good,
euill is present with me. 22. For I delight in the
law of God, concerning the inner man. Mal. 3.
17. I will spare them, as a man spareth his son,
that reuerenceth him.
               7 When one sinne is forgiuen, all the
rest are remitted also: for remission being giuen
once, without any prescription of time,
is giuen for euer. Rom. 11. 29. For the gifts
and calling of God are without repentance. Act.
10. 43. To him also giue all the Prophets witnesse,
that through his name, all that beleeue
in him, shall receiue remission of sinnes.
               8 That grace and faith are not taken away
by fals of infirmitie, but thereby are declared
and made manifest. Rom. 5. 20. Moreouer,
the law entred thereupon, that the offence
                  
should abound: neuerthelesse, where sin abounded,
there grace abounded much more. 2. Cor.
12. 7. And lest I should be exalted out of measure,
&c. there was giuen vnto me a pricke in
the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me. 8.
For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that
it might depart from me. 9. He said, My grace
is sufficient for thee.
               9 That all the workes of God are by
contrarie meanes. 2. Cor. 12. 9. My power
is made perfect through weaknesse.
               
            
            
               Lidia.
               By the blessing of God I will not
forget to practise these soueraigne remedies
if Satan at any time seeke to take away my
faith, and to cut off this hand by which I
must apply, or to blindfold this eye, by
which I may behold Christ sitting at Gods
right hand, as Stephen did. Let me heare, I
pray you, the third assault, and what it concerneth.
            
            
               Paul.
               The third assault is concerning
Sanctification.
            
            
               Lid.
               What is this temptation?
            
            
               Paul.
               
                  The temptation is a prouoking to
sinne, according as the disposition of euery
man, and as occasion shall offer it selfe, 1.
Chron. 21. 1. And Satan stood vp against Israel,
and prouoked Dauid to number Israel.

                  Ioh. 13. 2. And when supper was done, the diuell
had now put into the heart of Iudas Iscariot,
Simons sonne, to betray him.
            
            
               Lid.
               Let me not be ignorant of Satans
enterprises. How will he allure to sinne?
            
            
               Paul.
               
                  In this temptation, the diuell doth
wonderfully diminish and extenuate those
sins which men are about to commit, partly
by obiecting closely the mercie of God,
and partly by couering or hiding the punishment
which is due for the sin. Besides, there
are helpes to further the diuell in this his
temptation: as first, the flesh which lusteth
against the spirit, sometimes by begetting
euill motions and affections, and sometimes
by ouerwhelming and oppressing the good
intents and motions, Gal. 5. 17. For the flesh
lufteth against the spirit, and the spirit against
the flesh: and these are contrarie one to another,
so that ye cannot do the same things that ye
would. 19. Moreouer, the workes of the flesh
are manifest: which are, adulterie, fornication,
vncleanenesse, wantonnesse. 20. Idolatrie, witchcraft,
hatred, debate, emulations, wrath, contentions,
seditions, heresies. 21. Enuie, murthers,
drunkennesse, gluttonie, and such like,
whereof I tell you before, as I also haue told you
before, that they which do such things shall not

inherit the kingdome of God. Iam. 1. 14. But
euery man is tempted, when he is drawne away
by his owne concupiscence, and is entised.
               
                  Secondly, the world, which bringeth
men to disobedience, through pleasure, profite,
honour, and euill examples, Ephesians
2. 3. Among whom we also had our conuersation
in time past, in the lustes of the flesh, in fulfilling
the will of the flesh, and of the mind, and
were by nature the children of wrath, as well as
others. 1. Iohn 2. 16. For all that is in the
world, as the lusts of the flesh, and the lust of the
eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the father,
but is of the world.
            
            
               Lid.
               How may I resist this temptation?
            
            
               Paul.
               
                  Resistance, is made by the desire
of the spirit, which worketh good motions
and affections in the faithfull, and driueth
foorth the euill. Gal. 5. 22. But the fruite of
the spirit is loue, ioy, peace, long suffering, gentlenesse,
goodnesse, faith, 23. Meekenesse, temperancie:
against such there is no law. 24. For
they that are Christs, haue crucified the flesh,
with the affections and the lusts thereof. 26. Let
vs not be desirous of vaine glorie, prouoking one
another, enuying one another.
            
            
               Lid.
               Giue me here some preseruariues,
that I may resist.
            
            
               
               Paul.
               The preseruatiues are these.
               1 To account no sinne light or small.
Gal. 5. 9. Alitle leauen doth leauen the whole
lumpe. Rom. 6. 23. For the wages of sinne is
death, but the gift of God is eternal life, through
Iesus Christ our Lord.
               2 To auoide all occasions of sinne. To
these rather agreeth the Prouerb vsed of the
Plague: longè, tardè, citò: that is, aloofe, slowly,
quickly. 1. Thessal. 5. 22. Abstaine from all
appearance of euill. Iud. v. 23. And other saue
with feare, pulling them out of the fire, and hate
euen the garment spotted by the flesh.
               3 To accustome thy selfe to subdue the
lesser sinnes, that at the last, thou maist also
ouercome the greater. Rom. 13. 4.
               4. To apply thy selfe to thy appointed
calling, and alway to be busily occupied about
something in the same.
               5 To oppose the law, the iudgements
of God, the last iudgement, the glorious
presence of God, and such like, against the
rebellion and loosenesse of the flesh. Pro. 28
14. Blessed is the man that feareth alway: but
he that hardeneth his heart, shall fall into euill.
Gen. 39. 9. There is no man greater in this
house then I: neither hath he kept any thing
from me, but onely thee, because thou art his

wife: how then can I do this great wickednesse,
and so sinne against God?
            
            
               Lid.
               But alas, I see Satan foyles me in
many sins: instruct me I pray you, with some
rules against them. Say I be angrie vnaduisedly,
or desire to reuenge wrongs done vnto
me, how may I remedie this my sinne?
            
            
               Paul.
               Against vniust anger, or priuate desire
of reuenge. Here meditate, 1. iniuries;
they happen vnto vs by the Lords appointment
for our good. 2. Sam. 16. 10. 2. God of
his great goodnesse forgiueth vs farre more
sinnes, then it is possible for vs to forgiue
men. 3. It is the dutie of Christian loue, to
forgiue others. 4. We must not desire to destroy
them, whom Christ hath redeemed by
his precious bloud. 5. We our selues are in
daunger of the wrath of God, if we suffer our
wrath to burne against our brother. Forgiue
saith he) and it shall be forgiuen. 6. We know
not the circumstances of the facts, what the
mind was, and purpose of them against
whom we swell.
               Bridles or externall remedies, are these:
1. in this we shall imitate the clemencie of
the Lord, who for a very great season doth
often tolerate the wicked. Learne of me, for
I am humble and meeke. 2. There must be a

pausing and time of delay, betwixt our anger
and the execution of the same. Atheno
                     
                        ••
                     rus
counselled Augustus that he being angrie,
should repeate all the letters of the Alphabet,
or A B C, before he against another
did either speake or do any thing. 3. To depart
out of those places where those are,
with whom we are angrie. 4. To auoide contention,
both in word and deed. Do nothing
through contention.
               
            
            
               Lidia.
               Say I sinne by couetousnesse and
ambition: what must I do?
            
            
               P.
               Remedies against those bad desires of
riches and honor, are: 1. God doth euen in
famine quickē and reuiue them which feare
him. Psal. 33. 18. 19. The eye of the Lord is
vpon them that feare him, to deliuer their souls
from death, and to preserue them from famine.
2. Godlinesse is great gaine, if the mind of
man can be therewith content. 1. Tim. 6. 6. 3.
we do waite and looke for the resurrection
of the bodie, and eternall life: therefore we
should not take such carking care for this
present mortall life. 4. We are seruants in
our fathers house, therefore looke what is
conuenient for vs, that will he louingly bestow
vpon vs. 5. The palpable blindnesse of
an ambitious mind, desireth to be set aloft,

that he may haue the greater downe-falle
and he feareth to be humbled, lest he should
not be exalted. 6. Adam when he would
needes be checke-mate with God, did bring
both himselfe and his posteritie headlong
                     ••
                  
destruction. 7. He is a very ambitious rob
God, which desireth to take that comme
                     •
                  
                  dation
to himselfe, which is appropriate only
to the Lord.
            
            
               Lidia.
               Admit Satan allures me to carnal
vncleanenesse; how may I preserue my selfe
that I may with the wise virgins enter with
the bridegrome?
            
            
               Pa.
               Preseruatiues against the desires of the
flesh: are, 1. He that will be Christs disciple,
must euery day take vp his crosse, Luk. 9. 23.
2. They which are according to the spirit,
sauour of such things as are according to the
spirit, Rom. 8. 5. 3. We ought to behaue 
                     〈◊〉
                  
selues as citizens of the kingdom of heauen,
Philip. 3. 20. 4. We are the temple of God
                     •
                  
1. Cor. 3. 6. Our members, they are the mē
                  bers
of Christ. 1. Cor. 6. 15. And we ha
                     ••
                  
dwelling within vs the spirit of Christ
                     •
                  
which we should not grieue, Eph. 4. 30.
            
            
               Lid.
               How may I fall in this temptations?
            
            
               Paul.
               When you being preuented, fall 
                     〈◊〉
                  
some offence: Gal. 6. 1.
            
            
               
               Lidia.
               What doth Satan when one is thus

                     ••
                  llen?
            
            
               Paul.
               
                  Here Satan doth wonderfully aggrauate
the offence committed, and doth ac
                     
                        •
                     use
and terrifie the offender with the iudgements
of God. Mat. 27. 3. Then when Iudas
which betrayed him, saw that he was condem
                  
                     ••
                  d,
he repented himselfe, and brought againe
the thirtie peeces of siluer to the chiefe Priests
and Elders: 4. Saying, I haue sinned, betraying
the innocent bloud: but they said, What is that
to vs? see thou to it. 5. And when he had cast
downe the siluer peeces in the Temple, he departed,
and went and hanged himselfe.
            
            
               Lid.
               What remedie is there if that I fall?
            
            
               Paul.
               
                  The remedie is, a renewed repentance,
the beginning whereof is sorrow, in
regard of God for the same sinne; the fruites
hereof are especially seuen. 2. Cor. 7. 9. Now
I reioyce not that you were sorrie, but that ye
sorrowed to repentance: for ye sorrowed godly,
so that in nothing ye were hurt by vs. 10. For
godly sorrow causeth repentance vnto saluation,
not to be repented of: but worldly sorrow
causeth death. 11. For behold, this thing
that ye haue bene godly sorrie, what great
care hath it wrought in you: yea, what clearing
of your selues: yea, what indignation: yea,

what feare: yea, how great desire: yea, wh
                     ••
                  
zeale: yea, what punishment: in all things 
                     〈◊〉
                  
haue shewed your selues, that ye are pure in
this matter.
            
            
               Lid.
               Repeate out of this place those seuen
fruites of repentance.
            
            
               Paul.
               First, a desire of doing well.
               
                  Secondly, an Apologie, that is, a confession
of the sinne before God, with a requiring
of pardon for the offence. Psalm. 32. 5.
Then I acknowledged my sin vnto thee, neither
hid I mine iniquitie: for I thought, I will confesse
against my selfe my wickednesse vnto the
Lord, and thou forgauest the punishment of my
sinne. 2. Sam. 12. 13. Then Dauid said vnto
Nathan, I haue sinned against the Lord: and
Nathan said vnto Dauid, The Lord also ha
                     ••
                  
put away thy sinne, thou shalt not die.
               3 Indignation against a mans selfe, for
his offence.
               4 A feare, not so much for the punishment,
as for offending the Lord. Psal. 130. 3.
If thou streightly markest iniquities, O Lord
who shall stand?
               
               5 A desire to be fully renewed, and to be
deliuered from sinne.
               6 A feruent zeale to loue God, and to embrace
and keepe all his commandements.
               
                  
7. Reuenge, whereby the flesh may be ta
                  
                     •
                  ed
and subdued, lest at any time afterward
such offences be committed.
            
            
               Lidia.
               Blessed be God, that thus teacheth

                     •
                  e by you. Let me speake yet vnto you concerning
calamities: I reade in the Scriptures
of the patient bearing of the crosse; what wil
it teach me?
            
            
               Paul.
               The patient bearing of the crosse,
teacheth how Christians should vndergo
the burden.
            
            
               Lidia.
               VVhat (I pray you) is the crosse?
            
            
               Paul.
               
                  The crosse is a certaine measure of
afflictions, appointed by God to euery one
of the faithfull. Math. 6. 24. If any man wil follow
me, let him forsake himselfe, take vp his crosse
and follow me. Col. 1. 24. Now reioyce I in my
sufferings for you, and fulfill the rest of the afflictions
of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake
which is the Church.
            
            
               Lidia.
               How must this crosse be taken vp?
            
            
               Paul.
               We ought to take vp this crosse willingly,
euen with both hands, when it shall
please God to lay it vpon vs. And after we
haue taken it vp, we must beare it with patience
and perseuerance. Col. 1. 11. Strengthened
with all might through his glorious power,
vnto all patience and long suffering with
                  
ioyfulnesse. Luke 21. 19. Possesse your soules with
patience.
            
            
               Lidia.
               How may I preserue patience?
            
            
               Paul.
               
                  The preseruatiues of patience, are
first strength by the holy Ghost. Phil. 4. 13.
I am able to do all things through the helpe of
Christ, which strengtheneth me. Phil. 1. 20. It is
giuen to you for Christ, that not onely ye should
beleeue in him, but also suffer for his sake. 2. An
holy meditation which is manifold.
               
               1. That the afflictions of the faithful come
not by chance, but by the counsell and prouidence
of God, which disposeth all things
in a most excellent sort. Gen. 45. 4. 5. It was
God that sent Ioseph into Egypt. 2. Sam. 16. 10.
The Lord biddeth Shemei curse Dauid. Psal.
119. 71. It was good for me that I was afflicted,
that I might learne thy statutes. Hence it is euident,
that afflictions to the godly are ineuitable.
Act. 14. 21. By many afflictions you must
enter into the kingdome of God. Mat. 7. 14. The
gate is streight and the way narrow that leadeth
vnto life, and few there be that find it. Iohn 16
20. In the world ye shall haue troubles.
               2 That albeit afflictions are grieuous,
yet are they good and profitable. For they
are helpes, whereby men being humbled for
their sinnes before God, obtaine peace and

holinesse of life. 2. Cor. 1. 9. We receiued sentence
of death in our selues, because we should
not trust in our selues, but in God, which raiseth
the dead. Esa. 26. 16. Lord, in trouble haue they
visited thee, they powred out a prayer when thy
chastening was vpon them. Hos. 5. 15. I will go
and returne to my place, till they acknowledge
their fault and seeke me: in their affliction they
will seeke me diligently. Psal. 78. 34. When he
flue them they sought him, and they returned,
and they sought God early. Ierem. 31. 18. I haue
heard Ephraim lamenting thus: Thou hast corrected
me, and I was chastised as an vntamed
calfe: conuert thou me, and I shall be conuerted.
Heb. 12. 11. No chastisement for the present see
                  
                     •
                  eth
ioyous, but grieuous: but afterward it bringeth
the quiet fruit of righteousnesse vnto them
which are thereby exercised. Psa. 30. 5. Weeping
may abide at euening, but ioy commeth in the
morning. Iohn 15. 2. Euery branch that beareth
fruit, he purgeth it, that it may bring forth

                     ••
                  re fruite. 1. pet. 1. 6. Wherein ye reioyce,
though now for a season (if need require) ye are
in heauinesse through many temptations. 2. Cor.
1. 4. The God of all comfort, which comforteth
vs in all our tribulations, that we may be able to
comfort them which are in affliction, by the comfort
wherewith our selues are comforted of God.

                  Rom. 5. 3. We glory in afflictions, knowing that
affliction bringeth patience. Heb. 2. 10. He did
consecrate the Prince of their saluation through
affliction. We permit Chirurgians that they
both bind vs lying diseased in our beds, and
seare vs with hot irons, yea lanch and search
our members with rasors: and lastly, we send
them away vsually with friendly and kind
speeches, & often with a golden fee for their
thus handling vs. Shal we thē suffer so many
things of a Chirurgian, to cure a bodily disease,
and will we not giue God leaue to cure
by afflictions the most festered diseases of
our sicke soules?
            
            
               Lidia.
               What is to be gathered hence?
            
            
               Paul.
               
                  By this we may gather, that the afflictions
of the godly, are signes of their adoption.
Heb. 12. 6. Whom the Lord loueth,
he chasteneth, and he scourgeth euery sonne that
he receiueth. 7. If ye endure chastisement, God
offereth himselfe vnto you as vnto sonne
                     •
                  .
And that they are to them, the Kings
high way to heauen. Iames 1. 12. Blessed 
                     〈◊〉
                  
the man that endureth temptation: for when he
is tried, he shall receiue the crowne of life, which
the Lord hath promised to them that loue 
                     〈◊〉
                  
2. Cor. 4. 17. For our light affliction which i
                     •
                  
but for a moment, causeth vnto vs a farre more

excellent and an eternall waight of glory.
               3 That God hath promised fauour, mitigation
of punishment, his presence and deliuerance.
Philip. 1. 29. 1. Cor. 10. 13. God is
faithfull, who will not suffer you to be tempted aboue
measure, but with temptation will giue deliuerance.
2. Sam. 7. 14. Psal. 50. 15. Call vpon
me in time of trouble, and I will deliuer thee, and
thou shalt glorifie me. Psal. 121. 4. He that keepeth
Israel, will neither slumber nor sleepe. Esa.
43. 2. When thou passest through the waters, I
will be with thee, and through the flouds, that
they do not ouerwhelme thee: when thou walkest
through the very fire, thou shalt not burne, neither
shal the flame kindle vpon thee: 3. For I am
the Lord thy God, the holy one of Israel thy sauiour.
               4 That in all troubles of the faithfull,
Christ is a companion. 1. Pet. 4. 13. Reioyce
that ye are partakers of the afflictions of Christ.
2 Cor. 4. 10. Euery where we beare about in our
bodie the dying of Christ, that the life of Iesus
might also be made manifest in our bodies. Col.
1. 21.
               5 That the Angels are readie to defend
such as feare God. Psal. 34. 8. 2. Kings 6. 16.
Feare not, there are more with vs then against
vs.
               
            
            
               
               Lidia.
               But of all calamities, the remembrance
of death is fearful vnto me: giue me (I
pray you) some few preseruatiues against it.
            
            
               Paul
               Against the feare of death, note
these preseruatiues:
               First, death it freeth the godly from the
tyrannie of Satan, sinne, the world, the flesh,
and eternall damnation; yea frō infinite both
perils and losses, and doth place vs both safe
and happie vnder the shadow (as it were) of
Christs wings.
               Secondly, Christ by his death hath sanctified
vnto vs both death and the graue.
               3 Christ is both in life and death, gaine to
the godly, Phil. 1. 12.
               4 Those consolations which the spirit of
Christ doth suggest to the soules of the faithful,
do by many degrees surmount the dolors
of death.
               5 The desire of that most bright and glorious
beholding of God, and the presence of
those Saints which are departed before vs.
               6 In stead of our bodies we shall be clothed
with glory, 2. Cor. 5. 1.
               7 The sting of death, namely sin, is then
so taken away, as that that serpent can no
more hurt vs. 1. Cor. 15. 55. O death, where i
                     •
                  
thy sting! O graue, where is thy victory! Heb. 2.

15. That he might deliuer all them, which for
feare of death, were all their life time subiect to
bondage.
               8 We should not so much thinke of our
death, as to take an exact account of our life.
For that man cannot die ill, who hath liued
well: and he seldome dieth well, that hath liued
badly.
               9 The Angels they stand at our elbowes,
that so soone as a Saint departeth, they may
with al speed immediatly transport his soule
into heauen.
               
                  Soules being once in heauen, remain ther
                        •
                     
till the last day of iudgement, where they
partly magnifie the name of God, and partly
do waite and pray for the consummation of
the kingdom of glory, and ful felicitie in body
and soule. Reu. 5. 8. And when he had taken
the booke, the foure beasts and the foure and
twenty elders fell down before the Lamb, hauing
euery one harpes and golden vials full of odours,
which are the prayers of the Saints: 9. And they
sang a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take
the booke, and to open the seales thereof, because
thou wast killed, and hast redeemed vs to God by
thy bloud, out of euery kinred, and tong, and people,
and nation. Reuel. 14. 2. I heard the voice of
harpers, harping with their harpes, 3. And they

sung as it were a new song before the throne: and
they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long
Lord, holy and true? doest not thou iudge and auenge
our bloud on them that dwel on the earth?
            
            
               Lidia
               Yet for all this, Satan in the time of
temptation, and at the houre of death, wil go
about to perswade me that these things do
not belong vnto me: what must I do then?
            
            
               Paul.
               Descend into your owne heart, see
whether you haue Gods spirit or no, testifying
vnto you that you are Gods child: for as
many as haue the spirit of God, they are the
children of God.
            
            
               Lidia.
               But how shall I know whether this
testimonie come from Gods spirit, or from
carnall presumption?
            
            
               Paul.
               First, by a full perswasion which you
shall haue; for the holy Ghost will not barely
say it, but perswade you that you are Gods
child, which the flesh cannot do. Secondly,
by the maner of perswasion; for the holy
Ghost draweth not reasons from the works
and worthinesse of man, but from Gods fauour
and loue: and this kind of perswasion
differeth much from that which Satan vseth.
Thirdly, by the effects of that testimonie; for
if the perswasion arise from presumption,
it is a dead perswasion: but contrariwise, it is

most liuely and stirring, if it come from the
holy Ghost: for such as are perswaded that
they are elected and adopted the children of
God, they wil loue God, trust in him, and cal
vpon him with their whole heart.
            
            
               Lidia.
               Alas, I find this testimonie maruellous
feeble in me: are there not other meanes
by which I may be comforted in this temptation
of Satan, that I am not Gods child?
            
            
               Paul.
               Yes verily, if you feele not the flame
of Gods spirit in you, then must you iudge of
it by the heate: and if you find the effects of
sanctification in you, you are without doubt
in the state of grace.
            
            
               Lidia.
               Which (I pray you) be they?
            
            
               Paul.
               Of all the effects of sanctification,
you may iudge of your adoption by these
that follow: First, if you feele your wants, and
with griefe bewaile the offence to God in euery
sinne. 2. If you striue against the flesh,
that is, resist and hate the first motions thereof,
and with griefe, thinke them burthenous
and troublesome. Thirdly, if you desire earnestly
and vehemently the grace of God, and
merite of Christ to obtaine eternall life. 4.
When you haue obtained it, to account it a
most precious i
                     •
                  well, and all things to be as
dung in respect of it, Phil. 3. 9. 5. If you loue

a Minister of the Gospell, as he is a Minister,
and a Christian as he is a Christian; and if
need require, can be readie to giue your life
for them, 1. Iohn 3. 16. 6. If you call earnestly
vpon God, euen with teares. 7. If you desire
Christs comming to iudgement, that an end
might be made of these dayes of sin. 8. If you
flie all occasions of sin, and endeuor to come
to newnesse of life. 9. And last of all, if you
perseuere vnto the last gaspe in these things.
For, as one saith, he that wil serue God, must
beleeue that which he cannot see, hope for
that which is deferred, loue God when he
shewes himself an enemie; and thus remaine
to the end.
            
            
               Lidia.
               These indeed are sure effects of sanctification,
but euen these are weake in me
as the former.
            
            
               Paul
               Are they so? Then know that God
tameth you, yet so as you must not therewith
be dismaied: for it is certaine, that if you haue
faith but as a graine of mustard-seed, and be
as weake as a yong infant, it is sufficient to
ingraft you into Christ: and therefore you
must not doubt of your owne election, by
reason of your weaknesse. A child holding a
staffe in his hand, holdeth it as well as a man,
though not with so much strength; and you

laying hold vpon Christ by faith, though
you do it neuer so weakely, it will suffise for
your saluation. Nay, if one haue not yet felt
these effects in his heart, he must not conclude,
he is a reprobate, but must rather vse
the word of God and the Sacraments, that
he may haue inward sense of the power of
Christ drawing him vnto him, and an assurance
of his redemption by Christs death
and passion.
            
            
               Lidia.
               He that opened the heart of Lidia
to heare Paul, open my heart to know and
do these things.
            
            
               Paul.
               Amen.
            
         
         
            
            Sundry necessarie obseruations
meete for a Christian,
published long since by some
religious man.
            
               I. THat you keep narrow watch ouer your
heart, words and deeds continually.
Psal. 93. 1. Mat. 24. 42. Luke 12. 36. 1. Cor.
10. 13. 15. 34. 16. 13. Col. 3. 17.
               II. That with all care the time be redeemed
that hath bene idly, carelesly and vnprofitably
spent. Eph. 5. 16. Col. 4. 5.
               III. That once in the day at least, priuate prayer
and meditation be made. Psal. 119. 164.
Dan. 6. 10. Luke 18. 1. Ephes. 6. 18. Col. 4. 2.
               IV. That care be had to do and receiue good
in companie. 1. Thess. 5. 11.
               V. That your familie be with all diligence
and regard instructed, watched ouer, and
Christianly gouerned. Gen. 18. 19. Deut. 4.

                  
                     •
                   & 5, 6, 7. Pro. 31. 27. Eph. 6. 4.
               VI. That no more care be spent in matters of
this world, then must needs. Mat. 6. 31. Col. 3.

                     •
                  . 1. Iohn. 2. 15.
               VII. That you stirre vp your selues to liberality
to Gods Saints. Gal. 6. 10. Heb. 13. 16.
               VIII. That you prepare your selues to beare the
crosse, by what meanes soeuer it shall please
God to exercise you. Mat. 16. 24. Luke 9. 13.
& 24. 27.
               IX. That you giue not the least bridle to wandring
thoughts. Iob 31. 1. Eph. 5. 3.
               X. That you bestow some time in mourning,
not onely for your owne sinnes, but for the
time and age wherein you liue. Ezech. 9. 4.
Psal. 119. 136.
               XI. That you looke dayly for the coming of
our Lord Iesus Christ, for your full deliuerance
out of this world. Mat. 24. 44.
               XII. That you acquaint your selfe with some
godly person, with whom you may conferre

of your Christian estate, and open your
doubts to the quickning of Gods graces 
                     〈◊〉
                  
you. Iames 5. 16.
               XIII. That you obserue the departure of men
out of this life, their mortalitie, the vanitie
and alteration of things below, the more to
contemne the world, and to continue your
longing after the life to come. Esay 57. 1.
Phil. 3. 3. 1. Pet. 1. 24. Reu. 22. 20.
               XIIII. That you meditate often vpon your death
and going out of this life, how you must lie
in the graue, go to dust, leaue all glorie and
wealth: and this will serue to beate downe
that pride of life which naturally is in you.
Eccles. 7. 4. & 12. 1.
               XV. That you reade something daily of the
holy Scriptures, for the further increase of
your knowledge. Math. 22. 29. Iohn 5. 39.
Act. 17. 11.
               XVI. That you make a couenant with the Lord
to striue against all sinnes, especially against
the specialsins and corruptions of your heart
and life, wherein you haue most dishonored
God: and that you carefully see that your

                  
                     •
                  ouenant be kept and continued. Neh. 9. 38.

                     •
                  . Chron. 34. 31.
               XVII. That you marke how sinne dieth and is
weakened in you, and that you turne not to
your old sinnes againe. Matt. 18. 8. 1. Thess.
5. 22. 2. Pet. 2. 22.
               XVIII. That you fall not from your first loue, but
continue still your affection to the liking of
Gods word, and to all the holy exercises of
religion, diligently hearing it, and faithfully
practising it: that you may prepare your selfe
before you come, and meditate of that you
haue heard, either by your self or with other,
and so mark your daily profiting in religion.
Heb. 3. 12. & 12. 15. Reu. 2. 4.
               XIX. That you be often occupied in meditating
vpon Gods benefits and workes, and sound
forth his praise for the same.
               XX. That you exercise your faith, by taking
delight in the great benefit of your redemption
by Christ, and the fruition of Gods presence
in his glorious and blessed kingdome.
Psal. 116. 12. 13. & 118. 15. Eph. 5. 20.
               
                  XXI. Lastly, that you make not these holy practises
of repentance common for the time,
nor vse them for fashion sake. Luke 8. 13.
            
            In Adamo potuimus non mori, in Christo
non possumus mori.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   