
      
         
            
            
               ❧A NEVVE BALLADE INTITVLED, AGAYNST Rebellious and falſe Rumours. To the nevve tune of the Blacke Almaine, vpon Sciſſillia.
            
               
                  
                     GEVE GOD THE GLORYE NOWE AND EVERMORE
                  
               
               
                  WHat Rumores now are raiſed of late
               Within this Engliſh lande:
               Which is not much for to be prayſed
               The caſe ſo harde doth ſtand,
               For euery one doth talke,
               There tongues contrary walke,
               And ſemes to meddell, of this and that,
               There babling tongues, ſo large doth chatte,
               As fooliſhe fancye, moues them ſaye,
               So out there fooliſh talke they braye.
               And euery one doth beſie him ſtill,
               About the thing he hath no ſkill.
            
            
               ¶Some of his neighbors doth inquire,
               What newes abrode there is:
               If that he any thinge doth here,
               Of thoſe that dyd amiſſe.
               Some longeth to here tell, ¶⁋
               Of thoſe that dyd Rebell,
               And whether they be fled or take,
               Thus ſtill inquirie they do make,
               Some ſayth to Scotland they be goe,
               And other ſayth it is not ſo,
               The Rumerous Deuell is now abrode,
               Which makes them ſo to laye on lode.
            
            
               ¶Some ſayth this yeare there ſhalbe hapte,
               Much trouble in the lande: ¶⁋
               Of Propheſies they carpe and clappe,
               As they that haue them ſkande.
               Doth tell them ſo abrode,
               And thus they laye on lode:
               And filles the peoples eares with lyes,
               Thus Rumor ſtill abrode he flyes.
               Which makes them now in ſuch a rore,
               As all true hartes may well deplore.
               And praye to God if that he pleaſe,
               Theſe fooliſh Rumores once maye ceaſe.
            
            
               ¶And let vs nowe applye our tyme,
               In prayer to the Lorde: (¶)
               That he may ceaſe this furious cryme,
               That now is blowne abrode.
               And euery one to ſtaye,
               His tongue and nothing ſaye:
               But of the thinges he hath in hand,
               And ſée his beſynes well be ſcand?
               And not to meddle of Princes actes,
               What they will do nor of there factes,
               If occupied, well we thus abyde:
               The Lorde for vs will well prouide.
            
            
               ¶For ſurely Plagues we do deſarue,
               Moſt horrable and great:
               Becauſe from God we ſtill do ſwarue.,
               And dayly doth him frette.
               And ſtill prouoke his Ieare,
               Which glous as hotte as fyare:
               His Bow is now all redye bent,
               Therfore in tyme let vs repent,
               Leaſt he for ſinne do vs depriue, ¶⁋
               For warned folkes they ſaye may liue?
               And warning take by other men,
               Which we before our eyes haue ſene.
            
            
               
                   We haue hard in Fraunce the Rumur there
               That hath bene many a daye:
               There countrey ſpoyled in Ruth and feare,
               Vnto there cleane decaye.
               With loſſe of many a man,
               Since firſt that ſturre began:
               And many a Noble hath bene ſlayne,
               A Duke, and eake a Prince certayne.
               Which weare the chiefe ſtayes of that land,
               Wherfore in hazarde now they ſtande,
               For where the chiefe are taken awaye,
               The reſt muſt nedes runne to decaye.
            
            
               ¶In what eſtate doth Souldiers ſtand,
               Great ruth it is to here:
               That there is wrought the Tirants hand
               We nede not to declare.
               Experiaunce well may ſhowe,
               What numbers here doth flowe.
               Of Flemminges fled from Tirantes hand,
               Which dayly commeth to this land:
               Whoſe harts in wrath full long hath boyld
               And eake there Countrye cleane diſpoyld.
               Which thing may warne vs well I ſaye
               Leaſt that we féele the lyke decaye.
            
            
               ¶The Lorde hath ſuffered vs full longe,
               And ſpared hath his rodde:
               What peace hath bene vs now among,
               A leuen yeares prayſed be God.
               And round about vs hath,
               Bene warre and cruell fayth,
               And all to cauſe vs to repent,
               For we deſarue worſſe punniſhment,
               Then any of theſe Landes haue done,
               I feare we ſhall be plagud right ſone,
               Thy Iudgement ſure our God hath had,
               To plague the good ſtill for the bad.
            
            
               ¶Wherefore let vs with one accorde,
               Fall all to faſt and praye:
               And Pardon craue now of the Lorde,
               To kepe vs from decaye.
               And leaue this murmoring ſpight,
               Which God doth not delight:
               The Scripture playnely doth declare,
               The Iſralites they plagued weare:
               Becauſe the murmered at there God,
               Therin we do deſarue lyke rod.
               With hartes deuoute now let vs praye,
               To kepe this Realme from all decaye.
            
            Finis.
            
               ꝙ. Thomas Bette.
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶IMPRINTED AT LONDON, in Fleteſtreat at the ſigne of the Faucon by VVylliam Gryffith, and are to be ſold at his ſhoppe in Sainct Dunſtones Churchyarde. 1570.

            
         
      
   