
      
         
            
            
            ¶ The perfect path to Paradice: Contayning diuers most ghostly and wholsome Prayers, fruitfull and Christian Meditations, for the comfort of euery afflicted conscience: Published in these dangerous dayes of wickednesse, and deliuered to all those that feare God, and hope for saluation in Christ Iesus, as a spirituall weapon to beate downe sinne, sathan, and all the power of hell, &c. By Iohn Phillips.
            
               Matthew 3.
               Repent and amend your lines for the kingdome of God is at hand.
            
            ¶ Imprinted at London in Fleetstreete by H. Iackson. 1588.
         
         
            
            
            To the Right Honourable Lord, Robert Deuorax Erle of Essex and Ewe, Visecounte of Herrifard and Bourchire, L. Ferres of Chartley, Bourchire and Louaine: Maister of the Queenes Maiesties horsse, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter Iohn Philips his humble well-willer, wisheth the feare of God, continuall health of body and minde, peace and quietnesse of conscience with all other the giftes of grace prrceeding from God the Father through the intercession of Christ Iesus &c.
            
               RIght honorable, when I call to memory how apt and redie wee are of our selues to fall into the

filthy quagmire of the olde Adams corruption, wherein wee are moste monstrously soyled with all kindes of wickednesses, which make vs detested in the eyes of our heauenly father, whose loue wee by the exercise of our notorious euils, dayly committed against his deuine maiestie, we most wilfully conuert to hatred, I am driuen into no small admiration. But truly as these are the dangerous dayes of wickednesse wherein sinne aboundeth and iniquitie hath obtayned the preheminence and vpper hand, so it is expedient for all those that haue the feeling of GODS

grace in their consciences, to arme thēselues in this worldly Laberinth of vncleannesse with a liuely faith and earnest repentance, and to continue in prayer and supplication to the almightie, to abridge these dayes of wickednesse, and to hasten his comming. For vnlesse this perillous season as Christ himselfe hathe foretolde vs, should be shortned, wherein sinne is exalted to the subuersion of vertue, there shoulde no fleshe be saued. It shall bee necessary for vs therefore, that seeke dayly and hourely, by the vsuall practise of our innumerable euiles, to offend the Lord our

gracious God, whose heauy indignation we haue worthely heaped vp vnto our selues, and whose vengeaunce wee haue iustly deserued. Nowe euen nowe and hencefoorth for cuer to return with Dauid from our impieties, to mourn with Magdalin for oure iniquities, to weepe with Peter for our offences, and to crye out with the prodigal child, for the mispending of oure portions ryotously. Yea and thē the Lord our God whose wrath we haue kindled vp agaynst vs, like consuming coales of fire, beholding the sorrowes of oure contrite hartes, the grieuous gronings

of our sinful soules, and our wet and blubbered eyes, weeping for oure wickednesses, wil repēt him of these plagues that he had prepared to poure forth vpon vs for our destructiōs. Yea he wil cast aside the vioals of his wrath, yea hee wil in his mercy quenche the burning coales of his furie. Yea he will vnbend the bowe of his anger and breake asunder the arrowes of his displeasure, wherewith he had in his diuine iustice prepared to wound vs: For faithful praier and hartie repentance are acceptable to God. The which weapons if we wil take vpon to vse, vndoubtedly in steede

of cursinges wee shal obtayne blessings, in steed of penury, we shal reape plentie: in steed of battel wee shal haue peace: in steed of sicknesse wee shal finde health, yea and at the last of vncleane vessels, we shalbe made vessels of honor and heires of his heauenly kingdome. God for hys sonne Christ his sake giue vs the grace therefore whilest mercy as yet keepeth his indignation at a baye, to continue in prayer, and to shew vs hartie repentant for our sins, for the day of oure visitation draweth nigh. Thus ceasing right honorable, I leaue you to the merciful protection of

the almightie beseeching him in this life to blesse and defend you from al peril and daunger, to continue your health to his good guiding wil & prouident pleasure, to giue you victorie ouer al the enemies of God and hir royal maiestie, and in the world to come to crown your head with honour and glorie.
            
               Your honours in al humilitie and reuerence. IOHN PHILIPS.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            ¶ When that thou preparest thy selfe to pray, look that thou with all humblenesse of mynde kneelest downe, and lifting vp thy hart, thy handes, and thine eyes vnto heauen, to God the Father almightie, praye on this manner.
            
               O Lorde open thou my lippes, that my mouth may speake and shew forth that, whiche is to thy glorie and praise.
         
         
            A prayer for the Morning.
            
               O Omnipotent Father, and euerliuing GOD, the Fountayne of al felicitie, from whom onely procéedeth all good giftes, most hūblie I beséech thée of

thyne aboundante mercye and exceding kindnes, so to direct and gouerne me this day and euer, with thy good guyding spirite, that all my thoughts, words and déeds, maye onely be occupyed in thy seruice, fayth, feare and loue, and so assist & strengthen me with thy grace, O most mercifull and louing father, for thy sonne Iesus Christ his sake, that nether sinne, death, hell, nor Sathan, haue the dominion & vpper hande of mée, Indue my heart with the true vnderstanding of thy true and liuely word, that I may be ready & proane manfully to

fight vnder the standerd of my glorious captain Iesus Christ, agaynst the world, the flesh, & that cruell Serpente the olde Leuiathan, which hunteth continually like a roaring lion, seeking the vtter destruction of my soule. Make me constant in time of temptation, ye whē or at what time my rebelling and sinfull fleshe, shall intice me to luste after the pomps and vanities of this wicked worlde, I may by a strong, liuely, and vnshakeable fayth, thorowe the bitter tormentes that my sauiour Christe Iesus suffered for me, and al that faythfully

beleue and cal vpon him, so mortifie and subdue the olde Adam, that I maye bée dead and buryed from sinne and all iniquity, & the new man Christ Iesus may continually dwell and raign in mee, by whose meanes, I shall be garnished & decked by the meanes of a fruitfull fayth, with immortalitie & heauenly blessednes, vouchsafe (O Lord) I beséech thée, according to the multitude of thy mercies to looke vpon mée, and by thy celestiall prouidence so illuminate the eyes of my soule, that I may continually watche for the glorious cōming of thy

anoynted son Iesus Christ. Roote oute (O Lorde) in and from me the vilde and corrupt branches of rapine, deceipte, auarice, luxurie, concupiscence, and all vngodlinesse, let the motions of my minde altogether depende vppon thée, prepare my tongue to publishe thy prayse, let my lippes be locked vp from all scurillitic & vncomely talke, let myne eares loathe and abhorre to heare thy glorious and blessed name blasphemed, & thy trueth to be by any Sectarian ill spoken of, and slaundered, kéepe and defend mée vnder the winges of thy cō
               fortable

protection, from al errors, sismes, and detestable heresies, make me with out fayning, firmely, & constantly to builde vpon the truth, wherein is perfectly set forth thy great mercie & diuine iustice. Let the zeale of thy promises in al distres be my chiefest ioy and consolation, and giue me grace from aboue, that as I make my boast of thy mercies and louing kindnes, by vertue wherof, I am by my Sauiour Christ Iesus quickned from deathe to life, & in his dearest death, and precious bloudsheding, regenerated & borne a new, not of water

but of the spirit by fayth, so Lorde, I maye with thy aboundaunt loue showne to mée warde, & the whole posteritie of Adam, I may bée afrayde, wilfully, or of a set purpose, to transgresse thy commaundementes, and so incurre therby thy displeasure, that the effectes of thy iustice, in the day of thy cō
               ming to iudgement, be pronounced against mee, to the vtter destruction of bodie & soule, make me alwais willing good Lord to heare thy worde, by the power wherof my faith is increased, and therewithall plante in mée perfite loue and obedience,

and so directe my footsteppes in this vale of miserie, that I may treade the pathe that leadeth to thée, with whome my soule thirsteth to rest, euen as vehementlye as the Hart longeth after the water brookes. Graunt this O merciful God, for the honor and glorye of thy names sake. Amen▪
            
         
         
            ¶ A fruitfull Prayer to bee sayde at the g
                  •
               yng to bedde of euery Christian.
            MOste mercyfull Father, I moste wretched and vnworthye sinner, prostrate my selfe before the Throane of thy heauenlye

grace, yeelding vnto thée moste humble and heartye thankes, that hast of thy excéeding loue and fauor, preserued mee this day from al perill and daunger, humbly beséeching thy diuine maiestie, this night to preserue me, for the loue of thy onely sonne, & my sweetest Sauiour Iesus Christ, my Mediatour & aduocate, who continuallye pleadeth and maketh intercession to thée for mée, & all the rest of thy chosen children, presenting hys bloudy wounds, and his glorious body al to be scourged in thy diuine presence, who thereby doth mittigate thy

wrathe & indignation, iustly conceiued agaynst me, a miserable and wretched creature, and all mankynde. Make me Lord still to confesse myne vnworthynesse, and weakenesse to be suche, and so great, that of my selfe I am not worthye to lift vp myne eyes to heauen, much lesse to be called thy sonne, such and so great is the burthen of my sinne and iniquitie, so that by the meanes of my corruption & filthinesse, I acknowledge my selfe to be the child of death, and destruction, yet build I still on thy promises good Lord, and in this greate daunger, I

come vnto thée with teares, saying.
            O father, I haue sinned agaynst heauen, and agaynst thée, and am no more worthy to bée called thy sonne: of my selfe I haue nothing, but by thée I haue al things: of my selfe I acknowledge I haue iustly deserued the heauy sentēce of thine yre, but by grace of thee, O mightie Emanuel, I am regenerate and borne agayne from death to life: from daunger to ioy: from perill to peace: from bondage to libertie, & so in fine, from Hell & damnation, to blisse & saluation. Such is the effect of thy mercie,

so abundant is thy loue towardes me, and all those that with contrite heartes presente themselues vnto thée. Increase my fayth lord that it may abound in good and fruitfull workes, so fortifie mée, yt I neuer swerue from thy veritie, giue mée thy grace from aboue, O merciful Iesus, that I may neuer shrinke from thy sacred testimonies. And more ouer, I with all humilitie, and reuerence of heart and mynde, beséeche thée thys night, whiche thou hast ordayned for man to rest in, thou wilt gard and protecte mée with thy good guidyng

spirite, and albeit, my sinfull flesh shall sleepe & slumber, yet graunt good Lorde, that my soule may continually kéepe watch and ward, let not the enemie finde me slumbering and sléeping as careles in the cradle of sinfull Securitie, leaste that whilest I am vnarmed, that is naked & destitute of thy grace and fauour, he enter in and breake vp the house of my sinnefull bodye, and make such hauocke & spoile, that my infected and leaporous soule, deformed by meanes of myne iniquitie, and wounded with the dangeruos Darts of transgression,

bée throwne with the body of sinne to the Lake of destruction, wherein is continuall wayling, and gnashing of téeth. Make me stil (O good Lorde) to consider that the bed is a plaine patterne and similitude of the Graue, which continually calleth for me and all other thy Creatures, make me to vnderstand that when I am layd (of my self) without thy heauenly prouidence, I can not bée able to ryse agayne: make me to acknowledge, that sléepe is the very figure of death, to whose stroak, at thy appoynted pleasure, I must submit my selfe. Indue

me with loue & charitie to all men, let my Lampe (O Lord) be garnished with Oyle, that whensoeuer, or at what tyme soeuer thy messenger death shall drawnie, and knock at the gates of my house, I maye at hys sommons, in the daye of the resurrection of the dead, be ready to attend on thée and thy bride, with my burning Lampe, that is, with a stedfast fayth, when as by thée I shalbe clothed a newe, for my mortall body shall then be couered with immortallitie, the corruption of my sinful & rebelling flesh, shal be changed to incorruption

and perfite puritye, thy righteousnesse shalbe mine, thy merites shal make me perfite & holy, by vertue wherof hell shal loose his victory, death shall loose his sting, my fayth and hope shal haue ende and rewarde, & I wyth thy Saintes, continuallye dwell in loue and charitie with thée, the Heauenlye Bridegrome Christ Iesus. To whome with the father and the holy ghost, be ascribed all lawd, glory, power, prayse, and dominion, for euer. Amen.
         
         
            
            A Prayer for the remission of sinne, and to obtayne a vertuous life.
            
               FOr as muche as (O Bountifull Lorde) it is most méete, right, and iust, that all fleshe shoulde prayse, magnifie, and worship thée, and shoulde without ceasing giue thankes vnto thée, who onely art the Creator and maker of all thinges, as well visible as inuisible, who onely art the Treasure of all goodnesse, the Well of life, onely God and Lord, whom the Heauens, and Heauens of Heauens, the Sunne, the Moone

the Starres, the earth, the Sea, with all that mooue therein: yea, the heauenly companie of martyrs, the soules of the Prophets, and Apostles, Aungels, Arckeaungels, togither with the soules of al iust & righteous persons, do lawd & glorifie. It is moste requisite, that ech mortal creature, liuing in this worlde, shoulde also acknowledge thy magnificence, wherefore (most mercifull Father) I wyth my hart and mouth do acknowledge thée to be my king & Lorde, the giuer of all goodnesse, I confesse thee to bee omnipotent, reuerent, merciful,

long suffering, God of all consolation, comforte, mercie and pitie.
            I knowe that of thine infinite goodnesse onely, thou didst make man after thy similitude & likenes, placing hym in the moste delectable place of Paradice, and althoughe he did transgresse thy commaundemente, and therby deserue eternal deth & damnation, yet thou lyke a most louing & pitifull Father, didst not vtterly reiect him, but gently correct him, & after that thou hast sente hym into the earth, cōmanding him there to increase and multiply, thou didst instruct

his posterity with thy lawe, thou didst teach them by the Propehtes, and after that, sentest down thine only begotten sonne, to take vpon him our nature, and to suffer death for our sinnes, thereby to make a recompence for the offence which man had committed against thée, and al this thou didst of thy excéeding great mercye and kindnesse, without any deserte of mankinde, not being so muche as by any one prayer, or yet intreatie, thervnto incited.
            Therefore, I being boldened with such inestimable benefits, so fréely giuen and

bestowed, doe without any feare at this time, appeare before thy diuine maiestye, prostrating my selfe before the seate of thy mercye, and with al humblenes of hart, and minde, doe make this my prayer vnto thee.
            Dispise me not (O Lorde God) being defiled with sin and iniquitie, for beholde I present my self before thée, not presuming vppon myne owne worthinesse, but trusting in thy goodnesse.
            Be mercifull vnto me a sinner, light thou the dull sighted eyes of my minde, open yu the stopped eares of myne hart, ye I may both sée, heare

and perceiue & vnderstande that which thou teachest, & alwayes do that which thou commandest, make me not only a hearer of thy heauenly doctrine, but also a perfit follower of the same: direct sanctifie & gouerne my life, be thou alwayes present & readie, both to heare and to help me. Saue & defend mée from al shame and reproch, be thou my shield and buckler against al temptations, clense my minde & thought from all vncleannesse, kéepe and preserue mée from all danger both of body & soule. This fraile life is nothing else but a continuall warfare

in this worlde, our sins most like to cruell enemies assault vs on euery side, agayne our dayes are but fewe in number.
            Guide me therefore with thy grace, so to spende my small, short, and transitory time in this worlde, the very Fountayne, welspring, & vale of all miserie, that I maye be made a member of Christ, & a partaker of thine eternall felicitie. To the which, séeing that thorowe mine owne deserte, I shall neuer be able to aspire, (for sin truely so aboundeth in me, that ech déede and act of mine, is not onely infected,

but altogether poluted therwith) none other remedie haue I to ease my self, none other salue to ease my sore, but only to take hold of that promise of thine, whereas thou sayest: Come vnto me all ye that labor, & be ouerloden, & I will refresh you, this is my holdfaste, this is myne Ankor, and sure stay, for verily (swéete Sauiour) when I looke vppon myne owne fraylenesse, & beholde how readie I am to offende thée, then I quake for feare, then I am almoste in vtter dispaire, but assoone as I call to minde thy great loue and kindnesse, and how that

thou wilt not the death of a sinner, but rather that hée should repent and liue, and that in what daye soeuer he doth hartily repent, and cal vnto thée, thou wilte heare him, then I am relieued, then I am not a little comforted, knowing surely that thou wilte performe that whiche thou hast promised. In faithful assurance wherof, I nowe say vnto thée.
            Tourne thou mée (O my God) and I shalbe tourned, from all my wickednesse deliuer me. Heale my soule which is wounded with sin for I doe acknowledge my iniquitie, & am hartily sory

for mine offences. Correcte mée, O Lorde, but yet not in thy furie, look not vpon my weakenes, but thinke vpon thine owne worthines, remember thy louing kindenes, and in the aboundance and multitude of thy mercies wipe clene away, pardon, and forget all my sins, throw whiche I haue either in word, or déed, thought, or any other kinde of waye offended thée, blot them out of thy remembraunce, & let the bloude of that Immaculate Lambe Iesus Christ washe them away, let mine old offences so decay & die in me, that I neuer commit them

any more, or by any meanes renew them in thy sight.
            And in the meane time do not withdraw thy grace frō me, but cause me to do all yt which good is. O Father remoue thy wrath away from me, and restore vnto me thy fauour. Turne thou thy louing countenance vnto me, and plentifully poure forth thy mercy vpō me. Incline my heart to doe that onely whiche is acceptable in thy sight. Guide thou my footesteps in thy pathes, & suffer me not at any time to stray from thy wayes, let me alwayes haue the feare of thée in my hart, and the remembrance

of thy benefits fresh in my memory, & if at anye time thorow weaknes and frayltie I do transgresse thy commandemēts, yet do not therfore reiect & cast me out of thy sight, but be thou that good Samaritane, & poure the Oyle and wyne of mercy & forgiuenesse, into those woundes which sinne shall make in me. Disdaine mée not for my reuoulting, but haue mercy vpon me according to thy great goodnes, & according to the multitude of thy mercies, wipe awaye mine iniquitie, hide me vnder the shadow of thy winges and protection, lighten

mée with thy holye spirite. Make mée thy seruant, & so indue me with thy grace, that I maye vnfaynedlye, with hart and voyce, serue, honor, and prayse thee, al the dayes of my life. Amen.
         
         
            A Prayer for patience in trouble, and meekely to suffer aduersitie.
            
               O Gracious Lord, Omnipotent, whose mercy is euerlasting & infinite, bow downe thyne eare and harken vnto this my prayer, whiche I make before thy diuine Maiestie, most humbly beséeching thée of thyne acustomed goodnes to indue

me with the works of mercie, & déedes of charitie, and aboue all things to giue me pacience in aduersitie, méekly to suffer, and pacientlye to take whatsoeuer it shall please thée to laye vpon me, and neuer to murmur, or to grudge therat, but alwaies to thinke thy louing & gentle correction to be muche lesse than the desarts of my great & manifold offences.
            Againe, if I be not vnder correction, then am I not thy childe, for what father is he who correcteth not his Children, whome he moste intyrely beloueth. Thys thē is an euident tokē that

thou louest vs, whē as thou correctest vs, for as the scripture sayth: Whome God loueth, him he chasteneth. Thou séest all thinges, thou vnderstandest & knowest al thinges, so that not so much as one little Sparrow lighteth vpon the ground, without thy knowledge: yea, our very thoughts are foreknowen vnto thée, thou disposest & orderest all things as séemeth best to thy holy will and pleasure, by thy helpe I maye doe all thinges, wythout thée I can doe nothing. When thou powrest vppon vs thy creatures, thy good giftes and benefites: When

thou bestowest vppon vs prosperitie, health, wealth, and such like, thou doest it to this intente, that we acknowledging the same, should thereby be encouraged to serue, honoure, and humblye obey thée, and alwayes prayse and magnifie thy glorious name, contrariwise, when thou strykest vs with thy rod of correctiō, as plaguing vs with great mortalitie, suffering our enemies to inuade vs: robbers for to spoyle vs: pouertie to oppresse vs: or fire to consume those thinges, which thou hast lent vs, for the maynteynaunce of oure

bodyes in this mortall life. Thou doest it to put vs in mynde that we haue transgressed thy Commaundementes, that we haue not harkened vnto thée, neyther done that which is acceptable in thy sight, but willingly falling into the puddle of sinne, and following oure own appetites, haue prouoked thy iust wrathe and indignation against vs. Thus thou dealest wt vs, O Lord, to the intent that we suffering bodily punishment, & féeling the smart of the same may therby be admonished of our duetie, and with true compunction of heart, desire

to be released frō thy scourges whiche we haue deserued, and worthily receaue, and then acknowledge our selues to be lost children, & straying shéepe, may bothe see and be ashamed of oure vnbrydled affections, & wilfulnes, which haue brought vs to calamitie & misery, & with ye true penitent to say.
            We are not worthy, most mercifull father, to lifte vp our eyes or voyce vnto thée for our manifold sinnes and wickednesse: neuerthelesse, presuming vppon thine aboundaunt mercie (who refusest none that doe call vpon thée) moste lamentablye

we doe cry, haue mercy vpō vs▪ O Lorde, haue mercye vpon vs miserable sinners, being nowe gréeuouslye afflicted with the burthen of punishment and affliction, which thou hast layde vpon vs, put thou therfore away all displeasure conceiued agaynst vs, thy poore creatures, and graunt vs, that being warned by thys, we maye euer hereafter serue thée in newnesse of life, and neuer committe anye thing whiche shall displease or offend thée.
            This O heauenly father, I acknowledge to bée oure duetie, but althoughe I for

my parte, haue not perfourmed the same as I ought to doe, yet I beséeche thine inestimable goodnes not to execute the rigoure of thy iustice vppon me, but to staye thine hand, and before thou giue me any greter wound, to behold my humilitie and repentaunce, which beyng not able to recompence and satisfie the trespasses which I agaynst thée haue cōmitted, do offer vnto thée according as the poore Widdowe did, al that which I am able to giue, that is a sorrowfull contrition of hearte, for my former offences done and paste. Thy Iustice as it

is right, so is it rigorous to sinners, thou art so iealous & so much doest detest sinne, that thou sparest not to punnishe thy very elect and chosen seruants, when as they fall into it.
            Who was more acceptable in thy sighte, then that holy Prophet king Dauid? of whom thou thy selfe didst say, I haue found a man according to mine own heart, euen Dauid my seruaunte: yet neuerthelesse, diuers & sundrye wayes didst thou punishe him, when that he had swarued from thy testimonies. Thou sufferedst him to be molested with the

insurrection of hys owne sonne, thou didst sende the Prophet vnto him, to offer him the choyce of plagues, which thou wouldest sende vpon him for his wicked lyuing, but when he with sorrowfull sighes, & trickling teares, tourned vnto thée, cōfessing his fault, crauing pardone, and promising amendment of life, thou forgatest thine anger, and forgauest his offence.
            Other of thy chosen Uessels thou hast permitted to bée gréeuouslye tormented, and vexed by sundrye troubles and aduersities, onely to trye their faith and stedfastnesse

towardes thée, as thou didst suffer that pacyent man Iobe, for to be most cruelly intreated by that enemie of all mankinde, to haue his houses burned and spoyled, his cattle taken away, his seruauntes driuen into bondage, his Children to be slaine, his own body to be afflicted with most loathsome diseases, plagues, and sores, and all this thou didst not for any euil déede of his, but to shew thine Omnipotencie and power, for when thou hadst tride hym to the vtmost, and founde that his ennemie the Deuill coulde not preuayle agaynst hym,

or by any 
                  〈◊〉
                and griefe, 
                  〈◊〉
                him to blaspheme and speak euil of thée, thou didst reduce him to health, thou didst enriche him agayne, thou didst restore vnto hym agayn his children, friends, familye, and all his goodes, with muche more than euer he before possessed, shewing most manifestlye, that thou wilte▪ re warde them moste plenteously, which doe loue thée, follow and obserue thy commandementes.
            Wherefore I beséech thée to giue me grace, that what soeuer waye it shall please thée, to visite mée wyth thy punishment, I may take it

paciently and say: Naked came I into this world, and naked shall I retourne to the earth agayne, the Lorde giueth, the Lorde taketh away, euen as it pleaseth the Lorde, so be it. Suffer mée not to dispaire, or to thinke that thou dealest vniustlye with me, but to say. Shall I receiue prosperitie at the Lordes hande, and not to be content with aduersitie: & alwaies to think vpon this. Happy are they whom thou dost punish, for though thou make a wounde, thou also giuest a playster, thoughe thou smitest, thy hande maketh whole agayne, my iniquitie

is greate, but be thou mercifull vnto my wickednesse. O deliuer me from thyne anger, and presse mée not farther than I shall be able to beare, but now that I acknowledge, that what soeuer trouble thou haste sent me, or wilt laye vppon me, is either for the punishment of mine iniquitie, or for the triall of my constancie, I maye with repentant Dauid, finde remission of my sinnes, and with patient Iobe release of my aduersitie, and obtayn such fauor in thy sight, that thou neuer agayne so gréeuously punishe me, but that I may so passe

this life, that I may afterward liue with thée, to whō be honour and glory, for euer and euer. Amen.
         
         
            A prayer agaynst the feare of worldly casualties.
            
               O Most bountifull and louing Father, myne onlye guyder and comforter, the Wel of mercie, the true light of the worlde, take awaye the darkenesse of my mind, lighten my heart and sences, indue me with thy grace, arme me so strongly with sure hope, confidence & truste in thée, that I neuer be driuen into feare, eyther by the subtle inuasions of

our ghostlye ennemye Sathan, or by the craftie wylinesse of the worlde, neither yet by losse, damage, hurte, or hindrance of any of those vain and transitory things, which we in this world doe possesse. But alwaies whatsoeuer shal become of them, to thinke that they are but thinges lent, and not oure owne, & that we shall make a streight accompt for the vse, or abuse of them.
            Whereby the more wée possesse thereof, the greater shall be our payne, if we abuse them. Wherefore take from me all inwarde heauinesse, thought and care, for

any losse and discommodity receiued by worldly goods, and alwayes to thinke that as well pouertie, as riches: néedinesse, as aboundance: sicknesse as health: aduersity, as prosperity: come from thée, and that it is knowne to thine vnserchable iudgement onely, why and wherfore thou sendest eyther of these vpon vs, and therefore let not my minde bée troubled with any feare of thinges to chaunce, sauing onely to feare to displease thée, but alwayes to be merry in thée with sobernesse, and to cast all my care of worldlye affayres vppon thée. For as

much as thou hast commanded, that we shoulde not be careful what to eat or what to drink, or with what rayment we should be clothed, for yu wilte not sée the righteous forsaken or their children begging their breade, and that thou tournest all thinges to the best, to them that serue thée, and flie vnto thée for succour in the tyme of their distresse.
            Let this (O Lord) be euer more fresh in my memorye, grauen in my heart, and redy in my mouth, so that I leauing all néedlesse feare, may alwayes giue thanks vnto thée, and prayse thy

holye name. Amen.
         
         
            The prayer vnto God the Father.
            ALmightie God, the Father of our Lorde Iesus Christ, whome no deserte, merite, or worthinesse of oures, but thyne own great clemencie, mercy, and pity, caused to send downe thyne onely begotten sonne into this world, to beare the burthen of our sinnes, with the which, we moste miserable sinners were ouerladen, & that he shoulde suffer moste cruell tormentes, yea, and also most bitter and shamefull

death, and sanctifie the reprochefull name of the Crosse, with the renting of his blessed bodye, and shedding his most precious blood thereon. Thereby to make attonement betwéene thée & vs: thereby to pay the ransome for our soules: thereby to consumate and finish the perfection of oure redemption and saluation. Whiche thing it was thy good will, that he should doe, not only to aswage thy wrath and indignation, but also to bring vs agayn into thy grace and fauour, & that wée being deliuered out of the bondage of sinne & hell, might serue

thee in righteousnes and holynesse all the dayes of oure life, and by thy frée gift and benefite of his deathe and passion, be made partakers of his resurrection, and of thyne endlesse & vnspeakable glory.
            Wherefore my God, my maker, my Lord, my kyng, séeyng thou hast so aboundauntly bestowed thy Heauenly giftes vpon me, & all mankind, and hast so plentifully poured out thy grace and fauour on vs, that for our sakes, thou wouldst not spare thy owne sonne. How shal we escape thine indignation, whiche for this care

and kindnesse of thyne, are most carelesse and vnkynd, and among all other, which way shall I poore creature turne me? how shall I, who haue bene moste vnthankefull for his benefites, and moste vnmindefull of them, be so bolde as to lifte vp my hart, or hands vnto the heauens, and to call vpon thée? thou of thy singuler goodnes diddest so prouide, that the wickednesse of olde Adam shoulde be purged and washed away with the bloud of Iesus Christe, but I haue wilfullye fallen into sinne againe: Thou madest me the child of light, but I haue

made my selfe an inheritor of darknes: thou madest mée thyne by creation: I haue made my selfe the childe of perdition.
            What shall I now therefore do? shall I doubt of anie further mercie and forgiuenesse? No, no (sweet Lord) so great is thy mercye whiche surmounteth al thy works: so large are thy promises, so sure is the perfourmance of them, to al such as take hold thereof (so deare in thy sight are the merites of thy sonne Iesus) so acceptable vnto thée is the harty repentance of a sinner, that with the remembrannce thereof, I am

prouoked to crye vnto thée, saying: Father, I haue sinned agaynst heauen, and agaynst thée, I am no more worthye to bée called thy childe: Neuertheles, behold thou me not as I am, a gréeuous offendour, but as thy creature, haue nowe no respect to mine offences, but behold my repētance, think not vpon my wickednesse, but vpon the wounds of my sauiour Iesus, looke not vpon my false hart, which hath wauered from thy lawes, but behold the bléeding hart of thy sonne Iesus Chryst, whiche was pierced to release me and set me frée, my

sinnes I cast vpon his back, beséeching thée that hys merites may beare them, and thy mercy pardon them.
            Heare me, O Lorde, my God, heare me, for I knowe the more earnestlye that I séeke for, & desire thyne ayd, the readier yu art to stretche forth thine hand to help me. Heare me therfore, O Lord, bow downe and incline thy eare vnto my praier, inspire me so with thy holy spirite, that I may loue thée aboue al things, and that I neuer fayle to put my hope & trust of saluation in him, whome thou wouldest to be my Redéemer and sauiour.
            
               Make mée by the forsaking of all wickednes, so to rise from falling into sinne, that I may obtayne the true seruing of thée with innocency and purenesse of life. Graunt this, O Lorde, for Iesus Christes sake, to whom with thée and the holye Ghoste, be all honor and glory. Amen.
         
         
            A Prayer vnto God the Sonne.
            
               O Most sweete Sauiour, O moste mercifull Redéemer: O bountifull Iesu, the sonne of God, who although

thou art highe, yet thou art moste humble, although thou arte Omnipotente, thou arte also moste méeke, and as thou art most mightie, so art thou moste merciful. To thée O Christ, the guyde of al felicitie, the Father of heauen hath gyuen all power, both in heauen and in earth.
            Thou art the true Pastor of our soules, thou art oure Messias, yu castest off none that sue vnto thée, but as thou hast taken awaye the hande wryting that was agaynst vs, and hast fastned it to thy Crosse, so art thou ready to imparte the merits

of thy Passion, vnto all such as with true repentaunce of their sinnes call vppon thée faythfully. Wherefore, my swéete Iesus, I most faythfullye and vnfaynedlye acknowledge ye benefites that thou hast bestowed vpō me, and steadfastlye beléeue, that thou being an Immaculate Lamb, in whose mouth was neuer found guyle, didst suffer most cruell torments at the hands of sinners, for the loue of vs moste wretched sinners, for the which cause I most hartily beséeche thée, and most humbly pray thée, to accept me into the number of thē, whome thou wilt

make Coinheritours of thy bitter paynes, and although I of my selfe, be moste vnworthy thereof, yet thy merites can make me worthy: to them doe I flye, crauing that I may be so armed, and defened by them, that I maye subdue the world, the fleshe, and the Deuill, euen as thou hast gloriously conquered sin, death, and Hell. Thou seest, O my Sauiour, how I am daily and howerly beset, with these thrée ennemies, and so hardly beséeged of them, yt without thy help, I can by no meanes escape, but that I must néedes be a pray vnto one of them.

Strengthen me therefore, O Lorde, that neyther the one with carnall lusts, neyther the other with delectable pleasures, nor sathā him selfe with all his crafty and suttle deuises, get the dominion ouer mee. Thou haste bought me, thou haste payd for me, take thou me, saue, kéepe, and defend me, be alwayes ready at the voyce of my crying, poure into mée thy grace paciently to abide thy diuine wil & pleasure in all things, make me both at this present, and all ye dayes of my life, to haue in minde and profoundlye to roote in my heart, the misteries of

thy painefull passion, and so to be filled with the remembraunce thereof, that sinne may no more enter into me and that Sathan mine olde enimie, may wel perceiue, that he hath neyther parte nor fellowship in me. But that I am both body & soule altogether thine. To whom be all prayses worlde without end. Amen.
         
         
            A Prayer vnto God the holy Ghost.
            
               O Holye Ghoste, O blessed and Holye Spirite, comforter of them that be afflicted. Thou procéeding from the Father and the

Sonne, art the true instructour and teacher of the deuine and heauenlye veritye. Wherefore I with all humilitie, praye thée to renewe and make in mee a cleane hearte, to grafte a right spirite in me, Guide and gouern mée, that I may thinke nothing, speake nothing, doe nothing, but that only which shall please thée.
            And whereas I haue not ceased to offend my Lorde God and Maker, and moste gréeuouslye to transgresse agaynst Iesus my redéemer and sauiour, I pray thée that I maye haue inwarde sorrow, repentance and shame

thereof, and that euer hereafter, I may performe my duety as I ought to doe, and so bring forth the fruites of repentance, that the passion of Iesus Christ may defend me from all sinne and wickednesse, and bring me to the ioyes of Paradice. So be it.
         
         
            A deuoute Prayer.
            REmember not, O Lorde GOD, thine anger agaynst me an offender, but be myndefull of thy mercye towardes me a true penytente, forget that through pryde, I haue prouoked thée

to yre, and fauourablye harken vnto my prayer. What is Iesus, but a Sauioure? therefore O bountifull Iesu be thou my Sauiour, ryse vp in thyne owne strength to helpe me, saye vnto my soule, I am thy safegarde. In thy goodnesse do I trust, in thée is my hope, and for as much as thou hast willed that we should without ceasing séeke and sue vnto thée, beholde I being counsayled and foretolde by thy cōmandementes, doe nowe both aske, séeke, and knock. But thou which commandest me to aske, graunt that I may receiue, thou bidst me séeke,

make me to find. Thou hast taught me to knocke: open vnto me yt stand knocking: strengthen mee that am weake: restore me that am lost: reuiue me that am dead by sinne: make me to serue thée: to liue to thée: to giue my selfe wholy to thée.
            I knowe my God, that because thou madest me, I owe my selfe vnto thée, & for that thou hast redéemed mée, I shuld owe thée more than my self. But behold, I haue no more to giue, neither can I giue my selfe vnto thée, vnlesse thou make me willing therevnto. Take thou me, draw me vnto thée, that

as I am thine by creatiō, so I may be thine by folowing of thée, whiche liuest & raignest for euer & euer. Amen.
         
         
            An other Prayer.
            HAue mercie vpon me, O Lord, haue mercy vpon mée, moste miserable Creature, which doe that which I ought not, and feare that whiche I haue moste iustly deserued, if I weigh with my selfe the wickednes that I haue done, the punishmēt therby deserued, is not halfe so great as the sinne that I haue committed, but yu art a mercifull God, & thy iudgementes

are right, neyther doest thou at any time punishe vs vniustly. Thou almightie god madest vs, whē as we were not, and when as we were loste and damned, thou didst miraculously restore vs. I knowe and am sure, that our life is not led by sodaine and vncertayne motions, but is disposed and directed by thée, thou hast a fatherly care of vs al, but specially of all suche as do put their whole trust and confidence in thy mercy.
            Therfore I humbly pray and beséeche thée, that thou wouldest not deale with me after my deseruings, but according

to thy great mercy, which doth excéed the sinne of the whole world.
            And as often as thou doest punish me outwardly, giue me grace inwardlye with patience, to beare the same and that thy praise neuer depart out of my mouth. Order my doinges, euen as shall be most necessary both for my body and soule.
            Thou onely hast power ouer all things, thou knowest all thinges, to thée be al honour for euer. Amen.
         
         
            
            A Prayer for the obtayning of mercie.
            
               BEholde, out from the bottom of my hearte, doe I crie vnto thée (O lord) beséeching thée, that thou wouldest saue me from the bottomlesse pitte of Hell. I knowe that there is mercie with thee. Doe not therfore marke what I haue done amisse. Enter not into iudgement with thy seruant, for then can I by no meanes be iustified in thy sight.
            The remembraunce of mine offences is grieuous

vnto me, & therefore I right humbly craue pardon thereof. My heart is troubled, my soule is vexed, there is no health in my flesh. Forsake me not myne onely stay and comforte. Dispise not my contrite heart, open the bosome of thy mercie, take clean away mine iniquity, bring my soule out of tribulation, turne the extremitie of thy iustice into thy tēder mercy, and when thou shalt come to iudge ye quicke and the dead, be not reuenged on mée by eternall damnation, but to take me amongest thyne electe, into the blessed state of Saluation.

Graunt this O Father, for Christes sake, our Mediatour, and Aduocate. Amen.
         
         
            An other Prayer.
            
               O Lorde my GOD, although I haue committed that, whereby I am an offendour, can I make my selfe not to be thy creature? though through sin I haue loste my cleannesse & puritie, haue I also taken away thy goodnesse, and mercye? thoughe I haue committed that, wherefore thou mayest condemne me, hast thou not done that, whereby thou mayest saue me? True it is (O Lord) that my conscience

doth shewe me, that I haue deserued damnatiō, but thy mercy excéedeth all offensyon. Spare mée (O God) because it is not vnpossible for thy power: it is not vnmeet for thy mercy: it is not vnacustomed, or yet contrary to thine infinite goodnes.
            Wherefore thou whiche hast created me, doe not destroye me. Thou (O Iesu) whiche hast redeemed mée, do not condemne me, thou whiche hast made me, let not thy worke be cast away by my wickednes. Wype away all that is myne, and draweth me from thee, and knowledge all that is thine

in mée, and may bring me vnto thée. Which liuest and raignest one God in persōs thrée, to whome be al honor, now and euer. Amen.
         
         
            A necessary prayer in Meeter.
            
               O Lorde my God, make thou my hart,
            repentant for to be:
            The spirite of contrition,
            doe thou ingrafte in me.
            Unto myne eyes let there be giuen,
            aboundance of weeping:
            And let my handes be occupied,
            With often almes gyuing.
            O thou my king quench out of me,
            all foule fleshly desire:
            And with the loue of thee alone,
            set thou my hart on fire.
            O my Redeemer dryue away,
            the spirite of pride from me,
            And graunt to mee that great treasure,
            of meeke humilitie.
            
               Take from me, O my Sauiour,
            the furious rage of yre;
            The shield of pacience giue to me,
            the which I doe desyre.
            O Creator roote out of mee,
            all spitefulnesse of mynde:
            And graunt in steede thereof agayne
            meeken
                  •
               sse that I may fynde.
            O Bountifull father giue me,
            a fayth that shall indure:
            With hope agreeing therevnto,
            and charitie most sure.
            O thou my guyde, keepe from my lips,
            all lying vanitie:
            And from my minde, driue farre away,
            all vayne vnconstancie.
            All wauering tak
                  •
                from my heart,
            and from my mouth scoffing:
            With all proud lookes & glottony
            backbiting, slandering.
            Couetousnesse wipe cleane away,
            with curiositie:
            The fond desire of vayne glory,
            with all hipocrisie.
            Let me neuer the poore despise,
            nor yet the weake oppresse:
            And let me not blaspheme, for then
            
               I dye remedilesse.
            O thou which didst mee forme and make
            take all rashnesse from me:
            And leaue me not such a minde as
            will not with peace agree.
            Take from me ydlenesse and sloth,
            with heauie lumpishnesse:
            Take from me disobedience,
            and also stubburnnesse.
            O my God, for thy deare Sonnes sake,
            I humbly beseeche thee,
            To graunt me the works of mercy,
            aboundance of pitie.
            That I may thee both loue & feare,
            and eke pitie the poore:
            Make mee good men alwayes to loue,
            and wicked to abhorre.
            Make me so little to esteeme,
            those thinges that worldly bee:
            With harte and voyce that I maye craue
            in Heauen to be with thee,
            amen.
         
         
            
            ¶ Beeyng tempted by the ghostly ennemy (as all that feare God are) to doubt in any article of the Catholike Fayth, to dispayre in Gods mercye, to yeelde to melancholye fantasies, to bee vexed with vnkindnes of friends or the malice of ennemies, to bee troubled with sicknesse, or any other wayes oppressed with griefe of body and mynde, say deuoutly as followeth.
            
               I Humblye accept moste mercifull Iesus, this heauie temptation, whiche nowe I suffer at the handes of thy diuine prouydence, and would a greater if thou please to laye it on

me for thy sake. Who hath ordayned this from the beginning, for the tender loue thou bearest to the health of my sinfull soule, and I most hartily thanke thée for it, I confesse I haue deserued worse for my sinne and vnkindenesse towardes thée, and I am not worthie to receyue any comfort or consolation at thy handes, therefore to the honor of the passion and death, whiche thou wyllinglye sufferedst on the Crosse, I offer my selfe to sustayne this, or any other aduersitie with al my hart, not séeking other ways ease or reliefe, then in and by

thee (O Lorde) and as thy good will and pleasure shal appoint, yet this one thing I craue and beséech thée, for the tender loue thou bearest to mée, and all mankinde, (for in mée is no vertue, or ought that is good) to helpe and assist me with thy holy spirite, (as my trust is thou wilt) who promiseth that no man shall be tempted more than he shalbe able to beare and giue me all what euer shalbe necessary to sustayne with patience this painfull Crosse & temptation, which thy deuine wisdome hath apointed for me, to the intēt that I bearing ye same wyllingly

with thée here in this worlde, may conceiue assured hope to bée partaker of thy glorye in the worlde to come: grant me my request moste mercifull Sauioure, not for my merite or deseruing, but onely for the merites of thy death and bitter passion, I humblye beséeche thée. Amen.
         
         
            A Prayer for the obtayning of grace and mercy.
            
               O Moste mercifull Lorde God, whose Maiestie is incomprehensible, and power infinite, whose magnificence is exalted aboue the

heauens, vouchsafe I beséech thée, from thy high Throne, to beholde the worke of thy handes. Haue pitie on the vnhappy & desolate condition of thy creature. I am a sinner conceiued in sin, & of my selfe I haue no good thing: wherefore (O Lord) I cleaue to the Altare of thy mercy. Thou art my Ankor, my hope, my refuge, & staye. Therefore O Lorde, haue mercy vpon me, for no flesh can be iustified in thy sight. Thou knowest the frayltie & weakenes of men, we are taught by the fall of Peter, yt we can doe nothing wythout thée. Graunt vs therfore

good lord thy grace, without which in this world, we are lyke by the waues of temptations, to be swallowed in the gulph & whyrlepoole of sinnes, to be drownd as the ship without Ankor & Pylate, in euerye Tempest to runne on the Rocke and perishe: Guide vs therfore by thy grace (good Lorde) thorow the flouds of this carefull worlde, that wee maye rest for euer in the pleasant Porte, and happye hauen of euerlasting ioy, with thyne elected, thorough our blessed Sauiour Iesus Chryst. To whome wyth thée and the holye Ghoste, bée all

honour and glorye, in all worldes. Amen.
         
         
            A Prayer for the Penitent.
            
               O Lord, I am a sinner, my sins are heauy vpon me, the burthen of them is intolerable, refresh me with thy grace, washe away mine offences, & I shall be whiter than the snow, let the chéerfull beames of thy countenance shine vppon mée, and giue light to the darknes of my life. We can looke for nothing as deserued, but punishment due to oure offences. Wherfore good lord▪ not according to thy iustice, but

in the multitude of thy mercies deale with thy seruant. Remember not the sinnes of my forefathers, think not on the misdemeanor of my youth passed, haue pitie on thy creture, which acording to the likenesse of thy selfe, thou hast made & shaped of earth. How long wilt thou turne thy face away frō me? forsake me not, O my God, but renewe in me thy holy spirit. Pluck away from me all that withdraweth mée from thée. Graft in my hart thy grace, yt I may loue thée, and feare thée, and so finallye reioyce in thy goodnesse with thy elected, and prayse

thée in thy wondrous works for euer. Graunt thys most mightie God, for our Sauiour Iesus Christ his sake. To whome with thée and the holye Ghost, be all honour and glory, for euer and euer. Amen.
         
         
            A Prayer for Fayth.
            
               O Blessed sauiour Iesus, sonne of the euerliuing God, the vnspeakeable ioye of thy seruantes, moste present cōfort to sinners, which camest into ye world to saue offenders, whiche so louest the world that thou sparedst not thy most pecious blood, to redéeme the losse of oure

first father Adam, & to make vs Coheires of the forfaited inheritance with thy selfe, that al which beléeue in thée might be saued, good Lorde whiche hast promysed to them that knocke, it shal be opened, & that they whiche seeke shall finde, graunt I beséeche thée, that I maye search thy holye lawes, and finde the trueth of thy holye worde, that I may alwayes constantly confesse & shewe thée & thy goodnesse, as well in my words as lyuing. Inspire me with thy holye spirite, that I may know thée, stedfastlye trust in thée, and serue thée in prayers & well

doing, all the tyme of my life. O most mercifull Lord and sauiour of the world, for the glory of thy names sake I beséeche thée to heare my praiers. My soule reioyce in God thy sauing healthe, for he hath bene good to thée, he hath kept thée frō the snare of the hunter, & blessed thée. The lord is a merciful God, let all the earth feare him, let the mouthes of all men sounde prayses vnto hym. God is a good Lord, & dayly increaseth his good giftes to his seruants, the Lord wyll encrease my fayth in hym, and I shalbe saued, Amen.
         
         
            
            A Prayer for righteous iudgement.
            
               O Lord God of all iustice, whiche in equall Ballance doest weigh the cause of the Prince and of the poorest man, whiche despisest not the sutes of the simple, whiche deliuerest the Captiue, and comfortest the desolate and carefull. O Lord whiche hast blessed them that are poore in spirite, reléeue thy seruaunt oppressed with griefe, remoue from me the clowdes of my sorrowes. O Lorde stretche forth thy mightie hand and helpe me, let me not sincke

in the Seas of slaunder and shame. Thou knowest the secretes of my heart, defend me in myne innocencie. Pleade thou my cause agaynst the vngodly, whiche haue layd their nets for me. O God, thou which hast deliuered Ioseph, Danyell, Mardocheus, and Susanna, from captiuitie and instant death, and didst cloath them with honoure, good Lorde strengthen me, and be my defendour against all euils, and let not the poysoned arrowes of malicious tongues doe me any harme. Graunt these my prayers (good Lorde,) I bseeche thée, for

our Sauioure Iesus Chryst his sake. Amen.
         
         
            A Prayer agaynst lying and euill imaginations.
            
               O Lorde cleanse my heart I beséeche thée, from all impure and wicked cogitations, and thoughtes, and giue me a cléere conscience, shamefast eyes, innocente handes, and a tongue to tell the truth. Séeing that there is nothyng hidde that shall not be discouered, good lord I beséeche thée to search my thoughtes, and renewe in me thy holye spirite, directe my féete in thy wayes, that

walking after thée, in the pathe of the righteous, I may passe thorow this vale of misery, bearing thy banner stowtly in my warfare, and obtaine euerlasting ioy the promised hire to such as here haue paciently borne thy crosse, and valiauntlye fought with the armoure of fayth, against temptations and all euils, vouchsafe (O Lorde) to graunt my peticions, I most humbly beséech thée, for thy onely begotten sonne, our Sauiour Iesus Christ his sake Amen.
         
         
            
            A thankesgiuing for the goodnesse of God to vs.
            
               O Almightie God, and euer ruling King, whose infinit power & maiesty our wyts cannot comprehende: whose glorious brightnesse with our mortall eyes wee cannot behold: whose wonderous workes & manyfold mercyes, the tongues of mē cannot sufficiently declare: Good Lord I yéeld thée most humble thankes, for thy singuler great gifts and benefites, bestowed vppon me a sinner. Good Lord thou hast blessed me with knowledge

with increase and plenty of all thinges, thou hast giuen me friends, health, and rest. That I shoulde eate my meate with ioy, and prayse thée in al thy gifts & works: I know that I haue no good thing, but it commeth from thée, and onely for thy mercies sake, thou hast so regarded me thy seruaunt, wherfore (good lord) I beséech thée to grant me thy grace withall, that I maye vse these thy gifts to thy honour and glory, & the comfort of them that néede, that vsing the talent whiche thou hast lente mée, I maye become a good seruaunt, and obtayne eternal

blisse, the promised hire to suche as doe well. Uouchsafe good Lord, for thy sonne our Sauiour Iesus Christe his sake to heare my prayers.
            ALmightie God, refreshe me with thy grace, I beséech thée, comfort me wyth thy mercye, and blesse mée, that safe from all euils, frée from feare of all daungers, in peace and quietnesse, I may sing prayses to thy holy name, and reioice in thée, with thine elected for euer and euer. Amen.
         
         
            
            A Prayer to liue well.
            GOod Lorde so rule the eyes of my heart, that they being kept simple and pure, my bodye may bée a cleare and shining temple of thy holy spirite, so kindle in vs the loue of thy glorious sonne, that we following his steps, may doe that which is good, and declyne from the euill, so that our light shyning before men, we may glorifie thée by our good works, with thy blessed sonne our Sauiour and the holye Ghost. To whose infinite maiestie, in trinitie

and vnitie, be all honour and glory, for euer. Amen.
         
         
            A confession for the penitent.
            
               O Moste mercifull Lorde God, I haue offended against the Throane of thy Maiestye, my sinnes are euer before myne eyes, I am not worthy to liue or enioy the fruites wherewith thou hast blessed the earth, my owne conscience is my tormenter, bringing testimonie and witnes against me. The Sunne doth hyde hys light agaynst mee, and the place is the worse wherein I become. O Lorde, what

shall I doe, shal I dispayre? No, thou art mercifull, and more ready to forgiue, then we to aske, I will confesse my sins to thée. I am weary of my sinfull life, I am sory in my soule for myne offences, wherefore good Lorde thou whiche doest case them that are laden, and refreshe them that trauayle, thou which hast promised mercy to the penitente, looke on thy seruant with thy chearefull countenaunce, beholde me with those pittying eies, with whiche thou didst Mary Magdalen, and the woman taken in Adulterye, thou whiche hast shedde thy

bloode on the Alter of the Crosse, offering thy moste precious bodye, an eternall Sacrifice for our sinnes, dispyse not that whiche thou hast redéemed: Thou which camest into the world to cal sinners to repentaunce, and to saue the lost shéepe of Israell, haue mercye vppon me, & leade me by thy grace to the Foulde, among thy Sheepe, for they go in sweet Pasture, & are not in daunger of Wolues, for thou art their shepheard, and kéepest good accounte of euery one of them, thoughe I haue gone astray wandring from thy flocke, and borne the

markes of the worlde, yet good Lord disclaime not thy right, I beséeche thée, but take me vnto thée, that I may be safe vnder the shaddow of thy winges. He may sléepe soundly, whome thou doest kéepe, thou arte the watchman of Israell. All honour and glorye be vnto thée for euer.
         
         
            A Prayer for humilitie.
            
               O Lorde I am a sinner, & sorry for mine offences, I cannot make satisfaction for my defaultes, if I haue any good thing it cōmeth of thée. The moste acceptable

sacrifice to thée, is a contrite and humble hart. O God let me not be oppressed with the waues of sinne, let mée not sinke into the Whyrlepoole and gulph of dispayre: thou which liftest vp the fallen, and raysest the humble and méeke, cloathing them wyth purple, & setteth them vp wyth Prynces in the seates of honor: thou whiche despisest the imaginations of the proude, and resistest their enterprises, blesse me in all my doynges, send mée happy successe in all my affayres, that I maye reioyce in thy goodnesse, with thyne elected for euer & euer. Accepte

my humble sute good Lorde, I beséeche thée, for the glorye of thy names sake. Amen.
         
         
            A Prayer to be deliuered from enemies and dangers.
            
               O Moste mightie Lorde God of Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, which didst lead the children of Israell thorow the red Sea, and made the streames of Iordane runne back into their springes agayne, that thy people mighte passe throughe the middest thereof: good Lorde whose heastes the floudes obey, at whose voyce the hils

doe leape, and the earthe doeth tremble, O moste mightie Lorde, which canst destroy the prowdest kings with very Flyes and Ants, whiche made little Dauyd to tryumphe on the Gyaunt Golyath, which deliueredst his enemy King Saule into his handes, gauest Gedeon thy seruaunt wyth hys few Souldioures, victorye of so manye Legyons of strong men: Thou which hast subdued so many mighty kings and sundrye Nations vnto thy people Israell. O God, whiche workest all in all things, which giuest victory alwayes as séemeth best to

thy vnsearchable wisdome: defende me alwayes I beseeche thée, agaynst myne enemies & all euils, that my ship tossed and beaten in the waues of this worlde, may rest in thy happye Hauen of euerlasting ioy.
            My soule cleaueth vnto thy mercye, as to an holye Sanctuary. O God, if thou shouldest not be mercyfull, who could abyde the heat of thy displeasure? but thou (O Lorde) arte good to thy seruauntes, and I hope to sée thy goodnesse in the land of ye liuing. All glory be to thée moste high and mercyfull God, for euer & euer. Amen.
         
         
            
            The Penitent longeth for comfort.
            HOwe long (O Lorde) wilt thou tourne awaye thy face from mee? Howe long wilte thou be angrye wyth thy seruauntes? How long shall I abyde mourning & solitarye, as the byrd that hath lost hir young? O Lorde thinke on mée in thy mercies, and doe not correct me in thy wrathe, for then shall I become as the duste and smoke in the winde. O Lorde forsake not thy seruaunt Israell, whome thou hast chosen, my heart comforted

in thy mercyes, shall reioyce, and I will sing vnto thée, and praise thée in thy good works and Myracles, which thou hast done in our forefathers time.
         
         
            A godly Meditation.
            
               I Altogether vnhappy, and comfortlesse, haue greeuouslye offended my Lorde God, what shall I doe? whether shall I goe? I cannot hyde me from hys sight: how oft haue I trespassed against hym? howe oft haue I deserued his displeasure? and yet howe seldome hath hée punished me? howe oft hathe hée

béene good and mercyfull vnto mée? howe ofte haue I promised & vowed amendemente, and howe little and seldome haue I perfourmed it: this is a woefull case. Who will haue pittye on me, I dare not lift vp myne eyes towarde Heauen, because I haue sinned against it, and in earthe I can looke for no refuge, because I haue béene a slaunder and shame to it. What then: should I dispayre? No, God is a mercifull, and a good sauiour, hée dothe visite them that liue in darcknesse, and is a chearefull light to them that sit in the shaddowe of

death. He willeth vs to forgiue our brother, though he offend seuentie times, yea, infinitely. And God is more mercifull than any man can be, and he must be the onely refuge and comfort, he will not despise hys creature, the image of himselfe, returne thée to thy Lorde God, praye to him humbly on thy knées for grace, and continue to bewayle thy sinnes past, because that he whiche loueth thée, prouoketh thée dayly with hys gracious giftes, and blessings to loue him, & wil not leaue vntil he haue made perfite his worke begone, & brought his mercye

to full effecte in thée. What naturall cause begynneth his worke, and leaueth it in the halfe way imperfite: the vertue of the seede doth not cease, till ye fruit be brought to perfection, yet that nature worketh not at once, but first prepareth the matter, and then disposeth, and makes it fit to receiue the shape, which is the perfection and ende thereof, and as by naturall order, and right course, things doe procéede, and increase by little and little, from the lesse to the more, euen so doth God first dispose vs to his mercy, and then increasing his goodnes

daylye, bestoweth on vs in the ende, the treasure of his grace, the inheritance of euerlasting ioies. What bird forsaketh hir yong, till they bée able to lyue of themselues? and yet no auayle for their paine cōmeth to them, very loue worketh in naturall causes, to bring foorth their affectes to perfection, if it be so in creatures, what will the Creator doe, which is loue it selfe, and infinite goodnes? He wil withdraw thée from thy sins, make thée cleane and pure, and finally blesse thee with eternal life, whiche he hath prepared for thée. O Lorde I come to thée

sad and mourning, I sit at thy feete, humblye wayting for thy mercie, thou art my hope and helper, according to thy great mercyes, haue mercy vpon me. Amen.
         
         
            A Prayer agaynst Couetousenesse, or too much care of the worlde.
            GOod Lord, seeing that it is thy pleasure that wée shall not bée carefull for worldly thinges, if a Sparrow falleth not on ye ground without thy foresight, howe muche more care doest thou

take of vs thy children, good Lord, thou féedest the byrdes of the ayre, and cloathest the Lyllyes of the Field, which take no care. Wherefore good Lorde, so prouide for our necessitie & sickenesse, wée beséeche thée▪ that wee casting all our care vppon thée, maye chieflye studye to please thée, and serue thée, and not to be so wrapped & entangled in the desires of worldly thinges, like little children, who for light trifles of no valure, will forsake the moste ample inheritance that is. So in like manner, those whome the Scripture calleth the children

of this worlde, are so adicted to trifles, are so giuen to transitory & moment thinges, that for them they dispise the inheritaunce to come, and in comparison of them, they contemne euerlasting felicitie of heauenly thinges: Graunt vs therfore good Lord, that we be not so ouercome with the desire of worldly & transitorie things that thereby wee loose the ritch inheritance of euerlasting life. Graunt this good Lord which liuest and raignest King of all Kinges, for euer and euer. Amen.
         
         
            
            A Prayer that we may liue vprightly.
            
               O Lorde, seeyng that the righteous shall dwel in thy tabernacle, graunt mée I beséech thée a pure and vndefiled soule. O what is the shape of the earth, wherein Gods ennemies haue abyding? in comparison of the wonderfull bewtie of Heauen, wherein righteousnes doeth dwell: in comparison of that place, wherein Aungels Arckaungels, all good men, yea, and God himselfe is abyding. What are the plesures of the world, welth

honour, company of our parentes and friendes, wherein all our pleasure & swéetenesse, is mixed wyth sowernesse and sorrowe, wherein euerye perfection hathe hys imperfection. What is all this to the vnspeakable ioy in the kingdome of GOD, what is ye company of frinds &c. here, in comparison to the companye of Abraham, Isaac & Iacob, the Patriarches & Prophets, and all the Sayntes of God. O the infelicitie of euerlasting lyfe, whiche is without all discommodities, perpetuall without all perrill and molestation: Oh the glorious

maiesty, the singuler myrth and passing ioyes of the lyfe to come, the eye hathe not séene, nor the hart of man is able to conceiue in any part the happy estate of the blessed soules in heauen. Oh howe amiable are thy Tabernacles? my soule hathe a desire to enter into the (Courts of the Lorde,) my harte and my soule reioyce in the liuing god, blessed be they that dwel in thy house, they may be alwayes praysing thée. One daye in thy Courtes is better than a thousande else where, I had rather to be a dore kéeper in the house of my God, than

to dwel in the Tents of vngodlinesse. The Lorde God is a light and defence. My soule is a thirst for God, euen for the lyuing GOD. When shall I come before the presence of my God. My flesh longeth after thée in a barren and dry land, where no water is. Good Lord remember mée, and grant that I maye weare the white Garmentes of innocencye, with thyne elected, in thy euerlasting kingdome. Amen.
         
         
            
            A thankesgiuing for benefites receyued at Gods hand.
            
               O Moste mercifull father, I yeeld thée moste humble thankes, for thy greate benefites bestowed vppon me a sinner, of thy frée mercye, onely thou haste of thy fatherly loue, brought mée vp tenderly, and instructed me in thy holy lawe, thou hast giuen me knowledge, and vnderstandyng, thou hast preserued me from many daungers & euils, which diuers men haue felte: thou hast blessed me with helth, quietnesse, ioy, plentye, and

wealth, which a number do want, thou hast taken care of me, and done all thinges for me. O Lorde thoughe I can deserue nothing but punishment, by thy iuste displeasure, yet good Lorde, I trust to thy goodnesse, I ask thy mercye, and not iustice, and for thy mercies sake, I beséeche thée to continue thy grace, and to increase thy good gifts towards me, and haue me in thy protection, till my lyues end: good Lord blesse me, that I may enioy the fruites of the earth, and vse them to thy honour and glory: good Lord be thou my ayde and guyde me in al my

doinges, my buckler and defence in all daungers, that I may freely and ioyfullye sing prayses to thée, whiche liuest and raygnest, one God almightie, and incomprehensible, worlde wythout ende. Amen.
         
         
            A Godly Prayer.
            MOst mightie God which by thy worde hast made all thinges, whose voyce the floudes and hilles doe knowe, whose heast both quick and dead, heauen and hell obey, at whose displeasure, the Diuels in hell doe tremble, let thy worde so

lighten our heartes, that by oure good workes, we may testifie our profession, séeing that the Trée whiche beareth not fruite, shall be cut downe and throwne into the fyre. Graunt that I may not onely be a hearer, but also a doer of thy holy word, that so finallye I maye bée partaker of thy euerlasting ioye and blisse. O Lorde graunt mee wisedome to knowe thee, and grace to followe thée in true humilitie, that as thou didst suffer to be spitted at, and smitten of thine enemies: so wee may beare the displeasures of the world, and rage of our

ennemies wyth pacience: thou hast blessed the little ones, & reuealed vnto them the thinges hidden from the wyse, for thou wilte haue mercye where it pleaseth thée. O set thy feare always before myne eyes, and graft thy fayth so in my hart, that I may loue thée, and glorifie thy holy name, for euer. Amen.
         
         
            A godly Prayer to be sayde of euery christian.
            GOod Lord, whiche wyth thy handes doest stay the frame and engyne of the

earth, and rulest the course of the swifte heauens, disposing, and ordering all thinges by thy diuine prouidence, whiche hast appoynted boundes to oure life, which we cannot passe, I beséeche thée, that by my liuing, I learning to dye, mortifying by thy spirite, the affections of the fleshe, though not expelling them, yet subduing the rage of them, I maye at the last by the Hauen of Deathe, land in the moste gloryous Citye of euerlastyng lyfe, where our bodyes, whiche are nowe darcke, myserable, and corruptible, shall

be moste brighte, glorious, and incorruptible, lyke to the immortall shining bodye of oure Lorde Iesus Chryste, we shall be lyke to Christ oure Sauyour, euen as he is, so shall we be, as we haue borne the Image of the earthlye, so shall we beare the Image of the heauenly, and shyne lyke to the sunne, as the face of Christe did in his transfiguration, Oh Lord Iesus, blessed Sauiour, whiche by thy deathe haste tryumphed ouer sinne and deathe. Thou hast troden on the sting of the monster, oure hydeous enemye, the Gates of Hell haue not

preuayled againste thee, graunt to me true and liuely fayth, by which men passe from earth to heauen, from death to eternall life. This can we not do without thée, thou must be our Mediator, for a child of a nights birth, is not pure in thy sight. In sinne were wee borne, and by nature wee are the children of perdition, and fyrebrandes of Hell, but thou O blessed Sauiour, arte the perfection of the Lawe, to them that beleue. As death came by synnes, so by thy death and precyous bloodeshedding, is death conquered and exiled, and wée that

beléeue, washed and cleansed of our sinnes, al the prophets beare witnesse, that they whiche beléeue in thy name, shall receiue remission of their sins. If we confesse our synnes, thou arte righteous to forgiue vs our iniquities. Whosoeuer calleth on thy name, shal be saued, thou hast no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but rather desyrest yt they shoulde liue & be cōuerted, thou hast so loued the world, that thou not only didst become man and tooke our nature vpon thée, but were content also to suffer most cruel death on the Crosse, to purge our nature

from mortal sinne and corruption, & adorne it with immortality & eternall glorye, not only in thyne own person, but in vs also, to satisfy the iustice of the father for oure sinnes. O blessed shepheard, thou doubtest not to spende thy most precious bloode, to saue thy beloued sheepe from rauine & spoile, Good Lorde so increase thy grace in mee, that thy holye woord may take roote & florish in me, that the good séed may not bee choaked with thornes, so order my liuing, that when by course of nature, I shalbe dissolued from the pryson of my bodye, I

may come to thée, that when thou more brighter then the sunne shal come in the middest of the Legions of Aungels, in the shyning glorye and Maiestye, to iudge the quicke & the dead, I may be in the number of the blessed ones, whom thou shalt call to possesse thy kingdom prepared for them, by thy father, saying: Com ye blessed children of my father, receiue y• kingdome prepared for you from the beginning of the worlde. Thou whiche didst dye and ryse agayne, wilt rayse and bring to life all those that are dead, beléeuing in thy faith.
         
         
            
            Comfortable Exhortations against the manifolde assaultes of Sathan.
            
               IF thou perceyue that the storme of temptation doth verye often and greeuously assault thee, dismay not therefore thy selfe, neither bee displeased with thy selfe, as though almighty God nothing regarded thee, but rather thanke him that hee instructeth and teacheth thee, as one to bee hys heyre, that he punisheth & correcteth thee as his most deare sonne, that he proueth & assayeth thee as his welbeloued friend. It is a manyfest and great token that man is reiect from the mercy and fauour God, when hee is troubled with no temptation. In thy temptatiō remember the holy Apostle S. Paule, which being wrapt to the misteries of the thirde heauen, was v
                  •
               xed with the aungel of sathan: remember the temptation of the holy man Iob, & other which

were grieuou
                  •
               ly troubled with their offences. O happy & fortunate man in whome this earthly Adam is so mortified and subdued, that it in no wise resisteth the spirit, but whether thys perfit quyetnes may be in any, I will not affirme, peraduenture it is not necessary to be. For Paule in this life, notwithstanding his highe perfection and grace, had a motion of the flesh to vexe & trouble him. And when he thrice desyred God to be deliuered from the sayd motion. He only had this answer. Paul my grace is sufficient, for vertue is made perfit by vexatiō. Paul was vexed by pride that he should not be proud, to be perfite & strong in God, he was caused to be weak & feeble. For he carryed the treasure of heauēly reuelation in a frayle & britle vessel, that the honor & victory should only be in God, not in himself: this one example of Paul is eruditiō & lerning in many things when that we be intised & moued to sin, that we diligently cal to almighti god by prayer. Remember that Dauid

the Prophet, King Salomon & Peter the Apostle, notwithstanding they were great lightes & examples of holynesse, yet they fell into grieuous and great sins, whom almighty God peraduenture suffred to fall for this cause, speciallye that thou shouldest not dispa
                  •
               re. Lyft vp thy selfe therefore vppon thy feete, and with high courage & bolde stomack returne againe into battayle agaynst thy enemies, not onely more fierce and bold, but also more ware & diligent, and think with thy selfe what intollerable and inuincible temptations Christ suffred for thee, wherin there appeared no help, comfort, ayd, nor defence anye where, wherein God and the whole worlde seemed to be his most cruell and malycious enemyes, when that he cryed alowd: My God my God, why hast thou forsaken me? Truely this was a most grieuous, paynfull, and bitter temptatiō, which Christ suffred for vs, that he might make the way of the crosse easy for vs. Therefore prepare

thou thy 
                  •
               elf paciently to drink of that Cuppe, which Christ Iesu thy head, hath so willingly dronke on, for the saluation of al mankynd. And seeing therefore that Christ so willingly put himselfe in subiection and dipped himselfe in those so horrible and intollerable sorrowes and calamities (oure moste louing and heauenly Father willing the same out of doubt) he also vnderstandeth and knoweth our infirmitye, out of doubt hee taking compassion on vs, will not extreamly deale with vs, but will rather beare with our imbecillitye and weakenes. Doth not he himselfe, calling al men vnto him, say: Come vnto me al yee that labor and are heauy laden, and I will refresh you: what more greater comfort I pray you can be giuen vs. How could Christ speak more mercifull vnto vs. There bee manye things that greeuously vex & trouble man, but what thing can more cruelly vex & torment his conscience, ouerwhelmed with sin, then when he

doubte
                  •
               h of the mercy of God, when he dreadeth least God be his aduersary and will reiect him, when he is not able to conceiue this fayth of his mercy, & doth imagine himself to be cast away, as a dry member that is cut of. Be present here, O Iesus Christ with thyne ayde & help, here we haue need of thy comfort, let not this blacke, violent & horrible tēpest of troubls ouerthrow & drown wretched man: but there is no cause why we should doubt. Christ is true, he wil make his promises to appear, he wil help vs & refresh vs. Therfore where as thy faith is not strong ynough, wheras thou feelest thy self to doubt of Gods mercy, and haste well neare no fayth at all, strayght waies cal vpō God, bewail tho misery & lack of belief before him, seek for his aid & succour by feruent prayer, & he wil both help & refresh thee he hath taken vpon him thus to do, & he wil bring it to pas: but take heed thou cease not to call vpon god beseech thou without al ceasing, the

Father of all consolation & comfort, with sighs from the bottom of thine hart, that he turne not his face from thee, lay thy weakenes vppon him, & poure out into his bosom all things which trouble & torment thee. Crye out with his disciples, O Lord increase my fayth. Lykewise say thou with the Father of the lunaticke child: lord I bele
                  •
               ue, help thou mine vnbeliefe. Make hast O lord to help mee, before that I oppressed wyth this weight be drowned. O moste louing & mest merciful Father, lord God of my health, our only help and refuge: Enter not into iudgemente with thy seruauntes. Christ is my righteousnes, redemption and innocencye, whiche suffred most bitter and cruell death for my sake. Let those things mooue thee, O Father of all compassion, haue mercy vpon me for thy sons sake, confirme and strengthen my hearte by Faythe in Christ: Comforte mee with the consolations of the holy ghoste, that I may enioy the true ioyes of euerlasting

lyfe, through the merites of my Lord and sauiour Iesus Christ to whom with the Father and the holy ghost be all praise and glorye, for euer and euer. Amen.
         
         
            A Psalme to be sayd at all tymes.
            
               REioyce in GOD my soule, for he is my lighte and my defence, my helpe the lanterne to my féete, he hath heard my prayer, when I called on him, he hath holpen me in my néede, he hath deliuered mee in my daungers. The Lorde is the kéeper

of my life, from whome shall I shrinke, whom shall I feare, lying prostrate at the féete of my Lorde, I bewayled my case, and hée heard my complaint, he forsaketh not his seruaunts. Wherefore, if armies of men stoode vp agaynst mée, I shoulde not feare, for if God be on my syde, who can preuayle against mée? Hée is happye and safe, whom God the mighty God of Israel keepeth, the sunne shal not burne him by daye, nor the Moone by night. Thryse blessed is hée that feareth the Lorde, for hée shall see happy dayes. As the Hart

thyrsteth after the water springes, so my soule hath longed for my Lorde the liuing God. When shall I come to appeare before thy presence, to sée thée in thy glorious Maiestie, face to face? O Lord let thy kingdome come. Come Lord Iesus, that I may see the day of my redemptiō. Good Lord make hast to helpe mée. All glory, maiesty, and Empire, be vnto God the Creatour, God the redéemer, and God the holy comforter, for euer and euer. Amen.
         
         
            A Prayer to bee sayd of the sinfull soule.
            
               MY synfull life increasinge, and my synnes still abounding (good Lord) to whom shall I flye, or to whome shall I resorte for succoure? from offendinge thée I cannot cease, neyther day nor nighte, & my sinnes are heuy vpon me, pressing mee downe euen vnto Hel, such is the weight thereof. Moreouer, when I prepare my selfe to amendmente of life, and thinke stedfastly to serue & please thée, euen soone after doth my corrupt and infected nature, offend and displease thy Deuyne maiesty, so that I am proane & ready to runne headlong

into all kynd of wickednes & sin, such is my strength, such is my force, or rather weaknesse in performing those things which thou requirest at my handes. So that good Lord, I am ready vtterly to dispayre, and forsake thée, vnlesse thou of thy great mercy and pitty, send thyne ayde from aboue, and poure into mee thy moste healthfull grace, that I may make hast to flye vnto thée with most bitter teares, a sorrowfull heart and bowing knées, lamenting my sinfull lyfe, and gréeuous offences committed agaynste thée, trusting most assuredlye,

and faythfullye in the merites of my sauioure Iesus Christ, that by his most bitter death and bloodshedding, which is of farre greater force, vertue & effect, in preseruing me, then all my sinnes and offences are, in condemninge and casting mée away, for whose sake I moste assuredly beléeue all my sinnes and offences are clearly forgiuen, and shall neuer be layd to my charge, but that I shall enter with thée in the laste day into thy euerlasting kingdom, there to bée with thée for euermore, to whom be all honor praise and glory, for euer

and euer.
         
         
            A Prayer for the obtayning of Gods grace.
            SHyne wee beséech thée, O almighty and mercifull God, through the power of oure Lorde Iesus Christe, and the comfortable woorking of thy sacred Spirite, the heauenlye comforter, vpon our myndes and harts with the glorious beams of thy heauenly grace, geue vs such plenty of wisedom and vnderstanding from aboue, that thorow the knowledge of thee, the man of ūn, that is, our frayle & féeble fleshe, with the wicked lustes, and

desyre of concupiscence, may lye deade and buryed in vs, giue vs good Lord the feeling of thy grace, that by the vertue and deuine operation of thy worde, the eyes of our soules may bee illumyned, and made so light, that the Prince of Darknesse, with all his vnrighteous ministers may bee expulsed and banished from our memories, and so establish vs in thy truth, that our harts, myndes and thoughts, may continuallye be occupyed in thy testimonies, that thereby thou good Lorde effectually shyning in our hearts, by the vertue of thy good spirite,

we may learn to know and vnderstand, what is the fulnes of of our calling, and how ritche thou arte in the glory of the celestiall and Heauenlye heritage of thy Sayntes, and that excellent greatnes of thy power and louing kyndnes towardes vs, which beléeue without fayning thy holy Gospell, according to the might and force of thy strength, which thou shewedst in Chryst Iesus, when thou didst rayse him from the dead, and didst set him on thy ryght hande, farre aboue all Empire, power, authority, and dominion, and euery name that

is named, not onely in this worlde, but in the world to come, by whose precyous death, & dearest bloodshedding, wee are assured, that sinne, Death, and hell, are vanquished, ouercome, and vtterlye destroyed, and if wée beléeue without wauering, we shall in him bee able to resiste all the power of Hell, and in Christ as Conquerours, to tryumphe with victorye ouer sinne, Death, and Sathan, and at the last, to haue and enioye the fruition of his riche and glorious kingdome, which hee by moste paynfull agonye, bloody strypes, gréeuous

and bloodye woundes and lastly by his most painfull death purchased for his chosen and elect. To whom for our sanctification, iustification, redemption, and our saluation, bee rendred with his Celestial Father, and the holye Ghoste, all lawd, glory, power, honor, and dominion, for euer and euer. Amen.
         
         
            A Prayer for a woman that is great with childe, to be repeated by her hartily, before her trauel, which will bee maruaylous comfort vnto her.
            
               Thy wisedome Lord in all thy wayes,
            and power great to perfourme it:
            We cease to search, and onely praise,
            they passe so farre the reach of wit.
            And thus we muse, and maruaile much,
            of all thy works, and yet wee finde:
            No marueile, nor no wonder such,
            as daily forming of mankinde.
            Of such beginning, such an ende,
            and of such seede, such frune to growe:
            With Dauid well we may contende,
            to mase, to muse, and nothing knowe.
            The matter earth, the shape from Heauen,
            doth knit both soule and flesh in one,
            Whereof such stryfe is them betweene,
            from whēce they came, they would be gon.
            And yet in all thy wonders great,
            thy mercy Lord doth farre passe all:
            Which doest vouchsafe to worke this feate,
            in mee pore wretch; thy bond and thrall.
            And as good Lord then doest me make,
            thy shop to shape the worke therin:
            Thy handworke so do not forsake,
            but ende the thing thou doest begin.
            Thy goodnes Lord did once make light,
            this burthen now which sore doth greeue,
            
               Untill which woe did wrap each wight,
            the wilfull worke of woeful Eue.
            That Eue hath lost, let Christ restore,
            that guilt hath made, let grace amend:
            Why should the fault of Eue do more,
            then grace in Christ, God it defende.
            Oh Lord the time approcheth neare,
            that throwes of Eue I must sustaine:
            And that I may the same wel beare,
            increase my strength, or lesse my paine.
            Thy wil this burthen on me layd,
            thy goodnesse eke wil ease the same:
            Where Christ hath once the raunsome payd,
            why should the deed of Eue bring blame?
            Thus (O Lord) I me in thy will,
            doe put eke wholly in thy hand,
            I will not once swarue from thy skill,
            to dye, or liue, to fall, or stand.
         
         
            A Godly and earnest Prayer in time of trauayle or Childbyrth, of euery Christian & faithfull woman.
            
               ALmighty GOD, my Heauenlye and moste mercifull Father, I feele thy promised punishmente at this presente to take effect on mee, which for the guilte and transgression of my progenitours, hath bene by thy deuyne maiesty, iustly pronounced agaynst me, and the whole generation of Adam, great and intollerable are these bitter pange and piercing paynes that in this my trauaile of Childe-byrth, I indure and abyde. Now féele I as it were, a cruell and sharpe conflicte betwixt death and lyfe, now féele I (O Lord) the rod of

thy correction, according to thy iustice, layde heauy vpon me, for the vse and exercise of sinne and iniquitie, yet when it shall please thée (good Lord) looke vpon mée wyth the eyes of Fatherlye compassion and pittie, and according to the multitude of thy manifold mercyes, bée thou now present with mée, arme me with perfite pacience, ioyfullye to beare thy correction, and in the midst of these my sharpe and bitter bruntes of griefe, giue me grace styll to call vppon thée, strengthen me a poore wretched woman, giue mée comforte and heauenly consolatiō
               
from aboue, & when thou shalt thinke it meete & conuenient, send me safe deliuerance, that I may enioy the fruite of my wombe, the sight whereof shall adorne & deck me anew wyth ioy and gladnesse: Otherwise good Lord, if in this season thou determine to take me hence vnto thy self, by thy messenger Death, to whose stroake all Creatures (when thou thinkest it méete and expedient) shall bowe, make mée constant & faithfull in thée, whose I am, whether I dye or liue, forget my sins and offences committed by mée, agaynst thee, let the bloude

of the Lambe Iesus, washe awaye my deformitie, let the spottes of my corruption, bee purged and taken awaye, let my infected soule that is putrified therein, be purified therein: Giue mée grace alwayes, whether I liue or dye, to call vpon thée continually: giue me power to pitch ny confidence onely and alone in the bloudye woundes of Christ Iesus, to whome in this my distresse I flye and appeale for remedie and comforte. Graunt this, O gracious God, which liuest and raignest worlde without end. Amen.
         
         
            
            A Prayer to be sayde of euery woman, after the tyme of deliueraunce.
            
               HOw muche, and how greatly am I bound to laud, prayse, and extol thée (O my Lorde God) euen nowe was I assayled in my body, being a wretched and sinfull woman, with sundry and diuers dolors, and gréeuous grypes of perrillous paynes, in such sort, that my Agonyes abounding, Death himselfe, séemed to mée, to knocke at the gates of my bodye, thy rodde of Iustice

lay so heauy vpō me, so that I iudged my self a creature more méete for the graue, whose clamor I thought stil sounded in my eares, then to reape the benefite of life. By my paynes Lorde God, in this my trauayle, I am forced to confesse & acknowledge that thou arte iuste in thy promises, and art ready to punishe sinne and iniquitie: by this my safe and sure deliueraunce, I am bounde to acknowledge, that wyth thy iustice, thou alwayes frequentest pittie, commixing thy mercye & iustice together, in such sort, yt I must needes confesse thee to bée

most righteous & mercifull. I cannot (O my God) but protest that thou hast dealte fauourablye with mee, and those paines which I abode were layde vpon me for my sinne and wickednesse, and yet haste thou not dealte seuerely with mee, neyther giuen sentence agaynst mée in thy fury, which haue iustlye deserued the same, for hadst thou, O Lorde, respected my desertes, I had porished euerlastingly, and béen vtterly confounded, my greuous grones throwne forth vnto thée, pierced the verye Bowels of thy annoynted sonne Iesus Christ, who beholding

my agonyes and bitter payns, became an intercessor to thée for mée, thorow whose earnest intreaty, and louing meditation, thou cō
               uertedst thy displeasure to mercie, and for hys sake alone, that dyed vppon the crosse for my offences, thou hast asswaged my torments▪ and in t
                  •
               e fu
                  •
               nesse of thy b
                  ••
               nty & louing kindnesse, thou hast giuen me a liuing soule to glad my hart, for the which I am bound of right, to giue thée harty and humble thankes, humblye be séeching thée, being now faint and féeble in body, to strengthen me in soule, mind, and

heart, that my tongue maye be the Organ that may continually publish forth thy euerlasting prayse. Graunt this (O gracious God) for the loue of thy onely begotten sonne Iesus Christ. To whome wyth thée and the holye Ghoste, bee giuen all lawde, power & dominion,  for euer and euer. A
                  •••
               .
         
         
            A godly prayer for the true worshipping of God.
            
               EStablyshe oure hartes & mindes, O moste gracious God, in the true worshipping of thy deuine

Maiestye, make vs to beléeue thy holye and sacred Gospell, wherein wée are daylye and hourely instructed to loue, feare, honoure, and obeye thée, to hate sinne and iniquitie, to renounce al superstitious ceremonies whereby thy worship is defaced, thy glory prophaned, and thine honoure greatlye dyminished: Giue vs thy grace to hate sinne and iniquitie, to renounce and forsake the vanities and wanton pleasure of this wicked and sinfull worlde, arme vs we beséeche thée to mortifie and bryng vnder, the rebellyous appetites, and

straunge lustes of the fleshe, and finallye giue vs power from aboue, to wythstande Sathan the prince of darcknesse, and all his damnable ministers, who by diuers temptations, prouoke and alure vs from godly puritie, and perfite integrity (which passeth onely from Chryste Iesus to vs, who is the fulnesse of oure perfection and holynesse) to all kinde of euill, impietie, & vncleannesse, by meanes whereof, thy worship is greatlye prophaned, and of a set purpose contemned. Make vs constant to skirmishe agaynst the worlde, sinne, death, and

hell, and by the power of afruitfull faith, giue vs grace to resist and brydle the concupiscence of oure fleshe, in suche sorte, that oure soules may triumph with victorye, & continue constant in worshipping thee, from whome passeth the fulnesse of oure ioye, prepare oure heartes and myndes (good Lorde) to spreade foorth the glory of thy name, keepe oure tongues from al filthy talk, and vncomely iesture, least by the exercise of such sinne, we contemne thy worship, and prouoke thée to displeasure and indignation, set thou a watche before the

gates of my mouth, that my lippes may by thy grace, be always made open to sound forth thy prayse and euerlasting glorye, be mercifull to our offences, think thou not on our vnrighteousnes, but vppon thy clemencye, forgiue thou fréely, and pardon graciously our sinnes, make vs faythfull in Christe Iesus, shorten the daungerous dayes of iniquitie, increase the number of thy chosen & peculier saintes, hasten thy comming, O sauior Christ, that we with the fellowship of thy saintes, heauenly Angels, and the blessed company of Martirs may celebrate

thy prayse, and worship thée in thy glorious kingdome, before thy father oure God, and the holy Ghost, to whom be prayse for euer. Amen.
         
         
            A Prayer agaynst the fellowship of the vngodly.
            
               PRotect & defend me (O heauenlye and most mercifull father) from the fellowship of the vngodly men whiche dayly imagine mischiefe in their heartes, to harm the innocent: kepe me from the counsayles of the foolish and vngodly, whiche speake proud things against

the glorye of thy blessed name, defend me from faithlesse and deceiptfull ones, whose guiltie stomacks are gorged with grudge, enuie, mallice, hatred, disdayne, and al vncharitablenes, for their throts are like vnto an open sepulchre, or swallowing graue, their tongues are giuen to slaunder, and backbite their neighboures, the poyson of Adders lyeth hidden vnder their lippes, and in fine, they as thyne enemies blaspheme thy holye and blessed name, and contemne thy testimonies, O Lorde gine me thy grace to be conuersant with good &

godly men, such as fauoure thy gloryous Gospell, & doe their indeuour to practise thy preceptes to the glorye of thy holye & blessed name: make mee by their example to exercise my selfe in the heauenly verity, that thereby I maye bee instructed in the liuely knowledge of thy commandements, & obtaine such wisedome from aboue, that by saythe I may cleaue to thee, & the fellowship of those yt feare thy holy name, and so auoyde the company of the wicked, and vngodly worldlinges, whiche haue layde snares to intrap mée. Graunt this, O most mercifull

Father, for thy sonne Iesus Christ hys sake, who euer liueth & raigneth with thee, and the holye Ghost, to whome be all lawd, glorye, power, and prayse, for euer and euer. Amen.
         
         
            A Prayer to be purged from syn and vncleannesse.
            
               TAke awaye from mée (O Lorde) the burthen of my corruption, which by the continual exercise of my sinne and wickednesse, hath wounded my soule wofullye, with the daungerous dartes of transgression, so

that I feele my putrifaction abounding, and my festred conscience ouerladen wyth vncleannesse, so that I haue no other meane or remedye, but to prostrate my seffe before the Throane of thy glorious Maiestye, beséechyng thee intyrely, of thy gracyous goodnesse, to salue my sores wyth the comfortable Oyle of thy mercye▪ thou onely (O Iesus) arte the swéet phisition of my soule: sprinckle vppon mée Isope, and I shall be made whyter than snow, if thou of thy excéeding bounty and fauour, good Lord, wilt vouchsafe to washe awaye the spottes of

my sinne and wickednesse, that heapeth thy indignation and furye agaynst me, I shall then excell the Gold that hath beene purified in the Furnace seuen folde: let it therefore good Lord and mercyfull Father, seeme pleasaunt vnto thy deuyne Maiestye, to touche my corrupted & vncleane heart, wyth the heauenlye finger of thy grace, that I maye bryng foorth the fruites of true repentaunce, whiche are more acceptable to thy glorious and deuyne presence, then the offering of Calues, Bullockes, shéepe, Goates, or any other burnt

offring, or sacrifice of peace, a contrite and sorrowfull soule, is the thing that thou doest moste delight, an humble and a lowlye spirite, is the oblation that thou doest desire: A cleane and pure heart, O Lorde my God, I knowe thou doest loue and fauoure, wherefore I beseeche thée, to purge me from my sinne and iniquitie, of thy great mercy, let the bitter deploration of myne offences & hartye contrition, thorough thy glorious merites and paynefull passion: (O Iesus) be y• only meane and way, to set me frée from the powers of hell, death, &

damnation, and sith I am by thy goodnesse, begotten and borne anew, strengthen me good Lord, that I neuer slyde nor fall from thée, but that I maye continuallye beare in my remembrance, the state whereto I am called by thée, thorowe thy aboundaunt loue and kyndenesse, wype away good lord all my sinnes out of thy remembraunce, cleanse me in the bloude of thy spotlesse Lambe Iesus Chryste, and I shall be made cleane, pure and safe. Graunt this moste mercifull God, for the honour and glory of thy name sake, thorow the bitter deth

of thy sonne Iesus Christe, my mediatoure and Aduocate, to whom with thée and the holye Ghoste, be giuen lawd, glory, power, & praise, for euer and euer. Amen.
         
         
            A Prayer to be sayde in tyme of peace and prosperitie.
            GIue vs good Lorde the comfortable and healthfull spirite of thy grace, and aboundaunt fauoure, that wee maye wythout ceasing make oure continuall boast of thy prayse, we know and from the bottomes of oure heart confesse, that thou hast dealte more louinglye

with vs, then thou hast done with our next neighboures, whose painefull miseries and bloudy broyles, may be a sufficient warnyng vnto vs to hate oure sinne & iniquitie, least the like calamitie or euer we be aware, doe compasse & hedge vs rounde about, giue vs grace therefore in time of peace, and happie prosperitie, so to walke, that thy fatherlye blessing bée not withdrawn nor taken from vs, and the rod of thy sharpe correction be layde vppon our neckes, euen in such sorte, as thou hast visited oure brethren in other Countreyes, whose

bodyes by the meanes of cyuill discention, haue béene made a praye to the sworde, we heare and vnderstande, that not farre off, but euen hard at the gates of our borders, the father is readye in armes, to séeke the destruction of hys sonne, the sonne is as gréedye to gape for the blood of his father, we heare how vyolentlye the brother thirsteth after the bloude of hys brother: frind is against friend: neighboure agaynst neighbour: young men are murthered: olde men are sodaynlye slayne: manye a wife is husbandlesse: many a childe is desolate and fatherlesse:

the cruel harted enemy spareth none: he maketh hauocke: no teares can staye hym from hys affectioned Tyrannye, the tender infantes are haled from the earnfull paps of their wéeping mothers, and torne to péecemeale before the sorrowfull eyes of their carefull parentes: Olde age is contemned: godly Matrons are abused: Uirgines are deflowred, and rauished by violence, a spectacle or extreame crueltie for vs to beholde, and a glasse of great carefulnesse for vs to looke vppon, that haue worthely deserued like or far greater

punishmentes, yet withholdeste thou from vs thy scourge, although our offences are so great and diuers, that might heap vp the sentence of thy excéeding iustice agaynst vs, in place of war and bloudye battayle, thou hast giuen vnto vs prosperitie and perfit peace: in place of penury, dearth, & scarcity, thou hast giuen vs increase, fulnesse, and great plentie: in stead of discorde and discention, thou hast sent vs vnitie and concorde, and by thy celestiall prouydence, wee are defended from the cruell enemie, and from the domesticall and ciuill

warre, and besides these thy gracious giftes, to heape vp our consolation & ioye, thou hast giuen vs thy true and lyuely word, as a Lanterne to direct and guide our footsteps: from vanitie to vertue: from wickednesse, to godlye wisedome: from lycentious libertie, to newenesse of life, and godly conuersation, besides all these thyne inestimable graces, fréelye bestowed vppon vs, thou haste giuen vs godly & zealous Preachers, whiche plenteously breake vnto vs out of thy eternall testamēt, the breade of life, whereon (good Lord) giue our soules

such power to féede by fayth, that they maye be nourished to eternall ioye, and we by the diligent obseruing and obeying of thy commandementes, maye be preserued from all kind of discention, and peaceably enioye the fruites of pure peace, & trustie tranquilitie. Grant this (O mercifull father) for thy Sonne Christes sake, oure onely Sauioure and Redéemer, Christ Iesus.
         
         
            A godly and fruitfull prayer to be sayd in tyme of bloudy Battaile.
            
               O Lorde, oure heauenlye father, and euerlyuing

God, wée thy wretched and most miserable Creatures, confesse and acknowledge, wée haue worthelye deserued the rod of thy correction and punishment, and doe merite manye sharpe and bitter stripes, that knowing thy blessed & glorious wyll, haue of set purpose contemned thy deuine and heauenly precepts, for which cause the sentence of thy wrath is sharpely kyndled agaynste vs, euen as it hathe béene against thy chosen people Israell, in the dayes of oure forefathers, who glorying in their wickednesse, were plagued in the fulnesse of

thy indignation, the sworde of their enemies beset them rounde about, and hemmed them in on euery side, the Iebusits, the Amonits, the Philistines, and the Amorites oppressed them diuersly, theyr strong holds were rased, their Citties were besieged, theyr houses were ransackt, theyr goodes and theyr riches were caryed awaye, by force of the bloudthirstie enimie, theyr yong men were ledde awaye captyue, their virgines were woefully deflowred, but in fyne, when thou Lord God, diddest beholde their heartie and earnest contrition, thou

didst withdrawe thy frowning countenance, and sent them spéedy and safe deliueraunce, one whyle thou Lorde sentest them Moyses to bring them out of the seruitude of Pharao, the stony and stubborne hearted king of the Egyptians, another whyle Iepthah sette them frée from the sworde of the Amonites, wherewith they were greeuouslye afflicted, and to make thy power & excellent glory fully known, thou gauest Sampson suche fortitude to bridle ye prowde Philistians: Ouer and besides these, thou of thy loue and myraculous goodnesse,

hast made feeble women, mightie and victorious conquerours, Debora was a shield to thy people, Iudith comforted the distressed Bethulians, and cut off ye head of prowd Holophernus, that thy selfe good Lorde, when thou beheldest their teares, and harty sorrowe for their offences, did prepare thy selfe to goe forth with their hostes, thou thy selfe wyth the breathe of thy Nostrels, diddest confounde and ouerthrow their enemies, so good Lord, be thou nowe present with vs, in the fulnesse of thy deuyne power, looke vpon vs wyth the eyes of thy

fauourable pittie, forget our corrupt and moste filthye offences, let our contrite and sorrowful harts be a meane to vanquish thy displeasure conceiued agaynst vs, bée thou present with vs in this tyme of necessitie and trouble, set thy hand to help and assist vs agaynst the enemy, be thou present with vs, in this tyme of perrill & daunger, goe thou forth with our hostes, then shall wee be assured to preuayle, let not the multitude of furious foes dismaye vs, for victory we doe know consisteth not in the power nor strength of many men, the strengthe of

horses, armor nor weapons: but it is thou O merciful father, that giuest ye conquest, where, and to whome thou pleasest. To thée therfore in this great extremity we flie and appeale, beséeching thée of thyne inestimable loue and kyndenesse, for the loue of our sauiour Christ Iesus, to looke vppon our true repentante hearts, and in the fulnesse of thy misseration and pytties, to set vs free from the power of the raging enemye, and to pardon our sinnes and greeuous offences, that henceforth wée vow and dedicate our harts and mindes wholy to walk

in integritie, and newnesse of life. Whiche graunt good Lorde, to whome with thy sonne Christ Iesus, and the holye Ghost, be prayse and glorye attributed for euer and euer, worlde wythout end. Amen.
         
         
            A Prayer agaynst presumptuous pryde, and vayne glory.
            
               WE heare (O Heauenly father) and are daylye taught and instructed out of thy eternall worde, howe greatlye the gréeuous sinne of presumption, pryde, and vayne glory, displeaseth thy deuyne Maiestye, wée are

learned that for the practise of this pestilente and haynous euill, thou haste not spared the verye Aungels, but haste throwne them in thy displeasure, for their pryde, vayneglory, and presumption, from beatitude, to miserye, from ioy wythout end, to perdurable payn: from brightnesse of thy glorious presence, to vtter extreme and palpable darkenes, from the gloryous fruition and participation of thy euerlasting kyngdome, to the bottomlesse pit of hel, Death, damnation, and endlesse flames of fire, besydes this, we are taught that by

the transgression of Adam, whose hawtye presumyng, thorowe the intisemente of the subtle and perillous alurement of the Serpente, thought to bee as thy selfe, but in fine, thy iustice condemned him and all hys posteritie, this pestiferous sinne of pryde drowned him in the floudes of all daungerous euils, as gluttonye, luxury, and suche other perils, that had not thy mercye taken effect, to keepe and hold Plea for his and oure sauegarde, and thy sonne Chryst imbrased the glory & power of his deuyne Essence, & taken vpon him our fleshe and

frayle nature, sinne onely excepted, who freely offered his innocente bodye to the death of the Crosse, we had perished euerlastinglye, and bene vtterly confounded. Print therefore good Lord, and wryte these examples in my memorye, that I fall not from thy fauour, by the exercise of thys detestable sinne, make me still to consider that the proud and disdaynfull are always abhorred in thy sight, and sith it is thy good will and gracious pleasure, to regard the humble and lowly man, giue me such méekenesse from aboue, that I maye continuallye

present thée with the Sacrifice of a gentle, méeke, and contrite spirite, that I may auoyde the plagues and punishmentes which thou hast prepared for the prowd and hawty minded. Graunt this (good Lord) for Iesus Christ his sake, my onely Mediatour and Aduocate, who liueth and raigneth with thée and the holy ghost in glorye permanent and maiestye euerlasting.
         
         
            A Prayer to be sayde in tyme of affliction and trouble.
            
               O Eternall and euer lyuing god the father of al consolation, and comforte,

vouchsafe of thyne infinite loue & kindenesse, to strengthen mée with thy heauenly grace, paciently to beare, and wyth meekenesse to suffer this Crosse of affliction and trouble, which thou hast layde vpon mée, for the vse of sinne and iniquitie, I knowe (O gracious and louing father) that my deserts are suche, as worthely haue prouoked thée to displeasure the burthē of my sinnes are intollerable, for the whiche I must acknowledge, and earnestly from the bottome of my heart confesse, that iustlye thou haste corrected and visited mee, yet not in

the fulnesse of thy furye, but according to thy fatherlye loue and kyndnesse, and albeit, thy rod lie heauy vpon my shoulders, yet in thys tyme of thy correction, I am comforted greatlye, knowing assuredlye that yu correctest and smytest where thou louest, thou woundest and healest agayne, thou throwest downe to Hell, and thou liftest vp to Heauen, such and so great is thy omnipotencie, that thou rulest aboue the Firmament, in earth, flouds, and the lowermost partes of hell, in Heauen the Aungels, Arckaungels, the souls of thy saints,

the blessed company of martyrs giue thée prayse, glory, and veneration, the Sunne, the Moone, and glistering starres, eche one of them in their course and quallitie, shewe themselues obedient to thy will, in earth ye beasts of the field, and the siely fethered fowles of the Ayre, in their order séeme to sette forth thy glorye and prayse, in the déepe waters the fyshes of the Seas are readye to obserue thy will, and in their manner, they as thy creatures, giue thee due honour and reuerence, but amongest these, man whome thou by thy diuine will and

pleasure haste indued with reason and in his creation, cōcerning the inward man, hast fashioned hym to thy similitude and lykenesse, is nowe moste prone and willing to be by thy ministers of darckenesse, seduced and carryed awaye from vertue to vyce: from godlinesse to all impietie: from obedyence to wilfull breache and contempt of thy precepts, so that diligence is banished by negligence, and suche is the power of oure flesh, that our eyes which should haue their chiefest cōtemplation and delight in perusing and reading thy glorious and sacred

Gospell, wherein wée maye beholde thee crucified and slayne: O swéetest Sauiour Christe Iesus, perfite God and perfite manne, by whose innocent deathe and bloudy passion, the attonement betwixte thy Father and vs, are so daseled wyth the dimmy and darke mysts of Sathan, that they are occupyed in the beholding of mundane and transitorye pleasures, al which in effect vanish & weare away, euen as the Flower that eyther is parched by the force of Phebus radiant beames, or by Winter stormes and horye frostes consumed, oure

eares whiche thou haste gyuen vnto vs to heare, and vnderstande the sacred and deuine misteries contained in thy holy lawe, are made deafe of purpose, so that they glory more in fables & lothsome leasinges, then they conceiue delight in the zealous predication of thy Euangelicall and heauenlye doctrine, our hartes are hardened like the Adamāt, so yt for the greatest parte, they cannot brooke thy testymonies, they continually luste and desire to bee satisfied with worldly welth, honor and dignitie, and who beholdeth not in these dayes,

what cruel conflict and bloody fyght, there is betwixte good conscience and filthy auarice, the roote of all myschiefe and euill: Naye who seeth not in this age, playne dealing murthered by deceyte, and faythlesse frawd: Who nowe beholdeth not true meaning strangled by forged flatterye & loathsome leasinges? the bowels of cō
               passion and pitty are shut vp by vyolent oppression & tyranny, our féete are willing to tread the pathes of pryde, fornication and vncleannesse, our hands are ready to offer wrong & iniurie to the innocent: yea, and in fine,

whatsoeuer thou hast giuen vnto vs, to spreade and set forth thy glory and honor, is by sinne so corrupted, that wee make the members of our bodyes, which by grace and of pure loue are ingrafted in the body of Christ, the riche and great shepheard of oure soules the verye members of Sathan, so that of set purpose our transgression abounding, wée flye from Chryst the rocke and strong piller of our saluation, and run headlong to deathe, and vtter destruction of body and soule, yet like a louing God and mercifull Father, thou callest vs home agayne by

thy word, wherin not onely thy mercies, but also thy terrible threats are thundered forth agaynst vs for our impenitencye, but when neyther thy manifolde mercies fréely of thy aboundant goodnes offred vnto vs in Iesus Christ, can moue nor stir vs to handfast contrition, neyther yet thy terrible comminations and threatnynges can exclayme, nor call vs backe from the daungerous puddle of our sinnes, then yu sendest foorth thy plagues and punishmentes, as pestilence, famyne, and bloudye sworde, intending thereby to driue vs to amendement

of lyfe, and to acknowledge thy omnipotency, but when thou beholdest oure true repentaunt heartes, oure sobs and sighing teares powred foorth, before the Throane of thy deuyne Maiestye, thou withdrawest from vs the terroure of thyne indignation, and vengeaunce, the Rodde of thy correction is layde aside, thy displeasure iustly conceiued against vs, for the continuall exercise of sinne, is vtterly forgotten, and by the intercession of thy sonne Iesus Chryste, that sitteth on thy right hande in glorye permanēt and euerlasting,

lyke a louyng Father, and moste mercyfull GOD, thy Syluered Scepter of peace is offered vnto vs, wyth al other thy gracyous benefites, that thy anger is conuerted to clemencye, thy displeasure is tourned to louing kindenes, and in fine, thy indignation is so calmed by thyne aboundant grace and mercye, that lyke a louing and gentle father, thyne armes are stretched foorth ioyfullye to imbrace and receiue vs to thy fauoure agayne, all thys I knowe to be moste certaine and true, for when, or at what tyme soeuer, wée shall

appeare before the gates of thy mercye, & by the vertue and power of a constant and liuely fayth knock thereat, thou art readie to open vnto vs, not for any of oure desertes, but for the merites of Iesus Christe, the fulnesse of thy deuyne misseration, compassion and pittye, and whensoeuer we shal cal vpon thee, with lowlynesse and méekenesse of our harts and myndes, bewayling wofully our heynous offences committed against thée, thine eares are most attentiue to heare, and willyngly doest graunt vs our peticions, wherefore (O moste

gracious and louing father) we come vnto thée with sorrowfull and contrite harts, beséeching thée for the loue of thine anointed sonne Iesus Christe our Messias, sauioure and redeemer, beséeching thée to beholde & looke vppon vs wyth the eyes of compassion and pitie, & albeit wee haue worthely deserued this thy plague and punishmēt, yet respect thou not our deseruings, least in thy furie & indignation, we be confounded and perishe, haue an eye rather to thy sonne Iesus Christ, beholde his bloudy woundes, which yet are freshe & gréene, and

neuer stint bléeding, thinke vpon the bitter and painfull tormentes that hee suffered for vs vppon the Crosse, in whose name we beséech thée fauourably to looke vpō our infirmities, mercifullye to heare our prayers and peticions offered vnto thée, and graciouslye for the glorye of thy names sake, to take and withdraw from vs this thy heauie rodde of correction, whiche our sinfull liues and contempt of thy preceptes hath heaped heauily in oure necks: giue vs pacience to suffer whatsoeuer it shall please thée to lay vppon vs: giue vs grace alway to call

and cry vpon thy holy & blessed name, and faythfullye with teares to say vnto thée continually. Spare vs good Lord, spare thy people, whō thou hast redéemed with thy precious bloode, neither yet good Lorde be thou angrye with vs for euer. Grant this (O mercifull father) for the loue of thy onely sonne Iesus Christ, to whome wyth thée and the holye Ghost, bée all honor, glorye and prayse ascribed, for euer. Amen.
         
         
            A prayer to be sayd before the receyuing of the Lords supper.
            OMnipotent God, and father euerlasting, whose mercy is infinite and whose

kingdome hathe no ende, vouchsafe I beséeche thée of thine excéeding goodnesse to increase our fayth, that as thy Guestes repayre to the Table of thy sonne Iesus Christ, who hath lefte vnto vs before he gaue hys bodye to be crucified, and his blood to be shedde largely on the Crosse for our redemption, as a pledge of his great loue and aboundant kindenesse, the celebration of his glorious Supper, wherein as it were in a looking Glasse, the death of our great mayster, the high shephearde of our Soules Iesus Chryste, is moste liuely set forth vnto

vs, giue vs grace therefore from aboue, rightly to vnderstand the deuyne mysteries offred vnto vs thereby, and not to wreste or wring the same contrary to thy will. Let it bée far from oure thoughtes, (good Lord) to leaue thy eternall veritie, and to builde on the doctrine of men, who following their owne imaginations, run headlong to the gaping Gulphe of daunger and destruction, plucke the Scales of ignoraunce from oure eyes, that wee maye cléerly disearne and behold, by the light of thy glorious Gospell, howe wee maye

truelye Communicate and participate the fruites of thy grace, represented vnto vs in this comfortable Sacramente, indue vs plentifully with such pure knowledge, that we may not once think or say after any grosse fourme or carnall manner, we feede vppon, or eate thy fleshe reallye, or carnallye, make vs alwayes constantly to beleeue that thy gloryous body is ascended vp into heauen, & sitteth on the right hand of thy father, cō
               cerning thy humanitie, and cannot be thence remoued, till the time that thou shalt come with Legions of Aungels,

to iudge the quick and the dead, before whose presence, shall runne a consuming fyre, and moreouer, wee doe moste humblye beséech thée, so to confyrme vs in the trueth of thy blessed Testamente, that we maye confesse thy deuine nature to be equall with the father and the holy Ghoste, and to beléeue that thy power is not a power perticuler, but a power generall, and suche as doth and shall gouerne in Heauen and Earth, in the déepe and low waters: yea, and in the neathermoste partes of Hell, strengthen vs therefore good Lord that

stande, least that in falling from the true knowledge of thée, we perish euerlastingly, and sith thou hast called vs by thy worde, as thy Guestes, to this blessed banquet, wherein the mouthes of our carnall bodies are fostered and fedde with bread and Wyne, so Lorde confirme oure faith in thée, that the mouthes of oure soules may féede spiritually vppon thy swéetest flesh, and drink thy dearest bloud, and so bée norished to euerlasting life and heauenlye blessednesse, which rewarde as a dowrie due, thou haste promised to all those that faythfully
                  •
               
               
build vpon thée, whiche art the Rock and strong Piller of oure Saluation, and as these must set forth vnto vs most liuely thy death & passion, so make vs thankfull to thée for the same, & therby giue vs grace to prynte in oure heartes thy greate loue and exceedyng clemencye, that sparedst not to giue thy bodye to the moste vylde, shamefull, and slaunderous death of the Crosse, and thy bloud to be shed for oure offences, indue vs wyth loue and charitie to all menne, make vs readie to forgiue, loue, and pardone oure enemies, persecuters and slandoers,

tourne oure heartes and myndes from al impietie, couetousnesse, blasphemie, pride, glottonie, fornication, and al other detestable euils, and if at any time we haue defeated y• fatherlesse of hys right, the widow of hir dowrie, or gathered together our goodes wrongfully, by vyolence, oppression, fraud, by collusion, or deceyt, giue vs grace to make restitution, and to ask wyth sorrowfull playnte & flouds of teares, from the bottome of our heartes, pardon and free forgiuenesse of thée, for such and all other our offences, whatsoeuer wee haue

don, or cōmitted, in thought worde, will, and deede, agaynst thy deuyne Maiesty, or any other oure brethren. Take away from vs all bitternesse, curssed speaking, and backbyting, gyue vs grace to come worthelye by the vertue of a true & fruitefull fayth, to this holye and blessed Supper, that oure soules féeding faythfully on thy swéetest fleshe, and drinking thy dearest bloude, wée may both in bodye and soule be nourished by thée to euerlasting and endlesse glorye in Heauen, where with thee and the fellowshippe of thy chosen sayntes, we shall enioy

the fruition of thy euerlasting kingdome, whiche thou haste ordayned for all those that onely and alone without wauering, do build vpō thée, sanctifie and make cleane our harts and minds by the power of the holye Ghost, the verye comforter of thy chosen, purge thou our canckred consciences infected wyth sinne, by the working of thy good grace, least that by the presuming to this thy table (O Lorde) we incurre thy displeasure, and being vnrepentant for oure offences, wee be founde vnméete Guestes, to come to thy holy banquet, and so we

eate and drinke to the vtter confusion of oure soules and bodies, giue vs grace therefore (good Lord) to conuerte vs wholye vnto thée, and we shall bee tourned from all our sinne and iniquity: giue vs grace to rest onely vppon thée, and wee shall be made safe: giue vs thyne ayd from aboue, we beséeche thée, by fayth to striue with the man of sinne, and so to vanquishe him, that he maye die in vs, & we may liue to thée, which art the giuer of life. Graunt this, O most gracious God, for Iesus Christe hys sake, to whome with thée and the holye Ghoste, be giuen all

prayse, honour, and glorye, for euer and euer. Amen.
         
         
            A Prayer or thankesgiuing to be sayd after the receyuing of the Communion.
            WE giue thée moste harty thanks, O heauenly father, that hast at this present fed & refreshed our hungry Soules with the fleshe & blood of our sauior Christ, not carnallye, but spirituallye, giue vs grace therefore continuallye by the meanes of an increasing and fruitefull fayth, to beleue that thy flesh is meate in déede, and thy bloud is drinke in déede,

and that vnneaths wée eate thy flesh & drinke thy bloud, wee cannot enter into thy kingdome, nor be saued in the daye of thy commyng. (Giue vs grace therfore, being vnprofitable seruantes and vnworthely called, by the reason of the multitude of oure sinnes, to banquet at thy table, whereas the celebration of thy Supper hath bene vsed, and thy death by the vysible Elementes of breade & Wine represented vnto vs, to offer vp vnto thée continually the fruites of true repentaunt and sorrowfull heartes, that thy name may be glorified, wée

by thy grace comforted, thy displeasure bee tourned to loue: thy wrathe to compassion: oure sinnes pardoned, and forgotten, & our names written in the booke of life. And as it hath pleased thee at thys present to accompt vs for thy guests, & not onelye to féede vs wyth visible creatures, namely breade and wyne, but also in soule whiche is thyne owne similitude, to cherishe vs wyth thy flesh & blood, whereon by the vertue of a liuely fayth, we haue to oure great comfortes, most plentifully fed. So now (O Lord) we beséech thée of thyne aboundaunte

goodnesse, to increase oure fayth, yt it may waxe strong in thée, and fruitfully, to exercise the workes of Charitie and loue to all menne, that thereby as wee haue now bene at the celebration of thy gloryous and blessed Supper, so we maye, whensoeuer it shall please thee to call vs to thy heauenly banquet, be found furnished, not emptie, not naked, but armed & couered with fruitful fayth and trueth, and so as thy guestes, or vesselles of honoure, enioye the participation of thy heauenlye and riche pallace, wheras ioyes neuer fade, but continually

indure, take from vs the burthen of oure corruption, sette vs frée from the cursed clogge of sinne, deliuer vs from the snares of death and destruction, giue vs willyng myndes to obey & heare thy commandementes, cleanse thou oure heartes from all iniquitie, and giue vs grace henceforth to walk in newnesse of life and godlye conuersation, that thy name may be glorified, and we saued in the daye of thy comming to iudgemente. Grant this for Iesus Chryste hys sake, our Mediatour and aduocate. Amen.
         
         
            
            A Godly Meditation often to be remembred.
            
               O GOD (my Lorde) my harts delight, with whō my soule longeth to dwell, in that heauenly Ierusalem wherin is continual health, eternall felicitie, happie libertie, and perfite blessednes, where men shal be like vnto the Angels of God, and iust men shall shyne as the Sunne, in the euerlasting kingdome, wherein is no heauynesse, no sorrowe, no griefe, no feare, no labour, no death, no disease, no lack no hunger, no thirst, no cold nor heate, no wearinesse of fasting, nor temptation of

the enemy, no will to sinne, nor power to do euil, no old age, no lame or deformed person, no feare of pouertie, or weakenes by disease, but a quiet harbor of all ioy, and euerlasting happines, wher men in the societie of Aungels, shal continually dwel, wythout anye infirmitie of the fleshe. For there is infinite ioye, and eternal blisse, from whence none shall bée remooued, that once by thy prouidence shall enter therin. There is rest from labors, peace from ye enemy, a new kinde of ioy & delight, such as no hart can cōceyue, saue onely by taking a meruaylous

delight, and excéeding pleasure in the beholding of thée my Lorde God, my gloryous redéemer, and the heauenlye comforter, whiche proceedeth from the Father and the Sonne. O heauenly Ierusalem, thou art swéete and beautifull in all thy ioyes and delyghtes, there are no suche myseries in thée as we féele and suffer in this poore and miserable life. There is in thee no darknes nor change of tyme the shyning of the Moone, the twinckling brightnes of the starres giueth not light in thée, but onely the God of all power, glory & maiesty,

the light of lightes, for in thée the sonne of Iustice giueth light, to those that are adopted in his blood to euer-during blessednesse. The bright & imaculate Lambe, a moste beautifull light, is thy light, that doth illuminate hys chosen Children. The king of kings is in the midst of thée, enuironed on eche side with hys beloued Saintes, and redy to crown them with euerlasting glorye: In thée are Legions of Aungels, singing of swéete Hymnes and songs, that set forth thy prayse and honour of thy name: In thée are the fellowshippe of heauenlye

citizens: In thée resteth the swéete solemnity of al such as returne from this miserable pylgrimage vnto thy glory, the companie of the prophets, Apostles, & victorious armie of Martyrs, holy men & women, which haue vanquished the pleasures of the worlde, haue their abyding with thée: There are yong children & maidēs, which haue passed ouer their dayes in holinesse of life publishing thy praise. Euery one reioiceth in his degrée, though not equall in glory, yet like in ioyes & gladnesse, for there raigneth perfect charitie, &

God is al in all, whose maiestie without end they sée continually, and still in beholding him their loue increaseth. Of this eternall blessednes, the holy Apostle Peter had as it were a shadow or a taste vppon the Mount Thabor, at the trāsfiguration of Christ from whence he desired he, might not depart. Paul also had a proofe of it, when hee was rapt or takē vp into ye third Heauen, where he hearde words and sawe thinges so maruailous & secrete, so far passing al mans vnderstanding, & such as were not to be told or reuealed vntomē.

Moyses his face became so bright, through the conuersation that he had with the deuine glory vpon Mounte Sina, that the Israelites coulde not abide it: what then shall become of vs, when perpetuallye with thée, which art the Lorde of al glory, we shal be conuersaunt after the manner of thy children and famylier friendes? Who is he then, that will not séeke and desire by all meanes possible to be a dweller there, both for the desire of peace, ioy, and eternitie, and for the perfect sight of God.
            Contrariwise, who is

able to expresse y• torments appointed for the vngodly, and vnrepentant liuers, in that deadly place, called Hell, which Sathan himselfe abhorreth: what other thing can be there, but continuall paines, eternal tribulation, & infinite calamitie, repleate with al euils. There dwelleth wicked & vgly Aungels, whose horrible looks bringeth sodaine feare, grieuous paines, and fearefull death, with continual clouds of euer during darknes: There is nothing but howling, wayling, lamentation and mourning without all ende, fearefull

               
                  •
               criches, and confused cries are there in all places sodaynly raysed: There the worme of conscience neuer dyeth. In that damnable dungeon there is fire vnquenchable, and perpetual gnashing of toeth: The miserable soule findeth there no rest, but is afflicted with all kinde of torments, and such as can neuer be expressed, all which indure for euer. Alas little auayle it those that are subiected as fire brandes of bell to crye vnto the Lorde, for he will not heare them, then shall they know, that all things which they had in this life,

are vaine, and such thinges as they thought to be pleasaunte, to bee found more bitter then Gall or poyson. Then where is the pleasure of the flesh so tearmed falsly? for there is none other pleasure, but to feare the Lorde. Then shall they confesse, and saye, that the iudgement of God is true, and righteous, saying: did we not heare of this, & yet woulde not bee conuerted from the wicked déedes, but then shall nothinge preuayle: No sorrowe canne finde comforte, no complaintes, no remorce, no tormentes, nor paynefull

passions an ende, such and so increasing are the vexations of the seconde death, wherewithall the bodyes and soules of the vnrighteous shal for euer be inuironed. Sith therefore (O heauenly father, & most gracious God) it seemeth good to thy eternal wisdome by the knowledge of thy euerlasting trueth, to giue mee knowledge of thyne inestimable mercy offered fréely vnto mée in Iesus Christe my mercifull Sauyour, in whose bloody death & paynefull passion I am assured of eternal life & blessednesse. Giue me grace to printe in

my remēbrance thy manifolde mercies, that feeding in soule by faith in thée, I may attaine vnto those end lesse ioyes, that thou haste. prepared for thy adopted sonnes and chosen children, in thy kingdome of euerlasting righteousnesse. And so escape those euerlastinge torments, which thou haste prepared for the Diuel and his Angels, from the which place of woefull vexation and endlesse miserie, deliuer me, O heauenly father, for the loue of Iesus Christ his sake, to whome with thée and the holy Ghost, be all lawde and praise, for

euer. Amen.
         
         
            A prayer to be sayde at the hower of death.
            MOst mightie art thou O Lorde, in all thy déedes, and most holy in all thy wayes, blessed bee the name of my father, my God and glorious creator, who by his deuine power, and celestiall prouidence, of nothing made all things, fish, fleshe, fowles, fruits, trées, herbes, & all other thinges, whatsoeuer are contayned both in Heauen, earth▪ Seas, and the nethermost partes thereof. Man concerning the outward parts,

thou by thy celestial prouidence, and fatherly bounty, framedst and createdst of clay, but concerning the inward substance of thy creature man, thou didst fashion & make euen according to thine owne similitude and likenesse. Moreouer, such and so great was thy loue and good wil towards him, that all the Creatures, or workes of thy creation serued to his vse. In earth thou haste made him Lorde & king ouer the fruits therof, the beastes of the Field, the Foules of the ayre, and the fishes of the little floods and great waters. In the

Firmament, thou hast placed the glistering Sunne with his oryent beames to giue him light by day, and therewith thou hast giuen him the Moone & the stars to gouerne him by night, for the which cause, aboue all other, the workes of thy creation, man shoulde and ought of right to giue thée that glory that to thée belongeth. But alas, such and so great is the corruption of our frayle and sinful flesh that for all these thy graces, we are carryed away from thée, and enter into contempt of thy precepts, for which cause thou oftētimes

doest correct and punish vs, to the intēt we might therby feeling thy rod of correction bee driuen to imbrace harty and true repentance, but when thy threates and the stripes of thy displesure laide vpon vs, cannot take place amongest vs, thou oftentimes giuest vs vp to follow our lustes and affections, but at last when thou doest beholde our inormities, thou in a moment, by the power of thy deuine iustice, restrayned the rope of our disordered libertie, and cuttest in sunder the Brydle of our voluptuousnesse, eyther by sodayne death,

sworde, fire, famine, or other thy deuine sentences of thy conceiued yre, to the intent, that other thy creatures might by the terrour of thy Iustice, auoyde sinne, and learne to amende their liues, least they fall into the like calamitie or daunger. True, and moste true it is, good Lorde, that by the exercise of sinne, we are the children of death & destruction, but by grace of the almightie and victorious conqueror, swéet Iesus Christ, we are the adopted sonnes of thy father, and made fellowe heires with thee our perfect Emanuel, in whose

name with all humilitie & lowlinesse of heart & mind, I come vnto thée in this great extremitie and daunger of death, beséeching thée to bée present with mee, to forget mine offences, to thinke vpon thy mercies, and although I haue not deserued so much as the least drop of thy fauor, by means of the great burthen of my sins, which are in the presence of thy diuine maiesty, most vgly and loathsome to behold, yet respect thou not (O Father) mine iniquity, but haue an eye, I beséech thée to the merits of my sauior Christ Iesus, to whom

as my mediatour, sauiour & Redeemer, I apeale, who hath promised comfort and sweete consolation to all those that in thy name flye vnto thée for reléefe, I confesse th
                  •
               e worthily thou hast visited me, and yet not according to the multitude of my sins but in the fulnes of miseration and fatherly pitie, giue me grace therefore in these bitter bruntes of death, who vehemently at this present, beginneth to combat with fainting & féeble life, constantly to cleue vnto thée, let not ye plesures of this wicked worlde bee a let or impediment for mée

to come vnto thée, let not my fraile & feeble flesh, subiect to sin, which hath thorow my transgression made mee a bondman to death, moue me to dispaire in thy great mercy, neither yet let that cauilling aduersary, ye enemy of mankinde, at my last end triumph ouer mée, gyue me patience to suffer and gladly to beare & abide this thy scourge and visitation, and so fortifie mée in soule and body, that so long as life shall indure in mée, I may neuer cease to call vpon thy holy and blessed name, yea, and when death is most busiest, make thou

me most constant, yea, whē he séeketh most strongly to assayle my féeble body, giue mée thy grace, good Lorde, that I may in spirite, hart, minde, and all the powers of my soule, giue praises vnto thée, that of thy grace & inestimable kindenes, hast sent thy sonne Christ Iesus to raunsome me by his blodie death and passion from the power of hell: Giue me grace therefore nowe that thou hast appoynted thy messenger death, to finishe the days of my pilgrimage, and to call me by his sommons from out this vale of misery & wrecchednesse, to

build stedfastly vpon him, & faithfully to hope for life & saluation, in and alone thorow him, let the remembraunce of my 
                  〈◊〉
                wickednes, be 
                  〈…〉
                vpon, 
                  〈…〉
                thy glorious 
                  •
               ight, b
                  •
               h
                  ••
               de my sorrow
               
                  ••
               l & true repentant heart, which come vnto thee with teares, not building on my merites, but vppon thy mercies, though I be sinful, thy son my sauiour is righteous: though I be wicked, yet he is most holy: though I be full of iniquitie, yet he full of all goodnes: though I haue grieuously offended

thee, yet he hath fully contented thee: though I haue transgressed thy lawe, yet he hath fulfilled the same, & hath promised in his blood, to wash away their sinnes, that by faith continue in him constant to the ende I therefore in 
                  〈…〉
                g
                  ••
               at and 
                  •
               aynefull 
                  ••
               onie,  beholding Death 
                  〈◊〉
                heate at the gates of my body, come vnto thee by the vertue of a fruitefull fayth, beséeching thée, when thou shalt see it méete and conuenient, that hee shall dissolue the bandes of this fadyng life, which endureth but a whyle, for a thousand yeres

are as yesterday in thy sight to take my soule into thy glorious and blessed hands, and so to confirme mee thy truth, that at the last when it shall please thée, by the sounde of a trumpe, to raise my body from the graue, when and in which time, body and soule shal vnite, & come before thy presence, I may by faith in thée, passe ouer the mount of my corruption, shake off the bands of sin be set frée from death, and destruction, and being by the vertue of thy righteousnesse made holy, I may triumph with happie victorie ouer sinne, death, and al

the powers of hell, and enter with thée, & the felowship of thy chosen Sayntes into euerlasting rest, grant this most louing father for Christ Iesus sake, to whom with thée and the holy ghost be rendred al laude, glory, honour, and prayse, for euer. Amen.
            THe Lorde God bee mercifull vnto me, pardon & forgiue me my sinnes, looke vpon me with thy gratious and blessed countenaunce, preserue mee from the second death, and euerlasting destruction of body & soule. The Lord God iustifie me in his death & bloode, cloath

mée with his euerlastinge righteousnes, and register my name in the booke of life. The Lorde God comfort my guiltie conscience with the euerlasting light of his bountiful fauor, & lot my place among his saints in his heauenly kingdome. The Lord God for his mercies sake, after this my bodily death, giue me the fruition of his presence, in his right palace of endlesse glory, to whose mercifull protection I commend with al humilitie and reuerence my soule, Lord Iesus preserue me, Lord Iesus comfort me, Lord Iesus refresh

mée, Lorde Iesus praye for me, for only into thy hands that hast redéemed mee, O Lorde God of truth, I commend my soule. Amen.
         
         
            A prayer vnto the holy Ghost, against the temptations of Satan, the malicious and wicked spirite.
            AH Lord, the euerlasting and heauenly spirite which sanctifiest and quicknest the hartes of the faithfull. For as much as there is an other spirit which cō
               trary to thy heauenly mocions, moueth and prouoketh

vnto infidelitie malice, lying, pride, wrath, whoredome, fornication, glotonie, dronkeship, enuy, couetousnesse, contention, errour, deceyte, hypocrisie, straunge religion, fayned holinesse, impietie, desperation. &c. which is called the Prince of the world, the great dragon of Hell, the authoritie of all euilles the father of lying and a murtherer from the beginning, to whom it is euident that we are poore wretched and miserable, fallen away frō God, walke in th
                  •
                lustes of the flesh, liue after the trade of the world, and doe that

that is pleasaunt to the corrupt affections, and are far away estraunged from the citie of righteous Israel, & as straungers partaine nothing vnto the couenaunt and promises of grace. Wherefore while we thus consider this our damnation and the word of thy promise and commandement, we are earnestly mooued to flie vnto thée, humblie to desire and beséech thée, trusting that we shal obtayne. For thou promisest and also commaundest to trust an looke for this, that through the good will of thy spirite, thou wilt gather & receaue

vs into thy people, that we may bee made a spirituall Israell, & renew vs, that is to say beget vs a new vnto repentance & godly liuing turne vs & with an earnest zeale of our heart drawe vs vnto thée, that from henceforth we may abstaine from the workes of darkenesse & death. Destroye in vs the kingdome of sinne that is to say exclude frō vs not onely euill words & déeds but also plucke out of our minds all euil thoughts, noysome coū
               cels furious effectes and the stinking course of this flesh. Turne vs from euil wayes vnto the right path of repentance.

Let our members be so addict to righteousnes and sanctification, that they may bee made fitte to serue thée. Let vs increase and be plenteous in al such works as bee pleasaunt vnto thée. Forsake vs not in tentatiō, but rather strēgthē vs with that thy secret vertue & inward power. Bring to passe that we giue no eare to his flattering deceits, nor yet to his beautyfull & glistering falaces, least he corrupt our mindes and abuse our flesh vnto our destruction, which at the beginning full craftely hee brought to passe by his subtyle and swéete suggestions

but rather throwe downe and treade vnder our féete this our cruel enemie, that we being frée frō his deceitfull tyranny may through thy ghostly inspiration obtayne such peace and quietnes in our harts, that we may serue thée with a cleane bodie and pure mind, through Iesu Christ, vnto the laude prayse and glory of God the heauenly father. So be it.
         
         
            A prayer for true repentaunce and for the comming of the kyngdome of Christ.
            
               O Lord and our God Iesu Christ the scripture

testifieth of thee that when thou wast in the worlde thou diddest preach repentance and the comming of the kingdome of heauen, and after thou wast risen agayne thou saidest, that it behoued thée so to suffer, & on the thirde daye to rise agayne from the deade, and that both repentaunce and remission of sinnes shoulde be preached to euery creature in thy name. And that whosoeuer beléeued & were baptised shoulde bee saued. Agayne, than full louingly diddest bid them that labor and are laden to come vnto thée, and promised that thou

wouldest vnlade & refreshe them. Uerely it is no small company of wicked spirites cleueth, which, is also a roring Lyō, and earnest accuser of the sons of God, yea and such an enemy of God and of thē that pertain vnto him, as by no means neither will nor may be reconciled. Therefore we & all of vs, which thorow thy grace are bound and giuen ouer to serue God most humbly beséech thée O holy spirit, that thou wilt defend vs against al the wicked temptations and pernicious breathings of the most wicked spirite, that all vice excluded all vertue and godlinesse may

spring growe & increase in vs vntil we be made perfect & auncient in Christ Iesu our Lord & in his holy law. Take away infidelity, and engraffe in our brest a true and vnfayned faith. Take away pride, wrath, enuye, debate, whoredome, glotonye, dronkeshippe, couetousnesse errour, hypocrisie with all kinde of vngodlines, and print in our hearts humilitie, loue, chastity, and concord, purity of life, temperance, sobriety, mercy, liberality towarde the poore, truth, pure holynesse, with all kinde of vertue. Take awaye from vs

all that euer is of Sathan, the flesh and the world, and giue vs that which onely commeth from the heauenly father, and from his onely begotten sonne and from thée that holy spirit, Teach vs all trueth, enarme vs with the shield of true faith that we may so quench the firie dartes of Sathan. Graunt that wee may so watch and shewe such diligence, that wee may perceiue his craftie assaultes and daungerous vnto thee, that wee liue not heare after in the fleshe, but rather that wee abhorre from all filthinesse and impuritie

thereof, and that we being brought into the kingdome through thy precious bloud may obtayne dayly more & more perfect remission of our sinnes. So be it.
         
         
            A prayer for the knowledge of Gods wyll.
            
               O Lord God our heauenly father, giue vs grace that wee may neuer cease diligently to cal vpon thée, & with most humble minds to desire thée, that through thy great mercies we may be fulfilled with plenteous and rich knowledge of thy diuine will, and that wée may encrease dayly more &

more in vs by the vertue of the word of God by the vse of preaching and ministration of the Sacramentes, which knowledge of thy will is a spirituall knowledge and an heauenly science whereby we being also endued, doe those things that are right and pleasant before thee, yea wherewith we haue such knowledge, that wee take nothing in hand, but that onely which thou most of all doest approoue. Graunt that we being fruitfull in good works, may encrease in the same knowledge, that wee may bee made strong in all vertue

and godly power according to the excéeding abundant glory of thy Maiestie & that we may be enarmed with patience, long suffering, chéerefull perseuerāce so well in aduersitie and perill as in sorrow & death. Thorow Iesus Christ our Lord. So be it.
         
         
            A prayer for true christen loue.
            
               O God the almighty Lord which art the very loue it selfe, & he that abideth in loue, abideth in thée, & thou in him thorowe Iesu Christ wee miserable Creatures cry this day vnto thée with

a bitter and sorrowfull hearte, and for our little strength we earnestly desire, that thou wilt powre out into our hearts the true christen and vnfayned charitie through the holy ghost whereby wee may loue one another, not only in words but also in workes, that we may aboundantly declare our faith, as newely borne from aboue of the immortal séede by the word of the liuing God, Helpe vs O God and giue vs so much light that wee may knowe perfectly all fayned loue wherewith we behelde our selues, & our false boasting,

which commeth not from a pure heart, lest vnder the pretence of loue wee doe against fayth, & against the godly trueth, and by thys meanes fall away from the true loue which is gotten by the same crosse & bloude of Christ. Through the same our Lord Iesu Christ. So be it.
         
         
            A prayer to obtaine godly learning.
            THy seruaunt am I, giue me vnderstanding, O Lorde, that I may learne thy commandements. For thy lawe is pure and vndefiled, it turneth soules, it

giueth wisedome to babes: Thy ordinaunces are right making heartes chéerefull Thy commandementes are bright lightening eies. The declaration and preaching of thy wordes maketh them to see that are blind, and giueth vnderstanding to the litle ones. Lighten therfore my eyes, O Lorde, and giue me knowledge and vnderstanding in thy holy lawe. For thou O Lord alone giuest wisedome, and out of thy mouth commeth prudence and knowledge. So shall I with a glad heart searche thy lawe, and sing perpetuall prayses to thy

most blessed name.
         
         
            A prayer for the faythful ministers of Gods worde and for the fruite of the Gospel.
            
               O Lorde Iesu Christ, let very mercy moue thée to haue pitie and compassion on vs, which being destitute of all other helpe, wander abroade and are dispersed like sheep that are without a shepheard. And for as much as there is much haruest and fewe worke men, sende foorth thou which art Lorde of the haruest, many faithful workemen, to finish it. And those that thou shalt sende, endue and replenish

them with thy grace, yea, to guide them, that they may bring forth much fruit that great heapes of them that beleeue may plenteously be gathered into thy barne, that there may bee plentie of that pure spirituall wheat vnto thy praise which liuest and reignest with God the father in the vnitie of the holy Ghost verie God for euermore. So be it.
         
         
            A prayer for the Magistrates and heade officers.
            
               O Almightie euerlasting God, of whom al power is ordained we commende

vnto thée all them, which by thine ordinance are our superiours, as Emperours, Kings Princes and other Magistrates to whom thou hast committed the sworde and giuen power to gouern the subiects. Wee beséech thée, that thou wilt make them to be feared of the vnrighteous and trāsgressors, and that through thy gifte they may ouercome the enemies of thy name maintaine publique peace and tranquilitie looke vpon and defend widowes and them that be succurlesse.
            Moreouer graunt to the subiects an obedient mind

that they do not resist thine ordinance vnto their great hindrance, but that they diligently obeye their Magistrates in all lawful things not onely for the feare of paine but also for conscience. Thorow Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
         
         
            A prayer for the common people.
            
               O Mercifull euerlasting, God thou knowest right wel how earnestly our most cruell aduersary Satan as a roaring Lyon wandreth about the congregation of the faithfull, and through

the weakenes of our fleshe bringeth in among vs manifolde incommodities, diseases and sundry temptations.
            In consideration whereof we are prouoked according to the commaundement of thy sonne our Lord Iesus Christ continually to watch that is to say, to vse feruent prayer.
            Wherefore wee desire O most merciful father that thou wilt helpe and comfort them that are afflicted lighten thē that are blinde teach the ignorant, graunt to the weake strength, to them that beginne to go

shew the paths of thy way, to them that are going already, sende dayly the encrease of grace, and giue thē that haue obtayned some perfection of godlines constancie and stedfastnes that euery one of vs according to the measure of the gifte of his faith may bee made perfecte. Through Iesus Christ our Lord.
         
         
            A prayer to be sayd in affliction, trouble, or sicknes.
            
               O Most gentle redeemer, which art always mercifull, alwaye a Sauiour, whether thou sendest vs

prosperitie or aduersitie, this is a token of great mercie and of louing kindnesse, while by afflictions as by bitter plastures or salues thou doest heale the inwarde man, and by temporal paines preparest vnto vs euerlasting ioyes. And for as much as thou hast before declared vnto vs euē by thine owne steps that this is the way, vnto the true felicitie, graunt I beséech thée, that I may paciently & obediently drink out this cuppe, which thou hast reached vnto me. Uerely these thinges are vnto fraile nature verie gréeuous,

but yet thou suffered more gréeuous thinges for me and I haue deserued far more gréeuous things which haue so ofte deserued hell. Notwithstandinge thou knowest the frayltie of mans condition, and therefore euen as that mercifull Samaritane doest thou poure into our woundes wyne which fretteth and sharpely biteth our vices, but thou puttest to it also ye oyle of thy consolation, thorow the which we may suffer those thinges, that are intolerable to vs. If it bée thy pleasure to encrease my paines, giue mee also the

gift of patience and graunt that these afflictions of the body may turne vnto the remission of my sinnes. O if thy fatherly pitie be contented with this gentle chastysement where-wyth thou diddest nowe nurture mee, then let mee receiue at thy hande my health againe, that I may giue thée thankes for both, that is, because thou hast mercifully chastened mee thine vnprofitable seruant and also taken away ye bitternes of my affliction with ye swéetnes of thy comfort. So shall I remember thy benefits, & sing praise & glory to thée for

euer and euer worlds with out end. Amen.
         
         
            A prayer against the councels of the ennemyes of God and of his diuine verite.
            AH Lorde thou puissant strong & mightie God which destroyest the councels of the vngodly, & riddest away the tyrantes of this world out of the earth at thy pleasure, so that no councell or strength at all can resist thine eternal wisdome and euerlasting determination, which thou hast to fore appointed by thine vnsearcheable wisedome from the beginning.

We thy poore creatures, simple wretches and vnprofitable seruants, doe most instantly and hartely desire thee, for the loue that thou haste to thy welbeloued, and onely begotten sonne, our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, that thou wilt looke vpon thy cause, for it is time O Lorde, and bring to naught all those things that are or shall bée appoynted, determined and fully agréed vpon among the wicked against thée, and thy holy word. Let not the enemies of thy trueth so miserably oppresse thy seruauntes which seeke thy

glory, tender the aduauncement of thy pure religion, and aboue all thinges wish in their heartes that thy most holie name may onely be glorified among all nations.
            Whatsoeuer the vngodly goe about contrary to thy glory and thy worde, let it not take effect, O swéete father, yea rather destroy it & vtterly bring it to nought, that all men may knowe that thou alone art that almightie and euerlasting God, which rulest and subduest all inhabiters of the earth, from the highest to the lowest, after thy moste

holye will and pleasure. But to them that walk not in the councell of the vngodly, nor tread not ye way of sinners, giue thou good lucke & prosperous successe in thy name, that their holy trauailes and vertuous enterprises may come vnto a godly end. Defend them, that they sit not in the chaier of the pestilent scorners, which spitefully rayling on thy trueth, do defend with high tirannie both their wicked doctrin and liuing. Grant to thy seruantes the mouthe of thy wisedome which no man may resiste, whereby they may know yt
               
thou alone art the Lorde, & that none is to be compared vnto thée, al the enemies of thy Godly truth with their wicked counsels destroyed and put out of the way, we may with feruēt minds receiue the trueth of thy most holy word, order our life according to the same, & sing perpetuall prayses to thy most blessed name worlde without end, through Iesu Christ thy sonne our Lord. So be it.
         
         
            A prayer for the vnitie concord and perfect agreement in things concerning Christian religion.
            
               
               O Euerlasting and merciful God which art the God of peace, loue, vnitie and concord, & not of strife, debate, discorde and confusion, thou seest how miserably thy holy congregation is rent, torne, and deuided into diuers sectes, whyle fleshly mē leauing the holsome instruction of thy most blessed word, which is the alone truth and righteousnesse, set foorth and maintaine euery mā as his fansie leadeth, thinges of their owne brayne, inuented by carnall wisedome, without the authoritie of thine vndefiled lawe. And hereof

commeth it to passe that so great dissention reign now a dayes in the worlde, and that so manye and diuers sectes, schismes and heresies, spring vpp in euerie place, vnto the great perturbation of the christian publicke weale. For so long as men set aside the rules and ordinances of thy holie Scripture, and appoynt things of their own imagination, and stiffely defend them, it cannot come to passe that christian peace and vnitie of spirite, with heartie concorde can haue place among vs. Therefore we wretched sinners, to

whome knowledge of these thinges thorow thy grace, haue chanced, doe pray and moste feruently desire thy great mercy, that for asmuch as there is but one euerlasting God, and one heauenly father, which thou art, and one fayth, and one baptisme, which we al professe ye cal on thy name, thou wilt thorow thy onely spirit, gather togither such as are dispersed into diuers sects, into ye vnitie of true & pure vnderstanding of thy word by fayth, & bring them againe, whose mindes are disseuered, into one bodye, that there may be no dissention among them. But specially

O most mercifull father, graunt, that we which doe breath, and for our little power labour vnto the true vnitie in Christ, may lay aside al dissension, and seeke that thine only euerlasting trueth, which is contained in thy word, that wee together may growe into one iudgement, sentence, and minde, yea and that which floweth and commeth forth from the intelligence and vnderstanding of our Lord Iesu Christ, and euermore guide and leade vs agayne vnto him that we with one perfect agréement of minde and with one mouth may

praise, & magnifie thée, the celestial father of our Lord Iesu Christ, through the same Iesu Christ thy sonne & the holy ghost. So be it.
         
         
            A prayer for spiritual ioy.
            
               O Lorde Iesu the redéemer and comforter of mankinde, which hast prepared for them that forsake the vaine pleasures of this worlde for thy loue, farre better delectations & pleasures, through ye holy ghost that most swéete comforter which the worlde knoweth not, measuring the griefes of this life with inwarde

and secret comforts, and renewe to vs as a certayne gage or pledge of the glorie that hereafter shall come, wherewith we being refreshed & comforted, may run vnto thée with the more chearefull minds. I beséech thée that the annoynting of thy sprite may continually beate out of me the tediousnes of euils, and make my minde merry with healthfull ioy, and be annoynted thorow thy aboundant mercie, with the oyle of gladnesse and ghostly comfort, which liuest and reignest with the father and the same spirite, very GOD

worlde without ende. Amen.
         
         
            A prayer vnto Christ our sauiour for the glory of heauen.
            
               O Lorde Iesu Christe, which art the onely and euerlasting sonne of God the father, which also becamest man for oure sake, that thou shouldest bring vs vnto God ye father, and therfore thou going vnto the father occupiest hys right hand, graunt that we may be cōuersant now with thée, thorowe fayth in the

holy Ghost after an heauenly manner, and that after this exyle and banishment we being illumined with thy brightnesse, may remaine with thée for euer, which liuest and reignest with God the father & the holy ghost, very God world without end. Amen.
         
         
            Thanks gyuing to God for his benefites.
            
               O Lorde God our heauenly father, we right hartely thanke thée for thy manifold and inestimable benefites, which thou haste giuen to vs, deseruing nothing

lesse than to receiue of thy boūtie so great kindnesse. We thanke thée that it hath pleased thee of thy great mercie first to create and make vs according to thy likenes, and to place vs in ioyful Paradise there perpetually to haue remayned, if through the subtile and deceitefull suggestions of Satan our aduersarie we had not transgressed thy most holy commandment. We thank thée also, O most bounteous father, for thy louing kindenesse which thou shewest vnto vs, when we were all perished and lost, through

the sinne of Adam. For when thou mightest iustly haue condemned vs, & cast vs into perpetual damnatiō thou like a father of singuler great loue haddest pity on vs, and sauedst vs by the death & passion of thy welbeloued sonne oure Lorde and sauioure Iesus Christ, which gaue himselfe a ransome for all our sinnes, and paide sufficient price by his precious bloud for all the wickednesse that wée euer committed in times past, or hereafter shall commit thorowe oure frailtie and weakenesse, so that we repent and beleue. Neyther

wast thou thus contented he should onely dye for oure sinnes, but thou didst raise him also againe for our iustification, to make vs righteous in thy sight. Moreouer after that hee hadde shewed himself vnfainedly aliue to his apostles by manifest and euident tokens, certayne dayes after hys resurrection, thorowe the power of his Godhead, ascended vp into heauen, perfect God and perfect man, where he sitteth now on the right hand and maketh intercession for vs, being our onely Mediatour and alone Aduocate.
            
               From thence we looke for him to come againe at the day of Iudgement, not as a cruell Iudge to condemne and cast vs away into perpetuall damnation, but as a most louing Lorde and gentle Sauiour to cary vs with him into perpetuall glory, there alwayes to remayne in euerlasting ioye, praysing thée worlde with out end. For these thy most bounteous giftes and for other innumerable, which dayly thou giuest vnto vs of thy great mercy, wee thanke thee most gentle & mercifull father, desiring thee with all humblenes of

minde that thou wilt giue vs grace through thy holie spirit not to be vnthankful but to walke worthy this thy kindnes, and so to behaue our selues in this wretched worlde according to thy word, that at the last day we may be found in the number of them to whome thy onely begotten Sonne our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ shal say, come ye blessed of my father possesse that kingdome, which was prepared for you from the beginning of the worlde. Lord let it so come to passe, Amen.
         
         
            
            An other confession of our sinnes to our Lord Iesus Christ.
            
               O Lorde Iesu Christe, whiche art the onely and alone Phisicion of the wounded conscience, we poore & miserable sinners, trusting on thy goodnesse and grace, doe here briefly declare vnto thée the euill trée of oure heart, with the rootes, braunches, leaues, & fruits of the same, which all we vnfaynedly confesse to be euill and wicked. For thou doest no lesse consider, weigh, and ponder the inward lustes of oure heart, which is froward and vnsearchable,

then these outward grosse sinnes, that we wickedly commit eyther in word or déede. Therfore we beséech thée & pray thée, euen so heartily as our weaknes will suffer, although we be very vnapt to praye, that thou wilt mercifully circumcise & cut away our stony heart, yea for this olde heart, create in vs another new hart, replenish it with thy spirite, water it and make it moyst with the iuyce or humoure of heauenly grace, and wyth the fountaynes of Spirituall waters, that the inwarde poyson and the noisom iuice

of the flesh may be dried vp, the custome of the olde man abolished, & our heart after this no more bring foorth thorns and cockle, fit stuffe 
                  •
               or the fire, but spirituall fruits in righteousnes and holinesse vnto euerlasting life. So be it.
         
         
            
            Grace before meate.
            GIue thanks to God
            the Lor
                  •
                o
                  •
                might,
            as it becommeth
            Christians right.
            And euer when
            thou 
                  〈◊〉
                thy meate,
            Remember God
            before thou eate,
            And then God will
            remember thee,
            An
                  •
                wi
                  •
               h his food
            will nourish thee,
            And after thi
                  •
                life
            ended is,
            Wee shall remayne
            with him in blisse.
            God saue his vniuersall Church,
            Our noble Queene defend:
            G
                  •
               aunt that thy people may enioy,
            thy peace vnto the end.
         
         
            Grace after meate.
            OF Dyues and Lazarus
            the scripture telleth plaine▪
            
            How Dyues liued in welth, & ease
            and Lazarus in great paine.
            
               The rich man he was clothed wel,
            and 
                  〈◊〉
                of the best:
            But Lazarus for hunger great,
            could haue but 
                  〈◊〉
                rest.
            But full of sores lay crying stil,
            for some man to re
                  ••
               eue him:
            With 
                  〈◊〉
                that fell frō Di
                  •
               es 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            wherof no man did giue him.
            Thus perished poore Lazarus,
            and that for lacke of food:
            And also the rich glutton died,
            for all his worldly good.
            Therefore all yee that present be.
            remember this thing well,
            That how this man vnmerciful,
            is buryed now in hell.
            From the which torments great,
            the Lord vs all deliuer,
            And grant we may be mercifull,
            while we liue here togither.
            Then sha
                  •
                we raign with Lazarus
            with ioyes that be indinab
                  •
               e.
            Euen by the bloud of Iesus Christ
            for our hea
                  •
               th most profitable.
            Now therfore lord we thee beseech,
            to make vs all consent,
         
         
            
            Grace before meate.
            To pity those that haue most neede
            and the our sinnes repent.
         
         
            Grace before meate.
            ALl that is and shall be,
            set vpon this 
                  •
               ord,
            Be the 
                  〈…〉
               ,
            by the Lords word.
            So be it.
         
         
            Grace after meate.
            HE that is king,
            and Lord ouer all,
            Bring vs to the table,
            of lyfe eternall.
         
         
            Grace before meate.
            THanks be giuen vnto our lord Iesus Christ, both nowe and alwayes for these and all other his benefit
                  •
               , so mercifully, louingly, and aboundantly powred vpon vs. Amen.
         
         
            
            Grace after meate.
            THe God of all glory and peace, who hath created, redemed, and presently fed vs, be blessed for euer an
                  •
                euer. Amen.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   