
      
         
            
            
            A FAMOVSE Cronicle of oure time, called Sleidane's Commentaries, concerning the ſtate of Religion and common wealth, during the raigne of the Emperour Charles the fift, with the Argumentes ſet before euery Booke, conteyninge the ſumme or effecte of the Booke following.
            
            
               Tranſlated out of Latin into Engliſhe, by Ihon Daus.
            
            ¶ Here vnto is added alſo an Apology of the Authoure.
            
               
                  ✚ CHE SARÀ SARÀ. ❧
               
               blazon or coat of arms
            
         
         
            
            
            
               ✚ To the right honorable, and his ſingular good Lord, Fraunces, Earle of Bedford, Lord Ruſſel, one or the Quenes highnes, moſt honorable priuy counſel. Ihon Daus his daily oratour, wiſheth helth, peace, and cō
               ſolatiō. In Chriſt Ieſu, with thincrele of honor and digntiy.
            
               AMonges all other wryters, that compile Bookes for the knowledge and inſtruction of others (right honorable and my ſingular good Lord) thei in my opinion) deſerue beſt of the common welth, which commit to wrytinge, ſtories, wherby men maye learne by thexamples of others ſet before their eies, how to guide and gouern theyr life, what thinges to embrace or eſchue, and to iudge by matters paſt, what ſhalbe the conſequent, and end of things to come. For which cauſe the moſt eloquent orator Cicero calleth an hiſtory, the myſtres of māners, the guid & light of life, the ſercher out of vertues, & driuer away of vices, with many ſuch other like goodly titles, which he attributeth to the ſame: And certenly if ther wer euer any ſtory written: whereof men might reape frute and commodity, or worthy to be had in hand, & practiſed in the common vſe of mans life, ether for the worthines ofihargumente, which is concerning the ſtate of religion, and common wealth, or for the report of things done lately of freſh memorye: it is thys ſame work of Sleidane. For he treateth not only of thenterpriſes of men, with the caſuall chaunces of things that happen.

But climing higher, and auauncing the minde of man vp vnto heauen, conſtraineth the ſame to maruel at the wō
               derful prouidence of the liuing God, touching the gouernement of the Churche: And induceth men to wonder at the vnſearchable counſel of God almighty, who hath preſerued the ſame in ſomany troubleſome ſtormes, and tempeſtes ful of pearil and daunger. And as concerninge the author, the dilligence and fidelity that he hath vſed, deſerueth doutles to be highly commēded of all men: for ſo much as he, hauing more reſpect to the common wealth, than regard to his priuate commodity, hath wholy imploid him ſelf to conſecrate the beſt and moſt excellent matters that maye be to euerlaſting memory. It is ſaid how Thucidides was ſo deſyrous of the verity, and ſo doubtfull and ſcrupulous in wryting of his ſtory, that he gaue a great ſome of monye, euen to his ennemies, to haue the truth of matters, & to know how all thinges went. Aſſuredly the ſame may we ſay alſo by Sleidan: who (as he him ſelfe confeſſeth) not content to go by heare ſay, or by common report of people, hathe fiſhed for the certenty of his Story out of common recordes, or at the leaſt by report of men worthy credit, and herein hath ſpared nether coſt nor paine. For although he hath wrytten many thinges which he him ſelf hath ſene in Germany, Fraunce, Italy, & other places, yet muſte he of neceſſitye be holpen herein with the eies and eares of many, to compact an hiſtory of ſo many ſeuerall nations, and places ſo far diſtante one from an other. Seing therefore that thys ſtory of Ihon Sleidane is compiled of matters of ſo ſinguler and excellent perfection, worthy of perpetuall memory.

J haue thought it expediēt for ſondry cauſes to preſent your honoure with the ſame. And that as wel for the great good wil & zeale that your good Lordſhip beareth towards lerninge & chriſten religion, and common wealth of your natiue country. As alſo for the place and dignity, to the which (by the iudgement of al mē) you are moſt worthely called, cōſidering how it ſhalbe neither vnprofitable nor vnnedeful for your honor to vnderſtand the ſtate of other realmes and cōmon welthes, with the tormoils of the church in the ſame, which things do here aboundantly and ſufficiently appear. And to thend it may be eaſely knowen, in what place euery matter may be found, I haue ſet before the beginnyng of euery boke, the ſome or argumēt conteining the moſt matters compriſed in the ſame, moſt humbly beſeching your honour to accept this ſimple tranſlatiō, dedicated to your good Lord ſhip, and wrytten for the vtility of our common coūtry, into your honorable tuition, that throughe your good Lordſhips authority, the tonges of euil ſpeakers being repreſſed & put to ſilence, all others that are diſpoſed may receiue commodity and profit by readinge of the ſame. For doutleſſe a more profitable boke than this is, hath not ben ſetforth in thengliſh tong now of many yeres. Thus the liuing God preſerue and increaſe you in honor, and ſo repleniſh your noble mind with the light and grace of his holy ſprite, to perſwade and treat with the Quenes highnes moſte honorable in ſuch wiſe, that all thinges ther condeſcended and agreed vpon, may wholy redownd to the glory of Gods holy name.
            
               
                  The Kalendes of Auguſt, Anno. 1560.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ The. Tranſlator to the Boke.
            
               GO forth my painful Boke,
               Thou art no longer mine:
               Eche man may on the loke,
               The ſhame or praiſe is thine.
            
            
               But ſeke thou for no praiſe,
               No thanke nor yet reward:
               Nor eche man for to pleaſe,
               Haue thou no great regard.
            
            
               The labor hath bene mine,
               The trauell and the paine:
               Reproches ſhalbe thine,
               To beare we muſt be fain.
            
            
               Yet hath my ſtudy bene,
               To profit others mo:
               Some men thereby to win,
               And truſt it ſhalbe ſo.
            
            
               For as to pleaſure many,
               I haue bene euer glad:
               Right ſo to diſpleaſe any,
               I wold be loth and ſad.
            
            
               But if thou pleaſe the beſt,
               And ſuch as be of ſkill:
               I paſſe not for the reaſt,
               Good men, accept good will.
            
            
               Thou mightſt with me remaine,
               And ſo eſchue all blame,
               But ſince thou wouldſt ſo faine
               Be gon, goe in Gods name.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ To the moſt excellent Prince Auguſtus, Prince Electour, Duke of Saxon, Lantzgraue of Turing, Marques of Meiſſen, high Mareſchall of thempire, his ſinguler good Lord, Ihon Sleidane wiſheth health.
            
               DIuers authors (moſt excelleut prince) haue ſetforth vnto vs many and ſondrye alterations of kingdomes: And God him ſelf wold that we ſhuld be taught theſe thinges, as it were with his mouth long before they ſhoulde come so paſſe.
            And of thoſe foure greate Monarchyes of the worlde, of theyr greate aulteration and ſucceſſion, he taughte vs by the Prophette Daniell. Whoſe Prophecies for the mooſte parte of them, are alreadye made euidente and manifeſt vnto vs, wyth a certaine knowledge moſt pleaſaunt and ful of conſolation. And of the alteration and contention that ſhoulde be about Relygion and Doctrine, both the ſame prophet hathe ſpoken before, and S. Paule comminge after him prophecieth alſo manifeſtlye. But in what ſorte the ſame ſhalbe, it is ſetforth and declared by mo than one or two. Howe be it the alteration that hath chaunced in this our time, is moſt notable of all others. The Romain Empire, whyche ſhould both be the laſt, and alſo much greater then the reſt, the prophet ſaid ſhuld be deuided, and brought from that huge and vnmeaſurable great quantity, to a right ſmall thing, as it is now manifeſt, whiche only conſiſteth within the limites of Germany, and hathe bene manye times in great haſard and daunger, partly by reaſon of domeſticall euils, and partly throughe the factions of forain enemies. But at the length God hath geuen vs ſuch an Emperour, as a more mighty hath not bene theſe many hondreth yeres: For vnto him haue deſcended mooſte ample realmes and prouinces: which as they be moſt ritch and welthy, ſo alſo be they mooſte commodious for the doing of thinges in ſondrye places bothe by ſea and lande. And like as he him ſelf excelleth in power all other Emperors of Germanye, that haue bene ſence the tyme of Charles the great, ſo alſo, by reaſon of the thinges that haue chaunced in his time and gouernment, is he moſt famous and notable. But amonges all other thinges, the alteration of Religion hath the chiefeſt place: whiche with the beginninge of his raigne toke her originall. For at that time, whan the Emperour Maximilian departed out of this preſent life, that matter had not ben in hand aboue .xiiii. monthes: but what time the Princes electours choſe this manne Emperour, in a manner the ſelf ſame time Luther beinge prouoked came forthe to reaſon the matter, and diſputed openly with Eckius at Lipſia, and than fell men to theyr ſtudy on ether ſide. Wherefore thempire of this man ought to be conſidered dilligentlye, and waied with the memory of former times. For god hath at euery time ſtirred vp certain great princes more no table thā the reſt, whē ether the ſtate of religion or comon welth ſhuld be altred, of the which ſort was Cirus, Alexander of Macedonie, Iulius Caeſar, Conſtantine, Charlemaigne. Alſo Ottous of Saxonie, and now he, of whom we ſpeake, Charles the fift. And certenly this alteratiō is of ſuch ſort, wherof we now make mention, that no man, that knoweth the thing perfectly, can thinck theof without great maruel and wonder. For the beginning was ful ſmall, and in manner to be contemned, and one man alone ſuſteined the malice & violence of all the world: And yet might he him ſelf haue ben appeaſed and quieted, in caſe his aduerſaries would haue, taken the condition, which at the beginning he offred them. For he promiſed to kepe ſilence, ſo that they would do the like: But when they refuſed that, and preſcribed him a recantation, and herein perſeuered, and he ſaid, that vnleſſe they could firſt ſhewe his erroure, he coulde not

chaung his opinion, the diſſention increaſed, & the matter was brought before the counſell of thempire, & now is come to ſuch a great maner, as we ſe. And by what meanes it came ſo to pas, what thing the Biſhops of Rome, what, the vniuerſities, what Kings & Princes haue at tempted, how he him ſelf hath pleaded his own cauſe, before themperour and counſell of princes, how diuers men of excellent learning, haue ioyned them ſelues with him, howe the matter again hath ben debated in thaſſembles of thempire, howe meanes of reconcilement haue bene aſſaid, how oftentimes the Biſhops of Rome haue bene in hand with the Emperour and other Kinges, how oft they haue put them in hope of a reformation and of a counſel, what perſecution and burning ther hath ben, what leagues and conſpiracies haue hen made, how this ſame religiō hath ben ſetforth, not only in Germany, but in other places alſo, how diuers haue reuolted, and others remained conſtant, what tumultes, warres and battels haue riſen by this occaſion: theſe I ſay, ſo great and ſondry things to leaue vnſpoken, and not to commit them to memory by wryting, I think ther is no man, but would iudge it blame worthy.
            Moreouer it is not to be paſſed ouer in ſilence, what was the ſtate of the common wealthe, during this mans Empire, by the ſpace now of ſix and thyrty yeres, what wars he hath kept, what commotions and tumultes haue ben in the meane ſeaſon, and what things haue chaunced in all realmes and prouinces. Neuertheleſſe, thordre that in this argumente ſhalbe obſerued, hereafter ſhalbe declared. For like as this Emperor raigneth ouer moſte large and ample dominions, ſo hath he had alſo moſt ſtrong and puiſſant enemies. Wherfore the matters haue ben wonderful great, that haue chaunced in this our memorye, and duringe the raigne of thys Emperor. And therfore certen yeres paſt, diuers worthy and wel lerned men, when they chanced to talke of ſuch matters, began to perſwade with me, that whoſoeuer had chanced in theſe dais, eſpecially, touching the cauſe of Religion, I ſhuld put in wrytinge: And here vnto dyd exhort me, not for that I could do this beſt, or for that ther wer not others much more mete for this purpoſe, but becauſe they ſaw me delite much in that ſame kinde of exerciſe, and therefore ſuppoſed, that through acerten natural inclination to the thing, I ſhould not beſtow my time and labor amiſſe: I my ſelf doubtleſſe, who knew wel enough, what a daungerous ſea I muſte enter into, and how that caſe required an other maner of man, endued with a greater wit, & eloquence: Albeit, I was almoſt in deſpair, that I could bring the thing to paſſe, yet vanquiſhed by theyr auchority, which had that opinion in me, I determined to aſſay the thing: And beginning from the time that Luther began to inuey againſt the ſelling of pardons, & brynging the matter ſtill vnto the diſputation of Lipſia, appoynted by Duke George, that ſame, that I hadde ſo compoſed, I ſente vnto them that were my ſetters on, at Woormes, where that time was the counſel of thempire, ten yeres paſt, to read and peruſe ouer. They afterward by their letters, & by mouth alſo did more importune me, that I ſhould procede: but not longe after ther chaunced a ſorowfull time to Germany, whan there aroſe warre, which as it was a great let and hindraunce to ſtudy & learning, ſo did it alſo diſturbe and let all my purpoſe & doings. For nether could I procede, as I deſired, & many times muſt I tarye, and make delay: but ſo ſone as I was relieued from thoſe euils, & eſpecially thoſe iii. yeares paſte. I imploide all my ſtudy and trauel herein, and neuer reaſted, till I came to thend wiſhed for. And ſurely this worke is made chiefly and principally concerning Religion, neuertheleſſe for obſeruynge an order, I thought good alſo to put in polliticke matters. Now as touching the whole narration, after what ſort that is, euery man by reading ſhall eaſely perceiue. Nothing becommeth an history better then truth & ſidelity. And doubtleſſe I, leaſt any man ſhould finde lacke in me in this behalf, haue traueled diligently: For I haue written nothinge by lighte reportes or by hear ſay, but I haue compiled my worke of publick records, which I haue gathred vp dilligently, of the verity, wherof no man nodeth to dout. I had alſo the aid and helpe of a worthye and noble man, lames Sturmie, who hath ben occupied in publicke and waighty affaires theſe xxx. yeres and mo to his commendation, who of his gentlenes ſhewinge me frendſhip, whan I ſomtime doubted and ſticked faſt on the rockes and ſhelues, he as an expert ſailer, many times brought me again into the right courſe & void of dāgers, & the moſt part of the work, he red ouer at my requeſt, before his ſickneſſe, wherof he died, & admoniſhed me diligently of ſuche things as wer nedeful. Here is alſo much mention made of forein matters, eſpecially french &

Engliſhe. And therein haue I alſo folowed the ſame ordre, and haue put in nothing, but that which was tried & certenly knowne, and the French matters for the moſt part I my ſelf haue ſene, in theſe .ix. yeres that I dwelt ther. For diuers executions and burnings, whereof is mention made, again many decrees made, and actions commenced by the diuines of Paris, againſte certen miniſters of the Church, and ſhortly after articles of religion ſetforth, & factions of the court, chaunced at the ſame time, whan I was in thoſe parties, but warlike matters, & ſuche other like affaires, I do not omit, for that I mighte in no wiſe do. Yet haue I not profeſſed to to treat of them expreſly. For as I ſaid a little before, this laboure was purpoſed chiefly to the cauſe of religion. Therfore wold I haue the reader warned, that whan he ſhal come vnto ſuch places, he loke for no long diſcourſe of thoſe affaires. For nether is it mine intent, & they may read it in other mens works, which haue taken in hand to wryte of that part, ſo much as herein ſhalbe wanting. An other thing that I ſaid is to be obſerued in a hiſtory, is fidelity or vprightnes, that is to wit, that nothing be told of affection: which although it ſome very harde, becauſe it is of few performed, and albeit that perauenture I ſhall not perſwade all men, that I haue ben dilligently ware of the ſame, yet I require them inſtantly, that I be not burthened with any ſuſpition before there be cauſe. This worke of mine, is wholy compiled, as I ſayde, of publick recordes, collected with great dilligence, wherof alſo a great part was ſetforth in print before, partly in the Latin, partly in the vulgare, ſome in Italian, and ſome alſo in French. And it hath many orations, and demaunds, and anſwers, and diuers accuſations and conſutations alſo: All theſe thinges I recite plainly, ſimply and truely as euerye thinge was done: For neither I adde to any thing of mine own, or ſpeak mine own iudgement, but leaue that to the reader free, neither vſe I alſo any collour of Rhethorick, nor wryte any thing in the hatred or fauor of any man, I frame my ſtile only, and vſe mine own words, that the ſpeache may be alwaies like and equal, and I beſtow eche thing in his place, as they followed in ordre. In thoſe firſt yeres Biſhop Leo and Adrian ſpake many thinges bitterly againſte Luther: from whoſe wrytinges, as I take away nothing: ſo likewiſe do I adde nothing vnto Luthers anſwers, neyther make I their complainct worſſe, nor yet his defence better. The Biſhops that ſucceded thē Clement and Paule, and this man eſpecially, whan Luthers dostrine was now ſpred abroade farre and neare, making digreſſion from his perſon, haue inueyed moſt ſpitefully againſt princes alſo and cities: Here I follow the ſame ordre, and throughout the whole volumne kepe the ſelf ſame trade. Wherfore I beſeche the reader, that he lay a part all diſliking, and know firſte the matter it ſelf, and tender my laboure, which hath ſurely bene very great, with theyr good wil and fauor. For certenly vnleſſe the ſame cauſes, which moued me to write at the firſt, had not eftſones allured me to procede, & deuour all tediouſnes, I had long ſince forſaken my enterpriſe, when ther appeared ſo great variety & much a do: but my ſtomack & ſtrength came to me, firſt, becauſe I ſuppoſed, that the ſame ſhuld concern the glory of God, who had opened in this our time his omnipotency, & wonderful counſel: And again the comon vtility moued me. For euen in Germany few remember the things paſt, & forain nations know no certenty at all, & many mennes mindes diſpoſed to diſlikinges, thinck farre otherwiſe of many matters than they ought. Furthermore I had a reſpect to posterity, if at the leaſte wiſe my wrytinges may abide light and continuaunce: beſides this alſo, many things of the like fort are by others put in wryting, nether truely nor modeſtly. And ther is one of our natiō, that ſetforth a boke vi. yeres ſince at Mentz, moſte full of lies and ſlaunders, triſling & rayling wordes: And in theſe laſt yeares paſt came forth two tomes at Florence, the authour wherof handleth in dede, in moſt larg and ample wiſe the history of his time, but wherſo euer he ſpeaketh of Germain matters, eſpecially concerning Relegion, he bewraieth the diſeaſe of his mind: For the things be vntrue, falſe, and ſclaunderous, what ſo euer he wryteth, as it may be euidently proued. I omit here ſo manye Orations, Epistles, Prefaces, whiche are ſetforthe in 
                  •
               rinte, whan they touch theſe matters, they do handle all things not only of hatred and mallice, but ſwarue alſo moſt far from the truth. For theſe cauſes I ſay, I thought good to proceade, and not to permit that the ordre of actes done ſhould be vntruely ſet out, ether for this preſent age, or els for the time to come. For in this kind of thing, what is more vile or les to be ſuffred, thā that the ſame things which ſhuld make the reader more expert, ſhuld wyth falſe tales & lies be depraued. Aſſuredly the Magiſtrate ought to foreſee that nothyng be done herein licentiouſly.
            And thys faulte is vſed in oure dayes, that verye manye of thoſe wryters,

ſeke to pike a thanke, and whileſt they ind
                  •
               uour to pleaſe and gratifye one man, they deſerue euil of many, and induce mo into errour. Doutleſſe I for my part, whiche yet I would ſhuld be ſpoken without ostentation, am ſo affected herein, that if I knew ther wer anye thing in this work vntruely wrytien, I my ſelf wold ſcrape out the ſame, and frankly warn the reader, that be ſhould geue no credit to it. But I truſt aſſuredly, that no vntruthe can be obiected to me. For what ſtudy, paines, and dilligence I haue taken theſe certen yeres, that I might know eche thing exactly, both manye good men can witneſſe, and as I trust alſo the thing it ſelf ſhall declare. Notwithstanding, although I compriſe thoſe thinges that haue chaunced in thys Emperors gouernement, al be it he be yet aliue, and hath the gouernment, although many thynges mo, yet may fortune in his daies, yet forſomuch as theſe former actes do chalenge the firſt, chiefest and greateſt part vnto them, I wold not that the ſame ſhould be longer wanting, ſo many learned men, not only of Germany, but alſo of foreine nations inſtantly requiringe me, that I wold gratify them herein. There be comming doubtleſſe moſte greuous commotions, and wonderful alterations. Which thing alſo the holy Scripture dothe nether doubtfullye nor daroklye Prognoſticate, and the preſent state of thinges doth plainly ſignify, ſo that ſuch as will applye theyr minde here vnto, ſhall not want matter to wryte of: but, the ſame cauſe that moued me to wryte, that is publicke vtility, the ſelf ſame perſwadeth me nowe alſo, that ſome thinges as I haue written, and be compriſed in theſe xxvi. bookes. I ſhoulde ſuffer to come abrode into others mens handes. And this my labor and all my pains taken, I wil dedicate whole vnto you, mooſie excelient Prince, whiche are deſcended of that noble houſe and familie, whiche fyrſto gaue harborow and refuge to thys Religion, whoſe father did earneſtly imbrace the ſame, whoſe brother for the education of youth in true Religion and learning, imploied a wonderful ſubstaunce, whoſe father in law for the ſelf ſame cauſe hath a famous name among kinges. And for ſo much as you alſo walke in theſe theyr foteſteps, to your great commendation, this worke which I hope wil profite many, I truſt will be to you alſo not vnpleaſaunt. The liuing God preſerue your highnes, ſafe and healthful.
            
               Geuen the .x. Kalends of April, in the yeare of our Lord. 1555.
               
            
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               The firſt Boke 
               ❧ The firſte Booke of  Sleidans Commentaries, concerning the ſtate of Religion, and the common wale, during the reigne of the Emperour, Charles the fyfte.
            
               The argument of the fyrſt Booke.
               THe Pardons graunted by Byſhop Leo, Luther reproueth by preachyng and wryting of propoſicions and Letters, ſent to Tharchbiſhoppe of Ments, the which are fyrſt unpugned by Frete Tckell and Eckins: and after by Silueſter Prier as, & Hogeſtrate. Upō this the Pope ſendeth Cardinal Caietane, taduertiſe Thēperour Maximilian, & to cite Luther to Rome: but Fridericke Duke of Saxon founde the meanes, that Luther aunſwered Caietane at Auſpurge. The Cardinal what with threatenynges, and what with thalligations of decrees, mainteyneth thauthoritie and ſupremacie of the Pope. Luther at his depertynge thence, ſet by an Appellation. Caietane ſolliciteth by letters the Duke of Saxon, but in vaine, whiche the Pope perceyuing, publiſheth a new remiſſion of ſynnes by pardons. And to wynne Duke Fridericke, ſendeth him a goldē Roſe. In the meane tyme dieth Maximilian, and great ſuite and meane was made taſpire vnto thempire: whiche in fine Charles of Auſtriche atchieued, and word was ſent him into Spaine. The golden bulle, & lawes of Thempire are here recited. Eraſmus commendeth Luther. And at the ſame time that the diſputacion was at Lipſia, Zwinglius preached at Zuricke, and (as Luther had don) reſiſteth a perdoner there one Samſon agraye Frere.
            
            
               THE Biſhoppe of Rome, Leo, the tenth of that name, a Florentine borne, after the vſurped auethoritie of his predeceſſours, which he pretēded to haue ouer all Churches, had ſent forth into al realmes, vnder his Bulles of Lead, indulgēces & pardōs, wherein he promyſed cleane remiſſyon of ſynnes, and euerlaſtynge ſaluation, to all ſuche as would gyue money for the ſame, for the leuiyng wherof, he ſent his Collectours into all Prouinces, who gathered together, and heaped vp great treaſures in all places, but ſpeciallye in in Germanie. And affirmed their doynges to be good, bothe in wordes and writyng (which pardons the Papiſtes call by an olde accuſtomed terme, indulgences) Grauntyng moreouer for money, licences to eate whitmeat and fleſhe, on daies prohibited:
            The ſame time was Martin Luther an Auguſtine Frere, and profeſſed diuinitie in the Uniuerſitie of Wittemberge, who beynge not a little tickled with the preachinges, & fonde bokes of theſe collectours, for that he ſawe, howe the ſimple people beleued the thinges to be true, that they bragged of, began to admoniſhe men to be more ware and circumſpecte, and not to bie their marchaundiſe ſo dere: For that the ſame, which they beſtowed vpon ſuch trifles, might be much better emploied

This was in the yeare of our lorde a thouſande fiue hondreth and ſeuentene. And to thintent he might woorke the thynge to more effect,  he wrote alſo to the Archebyſhop of Mentz the firſte of Nouembre, ſignifying, both what they taught, and alſo lamenting that the ignoraunt Luthers letter to the B. of Mentz. people ſhould be ſo far abuſed as to put the whole truſt of their ſaluation in pardons, and to thinke that what wickednes ſo euer they had committed, it ſhould by them be forgeuen: And that the ſoules of them that were tormented in Purgatory, ſo ſoone as the mony were caſt into their boxe, ſhould ſtraight wayes flie vp into heauen, and fele no more payne: he ſheweth him how Chriſt cōmaunded that the Goſpell ſhould be taught, and that it is the propre office of a Byſhop to ſee that the people be rightly inſtructed. Wherfore he putteth him in remē
               braunce of his dutie, and prayeth him that for the authoritie whiche he beareth, he would eyther put thoſe prattelinge pardoners to ſilence, or els preſcribe them a better order in teachinge, leſt a further inconuenience might growe vpon the ſame, as doubtles there wil doo, vnleſſe they be inhibited. The cauſe why he wrote vnto him, was that for ſo muche as he was alſo Byſhop of Maydenburg, the care of al ſuch matters B. of Maydē
                  burgs charge belonged vnto him. And with theſe letters he ſent certen queſtiōs whiche he had lately ſet vp at Wittenberg there to be diſputed, to the nombre of foure ſcore and fiftene: In the whiche he reaſoneth muche of purgatory, of true penaunce, of the dutie of charitie, and of their indulgences Luthers. 95 queſtions at Wittenberge. and pardōs at large, and inueigheth againſt their out rageouſe preachinges, only of a certen deſyre to boulte & trie out the truth. For he prouoked all men to come to that diſputation, that hadde anye thinge to ſaye, and ſuch as could not be there preſent, he deſyred to ſend their myndes in wrytinge, proteſting that he would affirme nothing, but ſubmitte him ſelfe and the whole matter to the iudgement of holy churche. Neuertheleſſe he ſayd, how he woulde not admitte Thomas of Aquine, and ſuche other lyke writers, but ſo farre foorth as they be Luthers exception. conſonaunt to holy Scripture, and decrees of the auncient fathers. To this the byſhop aunſwered not a woords. But ſhortly after Iohn The B. of Mentz clence Tecela Frere Dominick, ſet vp other concluſions at Franckford, quite contrary to thoſe of Luthers, wherin he extolleth the ſupremacie of the Ihon Tecell ft. do. concl. at frankford. Byſhop of Rome, with the frute of his pardōs and other lyke thinges, in ſo muche as he compareth him with Peter the Apoſtle, & the croſſe whiche he commaundeth to be ſet vp in churches, with the croſſe that Chriſt ſuffered vpon. But where as no man of the cōtrary parte wold repeare to the diſputacion at Wittenberge, & the queſtions were ſuche as many were deſtrous to reade: Luther wrote a longe expoſition of the ſame, and ſent them firſt to Hierome, byſhop of Braundenburge, and to one Stupice Prouinciall of the Auſten Freres, deſiring hym to cauſe them to be ſent to the byſhop of Rome: And he him ſelf in the moneth

of Iune wrote vnto Leo the tēth, partly complayning of his pardoners  whiche through their owne auarice abuſed his auethoritie: And partly purging him ſelfe, knowing for a ſuertie that they had complayned Luters letters to Pope Leo. on him for the ſame matter, but affirmyng that they did hym wrong: For he was inforced, by reaſon of the fonde Sermōs & bokes of the Collectours, to ſet vp certain queſtiōs only for ye matter of diſputation, whiche he woulde now more playnly declare: beſeching him to geue no credit to ſclaunderous reportes: alledging that Duke Fredericke Duke Fredericks wiſdom the Prince electour of Saronie, was a man of ſuche wiſdome & honour, that in caſe ſuche thinges had been true that his aduerſaries reported of him, he would not haue ſuffered his countrey to beare ſuch an infamie: And that the vniuerſitie of Wittenberge was of lyke conſideration, and ſo ſubmitted vnto him both all his workes and his lyfe alſo, not refuſing death if it ſhould ſeme good vnto him. For whatſoeuer ſhould procede from him, he would take as an oracle that flowed from Chriſte him ſelfe.
            Amonges others of Luthers aduerſaries. Iohn Eckius wroote a Echins booke againſt Luth. little booke againſt him at the ſame tyme. To the whiche Luther aunſwereth that he neyther bringeth Scripture for hym, nor any thinge out of the auncient Doctours, but certein dreames of his owne, receiued of ſcoolemen by an vnallowable euill cuſtome.
            After Eckius, one Silueſter Prierias a freer Dominicke, maſter of Silueſter priers dialogue. the holy palace (as they terme it) wrote againſt him a dialoge with the preface to Leo the tenth right ſtoutelye: ſaying that he woulde proue whether Luther be ſo inuincible that he can not be confuted or vanquiſhed: For if he can anſwer this, thē wil he ſet forth greater thinges with moſte exacte diligence. Then ſpeaketh he vnto Luther, exhorting him to amende, and before he commeth to his diſputation, he propoundeth certain Themes, that the Byſhop of Rome is head of the whole Silue. priers Themes. churche, and that the churche of Rome is the firſte and chiefeſt of all others, and can not erre in matters of faythe and religion. Neyther that the generall counſell can erre, where the byſhop of Roome is preſent. Moreouer that the holy Scripture taketh all his force and authoritie of the churche and byſhop of Rome, as of a moſte certain rule. And he that beleueth other wyſe to be an heretike. This foundation ones layd, he beginneth to debate the matter. Afterward doth Luther Luth. anſwer to Sil. priers. make anſwer to ye ſame boke: And in his preface to this Silueſter ſaith that he wōdreth at his queſtions rather than vnderſtādeth the ſame. Then takyng of him example, for the defence of his cauſe, putteth forth alſo certen themes, but ſuche as are taken out of holy ſcripture, wherin he ſheweth that we ought not to geue credit to euerye doctrine of man, but to way euery thing exactely, and to embrace that thing only, whiche is conſonaunt to goddes worde: And none other doctrine to

be receiued, but that which is left vs by the Prophetes and Apoſtles, Scriptur and choldewriters only to be alſo wed. although it haue neuer ſo goodly an apparence: Neuertheleſſe thautoritie of thoſe writers whiche were next after them to be allowed, but for the reſt to be well ware what they wryte. And as concerning the indulgences, that it is not lawfull for the Collectours to inuente anye newedeuiſe herein, but to followe in the ſame the order of the Canon Iudulgences to be vſed after the Canon lawe. law. After this he obiecteth that he alledgeth no teſtimony of ſcriptur, but reciteth only the opinions of Thomas of Aquyne, who treated in a maner of al things, at his pleaſure without thauthoritie of ſcripture. Wherfore he reiecteth both affirming that he doth the ſame, not onely by the commanndement of ſaint Paule, but of S. Auſten alſo. Emōgs the Ciuilians it is commonly ſayd, that it is not lawfull to pronounce The Ciuiliās vſe of citing. any thyng, but after the preſcript of the lawe: Much leſſe in diuine matters ought that thing to be ſuffered that is ſpokē without the teſtimony of ſcripture. It is S. Paules precept, that ſuche as be appointed to inſtruct the people, ſhould be furniſhed, not with Syllogiſmes or ſondry decrees of men, but with holſome and ſounde doctrine, lefte vs by godly inſpiration. But for ſo muche as many haue contemned this precepte great blyndnes hath been induced, and an innumerable ſorte of vnprofitable queſtions hath flowed ouer the worlde. What tyme he hath thus made his waye he commeth to the confutacion, and aboute thende therof ſayth, howe he is nothinge affrayed of his manaſinge wordes which are ſet forth for a brauery: For albeit he ſhuld dye therfore, yet Chriſte liueth and is immortall, vnto whome all honoure is dewe. And therfore if he liſt to come to a further trial in this matter, he muſt fight with ſtronger weapōs, or els his authour Thomas and he are lyke to goo by the woorſe. Againe this Sylueſter writeth Luther an aunſwer, and ſaythe it deliteth him muche, that he ſubmitteth hym Silut. prier. ſeconde aunſwer to Luth. ſelfe to the iudgemēt of the byſhop of Rome: wyſhing alſo that he ſpake it with his harte vnfainedly. Luther had charged him with ambition and fllatterie, but he purgeth him ſelf therof as muche as he may: And defendeth right ſtoutly the doctrine of Thomas, affirming it to be in ſuche ſorte receiued & approued by the churche of Rome, that it ought to be preferred aboue all other writinges: And blameth him ſore, that hath ſpoken of ſo worthy a man ſo vnreuerently: accomptyng it an honour to him ſelfe to be called a Thomiſte: Notwithſtanding he ſayeth howe he hath red other mens woorkes alſo, whiche ſhall hereafter appere. After this preface he ſetteth forth a little booke: wherin he cōmendeth exceadinly the aucthoritie of the byſhop of Rome, in ſo much that he clerely preferreth him before all counſelles and decrees, affirminge that all the ſtrength of Scripture dependeth vpon his authoritie.
            This Thomas comming of a Noble houſe, gaue him ſelf wholy to learning. And leauing Italy went firſt to Collyn, and after to Paris,

and proued beſt learned of al men in his time, wryting diuers workes in the whiche he treated of matters of diuinitie and Philoſophie. He was a blacke frere, the diſciple of Albertus Magnus. Whan he was Thomas of Aquine. Albertus magnus ſcollar. dead Iohn byſhop of Rome the .xxii. of yt name; made him a ſainct; about fifty yeāres after he lefte his lyfe. He was a great mainteiner of the byſhop of Romes authoritie. For he attributed vnto him the ſupremacie ouer all other byſhops, kynges, and churches vniuerſall with Thomas of Aquine a ſalt. both Iuriſdictions aſwell ſacred as ciuile: affirming it to be a neceſſary thyng vnto ſaluation, that all men be ſubiect vnto him, that he hath full authoritie in the churche, and that it appertaineth to him to call Thomas of Aquin geueth authoritie to the Pope. counſell, and to confirme the decrees made there: Moreouer he ſayeth howe men may iuſtlyappeale from any generall counſell. Finallye he aſcribeth vnto him all thinges: onely this he excepted that he can not make newe articles of our faith, neither aboliſhe thoſe whiche are left vs by the handes of the Apoſtles and auncient fathers. Of iudulgēces and pardons, he wrote very muche alſo. And in graunting of the ſame maketh the byſhop of Rome a great Prince, he died (as it is ſaide) in 1274. Thom. of Aq. died. the yeare of our lorde, athouſand two hundreth thre ſcore and fortene. And is cōmonly called thangelical doctor, for the ſubtiltie of his witte.
            This booke of Sylueſters, Luther aunſwereth onlye in an Epiſtle Luth. ſeconde anſwer to Silueſter prier. to the reader, ſaying it is ſo compacte altogether of lyes and terrible blaſphemies of Gods holy name that it ſhould appeare that the deuyl himſelfe was the aucthour therof: Wherfore if the Byſhops and Cardinalles be of the ſame opinion, and that ſuche doctrine be taughte at Rome the ſeat of Antechriſt. Rome, then is it no longer to be doubted of, but that Rome is the very ſeate of Antechriſt. Then happy is Grece, and happie is the lande of Grece and Bohemes happines. Boheme, yea fortunate are all thoſe that haue made a diuorcement wt her, and miſerable are they that haue to doe with the ſame. Wherfore vnleſſe the biſhop will ſee him puniſhed, and compell him to recante, he Lut. his forſakīg of Rome. proteſteth that he wil diſſente frō him. And not only forſake the church of Rome, but alſo to take it from henceforth, as a moſt filthy ſynke, and puddell of all wickednes. For there be daylye inuented newe prayſes for the Byſhop of Rome, ſuche as the lyke haue not been heard of, for this ſubtile ende and craftie polycie, that a lawful counſell ſhould take no place: And therfore do his flatterers preferre him aboue al counſels, and affirme that the vnderſtanding of all Scripture muſt be fetched The cauſ wh
                     •
                   ye By. of Rome is extold. at his hande, as of a mooſte certen iudge. Wherefore if they holde on their madnes, and with their iuggelinge caſtes mocke all the worlde after this ſorte: other remedy is there noone, but that the ciuile magiſtrate muſt ſe them puniſhed: Theues and murtherers, and ſuch other malefactours, are puniſhed with death, but it were a great deale more Princes of neceſſitie muſt reforme Ro. right, that theſe whiche are muche more hurthfull enemies to the common wealth ſhould with the common aſſent and trauell of men be ſupſuppreſſed.

For the biſhop of Rome is in the ſame ſtate that al other mē 
               The biſhop of Rome bounde as other to Gods commaundement. be, and is no leſſe bounden to the obſeruation of Goddes commaundementes, than is the pooreſt man liuing. And ſuch as teache otherwyſe do the greateſt iniury that may be to the diuine maieſtie.
            At the ſame tyme alſo Iames Hogeſtrate a blackfreer, wrote againſt Luther full bitterly, exhorting the Byſhop of Rome to fyre and Iames Hogeſtrate wrote againſt Luther ſworde: whome Luther aunſwering in very fewe wordes reproueth his cruell and bloudy mynde, ſcoffing merely at the mans ignoraunce, & admoniſhing him ſo to procede: for that it is the chiefeſt way to wyn true fame, what tyme a man is blamed of vnlearned and euil men: but at Byſhop Leo his handes he ſaith, he looketh for better thinges Whileſt theſe matters were thus handled on either parte after the maner of ſcolemē, Themperour Maximiliā calleth an aſſemblie at Auſputg, Thaſſembly at Auſputge by Maximilian. whether alſo Leo the tenthe ſendeth afterwarde his Ambaſſadour, Thomas Caietane Cardinall. At this aſſemblie were preſent all the ſeuen Princes electours, ſo called bycauſe they haue the authoritie to electe and create Themperour. They treated here of warre againſte the Turke: For Solyman Emperour of the Turkes, hauing lately ſubdwed the Sultane, had conquered all Syria and Egipte. Wherfore the Cardinall made an exhortacion, promyſing in his maiſters name The treaty of warre againſt the Turke. the treaſures of the churthe to be employde vpon this warre. And required herein the ayde and aſſiſtaunce of Maximilian as defendoure of the churche. At this ſelfe ſame tyme Leo the tenth created Albart Archebyſhop of Mentz Cardinall. And in this aſſemblie cōmaundeth Caietane to cōſecrate him with the ceremonies and rytes accuſtomed: Albert archb. of Mentz mabe Cardinall. Whiche thing being doone accordingly, Themperour leadeath home the newe Cardinall from the churche, and ſendeth him preſentes, that is to ſaye a Princelyke horſelitter, wythe horſes, and manye ryche and coſtly hangynges. And the Byſhop of Rome gaue him alſo an hat ſet with golde, pearle, and precious Iwels, and a ſwoorde with a gylt ſkabarde. For the moſte part of al the biſhoppes in Germany be as wel Ciuile as Eccleſiaſticall Magiſtrates: Howbeit it was thoughte that The cauſe of his Cardinalſhip. Leo preferred him to this dignitie, to theude that the church of Rome myght haue a defendour in Germany, ſuche a oue as was both in nobilitie of birth and in authoritie alſo right famous as the lyke vnto this man could not be founde there. For beſydes that he was of the noble houſe of Brandenburg, in that he was archebyſhop of Mentz, he was the chiefeſt of all the Princes electours, and as it were conſull for euer. And albeit that all byſhops are bondē to the Byſhop of Rome, yet ſuch as are made Cardinalles be muche more bonden.
            Maximilian being aduertiſed of the controuerſie of Luther, in the Maximilians lettre to Pope Leo cōcerning Luther. moneth of Auguſt writeth his letters to the byſhop of Roome, ſignifiyng that he hath heard in what ſorte Luther hath reaſoned many matters,

and preached alſo ſome thinges that ſeme to be hereticall: And he is the more ſory for that he defendeth his doctrine ſtyfly, and hath very many fauorers of his opinion, emonges the whiche there be diuers of hygh eſtate, he exhorteth hym therfore that he for his hyghe authoritie that he beareth, would abolyſhe all ſuche Idle and vnprofitable queſtions, and inhibite all ſophiſticall contencions of wordes, for ſo much as they that applie their ſtudy that way do not a little hurt the chriſtē cōmon weale. Where as their intent is only, that the thing whiche they haue learned, ſhould bee prayſed and receyued of all men, alledging that in tyme paſt there was great diligence ſhewed in appoyntinge ayt preachers to the intent ye al Sophiſticall contention myght be eſchewed, howbeit this order by lyttle and lyttle felle into cōtempt, ſo that it is no maruell that ſuche as ſhould haue taught others, haue oftentimes erred thē ſelues: And this to be the cauſe therof, for ſomuch as the auncient writers, and interpretours of holy ſcripture haue now a long tyme been layde a ſyde, and filled more full of lyes. It maye bee imputed to them alſo that ſo muche contention is reyſed in theſe oure daies about matters of learnyng, and this laſte daungerouſe controuerſie now about pardons. Certeinly the weightines of the thinge requireth a remedie betyme, leſt the diſeaſe runne to farre: for in delaye is daunger. What ſo euer he ſhall determine therin, the ſame wyll he allowe, and ſee that it ſhall take place throughout all partes of Thempire. There was mencion made before howe Luther and Sylueſter wroote one againſt an other. Nowe had he being in office at Rome, ſo aggrauated Luthers matter, that Leo cited him tappeare at Rome, Luther is cited to Rome. and that vnder a great penaltie: Afterwardes the .xxiij. day of Auguſt he wryteth his letters to Caietane his Ambaſſadour in Germany, ſignifiyng howe he is aduertyſed that Luther holdeth certein opinions that be wycked and againſt the iudgement of the churche of Roome, whiche is the maiſtres of faith and religion: And that he of a fatherly loue deſyrous to repreſſe his raſhenes, hath geuen in commaundement to Hierome byſhop of Aſcula, vnto whome this thing properly apperteyneth to ſomone hym to Rome, that both he might aunſwere to matters that he is charged with, and might alſo make a declaraciō of his fayth. The byſhop of Aſcula executed his commaundemēt: But he did not only comme to any amendement, but ſtubbernly perſiſtinge in his hereſy, did ſet forth muche more peſtilent workes than he did before, to the great grief and vexation of his mynde: wherfore let him fynde the meanes, that he may be brought to Auſpurge, and herein requiring the ayde of the Emperour and Princes of Germany, & whā he is brought thither that he be apprehēded, and ſent to Rome: wherfore if he repent of his owne accorde, and deſyre remiſſion of his offence, than let hym be pardoned and reſtored to the churche, whiche is neuer wont to exclude

a true penitent if not, let him be excommunicated. He commaundeth moreouer that all men ſhall obeye theſe his letters, and they that ſhall do otherwyſe, if they be eccleſiaſticall perſones, he confiſcateth all their goodes and promotions, and therwith taketh awaye all hope & poſſibilitie to obtaine any more hereafter: And others that be in ciuile office to be depriued of al honours, offices, and other commodities and finally to want chriſten buriall. But vnto all thoſe that ſhall dooe him faithfull ſeruice herein, his pleaſure is they ſhall haue eyther that common and ful remiſſion of ſinnes, or haue alſo ſome rewarde geuen thē. And to this precept he byndeth all men (the Emperour only excepted) but in no wyſe wylleth that any other mās fredome or priuilege ſhuld be of any force herein. The ſame day alſo he writeth to Frederick Duke The Popes letters to the duke of Saxō
                of Saxon, who was the ſame tyme at Auſpurg, howe that emonge other ornamentes of the houſe of Sarony, this was euer propre vnto it, greatly to fauour Religion: wherfore (he ſayeth) it is not lyke, that any of that noble familie ſhould ſo farre degenerate from his elders, as to mayntayne any man that would impugne the ſame: notwithſtanding he harde dayly greuous cōplaintes of Martin Luther, who bearyng him ſelfe highly on his princes fauour, and forgetting both his ordre and profeſſion, doth many thinges wickedly againſt the churche, regarding the authoritie of no mā: and albeit he doubteth not, but that he braggeth of his Princes fauoure falſelye, yet he thought it good to wryte vnto him herein and to admoniſhe him, that being euer myndefull of his owne honour and dignitie of his aunceſtours, he myght eſchewe not only the crime it ſelfe, but alſo the leſt ſuſpicion of the ſame: for (he ſayeth) he is well aſſured that he teacheth manye wicked and peſtilent hereſies, whiche he and the maiſter of his palace haue dylygently noted: and that ſame is verely the cauſe, why he hath cited hym to appere at Rome, and written to Cardinall Caietane his Ambaſſadour, what he would haue furthermore donne in the matter, and for ſo muche as this is a matter of Religion, and doeth appertaine properlye to the churche of Rome to examine euerye mans faythe, he requyreth hym and neuertheleſſe chargeth and commaundeth hym that beynge requeſted here vnto by his Ambaſſadour, he doe his endeuoure, and brynge to paſſe that Luther maye bee delyuered into his cuſtodye, wherein he ſhall bothe dooe GOD hygh ſeruice, and alſo the thynge that ſhall be to hym ſelfe and to all hys familie ryght honourable. And in caſe there ſhall bee founde no faulte in hym. Whan he ſhall be examined at Roome, he maye retourne home ſafe and ſounde, but in caſe there bee founde Crime worthie puniſhemēt, than ſhal the duke whiche wold no longer ſuffer ſuch a peſtilēt fellow be clere of al blame: And for his own part he was of ſuch clemēcie yt neither wold he oppres

an innococent, nor exclude out of his fauour one that were willyng to amende. Thus ſought he all meanes poſſible to oppreſſe Luther. The The Popes letters to Gabriel veneius. ſame yeare moreouer he wrote vnto Gabriel, prouinciall of Thauſtine fryers, that he ſhould ſpedely ſeke the redreſſe of Martin Luther a frier vnder his iuriſdiction, who ſoweth newe opinions in Germany, & quickly to quenche the flamme newly kyndled, leſt in proces of tyme takyng force and ſtrengthe it be paſte remedy and ſo ſet all on a fyre. For this diſeaſe increaſeth dayly, neyther is there any thynge ſo much to be feared as delaye. Therfore he muſt applye this thynge with all ſtudy, labour, deuiſe and diligence, for ſo muche as he hathe authoritie ouer hym.
            Whan Luther perceiued him ſelfe to be cited to Rome, he laboured muche to haue his matter heard in Germany before ſome indifferent iudges, and in a place not ſubiect to iniury. But when he coulde by no meanes bryng it to paſſe, the vniuerſitie of Wittenberge in their letters The vniuerſitie of Wittenberg writeth for Luther. to the byſhop of Rome, written the .xxv. of Septembre, gaue hym a maruelouſe good reporte both of his lyfe and learnyng. They ſaye, howe he is cited to Rome for certain queſtions, howbeit by reaſon of ſickenes and daunger of his lyfe he is notable, they beſeche hym to haue none other opinion of him, than of a good man. He propownded certen thinges to diſpute of only and not to determine, whiche his aduerſaries haue interpreted in the woorſe parte, and haue exaſperated ye matter: They proteſte, howe they wyll admitte nothinge againſt the churche, and being requeſted of Luther, they coulde not but geue hym this teſtimony, to the whiche they beſeche him to geue credit. With theſe letters they ſende others alſo to Charles Meltice a Germaine, and Chamberlaine to byſhop Leo, vnto whome they declare how Luther without any of his deſertes was brought into great hatred with the byſhop, in ſo muche as being cited to Rome, he could not yet fynde ſo muche fauour that his cauſe might be herde in Germany. They ſaye howe they be ſo affected not only toward religion, but alſo towardes the holy churche of Rome, that in caſe there were any cryme or wicked errour in Luther, they would not beare with him, but he is a man of ſuche learnyng and honeſtie of lyfe, and hath ſo well deſerued of them & of the whole vniuerſitie, that they can not faile him in this caſe. Neyther would Duke Frederick being ſo faithful and wittie a Prince, vnleſſe he iudged him to be an honeſt mā, ſuffer him ſo long vnpunyſhed. Wherfore they require him, that through the fauour and eſtimacion yt he hath with the byſhop, he would bryng to paſſe, that ſome indifferēt iudges might be appointed him not at Rome, but in Germany: And they doubte not but that he will declare him ſelfe lyke a Chriſten man and a good diuine, & that he hath not raſhely or without cauſe ſought the occaſion of ſtrife. And this they require him the more earneſtly for

ſo muche as they haue conceiued a greater hope of him, that he whiche is a Germain him ſelfe wil naturally for the coūtrie ſake, in ſo honeſt a matter, be helpfull to an other Germaine that is in a maner oppreſſed and in daunger of his lyfe. Beſydes this interceſſion of his frendes, Duke Fredericke deuiſed ſo with the Cardinall at Auſpurge that Luther ſhould not nede to trauayle to Rome, but ſhould come and pleed Luther is called to Auſpurg his cauſe before Caietane there. Who comming thether in the begynnyng of October, remayned there thre dayes before he ſpake with the Cardinall. For after Duke Friderick was gone homewarde, he was aduiſed by his frendes not to come in the Cardinalles fyght before the Emperour Maximilian had graunted him a ſaufe conduicte, whiche obtayned, he was gently receyued of the Cardinal, who ſayd, that he would not contende with him in diſputacion, but frendly appeaſe the controuerſy. And according to the Byſhops of Roomes commaundemente he propoundeth two thinges: firſt that he ſhould come to amē
               dement, and reuoke ſuche errours as he had publiſhed: ſecondlye that from henceforth he abſtayne from ſuche wrytinges as diſturbe the trā quillitie of the churche: Hereunto doeth Luther make aunſwer, that he is priuie to no errour, but if he hath erred in any thyng, he deſyreth His conferens with Cardinal Caietane. it maye be ſhewed him wherein: There the Cardinall chargeth hym that he affirmeth in his queſtions, howe the merites of oure ſauioure Chriſte, conſiſte not in the treaſures of pardons, whiche ſentence (ſaith he) is againſt the decree of Clemēt the ſyxte: Moreouer that vnto thoſe that come to receiue the Sacramēt, faith ſhould be neceſſary, wherby they myght be aſſured that their ſynnes were forgeuen, neyther is this true (ſayeth the Cardinall.) Luther aunſwered, how he had read that decree of the Byſhop, & ſhewed what his mynde is touching the ſame, and where as mention was made of Thomas of Aquine, he affirmeth that the authoritie of Scripture is to be preferred farre aboue hym: Than the Cardinall extolling the Byſhop of Romes authoritie, preferreth him aboue all Scriptures and counſelles, recityng howe the coū
               ſell whiche had determined the contrary was abrogated, he condemneth alſo Gerſon of Paris, and the fauourers of his opinion. Contrariwyſe Luther denieth the authoritie of the byſhop to be aboue the coū
               ſell, alledging emonges others the diuines of Paris to be of his opiniō. After long diſputacion, where as they could not agree, Luther aſketh ſome deliberation: The next day he retourneth. And in the preſence of the Secretary and certain other witneſſes, and foure alſo of the Emperours counſell, he proteſteth that he beareth all dew reuerence to the holy churche of Rome: And if he haue ſpoken any thyng againſt the ſame, he wyll not haue it ratified: Howbeit for as much as he is admoniſhed and commaundeth to forſake his errours, and to abſtayne from henceforth, he ſuppoſeth that he hath ſpoken nothing that ſwarueth either

from holy Scripture, or the opinions of the auncient fathers, the decrees of the byſhoppes, or alſo from ryght reaſon. Yet will he not denye but that he may erre and be diſceiued, for ſo may euery man: And therfore he committeth the hearing to the lawfull and holy churche, referryng the whole matter to the iudgement of the ſame: And not that only, but he wil alſo rendre a reaſon of his doctrine in any place: If this may not ſuffiſe, he wil make aunſwere in wryting to ſuch argumentes as may be brought againſt him, and will not refuſe to ſtande in iudgement herein of the vniuerſities of Germany and Paris. The Cardinal charged him againe, as he had done the daye before, with the decree of Clement, as though it made muche for him: In fine he permitteth hym to deliuer vp a wryting, theffect wherof was this. What time he ſet vp his queſtions, and after wrote an expoſition of the ſame
                  〈…〉
                had red the decree of Clement before, but his mynde was not therewith ſatiſfied: For although it be eſtabliſhed that the decrees of the Byſhop of Rome ſhould be aſwell receiued as the voyce of Peter the Apoſtle: Yet ought this ſo to be taken, in as muche as thei be conſonaunt to holy ſcripture, and agreable to the decrees of the auncient fathers. There is no doubt but the voyce of Peter is ſacred and holy, yet was he ſoore rebuked of Paule, neyther coulde his doctrine be receiued tofore the conſente of the Churche (whiche was than at Hieruſalem) hadde eſtablyſhed it: The wordes of all men may be hearde, but all thinges muſt be referred to the wordes of Chriſt, who only can not be diſceaued: That decrees is againſt ſondrye places of Scripture, and that was the cauſe whiche he at that tyme brought in the ſame queſtion, and afterwarde was not affraied to make an expoſition to the ſame. Euer ſynce that tyme he was fully reſolued to ſtire vp no further diſputation concernyng that matter, but rather to heare the opinion of others: but now, albeit he had leuer be inſtructed of others, eſpecially of the Byſhop of Roome. Yet for as muche as he is conſtrained of neceſſitie to defende his owne, he wyl proue and do the beſt he can to make the ſame decree and his queſtions to accorde. Whan he had made this preface before him, he goeth to the matter if ſelfe, and by a certain expoſitiō made, ſheweth howe that decree maketh for his purpoſe, but yet ſo as he would neither that the Biſhoppes authoritie, nor his owne eſtimation ſhould be therby infringed. After this he commeth to the ſeconde parte of hys accuſation, and alledging for his purpoſe, many places of Scripture, declareth playnly, howe it is faith that maketh vs iuſt before GOD. Wherfore he deſyreth him to deale fauourably with him, & ſhewe hym his errour. For the force of thinges whiche he had alledged out of the ſcriptures, was ſo muche, that he beleueth them to be ſufficiently groū
               ded vpon their owne truthe, whiche he can not forſake, for ſo much as we ought rather to obey God then mē. And therfore he requireth that

may be releaſed of the harde burthen of recantynge, for he came not in to this contencion vpon any arrogancie or deſyre of vayn glorie: Yea he would wyſhe for nothing more than that the truthe might be opened, and that any man els myght bryng that were moore learned and godly: her of he beſeched him, yt he may not be cōpelled to hurt his own conſcience. The Cardinall receiued this wryting offered vnto him by Luther, and whan he had red it, eſtemed it lyghtly: yet he promyſed to ſende it to the Byſhop of Rome. Than he vrged him muche to recant, And vnleſſe he ſo doe, he threateneth him with the puniſhment appointed already by the byſhop: And alſo commaundeth him out of his ſight and vnleſſe he amende his maners, to come no more in his preſence. After this threatening, whiche was the .xvij. day of Octobre, Luther wrote vnto him gentle letters ful of good wil and dutie. For Caietane after he had thus chidden Luther, & ſent him away, wrought ſecretly with Iohn Stupice Prouincial of the Auguſtine freers, that he ſhuld induce him to recant of his own accorde. Wherfore Luther in the ſame letters maketh mention what Stupice did with him: verely omitting nothing that becōmeth a faithfull and frendly man to dooe: he geueth him thankes for his beneuolence towardes him whiche he perceiueth well by the talke of Stupicious, wherby doubtles he was much comforted, ſo that nowe he would gratifie no man more rather than hym: he graunteth that he was ouer quicke, and had to little regarde to the Byſhop of Rome his authoritie: Howe be it the ſame is to be imputed to the importunitie of the Collectours: he deſyreth to be forgeuen this fault, and promyſeth to be more modeſte hereafter, and affirmeth alſo that he wyll in his ſermons ſatiſfie the Byſhops requeſt And as cōcerning indulgences he wil ſpeake no more therof, ſo that his aduerſaries may be lykewyſe commaunded to ſilence. How be it to reuoke his ſentence already taught and defended, he can not with a ſafe conſeience, tyll ſuche tyme as by the teſtimonies of holy ſcripture he be cōdemned of errour. He therfore requyreth that the hearing of the matter may be referred to the Byſhop of Rome: for there is nothing ran dooe hym more pleaſure than to heare the voyce of the churche. Whan the Cardinall would make none aunſwere to theſe letters, and had manaſed him in wordes, through the counſell of his frendes, he departed thence two dayes after leauing behind him an Appellation to be openlye ſet Luther appeleth. vp about the tyme of his departure. And or euer he went, he wrote agayne to the Cardinall: that he hath done what he was able, howe he came on foote being ſickly a longe iournaye to Auſpurg, to the intent he might declare his dutie towardes the Byſhop of Rome: And nowe hauing litle monye left, and being lothe to be longer chargeable to the houſe of the white freres (his hoſt) he is dryuen to retourne, and the rather for that he can not abyde his ſight, and hath forboden him his preſens.

Wherefore all his freindes in a maner had counſailed him, to appeale from him to the Biſhoppe him ſelfe, whiche he woulde not haue done, but by the aduiſe of his freindes, And chifely becauſe that he ſuppoſeth that Duke Friderick had alſo rather that ſome appellatiō were made, than that any thinge ſhould be raſhely or vnaduiſedly reuoked. The appellation was made muche after this ſort. How that ſame queſtion touching Indulgences, hath bene diuerſely handled of many, but neuer throughly determined: And that in ſuche doubtefull queſtions, it hath bene alwayes lawfull, namely for Diuines, to reaſon: which thing alſo he did at the ſelfe ſame time, whan certein clamorous Pardoners, did not onely write and teache raſhely and vncircumſpectlye, but alſo polled the people exceadingly, and yet did he this not to affirme anye thinge, but to trie out the trueth: he committed alſo the whole controuerſie to the iudgemente of learned men, and euen to the Biſhoppe of Rome, but his Pardonars haue inuented ſuch ſclaunders againſt him, and haue complayned ſo ſore to the Byſhoppe, and brought the matter to ſuche paſſe at the laſt, that the matter was committed to the Biſhop of Aſcula & Sylueſter Prierias: by whō he was cited to Rome: but for ſo much as both theſe wer ſuſpected, the one of thē alſo vnfit to be iudge in ſuch a matter: Moreouer, if he ſhold haue gone to Rome no mā douted but he ſhold haue ben in great daūger of his lif: And laſt for that he was cōmaūded by his prince to remain at home: for theſe cauſes, & alſo for ſuch feare as may come vpō the moſt cōſtant mā liuing, he had deſyred duke Friderick, to bring to paſſe, yt the hearyng of the matter might be referred to ſome ſkilful and fitte men in Germany, in a place not ſuſpected, nor ſubiect to iniurie. Wherfore the Biſhop of Rome hath committed ye whole matter to his Ambaſſador Cardinal Caietane, whiche doubtles was done at the inſtaunce of his aduerſaries, whiche knewe alreadye the mynde and wyll of the Cardinall. And all thoughe he myghte (not wythoute iuſte cauſe) be ſuſpected: yet dyd he obey, but the Cardinall by and by at the fyrſte metynge commaunded him, to reuoke his workes: whereunto he aunſwered, that he woulde iuſtifye that, that he had done, eyther in preſent diſputation, or by writinge. And yet would ſubmit the whole matter not onely to the vniuerſities, but alſo to the iudgement of the churche of Rome: But he, with al theſe thynges beynge nothing ſatiſfied, commaunded him ſtyll to recante. And where he coulde not bringe on the ſame, he threatened with greuous puniſhment bothe him and others alſo, that were of his opinion. Therfore where as he findeth him ſelfe ſore greued with ſuche preiudices, he doeth appeale from the Byſhoppe of Rome not well infourmed in this matter, to the Biſhop yt ſhal be better inſtructed in the ſame. And this he proteſteth openlye. Furthermore that ſame decree of Clement is to be founde in that parte of the Cannon lawe, that is called extrauagaunte.

There Clemente appoynteth the yere of Iubile, which Boniface the eight had ordained euery hundreth yeare, to be nowe euerye fiftithe yeare, and ſpeakinge of the benefite of our ſauioure Chriſte, he The welſpring of Pardons. ſayeth, howe that one droppe of Chriſtes bloud had bene ſufficient to haue redemed all man kynde, wherefore the ouerplus he hathe left as a treaſure wyth Peter and his ſucceſſours to dyſpoſe and diſtribute vpon penitente perſonnes that confeſſe theyr ſynnes lyke good Stewardes, and ſo to releue them from Temporall puniſſhemente dewe vnto them for theyr ſynnes. Moreouer and beſyde, the merittes of the Uirgin Marie, and of all Sainctes, belonge vnto thys place, (ſaieth he) ſo that the matter and power of remyttynge ſynnes is vnmeaſurable. Wherefore vpon this decree Caietaine groundeth the authoritie of pardons. But Luther ſayth howe that there was nothyng committed to Peter and hys ſucceſſours beſydes the keyes and miniſtration of the worde, wherein Chriſt commaundeth that through the truſt in him the remiſſiō of ſinnes ſhold be ſhewed to the beleuers: And this to be the true ſence & meanyng of Scripture. And if the decree of Clement meane thus, he can be content: otherwiſe he can not alow the ſame. And that whiche is ſpoken moreouer of the merites of Saintes, is wholy agaynſt the holy Scriptures. For men what ſoeuer they be can not onely not do more than they oughte, but alſo not ſo muche as they are bounden, neither are they ſaued by their owne merites, but by the ſole and mere mercy of God: for all men muſt pray dayly, that God the father will forgeue vs our offences, and that he ſtand not in iudgement agaynſt vs leſt we be damned. Touchynge that whiche the Cardinall inferreth for the authoritie of the Byſhoppe of Rome, thus ſtandeth the caſe. It was enacted in the fourth and fifte ſyttyng of the coū
               ſell of Conſtaunce, that the Biſhop of Rome him ſelfe ſhould obey the decrees of the Synode. The ſame was afterwarde eſtabliſhed and repeted The pope vnder the Coun. in the ſeuententh and eyghtenth ſyttting of the Counſel of Baſil. But wheras Eugenius the fourth would not come to the Counſell at Baſill, although he were oftentimes warned and cited thither, he pronounced the ſame to be fruſtrate, and called an other at Farrare, whither came Iohn Paleologe the laſt Emperour of Grece ſaue one, and with him Ioſippe the Patriarche of Conſtantinople, and a numbre of Biſhoppes in the yeare of our Lord M.CCCC.xxxvij. And from Farrare they remoued to Florence where as by the conſent of the Grekes, it was decreed amonges other thinges that the church of Rome ſhould haue the ſupremacie, & yt the biſhop of Rome was the ſucceſſor of Peter, the prince of thapoſtels, & the trew vicar of Chriſt, the head of ye whole church, ye father, & doctor of al chriſtiās, & that to him was cōmitted by Chriſt the ful power to fede & gouerne the church vniuerſal. This is the

decree whereby Caietanus woulde preferre the Biſhoppe of Rome before, and aboue all generall Counſels. For ſyxe yeares before, whan he was yet no Cardinall but maiſter of the blacke Frieres, he made an Oration in the ſeconde ſyttynge of the Counſell Laterane, wherof we ſhall ſpeake hereafter, and inueiyng muche agaynſte certeyne Cardinalles that had forſaken the Biſhop of Rome, he taunteth by the waie the Counſelles of Coſtauntz and Baſil, for that the fathers at the ſame tune toke to them ſelues aucthoritie ouer the Byſhoppes. Wherefore (ſaieth he, it was wel done of Eugenius, that he ſuppreſſed that factiō, and ſuffered not his aucthoritie to be diminiſhed. This oration did Iulius the ſeconde (in whoſe fauoure theſe thynges were ſpoken) commaunde to be recorded. And Caietane was made Cardinall by Leo Gerſon of Paris. the tenth. Gerſon of whom we ſpake, was a Diuine of Paris right famouſe, and wrote diuers worckes: he was preſente at the Counſell of Conſtans, and in bookes written he commendeth hyghely the decree whereby it is agreed that the Byſhoppe of Rome ſhould be ſubiecte to the Counſell. And ſayeth how the thing is worthie to be written in all Churches and publike places, for a perpetuall memorye. For he ſaieth they be peſtilent Flatterers whiche brynge thys Tyrranny into the Churche, as thoughe the Biſhoppe of Rome ought neither to obey the Counſel, nor be iudged by the ſame, as though the Counſell ſhould take all his force and aucthoritie of him, as thoughe it coulde not be called, but at his pleaſure, as though he were bounden to the obſeruation of no lawes, nor none accompt myght be taken of his doynges: certeinly theſe monſtruous ſayinges muſte be vtterly reiected which are againſt all lawes equitie and reaſon. For all the aucthoritie of the Churche dependeth of the generall counſell, and it is lawefull to appeale from the pope vnto it: and thoſe which inquire whether the Byſhop of Rome or the Churche be greater, make as wiſe a queſtion as if they ſhould aſke whether the part be more, or the whole, for it aperteineth to the coūſel, to conſtitute, to iudge, and to depoſe the Byſhop of Rome, as lately it was declared at Conſtaunce, for where as ſome ſemed to doubte in Pope Iohn is depoſed. the matter, and attributed ouermuche to the Byſhoppe, this queſtion was there determined, before Iohn the three and twentith was depoſed from his Seate. Theſe and many other thinges writeth Gerſon to to the ſame effecte. And therefore is he nowe reiected of Caietane. He died in the yere of oure Lorde .M.CCCC.xxix. And the vniuerſitie of Paris holdeth the ſame opiniō, and includeth the vnmeſurable vſurpation of the Romiſhe Byſhoppes, as it were wyth in theſe boundes: and but a fewe monthes before that Luther wrote of Indulgences, the ſame Uniuerſite appealed from Leo the tenthe for abolyſhyng of a law whych was very profitable for ſtudentes in Fraunce, and opened the waye to promotion.
            
               
After Luthers departure from Aſpurge, the Cardinall writeth letters to ye Duke of Saxonie the fiue & twentye daye of October, ſignifiynge how Luther in dede came to Auſpurge, but ſpake not with him Caietan writeth to ye duke of Saxonie. till he had obteined themperours ſafeconduit He marueileth greatlye that ſo little credit is geuen to him. After much treaty aboute the matter, he, of a certaine fatherly loue admoniſhed Luther to amende. And albeit he waxed more ſtubberue, yet did he deuiſe with Stupice and others, a waye of reconcilemente: And that in ſuche forte, as neyther the Churche of Rome ſhoulde loſe her dignitie, nor he his eſtimation. And wheras there was a good foundation of this thing already laid, they went preuely away, firſt Stupice and after Luther, whiche chaunced muche contrary to his expectation. Luther pretendeth that he treateth of theſe matters onlye by the waye of reaſonynge and of diſputation, but in his ſermons to the people he affirmeth all thynges whiche maye in no wiſe bee permitted: for ſo muche as hys Doctrine bothe ſwarueth from the churche of Rome, and is alſo verye parnicious: as it is certainlye to be proued. Wherefore he dothe admoniſhe him to regarde his owne honour, and his conſcience, and either to ſēd Luther to Rome, or els to baniſhe him his countrye. For it can not be that ſo peſtilent a thinge ſhoulde longe continue: neyther is there anye doubt but they wil procede in iudgement againſte him at Rome, and that he hath accordinge to his duetie ſignified to the biſhop the whole matter and the clokynge of the ſame. He prayeth hym therefore to geue no credit vnto ſuche as commended Luthers doinges, neither to ſuffer ſo greate an euill to ſpot and blemiſhe that noble houſe of Saxonie, like as he had oftentimes promiſed. To the whiche Epiſtle exhibited The dukes letters to the Cardinall. the ninetene daye of Nouembre, Duke Fredericke maketh aunſwere the eighte daye of Decembre, that he promiſed to ſende Luther to Auſpurge, whiche beinge perfourmed, they can require no more of him, And that he promiſed him likewiſe, to let him frendly departe. And nowe that he woulde dryue hym to recante before hys matter were hearde, he can not a lyttle maruell. For there were dyuerſe well learned men aſwell in other partes as in his Countrye, whyche dyd not condemyne his Doctrine: And ſuche as were hys aduerſaries, were blyneded wyth Auarice, and corrupted wyth filthye lucre: but in caſe hys erroure hadde bene detected, than woulde he whiche ſeeketh bothe the glorye of God, and the ſafetye of hys owne conſcience, haue done all readye herein the duetye of a Chriſten Prynce. And therefore where he wryteth that proceſſe ſhall paſſe againſte the ſayde Luther at Rome, that is beyonde all hys expectation: And when he deſyreth moreouer, that eyther he ſhoulde be ſente to Rome or elles into exile, it is not lawfull for hym ſo to do: Firſte, becauſe he is not as yet detected of Hereſye. Secondely, for becauſe that the ſame

ſhoulde be a greate loſſe to the Uniuerſitie of Wittemberge, whiche he had lately founded, whereof Luther was a certeine lyghte, and an ornament. Unto whome he ſent his letters, that he myght reade them. And he offereth him ſelfe (as before) to be readye to diſpute the matter in anye indifferente place, and to be iudged by anye indifferente hearers, or elles to aunſwere the matter in wrytynge: Whiche requeſt, becauſe it is reaſonable, and for ſo muche as he wyll defende none errour wyllyngly, he thynketh it meete to be graunted him, that at the length it maye appeare, wherefore he ſhoulde be accompted an Heretike, and what he him ſelfe myghte chieflye folowe. For lyke as he wyll maynteine no errour willyngly, and as he woulde be verye lothe to ſwarue from the Church of Rome: euen ſo can he not condemne him for an Heretike tofore he be detected of errour. Nowe Luther who had ſene the Cardinales letters, (as before is ſayed) wrote againe to hys Prince immediatlye that where as he wente not to Caietaine before he had obtayned the Emperours ſaufeconduit, it was done by the aduiſe of his freindes: And that the Cardinall would haue had him to recante ſuche thynges as he had wrytten touchynge Pardons and faythe to be neceſſarye in the Sacramentes: for the fyrſte he dyd not muche paſſe: but to denye the other, wherein conſiſteth the effecte of our ſaluatiō, he might in no wiſe cōſēt: After he declareth what places of ſcripture the Papiſtes do depraue and wraſte into a wronge ſenſe: he reciteth alſo what was done euery day, and howe at the length the Cardinall began to threaten him: vndoubtedly he wiſheth for nothing more, than that it might be ſhewed him wherein he erreth. But in caſe they at Rome ſhall refuſe to take ſo muche paine for ſo poore a man as he is, at the leaſt wiſe let them write hereof to the Duke him ſelfe or to Themperor, or to ſome great Biſhoppe of Germanye: or elles appoynt ſomwhere a free diſputation: whiche thinges all they haue denyed him hitherto. And if they will thus perſeuer, than is it eaſye to be iudged, whether the faulte be in him: or in them. And where they exhorte him to crueltie, he oughte not to be perſwaded by their woordes. For they that will ſeme to note errours, might muche more eaſely ſende them in writyng into Germany, thā he to his great charges and preſent daunger of his life, trauaile to Rome, there to vnderſtande his errours. Finally wheras he boaſteth, that iudgement ſhall paſſe againſte him at Rome, vnleſſe he eyther come thither or be exiled, he refuſeth not to be an exile: although he knoweth full well, that he can be in no place ſafe, hauynge ſo many aduerſaries liynge in waite for hym: Moreouer it ſhould be great griefe vnto him, that any man ſhoulde for his ſake incurre any daunger. Wherefore leſt they ſhould attempte any thing, he will departe out of the limittes of the whole countrey, whither ſoeuer

it ſhall pleaſe God to leade him: Wherfore he geueth him thankes, and prayeth for his proſperous health: And reioyſeth to him ſelf that it hath pleaſed God, that he ſhould ſuffer ſome thinge for the glorie of Chriſtes name. Thē dyd the Uniuerſitie of Wittenberge in the moneth of Nouembre The Uniuerſitie of Wittenberge writeth for Lut. write vnto the Duke theyr fauourable letters in Luthers behalfe. Nowe they vnderſtode by Luther (of Cardinall Caietanes letters) bothe what his requeſt was, and alſo what offer Luther made him at Auſpurge: where Luther therefore requireth that his errour maye be ſhewed him, and ſubmitteth him ſelfe to the holy Churche of Rome: They beſeche him, that he will ſee to it, that they do him no open wronge, but ſhewe him if he be in erroure, the way, oute of holye Scripture. He him ſelfe hopeth well in the gentleneſſe of Biſhop Leo, but he feareth leſt his aduerſaries ſo flatter him, that they will abuſe him and the name of the Churche. For albeit the Duke did not accompliſhe the Papiſtes requeſtes, but ſemed rather to defende Luther, as tofore it maye appeare: yet had he neuer read any of hys woorkes nor as yet hearde him preache, as he him ſelfe witneſſeth in letters written at Auſpurge to Raphell Riare a Cardinall, who for olde acquaintaunce had frindely admoniſhed him, that he ſhold not take vpon him the defence of Luther. Whileſt theſe thinges were in doinge, Leo, fearinge ſome alteration, eſtabliſſheth his Indulgences with a newe decree, New pardōn ſayinge that this is the doctrine of the Romaine Churche, which is the maiſtres of all others, that the Biſhoppe of Rome, the Succeſſour of Peter, and Chriſtes Uicare, hath authoritie to graunte this ſo great a benefite, in ſuche ſorte as they ſhall profit, not onely the quicke, but alſo the deade in Purgatorie. And this doctrine muſte all men receyue and beleue, vnleſſe they will be ſequeſtred from the Felowſhippe of holy churche. This decree he ſent to Caietane, that it mighte be publiſhed vnto all men: who folowyng his commaundement, publiſſhed the thinge at Lintz a towne in Auſtriche by the Riuer of Danubye or Tonoware, and in decembre ſendeth out copies to the Byſhoppes of Germany, commaunding them in Leo his name, vnder a great penaltie, that they ſhould immediatly ſet it foorth euery man in his Dioces, and commaunded it to be reuerently kept and obſerued. But Luther perceiuing by the Cardinals letters, that ſentence ſhoulde be geuen againſt Luther appealeth from the Pope to the Counſell. him at Rome, putteth vp an newe appellation the .xxviij. day of Nouembre, wherin was conteined that he would not diminiſhe thauthoritie of the Biſhoppes of Rome, thinking rightly muche leſſe diſſent from the Churche: notwithſtandyng for ſo muche as the Byſhoppe is in the ſame ſtate that other mortall men be in, it maye be that he maye erre and offende, neither ought this to be attributed vnto him, that he alone cannot erre nor be diſceiued. He proueth this by the exemple of Peter, who, for that he erred in ſounde doctrine, was ſharpely & openlye

rebuked of S. Paule: But and if the aucthoritie and riches of the Biſhoppe of Rome be ſo great, that he may commaunde and do what he liſte, and careth for no man, than ſuche as thinke they haue wronge at his hande, haue onely one remedie lefte them, that is to appeale. After he reciteth howe he was inforſed throughe the ouer muche aſperitie of Cardinall Caietane, to appeale to the Biſhop of Rome, in whoſe humanitie he had thought to haue founde ſome fauoure, for aſmuch as both he offered moſt reaſonable cōditions and promiſed to do al thinges (the errour beyng taken away.) But nowe ſins that this Appellation is condemned, the offers diſpiſed, lookynge for no more helpe nor health at the Biſhoppes hande, as he might learne by the Cardinalles letters written to the Duke of Saxonie, beynge broughte thorow extreme neceſſitie, he appealeth from the Biſhoppe of Rome to the nexte general Coūſell, which by al meanes ought to be preferred before him.
            After this the Biſhop of Rome ſendeth Charles Meltice his Chamberlaine The Pope ſendeth a golden Roſe to the duke of Saxonie. into Germanye, to preſente Duke Fridericke with a golden Rooſe, which the Biſhoppe yearely is wonte to conſecrate, with many Ceremonies, and great pompe and ſolemnitie. And after as a token of ſingular freindſhip to geue it vnto ſome mā. He wrot alſo to Degenart Pheſfinger a noble man of the Dukes counſell, praiyng him alſo that he woulde further his ſuite to the Duke his maiſter, that Luther (the childe of Sathan) might be puniſhed, that the noble houſe of Saxonie might not thorowe him be blemiſhed. And to the ſame effecte alſo he wrote to George Spalatine, whom the better to perſwade, he ſaid he was wholy geuen to plucke vp euillwedes out of Chriſtes felde. And after the ſame ſorte, wrote his vice Chauncelour alſo to degenart, deſyring him to moue Duke Fridericke to the imitation of his aunceſtors, that he commit nothing vnworthy their famouſe memory.
            Whā Meltice was come into Saxonie, and had exhibited his Roſe, he folowed his ſuite right ſtoutly. Whiche thynge once knowen, Luther  the thirde day of Marche writeth to the Biſhop of Rome letters full of ſubmiſſion, wherin he declareth howe greuouſly he is complained vpon vnto the Duke, whoſe diſpleaſure is no ſmal grief vnto him: beſydes that he is ſtil called vpon to recāte, which if it might be for the honoure and dignitie of the Churche of Rome, he will not refuſe: But ſince that in Germany therbe many wittie & wel lerned men, that are hable to iudge of the controuerſie, it ſhould be rather a blotte and hinderaunce to the Churche of Rome, than anye furtheraunce or dignitie, for he hath done no iniurie therunto. But thoſe Collectours and Pardoners who for couetouſnes vttered ſhamefull thynges to the people, haue complained, and accuſed him without deſerte, for he beareth ſuch an affection towardes him, and the Churche of Rome, that he will attempt nothinge againſte it: And the power thereof to be ſo great, that

Chriſt onely excepted, there is nothinge in this worlde more excellent: He beſecheth him, not to credite his enemies: And of Pardons he wyll make no further mention, ſo that hys aduerſaries maye be lykewyſe commaunded to kepe ſilence: He wyll alſo admoniſhe the people in his Sermons, to thinke well of the Churche of Rome, that they do not aſcribe vnto it the auarice of others, nor yet folowe his example, who, thorowe the Impudencie of his aduerſaries was enforced to treate it vnreuerently: briefely to do all thinges for a quietnes, ſo that no errour or falſe parſwaſion remayne in the mindes of men.
            Before Meltitius came into Germany, Themperour Maximilian The death of Maximilian. was departed out of this life in Auſtriche, the vij. daye of Januarye. That time wer Princes Electours, Albert of Mentz, Herman of Collon, Rycharde of Treuers, Archebyſhoppes: Lewes the Palſegraue, Fridericke duke of Saxonie, Joachin Marques of Brandenburge: the kingdome of Boheme had Lewes kinge of Hungry. Theſe beynge called to an aſſemblie by the Archebyſhop of Mentz after the cuſtome of the Empire, in the month of June, mette at Franckefourt, a towne by the Ryuer of Moene, all, except the kinge of Boheme, who ſent thither his depute Ladiſlaus Sterneberge. The Archebyſhop of Mentz beginneth an oratiō, who ſpeakyng much of the weightie importaunce of the thing, exhorteth them vnto concord, declaryng by many exāples, what an heape of euilles the diſſention of the Princes Electours had brought into Germany within their fathers memorye: And that they ſhould nowe be all of one mynde and conſent, it is ſo muche the more requiſite, for that the greater daunger hāgeth ouer them by the Turke and others, which ſeke the ſpoyle of Germanye. Two did aſpire to the dignitie of thempire, Charles Archeduke of Auſtriche who had three yeres before ſucceded Ferdinando kinge of Spaine, his graundfather on his mothers ſide: And Fraunces the Frenche kynge, whiche foure yeares paſt had vanquiſſhed the Heluetians at Marignane, and poſſeſſed the Dukedome of Millan. And the kynge of Spaines Ambaſſadoures were comen alreadye to Mentz, whiche is fyue miles from Franckefurt: And the Frenche Ambaſſadours ſtaied at confluence, a Towne of the Archebiſhoppes of Treuers, where the Rhine and Moſelle mete. From whence either partie by letters and meſſagers commended eche their prince to the Electours with the beſte reaſons they had to perſwade: Eſpecially the Frenche mē who perceiued their cauſe to be leſſe fauoured, for that they differed frō the Germans in lāguage, lawes, and maners. They ſente therefore to the Heluetians, praiynge them to further the matter to the Princes, who notwithſtandyng dyd cleane contrarye, exhortyng them not to choſe him but ſome one prince of Germany. And the Swiſes alſo wrote to Leo the tenthe, praiynge him that for aſmuche as it was hys parte to inueſte and confirme the

Emperour beyng once choſen, he woulde ſe that it ſhould not be geuen to any foreine Prince. And he aunſwered that he heard ſay there was one laboured for it, that might not haue it by the lawe: for the kynges of Naples are tributaries to the Biſhoppe of Rome, and haue promyſed their faith, not to couet the Empire, but to be content with the one or the other: and that he hath admoniſhed the princes hereof alreadye. He ment in this tale Charles of Auſtriche: for he fauoured more the Frenche kynge euer ſyns he ſubdewed the Heluetians, and led awaye Maximilian Sfortia Duke of Millan captife into Fraunce, whiche was the yere of our Lorde .M.D.xv. aboute the Ides of Septembre, The ſwiſſes banquiſhed. with whome in Decembre folowinge he mette at Bonony, and there made a perfecte league of amitie with him. Touching the kingdome of Naples, thus it ſtandeth. What time Manfredus the Baſtarde ſonne of the Emperour Fridericke the ſeconde made warre agaynſte the Churche of Rome, Clement the fourthe Byſhoppe of that name in the yeare of oure Lorde M.CCCCC.xv. to thentent to repreſſe hym, did that, whiche his predeceſſor Urban the fourth was aboute to doo: And ſent for Charles the Erle of Gaunte & of the Prouince in Fraunce Kinges of Naples paye tribute to Rome. into Italy, and made him kynge of Sicilie and of Naples, yet vnder this condition, fyrſt, that for ſuche a benefite receiued, he ſhould pay yerely to the churche of Rome fortie thouſand Ducates: Moreouer that he ſhoulde at no time ſewe to be Emperour, nor yet take it vpon him beynge offered freely. When the Princes were comen to conſulte, the Archebiſhoppe (after he had talked ſeuerally with Fridericke Duke of An oration of the Archebyſhop of Mēiz. Saxonie, whoſe Authoritie was verye greate) begynneth the matter, whiche, he ſaieth is diuided into three queſtions. Whether that Fraunces the Frenche kyng, or Charles the king of Spaine, or els ſome Germane be choſen Emperour. Touchinge the French kynge (ſaieth he) I ſuppoſe we are prohibited both by our lawes and our othe alſo, wherby it is prouided that the dignitie of the Empire ſhould not be alienated to ſtraungers: And I thinke there is no man that doubteth but that he is a foreine prince: And albeit that were no let, yet were it not for the commune weale. For he ſeketh all meanes to enlarge his kingdome, he hath ioyned to it Millan, he will attempte the ſame in Germany: he will warre vpon Charles, whome he hateth: yea and hathe proclamed it already, Germanye ſhall be tormoiled with vprores, and we ought to foreſe, that we ſtyrre vp no Ciuill warres. If he inuade Auſtriche, as ſuerly he will do, ſhall we leaue them in the Breres? hath Themperour Maxilimilian deſerued thus of vs, and of the Empire. And if thoſe countreis be ouer runne, howe longe thinke you ſhall our libertie continewe? We maye not truſte their fayre promiſes: for oftentimes couetouſneſſes and ambition cary awaye men headlonge from doyng theyr dewtie. In times paſte, there were many noble houſes in

Fraunce. Which nowe be but fewe in nombre: for the kinge in maner hathe all in his owne handes: They ſay, he is a ſtouce prince: the more like to brynge all to a Monarchie, but we ſeke to maintaine this preſent ſtate of nobilitie, he promiſeth great aide agaīſt the Turke: which in dede is a thinge to be wiſhed for, that Germany mighte ioyne wyth Fraunce and Italy: but firſt he wil bend his power againſte the houſe of Burgundy, and warre vppon Flaunders and Naples, and ſhall we aide him in theſe enterpriſes? And leaſt any mā ſhould ſay, I prophecied of dreames and doubtfull matters, he is now in leuying his armye. Foraſmuche therfore as we are letted by oure lawes, othe, and loue of our natiue country, I proteſt and iudge him vnmete to be elected. And nowe to the reſt of the parties: I ſuppoſe that ſome of you thyncke it vnmete that Charles ſhoulde be choſen, becauſe Spaine is ſo farre of, and that through his abſence, it ſhould not go well with Germany, either for the Turkiſhe warre, or for ciuile diſſentions. Which thinges I do not onlye graunte to be true, but alſo, when I conſider depelye, I am ſo moued, that in maner, I quake for feare: for I waye this alſo: If the emperour, at any time come into Germany in diſpleſure, and bring with him the Spaniardes, we ſhalbe in daunger to loſe our liberty. I conſider moreouer that it may be, that the Spaniards wil hardly at any time reſtore vnto vs again this dignitie of thempire. And, if by their force and power they recouer Millan, they will kepe it hereafter to them ſelues: So that almoſt it ſemeth better, to create one of our owne nation that is fit for it, after the example of our elders whiche paſſinge ouer foreine Princes haue choſen an inhabiter of the contrie. This wil not I deny, but the ſtate of that tyme was thē farre otherwiſe and the worlde a great deale better. But nowe if the Emperour be of ſmall power, thinke you that Auſtriche and other countries will obey him? Or if the Frenche kinge warre vpon Charles, as without doubte he wyll do, eyther in the lowe countrey or in Italie, ſhall he geue them the lokyng on? or ſhal our new Emperour ſuffer ſtraunge nations to ſpoile a great parte of the Empire. Yea, and as the world goeth now a daies, it is to be thought that the Princes of Germany, contemnynge theyr Emperour, will ioyne them ſelues, ſome with the houſe of Auſtriche, and ſome with the Frenchemen. When Fridericke the third was Emperour, Charles the Duke of Burgundie warred in Germany. And Philip Maria Duke of Millan in Italy, and no mā did repreſſe them, but the ſame was to our diſhonour: Moreouer a greater ſhame whan the Emperour was beſeged in Auſtriche: Yea, and driuen then oute of his owne countrey by the Hungarians. And yet at the ſame time dyd the lande of Boheme take his parte: and ſo did alſo my graundefather Albert Marques of Brādēburge, & the Duke of Saxonie of the ſame name. If it chaunce ſo, thē you ſee what is like to enſew at theſe daies,

when ſome princes are addicted to others for ſtipendes. I leaue of to ſpeake, howe many incidente cauſes maye chaunce, for the whiche the Princes and Cities maye refuſe to ſhewe their obeidience. Moreouer, now we are like to haue great tumultes & troubles for religiō. For ther are ſpronge vp diſputations of indulgences, & the authoritie of the Byſhoppe of Rome, and of the Eccleſiaſticall lawes, whiche ſeme as yet curable, but or euer it be longe they will cauſe a great Ruine and alteration of the Churche: For manye do ſubcribe, and myghtye Nations maynteine the cauſe, the Saxons and the Heluetians: neither can this miſchief be holpen but by a generall counſell. And howe ſhall an Emperour of ſmall power eyther call a counſell or defende the ſame, eſpecially if other kinges be agaynſt it? there remayneth the Turkiſh warre, the which we muſt not onely defende, but make alſo, to recouer that is loſt, and reſtore Grece vnto libertie: for the doynge whereof we haue nede of the aide of many and ſundry nations: which, if the Emperour haue but ſmall power and litle authoritie, howe ſhall he gather greate Armies of mē? For which cauſes I iudge it mete to choſe ſome mightie Prince, and Charles of Auſtriche to be preferred before all other Princes of Germanie. And if any incommoditie ſhould put you in feare ſo to do, I thinke it is a great deale leſſe then that will be, which ſhall enſew in caſe the gouernement be committed to anye other: For he is bothe a Germayne borne, and hath many countries holdynge of the Empire, and will not ſee his owne countrey brought in bondage: beſydes that, he ſhall ſweare neither to alienate nor diminiſh thempire, nor to break or infringe our liberties. And albeit theſe be great cauſes which I haue here mentioned, yet ſhould they not moue me one whit, vnleſſe his towardnes were wel knowen: For he loueth Religion, Juſtice, and chaſtitie, he hateth all crueltie, and hath a good witte: which vertues ſhall euer admoniſhe him to mainteine the comonwealth. They that know him throughly, do muche commende him: And if we conſyder well hys father Philippe, and his graundfather Maximilian, we can not doubt of him. He is of no great age, but yet fitte and ripe to gouerne: He ſhall haue his graundefathers counſellours, and certeine Princes of Germany choſen for the purpoſe. And whereas I ſaid before that the worſt were, if he ſhoulde be longe oute of Germany, we ſhall condition with him for that matter, and for aſmuche as he hathe greate poſſeſſions in Germany, it can not be, but that ſome time he will come ſee them. So ſhall the Turke be driuen out of Hungary, and the Frenchemen oute of Italy: the Church ſhal be refourmed and eſtabliſhed, and many others holpen: which thynges when I cōſyder, I care the leſſe for his abſens: for his owne naturall courage, the loue of his countrey, and the verye neceſſitie of thinges, ſhall prouoke him to come ofte amonge vs. When The oration of the Archbi. of Treuers. the Archebyſhop had ended his Oration, and had exhorted the reſt to

ſpeake their myndes: the others after they had talked a litle together, deſired the Archebiſhoppe of Treuers to ſuccede. Who for his ſyngular witte and experience, was of muche eſtimation. And he began his tale of a prophete that ſayd Maximilian ſhould be the laſt Germaine Emperour: Nowe (ſaieth he) me thinketh it is almoſt comen to paſſe, foraſmuche as my Lorde of Mentz (who hath ſpoken many thinges wittely, hath gon aboute to perſwade vs to commit the gouernement of the Empire to a ſtraunger. But I maruell muche, why he preferreth the Spaniarde before the Frencheman? Certes I lament the ſtate of Germany: For if we folowe the ſteppes of oure elders, we ſhoulde nede no forayne helpe: But nowe ſeyng that we ſeke vpon ſtraungers, what other thinge do we, then procure our owne bondage? But leauynge of this complainte, I will folowe the ſame order that my lorde of Mentz hath done, and ſpeake fyrſt of the lawe and of oure othe. And the chiefe cauſe and ground of the law I ſuppoſe to be this, leſt, if a foreine prince ſhould be choſen, that had no certen habitation in Germany, the dignitie of thempire ſhoulde by litle and litle be alieuated to ſtraungers. If this be the meaning of the lawe, then can no more the Spaniarde be choſen, then the Frencheman. But now, if Charles may be created, becauſe he hathe landes lyinge within the Empire, of neceſſitie, the ſame muſt be of force alſo in Fraunces, which hath Millan and other membres of our common weath. Wherefore of two thinges propounded, let Fraunce and Germani wer 
                     〈…〉
                  ted. vs ſee whether is better. Certaynly, whā Fraunce was vnited to Germany, then did our Empire moſt floriſhe: in ſo muche that the remembraunce of that time doth not a litle delite me, when I chance to reade the ſtories therof. And now is the like occaſion offered vs, whiche certainly would not be let ſlippe. Foreyne nations are alſo of this opinion the biſhop of Rome, the venetians, all the Princes and cities of Italie. For the Frenchmen come of the ſame ofſpringe that we do, and vſe almoſt the ſame lawes and maners, ſhewyng all loue and gentleneſſe to our men: And for the vicinitie therof are very neceſſary for the Italiās and vs. If any tumult ſhall ariſe, ſtraight waies ſhall an armye be ready, and Fraunce ſhall paye their wages. And if the Turke ſhall inuade either Hungary or Italye (as verelye I thincke he wil), ſhal it not be a goodly matter to haue ſo nere and ſo floriſhing an Emperoure, fourniſhed with the ſtrength of either nation? As for the Spaniards, though they be accompted warlicke, what notable thing did they euer in Italye without the healpe of the Germanes? Furthermore becauſe they be ſo farre from vs, We can loke for no helpe at their handes in time: And though they would neuer ſo faine yet can they not healpe vs greatlye: For Spaine is ſo waſted with continual ſayling, that it can ſend forth no great nombre of men. Moreouer we ſhall haue the Frenchmen our fellow ſouldiours) and companions of our trauell and paines: But the

Spaniardes, if any thing be wel done, will haue al the praiſe to them ſelues, they will enioye our boaties, and rule our countries. Then ſhal we bewaile our bondage all to late. But I will leaue this compariſon, and come to the election. If we choſe the kynge of Fraunce, there ſhalbe none occaſion of warre in Italy. For he hathe Millan nowe in poſſeſſion, and we ſhall perſwade him that he ſhall attempte nothinge againſt Naples: nether againſt the baſe countreis of Flaūders & Artois, ſo yt they wil be quiet. And yet I ſee not why we ſhoulde thincke that theſe countreis ought to be defended of vs. They be in dede oure neigbours, but we haue no league wt them, neither do they obſerue the lawes of thempire, nor geue any thing towardes our cōmon charges, no more thē doth Englād or Scotlāde: Seing than yt the Frēch kīges power is greateſt, & that he hath Lūbardy in quiet poſſeſſiō, & is furniſhed wt al thinges neceſſary, he wil attempt greater enterpriſes & more honorable, & moue warre namely againſt the Turke, & bend al his power thither wardes, yt the cruel enemie expulſed out of Hūgary & Italy, Germany maye liue at reſt. But in caſe we preferre Charles before him (O liuing God) what tumultes ſhall we raiſe vp in Italy? He wil recouer Millan, & that wilbe a long warre, & whileſt this goodly coū
               trey ſhalbe thus tourmoyled, the Turkes will inuade Hungary with theyr whole power. Who I praye you ſhall reſiſte them? Or be able to bringe a ſufficient Armie agaynſt them? Theſe thinges would be conſydered more diligently, and not paſſed ouer lightly Nowe, what the end of the Italyan warre ſhalbe, it is vncerten. If the Frenche kynge conquere, he will couet Naples, and it maye be that the Byſhoppe of Rome throughe his impulſon will vndo oure Election: what trouble will ariſe thereby, euerye manne perceyueth righte well. Agayne if Charles get the better hande, let vs not loke to haue Italy reſtored againe, the Spaniardes will kepe that to them ſelues foreuer. And not onely that, but wyll hardely let out of theyr handes this our Empyre. About the kepyng of Naples, the poſſeſſion wherof, it is wel knowen how they came by, what miſery haue they ſuffered? they may not therfore be brought into Italy. Now will I ſpeake ſome thinges of either king. I doubt not but king Charles is of a milde and gentle diſpoſition, for ſo is he reported of many, but being but a yonge man, howe can men diſcerne ſuch vertues in him as be required in a mightye prynce? The common welth had nede of ſuche a one, as beſides other thinges could eſtabliſh & reforme the ſtate of the church, as my Lord of Mentz here did wittely admoniſhe. This verely can king Fraunces performe beſt of all men: for he hath both a good wit, and a good iudgemente, & hath oftentimes conferens with lerned men, of religion, and readeth muche him ſelfe. Moreouer the ſtate of this preſente time requyreth a Prince and captaine ſkilfull in warres, payneful and lucky. But who ſhall in this behalf take the price away from Fraunces: for his vertue

is rightwell tried and knowen: Of king Charles we haue noue experiment, but that his towardnes promiſeth ſome thinge: but the other in prowes and dedes of Armes doeth farre excell all his aunceſtours. For he hath latly ouercome in battaill the Swiſers, a mighty nation and neuer ſubdued ſyns Iulius Ceſars time: A yonge man therefore oughte in no wyſe to be preferred before ſo worthye a Capitayne. My lorde of Mentz doeth accompte it a diſcommoditie, if thēperour ſhold be longe out of Germanye, but yet he biddeth vs take no thoughte for that matter: But I thinke it a matter full of greate daunger, to haue an Emperour abſente farre withoute the borders of the Empire. For who ſhall reſiſte the inuaſions of the Turkes? Who ſhall repreſſe the ſodayne inſurrections and Ciuile vprours? And there ariſe a tempeſt, Who ſhall ſaue the Shyppe that wanteth her Maſter? He ſhal know no certentie of oure affayres beynge abſent: many thynges ſhalbe told him vntruely: he ſhall haue no Germaines of his counſell, but Spaniardes onely: he wyll make many decrees, and ſend them vnto vs farre out of tyme and ſeaſon. Afterwardes, if he beynge tyckled wyth falſe complaintes and ſklaunders, ſhould come into Germany at anyetyme an Armye of foreine ſouldiours. In what ſtate thinke you ſhall be our wyth Empire then?
            Wherfore if you thinke it good, and that it be oure deſtinie, that a foreine prince ſhall at this time weare oure Crowne vpon his heade, certenly I thinke mete to preferre the Frenche kynge before the Spaniſhe: But if the lawe do prohibite vs to choſe the Frenchekinge, letthe ſame take place in the Spaniſhe kinge, and let vs not throughe a ſubtill interpretation accompt king Charles a Germanie, but let vs eſpie out amonges all the Princes one, whiche hath no manſion but in Germany, which is a Germanie in birthe, language, maners, and diſpotition. My lorde of Mentz ſuppoſeth that ſuche an Emperour ſhoulde for his ſmall abilitie be diſpiſed: but if we choſe a mete man, Germanie is riche and ſtronge enough to beare vp this burthen. Raffe the xj. Themperour Raffe. Emperour before Maximilian, was a man but of Small power, but he excelled in vertue. And he reſtored Thēpire that was ful weak, and ſore afflicted with great warres, in ſuch ſorte that all the kinges about him did feare him. What a good opinion had alſo foreine princes, and amonges others, Lewes the xij. king of Fraunce: of themperor Maxilian, onely for his wit & vertue, I ſuppoſe you knowe righte well: For doubtles the princes of Germany haue bene euer of muche eſtimation: And as yet their noble fame is not extinguiſhed, but floriſheth ſtil. And amōges others at this day, there be thre principal houſes in Germani, the houſe of Bauar, Saxonie, & Brādenburge: And of theſe houſes alſo diuers worthy mē. Wherfore if we choſe one of thē, & aſſiſt him with our aides, as ſurely we are boūden, we ſhal nede to feare no ſtraūgers.

ſo that we be all of one minde and will, althinge ſhalbe in ſaftie. Therfore ſetting a part ſtraungers, let vs create ſome one of our owne coū
               treymen: & it ſhal proue right wel: for there be many domeſtical examples of vertue, wherof I ſhall recite one. Matthias kinge of Hūgary a ſtout warriour & a fortunate, proclaimed warre vpon a time againſte your father (my lord of Saronie) but whē he perceiued a ſufficient armie prepared againſte him: his anger was ſone pacified. So mighte now alſo the meanes be founde, that an Emperor of our owne nation being elected might mainteinehis eſtate and authoritie both at home, and a broad. Thirdly ſpake ye duke of Saxonie, who, after he had proued the Frenche king to be excluded by the lawe, & king Charles to be a Germayne Prince, & to haue an habitation in Germany he ſaid the common weale had nede of ſome mightie prince: but he knew noue to be compared with Charles: therfore he was contented that he ſhould be declared Emperor, but yet vpon certen conditions, that Germany ſhall reteike her libertie, and that thoſe daungers which were mentioned, ſhould be eſchewed. Finallye when the reſt had approued this ſentence, the Archbyſhoppe of Treuers ſayde
                  •
                I ſee the fatall deſtenye of Germany, and the alteration euen nowe at hande: not withſtandynge, for aſmuche as it ſemeth ſo good to you; I will confourme my wyll vnto your iudgemente. This was the xxviij. daie of Iune, when it was darke night. Wherfore they departed, and mette agayne the next daye. There they began to treate, what conditions ſhould be propounded to the Emperour: the matter was in debating certein daies: at the lengthe when they were agreed vpon, they were written out, and ſent to his Ambaſſadours to Mentz. Whan they had receiued them, all theyr voices were committed to writinge as the maner is, and ſealed the daye before thempire was offered to Friderick duke of The duke of Saxo. refuſeth to be Emperour. Saxonie, but he with a ſtout courage refuſed it, & gaue his voice vnto king Charles, whoſe Ambaſſadours for his ſo doynge, offered hym a great ſūme of money, which he vtterly refuſed, & would not ſuffer his mē alſo to take one farthing. After this, tharchbiſhop of Mentz calling the nobilitie & comon people into the church of Saint Bartholomew, in his ſermō declareth Charles Archduke of Auſtrich, & king of ſpaine, Charles is declared Emperour. to be king of Romanes in ye ſtede of Maximiliā departed. And for yt he was choſen wt ſuch a cōſent, he ſaieth they ought to geue God thankes, exhorting thē to ſhew to him all fidelitie & obeyſaūce, & ſpeaking much in his praiſe, he declareth why they choſe him before all others. Than thambaſſours, which were comen with in a myle, were ſent for. Thoſe were Matthew ye Cardinall of Saliſburge, Erarde Biſhop of Liege, Barnard Biſhoppe of Trent, Fridericke countie Palatine, Caſimire Marques of Brādēburge, Henry Erle of Naſſo, Maximiliā of Sibebouge, & certē others of his coūſel. Whē they were comē, they cōſulted

howe the common wealth be gouerned, vntill ſuche tyme as he came him ſelfe into Germany. Howe Caſimire the Paulſgraue ſhould leuie a force of men, place them in gariſons, and foreſee that the ſtate take no harme. Afterwardes the Princes Electours ſente Ambaſſadours with their letters to king Charles, to declare the whole matter. The chief of thē was Fridericke the Paulſgraue. Howbeit in ye meane time Friderick the Paulſgraue ſent into Spaine. diuerſe meſſengers went into Spaine, & amonges other one went frō Franckefurth to Barcelona in nine dayes. The Countie Palatine arriued there at the ende of Nouembre, & deliuereth the Princes letters, the content wherof was this. That he would receiue thempire offered him, and all delaye ſette a parte, repaire into Germany ſo ſoone as he mighte. He aunſwereth ryght curteſiye by the mouthe of Mercurine Cattinar, that all beit there was muche trouble towardes him, what by the Turkes, and what by the Frenche men: yet this not withſtondyng, he ſayd, he neither coulde nor woulde faile the common countrie chiefly, ſyns that ſo noble Princes had ſuch an opinion of him, & required him ſo to do. Wherfore he receiueth their honour offered him right thankefully, & ſo ſhortly as may be will imbarke him ſelf to come to the borders of thempire. And in maner with the ſame wordes he writeth to the Princes Electours, and ſendeth home Fridericke honourably rewarded. Thus was he made Emperor the fift of yt name, being than xxj. yeres of age. The Frenche kyng toke the repulſe the more greuouſlie, for that he perceiued a greater daūger to hang ouer his ſtate, ſeing the power of his enemie, whom before he ſuſpected, herby to be muche increaſed: for he had rather any man els had bene choſen, than he. He had geuen great ſommes of money to haue bene cōſydered: And ſo did they of Flaūders in like caſe as it is reported, but herein I can affirme nothing certenly. Here will I declare the Petiegre of kinge Charles.
            Charles the fift (ſurnamed, wiſe) king of Fraūce, gaue the Dukedō of Burgūdy (which fel vnto him) to Philip his yongeſt brother, which Philip maried afterwards ye lady Margaret thonly daughter of Lewes Erle of Flaūders, & had by her a ſonne called Iohn. And he had a ſonne named Philip, the father of Charles the ſtoute warriour, which was ſlaine before Nancey: leauing a daughter called Mari, an inheritour of many great coūtreis: She was maried to Maximiliā ſonne to thēperor Friderick the .iij. & brought forth a ſon called Philip: He maried ye lady Iane ye daughter of Ferdinādo kig of Spaine, & had by her ij. ſons, Charles & Ferdinādo. Whan this lady was wt child, ſhe went into Flaūders, & was brought abed of Charles at Gaūt, in the yeare of our Lorde M.D. the xxiiij day of February. And here is ſome thynge to be ſayd of Ferdinādo, thēperours graūdfather by his mothers ſide, 1500 The byrth of the Emperor. who was king of Aragonie and Sicilie, & had to wife Elizabeth the daughter and heyre of Iohn the ſeconde kyng of Spaine, & in fine had

alſo the kingdome of Naples: He begotte of her fyue children, Iohn, Iſabel, Iane, Mary & Katherine: Iohn and Iſabell deynge without Iſſewe, the inheritaunce by the lawes of the Realme came vnto Iane the next ſyſter. By this meanes all yt the duke of Burgūdie had, which was exceding much, & whatſoeuer Ferdinando king of Spaine had: came wholy to Charles the ſonne of the lady Iane: For the landes of the houſe of Auſtriche in the diuiſiō of thinheritaūce, went to Ferdinā
               do his brother. Wherfore of a long time Germany had not an Emperour of greater power. His father died whā he was but ſixe yere olde, and his graūdefather Ferdinādo, whan he was ſixtene. At the whiche tyme he wēt into Spaine, & there remained til he was elected Emperour & came into Germany as ſhalbe declared herafter. And now forſomuch as we arecome to this place, it ſhal not be much out of purpoſe to ſpeak ſome thing of the creatiō of themperor Charles, kinge of Boheme ye iiij. Emperor of that name, made a law herofin the yeare. 1356. called comenly the golden Bull: wherof this is one thing, yt thēperour being dead, tharchbiſhop of Mentz ſo ſoone as he knoweth therof, ſhal immediatly ſignifie the ſame to the reſidew of the prices Electors, and The manes of choſing 
                     •
                  he Emperour. appoint thē a day within .iij. monthes to mete at Frāckfourt, either in their owne parſons, or to ſende their deputies wt their ful authoritie, to elect a new Emperor or king of Romanes. And if it fortune yt the ſaide Archbiſhop do neglect it, yt yet neuertheles the reſt ſhall there aſſembe within the time preſcribed: accōpanied euery mā with .ij .C. horſe & not aboue whā they enter into the towne, &. 50. of thē to be in Armure. He that neither cōmeth himſelfe, nor yet ſendeth his Ambaſſ. or depute tofore the buſines be ended, ſhall loſe his right of Electiō for yt time: The officers of Frākefurth ſhal ſhew al fidelitie to thelectours, & duringe the time of thelectiō ſuffer nomāto enter beſides the princes & their families: After yt all be cōmen together, they ſhal haue a meſſe of the holy Ghoſt, in the church of ſ. Bartholomew: & thē euery mā ſweare yt they ſhal do nothing in yt matter, for any bargain, bribe, reward, or promiſe: Afterward to come to the electiō, & not to depart thēce before thēperor be choſē: And if the thing be differred aboue .xxx. daies, thē to haue nothing geuē thē, but bread & water: whō the more part ſhall choſe, to be of as muche effect as if he were choſen wt the cōmen aſſent of almē: and that themperor thus elected ſhal firſt of all cōfirme al their priueleges, and whatſoeuer apperteineth to their honor, dignitie, libertie, & fredō. Moreouer it is prouided and ordeined how one ſhall ſuffer another to paſſe through his coūtrey, what place eche of thē ſhal haue in the conſiſtory, in what ſort they ſhall giue their voices, and what office euery of thē ſhall haue, what time Thēperor either dineth abroade, or doth any thig opēly. Furthermore yt durig ye vacatiō of thēpire, the coūtye Palatine ſhal haue the gouernemēt in Sueuelāde, Frākeconie, & about the

Rhine: & the duke of Saxo. in ſuch places as they vſe the lawes of Saxnie: That when a prince elector is departed, his eldeſt ſonne ſhal ſucced him, or his brother Germayne: that if the Electour be vnder .xviij. yeares of age, his next kinſman ſhall ſupplie the rowme til he come of age: that the electours mete euery yere once, to conſult of the comē wealth: That Frankefurth be the place of election, and Agnon in the baſe contrey the towne where he ſhalbe inueſted. I ſpake before of the conditions preſcribed by the princes, and ratified by the Emperours Ambaſſadours, puttyng in a Caution, as the maner is, and writinges made of the ſame in his name, whiche were theſe. That he ſhall defend the chriſten comen wealth, the Biſhoppe, and churche of Rome, whereof he is aduocate: that he ſhall miniſter the law vprightly, and ſeeke to maynteine peace: That he ſhall not only confyrme and eſtabliſh al the lawes of thempire, and chiefely that which is called the golden Bulle, but alſo by theyr aduiſe, when time ſhall require encreaſe the ſame: That he appointe a Cenate or counſell within the empire choſen of Germaines onely, which ſhall miniſter the comon wealth: That he ſhall not breake or diminiſhe the lawes, priueledges, the dignitie of the Prynces, and ſtates of thempire: That it ſhalbe lawful for the electoures when nede ſhall requyre to aſſemble and to conſult of the common welth: And he ſhall be no let hereunto, nor take it in euill parte: That he ſhall aboliſhe all confederacies and conſpiracies of the nobilitie and commōs againſt their Princes, and prohibite by a law that there be no ſuch made hereafter: That he make no league nor compacte with ſtrangers, touching the matters of thempire without the aſſent of the .vii. Princes: that he neither alienate nor lay to pledge anye parte of thempire, or deminiſhe the ſame: and that ſuch goodes or landes of the Empire, as other nations haue plucked away, and do occupy, he ſeeke forthwith to recouer, yet ſo, as he infringe not the lawes or priueleges: Alſo if he him ſelfe, or any of his houſe do poſſeſſe any parte of thempire, vnlawfullye gotten, that he reſtore the ſame, beinge required of the .vii. princes: that he kepe peace and amitie withall Chriſten Princes, and that he attempte no warre for the affaires of the empire, without the conſent of al ye ſtates, but chiefly of the Princes electours, either within the empire or wythout, that he bring no ſtraunge ſouldiours into Germany without their aſſent: And if any man moue warre againſt him or thempire, that then it ſhalbe lawfull for him to vſe what aide he can. That he cal none aſſē
               bly of the Empire, nor commaunde any taſke or tribute, but by the conſent of the Electours: And the ſame alſo to be within the limittes of the Empire: And that for publike affaires he appointe no Foreyners but Germaines, and that of the nobilitie. And that all writinges be made in Latin, or in the Duche tonge. That no man be ſommoned to appere in any court with out the bondes of thempire: And foraſmuch as many

thinges are done at Rome contrary to couenaūtes made in time paſt with the Biſhoppes therof, that he deuiſe with the Biſhop, that there be no fraude vſed towardes the preuileges and liberties of thempire: that he impoſe no cuſtome or droicte with out ye aſſent of thelectours: neither that through his letters he diminiſh the cuſtome of thelectors that dwell by the Rhine: If he haue any action agaynſt any man, that he ſhall trye the lawe, and vſe no force to ſuche as will aunſwere to the lawe, but ſtande to the ordre of lawe.
            The goodes of the Empire, whiche ſhall chaunce to be vacant, he ſhall geue away to no man, but a lotte them to the publicke Patrimonye: If he ſhall wynne any foreine countrey throughe the aide of the ſtates of Germany he ſhal annexe it to thempire: if he ſhal recouer any publike thinge by his owne force and power, he ſhall reſtore the ſame to the common welth: that he ſhall ratifie that which was done in the vacation of thempire, by the countie Palatine, and the Duke of Saronie. That he take no counſel to vnite Thempire to his houſe and poſteritie, as his propre inheritaunce, but that he leaue to the ſeuen Princes fre Election according vnto the lawe of Charles the fourth, & preſcript of the Canon lawe: if he do any thinge otherwiſe, to be fruſtrate and of none effect: That ſo ſhortly as may be, he repaire into Germany to be inueſted. What time the Ambaſſadours had approued theſe thinges with an othe in his name, they deliuered vnto eche of the electors writinges therof ſealed. That whiche is here ſpoken of the Cannon lawe, is conteined in the Epiſtle decretall of Innocentius the thyrde, which teſtifieth that the ſeuen Princes electours haue fre authoritye to create themperor. And that thempire goeth not by ſucceſſion but by election. Which Innocētius liued about the yere of our Lord .M.ii.C. Nowe let vs retourne to Luther. About this ſame time, Eraſmus of Eraſmus iudgement of Luther. Roterdam wrote letters from Andwarp to Frederick Duke of Saxonie, wherein amonges other thinges he maketh mention of Luther: ſaying that his bokes are ioyfullye receiued and red of good and well learned men: and moreouer that his life is of no man reprehended, for that it is farre from all ſuſpicion of auarice or ambition: But that the deuines of Louain hearinge that he is greatly oppreſſed, with thaucthoritie of the Cardinall Caietan, do nowe triumphe. And in all theyr ſermons and bankettes, raile vpon him, callynge him Heretike, and Antichriſt: declaringe with mo wordes the ſame to be much contrary to theyr profeſſion, ſo to ſlaunder any man, before he be comiicte of Hereſye. He wryteth alſo in a maner with the ſame woordes, to the Archebiſhop of Mentz and to Cardinall Campegius, tauntyng theſe ſophiſticall Diuines, and Monkes whiche can not abide the ſtudye of tonges and of eloquens, nor of any good learnynge. He writeth alſo to Luther very frendly from Louain, and ſayth howe he hath receyued

receiued his epiſtle, whiche declareth both the excellencie of his witte, and alſo his chriſtian hert, ſhewinge him what a Tragedie his bokes haue ſtyrred vp their, and what hatred and ſuſpicion he ronneth into of the Diuines, and that he can preuaile nothinge by excuſynge the the matter: And howe there be many in Englande of great Eſtimation, whiche thinke rightwell of his workes? And that he himſelfe hath taſted of his Cōmentaries vpō the Pſalmes, & truſteth that they ſhall profit many, for they like him very well: but of one thing he would admoniſhe him, that a man ſhall more preuaile with a certeine ciuile modeſtie, then if he be to vehement: And that he muſte rather thunder againſt them which abuſe the biſhop of Romes authoritie, then againſt the Biſhoppes themſelues: with certeine other good counſels, whiche he gaue him, exhorting him to procede as he hath begonne. Luther hauing thus manye aduerſaries, there was a diſputation appoynted at Lypſia, a towne of Miſnia, belonging to George Duke of Saxonie, The diſputatis at Lypſia. Uncle to duke Friderike. Thither came Luther, & Melanthon which read the Greeke Lecture at Wittenberge. Thither came alſo Iohn Eccius a Diuine bothe ſtoute and bolde, who the fourth day of Iulye began the diſputation with Luther touching the ſupremacie of the biſhop of Rome, affirming that they which ſaid that the church of Rome was not the fyrſt and chiefeſt of all others (euen before the time of Cilueſter) did erre, for he that hathe the Seate and faith of Peter, was euer taken for his ſucceſſour, and Chriſtes Uicar in earthe. For Luther had ſetforth one contrary to the ſame: that ſuche as dyd attribute the ſupremacie to the Churche of Rome, did ground themſelues onely vpō the Biſhoppes decrees, whiche were made foure hundreth yeres ſyns. Which decrees are cōtrary to all Hiſtories written a thouſande yeres paſt, contrary to the holy ſcripture, and to the counſell of Nice moſt famous of all others. But Eccius mainteyneth the ſupremacie of the Biſhoppe of Rome, and called Luther which diſſented from the ſame, a Bohemer, becauſe Iohn Huſſe was in times paſt of the ſame opinion. Luther aunſwereth that the Churche of Chriſte was ſpreade abroade farre and nere twentie yeres before Peter came to Rome to eſtabliſhe the Churche there: therfore is it not the fyrſt nor the chiefeſt by the law of God, as he ſaieth: then they diſputed of Purgatory, of Indulgēces, of Penaunce, of Remiſſion of ſynne, and of the authoritie of Prieſtes. And ended their diſputation the fourteneth day of Iuly, whiche was not appointed for Luther, but for Andrewe Caroloſtadius & Eccius. But Luther comming onely for the company of Caroloſtadius, and to here: was drawen forth by Eccius, which had got him a ſaufe cōduict of Duke of George, ſo that he muſte nedes diſpute.
            For Eccius was of a luſtie courage by reaſon of the matter it ſelfe, Wherein he thoughte him ſelfe aſſured of the victorye. At the whiche

diſputation Luther ſet forth afterwardes. And of the wordes & wrytinges of his aduerſaries, throughe his wittye obſeruation he collected diuerſe articles of doctrine, altogether (as he termeth them) hereticall to thintent he mighte playnely declare, howe they, whileſt they ſpeake and write all thinges in the fauor of the Biſhop of Rome, and of a deſyre to maynteine theyr cauſe, ſtraiynge farre a broade, do confounde moſt thinges, which beynge nerer looked to, conteyne ofte tymes great errours & wickednes. At the ſame tyme Ulrichus Zwinglius taught at Zuricke, and ſhortly after the Byſhop of Rome ſent thither a Pardoner, one Sampſon a Graye Frere of Millan, to gather vp money, whom Zwinglius ſtoutly reſiſteth, declarynge him to be a diſceyuour of the people.
         
         
            ¶ The ſeconde Booke of Sleidans Commentaries.
            
               
                  ❧ The argument of the ſeconde Booke.
               AT the motion of Charles Miltice, Luther wryteth to the Pope: and dedicateth vnto him a Boke of the Chriſtian Libertie. Themperour hauynge paſſed throughe Englande, came into his lowe countreyes. Luther writeth a Boke of Fouretene Images of conſolation: of confeſſion: of Uowes: prouyng that the Lordes Supper ought to be permitted to all mē vnder both kyndes. There was obiected the Counſell of Laterane vnder Iuly the .ii. wherevpon by the way is ſpoken of Iuly his actes, and of the ſayd counſell. In the meane while the Diuines of Louayne condemne Luthers Bokes. In his defence, the articles of Picus Erle of Mirandula, the Queſtions of Ockam, and the controuerſie of Rewcline with the ſame Diuines are recited. Seyng him ſelfe aſſayled with ſo many enemies, he writeth to themperour, and ſhortely after to tharchbiſhoppes of Mentz and of Marſeburge. Duke Fridericke beyng aduertiſed, that he had cuill will at Rome by reaſon of Luther, he maketh his purgation by letters, & Luther in lyke caſe. And yet this notwithſtanding, the Pope by an extreme Bulle doeth excommunicate Luther, who (contrary to a decree of Mantua by the waye recited) maketh his appellation, hauinge ſet forthe in Print a Boke of the captuitie of Babilon. The emperour at the ſame tune goeth to be crowned at Acon, the ſolemnities and maner whereof be there recited. The Pope beginneth agayne to ſollicite Duke Fridericke agaynſt Luther, but nothing preuailyng he cauſeth Luthers workes to be burnt, and likewiſe Luther burneth the Popes Decretals. and ſheweth the cauſe why, afterwarde he aunſwereth Ambroſe Catarine, who had written agaynſt him.
            
            
               WHen Charles Meltice, that was ſent from Leo the tenthe vnto Duke Fredericke with the golden Roſe, perceiued howe Luthers doctryne was ſo farre ſpreade abroade, and ſo highly eſtemed of many, that it ſhoulde be hearde, and almoſt vnpoſſible to quench it, he ſought all meanes poſſible to heale the wounde with a plaſter of reconciliation: Wherfore after longe conferens

with Luther and his frendes, at the laſt the meanes was foūde, that Luther ſhould write his letters to the Biſhop, reportyng of hym muche honour. And ſo did he at the requeſt of his Frendes aboute the 1520 Luters letters to the Pope. ſyxte day of Aprill. The tenure of his letters was this: that albeit he had appealed from him to the Counſel. Yet neuertheleſſe he ceaſed not to make his prayers vnto God for his healthe: And for as much as he is ſore blamed, to haue hurt and offended his name and dignitie: he is hartely ſorye to be ſo charged, and this to be the cauſe of his writinge at this preſent: ſignifiynge that in dede he hathe bene earneſt in rebukyng of vice and errours, but hath euermore written of him right honorablie, as it is to be ſene in his bokes: And in that he doth ſo frankely taunte falſe doctrine, he doeth it by the example of Chriſte, his Prophetes, and Apoſtles: but that ſuch reprehenſions, and holſome admoniſhementes can as yet take no place, to be long of naughtie flatterers which tickle men in the eares: And that he regardeth gods glory, and The court of Rome is vnturable. ſeeketh onely that the truth might appere: if he may this obtaine, to be willinge ynough to giue place in other matters: but to leaue of the profeſſyng of Gods veritie, he can by no meanes. Then commeth he to the Court of Rome, as they call it, and ſayeth it is more corrupt & wicked, then euer was Sodome, or Babilon, and that there cā be no more miſchiefe wrought then is there, no not of Antichriſt him ſelfe, wherefore he is ſory that he is there as a Lambe amonges manye Wolues. For Rome is not worthy to haue ſo good a man to gouerne it: that it were muche better for him to be content with a meane benefice, or to liue of his owne landes and reuenewes farre from ſuche peſtiferous ſlatterers, whiche to ſerue their owne luſt and ambition, do depraue his name and dignitie: he addeth that Barnarde bewailed the ſtate of Eugenius, when Rome was better then it is at this preſent: but now for aſmuche as it is the moſt filthy ſinke of al the places in the Uniuerſall worlde, and a rakehell heaped of all miſchief, he ought much more to be lamented: And this to be the cauſe, why he inueighed ſo ſoore agaynſt it: whiche appertayneth nothing to his reproche, but rather to his ſaluation: and he would wiſhe that all learned men woulde ſet on with touch and nayle to ouercome that Monſtre. Touching the thing it ſelfe, whan he had ſet forth certeine litle bokes, and ſawe that his attempt was vayne, he was willyng to haue left of his enterpriſe, & imployed all his frudye to the profite of his bretherne in the ſame houſe: but than roſe vp Eccius, who diſturbed all theſe quiet cogitations and deſyred leaſure wherin he did nothing els but more aptely diſcloſe the ſhame & wickednes of Rome. After he toucheth in fewe wordes howe he was vſed before Cardinal Caietane, who (he ſaieth) might haue appeaſed all the matter if it had pleaſed him, vnto whom the faulte is to be imputed, if any thinge be a miſſe, & not to him: And that afterwarde

came Charles Meltice, who had quieted the kinge, had it not bene for the importune diſputation of Eccius, whiche prouoked him to reaſon matters agaynſt his will, and is in dede his enemie, which fyrſt of all men kindled this fyre. And nowe for aſmuch as he was requeſted, by Conditions propounded by Luther. Melticius & others his betters, to write to him in the waye of ſubmiſſion, he would refuſe nothing that appertained to reconcilement Firſt therfore he required him that his aduerſaries might kepe ſilence, & not raile vpon him as they did: ſecondarely that he were not driuen to recante, or bounden to interprete the ſcriptures after the preſcript of mā: for the doctrine of the Goſpell, which bringeth libertie to the myndes of men, can not be bounden within any certen limites: if theſe thynges may be graunted him, he is content to do any thinge: ſo that it lyeth in him nowe to ende the ſtrife, if he will vnderſtande the matter, & commaunde either partie to ſilence: But herein he muſt chiefely beware of Flatterats muſt be eſchewed. flatterers, and with a deafe eare, ſayle beſydes theyr ſonges as the enticementes or daungerous rockes of the Sirenes, which aſcribe vnto him a godlines, and affirme him to be the head of all the world, preferring him aboue all generall counſelles: for there is nothing more peſtiferous than is this kynde of Paraſites: but that he credite them rather which admoniſhe him of his dewtie; and put him in remēbraunce that The part of a true frende. he is a man, and this to be the dewtie of a very frende. Finally he dedicateth to him his booke which he had lately written of Chriſten libertie, commendinge the ſame in fewe wordes, for that it conteyned the ſumme of trew doctrine. In the begynning of the ſpringe time, Themperour taketh ſhippinge in Spaine to ſayle into Englande, where he was royally receiued of kynge Henry the eight, who had maried hys Aunte Katherine, which amonges other kyndes of his princelike liberalite builded a goodlye lodginge purpoſely for him vpon the Riuer of Themſe, called Bridewell, and from thens he ſayled into Flaunders, where he was ioyefully receyued of almen. About the ſame time duke Fridericke fell ſore ſicke: Wherfore Luther compiled a boke to cōforte him, and in his letters to him, he ſaith it is the cōmaundemēt of Chriſt, Luth. boke to the duke of Saronie. that amonges other workes of Charitie, whiche we oughte to do one for another, we ſhoulde alſo comforte the ſicke: therfore he which for ſo many cauſes was ſo greatly boūden vnto him, had for his ſake gathered this litle boke, beyng not otherwiſe able to comfort him: ſignifiyng that like as in mans body: if the head do ake, it greueth the reſt of the membres, taking the ſame to apperteine priuatly to euery of them: ſo nowe that he lieth ſicke, the people not with oute iuſte cauſe, are all in teares and mournyng: For the greateſt part of Germany doth depēde vpon him, and reuerence him as their chiefe ornament and refuge. Afterwarde he maketh a booke of confeſſion: where he teacheth that we Confeſſion of ſynnes. ought not to leane to the truſt of confeſſiō, but to the promiſe of God,

whiche forgeueth oure ſinnes. And that firſte of all we muſte confeſſe vs vnto God, that who ſo confeſſeth him, muſte hate ſinne, and couet to amend his life. That thereherſall of euery ſinne particularly is not neceſſary, nor poſſible to be performed wt diuers other things, and laſt of vowes, wherof he wrote a ſeueral work afterwardes. In an other certaine boke he had ſaid that he thought it expedient if by the authority of the counſel it might be permitted that all men ſhuld receiue the The ſupper vnder bothe kindes. whole ſupper, or as they vſe to ſpeke vnder both kindes. Which ſaying for that it was contrary to the decrees of the laſt counſel of Laterane, did offend many, and among others, Ihonbiſhop of Miſene, who cō
               maunded to be taught throughoute his dioces that the whole ſupper was compriſed, vnder one kinde, and condemned Luthers boke, whiche thing he vnderſtanding maketh anſwer in ſuch ſort, that he layeth not the fault thereof in the biſhop, but in certaine other vnlearned and troubleſome perſons vnto whome he ſaith, that this wiſhe of his, that ſuch a decre might be made by the counſell, deſerued no iuſt reprehenſion, no more then if he had wiſſhed that by a decree of the counſell, it The wiſhe of Pope Pius. might be lawfull for priſtes to haue, wiues, whiche Pius the ſeconde Biſhoppe of Rome, ſaide and wiſhed: Wherefore he oughte not to be blamed for wiſhyng the ſame: He graunteth this to be a Decree of the counſell of Laterane: But yet neuertheles the ſame to be contrarye to the fyrſt and eldeſt counſelles, and the aunciente maner of the churche: Agayne we diſpraiſe the men of Boheme becauſe they receaue vnder bothe kyndes, wheras we kepe vs to the one halfe onely, and yet haue they to make for them, the inſtitution of Chriſte, and the maner obſerued in the churche from the Apoſtels time til it was now of late daies: And we haue nothing to aledge againſt them, but the counſels of Laterane: whiche is a lighte and verye weake reaſon: for what maner of coūſel yt was, it is wel knowen, & euen laughed at of the Romanes thē ſelues: And thoughe it were of neuer ſo greate aucthoritie: Yet for as The counſell of Latherane. muche as they can not proue the thinge by any reaſon of more antiquitie it is but a very mockery. But concernyng the counſell of Laterane thus it was. Iulius the ſeconde when he was elected Byſhoppe, promyſed by a ſolemne othe, with in two yeares ſpace to holde a generall counſell, this was in the yere of our Lorde a thouſande fyue hundreth and three. But whileſt he made warre one while againſt the Frenche kynge, another while againſt the Uenetians, and nowe with the duke of Farrare, and nowe with others, and troubled all Italy. Nine Cardinalles departed from him and came to Millan, and called a general The counſel of Piſa. counſell at the Citie of Piſa, the .xix. day of May, the yere of our Lorde a thouſande fiue hundreth and eleuen, to begynne at the kalendes of September folowyng, the chiefeſt of theſe was Bernardinus Cruceius, William of Preneſte, Fraunces Coſſentine, wyth whome were

annexed the Ambaſſadours of the Emperor Maximilian, and of Lewes the Frenche king, which intended by the ſame counſell to depoſe him from his biſhopprike which he had got by briberye. And nowe for as muche as he had broken his othe, in that he had bene Biſhoppe ſo many yeres, and called no counſel, nor pourpoſed to do, they could ſuffer the chriſtian common weale to be no lenger deluded. And becauſe theſe letters coulde not ſaufly be conueighed vnto him, they ſet them vp in all his Townes in Italy, admoniſhinge him to appeare there in parſon at the daye appoynted. Iulius, vnderſtandynge the matter, maketh anſwere the fyrſt of Auguſt. That what time he was Cardinall, he deſyred nothing more than a generall counſell, whiche is well knowen to kinges and princes, & to the whole College of Cardinals: For euen for this cauſe was Alexāder the ſyxt ſore offended with him: And that he is ſtill of the ſame minde alſo: Howe be it that the ſtate of Italy hath of late yeres bene ſo troubleſome (and was ſo lefte by Byſhoppe Alexander) that there coulde be no counſell called in ſuche aduerſitie of time: After he cōfuteth their appoyntment for the ſhortneſſe of time, and the diſcommoditie of the place. For Piſe was a Towne torne and defaced with the warres of former yeres, and all the countrie aboute layde waſte. Neyther that men can ſafely repayre thither by reaſon of the warres betwixte the Florentines and them of Seue. Moreouer, howe they haue none Authoritie to call it, and that theyr cauſes alledged be moſt vntrewe. Wherefore he commaundeth vnder the paine of excommunicatynge, that no man obeye them.
            Then called he a Counſell agaynſte the nexte yeare, to begynne at Rome, vpon the ninetenth daye of Aprill, in the Churche Laterane: The Popes Shifie. Where vnto ſubſcribed one and twentie Cardynalles. For this (they ſaye) is euer the Byſhoppes policie, when they are afrayde of a Counſell, to appoyncte an other in ſome place mete for theyr purpoſe. After this he warneth the Cardinalles, that were agaynſte hym, to leaue of theyr enterpriſe, and come to Rome, offerynge them pardon: but after they would not come, he banniſhed them the xxiiij. of Octobre, and namely thoſe thre which I ſpake of, as Heretykes, ſciſinatykes, and traitours, ſendynge the copie of theyr preſcription to Maximilian, and alother kinges. And becauſe many Byſhoppes of Fraunce had ioyned them ſelues with theſe Cardinalles, he banniſheth them alſo, vnleſſe they forſake them, and within a certeine tyme make their p
                  ••
               gation. Againe, when the cardinals had diuerſe times riſed him to the counſell in vaine, and had ſytten eyght tymes, they ſuſpends him from al, as well ciuill, as Eccleſtaſticall iuriſdiction, commaunding all mē ingenerall, that hereafter they obey hym not. Thys was in the yeare of our Lorde, a thouſande, fyue hundred and twelue, the one & twentye of Aprill: The ſame tyme at Pauie, was Philippe Decius a Euntian,

excellently well learned, who ſet forthe a Booke in the defence of the Cardinalles cauſe againſte the Byſhoppe of Rome.
            Afterwardes Maximilian forſakyng the Cardinals, made a league with Iulius, and with Fardinando kinge of Spaine, and ſent to the Counſell at Rome, Mathew Lang Byſhoppe of Gurce: which at the ſametime was made Cardinal. But Lewes kynge of Fraunce which perſiſted ſtyll in his purpoſe, and had lately ouerthrowen the Biſhops armye at Bauenna, was ſtriken with the thonderbolte of curſing and hys Realme gyuen ouer to be ſpoyled. But after he had ſytten in the Counſell fyue tymes, he died the .xxi. daye of February the yeare of our Fraunce is offered to the ſpoile. Lorde a thouſande fyue hundred and thyrtene, and Leo the tenth dyd ſuccede him. Who continewed the counſel, and reſtored the Cardinals to theyr former dignitie. The counſell ended the .xvi. daye of Marche, in yeare of our Lord .M.D.xvij. In this counſell was debated, of the At Rome they doubt of the immortalitie of the Soule. Turkiſhe warre, of the reformation of the Churche; of the Immortalitie of the Soule, which was doubted of at Rome, and howe they of Boheme ſhoulde be reduced from theyr errours, whiche is the thynge that Luther ſpeaketh of here, for they receyued vnder bothe kyndes. Whileſt theſe thinges were done in Saxonie, the Diuines of Louain and Collen, condemne Luthers workes, written to Sylueſter Prierias, alſo of Penaunce, of excommunication, of indulgences, of Preparation Luth. Bookes condemned at Louaine. vnto death, as prophane, wicked, and worthy to be brente, and the Aucthor of them to be compelled to recante. Whiche thynge beyng knowen, Luther aunſwereth to euerye article of his doctrine. And in the preface lamenteth theyr ſtate and condition: For before, what time Capnio. Rewcline. they condemned Capnio, he had yet ſome hope of them: But nowe ſeyng there endeuour, to extinguiſhe the clere lyght and doctrine of the Ghoſpell, and growe euery day wourſe, God doubtles muſt nedes be greuouſly offended: for in caſe they ſhoulde thus procede, and no man ſhould bridle them of this lybertie, they would ſhortely condemne all bokes of Scripture, and decree what they liſte at theyr owne pleaſure: which thinge when he conſidereth, he can thinke no leſſe, but that eyther Antichriſt doth now reigne, or els will come very ſhortly: For theyr doctrine conteyneth no ſounde, nor certen thynge, but is waueringe in diuers opinions: he ſaieth moreouer that Williā Ockam was in time paſte alſo condemned by the Uniuerſitie of Paris, but now he Ockam. is receiued, and ſet bye.
            And lykewyſe Picus Mirandula, and Lawrens Ualla, whyche Picus mirandula. Lawrence Ualla. are nowe had in eſtimation: moreouer, ſayeth he, the Iewes were in tymes paſte, the peculiare people of God, but when they fledde from the lyghte of the Ghoſpell, and refuſed the benefyte of Chriſt, they were forſaken, and ſo gaue place to the Gentyles: So lykewyſe is it nowe a dayes, that ſuch as be Byſhoppes and Diuines, which do

chalenge and take vpon them the greateſt authoritie in the Churche, haue in dede no thinge elles but a vayne title, but others that be farre from the lyke oſtentation, more ryghtely maye chalenge that name: Brieflye howe they haue thus vexed at all tymes, all good and well learned men, yet dyd they neuer contende wyth the ſame, wyth anye ſounde or trewe reaſons, but rather by very diſceipte, crafte, and tyranye: As they dyd with Iohn Huſſe, and Hierome of Prage, the memory wherof ſhal endure for euer. But he marueleth at their raſhenes that they can not be ware by ſo many examples to blemiſhe thē ſelues, and other Uniuerſities for euer. For althoughe they had neuer ſo ſure a grounde, and alledged neuer ſo ſtronge reaſons agaynſt thoſe other famouſe men: yet touching his matter, they haue dealt bothe wickedly, and maliciouſly. For if he had ought offended, they might haue conſidered that to be the parte of a man, and haue vſed a certen leuitie in iudginge of hys doctrine: But where they be moued with fury to cō
               demne althinges without reſpecte, herein they bewrey theyr maliciouſe myndes, and ſpitte oute the poyſon of theyr hatred.
            They make great accompt of Ariſtotle, and will defende him what ſoeuer he ſayeth, be it neuer ſo contrary to our religion, they will make Ariſtotle. an excuſe and a glo
                  •
               e for him: but they depraue his worckes agaynſte all charitie, where as they be conſonant to the trweth, to declare their malicious and cankred hertes, where they oughte fyrſte to haue ſhewed his faulte, admoniſhynge him gently to haue reformed the ſame, and if he had not, then they might haue proceded as Chriſt hath gyuen in commaundement: But nowe they do no ſmall iuiurie to the Byſhoppe of Rome, to condempne a Boke dedicated vnto him, and with a certeine preiudice to reproue his negligence, but to be no newes, nor maruell that they committee ſuche a faulte agaynſte the Biſhoppe, ſeynge that they moſte malapartely do contemne the lawes of God.
            This Wylliam Ockam (that he ſpeaketh of) flouriſhed in the tyme of the Emperour Lewes the fourth, aboute the yeare of oure Lorde Williā Ockā. a thouſande three hundred and twentie, and amonges other thinges, he wrote of the power of the Biſhoppe of Rome, and in the ſame boke, he handleth eight Queſtions diuerſlye.
            Whether the office of the highe Biſhoppe, and of the Emperor may be executed by one and the ſame parſon? Whether themperor hath his authoritie of God only, or alſo of the Biſhop of Rome? Whether chriſt gaue aucthoritie to the Biſhop & church of Rome, that they ſhould cō
               mit to themperor and other Princes their iuriſdiction? Whether yt the Emperor beyng once choſen, hathe thereby full aucthoritie to gouerne the common wealth? Whether that other kynges beſydes the Emperour, and kynge of Romanes, for ſo much as they be crowned by Prieſtes do receyue anye aucthoritie of them?

Wherfore the ſame kinges be in any ſubiection to ſuche as do inueſte them. Whether that if they vſed newe ceremonies and crowned themſelues, they ſhould loſe their regall power, whether the election of the ſeuen Princes can geue as muche authoritie to the emperour, as doth the lawfull ſucceſſion to other kynges. And debatyng manye reaſons on both partes, he determineth cōmonly with the ciuile Maieſtrate. And vpon this occaſion mentionynge of Iohn the two and twenteth Byſhoppe of that name then lyuynge, who had made the lawes extrauagauntes, as they terme them, and had placed them wyth the Canon lawe, whiche, ſaieth Ockam are reprehended of many as altogether falſe and full of Hereſyes, and recyteth the errours, maruelynge that men of witte will geue any credit to them: howe beit this is the tyme, ſaieth he, that Paule wrote to Timothe, for the moſte parte of men nowe a daies, ſeke not for the doctrine of Chriſte, of his Apoſtles, and the auncient fathers, but hearken what the Byſhoppe of Rome willeth or commaundeth.
            As concernyng Capnio Rewcline, thus ſtandeth the matter, Iohn Phefercorne a Iewe that profeſſed Chriſtianitie had ſued long to the Emperour Maximilian, that all the Bookes of the Iewes myghte be aboliſhed, for that they were wicked and full of ſuperſtition, and were a hynderaunce, that they were not conuerted to Chriſtianitie: And therefore, that they ſhoulde be ſuffered to kepe none, but the Bible. Maximilian at the length commaundeth Uriel Archebyſhoppe of Mentz, that he ſhoulde appointe certeyne Uniuerſities, and Iames Hogoſtrate the inquiſitour, and Iohn Reucline to ſearche and conſult The ſtory of Reuchliue. whether it were mete and expedient for oure Religion, that, excepte their Bybles, all other Bookes ſhoulde be burned. This was in the yere of our Lorde a thouſande, fiue hundred and ten. Reuchline which was both a lawier, and right ſkilful in the Hebrewe tongue, when he had receiued the Archbiſhoppes letters, he wrote againe his mynde, and ſaid how the Hebrewes bokes were of three ſortes, there were Hiſtories, Hebrew bokes of thre ſortes. Bookes of Phiſicke, and of Prophecies, and theſe laſte to alſo of dyuers ſortes, in the whiche, albeit there were many fonde and ſuperſticiouſe thinges, yet are they for this purpoſe profytable for that they will ſerue well to confute their Errours and their dotages. This his opinion he ſente to the Archebyſhoppe ſealed: After that Phefercorne knewe this, he made not a lytell a doe, but ſet oute a Booke agaynſte him, callinge hym the fautoure and defendour of the Iewes. Reuchline in the defence of his eſtimation, aunſwereth him with another, by the which he offended certein vniuerſities, but eſpecially Collen: in the which were then of moſte reputation, Iames Hogoſtrate, and Arnolde Tōgre: who wrot an Inuectiue againſt him in like caſe as Phefercorne had done, dedicating ye ſame to thēperor Maximiliā.

And after that they wente to the lawe with him before the Archebyſhoppe of Mentz, and Hogoſtrate was plaintife, whome Reuchline, as his ennemy reſuſed: And firſt aunſwered the vlatter by attourney, and in fine came him ſelf to Mentz accompanied with diuers gentlemen and other learned men, whiche Ulriche Duke of wirtemberge had ſent with him: but after they had ſoughte, meanes to haue quieted the matter, and coulde not, he appealeth vnto Rome. The Byſſhoppe of Rome committeth the hearyng therof to George Palatine Biſhop of Spires, commaunding that no mā els ſhoulde medle with all. This notwithſtandyng they of Colon condēned Reuchlines boke and burned it in the moneth of February in the yere .M.D.xiiij. This did the Biſhoppe of Spires take in maruelous euil part: And becauſe the Plaintife beynge called at ſeuerall tymes, as the maner is, appered not, he geueth ſentence with Reucline, approuynge his Booke to be good, and condemneth this Hogoſtrate in coſtes and domage. But he, to the intent to make this ſentence fruſtrate, trauayleth to Rome. In the meane time his fellowes at home labored and wrot to Paris, and to Lewis the Frenche kinge, by the mediation of Erarde Marchiaue Byſhoppe of Liege, who was at the ſame tyme greate with Lewis the twelfeth. Wherofore the Uniuerſitie of Paris after longe debatynge of the matter condempned the booke alſo, as worthye to be burnte, and the author to be dryuen to recant, and thoſe Hebrews bokes to be brent in like maner as they haue bene in times paſt. This was in Auguſte followynge.
            The Duke of Wirtemberge had intreated them by his letters. And Reucline him ſelfe wrote vnto them gentely, for that he had bene there ſtudiēt, and ſent them the Copie of the Sentence pronounced by the Biſhoppe of Spires, but all was in vaine. When this Hogoſtrate had ſued at Rome three yeres, and could not preuaile, he retourneth home againe, as he wente. For diuers of the Cardinalles vnto whome Leo committed the hearynge of the matter loued Reuchline intierlye for hys excellente learnynge, and amonges others Adrianus that wrote a booke of the Latin tounge. He was alſo commended vnto them by Eraſmus of Roterodame, whoſe Epiſtles in hys behalfe do yet remaine. Before the menne of Louaine hadde publyſhed theyr ſentence of Luther, they tooke theyr aduiſe of Adriane Cardinall of Derthuſe in Spayne, a Hollander borne, and brought vp amonges them at Louaine, by whome they were boldned to do it.
            Wherefore when Luther had ſo manye and ſo greate ennomyes, Luthers letters to the emperor. he wrote an Epiſtle to the newlye created Emperoure Charles the fifte, and fyrſte crauynge pardone, that beinge a manne of ſo lowe degree, he ſhoulde attempt to write to ſo highe a Prince, he ſaithe the matter is weightye, that cauſeth him to doe it, and altogether ſuche

as appertaineth to the glory of Chriſt: ſignifying how he had written certaine bokes, whiche had procured him the diſpleaſure of manye, through no deſert of his: for he was broughte into this contention by his aduerſaries agaiuſt his wikhe had muche rather haue ſetten ſtill, but this hath bene his chief and only ſtudye, that the pure doctrine of the go ſpell might appere, againſt the falſe traditions of men: and that many good, and excellent learned men can beare witnes of the ſame: And this to be the cauſe of all the hatred, diſdaine, reproches, pearils, and diſpleſures, that he hath bene in theſe thre yeres: that he had done as much as lay in him that the matter might be taken vp: But the oftner that he ſought quietnes, the more were his aduerſaries offended: and where he hath oftentimes required them, to ſhew him wherin he had erred, and to teach better thinges, hitherto they haue aunſwered in maner nothing, but by railing wordes, and cruell iniuries: ſekinge only how to quench both him and the doctrine of the Goſpell: For the which cauſes he is now conſtrained to vſe the laſt remedy, and after the enſamples of Athanaſius to flie vnto him for ſuccour: beſechynge him; to take vpon him the tuition of the chriſtian doctrine, and to defende him againſte all violence and iniurie, till the matter be further knowen: that he will deſyre no defence, in caſe he be proued to maynteyne an euill cauſe: but deſyreth onely that the thing may be tried and knowen, and nothing to be determined before: That this apperteineth to his office, and for this cauſe hath he this highe power geuen him of God, to miniſter Iuſtice, and to mainteine right and equitie. And to defende the pore and weake, agaynſt the iniuries of the ſtronger. In like effect he writeth after that, to all the ſtates of the Empire, reciting in fewe wordes, howe vnwillynge he was to fall into this contention howe deſyrous he hathe bene, to haue it taken vp, what conditions he hath offered, and yet doeth the ſame. Not longe after he writeth to Luth. letters to the archbiſhop of Mētz. the Archebiſhop of Mentz, Cardinall, with greate ſubmiſſion beynge ſory, as he ſaieth, that he is complained vpon to him, by ſuche as were wont to praiſe his doinges. But he admoniſheth him to gyue no credit to talebearers, and to beware of Flatterers, by the example of kynge Dauid, diſceaued by the flatteter Siba, that he would ſet a part all ſiniſtrall ſuſpicion of him and of his workes, vntill ſuche time as he had leaſure to reade them him ſelfe: for there were two kindes of men that condemned his writinge, one was of them that neuer red them, another of ſuche as read them in dede, but with a malicious minde, & theſe did depraue his doynges: wherin if any man coulde fynde any errour and teache him that were better he woulde be glad to folowe it, and hathe oftentymes ſo proteſted: And for aſmuche as he truſted well in his great humanitie, and was borne and brought vp in the ſame prouince that he hath cure of, he coulde not but write thus vnto hym.

The Cardinall aunſwered againe, that it pleaſed him well, in aſmuch as he promiſed not to defende his doynges obſtinatelye, but that he His annſwere to Luther. would willyngly gyue place vnto ſuche as coulde reache better thinges: And albeit he delighted muche in Religion, yet had he no leaſure hitherto, to reade his workes, and therfore would
                  •
               iot Iudge of them, but leaue it vnto others that had taken the thinge in hande: Neuertheleſſe he would wiſhe that bothe he and other expoſitours of ſcripture, ſhould handle euery thing reuerently and modeſtly without any How ſcripture muſt be hadled reproche or enuie: he is ſory to heare that men diſpute openly of the ſupremacie of the Byſhoppe of Rome, of Frewill, of the Supper of the Lorde, and ſuche other queſtions, full of daunger: for his part he could be contente that learned men ſhould conferre of theſe matters frendly amonges them ſelues, & would not blame him for teaching the truth, ſo it be done without bitterneſſe and contempte of the Eccleſiaſticall power. For if he profeſſe the trueth of a good zeale it will continewe: but if he do it of preſumpſion, or of malice, it can not be permanent, nor longe endure. For he that abuſeth Gods giftes, heapeth vp doubtleſſe ſore vengeaunce vpon him ſelfe.
            Luther wrote alſo to the Biſhoppe of Merſebourge the ſame thing Luth. letters to the Biſh. oy Merſeburge. in effecte, that as touching his doctrine, he was of a clere conſcience: for he taught none other thinge than Chriſt and his Apoſtles did. But becauſe his maners and lyfe did not Aunſwere to his profeſſyon, he wiſheth that he were remoued from the office of preaching: He ſeketh for no lucre, nor deſyreth any vaine glory, but this thing onely that the euerlaſtyng veritie myght be knowen to all men. Such as condemne his workes, are moued with a maruelous hatred, and abuſe the Byſhop of Romes name to fulfyll their owne affections: Whereas many learned men of foren nations haue writtin to him letters reioyſyng at his writinges and geuing him thankes for the ſame: whervpon he beleueth the rather, that he hath taught a ſounde doctrine. Wherfore he requireth him to deale fatherly with him, & to ſhewe him his faulte, if he be out of the way: For hitherto coulde he not obteyne ſo muche as that the matter might be hearde, notwithſtandyng that he hath with His aunſwers to Luther. erneſt prayer required it: And now alſo a man ſhould do him no greater pleaſure, than to take from him his errour. Whereunto the Biſhop aunſwereth, that he hath bene oftentimes very carefull for him, & how he is not a litell ſory that he hath written amonges others a Boke of the Lordes Supper, wherwith are many ſore offended: And that the people vnder his cure are greatly inflamed with that doctrine, for the which he is chiefly ſory. After he reprehendeth in him the ſharpenes of his writing, & ſaith that albeit ſtraungers like it, yet can not he allow the ſame: but wiſheth that he woulde bringe a Chriſtian minde, voide of all affections to the handlinge of the matter: furthermore he chargeth

him to haue ſpoken vnreuerently by the biſhop of Rome, which
                  •
                thing neither becometh him, nor is mete to be ſuffered. Wherefore he admoniſheth him to applye the dexteritie of his wit to dthirthynges that may profit the common wealth more, and to leaue all thys bitter contention. Laſt of al, where he requireth that his error may be ſhewed him, and promiſeth to be tractable, he ſaith how he can not anſwer therto by wryting: but au other time when they ſhal mete, he wil talk with him more at large. Duke Fridericke at the ſame time had certaine 
                  •
               rtes at Rome, which he had commended to Ualentine Ditleb a Germane. He ſent worde that his matters were not well hearde at Rome; by reaſon of the raſhnes and leud demener of Luther, who had written many thinges bitterly and ſpitefully againſte the biſhop, and the church of Rome, and all the college of Cardinals, which fellow he nouriſhed and maintained, as moſte men affirmed. Whan the Duke had receiued theſe letters, he aunſwereth, that it was neuer his intent to defende Luthers doctrine by his maintenaunce, neither dothe he take vppon him any iudgement of the thinges that Luther teacheth: He heareth in dede that his doctriue is well allowed of learned men that can iudge therof, and that he hath long ſince made this offer, that if he may haue a ſure ſauf conduicte, to rendre a reaſon of his Doctrine before the Biſhoppes Legate, what ſo euer he be: and then if hys error can be ſhewed him to be moſte ready to forſake hys opinion, and thus hathe proteſted openlye. And althoughe thys myghte appeare to be ſufficient, yet being admoniſhed of hym long ſence; he wold haue forſaken the country, had not Charles Meltice aduiſed him to the contrary: For he thought it better that he ſhould remaine here ſtil, then to go to an other place, where perauenture hauing more libertye he mighte ſetforth worſe thinges then hitherto he hath done: wherfore there can be no iuſt cauſe alledged to ſuſpect any euil of him: and truſteth to fare neuer the worſe at the Biſhops handes therfore. For he wold be right hartely ſory that any erroure ſpronge vp in his time, ſhoulde be ſaid to be defended and eſtabliſhed by him. After this he deuiſeth wt him more familiarely howe the contention began by reaſon of Eckius & others, what excellent wittes, what good learning and knowledge of tōges do floriſhe nowe in Germanye, what deſire the common people haue to read the ſcriptures, how Luthers doctrine is infixed in many mens mindes, ſo that if he be vſed otherwiſe then well, it is like to ſtyrre vp ſuche tumultes in Germany, as will turne nother the biſhop or no mā els to any profit. When the Duke had thus written at the Kalends of Aprill, he receiued the, vi. day of Iuly letters from the biſhop of Rome, wherin he reioyſed not a little, that he wold haue nothing to do wyth Luther that wicked man, affirming that he had euer a very good opinion of him before this: But now foraſmuch as graue mē haue aduouched

it to be true, the good wil, that he bare him before, is hereby not a little encreaſed: For this thing doth rightwel become him, and all hys houſe, which hath euermore done great honor to the church of Rome: And that his ſingulare wiſdome doth alſo herein appeare, that he perceiueth him, not to be ſente of Chriſte, but of Sathan the ennemye of almankinde. Whiche, for a mad kinde of ambition reyſeth vp agayne the Hereſyes of Wiclife and Huſſe before condemned, whiche ſeeketh the fauoure of the people, and vayne glorye, whichs by the falſe enterpretatiō of Scripture, giueth to the ſimple an occaſion to ſinne, which diſpiſeth Chaſtitie, and ſpeaketh againſte Confeſſion and Penaunce, which beareth fauoure to the Turkes, and raileth againſt all the diſcipline of the church, which lamentech the puniſhemente of Heretikes, & to be briefe turneth all thinges vpſide down, which is growen to ſuch a pride and arrogancie, that contemning the aucthoritie of Counſelles and Biſhoppes of Rome, he woulde haue hys owne oppinion to take place againſt the iudgement of mē: Wherfore it is wittely done of him to haue, no familiarytie with ſo peſtilent a fellowe, nor to alowe hys errour. In the whiche thinge all graue and wiſe men do muche commende his vertue: And chieflye he giueth God hertie thankes, that he hath giuen him ſuche a mynde: affirming moreouer that he hath ſuffered and borne with his raſhenes a while, to ſee if he woulde amende: but now for aſmuche as he hathe nothinge preuailed with gentle admoniſhmentes, he is compelled to vſe an extreme remedy, fearyng, leſt throughe his contagion, he ſhoulde infecte many: Wherfore callyng a counſel of Cardinalles and learned men to debate the matter, he hath made a decree, by the inſtinction of that holy ſpirite, whiche neuer faileth the Churche of Rome, the copie wherof he hath ſent vnto him, to the intent he might ſee what monſtrouſe errours that miniſter of Sathan The pope curſeth Luther. defendeth: he wilieth him therfore, that, vnleſſe he do openly and ſolemnely recant with in the daye preſcribed, he ſhould commit him toward: for ſo ſhall he put away all ſhame from his houſe, and from Germany, wynne muche honor, and do God highe ſeruice. The decree is ouerlonge, but the ſumme is this.
            Fyrſt the Byſhoppe Leo callynge vpon Chriſte, Peter and Paule, and other ſainctes, to tourne awaye the daunger hangynge ouer the The Bulle of Leo. Church, moſt lamentably complayneth that now there ſhould ſpring vp a doctrine, conteinyng bothe the Hereſies already condemned, and alſo newe errours, and great wickednes: And that in Germany, that was wont to do ſo muche for the Churche of Rome, bothe longe ſins, and of late dayes, concernyng Huſſe and thē of Boheme: But becauſe the numbre of Chriſtians throughout the vniuerſall worlde, are committed vnto his charge by Chriſt, he can no lenger wyncke at ſo great a matter: After, reciting Luthers opinions, ſaieth, that they be againſt

Chriſtian charitie, and the reuerens that all men owe of duetie to the Churche of Rome, and agaynſte the counſell of the aunciente fathers: Wherfore by the conſent of his Cardinalles, he condemneth both him and his works to be brought forth and burned, and by the aucthoritie whiche he ſaieth he hath, he commaundeth all Mageſtrates, namelye in Germany, to ſe the thing executed accordingely: Then commeth he to Luther, ſhewyng with howe fatherly a loue he ſought to refourme him, howe he cited him to Rome, and promiſed him to beare his charges: And howe in contempte therof, he appealed from him to the coū
               ſell, contrary to the decrees of Pius and Iulius: And all be it he had The decree of Pius & Iuliꝰ. hereby deſerued the puniſhement condigne for Heretikes: yet did he of his clementie gyue him a longer time, if happely) as the prodigal child amended) through his owne miſery, he would retourne to the boſome of the churche: And to be yet alſo of this minde, yea and moſte hertely beſecheth him and his adherentes to trouble the church no more, promyſing them great good will, if they wyll ceaſe from theyr errours. Notwithſtandynge he commaundeth Luther to teache no more, preſcribynge him .lx. dayes, wythin the whiche time he ſhoulde amende, burne his owne bokes, and recante his doctrine openlye: if he did not, he condemneth him as an Heritike, & to ſuffer accordynge to yt lawes, he ſuſpendeth him out of the Church, commaunding al men to eſchew his talke and his company, vnder the lyke penaltie: and this decree to be red in all Churches & aſſemblies of people at certen dayes appointed. Touching Pius and Iulius, thus it ſtandeth.
            This Pius hilde a Counſell at Mantua, in the yeare of our Lord .M.CCCC.lix. chiefely becauſe of the Turkiſſhe warre: And there amonges other, he made a decree that no man ſhould appeale from the Byſhoppe to the Counſell, for that vnder the Coope of heauen, he ſaid there coulde nothinge be founde better then Chriſtes Uicar: And not longe after he ſuſpended Sigiſmunde duke of Auſtriche, for takinge the Cardinall of Cuſane priſoner: The duke appealed from him to the counſell: Wherfore the Byſhoppe did excommunicate George Heimburge the worker herof, commaunding the Senate of Norinburge to baniſhe him the Citie, and to ſpoile him of his goodes. Whiche decree was after renewed by Iuly to maynteyne him ſelfe agaynſt the Cardinalles that ſwarued from him, agaynſt kynges and princes, and the vniuerſitie of Paris, whiche vſed ofte ſuche refuge. This Biſhop Pius (called before Aeneas Siluius) was at the Counſell of Baſill, wrot Aeneas Siluius. euery thing, prayſing the decrees that there were made exceadyngly: But when he was auaunced to this highe degree of dignitie, he chaū
               ged his opinion, and would haue the counſell ſubiecte to the Byſhop. Honors chāge maners. When Luther hearde that he was condemned at Rome, he goeth to his former appellation, wherin he appealed from the Biſhoppe to the

counſell: And nowe forſomuche as the Byſhoppe perſeuerynge in hys Luth. impugneth the popes cenſure. wicked tyrrannye, hath proceded ſo farre to condemne him, nether called, nor heard, nor yet conuicte of Hereſye, he ſaieth, howe he appealeth from him againe to the counſel, chiefly for foure cauſes, for that he hath condemned him at his pleaſure, not hearyng the controuerſie: for that he cōmaundeth him to denie faith to be in ſacramentes neceſſary: that he preferreth his owne decrees and dotages of men; before the Scriptures: and for that he leaueth no place to anye Counſell. Wherefore he calleth him Tyrran, a proude contemner of the Churche, and fynallye Antichriſte: affirmynge that he will ſhewe and proue al theſe thinges, whenſoeuer it ſhall pleaſe his ſuperiours. And therfore prayeth themperour and other Magiſtrates to accepte this his appellation, for the defence of Gods glory, and the libertie of the counſell, that they would bridell his tyrranny, and thynke that the decree made concerned nothynge, nor that they would ſtyrre nothinge, tyll the cauſe were lawfully decided. Before he had thus appealed, about the .xvij. day of Nouembre, he had written a boke of the Captiuitie of Babilon, in the preface, Luth. booke of the captiuitie of Babilou. wherof he ſaieth howe he profiteth dayely more and more in the knowledge of holy Scripture: And howe a fewe yeares paſte he ſet forth a booke of the Byſhoppes pardons, and that tyme wrote renerently, becauſe he ſtoode than in great feare of the Romiſſhe tyrranny, and had it in great eſtimation: but now his iudgement is farre otherwiſe, and beynge ſtyrred vp by the prouocation of his aduerſaries, he hath lerned that the See of Rome, is nothynge els but the kyngdome of Babilon, and the power of the ſtronge Hunter Niutroth. Afterwardes he diſputeth of the Sacramentes of the Churche, and holdeth that there be but three onelye, Baptiſme, Penaunce, and the Lordes Thre Sacraſes. Supper, and then treateth alſo of the other foure, confirmation, order, Matrimonye, and Unction. But theſe he calleth no Sacramentes becauſe they haue no ſygnes annexed to the promeſſe, other ſacramentes, Which are properly called Sacrament. which haue no promiſe to thē ioyned (he ſaith) are but vare ſignes, & therfore thinketh that Penaunce can not be coūted in the numbre of thē, if we wil properly & exactly ſpeake, accordyng to the difinition of the word, becauſe it wāteth the viſible ſigne, & heauēly inſtitutiō. But after yt he had hard of the biſhops decre beſides the appellation before mentioned, he ſetforth thā another work, wherin he confirmed and mayteyned all his opinions, whiche Leo had condemned: In the meane time the Emperor in Flaunders hauinge ſet all thinges in ordre, appointeth the Princes Electours to mete him at Acon the ſixte daye of Octobre, there to be inueſted: but the priuces arritſing at Collen ten miles from Acon heard of a ſore plage there, wherevpon they wrote to the Emperour beynge that tyme at Louaam, that he woulde chouſe ſome other place: but the Townes melt whiche had beſtowed

great coſte in preparyng of theyr houſes, and victualles, with wordes did extenuate the force of the plage, encouraginge him to come, wherfore the Emperour perceuereth ſtyll in the ſame mynde, ſaying that he can not ſo lightly alter and breake the law of Charles the forth, which had thus ordeined it. Wherefore the xxi. daye of Octobre come thirther the three Archebyſhoppes of Menty, Collen, and Treuers, with the Ambaſſadours of the Duke of Saxonie, and of the Marques of Brā
               denburge. For the duke of Saxonie lay ſicke at Collen. The next daye they rode forthe to mete the Emperour, whom, lyghting of theyr horſes, they receiued honorably by the mouthe of my Lorde of Mentz: he anſwereth them as gently by the Cardinal of Saliſburge. Thus ioynynge together, they marched towardes the towne: Before the gate mete him the Paulſograue. The Princes Electors had about a thouſande and ſyre hundred horſes, ſome demy launces, ſome archers. The Emperour had two thouſand, al in gorgeous apparell. Iohn the duke of Cleaue had foure hundred horſemen fayre Armed, they contended muche with the Saxons, whether ſhould go before other, in ſo muche that the preaſe beyng great, the companies fayre and many, ſuche as the lyke hath bene ſeldome ſene in Germany, the night came vpon thē before they could entre the Towne, on eyther ſyde the Emperour rode the Archebiſhoppe of Collen and Mentz: next after folowed the Ambaſſadour of the kynge of Boheme, alſo the Cardinal of Sedune, Saliſburge, and Croye, and the Ambaſſadours of other kynges & Prynces: The Ambaſſadour of the Byſhoppe of Rome, and of the kinge of Englande were onely abſent, whiche was thought to be done of a ſet porpoſe leſt they goinge after the Princes of Germany, ſhould ſeme to diminiſhe the dignitie of them that ſent them. The Emperour was broughte into oure Ladies Churche, where after he had made hys prayers, he talked with thelectors a part, and ſo went to his lodgyng. The next daye they met againe at the church: where was ſuche preaſe of the people, that harueſed men had muche a do to kepe them backe. In the middes of the Churche hangeth a large crowne: the floore vnderneth was covered with clothe of Arras: vpon the which Themperour The maner of the Coronatiō
                laye downe gruflynge, whileſt my lorde of Collen ſaid ouer hym certaine prayers: whiche ended, the Archeby ſhoppes of Mentz and of Treuers, toke him vp and led him to our Ladyes anltar. Here falleth he downe agayne, and when he had ſayd his praiers, he was led into his ſeate fayre gilted. Tharchebiſhoppe of Collen goeth to Maſſe, and when he had a litle proceded, he demaūdeth of him in Latin, whether he wil kepe the Catholicke faith, defende the church; miniſtre Iuſtice, reſtore the Empire, defende the widowes, the fatherles, & ſuch others as be in diſtreſſe? Whether he will gyue dewe reuerence to the Biſhop of Rome? After that he hath aſſented, he is led vnto the aultar, and taketh

his othe vpon the ſame, and ſo retourneth to his ſeate againe. After this the Archebiſhoppe of Collen aſketh the Princes, whether they will perfourme and gyue him theyr faythe and allegeaunce? Whiche thing promiſed, and againe certein praiers finiſhed, he annointeth his Breſt, head, the boughtes of his Armes, and the palmes of his hādes: This done, the Archebiſhoppes of Mentz and Treuers, lead him into the reuſtry, and there apparelled like a Deacon, bring him agayne to his chayre. And after more prayers ſayde, Collen accompanied wyth the other two, delyuereth hym a Sworde drawen, and commendeth vnto him the common wealth. And againe, puttinge vp the Sworde into the ſkabarde, he putteth alſo a rynge on his fynger, and aboute him a Roobe royalle: Moreouer, he reacheth hym a Scepre, and an Appell of Golde, repreſentynge the ſhape of the rounde worlde. Then all three Archebiſhoppes together ſet the Diademe vpon hys head: And ſo led to the Aultare, he ſweareth agayne that he wil do the dewtye of a good Prince: Afterwardes they followe conueing him vp into an higher place, and ſet him in a ſeate of ſtone: There tharchebiſhoppe of Mentz ſpeakyng in the vulgare tounge, wiſheth him great proſperitie, commendynge vnto him moſte diligently him ſelfe, and his Peres, with all the ſtates of the Empire. Likewiſe do the Prebendes of that Churche, for he is choſen f
                  ••
               lowe of their Colledge by an olde cuſtome: When all this is done, the Organes, and the Trompetes blow vp myrthe and Melody. All theſe thynges behelde the Lady Margarate his Aunte, yt was 
                  •
               egent of Flaunders. Whan Maſſe was done, and themperour had receiued the Lordes ſupper, he dubbed as many knyghtes as were willyng. Which honor in times paſt, was wont to be gyuen onely to ſuche as had foughten manfully agaynſt theyr enemies, and was the rewarde of valeauntnes: And nowe the maner is, that kynges with the ſwordes drawen, ſhall ſtrike ſoftely, the ſhoulders of them that deſyre the ordre, whether they be of the nobilitie, or Marchauntes, that couet honour. From the churche they came, to the Palace, moſt ſumptuouſly hanged and arayed, where the Emperoure dined, and the Electours alſo, euery man by him ſelfe. For in the ſame hall were diuers tables ſet on eche ſyde the Emperours table. And the Archebiſhoppe of Treuers was placed right ouer againſt themperor, accordyng to the lawe of Charles the fourth. That day of an auncient cuſtome there is rooſted a whole Oxe, farſed wyth other Beaſtes: A piece whereof is ſerued to the Emperours table, the reſt haue the common people: Moreouer all that day there runne two Conduictes wyth Wyne, free for all men.
            After diuer thēperor retornyng to his lodging, deliuereth to tharchbiſhop of Mentz ye ſeales of thempire: the next day he maketh a ſupper

for the Princes Electours. And the daye that folowed, reparynge to the Churche, when he had hearde Maſſe, he worſhipped the reliques of Sainctes, and amonges others, as they ſay, a cloth that our Sauioure was lapped in when he was in his ſwaddlynge cloutes: After this, the archbyſhop of Mentz pronounceth that the Biſhop of Rome approuynge his Creation; doeth commaunde him hereafter to vſe the name of Ceſar. The electours beyng departed out of that contagious place, Ceſar taketh alſo his iourney and arriueth at Collen, aboute the fyrſte of Nouembre: from whence ſendyng letters throughe out Germany, he calleth an aſſemblie of the Empire at Wormes agaynſte the ſyxte daye of Ianuarye. Themperor calleth a coū
                  ſel imperial.
            
            As concernyng that which the Archebiſhop of Mentz ſpake howe the Biſhoppe of Rome had confyrmed the Emperours creation, thus haue they tourned Totnam into Frenche of late yeres. For in tymes paſt the Biſhoppes of Rome were wonte to be approued by themperours, when they were but pore: but encreaſed in wealth, they did not onely begyn to rule at theyr pleaſure, but alſo at the length brought it vnto this paſſe, after muche ſtrife and contention, that in dede they The Pope was ſubiecte to themperor permitted that the ſeuen Princes of Germany might electe hym, but ſaye, how it lyeth in theyr power onely to cōfirme and ratifie the ſame And this Authoritie haue they vſed many tymes, in maner throughe all realmes, but chiefly in Italy, Fraunce, and Germany, what tyme they haue put downe kynges, and ſubſtituted others in theyr place. For beſides other places of the Canon lawe, in thepiſtles decretall of Gregory the ix. Innocentius the iij. affirmeth, that the aucthoritie of choſyng themperor, was by the benefit of the Biſhoppes and Churche of Rome conueighed from the Grekes to the Germanes in the tyme of great Charlemaigne, and howe it is theyr partes to know & iudge, whether the perſon be mete. And yet not cōtēted with that, they haue alſo extorted his faithe by an othe from the higheſt Magiſtrate of the whole vniuerſall worlde. Whiche thynge hathe bene often tymes the cauſe of great warres, and muche other miſchief. And in fyne Clemēt The lawe of Clement. the fift bounde them to it by a lawe, who lyued in the yere of our lorde a thouſande and thre hundred. For wheras Henry the ſeuenth Emperour of that name, of the houſe of Lucemburge, woulde not after thys ſort be bounden, for that he ſaid it was a matter newly inuented, neyther vſed in former time: Clemēt for them that ſhould come after, openeth the matter at large, declarynge what is in ſame othe conteyned, (that is to ſay) that themperour ſhoulde defende the Church of Rome, that he baniſh Heretikes, and haue no company with wicked mē, that he by al meanes poſſible mayneteine the Dignitie of the Biſhoppes of Rome, yt he defend & kepeal priuiledges graūted to the church of Rome at any tyme, but eſpecially ſuch as were geuen by Cōſtantine, Charlemaigne,

Henry, Otto the fourth, Fridericke the ſecōd, and Rodulphe, that he chalenge no parte of the landes and poſſeſſions of the Church of Rome, by any maner of title or pretence. In theſe thinges (ſaith he) the Emperour is bounden to him. And that Henry alſo by meſſengers promiſed hym no leſſe, howe ſoeuer he diſſembled afterwarde: Thys decree came forth after the death of the Emperour Henrye. The ſame Clement was the firſt of all, that called forth the Cardinals frō Rome to Lyons, and kept his Court in Fraunce. Syns the whiche time the The courte of Rome in Fraunce. authoritie and power of Emperours hathe decreaſed in Italy daylye more and more. And the power and dignitie of Biſhoppes bene augmented, in ſo much that at theſe our dayes, and a lytle before our time, Emperours haue ſuppoſed, that they owe this faithe and obediens to them euen of bounden dewtie. But the chiefe of the Biſhoppes yt haue moleſted oure Emperours are theſe: Gregory the ſeuenth, and the .ix. Alexandre the thyrde. Innotentius the thyrde, and the fourth. Nicolaus the thyrde, Boniſace the eyght, and Clement the fyſte. Nowe let vs retourne to our pourpoſe.
            In the meane tyme that Cefar was yet at Collen, the Byſhoppe of Rome ſent Marinus Carracciolus, and Hierome Aleander to encenſe The duke of Saro. incenſed againſte Luther. the Duke of Saxonie againſte Luther, who ſpeakynge fyrſte in the praiſe of him and his familie, than tellynge of the daunger that hāged ouer all Germany for the deuiliſhe workes of Luther, demaunded of him in fine two thinges. Firſte that he would commaunde all his bokes to be caſte in the fyre, ſecondarelye that he woulde eyther ſee hym executed, or ſend him bounde to Rome: This was before Peter Bonhomme of Tergeſte, and Barnarde of Trent, Biſhoppes. They had alſo commiſſion that Ceſar, and all other Princes of Germany, beyng required of ayde, ſhould accompliſhe the Byſhoppes requeſt, who had committed, as they ſayde, to this Aleander and doctor Eckius the herynge of the matter. Duke Fridericke becauſe it was a matter of importaunce, axynge a tyme of deliberation, the fourth daye of Nouembre The anſwer of duke Friderike. maketh them aunſwere by hys counſell for that he hym ſelfe was otherwiſe occupied in the preſence of the Biſhoppe of Trent. Howe it is farre beyonde his expectation, that the Biſhoppe of Rome ſhoulde demaunde anye ſuche thynge of him, who hathe alwayes indeuoured him ſelfe, to do nothing vnworthy the vertue and dignitie of his aunceſtours, to do his faithfull ſeruice to the Empire, and his dewe obſeruaunce to the Churche. And howe he hath heard, that whileſt he hath bene frō home, Eckius hath gone about to bring in trouble, not onely Luther, but others alſo, of his dominion, cōtrary to the order & maner of the Canon lawe, whiche thinge as righte is, he taketh in euil part, that a priuate mā ſhould take vpō him to medle ſo muche in any other māsiuriſdictiō: What Luther or others, haue done in his abſence, ſins

the Byſhoppes decre was brought; he knoweth not, but he had neuer any thinge to do with his matter, neyther nowe will haue: Howebeit if he teache not rightly, he is the more ſory: Two yere paſt through his labour and meanes, he was broughte to Cardinall Caietaine at Auſpurge: But when they had ſpoken together, they coulde not agree, in ſo muche that Cardinall Caietane wrote vnto hym letters of complaint, which he ſo anſwered at the ſame time, that he thought he had ſatiſfied him, yea, and to take awaye all ſuſpicion, he would than haue put Luther from him, if Miltitius had not letted the matter.
            Moreouer howe oftener that, that the Archbiſhop of Treuers was appointed to heare the matter, and howe Luther wyll appere in any place when ſo euer he is commaunded, ſo that he may be aſſured, and maketh ſo large and great an offer, that no more can be required.
            This is the opinion of good and well learned men, that he hathe thus farre proceded, not of his owne accorde, but pricked forwarde of his aduerſaries: as yet he hath neyther bene ſo heard of the Emperor, or of any others, that his workes ſhould be ſo conuicte of Hercſye, that they ought to be burnt: or els would he already haue done the duetye of a good Prince. He requireth them therefore that they woulde not deale after this ſorte, but rather fynde the meanes that ſome Godlye learned menne maye be choſen, that ſhall frendely and quietlye heare the whole matter: that Luther maye haue a good ſafeconduicte, and that his bookes be not burned, before he hathe pleaded his cauſe. And if he can by the teſtimonies of Scripture, and ſownde argumentes be conuicted, than will not he holde with hys doynges: And although that bothe he and his cauſe ſhoulde take the foile: yet woulde he truſt that the Byſhoppe would requyre him to do nothyng but that might ſtande with his honoure. In all other thynges throughe Gods helpe he would do as ſhoulde become a Prince of the Empire, and an obdient childe of the church: What tyme this anſwere was geuen them, After ſome deliberation, they began to recite howe many thynges the Byſhoppe of Rome had done, and ſuffered, that Luther mighte at the length retourne into the right way: but that he hath kepte no parte of his promyſe. And that it lyeth not nowe in the Archbiſhoppe of Treuers to here the matter, for ſo muche as the Biſhoppe of Rome hathe taken to him ſelfe the ſame, to whom onely it apperteineth to be iudge in ſuche cauſes, the concluſion of theyr talke was, yt they ſaid how they muſt procede according to the Biſhoppes decree. And ſo not longe after they burned Luthers workes. Luthers bokes are br
                     ••
                  .
            
            Aleander was an Italian borne, right ſkilful in the Hebrew tonge: he was ſometyme a Reader in Paris, commynge to Rome, he grewe in eſtimation, and was firſt made Archebiſtoppe of Brunduſe, & after that Cardinal. To the ſame degre of dignitie came alſo Carracciolus.

When Luther vnderſtoode this, he calleth forthe all the ſtudentes of Wittenberge, and in the preſens of many learned men, he burneth the Luther burneth the Canon laws. Byſhop of Romes law and the decree lately publiſhed openly, the tēth day of Decembre: And the next day in his lecture admoniſheth al men that regarde theyr ſaluation, to beware of that Biſhoppes kyngdom. Afterwarde he ſet forth a boke, wherin he ſheweth the cauſes, why he burned the Canon lawe. Firſt that it hath bene an olde cuſtome obſerued at all times that naughtie and Peſtilent bokes ſhould be burned, a teſtimony wherof is yet in the actes of the Apoſtles: Moreouer that it concerneth his dewtie, that is baptiſed in Chriſte, whiche is a profeſſour and an open teacher of holye Scripture, to impugne wycked doctrine, and to teache men that is holeſome, and to plucke out of mēs mindes falſe and erronious opinions. And that the ſame apperteineth alſo to many others. And although yt they bryng letted eyther through ignoraunce, or for feare of perill do not that they oughte to do, yet can that be none excuſe to him, vnleſſe he do his dewtie. Moreouer the Biſhoppe of Rome, and all his rable are ſo obſtiuate and ſhameleſſe, that not onely they wyll heare no good admonitions, but alſo condempne the doctrine of Chriſt and his Apoſtles, and compell men to committe open Idolatry Furthermore he ſuppoſeth howe theſe booke burners Booke burners. haue no commiſſion to burne his bookes, no more than had the Diuines of Collen and Louain of the Emperour. Finally for as muche as his workes beyng burnt, and the brute therof ſpread abroade ouer all countreis, many will growe to be weaker and doubtfull, ſuppoſynge they were not caſte into the fyre withoute cauſe: therefore dyd he, ſeynge his aduerſaries paſt all remedy, burne theyr Bookes alſo, that he might therby erecte & confyrme the mindes of men. Wherfore he beſecheth all men that laying a ſyde thambitiouſe and proude titles of his aduerſaries, they would looke nerer to the thinge, that is, howe wicked and peſtilent opinions are conteyned in thoſe bokes of the Law. Which thinge that it maye be the better perceyued, of innumerable, he hath gathered a fewe thynges, whiche belonge to the reproche of almightie God, to the iniurie of the ciuill magiſtrate, and to the eſtabliſſhing of their owne tyranny: to the numbre of thyrtie places whereby he ſheweth that he had iuſte cauſe to burne them. Than prouoketh he them to ſhewe the reaſons wherfore they burnt his workes. And the cauſe why fewe or none haue in diuerſe ages paſt attempted anithing agaynſte the tyrannye of Antichriſt, he ſaieth, hathe bene, for that the Scripture hath prophecied, howe he ſhoulde deſtroy his aduerſaries, and haue the kynges to aſſiſt him. Seyng therfore that the Prophetes and Apoſtles haue tolde vs before of ſuche tyrrible thynges to come, it is eaſye to conſydre howe greate it behoueth hys crueltye to be.
            For ſo commeth it to paſſe ordenarily in worldly matters, that of the

beſt begynnynge of thinges procedeth the worſte ende. Whiche after he hathe proued by diuerſe examples, he inuergeth agaynſte the Citie of Rome, whiche beyng indewed of God with many benefites and ornamentes is vtterly gone out of kynde, and with her contagion hathe infected a great part of the world, that this the Byſhoppes ordinaūce is agaynſt the lawes, agaynſt good cuſtomes, nether is he to be ſuffered, for that he fleeth from lawful iudgement, for that he affirmeth him ſelfe to be aboue all lawes and iudgementes. I tolde you in the fyrſte Boke, how Sylueſter Prierias, wrote agaynſt Luther: whan he had anſwered him ſharpely, Ambroſius Catarinus an Italian toke in had to defende him: ſetting forthe a booke of the dignitie of the Biſhoppe of Catarinus writeth againſt Lut. Rome: to the whiche Luther aunſwereth at large, and interpretynge certen places of Daniell, teacheth that the Byſhoppes Tyrrannye is there paynted out, and proueth that ſuche thinges as he hathe prophecied of the kyngdome of Antichriſte, do altogether concerne the See of Rome. After this was Catarinus made Archbyſhoppe of Coſſent.
         
         
            
            The thirde Booke of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the ſtate of Religion, and the common Weale, during the Empire of Charles the fyfte.
            
               
                  ❧ The argument of the thirde Booke.
               DUke Fridericke obteyneth letters of ſafeconduict for Luther to come to Wormes, there to defende his opinions and writinges before themperor, and the other ſtates, and perſeuereth conſtantly, although themperor threateneth him wyth baniſhment, and the Pope had curſed hym in the Bulle of the Lordes ſupper. And the Prynces ſeuerally ſoughte to peruerté him. The counſell of Conſtaunce was ſet before his eyes, vpon which occaſion mention is made of Wycleſe, of Iohn Huſſc, and of ʒ iſcha a Bohemer, the Sorboniſtes condempne Luthers bokes. Whileſt the Pope and the Frenche kynge made a league with the Swiſſes, ʒ wmglius diſwadeth thē from takyng Penſions of thē. Luter beyng exiled by letters patentes, auoydeth. The kynge of Englande writcth agaynſt him. Pope Leo dyeth, Adrian ſuccedeth. Solyman the greate Turke hathe luckie ſucceſſe in Hongary. Commotions in Spaynè, themperor couetyng to appeaſe them, after he had treated wyth Englande, goeth thyther. The Byſhoppe of Conſtance perſecuteth ʒ wynglius. Troubles at Wittenberge, The Annabaptiſtes aryſe, for the which, there is an aſſemble at Norinberge. The Pope ſendeth thyther letters and Ambaſſadours. The Turke taketh the Rhodes. ʒ winglius hauyng ſet forth hys doctrine by certeyne Articles, is aſſayled by the Papiſtes, but in fyne the Ghoſpell is receyued at ʒ uricke.
            
            
               DUke Fridericke accompaniynge the Emperour The Emperour ſent for Luther to Wormes. to the aſſemblie at Wormes, had obteyned that Ceſar ſayde he would call for Luther, and heare his matter, whiche Luther vnderſtanding by the Dukes letters, wrote agayne aboute the latter ende of Ianuary, that he was exceadyng glad,  that the Emperor would vouche ſaufe to heare this matter, which in dede is a common cauſe: And that he ſhalbe content to do any thing that he may do with a ſaufe conſciēce: Wherfore he beſecheth him to prouide ſo, that he may be out of all daunger, that good and well learned men may be choſen for him to diſpute with, that he be not condemned, before he be conuicte of Hereſie, that in the meane time his aduerſaries may refraine theyr wonted rayling, and ceaſe from burnynge of his Bookes. And that in caſe he ſhall nede hereafter to enterpriſe anye thinges els for Gods glorye and the trouthes ſake, that he be not by the Emperor impeched herin, promiſyng not to fayle, but to come to Wormes whan he ſhall haue receyued themperors ſauffeconduit. Where he truſteth in ſuch ſorte to demeane him ſelfe and his cauſe before indifferent iudges, that all the worlde may vnderſtande, that he hath done nothing by rebellion, but for the common wealth, chieflye of Germany to haue taken al this trauell

to reduce men from many groſſe errours to the ſownde and pure doctrine. He deſyreth him moreouer that the Emperor and he woulde haue a regarde to the horrible bondage and miſerable eſtate of Chriſtientie oppreſſed throughe mere Papiſtrie. Wherfore Ceſar Collicted The Empe. writeth to Luther. by the Duke, wrote vnto Luther the ſyxte day of Marche. That for ſo muche as he had ſetforth certeine bookes, he was determined to heare the matter him ſelfe before the princes: wherfore theſe be to ſignifie vnto him that he hath free libertie to paſſe and repaſſe ſafely without any daunger, as more plainely doeth appere by the ſaufe conduict ſent here with: he commaundeth him therfore to take his iorney ſpedely and not to fayle to be with him within one and twentie dayes.
            The Byſhoppes of Rome haue accuſtomed on Thurſedaye in the Paſſion weeke ſolemnely to curſe and banne certeine kyndes of men. The Bul of curſyng. Fyrſt Heretikes, ſecondarely Pirates, then ſuche as eyther Reyſe vp new cuſtomes, or extorte that is forboden: Alſo ſuche as coūtrefeit the Bulles or Iuſtrumentes of the courte of Rome: Moreouer they that ſell any Armure to Turkes or Saraſyns, and ſuche other vnlawfull wares: They that let or hinder corne to be brought to Rome: they that hurt any man ſuyng or belongynge to the Courte of Rome. Furthermore all ſuche as worke any damage or violence to the poſſeſſyons or neighbours dominions of the Churche of Rome, as namely the Citie of Rome, Sicilie, Naples, Cardinie, Corf, Hetruria, Spolete, Sabine, Ancona, Flaminie, Campanie, Bononie, Farrare, Beneuent, Peruſie, Auenion. The former Biſhoppes haue named for Heretikes the Garaſians, Pateronians, the pore menne of Lions, the Arnoldiſtes, Speroniſtes, Wicleuiſtes, Huſſites, and the Fratricelles. Leo the tēth put to alſo the Lutherians, and curſeth them full blacke, this curſe is commonly called the Bull of the Lordes Supper. Which Luther got afterwardes, and tranſlated it into Duche, not without much myrthe and paſtime. When Luther had receued the Emperours letters, he went to Wormes with the ſame Heralt: but when he came almooſte there, there were diuerſe that diſwaded hym, puttynge him in mynde howe his bokes were brent, which was a certen preiudice of his condemnation, and howe the ſame might chaunce to him, as ded to Iohn Huſſe: but he with a ſtoute courage, contemned all perill, ſayinge that it was plainely the Deuyll that woulde put him thus in feare, ſeynge The conſtā
                  cie of Luth. that his kingdome ſhould quayle by the confeſſion of the trewth in ſo notable a place, ſo came he to Wormes the ſyxt day of April. The next day he was brought before the Emperour and the whole counſell of Lut. cōmeth to Wormes Princes. Where as by the Emperours commaundement Eckius the the Lawyer ſpake vnto him on this, wiſe. There be two cauſes, Martin Eckius to Luther. Luther, for the whiche the Emperor by the conſent of the Princes and all the ſtates, hath ſent forth, commaundyng me to enquire of thee

the ſame. Firſt, wherther thou wilt acknowledge theſe Bookes to be thine, and made by thee: Againe, whether thou wilt reuoke any thing in them or ſtande to the defence of all that is written therin? Luther had brought wt him a lawies of Wittenberge one Hierome Schurffe: Lu. pleadeth his cauſe before themperour and the whole Empire. he had that the titles of the Bokes ſhould be read and ſhewed: which done Luther briefly repeting the queſtions propoūded, as concerning my Bookes, ſaieth he, I confeſſe and acknowledge them to be myne: but whether I will defende all that I haue written, to the intente I make trewe aunſwere, and do nothyng raſhely, and forſomuch as the thinge is of weightie importaunce, I require a time to take deliberation. When the thing was debated. Albeit (ſaieth he) that thou myghteſt eaſely haue knowen by the Emperours letters why thou waſte ſent for, & therfore nowſhouldeſt ſeke no delay to anſwere, yet Ceſar of his clemencie graunteth thee one dayto take aduiſement, commaunding thee to be here to more we this time, do declare what thou wilte do herein, by mouthe, and not by writynge. For that he made this delay, many ſuppoſed that he would not be conſtant. When he came the next daye, Eckius ſayde vnto him: yeſterday thou wouldeſt not aunſwere to the ſeconde demaunde, but required a time, whiche myghte ryght well haue bene denied the: for euery man ought to be ſo certen of his fayth, that he ſhould aunſwere therto at al times: much leſſe ſhould a great diuine doubt or premeditate an anſwere: but what ſo euer the matter be. What ſayeſt thou nowe? wilt thou defend thine owne writinges? Then Luther addreſſyng his aunſwer to the Emperor and the Counſell of the Princes, beſought them to heare him paciently, and if he ſhould ought offende them, eyther in wordes, maners, or geſtures, vnſemely for ſuche a preſens, to beare with him: and pardō him for the kinde of lyfes ſake that he hath bene brought vp in, for of my ſelfe (ſaith he) I can witneſſe nothinge els, but that I haue taughte ſyncerly hitherto, thoſe thinges, whiche I beleue, do concerne the glorye of God, and the ſaluation of men: And as concernyng my bookes I anſwered yeſterday that they were made & written by me, but if any other hath added to any thyng, that will I not take for mine: Now to the ſecōde queſtion. The bokes that I haue wrytten, be of ſundrie argumentes. For ſome apperteine onely to the doctrine of fayth and vertue, whiche myne aduerſaries them ſelues do commēde. If I ſhould abiure them, I ſhould not play the parte of an honeſt man: others there be wherein I reprehended the Byſhoppe of Rome and hys doctrine, whereby he hath ſore afflicted the Chriſtian common wealth. For who ſeeth not how pitifully mens conſciens are vexed with his lawes and decrees? Or who can deny howe craftely and diſceiptfully he robbeth all countreis, and chieflye Germany, and maketh not yet an ende of hys rauenynge? If I ſhould aboliſhe theſe bokes, I ſhoulde confyrme their tyrrannye:

And it ſhoulde be the greater preiudice, to be done nowe by the authoritie of the Emperour and the Princes. The thirde kynde is written agaynſte certeine priuate men, whiche woulde defende the Romiſhe wickednes, and ſeke euery where to in trap me in the which I confeſſe to haue bene more vehement then became me, but I aſcribe to my ſelfe no holines, nor my profeſſion is not of life or maners, but of trewe doctrine: Yet wyll I retracte nothynge in theſe ſame: for in ſo doyng I ſhould ſet open a windowe to the arrogancie of manye: And yet I would not be ſo taken, as thoughe I toke vpon me, that I could not erre: but for ſo muche as it is the propertie of a man to erre and be diſceaued, I take for the defence of my cauſe that ſaying of our ſauior, who, ſpeakynge of his doctrine what time he was ſtriken of a ſeruāt, ſayeth: If I haue ſpoken euyll, beare wytneſſe of euyll. Wherefore if Chriſt which is all perfection, refuſed not the witnes of a moſt vile ſeruaunt, Iohn .xviii. againſt him. Howe muche more I that am a ſynner by nature, ſhould come whan I am called, to here if any man can teſtifie or bring forth any thing againſt my doctrine? Wherfore I deſyre you for the honour of God, if any of all you, haue any thynge to obiecte agaynſte the doctrine that I profeſſe, he would not hide it, but come forth and ſhew the errour by the teſtimony of Scripture: whiche thinge done, I will be ſo lytell obſtinate, that the fyrſt of all men I ſhall caſte myne owne Bokes into the fyre: And hereby maye a man iudge that I am not led raſhely or like one that were rauiſhed of his wittes, but to haue waied diligently the weightines of the thinge, and the troubles that are ingendred by this doctrine. And I reioyſe greatly, whā I perceyue that my doctrine is cauſe of ſo great offences. For Chriſt him ſelfe ſaith how it is the nature of the goſpell to ſtyrre vp ſtrife and contention, euen amonges ſuche as be ioyned moſt nere in bloud. Nowe therfore (O noble men) ye ought grauely and with greate deliberation to conſyder: and to foreſee leſte in condemnynge a doctrine throughe the ſyngular beuefyte of God offred you, ye be not cauſe of muche incōuenience that may therby chaunce vnto you and all Germany. You muſte haue reſpecte alſo that this newe Empire of the yonge Emperor here preſent be not made vnlucky and vnfortunate by ſome vngodly and vnprofitable example for our poſteriti. For it is to be proued by diuerſe places of the Scripture, that there haue Empires fallen into greate perils, what tyme the common wealth hath bene gouerned onely by counſel and mans wiſedome. Notwithſtandyng (moſt wyſe and honourable Princes) myne intent is not to ſhewe you what you haue to do: but I ſpeake this for the zeale I beare to Germany, which is our natife coū
               trie, and ought to be derer vnto vs than oure owne lyues. For the reſt I beſethe you to receyue me into your tuition and protection agaynſt the forſe of myne enemyes.
            
               
What tyme he had made an ende, Eckius with a ſtowning comutenaunce ſayd vnto him: Thou anſwereſt nothing to the purpoſe, noyther is it thy part to call agayne in queſtion ſuch thinges as haue bene determined intimes paſt, by the aucthoritie of Counſels: Thou ſhouldeſt make a playne and directe anſwere, whether thou wilte abide by thy writynges? Then ſayd Luther, for aſmuche as it is your commaud dement (moſt mightie Ceſar, and moſt noble Princes) that I ſhall anſwere directly, I will obey: This therfore is myne aunſwere, that vnleſſe I be conuinced by the Teſtimonies of holy Scripture, or by manifeſt reaſon, I can not reuoke any parte of that, whiche I haue written or taught: for I will neuer do that thynge that ſhould hurte myne owne conſcience: And as for the Biſhoppe of Rome, and the Counſels onely I do not beleue, nor admitte their authoritie: for they haue erred Pope & Coſt ſell may erre often tymes, and ſet forthe thinges contrary one to another. And they may erre and be diſceaued.
            When the Princes had layde theyr heades together touchyng this aunſwere: Then ſayd Eckius, thou aunſwereſt Luther, more vnreuerently, then it becommeth thee, and not ſufficientlye to the matter: of thy Bookes thou makeſt a difference: but in caſe thou woulde retract thoſe, which conteyne a greater part of thyne errours, Ceſar woulde ſuffer no iniurie to be done vnto ſuche as be well written: Thou diſpiſeſt the Counſell of Conſtaunce, wheras were manye noble and well learned men of Germany, and reneweſt the errours therein condemned, and wilt be conuinced by holy Scripture: Herein thou doeſt not well, but art farre abuſed: for loke what thinges the Church hath once condemned, the ſame maye come no more into any newe diſputation: for if euery man will ſeke for a reaſon of eche thinge, and he that ſpeaketh againſt Counſell muſt be reproued only by the Scriptures, there ſhall be nothyng certeinly determined. For the whiche cauſe the Emperour wyll haue thee to pronounce openly, what thou determineſt of thy Bookes. I beſeche you (ſaieth Luther) gyue me leaue to kepe my conſcience ſafe and ſounde: I haue anſwered playnely, and haue none other thinge to ſay: for vnleſſe myne aduerſaries can ſhew me by trew argumentes taken out of the Scripture, and take away my errour, I can not be quiet in my minde: for I am able to ſhew that they haue oftentimes, and ſhamefully erred: And for me to ſwarue from the Scripture, whiche is manifeſt and cannot erre, were a very wicked dede? the other ſayd it could not be proued that euer generall counſel had erred: But Luther ſayd he both could and would, and ſo they departed at that time. The next day the Emperour ſent letters to the Princes, ſyttyng in Counſell: ſignifiyng, that his progenitours had both profeſſed the Chriſtian Religion: and euermore obeied the Church of Rome: And now ſeing that Luther doth impugne it, perſeueryng obſtinately

in his opinion, hys dutie requireth that folowynge the ſteppes of hys aunceſtours, he defende the Chriſtian Religion, and ſuccor the church of Rome: Wherfore he wyll baniſhe Luther and his adherentes, and vſe other fitte remedies to quenche this fyre: but touching his promiſe, he will kepe it, that he may retorne home agayne ſafe and ſound: This Epiſtle was muche debated, and ſkanned amonges the Princes: And there were ſome that ſaide there was no promiſe to be kept with him, according to the decree made in the Counſel at Conſtance, but againſt that were manye others, and namely Lewes the Countie Palatyne, Prince Elector, affyrminge that it would redounde to the perpetuall ſhame of Germany. Wherupon diuerſe thought mete, not only to kepe theyr promiſe, but alſo not to condempne him raſſhelye, for that it is a weightie matter, conſyderyng how themperor, at theſe yeares is ſoone moued and exaſperated agaynſt Luther, by the Byſhoppe of Romes miniſters.
            A fewe dayes after the Biſhoppe of Treuers appoynteth Luther, to come to him, the .xxiiij. daye of Aprill: There were preſent Joachin, Treuers & other Princes threateneth Luther. Marques of Brandenburge electour, George Duke of Saxonie, the Byſhop of Auſpurge, & other nobles. And whan Luther was brought in by the Archebiſhoppes Chapplaine, and the Emperours Heraulte, Ueus a Lawyer of Badon ſayde vnto him: Where theſe noble Princes haue ſent for thee (Martin Luther) it is not to enter into any diſputation with thee, but to treate frēdly with thee, and priuatly to admoniſhe thee touching thine owne profyt. For the Emperour hath geuen them leaue ſo to do. And fyrſt it may be that counſels haue taught dyuerſe thinges, but not contrary: And albeit they haue erred, yet is not theyr authoritie ſo decaied herby that euery man may treade it vnder foote. Thy bokes (if it be not well loked to) wyll ſtyrre vp greate trouble. For many interprete the ſame which thou haſt written of Chriſten libertie, after theyr owne affections, to the entent they maye do what they lyſte. This worlde is nowe more corrupte than it hath bene here tofore. And therfore men muſt worke more warely. There be ſome of thy workes that can not be reproued: but it is to be feared, leſt the Deuill in the meane tyme petſwade thee, to ſet forth others agaynſte Religion and godlines, that ſo thy bokes may be altogether condemned. For thoſe that thou haſt ſet forth laſt, declare ryght well, how the tree is to be knowen by the fruites, and not by the bloſome. Thou art not ignoraunt, how diligently the Scripture warneth vs, to beware of the noone Deuill, and the fliynge Arrowe: that enemye of mankynde ceaſeth not to lye in waite for vs, and many times vnder a Godly pretence, intrappeth and leadeth vs awaye into errour. Therefore thou oughteſt to conſider bothe thine owne ſaluation and other mens, and it would become thee to foreſee, leſt ſuche as Chriſt hath through hys

death redemed from death euerlaſtynge, beyng through thy faulte, bokes, and prechinges ſeduced from the Churche periſhe againe, the dignitie of the which Church all men ought to acknowledge reuerently. For in all the world is there nothing better, thā the obſeruation of the lawes. And lyke as no cōmō weale conſiſteth wtout lawes: euen ſo vnleſſe the moſte holy decrees of our forefathers be reuerently kept, there ſhall be nothing more troubleſome than the ſtate of the Church, which ſhould be moſt quiet and ſtable. Theſe noble and vertuouſe Princes here preſent, for the ſingular zeale they beare to the commō weale, and for thy cauſe and wealth alſo, thoughte good to admoniſſhe thee of all theſe thinges. For doubtles if thou wylte perſeuer thus obſtinatlye in thine opinion, and not relent, the Emperour wyll banniſhe thee out of the Empire, and wyll forbyd thee to haue anye reſtynge place of Germany, to the ende thou maieſt the better conſyder thine owne ſtate.
            Wherunto Luther replied: For this your great good will and gentlenes Luthers anſwer to the Princes. (moſt noble Princes) ſhewed vnto me, I gyue you moſt hertye thankes: for certenlye I am a man of a baſer ſorte than that it ſhoulde beſeme ſo noble men to take ſuche paines for me: But as concernynge the Counſels, I do not reprehende all, but chiefly that of Conſtaunce, and haue iuſte cauſe ſo to do: For Huſſe defyned the Churche to be the fellowſhippe of Gods electe, bothe this and that ſaying of his, he beleued the holy Churche, they condemned alſo, more worthy them ſelues to be condemned: for he ſpake bothe truely and like a Chriſten man. Therfore I will ſuffer any puniſhement, yea ſpend my life ſooner than I will ſwarue from the manifeſt worde of God: for we muſte rather obey God then men, touching the offence that connneth by my bookes I neyther can, nor ought to eſchewe. For the offences of Charitie and The offenca of Faith and maners. of faythe differ much, wherof that which conſiſteth in life and maners muſt in anye wyſe be auoyded: but thother whiche cleaueth to Godes worde is not to be regarded: for the trewth, will, and commaundemēt of the heauenly father muſt be accompliſhed, though the whole world ſhould be offended: The Scripture calleth Chriſt himſelfe the ſtone of offence. And the ſame appertayneth alſo likewiſe to all ſuche as preach the Goſpell: I knowe that we ought to obey lawes and Magiſtrates, and ſo haue I euermore taught the people alſo, & my writinges do ſufficiently beare witnes howe muche I do aſcribe to the dignitie of the lawes. But as touchyng the decrees of the churche, there is an other conſideration to be had. For if Gods word were taught ſincerely if the Biſhops & paſtours of the church did their dewtie, like as Chriſt & his apoſtles haue ordeined, it nede not to impoſe vnto mēs mindes & conſciēces yt heauie & intollerable burthē of mens traditiōs. Moreouer I am ignorāt not how ye ſcripture admoniſheth vs to refrain our own affectiōs, which thīg is truely ſpoken, & I wilbe glad to perfourme it,

neither will I do any thinge obſtinately: ſo that I may onely profeſſe the doctrine of the goſpel. Whan he had ſayd thus, he was cōmaunded to depart. Whan they had conſulted of the matter, Ueus amonges other thinges began to perſwade him to ſubmitte his writynges to the knowledge of the Emperour and the princes: content (ſaith he) I wil neuer ſeme to refuſe the iudgemēt of Ceſar, and the ſtates of thempire, ſo it maye be done by Scripture, and Gods worde, whiche maketh ſo much for me, that vnleſſe the ſame do reproue my errour, I can not forſake mine opinion: For Paule commaundeth not to beleue an Aungel comming from heauen, if he bringe an other doctrine. Wherfore he beſecheth the Princes, that he might kepe a ſaufe conſcience, which if by theyr mediation to the Emperour he mighte obtayne, he was content to do any thing. Then ſaid the Marques of Brādenburge: Wilt thou not geue place except thou be conuict by Scripture? No in dede (ſaieth Luther) or els by manyfeſt reaſons. Wherfore when the counſell was broken vp, the Archbiſhoppe of Treuers toke him a parte, and began to admoniſhe him againe, but it might not preuaile. The next day alſo he moued him to commit the iudgement vnto Ceſar, and to the ſenate of Princes, without conditiō: But it was in vaine. At the after noone the Biſhoppe and certeine others required him at the leſt, to ſubmitte his workes to the nexte generall counſell. He agreeth therunto, ſo that the matter be handled by the Aucthoritie of Scripture. After this the Archbiſhop in priuate talke with him alone, demaunded of him what remedy would helpe this greuous diſeaſe? (He ſayde) the beſt counſell is, that Gamaliel in tymes paſt gaue to the Scribes, and Phariſeis, and not to contende with God. In fyne when he coulde not preuaile, Actes .v. he letteth him depart gently, and ſayd he would deuiſe for him, that he ſhould retourne home by ſaufeconduicte.
            And not longe after commeth Eckius the Lawier, and ſaieth vnto him: For aſmuche as thou haſt refuſed the admoniſhmentes of Ceſar, and the Princes, the Emperour from hence forth will do as to his office apperteineth, and now commaūdeth thee, to depart hence immediatly, graunting thee one and twentie dayes for thy retourne: & looke what promiſe he made thee, the ſame wil he kepe vnbroken: charginge thee moreouer yt in thy retourne home, thou ſtyrre vp no people by the way, neither by word, nor writing. On this wiſe beyng ſuffered to depart, Luth. ſent awaye ſcom Wormes. he gaue the glory vnto God. By the way he wrote to thēperour, and to the reſidew of the Princes & ſtates, repeting the whole actiō at few words, requiring thē that for ſo much as he hath, & euer wil ſeke a quiet agrement, & deſireth nothing els, but yt the matter maye be indifferently heard & iudged by Scripture: they wold defende him frō the force of his enemies, for yt it is not his priuate cauſe, but cōmō to al the world, & namely Germany, whoſe weale he eſtemeth more thā his life.
            
               
For as muche as oftentimes mention hath bene made of Huſſe, of the Counſell of Conſtaunce and of the Bohemers, I ſhall brieflye declare the matter. Iohn Wickliffe liued in Englande about the yere of Iohn Wicl
                     •
                  ffe an Engliſhe man. our Lord .M. CCC .xciij. Who wrote many thinges agaynſt the See of Rome, which were brought afterwardes into the lāde of Boheme. Prage was thē a noble Uniuerſitie: And there flouriſhed Iohn Huſſe a Doctor of Diuinitie, who in his lectures and ſermons ſet forthe and Iohn Huſſe a Bohemer. taught Wicliffes doctrine, to be holeſome and godly; beyngt accuſed of the ſame to the Byſhoppe of Rome, Alexander the fyfte, he is cited. He by his procurers ſheweth cauſes why he coulde not come: Wencelaus alſo the king, entreateth for him, and requireth that he would ſend his Legates into Boheme to vnderſtand the matter: but yt was in vaine. Wherefore Huſſe condemned at Rome for an Heritike, ſetteth forthe a writing, wherin he appealeth from the Biſhoppe, to the Iudge Chriſt.
            The church of Rome was yt time full of trouble, for the Cardinals Huſſe appealeth from the Pope. beyng deuyded, had choſen three Byſhoppes at once, Gregory the .xij. Benedicte the .xiij. and Iohn the .xxiij. Which thinge Themperor Sigiſmſide, & other kynges were right ſory for. And cauſed Biſhop Iohn to ſommon a counſell at Conſtance: And Sigiſinunge the brother of kynge Wencelaus, called thither Iohn Huſſe ſendyng him a ſafe conduicte The Coūſel of Cōſtaūce. in moneth of Octobre, in the yere .M.CCCC.xiiij. Whereupon Huſſe accompanied with diuerſe gentlemen, come vnto Conſtance the thirde day of Nouembre: But three weekes after when he came to the priuate talke of the Biſhop and his Cardinalles, he was deteined priſoner. Thēperour was then abſent, which beyng certified of the thing came thyther in greate diſpleaſure: But when they had borne him in hande, that there is no promiſe to be kept with Heretikes, he was not onely content (albeit that the Bohemers made oftentimes greate ſute to him) not to kepe his promiſe, but alſo was the fyrſt that ſpak bitterly againſt him. Finally the ſyxt day of Iuly in the yere followynge the Synnode condemned him as an Heretike and a ſedicious parſon, his his workes alſo to be burſit. And thus beyng condemned he was deliuered Iohn Huſſe & Hierome of Praga burned. to thēperour and burned. And his aſhes were caſt into the riuer of Rhine, leſt any reliques of him ſhold remayne. After him Hierome of Prage a Scolar of his was in lyke maner executed. In this Counſell beſydes Themperour were the Ambaſſadours of ſondry kynges, thre Princes Electours, Lewes countie Palatine, Raffe duke of Saxonie and Fridericke Marques of Brandenburge: And a greate numbre of other Princes: Three Patriarches, of Aquileia, Antioche, and Cōſtantinople .xxviij. Cardinalles, and an .Civ. Byſhops, Diuines & Lawiers very many, Italians: Germaines, Frēchmen, Engliſhmē, Hūgariās, Polonians. Here was the doctrine of Wicliffe condemned, & a decree made that his body in Englande ſhould be taken vp, and brent.
            
               
Furthermore it was decreed that prieſtes onely ſhould receiue the hole ſupper of the Lord, al others to be content with one kind. Which thinge Huſſe had impugned. There was alſo a lawe made, that there ſhould be no promiſe kepte with Heretikes, or ſuſpected of Hereſye, albeit that they came to the counſell to be examined, by the Emperours ſaufeconduicte. Fynally the three Byſhoppes were depoſed, and by cō
               mon Thre Popes depoſed. aſſent was choſen Martin the fyfte of that name. Whan it was reported in Boheme of the death of Huſſe and Hierome, there aroſe a tumulte, and after, alſo a verye bloudy and crewell warre, by the conduicte of Iohn Ziſcha, in ſo muche that Sigyſmunde was conſtrayned to require the aide of the Empire. But their moſte crueltie was wrought againſt priſtes, for the hatred of the Biſhop of Rome, whoſe tirranny they had ſhaken of, and receiued the doctrine of Huſſe. About this time, the Diuines of Paris condemned Luthers Bokes, gatheryng out of the ſame certein titles as be theſe, of the Sacramentes, of The Diuines of Paris condempne Luth. bokes. theccleſiaſtical lawes, of vowes, of contrition, abſolution, ſatiſfaction, Purgatory, frewyll, and ſuche like, admoniſhyng all men that profeſſe Chriſt, to beware of ſuche Heretykes, which vnder flattering wordes exhibite preſent poyſon, as Wiclyffe, Huſſe, and Luther, as thoughe it were like that they could ſee more then all others, or that it were to be thoughte, that Chriſte woulde haue ſuffered his onelye ſpouſe to haue wandered ſo longe in the darkenes of Errours. And ſo in recytyng of his bokes, they ſhew in which opinions, what Heretikes Luther foloweth, wherfore (ſay they) ſeyng it apperteyneth chiefly to our profeſſiō, to ſuppreſſe the errours that ſpring vp, finding his doctrine to be pernicious, we cōdēne his Bokes to be brent, & him ſelf to be forſed to recāt.
            To this decree of theyrs aunſwereth Philip Melanchthon, and after Thauthoritie of the Diuines of Paris. that Luther him ſelfe, but ſkoffyngly. Notwithſtandyng the Diuines of Paris take vpon them herin to be the chiefe in all Europe: they haue two principall Colledges, Sorbone and Nauare. The Bachelars of Diuinitie are exerciſed in diſputations all the ſomer time, & by the ſpace of .xij. houres, muſt they anſwere to all mēs argumētes. Here be maruelous cōtentions, & for the moſt part either of very trifles, or of thinges farre exceadyng mans capacitie, they be clamorous aboue meaſure, but their ſtrife is cōmonly ended by the hiſſyng & clapping of theyr Auditors, what time the one of the diſputers is either to fōde or to tedious, The Doctors of Diuinitie ſtāde in the lateſſe windowes, & hearkē, they are called magiſtri noſtri, they be the Cēſours, & iudges of all doctrine, & plainely poſſeſſe a kingdō. For no man dare publiſhe any thing touching Diuinitie, but through their permiſſion, Leo the .x. had The Swyſſes make a league wyth the Frenche kynge. already made a league wt the Swyſes, yt if he had nede at any time he ſhold haue theyr aide. The kīg of Fraūce in like caſe, which before had cōcluded a peace with thē, laboured thē to aide him wt mē for his mony

Zwinglius in his ſermons diſwaded them from the ſame, declaringe vnto them howe vile, and howe wicked a thing it is to ſerue a foreine Prince for money, he exhorted them therfore to folow the frugalitie of their elders, whiche kepte cattel and occupied huſbandry, and yet had done many goodly exploictes, but all this was in vaine. For the chiefe of them corrupted wyth bribes, perſwaded the reſte to make a league alſo with the kinge, and aide him with men. Saue they onely of Zuricke perſwaded by Zuinglius, refuſed it, and made an othe, that they would neuer take wages nor ſtypende of anye Prince, to ſerue him in his warres. After this was borne the kynges ſonne Charles, whome Thirtene townes of Swyſſes. the Swyces ſendynge theyr deputies, Chriſtened at the Fonteſtone. The Heluetians or Swiceſſe, conſiſte of thirtene Townes, Zuricke, Bernes, Lucerna, Ura, Swite, Unterualde, Tugie, Glarea, Baſille, Solodure, Friburge, Schafuſiane, and Apecelle. Theſe are ioyned in a moſt ſtraite leage by an othe, vſynge one and the ſame law, and gouerne as it were in common theyr common weale.
            The fyrſt of all that made this leage, were the Uranites, the Swyces, and Unterualdians, what tyme they expulſynge their nobilitie The libertie of the Swyſſes. (vnder whome they were oppreſſed) procured their owne libertie. This was in the yere of our Lorde .M.CCC.xv. After came vnto thē they of Lucerne next them the Tugians, in the ſyxte place the men of Zuricke, and laſt they of Bernes and of Baſille. Than ioyned wyth them in ſocietie (but not in the ſame lawes nor ſo great frendſhippe) the Rhetians, Lepontians; Sedunites, Ueragrites, Sangallians, Mulluſians, and they of Rotuuille.
            The Emperour beyng now paſt one & twenty yeres of Age, baniſheth Luther by a common decree, the eyght day of May, takyng the begynning therof, of his owne parſon, for that it was his part and office, Luib. is ontlawed by the Emperour. not onely to eſtabliſhe and augment the Empire, but alſo to foreſe that no blemiſhe nor Hereſye ſhould ſpringe vp within the limittes of the ſame. And that his Progenitours in dede haue bene diligent men herin. Wherfore it is mete that he, vnto whō God hath giuen ſo large and ample dominiōs, ſhould folow their ſteppes: for vnleſſe he ſhould puniſhe nowe the Hereſyes lately ſpronge vp in Germany, he ſhoulde bothe hurte his owne conſcience, & in the beginning now of his reigne ſore blemiſſhe his name and dignitie: that it is well knowen vnto all men, what wicked doctrine Luther hathe ſpread abroade nowe theſe three or foure yeres, agaynſte the Byſhoppe and Churche of Rome, againſt the decrees of the auncient fathers, and namely againſt the coū
               ſel of Conſtance, to the great reproche of thēperor Sigiſmūde and the Princes of Germany yt were there preſent: Wherfore ſyns that in hys bokes is nothing els conteined but ſedition, diſcorde, warre, murther, and miſchief, ſo yt he appereth not to be a man that wrote thē, but rather

a Deuil in a mans likenes: He for the zeale that he beareth to the common wealth and the dignitie of the Biſhoppe of Rome doth condemne, and proſcribe him as aucthor of Sciſmes, as a manyfeſt and an obſtinate Heretike, commaundynge all men vnder a great penaltie ſo to accepte him, and after thre weekes wherin he gaue him leaue to retourne, to apprehende him, and bringe him vnto him: and al ſuch as ſhall fauour or aide him in his doynges, he baniſheth in like caſe: he commaundeth alſo his Bokes ſhould be brent, appoyntynge a greate penaltie herafter for the Stationers, commaunding this decree of his which he ſayeth was made by the common conſent, and aſſent of the Princes, to be well obſerued. Men ſay how this decree was made by a very fewe, for diuerſe of the Electours confeſſed that they were not made priuie to it, as ſhall be declared hereafter of the Archebyſhoppe of Collē. The Archbiſhoppe of Mentz beyng Chauncelour of the Empire maye do muche in ſuch matters. But how ſo euer it came to paſſe the Emperour hereby wanne muche fauoure, in ſo muche that the Biſhoppe of Rome, cleane forſakynge the Frenche kynge, made a league with him, as ſhall be declared hereafter.
            From the tyme of this publication, Duke Fridericke appointed certein of his nobilitie, whom he eſpecially truſted, to conueighe Luther Luth. is conuetghed out of daunger. out of the way, in to ſome ſecrete place, that he might eſchewe the daū
               ger, whiche thinge was done bothe diligently and cloſelye. In this carefulnes Luther wrote diuerſe epiſtles to his Frendes, and alſo bokes, concernyng the abrogating of the priuate Maſſe, whiche he dedicateth Sunday bokes of Luth. to his brethren the Auſten Freres: of Religious Uowes, to his father Iohn Luther, and a booke agaynſt Iames Latomus a Doctor of Louaine. The Auſten Freres beganne nowe fyrſte of all men to leaue of Maſſyng, and for that cauſe Luther compiled this Booke for them, that he might encourage the weake, and confyrme the ſkylfull, exhortinge them muche to perſeuer in the ſame purpoſe.
            Whiche thinge knowen, Duke Friderick fearing that ſome great trouble or commotion ſhould arriſe therof, commaunded that the opinion of the whole Uniuerſitie herein ſhould be knowen and brought vnto him: The Uniuerſitie choſe iiij. for the ſame purpoſe, Iuſtus Ionas, Of themaſſe to be aboliſſhed. Philip Melanchthon, Nyclas Amſtorfe, and Iohn Dulce. Who conferryng with the Auſten Freres, brought worde what theyr intēt was. And furthermore declared what an iniury was done to the lordes Supper. Wherfore they beſeche the Prince that he would aboliſh ſo great a wickednes, not out of one Churche onely, but alſo in all places, and ſet vp the trew vſe of the Lordes Supper, accordyng to Chriſtes commaundement, and the maner of the Apoſtles, ſtoutly contemnyng al the reproches of the aduerſaries: for it hath euerbene ſene, that who ſo taketh in hande to maynteine the trew doctrine of the Goſpel,

muſt ſuffre many thinges: and that he ought greatly to foreſee, that he accept reuerently this preſent gifte of God, wherwith he is chiefly adorned, by reaſon of the lyght of Ghoſpell; ſpronge vp amonges his people. Wherunto the Duke anſwered, that he would leaue nothing vnattempted that might be for Gods glory: but for ſo muche as the thing is ful of difficultie, he thinketh good not to beto haſtie, for litel it is that ſo fewe can bringe to effect: but in caſe the matter be grownded on the Scriptures, they ſhall doubtles haue mo to take theyr parts. And thē ſhall that alteration, which ſhall ſeme both Godly and neceſſary, more conueniently be brought to paſſe: For he him ſelfe which is ignoraunt in the Scriptures, cā not tel what time this accuſtomed vſe of maſſe, which you reproue came vp, or when, yt maner that the Apoſtles vſed, was lefte: But as he taketh it, the moſt part of Colledges and Churches, were fownded for Maſſes, whiche if they ſhould be put downe, and the landes taken awaye, that were geuen for the ſame purpoſe, euery man might well conſyder what hurly burly would follow vpon the ſame: Wherfore his aduiſe ſhalbe, that they go, and conſult further of the matter with the reſt of good and well learned men of the vniuerſitie, that all theyr heades leyde together, ſuche meanes may be foūde, as maye kepe a Godly quiet.
            Theſe men, after more deliberation had, make him anſwer, admoſhing him as before, to put downe thē Maſſe, that the thinge maye be done without any tumult. And thoughe it coulde not, yet that whiche is righte and godlye, woulde not therfore be lefte vndone: that they be fewer in numbre, it is no newes: For euer ſyns the worlde began, the greater part of men haue reſiſted the trewe doctrine: moreouer yt thoſe The beſt thiges pleaſe feweſt men. onely ſhall receiue this ryght vſe of the Lordes Supper, vnto whome it ſhall be gyuen from aboue.
            Furthermore, that Colledges were fyrſt inſtituted, not for Maſſes, but that youth myght there be vertuouſely brought vp in learnynge. And the landes gyuen to fynde ſome to teach, and ſome to learne, and the reſte to the vſe of the pore. And this vſe to haue continewed in maner to the time of Barnarde: But aboute foure hundreth yeares ſyns this Marchaundiſe of Maſſes began, whiche is vtterly to be taken awaye: And albeit the originall thereof, were yet more auncient, yet is not ſo great a wickednes to be ſuffered. And in caſe any buſynes ſhold come therof, the ſame ought not to be aſcribed to the doctrine, but to the wickednes of them, which for their owne lucre will impugne the truthe, againſt their conſcience. And that we ought not to regard ſuch inconueniences, but to procede conſtantlye what trouble ſo euer ſhall come therof: for all theſe thinges were ſhewed before of Chriſt. Thys yeare Themperours brother Farnando Archduke of Auſtriche, marieth the lady Anne, ſiſter to Lewes the kinge of Hongary. Emonges ſo

many aduerſaries as Luther had, Henry the eyghte, Kynge of Englande wrote ſoore agaynſt him. And fyrſt he confuteth his iudgement, Henry kyng of Englande writeth againſt Luth. touching Indulgences, and defendeth the Biſhops authoritie. After he reproueth all his diſputations, concerning the Sacramentes of the Churche, taking the occaſion of writing, out of his boke intitiled, of the captiuitie of Babylon.
            Whan Luther knewe therof, he anſwered moſt vehemently, ſhewynge that in the defence of this cauſe, he did not one whit reſpecte the highnes or dignitie of any parſon. For this cauſe the Biſhop Leo gaue the kynge an honorable title, callyng him, the defendour of the faith.
            Howe kynge Charles was choſen Emperour, it is here to fore declared: And wheras euer ſyns certen priuate dyſpleaſures did growe Themperor hath warre with Fraūce betwixte hym and the Frenche kynge, it brake out into warres. But fyrſt in the borders of Spaine, and of Flaunders. The ſame tyme the Frenchmen kept Parma and Placence in Italy: which the Biſhoppe Leo was right ſory for. And when they had alſo of late attēpted Rhegium, he vtterly forſoke them, and entred into league with the Emperour, wherof the chief condicions were theſe.
            That the dignitie of the Churche of Rome ſhould be defended, that ſuche Townes as the Frenchemen of late had taken from him, ſhould be recouered, that Frances Sfortia, that time a baniſhed man, ſhould be reſtored to his fathers ſeat and to the dukedome of Millan. Thus ioyning their powers together, they recouered of the frenchmen Parma and Placence, and by force toke the citye of Millan and droue the French king out of Lumbardy, which he had kept in quiet poſſeſſion fullye .vi. yeares, and afterwardes reſtored Sfortia, by the conduit of proſper Columne, & Fernando Daualle marques of Piſcare. And not lōg after theſe newes wer brought, Leo departed not without the ſuſpicion of poyſening. He was ſōne vnto Laurens Medices and had to The death of Leo the .x. his great grandfather Coſmus, that was yt great honor of that houſe. Leo was made Cardinall when he was but .xiii. yeares old: he liued not paſt ſeuen and forty: his ſucceſſor was Adriane the ſixt a Hollāder who had bene tutor to the emperour. About the ſame time Soliman Adrian ſuccedeth Leo. lately created Emperour of Turkes moued warre vpon Lewes king of Boheme and Hungary, which had maried the Lady Marye themperours ſiſter, and beſides many other townes and Caſtels, he tooke The Turke taketh Belgrade. Belgrade the chief fortreſſe of Hungary, and placed therin a garriſon. Whileſt Ceſar maketh his abode in Flaunders and Germany, greate ſeditions aroſe in Spaine: Wherfore to the intent he might remedye the thing in time, hauing firſt appoynted a coūſel to miniſter the law, Commotfôs in Spaine. and to ſee to the affaires of thempire, he ſaileth againe into Spaine. But before he toke his iorney, the ſtates of Thempire were all readye aſſembled at Norinberge concerninge diuers matters, but chieflye the

Turkyſhe warre: And Ceſar ſending forth his proclamation at the later ende of Marche, warneth chiefly all eccleſiaſticall parſons, to pray  and make theyr ſupplications vnto God: Afterwardes the fyrſte of Maye, was aide graunted to kynge Lewes. Themperour in his retourne, goeth agayne to ſee the kynge of Englande, whom to haue his aſſured frende agaynſt the Frenche kynge, he promyſeth to geue hym yerely, a hundreth and three and thyrtie thouſande Duckates. For ſo muche did the Frenchkynge paye yearely, to the kynge of Englande, and to his ſyſter Mary the French quene Wherfore vnleſſe he mighte be ſaued harmeles, he would attempt nothing againſt him. This treatie was made the thirtene day of Iune in the Caſtell of Wyndſore .xx. myles from Lōdon: And for a more entiere loue and frendſhip, it was agreed, that the Emperour ſhoulde take to wyfe, the lady Mary the kynges daughter by his aunte Quene Kataryne, and marry her whē 
               The lady Mart aſſured to thēperor. time ſhould ſerue, for ſhe was then but ſeuen yeares of age: Whetherſoeuer brake of, to pay to the other foure hundred thouſande crownes. The Frenche kynge bendeth all his force towardes Italy, to recouer that he had loſt: you haue heard before of Zuinglius: and now Hugh Byſhoppe of Conſtance, within whoſe prouince Zuricke is aduertiſed the Senate, what complaintes he heard of Zuinglius, and what a kynde of newe doctrine he had broughte in: he defendeth hys cauſe before the Senate, whome he ſatiſfied. After the Byſhoppe wrote his letters to the College of Canons; wherof Zuinglius was one, & ſpeakyng muche of new doctours that troubled the Churche, he exhorteth them to take hede and beware of them: And for ſo muche as Leo the Biſhop of Rome, and the Emperour alſo haue by moſt ſtreigth proclamations condemned thys doctrine, he warneth them that they obey the ſame, and neyther alter nor chaunge any thinge, till they that haue Authoritie, ſhould decree ſome thinge by a generall counſell, this was in the moneth of Maye. When this Epiſtle was read in the Colledge, Zuinglius whome it concerned, wryteth agayne to the Byſhop, that he vnderſtondeth right well by whoſe motiou he doeth this: He admoniſheth him not to folow theyr counſell, for the trueth is inuincible, and can not be reſyſted.
            Afterwardes with a longer letter he anſwereth thoſe, whiche ſtyrred vp the Biſhoppe to write. Then Zuinglius and certein others intreate the Biſhop by their letters, that he would not hynder the doctrine of the Goſpell, nor ſuffer any longer that filthy and ſklaunderous life of priſtes, but permitte them to marrye: And of the ſame effecte he writeth to all the Heluetians, admoniſhyng thē not to ſtop the courſe of the trewe doctrine, nor to worke any diſpleaſure agaynſte maryed Who is author of ſingle life. prieſtes, for of the ſingle life, the Deuill him ſelfe was author. In many of theyr Townes it is the maner, that whan they receyue a newe miniſter

of the churche, they bidde him take a Leman, leſt he attempt to defyle honeſt women, whiche cuſtome althoughe it be laughed at of many, yet was it wittelye diuiſed as the tyme ſerued, and in ſo greate darkenes of doctrine depraued. And the ſame that they did touchinge theyr concubines, ought nowe to be euery where receiued for lawfull wines. In the meane tyme Luther, who had kepte him ſelfe cloſſe cercertein monethes, retorneth to Wittenberge, & fearinge leſt the duke Lut. rotaurneth to Wittenberge. ſhould it take in euyll part, he writeth vnto him in Marche, ſignifiyng that where as he is retourned without his commaundement, he dyd ſo, of no euill wyll or contempte: he knoweth that ſome will beare him in hande, that the ſame ſhall be daungerous for his grace, for aſmuche as he is condemned, bothe by the Biſhoppe of Rome and themperour. Whoſe powers bothe are great: this did he conſyder before longe and ofte: but there be three cauſes, of his retourne, fyrſt that he was oftentimes requeſted by ſundrye letters of the Churche of Wittenberge to retourne, whoſe deſyre he coulde not but accompliſhe, for that the ſame people are properly committed to his charge of God, & ought not to be neglected. And albeit that ſome are muche offended with this refourmation of doctrine and reporte euill therof yet knoweth he moſte certenly, that this his profeſſion is vnto God moſt acceptable.
            Secondarely in the tyme of hys abſence, throughe the crafte of the Deuill (who can not abyde this lyght of the Ghoſpell, there was ſtyrred vp trouble in his churche, whiche vnleſſe he him ſelfe were preſent, coulde not be well appeaſed, which matter was ſo great and weightie that it might be in no wiſe neglected, for if the thinge might haue bene diſpatched by letters, he coulde righte eaſelye haue forborne Wittenberge. Thyrdely, he ſayeth, he feareth and doth in maner foreſee, a wō
               derfull great tempeſt in Germany, which ſo rackleſly doeth contemne Luther foreſeeth the teni peſt cōmyng. this preſent benefite of God: For many in dede do embrace the trewe doctrine, but in their liuyng they ſklaunder it, abuſynge the libertie of the ſpirit, after theyr carnall appetit. Others be wholy gyuen to quēch and oppreſſe the worde, they rare not howe, whiche contempte of his word, God muſt nedes punniſhe with one plage after an other, as he did in times paſt the Iewes and theyr citie Hieruſalem: Wherefore it is his part and ſuche others as he is, to admoniſhe all men hereof with their whole force and diligēce: for albeit they ſhould trauaile in vaine, and be laughed at, yet may not they therfore leaue theyr office vndone, ſeyng that it pleaſeth God, who hathe committed vnto them the cure of ſoules: wherefore he prayeth him not to be offended, that he is thus retourned, beyng neither called nor commaunded of him: for ſythe it is altogether Chriſtes cauſe, his truſt is, that he ſhall ſuſtayne no diſpleaſure or perill for his retourne.
            The trouble whiche in his abſence (he ſayde) was in his Churche,

was this: Andreas Caraloſtadius, in the meane tyme that Luther was abſente, preached contrary doctrine, and diſorderlye ſtyrred vp the people, to caſte the Images oute of the Churche:
            For the which cauſe Luther beyng called againe of his frendes, diſpraiſeth the raſhenes of Caroloſtadius, ſhewyng that fyrſte the Images ſhould haue bene remoued out of the peoples harts, being inſtructed, that God is not pleaſed with Images, but with faith onely: And then if they ſhould be taken away, the ſame to be done by the Magiſtrates, and not by the tumulte and rage of the common people. The ſame tyme began a ſecte of them, that ſaide, they had talke with God, who had commaunded them, that ſleyng all wicked men, they ſhould begin a new world, wherin onely the holy and innocent people ſhould lyue and beare rule. Theſe kepte them ſelues priuelye in that parte of Saronie that lyeth by the riuer of Sala, whoſe opinion (as ſaith Luther) Caroloſtadius alſo fauoured: And when he could not bringe hys matters to paſſe at Wittenberge, beynge defaced by Luthers aucthoritie, he went from thens vnto them: Of this ſorte of men was Thomas Muncer, whiche ſtyrred vp the people againſt theyr magiſtrates in Thuringe and Franconie, as ſhall be recyted in his place.
            Luther hearyng yt in the lande of Boheme there were ſome whiche in common aſſemblies counſeiled to receiue agayne the Biſhop of Romes Luther writeth to the Bohemers. aucthoritie, or elles there ſhoulde neuer be ende of contention and controuerſies, he wryteth vnto them in the moneth of Auguſte, that their name was in times paſt odioſe, and hated of him, before ſuch tyme as he knewe the Biſhop of Rome to be Antichriſte: But nowe, ſyns God hath reſtored to the worlde the lyght of the Goſpell, he iudgeth farre otherwiſe, and ſo hath profeſſed in his workes, in ſo muche that nowe the Byſhoppe and all his Clientes are much more offended with him, thē they are with them: His aduerſaries haue many tymes ſaied, howe he was fledde into Boheme, and in dede he hath ofte wiſſhed to go thyther, but leſt they ſhoulde call his iourney a runnynge awaye, he hath altered his purpoſe. And nowe is the matter brought to ſuche a paſſe, that there is good hoope, howe the Germaynes, and the Bohemers ſhall profeſſe the goſpell & the ſame Religion together. Where many be ſory that they be deuided into ſectes, they are not greued without iuſte cauſe, but if they reuolte vnto Papiſtrie, they ſhall not onely not take awaye theyr ſectes, but increaſe and ſwarme in the Many ſectes in the popiſh kingdome. ſame. For there is no where mo ſectes than is in the Romiſhe kyngdō, as is to be ſene by the graye Freres which differ much amonges themſelues: And yet are all ſuche thinges done and mainteined by the Byſhop of Rome, whoſe kyngdome throughe mens diſcorde, is nouriſhed and eſtablſſhed.
            For this is the verye cauſe, whye he ſetteth Princes together by the

eares, and ſeketh alwaies to ſtyrre vp matters of grudge and diſpleaſure. Wherfore let thē take goodhede, leſt whileſt they go about to aboliſh thoſe leſſer ſectes, they fal into more pernicious, as al thoſe Romiſh be vtterly vncurable. Frō the which now thorow Gods benefit Germanye is latelye delyuered. And howe there is no better medicine to take awaye euill, than if the Paſtours of the Churche woulde ſetforth the doctrine of the Goſpell purely and ſyncerely. And in caſe they can not reteyne the weake people in theyr dewtie, but that they wyll reuolte, at the leſt wyſe let them indeuour to kepe ſtyl the Lordes Supper wholy, and the memoriall of Huſſe and Hierome of Prage vndetiled. For it may be that the Biſhop will attempt to take theſe two thinges from them chiefly. Wherfore if any of them relent, and graunr the tyrant bothe, it ſhall not be well done of them. Howe be it though 
                  〈◊〉
                Boheme do reuolte, yet will he ſet forth and commende the doctrine of Huſſe vnto all poſteritie. Wherfore he praieth and exhorteth them 
                  〈◊〉
                perſeuer in that ſtate of Religion, whiche they haue defended 
                  〈◊〉
                with muche bloud and valeauntnes, neither through their 
                  〈…〉
               yng blemiſhe the goſpell, that nowe floriſheth.
            And all beit that al thinges be not wel eſtabliſhed amonges them: yet will not God fayle them, but whan he ſeeth time he will ſtyrre vp ſome faythfull miniſter to reforme Religion, ſo that they wyll be conſtant, and vtterly refuſe the fylthines and wickednes of the Romiſſhe Biſhoppe. As concernyng the Bohemers thus it ſtandeth.
            After the death of Iohn Huſſe, the people of Boheme wer deuided Three ſectes of the Bohemers. into three ſectes. Oue part toke the Biſhoppe of Rome for the head of the Churche, and the Uicar of Chriſt. Another ſorte receyued the Lordes Suppes in both kyndes, and in their Maſſes had certeine thynges reherſed in their vulgare tounge, differing in nothing els from the Papiſtes. The thyrde ſort were called Picardes, they call the Biſhop of Rome Antichriſte, and the whore of Babilon, deſcribed in the Reuelation: they admitte nothynge but the Bible, they choſe theyr owne prieſtes and Biſhoppes: they forbid no man to mary: they pray not for the dead, as for holy dayes and ceremonies, they haue but very fewe. After this Luther compiled a Boke againſte the falſe named order of Lu. writeth againſte the Biſhoppes. Biſhops, in the preface wherof (he ſaith) it is to them great ſhame that ſo many of them as they be with their great liuinges and honourable titles, proſeſſyng them to be maiſters of the whole Scriptures, yt they dare not come to diſpute with him onelye before indifferent Iudges, beyng ſo ofte prouoked therunto. Wherfore (he ſaieth) that from hence forth, he will no more ſubmitte his writynges vnto them, as he dyd at Wormes, for the Doctrine is not his, but Chriſtes. Who lyueth and reigneth for euer, who will once reſtraine theyr madnes, and bluddye enterpriſes.
            
               
By the decrees of the Biſhop of Rome, and thēperor, the name and marke of that great Beaſt is taken from him, for the which he thāketh God highly, that hath deliuered him out of the ſtiking dōgeon of moſt filthy errors, and wicked doctrine, and lightened him with the trewe knowledge of his worde, wherof he is ſo certein, yt he will not herafter ſubmit his doctrine to the iudgement, no not of any Angell, but by the teſtimony therof, to iudge both him ſelfe, and all them, and the Angels alſo. Wherfore, he warneth thē to put no truſt in theyr tyrany, for the more that they ſwell in theyr malice and enuie againſt hym, the more boldely will he proceds in his purpoſe, for Chriſt liueth and reygneth, which can, and will, confounde their cruell and bloddy enterpriſes: he would wiſhe in dede theyr amendment, but if yt wil not be, he wil haue ſuch continual warre with thē, as ſhall neuer be recōciled: And where as they charge him, that his franke rebuking of thē, ſhuld ſtyrre vp the people againſt him, in that they do him muche wronge: for it is to be proued by the Scriptures, yt ſuch reprehēſions are neceſſary, when the paſtors of Churches bevnlearned, wicked, & obſtinate, neither doynge their dutie thēſelues, nor permitting others to do, yt would, & can do it right well. Now to the coūſel at Norinberge, Lewis king of Hūgary ſent his ambaſſadors, who lamētably cōplaining of the Turkes great crueltie, deſyred ſtrōge & cōtinual aide. Thither ſent alſo Adriā Biſhop Adrian writeth to the duke of Sa. of Rome Hierome Rorare, one of his chāberlaines with letters to duke Friderike ſignifiyng yt he was right glad to heare of thaſſēbly at Norinberge, truſting yt there ſhalbe ſome thing done, yt ſhall cōcerne the cō
               mon weale for the which cauſe, he hath alſo determined, by the cōſent of his Cardinals toſēd his Ambaſſador thither. And in yt meane while thought good to ſēde this mā before, to ſignifie vnto him, whō he hath euermore loued derely, his good will & affectiō towardes the common wealth, as he ſhall better know by his Ambaſſador yt foloweth: he exhorteth & praieth hi, yt he which is a price of thēpire, in the tuition of the which Empire the church of Rome cōſiſteth, wold trauaile & cōſult diligētly, for the things yt cōcerne the dignitie of thapoſtolical church and the trāquilitie of the cōmon weale, & to folow herein the ſteppes of his noble progenitors: deſyringe him to giue further credite to Ierome, in ſuche thynges as he hath wylled him to debate wt him. Farnādo Archduke of Auſtriche was a ſtraight executer of the ſentēce giuen the yere before againſt Luther, & in the Dukedome of Wittenberge, which he helde at the ſame time, he ſet forth a ſore proclamation the .xxvj. day of Nouēbre, promiſyng rewardes to the promotors, & in all his own prouinces he puniſhed extremely all thoſe yt obeied not the Popes lawes. Reucline dieth. This yere departed Reucline, a pure aged man: whō Eraſmus of Roterodame commended with a goodly Dialoge, attributyng vnto hym immortalitie, and the excellencie in the knowledge of all three tonges.

At the latter ende of Nouembre, Adrian Biſhop of Rome ſendeth letters to the whole aſſemblie at Norinberge: That ſins the time he was The Pope writeth letters to at the princes of Germany. firſt choſen to thoffice of Apoſtleſhip, he neuer wiſhed for thinge more, than yt he might in euery cōdition accompliſh the dewtie of a good paſtour, ſuffring no one ſhepe of his flocke to go farre a ſtray, for asmuch as might be done through his vigilant eye, and carefulnes: And herof he taketh God to be his witnes, who hath auaunced him vnworthy, to this dignitie, which he neuer loked for: And to the intent he might more eaſely atteine to his purpoſe, he hath greatly exhorted all kynges and princes, to abſteine frō ciuil warres: And if they will nedes make warre, to bende all theyr forſe and power againſte the enemies of the Chriſtian faith: And the ſame yt he aſſaied to perſwade others, he hathe performed him ſelf: hauing ſent a great ſum of money to the knights of the Rhodes, which at this preſent are in great daunger of thēperor of Turkes: Afterwardes calling home his remēbraūce of forein periles, & loking more narrowly vpō domeſtical euils, he heareth, to his great diſcōfort, yt Martin Luther (who hath oftētimes bene gently, & fatherly admoniſhed) at the length, whan there was none other remedy, cō
               demned & baniſſhed by certein Uniuerſities, by Leo his predeceſſor, & alſo by themperor, by the cōmon cōſent, is not yet put to ſilēce, but ſtyll at libertie, ſetting forth dayly new bokes, by the which the chriſtiā religiō, & al honeſt liuing is ſore decaied: Which thing greueth hi ſo much the more, for that he heareth ſaye, howe diuerſe of the nobilitie fauoure hym, and that the matter is ſo farre gone, that Eccleſiaſticall parſons are in daūger to loſe both lādes & dignitie, through out Germany, touching ye which things, certein haue already ſtyrred vp ciuil war: It is 1. Corin. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . trewly ſpokē of Paule, yt iiedes there muſt be Hereſies, but as thinges ſtād now, it chaūſeth moſt out of ceaſon. But the deuill is diſpoſed to wrap vs in ſondry calamities at one time: for through his inſtigation, the fury of the Turkes, & the Hereſie of Luth. oppreſſe vs both at once: And although it were for vs poſſible to diſcōfite the foreine enemie: yet ſo lōg as this domeſtical aduerſarie is vnuāquiſhed, it ſhould litel preuaile. What time he was yet in Spaine, he hearde muche of Luthers falſe opinions, & albeit it greued him yt ſuch an euyl ſhold ſpring in the countrey where he was borne, yet did he comfort him ſelf wt .ij. things.
            Fyrſt, for that his truſte was, that ſo trifelynge and wicked a doctrine ſhould haue bene diſpiſed of all men.
            Secondely, that ſuche peſtilente plante broughte out of an other place, ſhould not lightly take roote in that countrie. Whiche had alwayes ingendred the roters out of Hereſyes. But where it hath chaū
               ſed otherwiſe, whether it be by the iuſt iudgement of God, or throughe a certeine negligence, and rackleſnes of ſuche as ſhoulde haue redreſſed it in tyme.
            
               
Uerelye they had nede to looke to it, leſt whileſt they worke ſlowlye herin, they appere eyther to haue forgotten their olde vertue, or els to approue this wickednes, alledgyng amonges other thynges, what a ſhame it were for ſo ſtronge and ſo conſtaunt a nation to ſwarue from that religion, whiche Chriſt and his Apoſtles haue lefte vs, whiche ſo many Martyrs, and notable perſons, which alſo our forefathers haue kept and obſerued, at the motion of a ſory Frere which hathe folowed and profeſſed the ſame him ſelfe many yeres. As thoughe we had erred Luthers Frere. ſo many hundreth yeres. As though Chriſt which hath promiſed to be euer amonges vs, woulde haue ſuffered his churche to remayne ſo lōg in errours. As thoughe he were onely wiſe, and ſtyrred vp of God for this intent, to open the errour of the whole worlde: which thinges are doubtles to all that wiſe be, a very mockerye, and be laughed at: But they haue a deuiliſh purpoſe, that vnder the pretence of Chriſtiā libertie, they may contemne all lawe, rule, and aucthoritie, and work what outrage they lyſt: for ſeyng they haue already cōmitted ſacrilege, & vnreuerently handled the lawes of holy Biſhoppes and counſels, yea caſt they them in the fyre: thinke you that they wyll knowe or obey any ciuill Magiſtrate? but as they haue begon to ſley Prieſtes, and to enter vpon their poſſeſſions, ſo wil they in fine, ende theyr miſcheuous enterpriſes with the Princes themſelues, theyr wiues, childrē and families: Wherfore he praieth and exhorteth them, and for the aucthoritie, and office that he beareth (as the ſucceſſour of Peter, and Chriſtes vicar) alſo chargeth and commaundeth them; that layinge all diſpleaſure a part with newe reconciled mindes, they come wholye together, and quenche that cōmon and domeſtical flāme, puniſhing Luther, if he do not amende according to that new decre made by thēperor and them. Folowyng herin thexample of theyr elders at the coūſell of Cōſtance, which burned there Iohn Huſſe, & Hierome of Prage, as they wel deſerued, whoſe vertu in caſe they nowe would imitate, God ſhould not faile thē, & then might they alſo be in the more hope to giue the repulſe to the Turke, with all his violence: Then wil he beſtowe all his treaſures, yea and hys lyfe alſo, for the flocke committed to his charge, the reſt, as concernynge Luther, they ſhall knowe of hys Legate Fraunces Cheregate Byſhoppe of Aprutia, vnto whome he prayeth them to gyue credite. The ciuill warre that he ſpake of, was betwyxte Rycharde The warre of Treuers. Archebyſhoppe of Treuers, and Fraunces Sickynge, a noble man, that fauoured Luther very muche: notwithſtandynge the cauſe of that warre was not for Religion, but for bicauſe the Biſhop would not ſuffer two men wythin hys Iuriſdiction, for whome he became ſuertie, to aunſwere to the Law: for ſo mentioneth the writyng, wherin Fraunces ſente hym defiaunce, aboute the latter ende of Auguſte. Byſhop Adrian wrote letters of the ſame effect to certein others alſo &

after he had greatlye deteſted the doctrine of Luther, he required the Senate of Straſbourge, that they ſhould ſuffer no Bookes of his nor The Popes letters to Straſburge. of his adherentes to be Printed, and that ſuche as were ſet forthe already, they ſhoulde not onely ſuppreſſe, but burne alſo. For he heareth ſay, howe ſuche maner of Bookes are put in Print by theyr men, and the contrary workes refuſed. Whereunto vnleſſe they obey, he threateneth them with the wrath and vengeaunce of God: For although they perſeuer neuer ſo much in the olde Religion: yet vnleſſe they take from others the libertie to offende, and the occaſyon of errour, let them not loke to ſcape vnpuniſhed.
            But where he ſaieth, that whileſt he was in Spaine, he hearde of Luther, thus it ſtandeth. The ſtocke of Aorian.
            
            This Adrian was a poore mans ſonne of Utrecht, in the egge of Hollande, who for his learninge, whiche he gote in the Uniuerſitie of Louain, was called to be Scolemaſter to Charles that nowe is Emperour. And afterwardes beyng ſent Ambaſſadoure into Spaine, he obteyned the Biſhopricke of Derthuſe, of the kyng Ferdinando, after whoſe death, when the gouernement came vnto kyng Charles, he remayned there as chiefe of his counſel. At the ſame time Biſhoppe Leo Diſſention betwixt Leo and his Cardinals. fell at variaunce with his Cardinals (which had conſpired his death) in ſo muche as he diſpatched ſo many, what with exile, and what with impriſonnement, that he made one and thirtie newe Cardinals at one tyme, partly for his owne defence, and partly to get money, amonges whom this Adriane was one: Who afterwardes whileſt the Emperour wēt to be crowned in Germany, had the gouernemēt of Spaine in his abſens. And whan Leo the tenth died, wheras Iulius Medices and Alexander Farneſius, laboured excendyngly for it, Adriane beyng abſent and vnknowen, was choſen Biſhoppe the .ix. daye of Ianuary in the yeare of our Lorde, a thouſande fyue hundred twenty and two. Who hearinge thereof, wrote letters of thanckes to the Colledge of Cardinalles, for the good opinion they had of him.
            And whereas iii. Cardinals were appointed to be ſent to him Ambaſſadours into Spaine, he willeth them to ſpare theyr paynes, for ſo ſhortly as may be, he will come to Rome him ſelfe. He writeth moreouer to the Senate, and people of Rome (who were not a litel diſpleaſed that a ſtraunger ſhoulde haue that dignitie) promiſinge them, what ſoeuer pleaſure he could ſhew them.
            And a fewe monethes after chaunſynge on a fayre wynde, he taketh ſhyppynge into Italy, and arryueth at Rome, in the monthe of Auguſt. And all beit that at the ſame tyme Ceſar was commynge out Flaunders (to appeaſe the rebellyon) was arryued in Spaine, yet departed he, and neuer bad hym fare well, but wrote vnto hym gentell letters, ſignifiyng that he had great haſt.
            
               
At the which time Soliman Emperor of Turkes, had beſieged the Rhodes three monethes, and in the ſeuenth moneth, when the knightes of the ſame had defended them ſelues moſt valeauntly, beyng than deſtitute of all aide & ſuccor, he toke it by cōpoſition, the .xxv. of Decē
               ber, not onely to oure great loſſe, but ſhame alſo. At that ſelf ſame time Cheregate the biſhop of Romes Ambaſſador, came to Norinberg, and vpon new yeres day he ſent frō thens to the Senate of Straſbourgh the Biſhoppes letters, offering his ſeruice, in caſe they would writ an anſwere. Whileſt many bare grudge towardes Zuinglius, & diuerſe as well within the citie as without, preched againſt his doctrine as wicked, and ſwaruing from the faith, eſpecially the black Freres. And he againe affirmed it to be agreable to the Scriptures, & that he was able to proue, the ſenate of Zuricke called a cōuocation of all the prieſtes A diſputatiō at Zuricke. within their Juriſdiction at the .xxix. of January for the controuerſie about Religiō at what time all men ſhalbe heard there, ſo much as ſhalbe requiſite. They require alſo very louingly by theyr letters the  Biſhop of Conſtance, yt either he would come him ſelfe, or ſende his deputie. Where thefore there came many at the dai appointed, & amōges others Iohn Faber the Biſhoppes deputie. The Borowmaſter ſpeaketh theſe wordes. Foraſmuche as great diſſention is ryſen about Religion, therfore this aſſemblie is called, to the intēt that if any mā hath ought to ſay againſt yt doctrine of Zuinglius, he may ſpeake the ſame frely: Now had Zuinglius before compriſed his doctrine into certein common places and Themes to the nūbre of .lxvij. and had publiſhed The queſtions of Zuinglius. the ſame in all places, to the intent men might come to the diſputation fourniſhed and prepared. And what time the Borowmaſter had done ſpeakyng, he propoūded the ſame againe, deſyring them to ioyne with hym in diſputation. There, whan Faber had ſhewed the cauſe of hys commyng, he goeth about to perſwade, that the place was not mere, to decide matters of Religion, but that the ſame apperteineth to a generall counſell, whiche he truſted ſhould be ſhortely. But Zuinglius required him to diſpute, and if he had any thinge to ſaye, not to diſſemble the matter: he ſaid he would confute his doctrine by writyng.
            After many wordes had betwixt them, when neither he, nor any other would come forth to diſpute, the Senate, breakynge vp the aſſemblie, commaundeth, that throughe out their dominions (the traditions of men, layde a ſyde) the ghoſpell ſhould be taught ſyncerely out of the Bokes of the olde and new Teſtament.
         
         
            
            
               ❧ The fourth Booke of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the ſtate of Religion and the common Weale, during the Empire of Charles the fyfte.
            
               
                  ❧ The argument of the fourth Booke.
               POpe Adriane by his Ambaſſadoure vttereth manye thinges, and confeſſeth the wickednes of Rome. The Princes of Germany anſwere him: and propounde conditiond of the counſell. An alteration is in Denmarke. Chriſtierne the kyng ſleeth. He ſpeaketh of the impoſtes ouer Germany, of the fyrſt fruictes, and the tenthes. Of the dere Mantel of the Archbiſhops. Of the burning of two Auſten Freres. Of the decree of Norinberge expounded by Luther, and of certeine bokes written by him. Of the complaint made of him by the kyng of Englād. Adriane dieth, Clement ſuccedeth him. Trouble in Swyſſerlande for ʒ uinglius doctrine, & at Straſbourgh for the mariage of Prieſtes. At the aſſemblie of Norinberge, Cardinall Campegius came Ambaſſadour from Clemente, who prayeth Duke Friderike to be there. After hauinge ſpoken to the Counſell, the princes make him aunſwere and replie. Troubles arriſe in Swiſerlande againſte them of ʒ uricke: who rendre a reaſon of theyr doctrine to the Ambaſſadours ſent by the other Cā
                  tons. The Byſhop of Conſtance defendeth Images, and yet not wythſtandyng his wrytyng, Images were beaten downe, through out al the dominion of ʒ uricke. To the foreſaid aſſemblie of 
                     •
                  orinberge, themperor ſent his Ambaſſade. They of Straſburgh and their Byſhop vtter theyr controuerſie to Campegius. After the ſayde aſſemblie, Kynge Ferdinando and others make a league agaynſt the Goſpell. The warre of the Bowres.
            
            
               BEſides the former letters, Biſhop Adrian The requeſt of Adrian to diſpatch Lu. had preſcribed to his Ambaſſadour, what he ſhould furthermore ſaye, and expreſſed the ſame in writing: Fyrſt, that he ſhould accompt before the Princes, what a grief it was to him, that Luther ſhoulde ſtyrre vp this trouble and ſedition, for that the thing concerned the loſſe of ſoules, and deſtruction of the flocke committed hym of Chriſt to kepe: ſecondly, that it hath chaſiſed in the ſame cuntreye, where he hymſelfe was borne, which nation was euer furtheſt of from all ſuſpecion of Hereſye. Wherfore he deſyreth greatly, that they would helpe to remedye the matter ſo ſoone as might be, leſt through longer delaye, the ſame thinge happen vnto Germany, as dyd to the lande of Boheme. Affyrmyng that he wyll neyther ſpare coſt nor labour herin, beſeching them that they will euerye man after his power, do the lyke, there beynge many weightye cauſes whie they ſo oughte to do.
            Fyrſte, for the glory of Gods holy name, which throughe this Hereſye is chiefly obſcured, the Rites and Ceremonies of the Churche defaced, and in maner quite aboliſhed: the loue of oure neighboure (vnto

whom Charitie bindeth vs) to ſhewe the right waye. For Germany, which was wont to haue the chiefe prayſe for Religion, now by reaſon of this reuolting, theyr fame and eſtimation groweth in contempt and ignomie. For where they might eaſely haue diſpatched Luther, & alſo quenched his hereſies, they would not, degenerating herin from their aunceſtours, which left a notable example of theyr vertu at Cōſtance. Is it not a moſt open wronge that he doeth both to them, and alſo to theyr elders? For where as they folowed the Religion of the catholick churche of Rome, nowe by his iudgement, that condemneth the ſame Religion, they are all damned. Let them wey and conſyder with them ſelues, what theſe fellowes do purpoſe and intende: Uerely vnder pretence of the libertie of the Goſpel, to ſubuerte and take away al lawes and Magiſtrates.
            And albeityt Luther ſemed in the begynning to impugne onely the eccleſiaſtical power, as tyrranical & wicked: yet is this his intent, that after he hath once perſwaded that Chriſtians are by no lawes bounden to obeye the Magiſtrate, he maye open the waye vnto all men, to worke what miſchief they liſte. And therfore greate daunger hangeth ouer them alſo. Hitherto they do craftely and traiterouſlye hyde theyr purpoſe, and flatter the Magiſtrate, to the intent they may frely vtter theyr malice vpon the clergie: but when they be oppreſſed, they wyll doubtles attēpt further: For they may ſee already by experience what grudge, hatred, tumultes & offences, this Hereſie hath alreadi brought into the common wealth. Whiche euyles vnleſſe they be ſuppreſſed in time, it is to be feared leſt God (who hathe gyuen them the power of the ſworde) wyll plage this theyr ſo great negligence, bothe with their owne priuate, and alſo with the common deſtruction of all Germany. Luth. compared with Bahomet.
            
            For Luther differeth not muche from the ſecte of Mahomet, which permitteth men to mary many wiues, and after to forſake the ſame, by the whiche policie that miſchieuous man bewitched, and allured the greateſt part of the worlde: whiche thing thoughe Luther permitteth not, yet doth he aduiſe all them to mary, which haue vowed chaſtitie, gyuing the reignes of lybertie to mans luſt and concupiſcens, that he maye haue the mo of his confyderacie, to the vtter deſtruction of the common wealthe, namely of Germany.
            He ſayd therfore to be theyr partes to put in execution the decrees of Leo and Ceſar, to the intent they may auenge Gods glorye, auoyde the ſklaunder of the countrey, and eſchewe the preſent daunger, yt hangeth ouer their owne heades. Furthermore, if there be any yt ſay, howe Luther was condemned before his matter was heard, or that it were reaſon, the thing ſhold be debated, before he were executed, they thinke not well: for Chriſt hath taught vs the rule of faith & Religion (whoſe authoritie we muſt folowe, and not reaſon of the articles of our faith,

nor inquire the cauſe of this or that precept: He is in dede to be hearde when he is examined, whether he ſpake this thinge or that in hys ſermon: whether he ſetforth this boke or that: but touching faith and the Sacramentes, we may not permit him to reaſon or defend thoſe thinges whiche he hathe written thereof: for in this we muſte folowe the vſe and cuſtome of the Church, and in no wiſe ſwarue from the ſame. Againe, ſith hys doctrine is ſuche as hath bene heretofore condemned by generall counſels, there is none accompt to be made therof.
            Moreouer, there ſhould be no ende of cōtention, if it might be lawfull for euery priuate man, to call in queſtion thoſe thinges, which wittie and great learned men haue with muche deliberation eſtabliſhed: whereſoeuer is any aſſēblie or felowſhip of mē, there be certein lawes which all they are bounden to obſerue: howe muche more oughte the ſame to be done, what time anye thynge is openlye eſtabliſſhed in the churche? But ſeyng theſe men do not onely contempne the lawes and decrees of counſels, and auncient fathers, but alſo burne them, they ought ſuerly to be puniſhed as breakers of the common peace & quietnes. Neuertheles he confeſſeth howe that God, which is the reuenger of all wronge, doeth thus plage his churche for the ſynnes of the miniſters therof, as the Scripture ſaieth. The iniquitie of the people procedeth Iniquitie procedeth frō the Prieſtes. from the prieſtes and elders: for certenlye (ſaieth he) they haue ſynned at Rome, theſe many yeres full greuouſly, by ſundry wayes, euen from the highe Biſhoppe to the loweſt Eccleſtaſticall parſon, and not one to be excuſed: for the which cauſe, callynge mekely to God for The ſynne of Rome ſpred ouer al the worlde. pardon. He wyll endeuour to redreſſe the thing, and ſee that the court of Rome, which perchaunce hath bene the occaſion of all this miſchief, be fyrſt ſharpely refourmed: And that as it hathe bene the example of vice, ſo it may be the begynning of amendement, and Patron of vertu. which (he ſaieth) he muſt do by lytell, and litell, for that al ſodayne mutations be daungerous, and as the common prouerbe is, He that bloweth his noſe ouermuche, ſhall wringe out bloude. This writing dyd Luther tranſlate in to the vulgare toungue, and ſet to his notes in the Lut. expoundeth the Popes ſaiynge. margente, and where he ſayeth by lytell and lytell, Luther affyrmeth that to be the ſpace of many mens liues. But in that he ſo frankely bewrayed the vicious lyuyng of the court at Rome, he gote no great loue of the Cardinals (as it is reported) Neuertheles this (they ſay) is euer the biſhop of romes policie, when he wil deferre the coūſel, or delay the hearynge of the matter, he will promiſe largely: that whileſt men truſt The meane to let coūſels vpon his promyſe, he maye fynde the meanes, what by the fauoure of Princes, and what by force of Armes, to mainteine hys power & dignitie, which is like to fall in ſome daunger, by fyre and generall counſels: Whileſt the Byſhoppes Ambaſſador declared thus, the Princes complained that the leagues, which they had made in times paſt with

Byſhoppes of Rome, were broken there diuerſe wayes. Whereof the Byſhoppe beyng certifyed by the letters of his Ambaſſadour, anſwereth them by the ſame, that ſuche thynges as his predeceſſours dyd, it lieth not in him to helpe, but he miſliked the handelyng of the matters at Rome, when he was but a priuate man, and purpoſed no leſſe, but to refourme the ſame thoughe no man had ſpoken therin, and to ſuffer no man to ſuſteine any wronge, muche leſſe them, whom for the common countrey ſake, he coueteth chiefly to gratifie: And where they deſyre that their actions commenced might be retourned in to Germany ſo ſoone as the Iudges and aduocates, whiche are fled oute of Rome for the Plage, ſhall retourne, he will inquire of the caſe, and do therin that which ſhall ſeme reſonable. He commaunded moreouer his Ambaſſadour, to require an aunſwere of the Princes, what (in theyr opinion) were the beſt way to deſtroy this peſtiferous ſecte, that he maye vnderſtande in time, what ſhall be his part to do therin.
            Theſe thinges beyng declared to the counſel, the Princes and other The anſwer of the prices. ſtates make aunſwere. Fyrſte, in recityng briefly his demaundes, they ſay they are ryght glad that it hath pleaſed God to place him in the gouernement of the church, which in this perilous time had nede of ſuch a Paſtour, who beareth ſuche a zeale to the common wealthe, and taketh ſuche paynes to ſet kynges at quietnes, and emploieth hys treaſure to the repreſſing of the Turkes violence, whiche thynges they reioyſe to heare of: for by theſe ciuill warres thempire is decaied, and the Turkes power increaſed, where no man prepareth any Armye to reſiſt him. Here be the Ambaſſadours of the kyng and Princes of Hungary, which not without great lamentation haue recited, what cruell thinges they haue ſuffered, and what daunger they ſtande in dayely: Wherfore they deſyre him which is the father & Paſtour of all others, that he will perſeuer in this moſt holy purpoſe and trauaile, yt eyther a ſuer peace, or els a long treuce may be taken, yt in the meane time they may make preparation, to withſtande the Turkes violence, and recouer the countreis of the Empire, which are loſte: Whereunto they promiſe their aide bothe of men and money.
            As concernyng Luther, if any diſpleaſure be growen in Germany by the meanes of his doctrine, they are right hartely ſory therefore, as it becommeth them no leſſe, and deſyre alſo to remedy the euyll, knowyng it to be theyr duetie to obey both him and themperour: nother wil Why Luth. was not puniſhed. they degenerat from their progenitours herein: where he complaineth that he is not already puniſhed according to the Emperours decree, it is vpon no lyght conſyderation omitted: for all degrees do complayne moſt heinouſly of the courte of Rome. And in maner al men are ſo wel inſtructed by the preachinges and bokes of Luther, that in caſe the decree ſhould be put in execution, it would doubtles ſtyre vp great ſedition,

and many would ſo couſtre it to be done for this intent, that the trueth ſhould be oppreſſed, and the lyght of the Ghoſpell extinguiſſhed for the mayntenaunce of ſuche open crymes, as were not to be borne withall: which perſwaſion moſt certeinly would ſtyrre vp a rebellion of the people againſt the Magiſtrates: for it tan not be denied, and he himſelfe graunteth alſo, that they lyue diſſolutely & vitiouſly at Rome, to the great decay of Religion: Wherefore in that he dyſſembleth nothing, nor clooketh the diſorder of the court at Rome, but promyſeth a reformation, it deſeruith muche praiſe, eſpecially if he performe in dede the thing which he hathe promiſed by wordes and writynge: whiche they earneſtly require him that he would do, for otherwiſe there is no certein or longe quietnes to be loked for. Germany is muche impoueriſhed with warres and other charges, and with tributes that be extraordinarie, ſo that it is hardely hable to ſuſteyne the neceſſary charges of the Common wealth, and to gyue aide to the Hungarians and others againſt the Turke: Nowe in what ſorte the Germanes certein yeres paſt, did permitte, that their Biſhops and others of the Clergie, ſhould for certein time be tributaries to the Biſhop of Rome: they ſuppoſe he is not ignoraunt: they cōditioned at the ſame tyme, that al that money when tyme ſerued, ſhould be employed vpon the warre againſt the Turke: But nowe bothe the tyme is expired, and his predeceſſors, Biſhoppes of Rome, haue not put the money to the ſame vſe that they ought to haue done: for the whiche cauſe, nowe that a ſubſidie is to be gathered in all countreis of the Empyre for the Turkiſhe warre, men do grudge and mutine. And think that thoſe great ſummes of money, which haue bene leuied in many yeres, & kepte for the ſame purpoſes, ſhould now ſerue the tourne, and they to be no further charged: They deſyre therfore that from hence forth he demaunde not anye ſuche tribute, but permitte the ſame to be broughte into the common treaſure houſe of the Empire: For thus ſhall many men be quieted in Germany, and when nede ſhall require, there ſhall not want money, to ayde foreine nations agaynſt the force and violence of the Turkes: where he areth their counſell in this alteration of Religion: conſydering that the matter conſiſteth not onely in Luthers doctrine, but alſo in many other abuſes and errours crepte into the Churche, and mayntened by longe cuſtome of men that be of a corrupte life and iudgemente, as he him ſelf cōfeſſeth: They cā ſee no better way, to redres al theſe things. Than by a free generall counſell, whiche the Emperour and he beyng The maner of a free coū
                  ſell. the chiefe Magiſtrates in Chriſtendome, may ſommon in ſome citie of Germany. As Mentz, Straſeboroughe, Metz, or Collen: whiche they thynke alſo good for the cōmon wealth, to begyn as ſhortly as mighte be, and at the furtheſt within ayere. Yet vnder this condition, that as many as ſhal be there preſent, of what eſtate, or degree ſo euer they be,

ſhall take their othe to ſpeake frely and not to hyde, what ſo euer ſhall ſeme to make for the glory of God, and the profit of the cōmen wealet or els it ſhalbe ſuſpected, and do more harme then good: And that this may the rather be done accordynglye, they will ſee that Luther in the meane time ſhall write no mo bookes doubtinge not, but that Fridericke the noble Duke of Saxonie wyll aſſiſte them herein: And that the Preachers ſhall teache the Goſpell ſyncerely and reuerently, after the interpretations approued by the Churche, and that the Printers ſhall Print nothinge but the ſame ſhall be fyrſte peruſed and aucthoriſed by certeine learned men, appointed by the Byſhoppes and all matters of controuerſie to be reſerued for the counſelles.
            And where amonges other thinges, his Ambaſſador ſpake of prieſtes that maried wiues: forſomuch as there is no puniſhment appointed for them in the Ciuill lawe, they thinke it not a miſſe that ſuche as haue offended, ſhoulde be puniſhed after the Canon lawe: Finally they beſeche him to take in good part theyr opinion touching euery thyng: for it doeth procede of a ſyncere minde, which both tendereth the common weale, and fauoureth alſo his dignitie.
            In the ſame tyme chaunſed a great alteration in Denmarke. And thus befel the caſe. Chriſtierne the fyrſt of that name king of Dēmarke An alteratiû in Denmark Norweye, and Suecia, had two ſonnes Iohn, and Fridericke, Iohn did ſuccede his father, and had warre with the Suecians, whiche rebelled, notwithſtandynge by compoſition the matter was appeaſed. This Iohn had a ſonne named Chriſtierne, who, whan he was but ſyxe yeres of age, was proclamed kynge, his father yet lyuing, and ſyxe and twentie yeres after that, whē his father was dead, he was crowned in the yeare of oure Lorde .M.D.xiiij. Durynge whoſe reigne the Suecians rebelled againe, and ſet vp Steno Stura, to haue the gouernement. Chriſtierne made all his power agaynſte them, and after many battels and ſondry ſieges, he ſubdueth them, commaūdyng that this Steno, which was ſlayne in battell, and buried; ſhoulde be taken vp and brent. This was in the yeare .M.D.xx. the Suecians beynge thus vanquiſhed, Guſtauus Erixonius, a noble man hauing aide; as it was thought, of the Lubeckes, ſtirred them vp to a new rebellion, and had good fortune. He pretēded fyrſt to haue done it for Steno his children, and for the more aſſuraunce, maried his daughter. when the king had loſt this prouince, and was euill beloued at home (for he gouerned the common welth eruelly, and offended all men, when alſo his vncle Fridericke, and they of Lubecke moued warre againſt him: fearynge leſt this broile at the length would tourne to his vtter deſtruction, fled The king of Denmarke flecth. away with his children and his wife Iſabell, ſyſter to Charles themperour, whan he had reigned .ix. yeares; and fyrſte aryued in Selande themperours prouince. Immediatly the ſtates of the realme, callynge

a counſell, do create his vncle Fridericke duke of Holſe an aged man, kynge, beyng aided herin by thē of Lubecke. And then ſending abroad theyr letters, to the Emperor, to the Byſhoppe of Rome, and the other Princes of the Empire, they rendre a reaſon why they dyd ſo, they accuſe him of moſt greuous crimes, and ſay, howe he is baniſſhed by hys iuſte deſeruinges. The ſame thinge alſo doeth Fridericke and the Citie of Lubecke, which is of moſt aucthoritie and power in al thoſe parties. But Chriſtierne fyndynge a good wryter, Cornelles Scepper, a Flemmyng very well learned, aunſwereth to theſe crymes and deſyreth Cornelles Scepper. the ſtates of the Empire (aſſembled at Norinberge) of aide & ſuccour. He had one ſonne, whom the Emperour toke vnto him: and two doughters, Dorothie and Christine. The ſame yere his frendes attēpted warre, to haue reſtored him, but it was in vaine. The Emperour beyng intangled with the Frenche warres. The Ambaſſodor of Rome had complained of the preachers of Norinberge, that they ſhould teach euill doctrine, and required that they might be layde faſte by the feete: But the Princes ſuppoſed how he was miſſe infourmed: for the Preachers ſaye, they are had in greate eſtimation with the people. And if ought ſhould be done to them, all men would take it to be done of a ſet purpoſe, to oppreſſe the trueth: whiche thinge myght cauſe a rebellion. Notwithſtandyng they wyll appoint certein men that ſhall make inquiſition of the whole matter, and therin do as ſhall be reaſonable.
            What tyme the Princes had anſwered to all the Biſhoppe of Romes demaundes, they gather into certeine articles, ſuche thynges as they would haue done by him and other Biſhops in Germany, which were ſuch as infringed their liberties, made Germany bare of money, and keptmen in great bondage, which they ſaid plainely they would no longer ſuffer, but in caſe they were not reformed with ſpede, they wold ſeke a redreſſe thē ſelues. Concernyng the tribute of the Clergie, thus it was. Amonges other meanes to gather vp money, this was one, that Byſhoppes and other ſpirituall parſons ſhoulde paye to the Byſhoppe of Rome, after the rate of the benefice, a certeine ſumme of The beginnyng of the firſt fruictes and tenthes. money, commonly called, fyrſte fruites and tentes. Some do aſcribe this deuice to Iohn the .xxij. others vnto Boniface the .ix. The pretēſe was fayre and goodly, that ther might be Treaſure ready at all times againſt the Turkes and Saracenes.
            And for as much as at that time the aucthoritie of the Biſhoppes of Rome was growen great, and eſtemed holy, it was eaſely graunted. Englishmen only refuſed to pay, namely for theyr ſmal benefices. This continued till the counſel of Baſil, where it was put downe, & brought vp againe by Eugenius the fourth, who made that counſell fruſtrate, and ſo hath continued euer ſyns, but yet not with out much repining. For in the yere of our Lorde, a thouſande and fine hundred, what time

the Emperor Maximilian held a counſell at Auſ
                  ••
               rge about the Turkiſhe warre, it was decreed that Ambaſſadors ſhould be ſent to Alexander the ſixt, that he ſhould aide the common wealth. And geue thoſe yerely reuenewes vnto this vſe that were graunted for the ſame purpoſe. But tharchebiſhops or Metropolitanes, receane of him a certein ſigne of honor and dignitie made of Flaxe & wolle, they call it a Palle. For the which they muſt paye a great piece of money to the Byſhoppe A Romiſhe Palle. of Rome, and that in a ſhort ſpace: For he maye admit none other Byſhoppe till he haue receiued his Palle, whiche he weareth alwayes at Maſſe: but before it be deliuered to him, he muſt take his othe to owne him his faith and obeidience. And the ſixte day of Marche the Princes at Norinberge ſet forthe a writinge of the thinges before mentioned, charging all men to obſerue the ſame, vnder a great penaltie, whiche decree was publiſhed in the Emperours name. For he had eſtabliſſhed the Senate and iudgement before he retorned into Spaine. And Fridericke Countie Palatine was his deputie in that aſſemblie. Two freres brent at Bruſels.
            
            About this tyme were taken at Bruxels two Monckes of S. Auſtens order, Iohn and Henry. Hogoſtrate a Frere Dominicke, had thē in examination. They were aſked what they beleued? They made anſwere: howe they beleued the bokes of the Olde and New teſtament, and the Crede of the Apoſtles, that conteined the Articles of our faith. Againe, whether they beleued the decrees of the Counſels, and of aū
               cient fathers? Such of them as are agreable to the Scriptures. Whether they thinke it deadly ſynne, if a man breake the decrees of the fathers, and of the Biſhoppe of Rome? It is only aſcribed to Gods commaundementes to condemne or ſaue. Whē they perſeuered herin, they were condemned to dye: But they gaue thankes to God yt they ſhould ſuffer for the glorie of his name. When they were brought forth to ſuffer, The Ceremonies of diſgratyng. all men marueyled to beholde theyr conſtancie, ſo were they burnt the fyrſt day of Iuly. But before they wer executed, they were diſgraded, which thing is done vnto prieſtes onely. For beynge condemned Hereſye by an Eccleſiaſticall Iudge, he hath put vpon him an albe and a Ueſtement, and deliuered into his handes a Chalice with wine and water, alſo the gilt Patent with a ſinging Cake. And ſo knelyng vpon his knees, the Biſhoppes deputie taketh from him the thynges before named, commaundynge hym that he ſhall no more ſaye Maſſe for the quick, and the dead. And with a piece of glaſſe he ſkrapeth his fingers in ioyninge him that he neuer herafter halowe any thing. After he taketh the reſt of the thinges from him, with certein curſes ioyned therunto. Whan he is exempted thus out of the numbre of Prieſtes, he is alſo put from ye reſt of the ordres by the which he came vnto prieſthod. Then he is he torned naked and decked againe with a laymans apparell and ſo deliuered to the magiſtrate, whom the biſhoppes chaunceloure

entreateth yt he wold determine no harme againſt his life nor body, for they vſe this Ceremony, leſt they beynge holy men, ſhoulde ſeme to be the Aucthors of death or bloudſhed.
            Whan the decree of the Empire made at Norinb. was of many taken diuerſely, of ſome alſo cōtemned. Luth. Writinge his letters to the Luth. interpreteth the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of the Princes. Princes, doth aduertiſe them yt he hath read it reuerently & with great pleaſure: Firſt where they cōmaunde the goſpell to be taught after the interpretatiōs approued by the church, ſome in dede vnderſtād it to be after ye accuſtomed maner of Thomas of Aquine, Dūſe, & ſuche others as the Biſhops of Rome haue allowed, but he taketh it to be mont of more aūcient writers, as Hilary, Cypriā, Auſtē, & ſuch others. And yet not ſo much credit to be giuē vnto thē, nothing like, as to the ſcripture. The Bible to be preferred before all others. Thus he doubteth not but they mēt it, & ſo doth he take it: which is the cauſe yt certen of the chiefeſt nobilitie wold not ſubſcribe to it, nor ſuffer it to be proclamed in theyr coūtreis. Secondly, where biſhops ſhould appoint mete mē to be preſent at ſermōs, which ſhould geue gentle admonition, if any thing were a miſſe (he ſaith) the decre is good, but that the Biſhops though they wold can not obſerue the ſame, for yt they wāt learned men, & haue no other but ſuche as haue learned nothinge elles but ſophiſtrie. And where they prohibite yt no bookes be printed before learned mē appointed therunto haue firſt peruſed thē, he wil not be againſt it ſo yt it cōcerue no bokes of ſcripture, which in no wiſe oughte to be inhibited. Finally where they haue decreed yt prieſtes which mary wiues or forſake their order ſhalbe puniſhed according to the Canon law: yt to be to ouer hard a thig: For as they cōfeſſe, if the goſpel be preached ſincerely, thā muſt the Canō law be much qualified. Afterwarde he bewalleth the miſerie & frowardnes of our time, yt in ſo clere a light of the goſpel, yt extreme law that prohibiteth mariage, is not aboliſhed which hath geuen thoccaſion of ſo many great euils: yet are they much to be praiſed, which are content wt the puniſhmēt preſcribed in the Canon law: but ſuch as wold kill the prieſtes yt marie or leaue their ordre, after they haue by priſon & all kind of punniſhement tormented thē, are greatly to be abhorred. Wherfore he beſecheth the Princes, that for ſo muche as theyr aduerſaries will not obeie the decre which they mighte and ought to obſerue: the pore prieſtes might be pardoned for yt thinge 
                  •
               ech not in their power to performe, for euery man hath not the gift of chaſtitie, and the vowes made be fooliſhe.
            After this he ſet forth a boke of ordeining of miniſters to the Senate Lut. wrot to the Senate of Prage. of Prage, and ioyneth with it a writynge wherein he declareth howe the Church hath power and authoritie to iudge of euery doctrine, and to appoint miniſters. But fyrſte, he defyneth the Churche to be where ſo euer the Ghoſpell is ſyncerely taught. And the Byſhoppes he calleth Images, and heades without braynes, wherof there is not one yt doth

his duetie in any place, namely in Germany.
            And not longe after, he wrote of the eſchewynge of mens doctrine, Luther wrot of eſchewing the doctrine of men. wherin (he ſaieth) he holdeth not with them, which do in dede contēne the lawes and traditions of men. And yet do nothynge which belongeth to the dwetie of a trewe Chriſtian. After this he preſcribeth how the Maſſe and Communion ſhould be vſed in the Churche of Wittenberge. And ſaieth howe he hath hitherto wrought ſlouthfullye, by reaſon of mens infirmitie, and to haue had a care one lye, howe he myghte plucke wicked opinions out of mens myndes: but nowe that many be confyrmed, it is time to ſuffer vngodlines in the churche no longer, but that all cloking and ſimulation ſet a parte, ſincere workyng maye enſewe vpon pure doctrine. And to this he addeth an other wrytyng of holy ceremonies to be obſerued in the Churche. And againe, of the abhomination of the priuate Maſſe, which they call the Canon. Wherin he exhorteth ye people to flee frō the accuſtomed ſacrifices of the maſſe, as they woulde do from the Deuyll hym ſelfe, for the demonſtration wherof, he reciteth in order the Canon of the Maſſe, declaryng howe full it is of blaſphemies againſte God. Amonges other learned men of Germany that fauoured Luther, Ulriche Hutten, a noble man borne, The death & workes of Hutten. was one, who died this yere not farre from Zurick. There be certein workes of his remaining which declare his excellent witte. In the iij. boke I ſhewed you how Luther made anſwere to Henry king of Englande. Whiche after the kynge had read, he writeth his letters to the The king of Englande writeth to the princes of Saxonie. Princes of Saxonie Fridericke, and John his brother, & to his vncle George, and greuouſly cōplaining of Luther, he ſheweth them what daunger hangeth ouer them, and all Germany, by reaſon of his doctrine: And that it is not a thinge to be contemned or neglected: for the great crueltie of the Turkes, which is nowe ſpred ſo farre a broad, had his beginning of a naughtie man or two: And Boheme hard by them, may be a warning for them, to ſee the thing reformed in time: he admoniſheth thē alſo, that they ſuffer not Luther, to tranſlate the newe Teſtament into the Uulgare tong: for he is wel knowē to be ſuch a practiſioner, that there is no doubt, but ſuche thinges as are well written he with his euill tranſlation, wil corrupt and depraue. Unto theſe letters The anſwer of duke George. Duke George anſwereth very frendly, blaming alſo Luther excedingly, whoſe bokes (he ſaith) he hath baniſhed out of al his dominiōs, as the moſt hurtfull enemies that can be. Moreouer howe he is righte ſory that he hath written ſo extremely againſt him, and hath giuen cō
               maundement throughe out all his countrey, that no man reade it, nor ſell it, and howe, he hath puniſhed the Printer that brought the fyrſte Copie thyther. In the aſſemblie at Norinberge, beſydes matters of Religion, the Princes entreated of peace, and lawes, of the punniſſhement of thoſe that obeyde not the lawes of the Empire, of continuall

aide againſte the Turke. Which two laſt were not agreed vpon. And al the cities of thempire, becauſe certein thinges were enacted, which they ſowe ſhould be preiudiciall to them, ſent theyr Ambaſſadours into Sp
                  •
               ine to the Emperour. Which ariuynge at Ualolet the ſixt day of Auguſt. The thyrde day after declared theyr meſſage: Unto whom the Emperor aunſwered gently and frankely: Notwithſtandynge (he ſayde) the Byſhoppe of Rome had complained to him in his letters of Strauſeborough; Norinberge, and Auſpurge, as fauorers of Luthers doctrine, he truſted it were not trewe, yet woulde he not hyde it from them, to thentent they might obſerue the Byſhoppes decrees and his: (as he thinketh they will do.) Theſe Ambaſſadors pourge them ſelues, faiyng: that they do what they can, to accompliſhe his will and pleaſure. In the meane time dieth Byſhoppe Adrian at the Ides of Septembre, Adrian the Pope dyeth. Clement ſuccedeth. & in his place was choſen Clement the vii. of the houſe of Medices. They of Zuricke onely folowed Zuinglius doctrine, the reſt of the Suices hated the ſame: Wherfore in a cōmon aſſemblie had for the fal
                  •
               e purpoſe at Bernes, ſome accuſed Zuinglius that he preached openly, howe that ſuche as made league with other nations, dyd ſell Zuinglius is broughtin hatred. bloud, and eate mens fleſhe: Zuinglius heringe therof, wrote that he ſpake not ſo, but that he ſaid in generall, howe there were ſome which abhorred as a wicked thing to eate fleſhe, beyng forbidden by the Biſhoppe The eatyng of Fleſhe. of Romes lawe, which thinke it none offence to ſell mens fleſhe for gold, and deſtroy it with weapon: But herin he named no nation: And ſeyng that vice doeth nowe ſo muche abound, it is his dewtie to rebuke it: but the ſame doeth nothing concerne the good and innocent parſons. Zuinglius amonges other things, taught that images ſhuld be had out of the Church, and the Maſſe to be put down as a wicked thing. For the which cauſe the Senate called a new aſſemblie in their A new diſputatiō at Zu. Citie, whither came great reſorte, in the moneth of October. And the diſoutation cōtinued thre daies. About this time in ſundry places, and namely at Strauſburgh: Prieſtes maried wiues, which thinge made Prieſtes maried wiues. muche contention. For being accuſed for ſo doyng, they anſwered that they had done nothinge agaynſte Gods lawe, permittinge all men to marie indifferently. The Senate of Strauſburghe had muche a do with the Biſhoppe in this caſe, who called them the .xx. day of Ianuary  to appeare before hym at the towne of Sabernes, to heare what ſentence ſhoulde be gyuen agaynſt them for contractyng of Matrimonye, wherein (he ſaieth) they haue broken the lawes of the Churche, of the holy Fathers and Byſhoppes of Rome, of the Emperoure alſo, and of the Empire, and haue done great iniurie to the order, and offē
               ded the diuine Maieſtie. When the Prieſtes had receiued this Citation, they make ſuite to the Senate, to haue theyr cauſe hearde before them. And refuſe not to ſuffer death, if they be founde to haue done

any thing againſte the cōmaundement of God. The ſenate intreateth the Biſhoppe, that for as much as they refuſe not to come to theyr aunſwere, & if he ſhould puniſh them, it were like to brede much trouble, cō
               ſyderinge that the reſide 
                  ••
               o kepe Harlots openly, and are nothynge ſaied to he would at the leſt defferre it to thende of the imperial counſell. Which was than at Norinberge, where doubtles ſuche like caſes ſhould be decided. To this later coūſel holden this yere at Norinberge Clement the Biſhop of Rome ſent his Legate, Cardinal Campegius, Pope Clemēt ſendeth Campegius to duke Fri. who had his letters moreouer to Friderike duke of Saxonie, written very friendly in Ianuary. Signifiynge howe he reioyſed to heare of this aſſemblye, where he ſhoulde be preſente him ſelfe, truſtynge that ſome thynge ſhoulde be there enacted that mighte helpe the Common 
                  〈◊〉
                for the which cauſe he hathe ſent thither Cardinall Campegius 
                  〈◊〉
                man of excellent vertue, who can enfourme the Princes of his carefulneſſe and 
                  〈◊〉
                towardes the Common weale, and deuiſe with him priuately of the meanes of peace and quietneſſe, whereunto he exhorteth him 
                  〈◊〉
                gyue his mynde, for the ſame thyng concerneth the proſperitie and dignitie of al magiſtrats. And how he beareth a great good will vnto Germany, hauynge good hope that they wyll not fall from their auncient vertue, but helpe to eſchewe publike daungers.
            Wherfore he requireth him to ſhewe all good will and fauoure to hys Legate, of whome he ſhall heare all thinges more at large.
            At the ſixe and twentie day of Ianuary, the Heluetiās called a conuocation A decree of the Suyſes. at Lucerne. There was a decree made that no man ſhoulde mocke or contemne Gods worde, whiche had bene taught theſe thouſande and foure hundred yeares, nor the Maſſe wherein the bodye of Chriſt is conſecrated to his honor, and comfort of the quicke & the dead that ſuche as be of lawfull age to receyue the Lordes ſupper, do cōfeſſe them ſelues to the prieſtwiſe in the Lent ſeaſon, that al men abſteine from fleſhe on daies forbidden, and in Lent alſo from egges and cheſe. That nothing of Luthers, or any newe doctrine be taught priuely nor openly. That ſuche as cary about the reliques of the holy goſt, the virgin Reliques of the holy goſt Mary, or of S. Anthony be not laughed at, and yt they do obſerue all other olde cuſtomes, they that offende herein to be preſented to the Magiſtrates & puniſhed. Whē Cāpegius was cōmen to Norinberge, The Cardinall writeth to the Duke of Saronis. Duke Friderike was departed thence, wherefore he wrote vnto hym the laſte daye of February, and ſendinge alſo the Biſhoppes letters, he lamenteth that vnhappye chaunce that he can not ſpeake wyth him preſently, hauyng many thynges to talke with him from the Biſhop of Rome, whiche can not ſo well be done by letters and meſſengers, and be of ſuche ſorte as maye abyde no delaye: But ſeynge it will be no better, after muche gretyng made in the Biſhops name and his own, he ſaieth, that albeit the reporte be great that he ſhould be a fauorer of

theſe newe ſpronge vp Hereſyes, yet can not the Biſhoppe hitherto, nor he be ſo perſwaded, for the manyfold and excellent vertues which they perceiue to be in him. And eſpecially, for that he hath bene euer a great fauourer of Religion, and of the Apoſtolicall Churche: whereupon he will not truſte the iudgementes of others, nother leaue the good opinion that he hath of him, before he ſhall ſee cauſe, and know it him ſelf: Germany hath bene wonderfully altered with in theſe fewe yeres cō
               cernyng Religion: but he vnderſtandeth howe muche the commō people do differ from the nobilitie and Princes, the rulers of the lawes, amonges whom he is as principal, aſwel by his own, as alſo by deſerte of his aūceſters, which haue euermore done great honor to the church of Rome: Wherfore the Biſhop requireth him that in theſe daūgerous dayes, he woulde after the example of his elders declare his vertue of ſtoutenes, not onely in miſlyking this lybertie of the people, but alſo in extremely puniſhing the ſame: for vnleſſe theyr licentious boldnes and malapertenes be reſtrained, it will bring the lyke miſerie and confuſion into Germany, that it did before tyme into Boheme and Hongary, which are not yet quieted: For they that do ſtubberuely contemne the ſacred Lawes, and Eccleſiaſticall Magiſtrate, will alſo vndoubtedly worke their violence againſt the Ciuil Magiſtrates, whom they loue not: Manye are nowe glad to ſee the Paſtours of Churches, and the Courte of Rome thus troubled and diſpiſed: whiche perceaue ful litel, what daunger they them ſelues ſtande in: But the Byſhoppe, whiche as the maſter of a ſhyppe ſitteth watching at the Healme, doeth foreſee this ſtorme approching, and hath ſent hym, to warne all the Princes, and him eſpecially, to beware of this tempeſt, which is like to diſtroy, not onely the citie of Rome, but alſo Germany it ſelfe. And for the ſame cauſe alſo, hath ſent letters by him, and willed him to treate diligently with him of all theſe matters, to the intente the tranquilitie and quietnes of Germany might be recouered: For he is purpoſely ſent, to lifte vp them that are fallen, and to receiue vnto grace, ſuch as are penitēt. Whereunto albeit he is not very fit, yet truſtynge vpon his gentlenes, he wil attempt it with al diligence: wherfore ſeing that he hath taken this wery and painefull iorney, he praieth him that he maye not want his helpe and fauor herein. And that he woulde write agayne ſhortly, what he thinketh beſt to be done: And he will do for him againe what he can in the worlde.
            After in the Counſell of the Princes, he fyrſte declareth howe that no man was willyng at Rome to take this voiage into Germany, at Campegius oratiō to the Princes at Norinberge. the laſt was he appointed, as one, that may thanke the Germanes for all his promotions, hauing two thinges to treate of, Religion, and the Turkiſhe warre: And fyrſt he marueleth muche, that ſo manye greate and worthy Princes can beare with this alteration, & ſuffer the ſame

Religion, Rites, and Ceremonies, wherin they were borne & brought vp, and theyr fathers alſo and progenitours dead in, to be thus defared and ſet at naught. Which thing if it be not ſpedely reformed, wil ſtyre vp doubtles, great commotions and rebellion of the people agaynſte theyr magiſtrates.
            This the hyghe Biſhoppe fearing and conſyderyng, hath ſent hym to deuiſe a way with them, howe to remedie this matter. Whoſe diligens herein, if it be refuſed, which as a good father and paſtour, wiſſheth well to all his Children and ſhepe, there is no cauſe hereafter, to laye any blame in him: As touchynge the Turkes, he denieth not, but that there was money gathered for the ſame purpoſe, and brought to Rome, which albeit it was not employed all that wayes, yet may not the cōmon welth therfore in this calamitie of time be neglected: what hurt that cruell enemie hathe done, it is not vnknowen: for by the negligens and cowardiſe of our owne men, he hathe taken the Rhodes, and the chiefeſt foretreſſe of Hongary. The Rhodes endured an harde ſiege many monethes; and at laſte, wantynge all thynges neceſſarye, whan they ſaw no aide would come, they yelded: the like chaūce was in Hongary. Which if he ſhould ſubdew wholly and bringe vnder his ſubiection, it is to be feared, leſt they wyll become our enemies, muche worſe than be the Turkes: But vnleſſe this contention procedynge of this new doctrine, be fyrſt taken away, the other part of the common wealth can not (in his opinion) be well holpen.
            Hereunto the Princes anſwere, that wheras he beareth this good The princes aunſwere. will vnto Germany, they are glad that he came thither, and amonges them all, they wyll choſe certeine to conferre with him, ſuppoſing that he hath ſome order preſcribed him of the Biſhoppe and his cardinals, which they haue willed him to folow, knowyng the matter ſo wel as they do, for the laſte yere, what tyme another Ambaſſador was here, they wrote vnto him theyr mindes, howe the daunger of this alteration ſhould be foreſeen and remedied. And alſo what they required of him to be done for his parte. Wherof if he haue brought any aunſwer, they deſyre him to vtter it, to the intent they may the better procede in the cauſe. And as touching Turkiſhe matters, they confeſſe to be as he hath ſayd, notwithſtandyng that great warre doth not only concerne The Empire, but all together, kynges and princes of Chriſtendome in like maner: For vnleſſe that they be at peace amonges them ſelfes, and giue their aide, ther can nothing be done to continew: But for aſmuch as the Turke nowe, maketh great preparation vnto warres, both by ſea and Lande, they would alſo knowe his opinion herin.
            The Legate ſaid againe, that whether there were any ſuch way by them deuiſed to appeaſe the ſtrife aboute Religion, or whether it were deliuered to the Biſhoppe and Cardinalles or no, he can not certeinly

tell: but the Biſhoppes good wyll is muche, who hathe gyuen him full aucthoritie in all ſuche matters: but they whiche knowe the men, the maner and cuſtome of the countrey, muſt fynd out that way, that may lead them to the ende wiſhed for.
            In the counſell at Wormes, the Emperor (by theyr common aſſent) The decre of Wormes repeted. made a decree to haue bene executed thorowout all Germany, which ſome obeied, and ſome not: Wherefore this great diuerſitie ſhould be in the Empire, he knoweth not: But he thinketh good before any thynge be determined, to conſulte howe it maye be executed: he is not comen thither to ſtyrre vp fyre and diſſention (as ſome reporte) but all his deſyre, and the Biſhoppes in like caſe is, to make peace and concorde, to thentent that ſuche as haue erred and ſtraied, may be reduced into the waie, that the decrees of the counſels. Themperors and Princes proclamations might be obſerued: concernynge their requeſtes, whether they were made to be ſent to Rome, he knoweth not: But three copies were brought thither to priuate men, whetof he had one, but the Byſhoppe and the Colledge of Cardinalles coulde not be perſwaded, that they ſhould be made by the Princes, but thought rather that ſome priuate men had deuiſed for hatred and malice, that they bare to the citie of Rome: Wherin be diuerſe thinges that deny the Byſhoppes authoritie, ſmell of Hereſye, and be ſuche as he can not meddle withall. But for others that are not againſt the Biſhop, ſuch as are grounded vpon equitie and reaſon, he will not refuſe to treate of: Howe be it it ſemeth vnto him, that the demaundes ſhould haue bene propounded wt more modeſtie, if they had ought to ſay to the highe Biſhop. For ſo dyd lately the Spaniardes, which ſendyng an Ambaſſade to Rome, declared gē
               tely what theyr requeſt was. But wheras they be printed and publiſſhed abrode, he thinketh that ouer muche: And yet there is no doubte, but that the Biſhoppe of Rome, wyll do for Germany what he can. Moreouer what power the Turke hath, and what preparatiō he maketh the biſhop hath good intelligence. And hath alredy great treaſure The pope is wel monied. in a readines, and will haue more. And for ſo muche as the concorde of Chriſten Princes is very requiſite, he hath done what he can, that the Emperor, the Frenche kynge, and the king of England, hauyng peace together might ſet vpon the Turke on all handes, and he will employ therupon all his treaſure. This doeth the Biſhoppe as a good ſheperde foreſee and care for peace and quietnes. But in caſe the ſhepe wyll not folowe the voyce of the Sheperde, he can do no more, but take it paciently, and commit the whole matter vnto God.
            Amonges the Suyces encreaſed dayly cōtention for Religion. And The Suiſes are offended with them of Zuricke. the reſt of townes, ſendynge theyr Ambaſſadors to them of Zurycke, ſhewed theyr grief. How that in tymes paſt, all thinges were at a godly quiet, and no contention of Doctrine at all: But nowe through the

meanes of Luther that fyrſt began, and Zuinglins, and Leo Iude, that preached amonges them, interpretinge Godes worde after theyr owne iuſte and appetite: that godly peace and quietues of the churche and the common weale, is nowe tourned into trouble and diſſention: And beſydes that theſe incommodities do enſew: vpon faſtyng dayes they eate bothe Egges and Fleſſhe: Religious folkes, aſwell men as women, forſaking theyr profeſſion and orders, do marrie. Gods ſeruice is laide downe: they ſinge no more in the Churche, they neglect confeſſion and penaunce, the Maſſe is railed on, our Lady and the ſainctes, diſhonoured, theyr Images pulled downe and broken, the ſacramentes had in contepte, in ſo muche that nowe a daies, the ſacred holy hoſt Yeare for the Hoſte. that repreſenteth Chriſtes body, can ſkarſely be ſafe in the Prieſtes haides. Theſe are thinges to be lamēted, and to be auenged alſo with the loſſe of life and goods: Wherfore they deſyre them to leaue their newe doctrine and perſeuer in the olde religion of their fathers: for they can beare this gere no longer: But in caſe there be any thinge wherin they fynde them ſelues offended with the Biſhop of Rome, Cardinals, Byſhoppes The Marchaundiſe of the clergie. and ſuche others, whan they entre into benefices, choppe and chaunge them, and gather vp all the money in the countrey, vſurping, and taking ouer muche vpon them, if theſe and ſuche other like things do moleſt and greue them, they will not refuſe to helpe to reforme the ſame, for they do miſlyke them very muche them ſelues.
            The Senate of Zuricke, aunſwered the .xxi. daye of Marche, that The anſwer of them or zuricke. their miniſters of their church had preached there fyue yeares. Whoſe doctrine at the begynnynge ſemed vnto them newe, becauſe they had not heard the like before: but after that they vnderſtode how the ende therof was to ſhewe Ieſus Chriſt the aucthor of ſaluation, who dyed for ye ſinnes of the world, who a loue deliuered vs wretches frō death euerlaſting, being the onely aduocate of mankinde to God the father, they could not but wyth feruent deſyre embrace ſo ioyful newes: there was great agrement and concorde in times paſt betwixt the Apoſtles and thoſe which after theyr time embraced Chriſtes doctrine: the ſame they truſt, ſhall be nowe alſo amonges ſuch as giue their minds hereunto. And if Luther or any other do ſo teache, it is well done, neyther ought Gods word to be called his doctrine: And although they do honor Chriſt only: yet do they no iniurie therfore to the virgin Marye, or other ſaints: For al they being here in earth, loked for eternall ſaluatiō, by the onely name of Chriſt, and nowe is there ſuch a light giuen, that in maner all men within their citie do reade ye Bible diligently: ſo that the miniſters can not wraſt a wrye, that is ſo continuallye in all mens handes: wherefore there can be no ſecte obiected vnto them, but that name accordeth to them, which to mainteine their lucre and dignitie, wraſte Gods worde whither they liſt. They are ſaid to be in an error,

but no man can ſhewe it: they haue often times required herin the Biſhoppe of Conſtaunce, of Baſill, and of Courtes certeine Uniuerſities, and them alſo, but vnto this day ther is nothing done: Therfore, their Miniſters gyue none occaſion of diffention in the commō wealth, but Authors of Sciſmes. the Biſhoppes and ſuche, as for their owne profit, teache that which is contrary to Godes worde: For they deceiue the people & offende God greuouſly, which feare to loſe any of theyr commodities, and wer loth to forſake theyr pride and auarice: As touchyng the eatyng of Egges and Fleſhe: Albeit it be free and not forbidden by Chriſt, yet haue they made a lawe to auoide offence and raſhenes: God is the Aucthour of Matrimonie lawfull for all men. Matrimony, and hath ordeined it for almen. S. Paule alſo commaū
               deth that the miniſter of the church ſhould be the huſband of one wife. And ſins that Biſhoppes do permit prieſtes for money, to kepe Concubines and Harlots by a filthy example. And they neither can nor wyll be without women, they thinke it not good to reſiſt God, who ordeyned holy wedlocke, ſufferyng them that haue not the gifte of Chaſtitie, to marrie, rather than in ſinglenes to lyue a fylthy lyfe.
            Colledges and ſuch other places were fyrſt founded for the pore, but now for the moſt part they poſſeſſe them, which haue enough beſides. And often times it is ſene that one hath as much as wold find many. Wherfore they think it reaſonable, that ſuche goods were againe conuerted to the vſe of the poore, wherin notwithſtandyng to vſe this moderation, that ſuche as be in poſſeſſion already, be permitted to enioye the rente, during theyr liues, leſte any man ſhoulde haue cauſe to complaine. That the Iewels of the Churche apperteine not to the trewe What nedeth gold in the churche. worſhipping of God. But this to be more acceptable vnto God, what time the pore and nedye are releued. The order of Prieſthode is not of them diſpiſed, but muche ſet by, in caſe they do their dewtie, and teach ſyncerely. But as for the reſt of the rabble yt doeth no good, but harme: If it be by litell and litel diminiſhed; without offence, and theyr poſſeſſions put to ſome godly vſe, there is no doubte but the ſame woulde be vnto God moſt acceptable. For whether that God do accept their ſinging and ſeruice in Latin, it is muche to be doubted of. For many of them vnderſtande not what they ſay, and yet are they hired to do the ſame. The order of Monkes is the inuention of man, and not the ordinaunce of God.
            Howe muche Auricular confeſſion is of valewe, that numbreth the ſinnes, they wil leaue vndiſcuſſed, but that, wherby trewe penitentes, What is true cōfeſſiō, haue acceſſe vnto Chriſte theyr mediator, they iudge not onely profitable, but alſo neceſſary, for conſciences troubled, and preſſed down with the burthen of ſinne. And this to be trewly to repent, when a mā doeth amende his life: The Sacraments which were inſtituted of God, are not of them contemned, but had in great reuerence, notwithſtandyng

they muſt be vſed accordyng vnto Gods worde, and the Lordes ſupper not to ſo applied, as if it were an oblation or a ſacrifice. And if the Clergie that thus complaineth, can fynde out any error amonges thē, or prone that they be hindred or empeched by thē, they will make them amendes: if not, it were reaſon that they ſhould be commaunded to do theyr dewtie, that is, to teache the treuth, and to abſtaine from ſklaū
               dering of others:
            Where as they deſyre to be deliuered from the pillage and vſurped Howe the yoke of the Papiſtes is to be ſhaken of. aucthoritie of the Biſhoppe of Rome and his clientes, they are exceadyng glad to heare it: whiche thinge can be done by no meanes better than if Godes worde may be throughly receiued: for ſo longe as theyr lawes and decrees ſhall take place, let vs looke for no deliueraūce. For it is onely the preaching of Gods word, that ſhaketh theyr power and dignitie: For the force of the Goſpell and veritie is ſuche, that they diſtruſting theyr owne ſtrength, ſeeke forthe aide of kynges: Wherefore if they ſhould in this caſe vſe the helpe of Scripture, it is requiſite that the ſame be done lyke wiſe in all other thinges, that all that God is offended with, may be aboliſhed: for the reformation whereof they wyll be glad to beſtowe not onely theyr trauaile & counſel, but their goods alſo: for this would haue bene done longe ſyns: Wherefore they deſyre them to accept this in good part, and to weighe it diligently: They conet nothing more than peace and quiotneſſe, and will do nothing contrary to theyr league: But in this caſe, which concerneth theyr euerlaſtyng ſaluation, they can not otherwiſe do, vnleſſe theyr errour can be detected: they deſyre them therfore, that if they thinke theyr doctrine to be againſt the Scriptures, it maye be ſhewed them before the ende of Maye: For ſo longe will they tary for an anſwere, from them and frō the Byſhoppes, and alſo from the Univerſitie of Baſill.
            In the meane while the Biſhoppe of Conſtaunce, calling a conuotion, The Biſhop of Cōſtance maketh a booke in defence of Images. made a boke to anſwere them of Zuricke, the ende wherof was to declare that where the Scripture ſpeaketh againſte Images, it is to be vnderſtand onely of the Idoles that were amonges the Iewes and Gentiles. And that the Images receyued of the churche are to be kept ſtyll. Then treateth he of the Maſſe, the which he proueth by many teſtimonies of Biſhoppes of Rome, and theyr coūſels, to be an oblation and a ſacrifice. This boke ſendeth he to Zuricke the fyrſt daye of Iune, exhortynge the Senate with many weightie wordes, that they neither take downe theyr Images, nor abrogate the Maſſe, nor ſuffer the people to be taught otherwiſe. The Senate make the anſwere the eighteneth day of Auguſte, howe that they are glad, that he hathe ſetforth this booke: for now it ſhall appere, whether partie defendeth the iuſter quarell. After they declared the mindes of theyr learned menne, teaching the contrary by the Scriptures.
            
               
But before they wrote an aunſwer; the Senate had commaunded throughout theyr inciſdiction, all Images to betaken downe & brent. Images brēt at Zuricke.
                Yet without any trouble, this was in the moneth of Iune, and within a fewe monethes after the Canons of Zuricke make a compact with the Senate, and order was taken how the landes and goods of their Colledge ſhould be imploied.
            The Emperor ſent to the Counſel at Norinberge, Iohn Hawnart, and complainyng that the decree made at Worines by their common aſſent and counſell, was broken to the great loſſe of Germany, he commaunded that from hence forth it ſhould be diligentlye obſerued. The Princes anſwer, that they wyll do herein what they can.
            Finally the .xviij. of Aprill, it was there decreed, that by the aſſent of The decre of Norinberge. the Emperour, the Biſhop of Rome ſo ſhortly as might be, ſhoulde all a free counſel in Germanye, in ſome place conueniente. That the eſtates of the Empire do aſſemble at Spires, the xi. of Nouember, there to conſult, what they ſhall folowe, vntill the begynninge of the counſell. That the Princes ſhall aſſigne certeine good and well learned men in euery Prouince, to gather out of Luthers bookes and others, all queſtions diſputable, and exhibite them to the Princes at the next aſſemblie, that they maye procede more ſpedely when they ſhall come to the counſell. And that by the meane and diligens of the magiſtrate, the goſpel may be purely taught and ſoberly) according to the interpretatiōs approued by the churche: Moreouer that herafter therebe ſet forthe no mo famous Libelles and Pictures: Finally that ſuche thinges as the Princes haue to charge the court of Rome and the Clergie, be treated of and diſcuſſed in the next aſſemblie at Spires. For the counſel, Campegius dyd vndertake, and promyſed the Princes to declare it to the Byſhop diligently. The Princes at this aſſemblie, were Lewes countie Palatine, Wylliam, and Lewes Dukes of Bauare, Friderike Palatine, Caſimire Markes of Brandenburge, Byſhoppes of Treuers, Bamberge, Wirciburge, Trent and Brixine, and Albert of Brandenburge, maſter of Pruſelande.
            I tolde you howe the Senate of Straſebrough intreated the Biſhoppe therof, for the maried prieſtes whome he had cited to appeare at Suite betwixt the Biſhop & ſenate of Strauſo. Sabernes: which came not at theyr day appointed, wherfore the Biſhop writeth to the Legate Campegius complaynyng of the Senate, by whom (he ſaith) he is letted ſo that he can not execute his office, nor puniſſhe them that haue maried contrarie to the Byſhoppe of Romes lawes. Thomas Murner a Graie Frere was the meſſager, who complained greuouſly of the Senate to the Cardinall: But the Ambaſſadours Thomas Murner. of the ſame Towne beynge preſent at Norinberge, came before him, and made their purgatiō, that they neither had, nor would be any let to the Biſhoppe, but had ſignified vnto him by their letters, yt looke

what actiō he had againſt the maried prieſtes, agreable to Gods law, that he might come and execute it. And they would aſſiſte him, but he called them out of the liberties, contrary to an ordre that was takē betwixt him and them And whereas they claimed theyr liberties, they were condemned, theyr cauſe neyther hearde nor knowen. They ſayde moreouer how the moſt part of the Clergie at Strauſb. liued viciouſly, kepīg ſtrōptes at home with thē after a lewd example: And yet the Biſhop doth not puniſh one of thē: Wherfore if the Senate ſhould permit him to handle theſe extremely for not obſeruing the Biſhop of Romes law, & let the cōmon whoremonges that breake the lawc of God, eſcape vnpuniſhed, doubtles the people would grudge & ſtyre thereat: To this Cāpegius anſwered, yt what cōpaet or bargaine was betwixt thē he knew not, but ſurely theyr act was manifeſt, & neded no greate triall in the law: for they wer ſequeſtred frō the felowſhip of the church by the dede doyng: And for bycauſe others kept harlots, & lyued diſhoneſtly, yt doeth not excuſe theyr cryme: he knoweth it to be the maner of the Biſhops in Germany to permit theyr prieſtes for money to kepe lemans, which is euil done in dede, & they ſhal yeld an accōpt for it one day: Neuertheleſſe, it is a greater offence for prieſtes to Mary than to Campcgſus raileth agai
                     ••
                   holye Matrimony. kepe at home with them many harlots: for they are perſwaded yt they do well. And theſe do acknowledge theyr ſynne: for all men are not ſo chaſte as Iohn Baptiſt: yet was it neuer ſene that they myght lawefully refuſe the ſole life, no not amonges the Grekes, which in theyr rites and cuſtomes differ much frō vs: Wherfore he praieth them to giue theyr aide to theyr Biſhoppe in this matter. The Ambaſſadors ſay that if he would fyrſt puniſhe the whoremongers, than might the Senate aſſiſte him the better in correcting of theſe others; But he was in hand with them againe. Firſt, to aſſiſt theyr Biſhop: And than if he woulde not puniſhe whoredome, he would come thither him ſelfe and ſee them puniſhed accordingely. After the aſſemblie at Norinberge, Fernando, Campegius, the Cardinall of Saliſburge, the dukes of Bauare, yt Biſhops A decree of Papiſtes againſt goſpellers. of Trent, & of Regenſpurge, alſo thambaſſadors of the Biſhops Bāberge, Spires, Strauſ. Auſpurge, Cōſtance, Baſil, Friſinge, Paſſame, & Brixine, mette at Ratiſbone, & agreed vpon this opiniō the ſixt day of Iuly. For as muche as Themperor, folowing herin the Iudgement, and requeſt of Leo the tenth cōdemned at Wormes by a publik decree the doctrine of Luther, as wicked. And for that it is likewyſe decreed in the aſſemblie at Norinberge aſwell fyrſt as laſt, that al men ſhould obey the ſame as much as in them lieth: they therfore, at the requeſt of Cardinall Campegins, who hath ful auethoritie of the Biſhop of Rome concernynge that matter, will and commande that the foreſayde decree, and the decrees made in the laſte aſſemblies be obſerued and kepte wythin theyr iuriſdictions: That the Ghoſpell and others

Scriptures be taught in churches after the interpretation of the aūetent fathers, which in puritie of life excelled, & through theyr great vertu, confyrmed theyr doctrine by martyrdome: they that teach any Hereſtes already cōdemned, or any thing els to the reproch of Chriſt, our Lady, or the ſaints, or the which may be an occaſion of ſedition, let him be puniſhed according to the tenure therof: That no man be admitted to preach, without he haue the Biſhoppes licenſe. Such Eccieſiaſtical lawes as cardinal Cāpegius hath writtē by cōmō aſſēt, to take away vice, & to reforme maners, whē they be ons publiſhed, ſhalbe obſerued. Touching the Maſſe, Sacramēts, and al other things, let nothing be altered: But done as hath bene accuſtomed by oure forefathers. They that receyue the Lordes ſupper, wtout confeſſion & abſolutiō, they that eate fleſhe on dayes forbiddē: Alſo Mōcks or Nones yt ron out of their ordre: Prieſtes, Deacōs, or Subdeacōs yt marrye, ſhalbe puniſhed. Let nothing be put in Print, but by the cōſent of the Magiſtrate: Namely of Luthers, & his cōpanions, let nothing be ſet forth nor ſold: That ſuch as be of theyr iuriſdiction ſtudying now at Wittēberge, wtin thre monethes after they ſhall heare of this decree made, retourne home, or go ſome where els, wheras Luth. poiſon taketh no place: They that ſhall do otherwiſe ſhalbe depraued of theyr benefices, & loſe theyr inheritāce: And all thoſe that ſhall cōtinew in the Uniuerſitie of Wittēberge ſhal neyther enioy benefice, nor haue the charge to brynge vp youthe: That certeine fit men be choſen in euery place to ſee theſe thinges executed. That the offenders ſo many as can be taken, be committed to warde, the reſt yt ſhall be baniſſhed to haue no place of refuge, ſo farre as theyr rule or dominiōs do rtretche: if any cōmotiō or ſedition ſhould fortune to arriſe, by reaſon of this decree wtin any of theyr limittes, that the reſt ſhall come & aide him. The Eccleſiaſticall lawes, whiche Campegius had deuiſed were theſe: Let the prieſtes liue honeſtly, go comely appareled, nother by nor ſell as marchantes, haūt not the Tauernes, let thē not be couetous, nor for theyr miniſtration extorte money gredelye: let ſuch as kepe Cōcubines be diſplaced: let the nūbre of holye dayes be in meaſure: Theſe woulde Campegius haue enacted in the counſell of the Empire: But when he could not bring it to paſſe, he held this aſſembly a part. Whan Luther vnderſtode that the Emperoure, and diuerſe Princes woulde practiſe the decree of Wormes, he bewaileth the ſtate The lamentatiō of Lut. of Germanye, whiche beynge ſo ofte admoniſſhed, neglecteth her own wealthe: And calleth vpon the Princes them ſelues, that beynge ſo openly and wickedly diſceaued of the Romiſhe Byſhoppes, they maynteyne neuertheles theyr dignitie, and ſeke all his diſtructiō, which wiſſheth beſt vnto them: Wherfore (he ſaith) for this great ingratitud, and frowardeneſſe inexcuſable, there hangeth a moſt terrible Plage ouer Germany: He warneth them alſo, that they attempte not raſſhelye to

warre vpon the Turke, who in counſell and moderation doeth farre excell our Princes: And liuing as we do, we may hope of no victorye. Furthermore, he calleth it a mockery, that thēperour and the kynge of Englande (which can not lengthen theyr lyues one momēt) ſhould cai them ſelues defendors of the Church and the faith: He beſecheth God, to ſende ſuche Magiſtrates, as will ſeke and tendre Gods glory:
            The golden Roſe, which the Pope had lately conſecrated (as is atcuſtomed, The golden Roſe ſent to the kynge of Englande. Eraſmus boke of Free will. three weekes before Eaſter) he ſendeth to Heury the eyghte kynge of Englande, as a notable token of his ſingular good wyll and beneuolens: Aboute this tyme came forth Eraſmus boke of Freewill. Wherunto Luther aunſwered with a contrary tytell, of Bondewyll. The kynge of Englande, and the Cardinal of Yorke cauſed Eraſmus to write his booke, as he him ſelfe confeſſeth in a certeine Epiſtle to the Cardinall, which is in printe: About this time alſo, Anthony, Duke of A decree of the duke of Loraine. Loraine, made this decree: For ſo muche as Luthers Doctrine is condemned of the Biſhop of Rome, of the Emperor, & of famous Uniuerſities, he commaundeth that none of his do preache any ſuch doctrine. And that all ſuche as haue any bokes ſet forthe by Luther do exhibite the ſame within a certeine day, appointynge a penaltie to ſuche as dyd diſobey: This yere Henry Zutphā was put to death with exceadinge Henry Zutphan. paines and torment for the doctrine of the goſpel, by thē of Dietmary, which is in the marces of Germany: for beyng called he went thither, after he had taught two yeres amonges the Bremers.
            I tolde you before of a coūſell that ſhould haue bene at Spires: the The Emperor biameth the Princes. ſame was altered, and themperor when he knewe, writing his letters out of Spaine to the ſtates of thēpire, at the Ides of Iuly, doth blame them exceadinly for the decree made. For wheras certeine yeres paſte, in the counſell at Wormes, by the common aſſente of all ſtates he had with moſte weygtie wordes condemned Luthers doctrine, as Hereticall and peſtilent: where alſo the Byſhoppe of Rome had after dewe examination condemned his Bokes, commaundyng them to be brēt: he marueyleth greatly and is ſory alſo, that they ſhoulde forbed onely his ſclaunderous Bookes, or ſkornefull Pictures to be ſold, as though that decree at Wormes were not ryghtly and orderly made.
            And moreouer, he is not a lytell moued, that they woulde both haue a counſell holden in Germany, and haue ſpoken to the Legate Campegius, that he would write to the Byſhop herin, as thoughe the ſame concerned not more the Biſhoppe or him, than it doeth them: for if they thought it ſo expedient for Germany to haue a counſel, why made they not him preuie to it yt he might haue obteyned the thing of the Byſhop. And nowe albeit he perceiueth rightwell howe muche the Biſhoppes authoritie and his alſo, is by this decree diminiſhed: yet conſyderynge that the waye ſhal not be vnprofitable for the cōmon wealth he approueth

the counſell alſo, yet ſo, that it may be done by the Biſhoppes authoritie, and in tyme and place conueniente, ſo as he maye be preſente there him ſelfe, as he is fully determined. And whereas they haue appoynted an aſſemblie agaynſte the .xi. day of Nouembre, to eſtabliſſhe Religion, till the begynnyng of the counſell, where they haue alſo choſen certeine learned men to gather the ſumme of a Doctrine, he neyther can, nor wyll conſent therto in any wyſe. But accordynge to hys office, in ſo muche as he is the defendor and protectour of the Byſhop of Romes Churche, he doth by all meanes prohibite this decrre, leſt he Themperor defendour of the Romiſhe churche. ſhould procure to him ſelfe the diſpleaſure of God, & of the Biſhop alſo: for what greater cōtumelie cā be wrought againſt the chriſtiā church, thā if the reuerēs dew to the higheſt power ſhould be thus ſhakē of? if Germany, which hath bene euer moſt cōmended for vertu & obeidiēce, ſhould a lone alter yt religiō, which no Princes, nor the biſhop of Rome him ſelf euer durſt do: Which neuer man forſoke hitherto, but he felt of Gods vengeaunce for his wickednes? if they ſhould forſake & aboliſh, that hath bene of ſo long cōtinewaūce in all Chriſtendō, at the craftye perſwaſion of Luther, who endeuoureth wt painted words to diſceaue Lut. cōpared with Mahomet. & abuſe mē, as in times paſt, did Mahomet, what plages of god might they loke for? He beſecheth God, to loke mercifully vpon Germany, and not to ſuffer ſo great a miſchiefeſt to take place ther ſo lōg as he liueth. Wherfore let thē obey the decre of Wormes, vnleſſe they will ſmart for it, & defer all matters of religiō, till a general coūſell may be had, at the Biſhop of Rome, & his appointmēt, which are theyr chief magiſtrats. After the ſelfe ſame ſorte writeth he alſo priuatly to certein ſtates, & amōges others to the ſenate of Strauſo. And thus was the decre of the next aſſēblie aboliſhed: for themperor hauing both his hands full of the Frenche warres, ſought to winne the Biſhop of Rome by all meanes The duke of Bourbō beſieged Marfelles. poſſible. This ſommer, Charles duke of Bourbon, Cōſtable of Fraūce which the yere before, partly by his owne accorde, & partely laboured by themperor, fell frō the French king, beſeged Marſelles, but in vain. Whom departing thence into Italy, the kyng foloweth with great expedition, and taking many holdes in Lūbardy, & the citie of Millan it ſelfe, towardes wynter he beſegeth Pauie, a towne by the riuer of Ticine. In the moneth of Nouembre, the countrey people of Suelande, began to ryſe againſt theyr lord, the countie Lupſe, for charges, wherwith The begynnynge of the ruſtical war. they complayned to be ouer muche burthened. Lykewiſe others in other places nere vnto the ſame, rebelled againſt theyr magiſtrats, in ſo much yt the counſel of thēpire, which gouerneth the cōmon welth in themperors abſence, beyng then at Eſlinge, ſent theyr ambaſſadors & appeaſed certeine cōtrouerſies: But this broile ceaſed not, as ſhalbe told herafter. This was yt begining of the greateſt & moſt daūgerous cōmotion, yt pearſed afterwards throughout a great part of Germany.
            
               
What tyme Luthers doctrine was ſet forth in all places, ye Clergie did reſiſt it with all their forſe, fearyng to loſe all theyr goodes and benefices. The Papiſtes fight for their bely. And certein of Straceborugh complained to the ſenate of the Empire of the townes men, that they did infringe theyr liberties and priueleges diuerſe waies, howe they had appointed maryed prieſtes, and Monkes, as Capito, Bucer, & others to haue the gouernement of their Churches. that they receiued the Lordes ſupper vnder both kindes, yt they had raſſhely caſt the Images out of theyr churches. For the which cauſe, two of the chiefeſt counſelors of thempire, Friderick coū
               tie Palatine, and Philip, marques of Baden, in their letters written frō Eſling, in the moneth of Ianuary, admoniſhing the ſenate to leaue of theyr chaūge, & reſtore eche thing to his place. Diuers of the Swices  namely the Schafuſians, & they of Baſill, where Oecolampadius then taught, begā by litel & litel to giue ouer theyr diſpleaſure towards them of Zuricke, but in maner al the reſt could by no meanes be pacified. And whā the Captaine of Turege, wherunto Zurick belongeth had taken a prieſt in the night, & was cariyng him awaye, he makinge an outcry & calling for helpe of his neighbours, reiſed vp a ſodē tumult and euery man gote him to his weapons. Whan they of Zuricke had ſuffered this and many other iniuries, the fourth day of Ianuary, they wrote theyr letters to al theyr confederates and felowes, complaining on this wiſe. Chriſt (ſay they) cōmaundeth that to him yt ſtryketh thee, The cōplaīte of them of Zuricke. on the one cheeke, thou ſhalte offer the other: And we folowinge this his doctrine, haue ſuffered many thinges, and that patiētly: But now ſith ther is no ende nor meaſure of iniuries, we are inforced to flie to yt ſame, which Chriſt him ſelf vſed. And if we haue done any euill, we deſyre yt the ſame may be taught & ſhewed vs. Undoubtedly for as much as we ſuſteine ſuche hatred and malice, and are euery where euill reported of all men, the thynge it ſelfe requireth and conſtreineth vs to to make anſwere. Wherfore we wil declare the cauſe of al this malice, The cauſe of theyr hatred. confute the ſclaunders, and ſhewe howe we be affected towards our common countrey. And fyrſte in dede, wheras Fraunces the Frenche kyng had made great and long ſuite to enter into league with vs, and had your conſent therto: we, notwithſtandynge that you were ofte in hande with vs, did vtterly refuſe the ſame. And that for diuerſes cauſes, but chiefly, for that the maner liked vs not, to witte, that we ſhold To ſerue foreine princes is vile. ſende our ſtrength and ſouldiours vnto ſtraungers, which for money, ſhould be hired to warre on them, that neuer did them harme, to bring vp ſuche an euill example, and maineteine them in Idlenes: whiche if they ſhould die in the warres: theyr wiues and childrē ſhould come to extreme miſerie: For we iudged it an vuſittynge thynge to oure owne great loſſe and hynderaunce, to ſerue the kynges torne, and to brynge our countrey men into ſuche a bondage to him.

And therefore haue we iudged it beſt, to retaine and kepe the ſame libertie both of bodie and goods, which our elders with great valeaūtnes, and blouddy handes haue gotten vs, wyth like vertue and conſtauncie. And this is al the matter, this is the very cauſe, and as it wer the welſpringe and begynnyng of all the diſpleaſure: for if we woulde haue ratified the league, we thinke there ſhould haue ryſen no diſpleaſure at all: For when you were often tymes in hande with vs, that we ſhould not forſake your league, we ſhewed you our mynde (that was to kepe amitie with the kynge, accordynge to the compoſition of peacetions of our olde league that was made for the wealth and preſeruaalready eſtabliſhed:
            And moreouer that we would obſerue the condition of our common Countrey. And becauſe we perſeuer herein, we haue gotten diſpleaſure abroade. For ſyns the lyghte of the ghoſpell ſprange vp, we haue ſhaken of our ſhoulders that moſte weigtie burthen, whiche the Biſhoppe of Rome, and his adherentes, had laide vpon vs, & aboliſhed manifeſt errours. This occaſion haue ſome of you taken of late, and by your Ambaſſadors ſent, haue intreated vs that we ſhould conuerte and amende. And we aunſwere thereunto (as before) that we worke after the preſcripte of Goddes worde: if any man can ſhewe vs, that we be in errour, we will alter our purpoſe: if not, ſurely it is more reaſon to obey God than men. Than ſtode vp Egly the Captein of Lucerne, threatenyng vs, that vuleſſe we forſake the doctrine of Luther, and Zuinglius, the Lucernates, Uranites, Switenſians, Unterualdians, Tugiaus, and they of Friburge, will ſit no more in counſel with vs from henceforth. And not longe after that they had confyrmed this thing amonges them ſelues by a law, the Captaine of Turege had taken in the night ſeaſon Iohn Oxeline, a preacher of the ghoſpell in hys owne houſe, and caried him away priſoner. Which vnto vsis a double iniurie, in that our owne man, is taken out of our owne liberties.
            And whereas many ran oute the ſame night, of al parts at the outcry, and did many thinges wickedly, all the blame was layde vpon vs and our men, that happened to be amonges them.
            Nowe the ſeconde matter that you charge vs with all procedeth of that aſſemblie, whiche Ferdinando Archeduke of Auſtriche helde the laſt yere at Regenſpurge, with the rulers of his countrie, alſo with the Biſhoppes and ſuche others as hate the doctrine of the Ghoſpell. But The era
                     •
                  t of, the Papiſtes what they endeuor and go about, it is not vnknowen, verely to make diſſention amonges vs, and to plucke vs a ſonder. Which thinge greueth vs the more, that you will credite ſuche, as in time paſt you haue knowen, at the leaſte ſome of them to be lewde and wycked parſous, whome we alſo, vnderſtandyng theyr craft and treaſon, haue baniſhed out of our limittes. Euen they nowe, for ſo muche as we woulde gyue

no eare to them, are fled vnto you, and accuſe vs nowe, as though we had brokē the league that was made with the houſe of Auſtrich. They ſay how we ſent aide to them of Walſute againſt theyr Prince Ferdinando, but that is vntrew: For whers the Walſutenſiās were in daū
               ger, for theyr Religion, and could not be ſuffered to ſpeake for them ſelues, a fewe of our men (againſt our knowledge) ran thither to ſaue the harmeles men from iniurie and violence. Whom, ſo ſone as we knew therof, we called backe againe.
            Therefore is the grounde of theyr accuſation vntrewe. And Ferdinando haue any thing more to ſhewe that the league ſhould be brokē, let him bring it forth, and he ſhall be aunſwered in ſuche ſort as al men may plainly ſee, whether parte hath kept couenauntes. Where therefore you haue had ſecret talke with Ferdinando his Ambaſſadours, a part from oures, we can not a litell maruel, for if you treated of tholde league, than ought our mē to haue bene made priuie to the ſame: but if it were of Religion, whye than deale you not wt vs after the ſame conditions which we haue many times offered you: The report góth that you haue conſpired to deſtroy the ſecte of Luther, whiche althoughe it were trew, yet for ſo much as we are ioyned in league aſwel with him as with you: Moreouer, becauſe we folow not the ſteppes of Luther, but of holy Scripture, we ought not to be accompted in that numbre: But in as muche as we knowe not what is done amonges you, and be complained on to you by malicious parſons, as though we had ſpoken for the aide of certeine cities, we proteſt it to be a falſe ſclaunder. Of like ſort is that, where they ſay, howe we wil ſodainly by the ſo ſide of a dromme cauſe men to take Armure, and ſo to ſurpriſe Baden, and certeine other places. Which lies are deuiſed for this entente and purpoſe, that you might take thoſe Townes and laye in them garuiſous againſt vs. Which thing (if it were done) they doubt not but that ſome greater tumult would therby arriſe, which might kindle amonges vs domeſticall and ciuile warre. And beſydes theſe there go manye other ſclaunderouſe reportes of vs, as this is one. Howe we ſhoulde teache, that Mary the mother of Chriſte had mo ſounes, and that the yonger, Iames an Apoſtle, died for vs, and not Chriſt him ſelfe. Theſe & ſuche other like thinges would we haue cōfuted at Lucerne, but you wold not ſuffer our men to ſpeake vnto the people.
            What tyme alſo that Eckins promiſed to come and ſhewe Zuinglius his errours, we were right glad therof, & ſent, not onely him, but Eckſuc thē Popes champion. alſo others a Safecouduict, exhorting him earueſtly to come, and promiſyng to ſhewe him all fauour. Finally (as we heare ſay) the plucking downe of Images, hath procured vs no finale diſpleaſure: But hereof we haue declared the cauſe and reaſon before.
            Wherfore, ſeyng we haue doné nothing againſt the conditions of

our league, ſeyng, we refuſe no perill for the ſafgarde of oure common countrey, and beare you the lyke loue that we haue done alwayes, in caſe you will permitte vs for to do. Why ſuffer we this diuiſyon to be The pouertie and boundage of the Swices. made amonges vs? It is knowen in what ſtate and condition ſome of our Aunceſters were, which content with a poore liuinge that they gote with ſore labor for them and their houſeholde, were oppreſſed of the nobilitie with extreme bondage: But God looked mercyfully vpon them, for they expulſed the tyrrauntes, and gote libertie.
            And after they were inriched with the ſubſtaunce of ſuche as they The riches and libertie of the ſame. had driuen oute, they fortified them ſelues with a league, by the force wherof they were able to defende theyr coūtrey from the inuaſions of all forein power, and had many times the victory ouer theyr enemies. For many they were ye ſought to ſeauer, and break that ſocietie, but yet in vaine. And what aide and power oure elders prepared at the ſame time: we doubte not but you haue in remembraunce. And theſe fewe wordes may ſuffice touching the begynnyng of our league. For as for the faith, indeuor, and diligence that hath bene ſhewed of vs euer ſins in amplifiyng the dignitie of our common countrey, nede not to be recited. And doubtles the ſame mynde and good will that we haue ſhewed euer hitherto, remaineth ſtyll in vs. And ſeynge it is thus, it greueth vs exceadingly, that you ſhould through the perſwaſiō of others, that ſeke theyr owne commoditie therby, be ſo incenſed againſt vs.
            Call rather to your remembraūce, what amitie hath bene alwaies betwene vs, what time in ſundry places, aſwel at home as a broad, we haue abiden the like chaunce of warre, and done many thinges ryght worthely. Aſſuredly the memoriall hereof, ought not onely to bynd vs, but alſo our poſteritie, with a moſt ſtreight bonde of amitie. If ye cauſe of Religion, or any other facte of oures do offende you, why do we not reaſon the matter quietly, and frendly amonges our ſelues as becommeth felowes and frendes knitte together in a brotherlye league? we wyll neyther be frowarde, obſtinate, nor vntractable, but as we haue alwayes ſaide, wilbe content and glad to be reformed by ſuche as can teache vs better thinges.
            And for ſo muche as the profeſſion of the ghoſpell, for ſakynge of the Frenche league, and moreouer many ſclaunders inuented againſt vs, haue torned your good willes from vs, and altered your former mindes, we muſt write theſe thinges of neceſſitie in defence of oure owne eſtimation. For as we haue often ſaied, vnleſſe our errour canne be ſhewed The conſtā
                  cie of them of Zurieke. vs by the Scripture, we may not forſake our religiō, what force ſo euer be bent againſt vs for the ſame.
            Aboute the middes of February, the Senate of Strauſburge aunſwered the letters that were ſente them from the chamber imperiall, and confuted all thynges that thoſe three accuſers (for mo ſay they can

not be founde) had charged them with, whom they reporte to be troubleſome parſons, which are fled out of the citie to ſtyrre vp ſtrife & contenſion. And therefore require them to gyue no credyte to them, but to haue the ſame opiniō of the Senate, as is mete to be had of thē which after the example of theyr elders, ſeke the concorde and wealth of the Empire. Alſo the Preachers thēſelues wrote the ſame time vnto thoſe counſelers. And in a longe oration declare the reaſons of theyr doyng. And for ſo muche as they haue committed nothyng againſte Goddes lawe, they require them moſte humbly, to geue no credite to theyr aduerſaries, nor determine any thing agaynſt them, before the matter be knowen.
            That time the warre in Italy waxed hote betwixt the Emperor The Frēche kyng taken priſoner. and the Frenche kynge, who after he had beſeged Pauie all winter aboute the later ende of February, was taken in battell, and caryed to the Emperour in Spaine.
            In this warre the Biſhoppe of Rome Clement, was ſecretly, of the The vnconſtācie of Clement. Frenche parte, but after this chaunge of fortune, he gaue vnto themperors Captaines a greate ſumme of money to paye theyr ſouldiours. Anthony Lena kept Pauie with garniſons of Germanes and Spaniardes. The kyng had a wonderfull great armye, in ſo much that the Imperialles beyng in diſpaire of Lumbardie, conſulted howe to conueigh their armye, and to kepe Naples: but encouraged throughe the oration of Fernando Daualle, marques of Piſcare, they gate the battell, and wanne the felde, and by takyng of a moſt mightie kinge, they The victors of themper
                     •
                  
                  alles. obteined a noble victorie, and riche ſpoiles. The Chirſtaine was Charles de Lanoy a Bourgonion. He pretendyng at the fyrſt as if he would haue led the kyng to Naples, takyng ſhypping, he chaūged his courſe, and ſayled into Spaine, that the matter might the ſooner be pacified. The Battel was foughten the ſame day that the Emperor was borne on, the foure and twenteth of February.
            In the begynnyng of the ſpring time, began a newe commotion in The cōmotion of the bulgare people. Sueuelande, and that parte of Germany yt lyeth by the riuer of Thonawe, of the bulgare people againſt the Prelates of the Churche, pretendyng a cauſe as thoughe they would defende the Goſpell, & brynge them ſelues out of bondage. The magiſtrates promiſed to heare theyr complaintes and to reforme that was a miſſe, but they perſeuered ſtill and encreaſed dayly. And ſet forth certeine demaundes, to the numbre Theyr demaundes. of xii. wherin they would be ſatiſfied. Which commynge to the handes of others, ſtyrred vp newe commotions in ſundry places.
            Whyleſt theſe thinges were a brewing, Ulriche duke of Wirtemberge, The duke of Wirtemberge attēpte
                     ••
                   warrs. whom certeine yeres before they of the confederacie of Suelād had driuen out of the coūtrey, got an armie of Swices, thinking to recouer his dukedome, but beyng reſiſted by Fernandoes captains, that

kept the townes therof, and by others of the foreſaid confederacy, and laſt of all wantyng money, he gaue ouer his enterpriſe. In the meane tyme the hoſte of the Bowres was much increaſed. And the power of the Princes, which had giuen the repulſe to the Duke of Wirtēberge and recouered the townes that he had taken, went againſt thē to Ulmes, which had gathered three armies, whereof one had pitched nere vnto Biberake, an other in Algouia, and the thyrde by the lake of Cō
               ſtaunce: There was muche intreatye for peace betwixte them, by them of Raueſbourge, and Campodune. Alſo the Senate of thempire being carefull for the ſtate of the common welth, ſent to Ulmes, Simon Piſtor, which was for duke George of Saxonie. And Iames Sturmnus a noble man of the Senate of Strauſburge to treate of peace wt the counſellours of the Princes confederated, commaundyng eyther partie in the Emperours name, to withdraw theyr warre, vnder a greate penaltie. But when neyther peace nor trewce could be taken, certeine bandes of horſemen wente from Ulines, to Elchinge whiche is by the Riuer of Danubius, and ſlewe a great numbre of the Bowres, and The fyrſte ſlaughter of Bowres. brought many priſoners backe into the citie. After that George Truckeſe, chiefe capitaine of the Sueuical league, marching forward with his army, came to Lippene a little towne by Danubius two miles beneth Ulmes, where was a great numbre of Peſauntes, who neyther taryinge for the footemen, nor for the Munition, gaue the charge with his horſemen, and ſlewe the mooſte parte of them, the reſt toke the Riuer Another ſlaughter. and were drowned, the towne beyng gyuen vp was taken & ſpoyled, and many therin beheaded. When Truckeſſe after this victorie would haue gone agaynſt the reſydew, the fotemen whiche were lead by Wylliam Furſtemberge, would not forward before they wer paid, as though they had fought a battell, but the Captaine ſaide it was no battell, and that the enemies were diſcomfited or euer they came, yet longe it was before they could be pacified. Then was there a new entreatie of peace. But when nothing could be concluded, and this Armie marched againſt them that wer in Algouia, who would haue had all men a lyke, what tyme they ſhould ioyne in battel, ſome ran away, the reſt yelded them ſelues at the Ides of Aprill.
            But in this meane while in another parte of Sueuia there aſſembled an other great numbre about Hala, and Franckonie, which vpon The great crueltie of the Bowres Eaſterday, beyng the .xvi. of Aprill, toke the towne of Winſperge, and ſlewe diuerſe noble men therin. And amonges others, Lewes Erle of Helfeſtene, in a moſt cruell ſorte, runnyng them through with ſpeares, and him ſo muche the more cruelly, for that they did it in the ſight of his wife, which was baſtarde daughter to themperour Maximilian, who cariyng a yonge childe in her armes, fell downe at theyr feete lamenting and wepyng moſt miſerably to beholde, axing pardon for her huſbande

and father of the ſame childe; whom they ſpurned at, and vtterly reiected.
            But Capitaine Truckeſſe (who had diſcoinfited the other three Armies before mentioned, marched ſtreight vpon them alſo, and ſlew two or three thouſande of them, putting the reſt to flighte: puniſhynge greuouſly the pryſoners, namelye thoſe whiche had fleyne the Countie A moſt cruel maner of burnynge. Helfeſtene, where one he tyed to a ſtake with a longe chaine that he might ronne vp and downe, and with a fyre made rounde about him, burnt him: others of the nobilitie do the like. After he fyreth the towne of Winſperge, and cōmaunded that it ſhould neuer be builded againe. Another troupe of them went into Franckonie, and burned there two hundreth caſtels and aboue, beſydes Abbeis and noble mens houſes. And taking the citie of Wirciburge, they beſeged the caſtell. But Truckeſſe commynge vpon them throughe the Countrey of Wittemberge, vanquiſhed them alſo and put them to flight. After he recouereth Wirciburge and reſkeweth the caſtel beſeged, beyng aided by Lewes coū
               tie Palatine, which was there in his owne parſon.
            And out of Germany this broile went into Loraine, in ſo much that The warre of Bowres in Loraine. Anthony duke therof, accompanied with his brother Claude Duke of Guiſe, who had gathered vp the remenaunt of the Frenche armye diſperſed at the battel of Pauie, when the kyng was taken, went to Sabernes, wheras muche people was aſſembled, as well of Lorayne, as of Alſate. And wheras no Bowres reſorted to aide ye others, he made out certeine horſemen and fotemen againſt them, who at a village called Lupfſteine, ſlew of them to the nūbre of a thouſand & fyue hūdred, the reſidew eſcaped by flyght. The nexte daye he made a great ſlaughter of thoſe that were at Sabernes. Where notwithſtandyng he kept not promiſe. For commaundyng them to laye downe theyr weapons, and promiſyng them all pardon, when they had done accordyngly goyng home wardes without any weapon, they were ſlayne by the horſe men and fotemen the moſt part of them: After the towne and the Biſhoppes The ſlaughter of Bowres. Caſtell were ſpoiled by the lewde foldiours, and the Citizens alſo ſlayne all without any reſpecte or mercie. When the Duke retourned home from this ſlaughter, an other armye of Bowres had encamped in the valley of Willers, kepinge the ſtreightes that he ſhoulde not paſſe: but when they ioyned in battel, they were ſlaine aboue .iiii. thouſande: in the ſame conflicte, he loſt the Erle of Iſerburge: And thus he retourned home with much ſpoile and many priſoners. There were ſlaine (as it is thoughte) in theſe three places, aboute an eghtene thouſande: This was in the monthe of May. The like ſucceſſe had others in all places. And at Peterſheme beſydes Wormes a great numbre were murthered by the ſoldiours, what time they had rēdred thē ſelues, and layde a parte their weapons. At the which ſlaughter were preſent the

Countie Palatine, and tharchbiſhop of Treuers. The Countie did the beſt in his power to ſtay and pacifie the ſoldiors: the other did not only The crueltie of the Archebiſhop of Treuers. allow theyr doynges, but alſo killed many with his own hands, as it was crediblie reported. Notwithſtādyng in ſundry places, through the policie of the Magiſtrates, the thing was appeaſed quietlye, as at Friburge in Briſgoye, whither the Senate of Strauſ. at the requeſt of Gneſt, Marques of Baden, that had great lands there, ſent Iames Sturmius and Conrade Iohame, ambaſſadors, by whoſe perſwaſiō, and the Ambaſſadors of Baſill together, all thoſe yt encamped at Lara foure miles from Strauſ. were appeaſed the .xxv. day of Iuly: Where yet fidelitie fayled: For many after they came home, were executed. Likewyſe the Heluetians appeaſed an other rebellion in Sontgauia, a Prouince belongyng to kinge Fernando and the houſe of Auſtriche, declaringe vnto them, what was the dewtie of a Magiſtrate, and of the people alſo. All theyr requeſtes wer euery where a like, beginning in Suelāde and paſſing ſo vnto others, reaching from Thuringe and the borders of Saxonie, vnto the toppe of the Alpes, and into the coū
               trey about Saliſburge, whither, after the rebellion appeaſed in Frāckonie, came alſo the armye of the Princes, confederated, and diſtroied Geiſmer captaine of the Bowers. and baniſhed many, amōges whom was theyr captein Geiſmer, who paſſed through the Alpes by ſtreyght paſſages with a part of his hoſte to the Uenetians, of whom he had an yerely ſtipende, and dwelled at Padwey, wheras after he was ſlaine by treaſon. And this was thend of the Bowres warre, in the whiche were ſlaine in one ſommer, at the leaſt, fiftie thouſande. The league of Swelane.
            
            The Princes that were of the confederacie and league of Swelād ſo oft mentioned weretheſe, Ceſar as Prince of Auſtriche, and his brother Fernando, tharchbiſhop of Mentz, the Palſegraue, the Biſhoppe of Saliſburge, Bamberge, Wirciburge, Aiſtet and Auſpurge, Wylliam and Lewes brethren, Dukes of Bauar, Otho Henricke & Philip, brethren Counties Palatine, George Marques of Brandēburge, and Albert his nephewe, Philip the Lantzgraue of Haſſe, & diuers others, both of the nobilitie and Clergie. Moreouer the moſt part of all the cities in Sweuia, and amōges other Norinberge. About the eight day of Aprill, the Maſſe was put downe at Zuricke, by the commaundement The Maſſe aboliſſhed at Zuricke. of the Senate, aſwell within the citie as without. And in ſtead of that was inſtituted the Lordes Supper. Lykewiſe all Ceremonies aboliſhed, the Doctrine of Godes worde taketh place, and a lawe made, againſte Fornication, and adulterie, and Iudges appointed to heare the cauſes of Matrimony.
         
         
            
            
               ✚ The fyfthe Booke of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the ſtate of Religion, and the common We ale, during the Empire of Charles the fyfte.
            
               
                  ❧ The argument of the fyfth Booke.
               MUncer by his newe doctrine, teaching goodes to be had in common, inflamed the rage of the people, hauinge Phifer to his companion. Duke Fredericke departeth, the princes aſſemble againſt Muncer. Who, perſwading the people to reſiſt is diſcomſited, and after executed. Luther had written againſt him toye ſenate of Miſſhuſe, the requeſtes which the wurs made at ye beginning are here recited. Wherunto Luther anſwereth & ſheweth their diſordre, exhorting ye magiſtrate to deſtroy ſuch wicked men. Themperor vnderſtanding theſe troubles, appoynteth a counſel at Auſpurge. Caroloſtadius exiled from Wittenberg goeth about to make his purgation. Luther marieth a nonne, ʒ winglius and he meete at Marſeburge to conferre of theyr controuerſie of the Lordes ſupper. Whileſt the French king was priſoner, Pope Clement, receiuing letters from the kynges mother, ſolliciteth the parlamente of Paris to make perſecuſion. Faber was conſtrained to flee, wherof the king wing aduertiſed, cauſeth ſuch ſuites, and actions againſt learned men to ſurceaſe, the common welth of Pruſe is altered from the Knightes of Germany to a Duke donie, and receiueth the Goſpell.
            
            
               AGreat occaſion of this terrible Warre Muncer a great anabaptiſts. came by raſhe & lewd preachers, wherof Thomas Muncer was principall: who leauing of the preaching of the Goſpell, ſet forth a new kind of doctrine in Alſtet atowne of the Dukes of Saxonye in Thuringe, and taughte not only againſt the byſhop of Rome, but againſt Luther alſo, contendinge that bothe their doctrines were vyle and naught: the byſhop byndeth mens conſciences with ſtraight and ouer harde lawes: whiche bondes he ſaide, Luther in deede hath lowſed but offended in the contrary parte in geuing ouermuche libertie, and not teaching thoſe thinges, that are of the ſpirite. The biſhops decrees we maye fafely contemne, for that they helpe nothynge vnto ſaluation: whiche to obtayne ſaith he, we muſt firſt eſchewe open crymes, as murther, adultery, blaſpheming of gods name, the body muſt be chaſtened and made leane with faſting & ſimple apparel, the coūtenaunce muſt be framed vnto grauitie, ſpeake ſeldome & weare a long beard. Theſe & ſuch other like thigs he called the croſſe, ye mortifiēg of ye fleſh & a diſcipline, wherwt he yt was furniſhed he ſaid, muſt get him out of cōpany, & thike oft of god what he is, whether he hath any care ouer

Whether Chriſt died for our ſakes? Whether our religion be better thā the Turkes: Moreouer to axe of God a ſygne wherby he maye teſtifie, that he careth for vs, and that we be in the true Religion: And albeit, he ſhew not a token by and by, yet muſt we neuertheles procede, praie ſtill, yea expoſtulate and braule with God, that he dealeth not well wt vs: For ſeyng that the Scriptures promiſeth, that he will graunt ſuch thinges as be demaunded, it is not righte, that he doeth not exhibite a Muncer will haue a token ared of God. ſigne to a man that ſeketh the true knowledge of him: This expoſtulation & anger (ſaieth he) is of God well accepted, for that he perceiueth herby our earneſt minde and zeale: And than no doubt but being thus inſtantly ſollicited, he will declare him ſelfe by ſome notable ſigne, and quenche the thirſte of our minde, dealinge with vs as he did intymes paſte with tholde fathers. He taughte moreouer that God opened hys minde by dreames, wherin he builded the foundation of his intēt, and loke whoſe dreame he could interprete, him would he praiſe openly in his ſermon. And when he had by this meanes allured many to him, then began he to take ſtipulation of them, and wrot theyr names that promiſed him by an othe, to ayde him in his pretenſed miſchiefe: For he ſaid, he was commaunded of God to diſtroy all wicked Princes, and ſubſiſtute new in theyr places. He taughte moreouer, that all thinges ſhould be cōmon, & al mē of like fredom & dignitie. wherupon ye cōmon He teacheth that all thinges ſhould be common. people leauīg theyr daily labor, toke ſuch things as they neded of others yt had ſtore, euē agaiſt their wils. The dukes of Sax. had baniſhed him what time he begā fyrſt to preach ſeditiouſly: thence wēt he to Norin. & frō thēce to Mulhuſe, wherhe altered the ſenate, droue out the Mō
               kes, & entred into theyr poſſeſſiōs, takig vpō hi, not only as a preacher, but alſo as a Senator, determining al matters as he liſt. For he ſayd, how he had all thinges ſhewed him by reuelation, & loke what he ſaid was to thē ſacred & holy. Theſe partes plaied he for the ſpace of two or thre monethes: And whē the Bowres were vp in Swelande & Frankonie, to the nūbre of fourtie thouſand, & had diſcomfited a great parte of the nobilitie, taken, ſpoyled, & fyred many holdes & caſtels as before is mentioned, thē began he to ſet hāde on, ſeing the time ſeruing ſo well Muncer maketh gonnes for his purpoſe, he caſt felde peces in the Gray friers, and gote a wonderfull numbre of people out of the Coūtrie, thinking to get ſome thīg. He had of his counſell one Phifer, a bold and a deſperate felow, which Phifer his companion. was much gyuen to dreames and viſions in the nighte, who dreamed that he ſawe in a certeine ſtable, an innumerable ſorte of Myſe, which he put to flight al: This toke he, as yt God had cōmaunded him to lead forth his armie againſt the Nobilitie, & to ſcatter them: Muncer, albeit he had made ſedicious ſermons, was not yet ſo hote as to haſarde all before the whole coūtrey were vp in armure: And therfore ſent letters into al places, namely to ſuch as digged in the Mines in the coūtrie of

Maunſfelde, exhorting thē in any wiſe to ſet vpon theyr princes without any reſpecte, for ſhortely ſhould all thoſe yt were vp in Franckonye come into theſe parties. In the meane while Phifer yt could no longer Phifers enterpriſe. abide maketh a roode with his company, and ſpoyleth the countrye of Iſefelde hardely, sacketh Caſtelies and Churches, diſcomfiteth many gentlemen, and caſteth ſome into fetters: And ſo retournynge wyth a great buttie, encouraged mens herts excedinly. And Mūcer ſuppoſing that all men were than in a redynes, departeth out of Mulhuſe wt thre hundreth, and ioyned with them of Francuſe. At the ſame time departed The death of Fridericke the noble duke of Sax. Fridericke Duke of Saxonie without Iſſewe: for he was neuer maried, leauing his brother Iohn to ſuccede him. Nowe had Alberte Countie Mūſfelde, hearing of a ſturre in his countrey, leuied ſpedelye certeine bandes of horſemen, and gyuynge the charge, ſlewe two hundreth. Which thinge put them in ſuche a feare, that they remayned ſtill at Frāckuſe, tariyng for more company, and durſt procede no further. The princes make a power. And in the meane time, the Dukes of Saxonie, Iohn Prince elector, and George his vncle, Philip Lantzgraue of Heſſe, & Henrye Duke of Brunſwike, leuied a thouſande and v. hūdreth horſemen, and certeine bandes of foote men, and marched towardes them. The rebelles had incamped them on a Hill a litell without the towne, and had ſo fenſed them ſelues with Carriages that hardely coulde they be inuaded: But they were neyther ſufficiently furniſhed of Munition nor weapōs, nor ſkilfull in the warres. Wherfore the Princes hauing compaſſion, ſente vnto them, aduiſed them to deliuer theyr captaines only, and lay aſide theyr weapons, & they ſhould haue theyr pardon, & retorne home. But Muncer fearing him ſelfe, came forth with a ſower countenaūce, and A ſeditious oration of Muncer. made this oration. You ſe my felowes and brethren not farre frō you, Tyrraūtes, which albeit they haue conſpired our deathes, yet are they ſo diſcouraged in their mindes, that they date attēpte nothing againſt vs: And they offere you ſuche condicions as be fooliſhe, that is to torne you out of your weapons. Now know you right well that I haue not attempted this thinge of my owne braine or priuate aucthoritie: for I was neuer experienced in ſuche matters: But by the commaundemēt of God. And ſeyng it is ſo, it ſhal be my dewtie and yours to obey, and not to depart of this grounde, were God him ſelfe hath placed vs. In tymes paſt he commaūded Abrahā to offer vp his ſonne: And although he was ignoraūt what ſhold be thēde, yet folowyng the cōmaūdemēt, he refuſed nothing: And therfore God bothe preſerued his ſonne, & alſo rewarded his faith wt great benefits: ſo likewiſe ought we, yt ſtād in the The ſaith of Abraham obteined of god great benefites. ſame caſe to cōmit the ſucceſſe of the thig to god: And nodoubt we ſhal haue our deſire: you your ſelfes ſhal ſe the helpe of god manifeſtly: For we ſhal diſcōfit our enemies in al places: God hath promiſed in ſūdrie places of the ſcripture, to helpe the pore & toppreſſe the wicked. Which

ſaying apperteineth vnto vs, for we are poore & afflicted. And becauſe we ſeke to ſetforth and mainteine the true knowledge of God, we can not doubt of the victory: Again, let vs cōſider the ſtate of our enemies, Muncer rai leth on the Princes. they are called in dede Princes, but they be very tirātes, they care not for you, they take your goods, & ſpende thē wickedly in pride, riot, and voluptuouſues: And for light cauſes, moue wartes, which deſtroye all that the pore haue lefte, theſe be theyr Princelik Uertues. In the place of the Widow and Orphane, they mainteine the Biſhoppe of Romes aucthoritie, and wickedneſſe of the Cleargie, where youthe ſhoulde be brought vp in learnyng, and the poore releued, they eſtabliſhe the marchandiſe of maſſing, and other abhominations. Thinke you ye God wil ſuffer this any longer: No truely, but euē as he droue out the Cananites: ſo wil he now expulſe theſe alſo. And as Chriſt whipt out the biers A blouddy Preacher bloweth the Crompet. and ſellers forth of the Temple, ſo will he do nowe likewiſe with theſe prieſtes, theyr Patrones & mainteiners. Wherefore play you the men, and gratifie God, in diſtroiyng this vnprofitable people. For ſurely there is no ſuerer waye to pacifie the matter: For they will not forſake theyr olde wont, they wil not reſtore vs vnto libertie, nor permit vs to haue the true Religiō, & ſeruice of God. And I wis we ought rather to die, then to allow theyr wickednes, & ſuffer the doctrine of the goſpel to be taken frō vs: For I promiſſe you moſt aſſuredly, ye God wil aide and ſtrengthen vs, and that the Uictorye ſhalbe oures: For he him ſelfe did ſo promiſe me, he him ſelfe that can not lye nor be diſceaſed, commaū
               ded me to procede on this wiſe, to puniſhe the Magiſtrate. For herein is Gods power chiefly declared, whan a ſtronge Army is deſtroied by a ſmale handfull, as appeared by the example of Gedeon, & Ionathos, Gods power appeareth in ſeweſt men. Iud vii .i. Sam .xiiii. and .xvii. and Dauid, that killed Goliah that greate Gyaunt ſo tyrrible to looke vpon: And no doubt but this preſent day ſhal be notable by a like ſpectacle, and ſpoken of whileſt the worlde goeth about: For albeit we are not well fourniſhed wyth weapons and other thynges neceſſarye for our owne defence, yet ſhall this engine of heauen and earth be chaunged rather thā God ſhal forſake vs: ſo was the water of the Red Sea, chaunged in tymes paſt, that the Iſraelites beyng perſecuted by Pharao, might paſſe through. Therfore feare you nothing but fight māfully againſt your wicked enemies, & be not a fraide of theyr Gunnes: for all the pellettes yt they ſhall ſhoute, I will receaue them with my cote. Beholde, ſe you not howe mercyfull a God we haue? beholde a ſigne & token of his euerlaſtyng good wyll towardes vs, lift vp your eies and ſee the Reinebow in the ſkie: for ſeing we haue the ſame painted in our enſeigne, God declareth plainely by the ſimilitude that he ſheweth vs Muncer diſceaueth the people by the Rainebowe. on highe, that he wyll aide vs in battell, and diſtroye the Tyrrauntes. Wherfore nowe ſet vpon them wyth a bolde courage, moſte aſſured of Godes helpe.
            
               
When he had made an ende, they were all for the moſt part afraide of the great daunger, but yet there were amonges them many lewde Fearein Mū
                  cers Campe. and deſperate perſons, ready vnto all miſchief, which beynge inclined of theyr nature to euyll, and perſwaded by his oration, and chieflye by the celeſtiall ſigne, ſuppoſyng it to be a moſt ſure token of victorie, more ouer hauing no ſmalle company, to the numbre of eight thouſande, and the place mete ynough to be kept: Cried oute that all men ſhoulde take theyr weapons, and fight with a ſtout courage againſt their enemies: ſinging a ſōg, wherby they called for helpe of the holy goſt: Ther was A meſſenger ſlaine agaiſt the lawe of Armes. ſent vnto them before a noble yong man: Whom Muncer (againſt the lawes of Armes) had ſlayne, wherwith the princes being more diſpleaſed cauſed the trompettes to ſoūde to the battel & ſet their mē in order. Thā Philip Lantzgraue of Heſſe, though he were yongeſt of them all, An exhortaci on of the Lantzgraue. ryding vp & downe frō one cōpany to another; exhorted the ſoldioures to be valcaūt. And although the thinges were trew wherof they were accuſed, yet were it not lawfull for the ſubiectes to rebell againſt their princes or magiſtrats, vnto whom God hath giuen the ſword & wold haue them obeyed, as may be proued by ſundry places of Scripture. He wente not aboute to execuſe eyther his owne faultes, or any other Princes, but to confeſſe theyr fault, & graunt that many thinges ought to be amended, yet ought the people neuertheleſſe to abſteyne from all ſeditiō. For where they alledge that they are not permitted to haue the doctrine of the Goſpel, it is no iuſt cauſe to make any rebellion. Whan Peter ſtroke with the ſworde, he was rebuked of Chriſt, if any Princes do perſecute the trew religion, they ought to beare with them, yea ſuffer death rather than to reſiſt by force of Armes. They take ye name of the goſpell for a cloke, but theyr intent is in dede to take other mens goods, to ſley the Magiſtrates, to force other mens wiues, that no crimes ſhould be puniſhed: and for aſmuche as they pretende the name of holynes in theſe ſo ſhamefull deedes, there is no doubte but God wyll plage their Hypocriſie, and reuenge the blaſphemie of his holye name, When he had with theſe and ſuche other like wordes encouraged hys men to fyght, they gaue the charge on theyr enemies, and fyrſt wente of the ordinaunce. And the other poore wretches ſtandyng all amaſed and as men rauiſhed of theyr wittes, neither defended them ſelues, nor The madnes of the Munceriane ſought theyr ſaftie by flight, but ſonge in Duche mytre, requiringe the aide of the holy ghoſt: For many truſtyng to Muncers promiſe, looked for helpe from heauen. When the greate peces were ſhotte of, and that they entred theyr campe and had ſlayne many, at the laſte they fled towarde the towne of Franckuſe: others went againe to thother ſyde of the Hill, and in the valley beneth ſkirmiſhed wyth certeine horſemen, and ſlewe two or three of them: For the Horſemen ſcattered them ſelues, when theyr enemies fledde, and folowed the chaſe oute of a raye.

But when they miſſed of their company, they wer in ſuch a rage, that to reuenge theyr felowes death, they ſlewe fyue thouſand. And immediatly after the battell, was the towne taken, and thre hundreth there beheaded.
            Muncer was fled into the Towne and hyd him ſelfe in a houſe not The ſlaughter of the Mū
                  cerians. farre from the gate: Hither by chaunce came a gentleman, and his ſeruaunt goyng vp to ſee the houſe, founde in a chamber aboue, one lying in his bed. He aſketh what he is, and if he be not one of the rebels that fled: He ſayd nay, he had layue there ſycke a good whyle of the Ague. His Purſe (as it chauſed) laye vpon his bed: that chatcheth vp the other thinkyng to haue a pece of money: After he had opened it, he foūd letters which Albert Countie Manſfelde had ſent to Muncer, admoniſhynge him to ceaſe from his enterpriſe, and ſtyrre not vp the people to rebellion. When he had red the letters, he demaunded of him, whether the letters were written vnto him. He denied it, thother threatened him, then he deſyred him to be content, and confeſſed that he was Muncer: Then was he led to duke George of Saxonie, & to the Lātz Muncer is taken. graue, and beynge demaunded of them: why he had thus abuſed the poore and ſimple people: He aunſwered that he had done nothinge but his dewtie. And that the Magiſtrates, whiche can not abyde Godes His cruell anſwere. word, ought thus to be puniſhed.
            The Lantzgraue replied and proued to him by Scriptures, howe God hath commaunded the Magiſtrate to be honoured and obeyed, He is reproued of the Lantzgraue. howe he hath forbidden all ſedition, and that it is not lawfull for anye Chriſtian to reuenge his owne wronge. Wherunto he aunſwered nothing: And beynge examined vpon the Racke, when he cried oute for paine. The duke ſaid vnto him: thou art nowe Muncer in payne, but remembre againe the loſſe of ſo many men, as beyng wickedly abuſed, thys day, haue bene diſtroied: Then with a greate laughter (he ſaide) they would haue it ſo. The vnreaſonable laughter of Muncer.
            
            Afterwardes being led to Helderunge, a towne of the coūtie Māſſeldes, vpon the Pymebanke there he appeached many companions, confederats of his conſpiracie, which were beheaded at Mulhuſe, and amonges others, Phifer before mentioned. When he ſhould be executed, he was not hable to receite his belefe, but as Henry duke of Brūſwicke, ſaide it before him: But when he ſhoulde die, he acknowledged At the houre of death he repenteth. his offence and error. And beynge inuironed with ſoldiours, he exhorted the Princes, that they would ſhewe more mercy to poore men, and reade ouer diligently the bokes of Scripture, that are written of kynges: He had no ſouer ſpokē thus, but the ſword was in the neck of him, and for an exāple his head ſet vp on a pole in the middes of the feldes. What time he was baniſhed out of Saxonie (as I ſaide before) wanderyng from place to place, and at the laſt (as it was reported) purpoſed

to come to Mulhuſe: Luther hearing thereof, wrote his letters to the Senate, admoniſhyng them in no caſe to receiue Muncer: For he was a ſedicious parſon, and imagined nothing but murther and miſchiefe, ſignifiyng what thinges he had attempted at Alſtet, and other places: Moreouer his doctrine to be fonde and pernicious, whereof he wylled them to beware, for ſhortly would his craft be knowen, with other frendly wordes, which (he ſaide) if they contempted, and fell after into miſery, he ſhold be without blame that had ſo diligently warned them, and they ſhould repente them to late. Likewiſe before anye tumolt was in Germany. And yet all thynges lyke to come to ſuche a paſſe, Luther ſet forth a boke, wherein he warned all men to abſtayne Lut. diſwadeth thē from ſedition. from ſedition, declaryng that the ſame is not the way to refourme the tyrrany of the Clergie, which ſhall fall and be confounded by no force of men, but by the ſpirite of God, and commyng of our Sauior Chriſt, as appere in Daniell, and ſainct Paule. This to be the grounde of hys ii. Theſſ .ii. opinion, and to be right well aſſured, that they that ſeke to redres the thinge by force of Armes, ſhall trauaile in vayne: Yet for ſo muche as ſome great tumult and daunger hāgeth ouer the Cleargie, & the thing requireth counſell, he wyll Franckly declare his opinion.
            And fyrſt to be the Magiſtrates dewtie, to foreſee that the people The dewtie of a good Magiſtrate. ſuſteine no hinderaunce through the fault of others. And that trew religion be not defaced by falſe doctrine: This to be theyr propre office to vſe all theyr power that is giuen them, to the glory of God, and welth of the people. But for as muche as they do the contrary, and let one an other, and ſome of them alſo mainteine the falſe doctrine, they ſhall not eſcape vnpuniſhed.
            It was neuer his purpoſe that the Papiſtes ſhould be oppreſſed wt 
               How the Magiſtrate ſhold deale wyth the Papiſtes force of Armes, but that the ciuill Maieſtrate ſhoulde compell them to do theyr dewtie, and herin to extende theyr right and aucthoritie: And that they neyther with theyr lenitie, nor yet with diſſimulation, ſhould confyrme their boldenes and lewde doynges. And as touchyng the cō
               mon people, they muſte be earneſtly admoniſhed, that they ſtyrre not, except the Magiſtrate commaunde them. For that way they labore al together in vayne, and God wil auenge the thing, and that with ſome greuous puniſhment. And wheras the Magiſtrates worke ſo ſlowely herin, where they beare and ſuffer ſo many vnworthy things, and are Gods wrath is ſlowe, but yet ſore. not moued with ſo manifeſt iniuries, and mockeries of the Cleargie, that is done throughe Gods permiſſion, that he alone myghte auenge all the matter, and powre out all his indignation vpon them. But in caſe this matter ſhould come to a tumult, and that God could be content with ſo light a puniſhment: yet were all this maner of procedyng not onely diſcommendable, but alſo vnprofitable. For in a ſeditiō there is no reaſon to be had, and for the moſt part it chaunceth that thinnocent

parſons are plaged ſoner than others. Moreouer there is no man Thauthors of rebellion are wythout excuſe. that ſtirreth vp rebellion, yt can be excuſed, be his matter neuer ſo iuſte. And in a great cōmotiō of people, the good wt the bad, the honeſt with the wicked of neceſſitie muſt periſhe together. Wherfore let them haue an eye to the Magiſtrate, and ſo long as he ſtyrreth not, let there be no priuate attempt. For all ſedition is againſt the cōmaundement of God, who cōmaundeth that all the controuerſies of priuate men ſhouldebe lawfully decided before a Iudge. But conſyderinge yt Rebellion is nothyng What thing rebellion is. els, but a priuate reuengement, no man nede to doubt, but ye god diſaloweth & abhorreth the ſame. And that this ſedition which is like to coine, is reiſed by the Deuill hym ſelfe the enemye of all mankynde, who, for that he can not abyde the lyght of the treweth, ſtyrreth vp tumultes by men that profeſſe the goſpell, that he might bringe in cōtēpt and hatred the trew doctrine that hath bene (through Gods benefite) in theſe former yeres reſtored: as though it proceded not of God, which ſemeth to geue an occaſion to ſo many euils. This do the aduerſaries of the goſpell already bragge of: But theyr iudgementes are to be cō
               temned. Whom he vtterly diſpiſeth herin: For he hathe neuer written nor ſpoken that thing that might kindle any ſedition. Now vnto ſuch as will queſtion & obiect what ſhall we than do? Howe longe ſhall we ſuffer theyr enormities: ſeyng that the Magiſtrate winketh therat? I How wicked dominion is to be ſhaken of. anſwer, yt they ought to folow this order. Fyrſt let them acknowledge theyr faultes: wherwith God beyng offēded, hath ſuffered the tyrrany of the Clergie to continew ſo long, and to ſtretche ſo farre as it doeth for their wicked & cruell gouernement is the reward of our offences: From the which if we wyll be deliuered, we oughte fyrſte to reconcile our ſelues vnto God through thamendement of life: And than wt earneſt prayer to deſyre gods aide againſt the popiſh knigdome, by the example The beſt way to ouer threw the popes authoritie. of king Dauid, who praied God many times to breake ye power and prid of the wicked. Finally that the doctrine of the goſpel be preached and ſet forth, and the iuggelinges of the Papiſtes made manifeſt to the world, that theyr errors beyng detected and the trueth knowē, men may eſteme lightly and clerely contemne what ſo euer ſhall procede from them. And this to be the redieſt way to ouerthrow theyr authoritie: by ſtrength and forſe of Armes, ye can preuaile nothinge: and commonly it chaunceth that throughe warre they are made ſtronger. But in caſe you cōpare Chriſt wt the Pope, & the goſpel wt his doctrine, than ſhall it openly appere, what difference there is betwixt the lighte of the ſunne, & mere darkenes: and howe great a benefite of God it is, Lu. did more with yt word thā cold haue bene don by force of Armes. that the way vnto the knowledge of him is made open, al lettes being takē away: Thā ſlideth & faleth downe all their force and eſtimation, which thing may appere by his example, which hath more afflicted the popiſhe kingdome, than any force of armes could haue done.
            
               
And therfore there is no other rebellion to be wiſhed after For only this preachyng of the goſpell, which is raiſed vp of Chriſte him ſelfe, is mightie and ſharpe ynough to ouerthrow all Papiſtrie. Hereupon let them fixe theyr eyes and mindes alſo, and loke for no other meane, Furthermore, not to be his owne matter, wherin he is ſo muche occupied, for ſo great a weight exceadeth the ſtrength and capacitie of mās witte. And that it is more than he loked for, yt the matter is brought ſo farre forth as it is: And therfore he putteth no doubt, but that he which hath laide the foundation of the worke, and hath gyuen increaſe to the ſame, will bringe it alſo to the concluſion and ende, maugre the heads of all his aduerſaries. He ſaieth howe the Deuill knew longe before of this great alteration, and how he went about to let it, and by certein It appereth by the Prophecies of Briget and others. men prophecied of theſe tymes, to the intent he might driue men farre from this holſome doctrine. But where he ſeeth his attempte to be in vaine, he ſeeketh a newe waye, and ſtyrreth vp men to rebellion, to let that there ſhould be no reuolting from the Biſhoppes kyngdome & his But yet ſhall he faile of his purpoſe. For through the preachinge of the pure doctrine their kingdome ſhall more and more be confounded. In which true doctrine we muſt ſtyll perſeuer, declaring howe mens decrees helpe nothinge at all vnto ſaluation: Moreouer, howe men muſt be warned that they ſuffre not them ſelues to be bounden to Monkiſh vowes, and ſuche as are intangled already, to forſake the ſame.
            Furthermore, that they giue no money to vaine and fooliſh vſes of the church, as for Tapers, Belles, Tabels, Ueſſels, Armes, Workes, & Ornamentes, and ſuche other like thinges. For the lyfe of a Chriſtian, conſiſteth not in theſe thinges, but in faith and Charitie. Thus if the people be taught, there is no doubt, but that the aucthoritie and kyngdome of the Biſhoppe and all his adherentes will fal in a fewe yeares.
            But in caſe this doctrine be not taught nor therrours plucked oute of mens myndes, Papiſtrie ſhal continew though neuer ſo many conſpiracies be made againſt it. Let them nowe conſyder and pōder with him, what he, in litel time brought to paſſe by his doctrine only, which his aduerſaries can teſtifie, that wanted their wonted commodities. Wherby it may be eaſely perceiued, what would haue come therof, in caſe this doctrine might haue had free courſe but two yeres longer.
            Wherfore the Deuill that ſmelleth out all the matter, doeth nowe beſtyrre him, & goeth about to let this enterpriſe through ſedition, but The Practiſe of the deuill. we muſt worcke wiſely, and commēde this benefite of God with high prayſes, which hath ſet vp this light of his knowledge before our eies. The Iuggling of the Papiſtes are bewraied, theyr ignoraunce, briberie, tyrrany, and all theyr fylthynes, wher with they haue ſo longe diſceaued the world, be nowe diſcloſed, and they whiche heretofore haue bene feared of all men, are nowe broughte to that exigente, that they

But where they nowe appeare in theyr likenes, and are beholden naked with the eies of all men, what vncleanes they haue hid hertofore, The popiſhe kingdō maie not long indure. and are nowe driuen to force of Armes, it can not be, that their ſtate ſhould longe endure: And if there chaunce any part of theyr power to remaine, which this doctrine of the ghoſpell ſhall not infringe, all that ſhall be aboliſhed by the commyng of Chriſt. We muſt therfore applye it manfully, and procede in the ſame courſe, but yet it muſte be done in order. For ſome are farre out of frame, which being not furniſhed with learnyng, after they haue heard two or three Sermōs, by and by take muche vpon them, callyng them ſelues Lutherianes, and reproue bitterly ſome that as yet knowe nothing. Wherin they do much offende, for ſo ought they not to do: And he requireth that no man vſurpe hys name: But rather indeuour, that ſeing we profeſſe the name of Chriſt, we may rightly chalenge that to ourſelues, that we may be ſurnamed Chriſtians. And he that teacheth, hath nede to be wel ware, what they Preachers ought to be circumſpect. be that he dealeth with: For ſome be obſtinate and froward, that both wyl contemne ſounde doctrine, and alſo bring others into errour: ſuch muſt they quite eſchew, & after the precept of Chriſt, to caſt no pearels before Hogges. But wheras they not cōtented eyther with theyr own ignoraunce or obſtinacie, do ſeke to ſeduce others, and bringe them frō the crew doctrine, thā muſt they be ſharpely withſtande: not for theyr owne ſakes, but that ſame of the multitude might at the leaſt be ſaued. Agayne therebe others not obſtynate but ſymple and without knowledge: with whom they muſt deale gently and not haſtely or raſhely: ſhewyng them in order wherein the ſaluation of men conſiſſeth: And accordyng to theyr ſmalle capacitie to applye all theyr ſpeache, tyll by lytle and lytle they increaſe and be confyrmed.
            In the laſt boke I ſhewed you of the Bowres yt were vp in Sweuelande, before Muncer came forth into the felde. Theſe people handled the matter with more attempraunce at the begynning, declaringe by articles written what thinges they would haue reformed by theyr Princes and Magiſtrates. And in caſe they were abuſed in any thing, they would not be ſtyfe nor wilfull, but promiſed to folowe better coū
               ſell: theyr requeſtes were theſe:
            Fyrſt, that they might chuſe them ſuche miniſters as ſhould preache Theyr demaundes. Gods worde ſincerely, without any mixture of mens traditions: Secondarely, that herafter they would pay no tithes, but of corne onely: and the ſame to be diſtributed by the diſcretion of good men, partly to the Miniſters of the Church, partly vpon the pore, and partly aboute commen affaires: Thyrdly that they haue bene hitherto vnworthelye kept in bondes, conſydering howe they are all made free in the bloude of Chriſt, they refuſe not to haue a Magiſtrate, knowyng that he is ordeyned of God, and wyll obey him in all honeſt thinges, but they can

not abyde to be any longer bounde, vnleſſe it be ſhewed reaſonable by the teſtimonies of Scripture:
            Againe, that it ſtandeth not with equitie that they are forbidden to Huntinge, Haukyng, & Fiſhyng prohibited. Hunte, Hauke, and Fiſhe, and that in many places they may not be ſuffered to chaſe the wilde beaſtes out of the corne. Seynge from the beginnyng of the world, God hath gyuen man right & rule ouer all kinde of beaſtes: we deſyre that ſome equalitie herein maye be had, & that rather the commoditie of a multitude, than of a fewe mighte be conſydered: Moreouer wodes be in few mens handes, to the great diſcommoditie of the people, wherfore theyr minde is to haue all ſuche common both for fewel and alſo for building, as be no priuate mans inheritāce: And for other woddes to be frendly vſed by the owners: Furthermore they be ſore burthened diuerſe waies dayly more and more: Wherfore they deſyre the Princes to moderate the ſame, after the rule of the goſpell, and charge them no further, than in times paſt hath bene accuſtomed: They would alſo that ſuch, as haue goods, landes, or poſſeſſions, by the benefite, or graunte of Princes, or Magiſtrates, be no further charged, than was couenaunted at the beginninge: lykewiſe ſome of them pay more rent yerely than theyr Fermes be worth, wherfore it is reaſon that the lordes remit ſome part therof, to the intente they ye tyll the grounde, may reape ſome fruite of their trauaile, and not liue in extreme pouertie: Brieflye in paimentes of money, they woulde require more equitie, for dayly are diuiſed new lawes and meanes to get money of them for no amendement, but oftentimes the thing is hādled by fauour or diſpleaſure, or ſome one or other pertialtie. Wherfore they require that all affections ſet a part, this thing be vſed from hence forth, as the maner was firſt preſcribed. Finally that ſome haue taken in lā
               des and Meddowes that are common, which they will redreſſe, vnles they be agreed withall: laſt of al, that wheras the goodmā of the houſe departeth, the wife and children are wont to paye ſome what, whiche becauſe it is vnreaſonable, they would that the Magiſtrates ſhoulde vtterly take it away.
            Unto theſe Articles beyng once publiſhed: anſwereth Luter (vnto Lut. anſwer to the Bowres. whom they had referred their matter) And framing his ſtile vnto thē: It is trew (ſayeth he) I graunt you, that ſuche Princes as do not admit the preaching of the Goſpell, and oppreſſe the people diuerſlye, are worthy whom God ſhould thruſt out of gouernement: for they haue none excuſe: And albeit this be trew, yet muſt you take heede that you bring hither a pure and vnſpotted conſcience: or els ſhall you ſuffer the loſſe bothe of body and ſoule: neyther ought you to conſyder what power you are of, or howe much your aduerſaries are to be blamed, but howe iuſt the quarel is, that you defende. Take diligent hede therfore, and beleue not the preachinges of all men. For Sathan hathe at this

tyme vnder the pretence of the Goſpell, ſtyred vp many ſediciouſe and bloudy doctours. I wyll counſell you ryghtly and truely as I am bō
               den: it ſhall be your parte to geue eare and mynde to heare it. Nether ſhal it moue me one whitte, though many ſhal reporte euyll and rayle vppon me: It ſhall ſuffice if at the leſt wyſe I may delyuer ſome from Goddes vengeaunce, for the reſt of them I paſſe not, and as they contempne me, ſo ſhall not I feare them: But for the purpoſe, you take to The Bours vſe Godlye titles. your ſelues an holy name, and call your ſelue a Chriſtian felloweſhyp and bragge that you wyll followe in all thinges the lawe preſcribed of God. But you know certenly that the name of God may not be taken in vayne, nor vntrewlye: for God threateneth a punyſhemente, Gen. 7 Gene. 19. whiche remayneth dewe vnto you alſo, if you handle not this buſines ryghtly he that drowned the whole worlde with a flud, he that ſwallowed vp Sodome with a fyrie ſhoure, the ſame can eaſely deſtroye you alſo, what power ſomeuer you haue. But it is to be proued eaſely that you take the name of God in your doinges falſely: Wherfore it is not very harde to coniecture what the ende will be.
            For he diſceaueth not, that ſayed they ſhoulde dye of the ſworde, Math. 26. whiche toke vnto them ſelues the ſworde (that is) which by their boldnes vſurped the aucthritie of correctyng others.
            Where as Paule not withſtanding commaundeth all men generally Roma. 13. tobey the Magiſtrate with reuerence and feare: What wyl you aunſwere vnto this, whiche will ſeme to followe the preſcript of gods lawe, and yet laye holde on the ſworde, and reſiſte the Magiſtrate, whome God hathe ordeyned, is not this to take the name of God in vayne? But you wyll ſaye the Magiſtrate is ſuche as is vntollerable, for they take from vs the doctrine of the Goſpell, & in all other thinges they oppreſſe vs vnreaſonably. I admitte it be ſo, yet maye not you therfore ſtyre vp commotions and ſeditions: for it is not euery mans pacte to puniſhe malefactours, but this appertayneth to him only, vnto whome is geuen the right and power of the ſworde, as the Scripture planely teacheth: Againe not onely the lawes wrytten, but alſo the lawe of nature printed in mennes myndes, ſheweth that no man ought to be iudge in his owne cauſe. For we be all faulty and blinded with the loue of oure ſelues. Neither can it be denied, but that this tumult and ſedition of yours, is a priuate reuengement: for you take vpō you the determination of matters, & the iniuries that you thinke are done vnto you, you ſeke to reuēge by your own aucthoriti. but the ſame is againſt Gods lawe, the lawe of nature, finally againſt equitie and iuſtice. And ſeing it is ſo, you are by no meanes able to defend this fact of yours, or if you haue any commaundemēt of God concerning your doinges, the ſame of neceſſitie muſt be declared by ſome notable myracle. But it taketh place in you that Chriſte ſpake: you can ſee manifeſtly

that is to be rebuked in others, but you conſider not what wyekednes is in your owne cauſe.
            The Magiſtrate doeth naught, but you doe muche worſe, whiche We are all blind in our own cauſe. contempnyng Gods commaundement, doe entre in to an other mans iuriſdiction, whiche leaue vnto the Magiſtrate nothing, for what remayneth whan you haue taken a waye his power and authoritie? the hygher powers take your goodes or poſſeſſions, they doe wrong. But you take away their iuriſdiction, in the whiche thynge conſiſteth all The ſtate of a magiſtrate wherin it cō
                  ſiſteth. their ſtate both of body and goodes.
            Nowe whether is he more wicked that taketh ſome parte of your goodes and ſpareth your lyfe, or he that taketh lyfe and goodes alſo? Waye well what is ſayde, and you ſhalbe founde more wicked. But we deſyre not their lyfe nor their goodes, you wyll ſaye, let hym beleue you that lyſt I wyl not. Who ſo taketh awaye the chiefeſt thyng, wyll not be afrayde to take the reſt alſo, whiche dependeth vpon the ſame, but let it be as you ſaye, let them enioye their goodes and their lyfe in ſafitie: That whiche you haue done already, exceadeth all meaſure, whan you takyng from them all their authoritie wyll be Lordes and Rulers your ſelues.
            Waye it with youre ſelues I beſeche you, in caſe your enterpryſe The Magiſtrate is as neceſſary as the ſeune to the worlde. ſhould be commended and take place, there ſhould be no place for iudgement, no Magiſtrate at all, eche man myght vſe an other as he thought good, and what wold followe therof, but robbyng and murtherynge one of an other? for ſo ſone as one ſhall thynke hym ſelfe to haue receyued wrong of another, he wyll couet to reuenge hym ſelfe at his pleaſure: Whiche if it be amyſſe and not to be ſuffered in any man, muche leſſe ſhould it be permytted to any vnlawfull aſſemblye, or if it maye be ſuffered, it is alſo to be borne with, in all others. But what ſay you, if in your aſſemblye the cauſe ſhould requyre that euery man woulde pryuatlye auenge his owne cauſe, tell me what woulde you doe? Doubtleſſe he ſhould be conſtrayned to ſtand to the publique iudgement appoynted by you. What thyng doth than excuſe you that contempne lawes & iudgementes, and reiecte the Magiſtrate whom God hym ſelfe hath appoynted ouer you?
            This lawe wherof we ſpeake nowe is impryuted in all mens hartes, The law of nature aloweth a Magiſtrate. and is obſerued alſo of the moſte barbarous people: for els ſhould ther be a wonderfull confuſion in all thynges: whiche lawe all beit you did obſerue neuer ſo dilygently, yet ſhoulde you be nothynge better, than Turkes or ſuche other lyke people that knowe not our religion: For to be ruled by lawe and Magiſtrates maketh not a man a good chriſtian: for neceſſitie byndeth them to it maugre their heades.
            Wherfore ſeing that you do breake this lawe whiche is ingryft in

the mynde, and common to all men, ye are a great deale worſe then the Heathen people: and farre vnworthy of the name of Chriſtians. Whiche tytle becauſe you doe vſurpe to your ſelues, and doe iniury to Goddes name, beynge not worthy in deede to be called Turkes for breakyng of the lawe of nature, howe ſhall you ſtande before the face of Chriſte, what tyme he ſhal iudge vs al? For ſee therfore agayne and agayne, what maner of men your preachers be, for I feare leſt ſome blouddy butchers be crept in amonges you, whiche perſwade you to this in their Sermons, to the intēt that they may through your ayde beare Rule and reigne, being carcleſſe for your ſaluation.
            God cōmaundeth that all vengeaunce be lefte vnto him. the ſcripture teacheth vs to obeye the Magiſtrate, though he be frowarde, you ought therfore to be obedient: otherwyſe you ſhall Reyſe a cōmotion in dede, but the ſame ſhall lyght in your owne neckes: for GOD wil not permytte youre lycencious outrage to be vnpunyſhed.
            And whyleſt you ſeke your lybertie, you ſhall procure to your ſelfe the loſſe of lyfe, goodes, and ſoule alſo. For the wrath of GOD is kyndled agaynſt you: And the deuyll ennemye of almens ſaluations, hath ſent into your felloweſhyp falſe teachers: followyng therfore my counſell, beware and amende in tyme.
            Nowe wyll I ſpeake of the Chriſtian lawe, or the lawe of the goſpell: The chriſtiā lawe. For as muche as you chalenge to your ſelues that ſurname, is mete it ſhold be tryed and knowen what your lawe is in this behalf. And firſt Chriſt cōmaundeth vs not to reſiſt harme, but when we are ſtryken on the one cheke, to offer alſo the other, and to hym that taketh awaye your coote, he byddeth you to delyuer alſo your cloke: he commaundeth vs both to praye and doe for our enemyes. And in the Math. 5. ſame ſenſe are alſo many other places of Scripture.
            Nowe conſyder with me, howe this your enterpryſe agreeth with Chriſtes commaundement: ſee howe farre youre Doctours haue lead you aſtraye. For it is the parte of Chriſtians to ſuffer and beare the Croſſe, not to reſyſte, not to reuenge, not to ſtryke with the ſworde: And what lyke thyng appeareth in you.
            The profeſſion of a Chriſtian man is exceadynge harde, and verye The chriſtē profeſſion is harde. fewe doe perfourme in deede that whiche they are bounden to. And to make the thyng more playne, I ſhal bring you an example out of the ſame lawe. Peter to defende his Lorde and Maiſter, ſtroke the byſhoppes ſeruaunt: Was it not a iuſte cauſe? ſeynge they dyd not onlye ſeke the lyfe of Chriſte, but with that to take a waye alſo from his diſſciples the doctryne of the Goſpell, wherin conſiſted their ſaluation. But ſuche lyke cruell iniury hath not yet touched you: but what ſayde Chriſte to this?

He commaunded Peter to ceaſe frō his defence, geuing a ſore ſentence againſt them that ſtryke with the ſworde, that is to ſaye, whiche concempning the Magiſtrate, will auenge their owne cauſe. What dyd he, when he was nayled to the Croſſe, when he was prohibyted to execute his office committed vnto hym of God the father? Uerely, toke it The nature of veritie. paciently, committyng the whole matter, to GOD his father, vnto whome he maketh interceſſion for his perſecutors: theſe ſteppes muſt be folowed of you, or els muſt you leaue and laye aſyde the goodlye name and tytle of Chriſtianytie. But in caſe you woulde followe the example of Chriſt, the power of God would appeare: And as after the moſte vnworthie death of his onlye ſonne, he ſet forth the Goſpel farre and nere againſt the wyll of all his aduerſaries: ſo would he vndoubtedly loke vpon you alſo, and ſend his holſome doctrine aboundantly: But now, conſydering the matter is attempted by force of armes, you ſhall neyther obtayne your purpoſe, nor eſcape in the daye of battell. Now wyl I ſpeake ſūwhat of myſelf alſo. I had the whole worlde againſt me with all their force and myght: And yet the more and greater that theyr violence was, the better ſucceſſe had my doctryne. How ſo? I vſed no force I ſtyred vp no commotion, I was not deſyrous of vengeaunce: But I obeyed the ciuyle Magiſtrate with reuerēce, and wrote in his commendation, and ſet hym forth as muche as lay in me, and that whiche was pryncipall, committyng my cauſe into Goddes handes, I reſted wholy in his protection: And thus haue I bene preſerued vnto this daye, though the Byſhop of Rome with al the reſte, ſtampe and ſtare at it: I haue decayed his kyngdome more, then any force of armes could haue done, and my doctryne is ſpread ouer ſondrye nations. But you ruſhe forth headlong vnaduiſedly, and whyleſt you thynke to further the thynge, you conſyder not howe muche you hynder the ſame. Wherfore in this quarell you muſt ſet aparte the name and tytle of Chriſtiās, for though it were neuer ſo iuſte, yet for ſo muche as a Chriſten man maye not fyght nor reſiſte iniury, I maye in no wyſe graunte you that tytle and ſurname.
            And yet I ſpeake not this to defende or pourge the Magiſtrates: for I confeſſe them to doe many thynges vniuſtly, notwithſtandyng your doynges, are here farre from the profeſſion of Chriſtianitie. In ſo muche that in caſe you wyll obſtinatly kepe ſtyll that name, and with this colour ſhaddowe your euell cauſe, I proteſt to be your ennemie, for becauſe vnder the pretence of the Goſpel, ye doe that is clean contrary to Chriſtes doctrine. Therfor wyll I pray vnto God, that he wyll mercyfully loke vpon you, and ſubuerte your enterpryſe. For I perceyne this euydently that the deuill goeth about, in aſmuche as he coulde not hytherto oppreſſe me by the Byſhop of Rome, to deſtroye

me now by the bloudy preachers. Wherfore I wyll praye, notwithſtandyng The craftes of the deuill to oppreſſe the Goſpel. that I had leuer you would ſo demeane youre ſelues, that I ſhould not nede to make my prayers againſt you. For al be it I am a ſynner, yet hauing ſo iuſt a cauſe to pray, I doubt not but my praier ſhalbe heard. For GOD wyll haue his name to be ſanctified, and ſo hath he commaunded alſo that we ſhould praye.
            Wherfore I exhorte and beſeche you, that you deſpiſe not the prayers of me and others, leſt ye fele to your vtter vndoing, what they can bryng to paſſe. but you can haue in your prayers no ſuche lyke faythe or affiaunce, for the Scripture and your gylty conſcience doe declare your proceadynges to be prophane and vngodly. But I praye you howe many of you haue prayed vnto God in this cauſe? I ſuppoſe not one. For you put your whole truſte and affiaunce in your great armie. But aſſure your ſelfe, for as muche as you ſo doe, all youre atattemptes at the laſt, wyll tourne to your owne deſtruction.
            Nowe as concernyng your demaundes they are eaſely anſwered, Aunſwere to the demaundes of the bowers. whiche though they were grounded vpon equitie, and were agreable to the lawe of nature, yet touchyng theyr Pryncipall parte, they ſtande not vpryghte, becauſe you wyll extorte them by vyolence from the hygher powers whyche is agaynſt all lawe and equitie Agayne he that deuyſed them for you, is no good man. For the places of Scripture, whiche he alledgeth to incenſe you and brynge you into daunger, he reciteth no wholy nor truly, which if you loke better vpon them, make nothing with you, but againſt you. But al your brauery No mā may be kept from the Goſpell. is about the Goſpell, that it is taken from you: but that can not be, for if it be reſtrained in one place, you may repare to an other wher it is frely preached. For the place maye not be kepte by force, but we muſt forſake it, and flee to another, as Chriſte hym ſelfe hathe taught vs. Your firſte demaunde for ordeynyng of Miniſters is not amyſſe, ſo it be done in dewe order: For if the landes or poſſeſſions that fynde the myniſter were geuen by Magiſtrates, then it is not lawefull for the people to gyue them to whome they lyſt. But firſt muſte the Magiſtrate Howe miniſters ſhoulde be ordayned be required to place one: whiche if he refuſe to do, than ſhal the people chuſe one, and maintaine him of their own charges: if the Magiſtrate wil not ſuffer this, than let the miniſter choſen by the people, flee, and with him who ſo lyſt: if it be done otherwyſe, it can not be wt
               out wrong or miſchief. That of the tenthes, is moſt vnreaſonable. For Tithes muſt be payde. what other thing is this, thā to take away al rule & power. You muſt be liberal, but of your own, not of an other mans: but nowe ye vſe the matter as if you had al authoritie in your own hādes, wherby it is eaſely perceiued what your intent & purpoſe is. you wold again haue all Chriſtianitie taketh not away bōdage men free, why had not Abrahā & other holy mē, bondmen? reade Paul

he ſhall inſtructe you touchynge bondemen: wherfore this requeſt is full of violence and robberye, and ſtriueth with the Goſpell.
            For he that is a Seruaunt, may neuertheleſſe be deuoute, and vſe Bondage is not let to chriſten libertie. the Chriſtian lybertie, as well as he that is ſycke or kepte in pryſon. You ſhoote al at this marke, to haue all equalle, and of one ſtate and condition, whiche is fonde and abſurde. For this ciuile lyfe and gouernment of the publyque wealth can not endure, vnleſſe there be a difference of perſones, that theremaye be ſome free, and ſome bounde, ſome to rule, and ſome to obeye.
            The reſt concerning wylde beates, wooddes, waters, paſtures, paymentes of money, and ſuche other lyke, I leaue to be diſputed of Lawyers, for they touche not my dutie, whiche is to inſtructe the myndes of men in Godlyneſſe.
            And nowe ye men and brethren, this is my mynde, and counſell Luters office whiche you deſyred to knowe: Nowe ſhall it be your partes, for as muche as you ſaye ye wyll obeye the Teſtimonies of Scrypture, to hearken vnto the ſame. And not by and by ſo ſoone as it ſhall comme to your handes to make an outcrye, as though I flattered the Magiſtrates, and taught you not ryghtly but ponder the whole matter and waye all my reaſons dylygentlye. For certenly the cauſe is your owne. And aboue althinges be ware of thoſe preachers that pricke you forwarde, I knowe that ſorte of men ryght well: they leade you head longe into daungers, that they myght get preferment and ryches through your peryll.
            The cauſe why Luther doeth ſo muche caſte in their tethe the falſe The falſe title of the bowers. tytle that they bragged of, was this, for that in all their lettres that they wrote to prouoke and allure others to their felloweſhyppe they made their boaſte, that they toke armure vppon them for Gods commaundement, and for a certen loue and zeale to the common wealth, to the intent the doctrine of the Goſpell myght be ſet forth, augmented and mayntayned, that truthe, equitie, and honeſt lyuyng myght reingne and floryſhe, and that they myght ſo prouyde for thē and theirs, that hereafter they be not oppreſſed with any violence, and whan thei had thus at fewe woordes declared the cauſe of their enterpryſe, they woulde than commaunde their neighbours by and by to put on Armure, and come vnto them immediatly and helpe them, if not, than would they threaten to come vpon them withall their power.
            What tyme Luter had thus aunſwered the commotioners, admonyſhyng alſo the Princes and the nobilitie by wrytynge ſayeth, vnto them: All the trouble and buſynes that is at this daye is altogether longe of you, chieflye that beareth the Tytle of the Churche, whiche ceaſe not yet at this daye for all my preachynge to perſecute the

doctrine of the Goſpel, and that again your conſcience, ſecondarely you that are Prynces and cyuyl Magiſtrates beyng wholly addicted to exacte and gather vp money, you care not by what meanes, ſo that the poore people are no longer hable to beare the burthen, and al to mainteyne your ryot, pryde, and voluptuouſnes. Wherfore there hangeth aſſuredly a wounderfull daunger ouer you, as a ſworde dependynge ouer your neckes by a twhyne threde. And yet are you in the meane tyme ſo careleſſe, as though no man were hable to diſplace you: but this ſecuritie wyll doubtles hurte you one daye: for God powreth out ſome tyme his indignation vpon Prynces, as it is read in the Pſalmes. I haue oftentymes admonyſhed you to beware therof, but no warning wyll ſerue. Wherfore Gods whrath wil fall upō your heads, Pſal. 107. vnleſſe you amende your lyues. The ſignes and wounders that are ſeene in all places, doe pretende no good. We maye eaſely coniecture that Gods anger boyleth againſt vs, for that he permitteth falſe doctours to be ſo muche eſtemed amongſt vs, to the intent we beinge lead by them into errours and darkenes, myght be plaged worthely. Moreouer this rebellion of the people, whiche wyll vtterlly deſtroye Germany, vnleſſe God, moued wt our Prayers, ſend ſome remedy. And your gouernment is at this daye after ſuche a ſorte, that men neyther can nor wyl, nother ought in dede to ſuffer it any longer. You muſt be cleane altered, and gyue place vnto Goddes worde: And if the people bryng it not to paſſe at this tyme, others ſhal ſuccede: for albeit you kyl vp theſe, yet God wil reiſe new, which worketh this, warreth againſt you, and ſeketh to plage your wickednes. Dyuers of you haue made your boaſte that you would ſpende al the goodes and lādes you haue, vpon condicion that Luthers doctrine myght cleane be taken away: And what is not the thing brought no we to the effect? God forbydde I ſhould ieſte in theſe weyghty matters. The Iewes in tymes paſte, ſayde, how they had no kyng: but at the laſt the ſtate of their common wealth came vnto that paſſe, that they want a kyng for euer, for many of you not content with your former faultes, woorke a newe iniury to the Goſpell, affirmyng that all this hurly burlye is the fruicte that ſpryngeth of my doctrine. Well go to, rayle on ſtyll hardely: you wyll not knowe what my doctrine is, nor vnderſtand the voyce of the Goſpell, The Goſpel is ſclaſidered with rebelliō
                whiche is the ſigne of an obſtinate and a malicious minde, I haue euer from the beginnyng taught quietly, and haue abhorred all ſedicion. I haue earneſtly exhorteth the people to be obediēt to the hygher powers, nay rather I haue admonyſhed thē to beare with your Tyranny and wicked gouernment: And hereof you your ſelues can beare witnes. Therfore hath not this ſedition proceaded of me, but thoſe The raſers of tumultes. bloudy Prophetes, no leſſe ennemies to me, than to you, haue brought in this miſchief ſeducing the people, & haue ben about this, thre yeares

and more, and no man hath reſiſted them ſo muche, as I alone. If god hath now for your ſynne permitted ſathā, by thoſe bluddy prophets, to ſtyrre vp the rage and fury of the people againſt you, and that it ſhall not lye in me to let or appeaſe the ſtorme, ſay, I pray you, what faulte can be layde in me or the Goſpell, whan this doctrine, whiche I profeſſe, hath not only borne with your crueltie hitherto, but alſo prayed vnto God for you, hath commended your authoritie and ſtate to the people, and maynteined the ſame with high commendacion? But and if I coueted nowe to auenge the iniuries that you haue done me, I myght laughe in my ſlyue, and be a loker on this cruel tragedy or aſſiſt the furious people, and as the common ſaiyng is, increaſe the flamme with oyle, and be as ſharpe nayle in the ſore, wherfore (noble Princes) I require you earneſtly, that you deſpyſe not myne admonition, nor ſet lyght by this ſame ſediton: Not for that I feare left they ſhoulde be able to deſtroye you, for I would not you ſhould dreade that: but that the Ire of God ſhould be be fearfull vnto you. For if he intede to plage you worthely whiche thynge I feare you ſhall not eſcape the daunger, although the power of your ennemies be neuer ſo ſmall. Therfore if any place as yet remayne for counſell I pray you, gyue place vnto fury, and appeaſe this matter wittely: And for ſo much as the end is vncerten, The part of a wyſe man. and Gods wyll vnknowen: it ſhall be mete for you firſte to trie alwayes, and to take hede that there be not ſuch a flamme kyndled, that ſhall ſet all Germany on a fyre. For certainly our offences wherewith we haue ſtyrred gods wrath agaiſt vs, are ſo manifeſt, that we ought to be afrayde of euery lyttle ſturre, muche more whan ſo great a number of ennemies are aſſembled to offer battell. Lenytie and gentlenes can tourne you to no loſſe, and if it ſhould, yet after it wyll reſtore you the ſame with the aduauntage: but if you go to it by force, it ſhal peraduenture be in great haſarde. And where as you may preuayle more by other meanes, why wyll you venter with ſo great daunger. Their requeſtes be twelue, wherof ſome be ſo agreable to reaſon and equitie, that you maye haue good cauſe to be aſhamed. They demaūde firſt of all, that the miniſter of the churche may be ordeyned lawfully ſuche as can preache gods worde. And albeit they haue a reſpect herein to their owne priuate commoditie, in aſmuche as they would pay hym his ſtipende of other mens tythes: Yet is it againſt reaſon, it ſhold be denied, for it is lawefull for no magiſtrate, to keepe their people from the doctrine of the Goſpell. Others that concerne ſeruices, droictes, and ſuch lyke thinges are grounded alſo vpon reaſon. For it is not the parte of a The dutie of a Magiſt. Magiſtrate, to vexe orpille the people: but rather to maynteine and preſerue their wealth and ſubſtaunce. But now there is no ende of pillage, and howe ſhould this continue? Certainly ye ought to leaue this exaction, and refraine your prodigalitie and riot, that the poore maye

haue ſome thyng more to releue their great myſery. When he had thus admonyſhed eyther parte ſeuerally, he wryteth an epiſtle common to both. And for ſo muche as eyther partie maynteyneth an euyll quarel, he aduyſeth them to laye downe their weapons, and put it to arbitrement, declaryng vnto the Magiſtrates howe cruell euer and howe bloudy the ende of Tyrauntes hath ben, and agayne to the people how vnfortunate, and myſerable hath bene the ſucceſſe and wyndyng vp of The ende of tyranny. commotioners, whiche haue taken armure and ſtanden in a defence with the hyghe powers. One thynge he lamenteth exceadyng, that ſeing they warre on eyther ſyde with an euyll conſcience, the Princes to eſtablyſhe their Tyranny, the others ſediciouſly to accomplyſhe their wycked deſyre, they ſhould loſe their owne ſoules, ſo many as peryſhe in this warre. After he bewaileth the ſtate of germany, which through this ciuile warre ſhould vtterly be deſtroyed: for to begyn warre is an eaſy matter, but we can not ſo wel ende the ſame when we wolde. He admonyſheth them therfore to abſteyne, and not to leaue to their poſte ritie the ſtate of the common wealth ſo full of trouble & bloudſhed: by force of armes can nothing be done to continewe, by the amendemēt of lyfe very much. he exhorteth them to committe the whole matter to the hearyng and determening of certayn good mē choſen for the ſame purpoſe. That the Princes would remitte ſomewhat of their ryght: & that the people againe ſhould followe good coūſell, and leaue out ſome of their demaundes. This to be his aduiſe and counſell, whiche vnleſſe they woulde folowe, he would gyue them the lokyng on: for to be on eyther ſyde were vnlawfull: ſeyng the people moue warre agaynſt their Prynces as the oppreſſours of their wealth and ryches: And the Princes agayne with the people as with theues and murtherers, that do alſo iniury vnto the name of Chriſt. In this ther obſtinate fiercenes he wyll praye vnto God that eyther he would ſhewe ſome waye to accorde them, or els to ſubuerte their counſell and all their enterpryſes: Howe be it after all theſe wonders, he feareth that the wrath of God ſhall no we no more be mitigated, than what tyme he declared by Ieremy that his wrath and diſpleaſure ſhould not be aſwaged, no not at the inſtaunt prayers of moſte holy men, but that he woulde plage the Iewyſhe nation: wherefore he would wyſhe for nothyng more, than that they would amende and ſerue God in feare and tremblyng, that Of Not, Daniel, and 
                     •
                  ob at the leſt wyſe, the plage hangyng ouer vs, myghte be differred and aſwaged. Whyleſt he endeuoured thus to appeaſe the tumulte, they yt were in Franckony and indiuers other places, marchynge forewarde ſodainly warred not only againſt the papiſtes, but againſt the nobilitie Luther bloweth the trō
                  pet againſt the boures. alſo, and did muche miſchief as is ſhe wed before. Then Luther in an other wrytyng, exhorteth all men that they would come to deſtroye theſe wycked theues and paracides in lyke caſe as they woulde come

to quenche a commen fyre, who haue moſte ſhamefully broken their fayth, to their Princes, taken other mens goodes by force and cloke al this abomination & wickednes with the couer of Chriſtianitie, which is the vyleſt and moſte vnworthieſt thing, that can be imagined. And after that he hath confuted their reaſons, as is before reherſed, he byddeth the Princes not doubte nor feare to ſet vpon and deſtroye that ſeditious Ther can be nothig worſe then ſediciō. Rabble: for it apertayneth chiefly to their dutie, and not they only, but alſo euery pryuate mā may kylle a ſeditious perſone by what meanes he can, for that there can be no more peſtilent thyng in the publique wealth than ſedition. ſo long as they proteſted not to be obſtinate, but to be reformed by the teſtimonies of Scrypture, or by them that coulde inſtructe them with better thynges, he durſt not be bolde to condempne them: but nowe ſythe the thinge it ſelfe declareth that they dyd nothyng but diſſemble, he muſt alſo chaunge his ſtyle. And therfore he ryngeth a larme and admonyſheth all men to ſet vpon thē and deſtroye as if they were ſo many wylde beaſtes.
            This booke dyd many diſcommende in all places, as to earneſt and Lut. to vehement. cruell, but he aunſwereth in the defence therof, maintaining his opiniō that none of them ought to be pardoned, no not they whiche were cō
               ſtrayned by others, if they haue done any thynge ſediciouſly, ſauynge thoſe only, whiche beyng ones admonyſhed were content to rendre & yelde them ſelues. I tolde you before howe the Emperour by his letters Thēperors letters to the princes of Germany. ſent out of Spayne, did inhibite the aſſemblye of the Empyre, that ſhoulde haue bene the laſte yeare in Nouembre at Spyres: but nowe hearyng of the trouble ſome ſtate of Germany, and of the great preparation that the Turke made to inuade Hongary, he ſent his letters agayne from Toleto, appoynting a counſell of the whole Empire at Auſpurge, to begynne the firſt daye of October, for the cauſes aboue An aſſemble called at Auf. mentioned, but chiefly for ayde agaynſt the great Turke. ſygnifyinge that in caſe he can not be there preſent hym ſelf, he wyll appoint others to ſupplye his place: whiche letters beyng wrytten the .xxiiij. of May, were not delyuered in Germany tyll the .xiij. of Auguſt, wherfore by the aduyſe of Ferdinando and others, it was differred tyl ſaint Martyns daye the .xj. of Nouembre, that ſuche as dwelt farre of, might prepare them ſelues to come in dew reaſon. Caroloſtadius diſſenting frō Luther, and therfore departing from Wittenberge, as before is mentioned, had kept familiaritie with thoſe ſecrete teachers that fayned themſelues to ſee viſions, and to haue talke with God. for the whiche cauſes the Dukes of Saxony had banyſhed hym out of his countrey: And he had ſet forth bookes againſt Luther and his fellowes callyng Caroloſtadius writeth againſt Lu. them newe flatterers of the Romyſhe byſhop, and ſuche as taught amyſſe concernyng the maſſe, confeſſion of ſynnes, Images, and other thinges: And thoſe wordes of Chriſt: This is my body, he interpreted

thus here ſytteth my body, and rayleth on the Duke for exylyng hym, but layde all the blame in Luther. Whereunto Luther aunſwered at large defendyng his opinions, and affirmed the cauſe to be iuſt, wherfore the prince had banyſhed him. Now after this ſedition was opreſſed, the armies of the commoners diſcōfited, and many executed dayly in al places: Caroloſtadius beyng afrayde of his own parte, cōpyleth a booke wherin he pourgeth him ſelfe ryght dilygentlye, affirmynge Caroloſtadius maketh his porgatiō
                that they doe vnto hym great iniurye that reporte hym to be one of the authors of this ſeditiō. And writīg his letters to Luther deſyreth hym earneſtly to ſet forth this ſame booke, to defende his innocenſie, that he be not vniuſtly condempned, and neuer come to his aunſwere. Luther wryting an epiſtle, that all be it he diſſented much from hym, yet for aſmuche as in this diſtreſſe he fleeth vnto hym for ſucour, he ſayeth he would not diſceyue his expectacion herein, conſidering chiefly that this is the very dewtye of a Chriſtenman. Wherfore he deſyreth the Magiſtrates, and all others in generall, that in ſo muche as he vtterlye denyeth the thyng that is layde to his charge, and refuſeth not to come to his anſwere before any lawful iudge, the ſame might be graū
               ted him, whiche ſtandeth both with equitie and iuſtice. After this Caroloſtadius ſendeth Luther an other boke, wherin he proteſteth, that ſuche thinges as he wrote of the Lordes ſupper, was not to defyne or determine any thing, but by way of diſputatiō to ſearche out the truth Luther admitteth the excuſe, but he warneth al men to beware of his opinion, for ſo much as he is doubtful in it him ſelfe, or els if thei doubt in lyke caſe, to ſuſpende their iudgement, tyl ſuch tyme as it be certenly knowē what to beleue therin. for in thynges that we muſt beleue, we ought not to doubte or wauer, but to be ſo certen, that rather than to Faith ought not to vauer forſake our opinion, we ſhould not refuſe to dye a thouſand tymes. In thoſe dayes Luther maried a Nunne; wherby he gaue occaſion to his aduerſaries to ſpeake euyll of hym. For than they ſayd playnly he was Luther maried a Nūne. madde, and became the ſeruaunt of the deuill. At this tyme, Zwynglius the miniſter of the congregation at Zurick, agreing with Luther in all other thynges diſſented from him, touching the lordes ſupper. For thoſe wordes of Chriſt, this is my body, Luther vnderſtode barely and ſymply after the texte of the letter, admitting none other interpretation, affirming the bodye and bloude of Chriſte to be verely in the bread and wyne, and ſo to be receyued with the mouthe alſo: but Zuinglius taketh it to be a trope or a fygure, as many others mo are to be found in the Scriptures and expoūdeth the wordes thus: This ſignifieth my body. Wherunto ſubſcribed Oecolampadius, a preacher at Baſill, interpretyng it thus: This is a ſigne of my body. The matter was hādled on eyther ſyde with much contention & wryting. The Saxōs held ye opiniō of Luther, the Zwicers of Zwynglius. There

followed others which did expoūd it otherwiſe, but they all agreed in this opinion, that the body & blud of Chriſt is receiued ſpiritnally, not corporally, nor with ye mouth, but wt the hart. This cōtention endured the ſpace of .iii. years: at the laſt, by the meanes of the Lantgraue, they Luther and Zwynglius met at Marpurge. came to a cōmunication at Marburg, as hereafter you ſhal here. Alſo the coūſel of thempire appointed a litle before at Auſpurg, becauſe few came thither, by reaſon of the tumultes in Germany, was proroged to the firſt of May in the next yeare folowyng, at the which time Ferdinando put thē in hope that the Emperour would be there him ſelf, and the place was appointed at Spyres. Neuertheleſſe it was decreed, yt in the meane tyme, the preachers ſhould expound the ſcriptures to the people, after the mindes of the doctours whiche the churche had receiued, and not to teache ſediciouſly, but ſo, as Gods name may be gloryfied, & quietnes maintained. Whileſt Fraunces the French kyng was priſoner in Spayne, Ales his mother had the gouernment: Who to kepe in the byſhop of Rome, ſignified vnto him by letters & meſſagers what a zeale and affection ſhe bare towardes him and the churche of Rome. Wherupon Elemēt the ſeuenth writing to the court of parliament The Popes letters to thē of Paris. in Paris, ſignifieth how he vnderſtode by her, that certen hereſies began to ſpring vp in Fraunce, againſt the auncient faith and religion & how they haue (wittely forſeing the thing) choſen certen men to puniſhe ſuch offendours, whiche thing he confirmeth alſo by his authoritie, wyllyng them to be diligent herein, both for Gods glory and alſo for the welth of the Realme. With many other faire wordes of exhortation to perſeuer in ſo doing. Which letters being dated at Rome the xx. day of May, were deliuered to the Senate at Paris the .xvij. daye of Iune. Moreouer in the kinges abſence the diuines of Paris, had ſo Faber driuē out of Paris euill entreated Iames Faber of Stapulles who hathe written dyuers workes both of Philoſophie and diuinitie that they droue hym out of Fraunce. Wherof the kyng being certified by the lettres of his ſiſter Margaret, which loued Faber for his vertue, writeth to the Senate of Paris in his behalfe, geuyng him a Godlye teſtimony for his learnyng and vertue, and that he is in much eſtimation amonges the Italians and Spanyardes, wherfore he wileth them to ſurceaſe, and let the action falle, till his retourne, or his pleaſure further knowen, beyng aſſured that it is by euyl wyll commenced againſt hym by the doctours of Serbone, for the matter was heard before his commyng from home. Theſe letters being dated at Madricea town in Spayn, The kynges letters for Faber. the .xij. of Nouembre, were delyuered at Paris the .xxviij. of the ſame moneth. It was a thyng geuen to the deuines in tymes paſte, to rayle vpon learned men: the cauſe was that they ſawe their ignoraunce diſpiſed. This yeare was the ſtate of the common wealth altered in the lande of Pruſe, the vttermoſt prouince in Germany, bordering on the

We ſhall repete the matter from the beginninge, In the Empyre of Henry the ſyxth, the ſonne of Frederick Barbaroſſe, what tyme the Chriſtians warred to recouer Hieruſalem, there was inſtituted an order of Knyghtes of Germany, whiche becauſe they fought for religiō, did weare the whyte croſſe on their garmēts as a badge of their profeſſion. This was the yeare of our Lorde .M. C. and foure ſcore and The ſtory of Pruſe. ten. The firſt maiſter of that order was choſen, as it is reported, in the Campe before the cytie of Ptolomais. After wardes dyd they ſubdue Pruſe lande,, when Frederick the ſecond was Emperour. And after they had kept warres of long tyme with the kynges of Polande, beyng vanquyſhed in battell they became ſubiect, geuyng their fidelitie by an othe to Caſunire kyng of Pole, the father of Sigiſmund. From the firſt maiſter, to the Marques Albert of Brandēburg, were thritty and thre. This Albert being choſen the yeare of our Lorde .M.D.xi. kept great warres for two yeares together with Sigiſmunde kyng of Polle. And in the yeare .M.D.xxi. there was a trewce takē for .iiij. yeares. In this tyme Albert ſued oft to the Emperour and the ſtates of the Empyre, for ayde and commyng to the councell at Nurrenberg, wherof we haue ofte tymes ſpoken, had his place amonges them as a Prynce of the Empyre. For the cauſe of the warre was, that he wold not be ſworue to the kyng. But what tyme the Emperour was empeched with the Frenche warres, and the Turke inuaded Hongary, and Germany was ſo tourmoyled with the ſedition of the communaltie, that no ayde was to be looked for from thence, and the tyme of the trewce was expyred, he maketh peace with the kyng of Pole, geuyng hym him his faythe as to his ſuprome Magiſtrate, & receyue the doctrine of the Goſpell, & alteryng the order, he taketh Pruſe for his own. And he that before was maiſter, no we by the kynges aſſente, is called Duke of Pruſe: And ſhortly after, he maried Dorothe the daughter of Frederick kyng of Denmarke, and foundeth the vniuerſitie of Conningſberge, called the kynges mount. Wherby he had the diſpleaſure of all the order: for al be it he kept the countrey, and was ſupported here in by the kyng of Pole, yet by a common aſſent was choſen in his rowme, Walther Cronberge, which ſhold repreſent the aunciēt name and dignitie: who after in all aſſemblies complayned vpon hym greuouſly. Againe he defended his cauſe by wrytyng, declaryng howe he was dryuen by extreme neceſſitie beinge vtterly forſaken of the Empyre, to ſubmytte hym ſelfe vnto the kyng. There is an epiſtle of Leo the tenth to Sigiſmunde and Alberte, exhorting them vnto concord, and eyther to committe their matter to his legate, whiche he wold ſende, or to the counſell of Laterane: for that it is moſte conuenient, that the cōtrouerſies of Princes ſhold be decided and determined by generall counſelles.
         
         
            
            
               ✚ The ſyxthe Booke of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the ſtate of Religion, and the common Weale, during the Empire of Charles the fyfte.
            
               
                  ❧ The argument of the ſyxth Booke.
               LUther wrote to the kyng of England, and to Duke George: but thei both reiected the ſame. Chriſterne kyng of Dēmarke, had moued Luther to do ſo: the ſycknes of the Frenche king duryng his impryſonment, haſted the treaty of Madrice. The king being deliuered, his two Sonnes were geuen as pledges. Whyleſt the eſtates were aſſembled at Spyres aboute matters of Religion, the Turke entreth into Hongarry. A diſputation was hoïoen at Baden in Swycherlande. Pope Element, and the Frenche kynge, make a league. The Emperour and the kyng complayne ſore the one of the other. Rome is ſacked by the Duke of Burbon. The Frenche kyng ſendeth Lawtrecke into Italy. The ſecte of Anabaptiſtes beginneth. A diſputation is kept at Bernes, for a reformation. A contention betwyxt Ferdinando and the Uayuode. Paccius is beheaded at Andwarpe. The Emperour, and the Frenche kyng offer them ſelues to the combat. The Maſſe is aboliſhed at Straſburge. Troubles at Baſyll for relygion. The Cā
                  
                  
                     •
                  ous Papiſtes make a league with Ferdinando. An aſſembly is holden at Spyres, where the name of Proteſtauntes hath his begynning. Ciuile warre emonges the Swychers: a treate of peace at Cambray. Uienna beſeged of the Turke. The ſweatyng ſycknes. The Proteſtantes make a league.
            
            
               YOu haue heard heretofore howe the kynge of Englande wrote agaynſt Luther, and Luther Lut. letters of ſubmiſſiō to the kynge of England. agaynſt hym: But when he had hearde certen thynges, that ſounded muche to the kynges cō
               mendation, delighted with that reporte, he writeth to hym with great ſubmiſſion. Doubting not but he had ſore offended his hyghnes, by ſetting forth his booke: neuertheleſſe he dyd it not ſo muche of his own accorde, as by the inſtigation of others. And where as he is ſo bolde to trouble hym with hys letters at this preſent, it proceadeth of his Prynclyke humanitie, whiche is hyghly commended of manye.
            Moreouer for that he vnderſtandeth howe the bookes ſet forthe agaynſt hym, were not of hys owne doynge, but wrytten of certen Sophiſters, whiche full craftely tooke an occaſion. And ſpeakynge here by occaſion of the Cardinall of Yorke, he calleth hym the plage of Englande: And that he heareth moreouer to his great comforte, howe that his grace miſlyketh that naughtye ſorte of men, and gyueth his mynde to the knowledge of the truthe: Wherfore he beſecheth hym to pardon hym that one facte: And that it woulde pleaſe hym to remembre, that ſyns he is a man mortall, he ought not to beare ennemytie immortall.
            
               
And if he ſhal commaunde him, he wyl confeſſe his faulte openly, and commende his pryncelike vertues in an other worke. After he exhorteth his maieſtie to gyue no eare to ſklaunderous tales, that reporte him to be an heretyke: For the chief point of his doctrine is, how al we The chief point of Lu. doctrine. muſt be ſaued by fayth in Chriſt, whiche bare the punyſhement of our ſynnes on his necke, ſhoulders, and al his body, who dyed for vs, roſe agayne, reigneth with his father for euer: And this to be the doctrine of all the Prophetes and Apoſtles: This foundatiō ones layde, he teacheth the dewty of charitie, what one ought to do for an other, howe we muſt obey the magiſtrate, and applye our whole lyfe to the profeſſion of the Goſpel: If there be anye errour or wyckednes in this doctrine, why do not his aduerſaries ſhewe it hym? Why do they condēpne and banyſhe him, beyng neyther examined nor conuicted? where as he writeth againſt the byſhop of Rome and his adherentes, he doeth it, for that they teache contrary to Chriſt & his Apoſtles, for their owne The ende of the Papiſtes doctrine. gayne and lucre, to the intent they may cōmaunde all men, & lyue lyke gluttons in all voluptuouſnes: for vnto this ende, tende all their deniſes and doinges, whiche thing is ſo well tryed and knowen, that they them ſelues can not deny it: but in caſe they wold amende their liues, and not leade this idle & beaſtly lyfe, to the loſſe & iniury of manye, the ſtryfe myght ſone be quieted. Diuers prynces and cities in Germany, haue embraced his doctrine, acknowledging it reuerently to be Gods benefite: and he woulde gladlye wyſhe, that he myght alſo be accōpted in that nombre. And where as the Emperour and certen others, do attempte thynges agaynſthym, it is no newes. For Dauid hathe prophecied longe ſynce, that kynges and other people ſhould conſpire, and imagine many thynges agaynſt the Lorde, and his annoynted, reiectyng his lawes and commaundementes. So that when he conſidereth ſuche places of Scripture, he maruayleth that there is anye Prynce, that ſhould fauour the doctrine of the Goſpell. Fynally, he requyreth hym that he may receyue a gentle aunſwere. And not longe after, he wryteth alſo to George Duke of Saxony, ſignifyinge howe God hath accuſtomed in the beginning to chaſtiſe mē ſeuerely & ſharpely, Luth. letters to George Dake of Saxon. but after gētly & louīgly to embrace the ſame. he was aterrour, & a feare to the Iewes, whā he gaue thē the law by Moſes, but after by the preachig of the goſpel, he ſhewed thē great ioye & gladnes, & that he hath followeth the ſame maner, in hādling ſome ouer roughly, & euen him for one: but yet ſince hath he writtē other thingesful of fruite & cō
               ſolatiō: wherby it is eaſy to ſe, yt he taketh al this payn to profit others of no euil will, but of a zeale he beareth to the truth. And where as he Duke George hateth the Goſpel. heareth yt he relenteth nothing in the diſpleaſure that he beareth hym, but increaſeth his malice againſt him daily more and more, that is the cauſe whye he nowe wryteth vnto hym, deſyryng him to ſurceaſe to

perſecute his doctrine, whiche is conſonaunt to the writinges of the Prophetes and Apoſtles: he admonyſheth him alſo to haue no reſpect to the baſenes of his perſone, for the matter is not his but Gods almighty. Al be it that all men ſhould fret & fume therat, yet ſhall this doctrine continue for euer. And therfore it greueth him the more, that he is ſo muche offended with the ſame, which he may in no wiſe forſake: and yet for that he ſeketh to gratiſie him, he deſyreth to be forgeuen, if he hath ſpoken any thing ſharpely againſt him, & he wil agayne craue pardon of God for him, in that he hath perſecuted the Goſpel, & doubteth not but he ſhal obtein, ſo that he leaue of in time, & ſeke not to extin gwiſhe that great lyght of the Goſpel, that appereth nowe vnto al the worlde. For if he ſo procede he will pray for Gods helpe againſt him, & doubteth not but his prayer ſhalbe heard, whiche he taketh to be ſtrō
               ger than all the craftes of the deuyll: which alwayes is his refuge and moſte aſſured defence. Whan the kyng of Englande had receiued Luthers letters, he made a ſharpe aunſwer & defendeth his boke, whiche he ſayeth is well accepted of diuers good and well learned men: And where as he hathe rayled on the reuerend Father the Cardynall of Yorke, he marueyleth nothing therat, which can not abſtayne frō the contumelies both of men & ſainctes: he ſayth the Cardinall is a neceſſarye inſtrument, for hym and his whole Realme: And where he hath loued hym before dearelye well, nowe wyll he ſet by hym ten tymes more, conſyderyng that he myſlyketh hym. For amōges other thinges this doeth he forſee with great dylygence, that none of his Leproſye, contagion, and hereſye, do infecte any parte of his Realme.
            After he caſteth in his teeth his inceſtuouſe marryage, whiche is a Thomas wulley Cardinal a Butchers ſonne. vyce moſte deteſtable. This Cardinalles name was Thomas Wulſey, a Buchers ſonne of Ipſwyche, but in hyghe authoritie wyth hys Prynce. Lykewyſe Duke George made Luther ſuche an aunſwere, as a man myght well perceyue what mortall hatred he bare hym.
            When the Ambaſſadours of Fraunce, whiche were ſent into Spayne for a peace, amonges whome was Margaret the Frenche kynges ſyſter a wydowe, could brynge nothyng to paſſe, Ales his mother whiche had the gouernaunce, for her ayde and defence founde the meanes to bryng into her league and amitie, Henry the kynge of Englande, whiche was done in the moneth of Auguſte. A league betwene Englād & Fraūce
            
            The fyrſt and chiefeſt poynt of this league was, that the violens of the Turkes, and the peſtiferous ſecte of Luther, ſhould be dryuen & kept out, which is no leſſe daungerous, then the Turkes be. The Cardinal of England (whiche might do al at ye tyme) was thought to haue perſwaded ye king vnto this league. for he bare ye Emperour no great good wil, for yt he toke him to haue bene thonly let yt he was not choſē biſhop of Rome after the death of Adriā, as in dede certē of thēperours

haue expreſſed in their writinges. Whan Luther red the kyng of Englandes aunſwere in printe, and ſawe that he aſcribeth to him vnconſtancie, as though he had chaunged his opinion, conſidering how this did not concerne his owne priuate iniurie, but the profeſſiō of the goſpel, he toke the matter heuely that to gratifie his frendes, he made ſo humble a ſubmiſſion. In lyke maner, he intreated gētly both by word, and writing, Chriſterne kyng of Denmarck, that he wold receiue the pure doctrine, truſting to haue preuayled with gentlenes, and nowe he perceiued how farre he is abuſe: The lyke thinge happened vnto him in Cardinal Caietane, in George Duke of Saxonie, in Eraſmus of Roterdame, vnto whome he hath written frendly, at the requeſt of others, and hath obtayned therby nothynge els, but made them more fierce, & cruell, to be fondely done of him, to thinke that he coulde haue foūde godlines in the courtes of Princes, that ſought for Chriſt, wher Godlines is not to be ſought for in the court. ſathan ruleth, or loketh for John Baptiſt, amonges thē that were clothed in purple Wherfore, ſeing that he can not preuaile by this gentle and frēdly kinde of writing, he wil take an other order frō henceforth. The frenche kyng, for that the treaty of peace toke not place, through a great thought, and penſiuenes, fel ſyck: but comforted again by the gentle talke of the Emperour, who bad, he ſhould be of good chere, he began to be ſomewhat better. The Emperour alſo waying with hym ſelfe what a pray he ſhould loſe, if any thyng chaunced vnto him other wiſe then wel, inclyned his mynde to peace daylye more & more wherfore the .xiiii. daye of January, then concluded of all thynges at Madrice, in the whiche wryting emonges other thynges, is this recited, The peace of Madrice. that the Emperour & the kyng, haue this reſpect chiefly, that the ennemies of the chriſtian religion, and the hereſies of Luthers ſecte, ſhould be extyrped, and that the peace being concluded, they ſhall ſet an ordre in the common welth, and moue warre againſt the Turkes and Heretikes that be out of the communion of the churche: for this is verye nedefull, and the byſhop of Rome hath often warned them, and bene in hande with them, to applye this thing diligently: wherfore the rather to ſatiſſye his requeſt, they are determyned to entreate hym, that he would appoynte a certaine daye in ſome place conuenient, for the Ambaſſadours of all Prynces to aſſemble in, hauyng ful power & authoritie, to agree vpon all ſuche thynges, as ſhalbe good and requiſite, as well for the Turky ſhe warres, as alſo for the wedyng out of Heretikes. In this peace makyng, was Elenor ye Emperours ſyſter which The lady Elenor. had bene maryed to Emanuell kyng of Portugall, beyng eſpouſed to the Frenche kynge, the Emperour promyſeth to gyue hym for her dowery, two thouſand ducates, & certen landes in high Burgundy. For the which they were at controuerſie. And the kynge ſhall within two monethes after he is retourned home, reſtore to the Emperour the

Duckdome of Burgundy, whiche the kynges of Fraunce haue kepte in their poſſeſſion ſyns the death of Charles Duke of Burgundye, by the ſpace of fyftie yeares: Moreouer he ſhall renounce, Naples, Millan, Gene, Aſte, and Flaunders: He ſhall gyue no ayde to Henry kyng of Nauarre, Charles Duke of Gelders, Ulryche Duke of Wirtēberg, nor to Robert Erle of Marche. He ſhall attempte no ſecrete deuiſes or counſels in Italy. When the Emperour wyll go into Italy by Sea, he ſhall aſſiſte him with a nauie of ſixtene Galleis vitayled and fournyſhed with all thynges ſauing ſoldiours, and alſo two hūdreth thouſand crownes, to arme them. The yerely penſion that the Emperour is bounden to paye to the kynge of Englande, all ſhall the Frenche kynge paye to the kynge of Englande. He ſhall reſtore Charles the Duke of Burbon and his fellowes, to all their ryght, landes, and goodes, permittyng them to vſe the ſame, dwellyng where they lyſte. For ſuche action or title as the Duke of Burbon hath to the Prouince of Marſeilles, the kyng ſhall abyde the ordre of the lawe at any tyme. When he had gyuen the Emperour his fayth to obſerue theſe conditions, he was ſet at lybertie, to retourne home. And departyng out of the borders of Spayn, leaueth behind him his two ſonnes Fraūces & The kynges ſonnes are pledges. Henry, verey yonge, for pledges, as it was agreed vpō. And vnleſſe he obſerue couenauntes, he promyſeth to yelde hym ſelf pryſoner agayn.
            After this the Princes of Germany, aſſemble at Spires, as I told you in the laſt boke, it was appointed. Emonges whome was Duke Counſell at Spyres. Iohn electour of Saxony, and Philip Lantgrane of Heſſe. The Emperour deputes here, were Ferdinando his brother, Barnarde Byſhop of Ttent, Caſimire, Marques of Brandenburge, Philip Marques of Baden, William Duke of Bauarre, and Ericus Duke of Brunſwyck. When they had begunne the counſell the .xxv. daye of June, and had declared the cauſes of that aſſemblye, they added this moreouer, that the Emperour aboue all thynges wylled and commaunded that the ſtates of the Empyre ſhoulde with common aſſent take order, howe the Chriſtian religion and auncient cuſtome of the church of lōg tyme obſerued, might be ſtill reteyned in his former eſtimation of al men, and how they are to be punyſhed that will attempt the contrary, and alſo to be reſiſted, if they make any force in the matter to the intent that both Ceſars decre made at Wormes, and publyſhed fyue yeres ſyns, and the decre of this aſſembly alſo may be obſerued of al men and put in execution. When certen were choſen of all degrees to treate of theſe matters, and emonges them alſo the Lantgraue, Iames Sturmius of Straiſborourgh, and Creſſus of Norinberge: The Emperours deputes call an aſſembly of all ſtates the .iii. daye of Auguſt, and ſaye how they vnderſtande that they haue choſen a certayne nombre to conferre of theſe matters propounded:

Who, as they ſuppoſe, wyll firſt conſulte of religion: But to the intent that the Emperours pleaſure may be accomplyſhed, and that they intreate of nothing, which they can not determine, but be a loſſe of time, and a lette and hynderaunce to other matters, therfore wyll they let them vnderſtande what the Emperours commaundement is in this behalf. After this, they read the Emperours letters, dated at Hiſpale the. xxiii of Marche. Wherof the ſome was this. Howe he intended to The Emperours letters go to Rome to be inueſted, and alſo to treate with the byſhop for a generall counſell: but in the meane tyme he wylleth and commaundeth, that the ſtates in this aſſemblye decree nothynge, that ſhall be in anye wyſe agaynſt the olde cuſtome, lawes and Ceremonies of the church, and that in theri dommions they do eſtablyſhe all thinges, according to the decre made at Wormes by their common aſſentes: And take well in worth this delay, tyll he haue deuiſed with the hyghe Byſhop concernyng a generall counſell, whiche ſhalbe very ſhortly: for in ſuch priuate aſſemblies, there is not only no good to be done, but alſo errours and licenciouſe lybertie of the people more cōfirmed. About this The Turke inuadeth Hū
                  gary. tyme, the Emperour of Turkes ſettyng foreward with his armie frō Belgrade, whē he was paſſed ouer the riuers of Danubie and Saue, he marched the ryght way into Hongary. Wherfore king Lewys ſendyng agayne his Ambaſſadours to Spyres, requyreth ayde. Further A league betwene the venetians, Pope, & Frē
                  che kyng. more out of Italy came certen newes, that Clement byſhop of Rome and the Venetians, hadde made a legue with the Frenche kyng, that was lately retourned home out of Spayne, to warre vpon the Emperour, as you ſhall heare afterwarde. Whan the Emperours letters before mentioned, were read in the aſſemblie, the cyties for the moſte parte, namely, of hygh Germany, put vp their aduiſe in writing: declaring how they deſyred by all meanes to obey and gratifies the Emperour, nowithſtanding the controuerſie about religion encreaſeth dayly, eſpecially touchyng ceremonies and mens traditions: hitherto the decre of Wormes, could not be well obſerued for feare of ſedition and vprores: but nowe is the daunger muche more, as in the laſte aſſemblye, before the Legate of Rome, it was alſo wel declared. In ſo much that if the Emperour him ſelfe were here preſent and infourmed of the ſtate of thinges, he could iudge none otherwyſe. He maketh promyſe in his letters of a counſell, but what tyme they were wrytten, the Byſhop and he were frendes, and nowe it is farre otherwyſe, ſeynge the byſhop hath altered his mynde, & leuied an Armie againſt hym: wherfore it can not ſynke into their heades, that in this trouble ſome tyme they ſhould haue any generall counſell: wherfore they thynke it beſte to ſende ambaſſadours to the Emperour, whiche maye informe hym of the whole matter, and of the ſtate of Germany, and howe daungerous a matter it is alſo, to delay the cauſe of relygion any longer, and

no leſſe perilous to put in vre the decree of Wormes: And therfore to entreate hym, that for the auoydynge of a further inconueniencie, he would permitte them to holde a counſell prouinciall of Germany, to treate of all matters in controuerſie: Whiche thyng was agreed vpon at Norenberg, and the place appoynted here in this ſame citie, & many of the ſtates had made preparation for the ſame: But when it was agayne defeated by the Emperours countremaundemēt, it opened the waye to rebellion, ſedition, and to ciuile warres, al the which thinges myght eaſelye haue bene eſchewed, in caſe at the ſame tyme, the cauſe of relygion had bene heard indifferently: And if he wyll not allowe a counſell of Germany, than to entreate him to differre the execution of the decree of Wormes, vntyll the generall councell: for otherwyſe it wyll come to paſſe, that the wounde newly healed, wyll waxe rawe agayne, & another that ſhalbe worſe, breake out. Furthermore in this diſcorde ſo long as euery man is carefull for his owne eſtate, it wylbe very harde and paynefull to collecte any money for the ayde of others. Beſydes this wrytinge, exhibited to the Prynces the fourthe daye of Auguſt, they put vp alſo an other, wherin the pouertie cōplayned that they were in all cities and townes ouermuche burthened wyth beggyng Freres: For that whiche ſhould be a helpe vnto them to ſuſteyn Againſt falſe Freers. their life, was preuēted & caught vp by them: and not only that, but often tymes alſo there came to their handes, throughe flattrye, great landes and legacies, to the loſſe and hynderaunce of many: wherfore their deuyſe was, that they ſhould not be ſuffered to make anye moo Freres when theſe are dead, and to permytte them that wyll take an other kynde of lyfe vpon thē, to depart out of their cloyſter, with ſome annuall ſtypende: And the reſt to be geuen to the poore mens boxe. Moreouer they thynke it not reaſon, that the clergie ſhould be frelye exempted from al charges and paymētes, for that priuilege was graū
               ted them in tymes paſt, by the lyberalitie of kynges and Prynces, but yet at ſuch tyme as they were both fewe in nombre, and had but ſmall lyuynges: But nowe that they be ſo many, & growen to ſuch a welth, there is an other conſyderation to be had, for the cauſe of their inunitie beyng taken away, the benefite alſo employed taketh place no longer, for they do enioye the benefytes and commodities, as muche as other The nōber of holy days men, or more, for the whiche tribute, cuſtome, and all other mony is payde: agayne to haue ouermany holye dayes, whiche hynder the people ſore, wherunto they are bounden vnder great penaltie, and do not only leaue their neceſſary workes vndone, but alſo in thoſe idle daies offende God diuerſe wayes: They thynke it alſo mete to aboliſh the lawe that is made for the choyſe of meates, to leaue vnto all men their owne ceremonies tyll the counſell, and in no wyſe to ſtoppe the courſe of the euāgelical doctrine. But after the byſhoppes vnderſtode

the Emperours pleaſure, they woulde not proceade in matters of religion, but thought in this great diſſention bet wyxte the Byſhop and hym, to deferre the thynge tyll ſome better oportunitie ſerued, when there aroſe great ſtryfe among the men choſen, whiche were contrary in Relygion, the Duke of Saxon, and the Lantgraue, all conſultation layde aſyde, ment to go home, and commaunded their company to make them ready to take their iournaye.
            That ſeyng Ferdinando, the Archebyſhop of Treers, and others, & conſyderynge what daunger it were in ſo peryllous a tyme, yf they ſhoulde thus breakynge of in diſpleaſure conclude vppon nothynge, but departe wyth grudge and malyce: Founde the meane to Salue this wounde: For wherof the commotion in the yere before, and what diſſention ſo euer is nowe in Germany, ſprange vp altogether of the controuerſye that is in Relygion, they thoughte good to remedye the thynge in tyme.
            Wherfore to appeaſe certen mens myndes, at the laſte they made A decree for Religion. a decre, that for the eſtablyſhynge of Religion, and mayntenaunce of the common peace and tranquilitie, it was neceſſarye to haue a lawfull counſell, eyther prouinciall, or generall, to begyn within a yeare at the furtheſt: And to the entent there ſhall be no let nor delaye in the ſame, to ſende Ambaſſadours to the Emperour to entreate hym that he woulde conſyder the myſerable and troubleſome ſtate of the Empyre, and to repayre ſhortly in to Germany, to holde there a counſell. And touchyng the decree made at Wormes, thei were contented that untyll the counſell were begonne, all men ſhoulde ſo demeane them ſelues in their prouinces, as they woulde yelde an accompte of theyr doynges, bothe to God and to the Emperour. Before this decree was made, the Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue, enter in to talke with the Ambaſſadours of Strauſborough, Norenberge, and Auſpurge, The begynninge of the Proteſtātes league. whiche they ſawe fauoured the Goſpell, concernynge a league, that for as muche as they knewe not what the Byſhoppes and theyr adherententes intended, if it fortuned anye to ſtande in daunger for Relygion, that one myght helpe an other: And for as muche as they had a good opinion of them of Frankeforth, and Ulmes, they woulde not refuſe to breake wyth them alſo in the matter. The Ambaſſadours make aunſwere that they had no commiſſion touchynge anye ſuche matter, neuertheleſſe, they would wryte home ryght diligently. The Duke of Saxon had his preachers, George Spalatine, & Iohn Iſlebie, and the Lantgraue had alſo his. The reſidewe of the Princes, requeſted that they might not preache for feare of any ſturre, but it was in vayne. Fardinando alſo calling before him the Ambaſſadours of all cities, and accomting vnto them the benefites of his aunceſters, and

the houſe of Auſtriche, exhorted them to be obediēt to the Emperour, and not to be caried away, by the counſell and perſwaſion of others. They decreed alſo here to ſende ayde to the kynge of Hungary: but at what tyme the aſſemblye was finiſhed, which was about the ende of The kynge of Hungary ſlayne. Auguſt, the Turke was entred into Hungarye, and had vanquyſhed kynge Lewis in battell, who was alſo ſlayne in the chaſe. At this aſſemblye were all the Prynces electours, ſauinge onlye the Marques of Brandenburg. The Emperour this ſommer maried Iſabell, The Emperour maried a wyfe. daughter to Emanuell kyng of Portugall, ſyſter to Iohn whiche had ſucceded his father. What tyme the aſſemblye was at Spyres, thetwelue townes of the Neluetians or Swycers, kept a diſputatiō at Badene. Thether came the chiefeſt diuines of the byſhop of Romes A diſputatiō at Baden. ſyde, Faber, Eckius, and Murmer. And the byſhop of Conſtance, Baſill, Courtes, & loſanna, ſent thither their Ambaſſadours. There were theames ſet vp, whiche Eckius defendeth ryght boldely. That the very body and bloud of Chriſte is preſent in the Lordes ſupper: that it is a trewe oblation for the quicke and dead, that the vyrgin Mary and other ſaynctes, muſt be prayde vnto as interceſſours: that Images ought not to be taken downe: And that after this lyfe there is the fire of purgatory. Oecolampadius, and others, did impugne thē: Zwynglius was abſent, and in his letters to the Heluetians, he declared the cauſe of his abſence, and confuted the opinions of Eckius by writing. For Zwynglius dred bad meaſure ſuſpecting bothe the men and the place. They concluded thus. That all men ſhould perſeuer in the ſame religion, that they haue obſerued hytherto, and receyue no newe doctryne, but followe the authoritie of the counſell. The byſhop of Conſtaunce, A Prieſt burnt. had a litle before cauſed one Iohn Huglie a prieſt, to be brent at Merſpurge, for that he woulde not allowe the byſhops of Romes doctrine in all thinges. When Lewys the king of Hongary was thus myſerably ſlayne, Ferdinando contended that the kyngdome was Diſcorde in Hongary. dewe vnto hym, by a certen compoſition, but he had an aduerſarye Iohn Sepuſe, the vayuode of tranſſyluania. Of the whiche diſſentiō, when all the nobilitie & ſtates were deuided, there aroſe warre right noyſome and hurtfull to the Germanes, & other nations that dwelled nere. For afterwardes the Emperour of Turkes, receyuing the Uayuode into his fayth and protection, eſtabliſhed hym kyng, as his tributarye and client, and had Buda delyuered vp into his handes. The Frenche kyng whiche was retourned home, leauing his children for The Frēche league agaiſt the Emper. pledges in Spayne, ſayde the conditiōs of peace were vnreaſonable. Wherfore ſendyng Ambaſſadours to and fro, the byſhop of Rome and the Uenetians, enter into league with hym: the effect wherof is this That for the defence and quietnes of Italy, they ſhall fynde an armye of .xxx. thouſand fotemen, of men at armes, and lyghthorſe men ſyxe

thouſande: They ſhall alſo prouide an Nauie of two and thirtye galleys with Shippes of bourthen: that what tyme they ſhall haue vanquyſhed the enemy in Lumbardye, and Italye, they ſhall muade the kingdome of Nayles, both by ſea and lande, which beyng ones wōne to remayne in the power of the churche of Rome, yet ſo as .lxxv. thouſande duckates be payde yerely to the Frenche kyng, which claymeth a tytle in it: That the dignitie of the houſe of medicees be maynteyned in the citie of Florence. The Frenche kyng leaueth the Duckdome of Myllan to Fraunces Sfortia, whome the Emperours men beſegyng in the Caſtell of Millan, conſtrayned to rendre, and promiſeth him his owne ayde, and the Swycers to helpe hym, & alſo a wyfe in Fraunce of the bloud royall, yet vpon this condition, that he ſhal paye vnto him therfore yeare fyfty thouſande crownes, and fynde his brother. Maximilian, whiche is pryſoner in Fraunce. After this the byſhop of Rome The Popes benefites to the Emper. wrytyng his letters to the Emperour, recyteth his benofites towards hym, what goodly offers he refuſed at the Frenche kynges handes for his ſake, howe that when the kynge was taken, he gaue a hondreth thouſande Duckates to his captaynes, vpon certayne conditiōs, that he hath vttered vnto hym oftentymes, the coūſels of his enemies, that what time his men dyd beſege Frances Sfortia in the Caſtel of Millan, and certen men of great power moued hym to ioyne in league againſt hym, he would not heare them: For all the whiche thynges he is full euyll recompenſed: For his ſouldiours haue wrought ſuche iniuries, ſhame, and myſery to hym and the churche of Rome, as hathe not bene hearde: moreouer that neyther the condicions are fulfylled, nor his money reſtored, how it appeareth what good wyll he beareth hym, whiche woulde not make hym prinie vpon what conditions he concluded with the Frenche kynge, that he vtterly reiected his ſuite & interceſſion made for Sfortia, howe he ſent the Duke of Burbon frō the ſiege at Marſeilles to reyſe vp a newe kynde of warre in Italye: for the whiche cauſes, he is of neceſſitie conſtrayned to make a league with ſuche as loue the quiet and wealth of Italy: Wherfore if he wyl alſo be content to embrace peace, well and good, if not, he ſhal not wāt force and power to defende Italy, and the common wealth of Rome. In this league was compryſed the kyng of England, and with great promyſes was deſyred to be the protectour therof. Unto this epyſtle Ceſar aunſweryng at Granato, the .xviii. of September, reaccompteth The Emperours āſwer his deſertes and benefites done vnto hym. Howe that by his ſute and meanes he was made byſhop of Rome, howe before that tyme he gaue hym an yerely penſion of ten thouſande duckates out of the reuenewes of the Archebyſhop of Toledo, when he was legate to byſhop Leo, notwithſtandyng that he had conſpyred againſt hym, with Albert prince of Carpes, to haue diſpoſſeſſed hym of Naples, and Sicily.

When the Frenche men were dryuen out of Italy, by the conducte of Bourbon, he could not deny him, but that he myght warre in Fraūce, or els where, to recouer of the Frenche kyng his owne: he graunteth the kyngdome of Naples to be holden of hym, not withſtandynge in The kyngdō of Naples. caſe ſayeth he, you ſhould make any warre there, you ſhoulde thereby loſe all your right and tytle: for euen for the ſame cauſes that the Cliente loſeth the benefite graunted, for the ſelfe ſame alſo doth the Patrone A point of yt lawe. loſe his prerogatiue. Before the kyng was taken, you entreated of a peace, but it was to the intent you might haue inioyed the Dukedome of Millan. And therfore the Uenetians and Florentines, withdrewe their ayde, through your motion, from my captaynes, againſt their league. For the Frenche kyng confeſſeth openly, howe throughe your prouocation he entred into a newe league before he went out of Spayne. And I knowe by certayne reporte, that you haue diſpenſed with him for his othe, wherby he is bounden to me: Furthermore you haue moued warre, before the letters (wherein it was proclaymed) were vnto me deliuered, ſeking not only to dryue me out of all Italy, but alſo to depoſe me from the dignitie of the Empyre: For all this am I able to proue by the letters of Ferdinando Daualle, Marques of Piſtare, whome you would haue entyſed in to your league, promiſing hym the kyngdome of Naples. I haue tytle to Millan by mo wayes than one, yet for the quiet of Italye, I ſuffered Sfortia to enioye it: And whan he was greuouſly ſyck, I would haue placed in his ſteade the Duke of Bourbon, for that I ſawe it pleaſed you well and dyuers others in Italy. And the cauſe why Sfortia was beſieged in the Caſtel of Millan, was that he had committed treaſon againſt me, by ioynyng in league with you, wherof beyng detected, he would not delyuer to my captaynes, the Caſtelles of Cremone and Millan, neyther make his pourgation, nor come to any talke in the matter. Your requeſt was, that I ſhould forgyue hym altogether, whiche I neyther coulde nor in deede ought to doe, leſt by an euyll example I ſhoulde gyue an occaſiō vnto Clientes, to offende againſt their patrones. Touchyng the peace concluded with the Frenche kyng, I kept nothing ſecret from your Ambaſſadours: for the condicions be ſuche as I would not haue concealed, for they tende to a publique peace, and to the reſiſtaūce of Chriſtes ennemies. But ſe, the vnworthines of yt thing. Ther commeth more money yearely to Rome out of my Realmes and prouinces, than doth from all other nations. That is to be proued by the requeſtes of the Prynces of Germany, what tyme they complaynyng greuouſly of the court of Rome, deſyred a reformation. Whoſe cōplaint Rome is the treaſure houſe of yt whole worlde. at that tyme I neglected, for the zeale I bare to the churche of Rome. Whiche thynge conſidered, and for as muche as I haue geuen you none occaſion of offence, I do inſtantly requyre you to lay down your

armies: And I wyll doe lykewyſe. And ſeynge we are bothe appoynted of God, as two great lyghtes, let vs endeuour our ſelues ſo as the The Pope & the Emper. are two gret lyghtes. whole worlde maye be lyghtened through vs, and not that by reaſon of diſſention, there ſhould aryſe an Eclypſe: Let vs regarde the publique weale, and attempt to dryue out the Turkes, to quenche the ſecte and errours of Luther: For this appertayneth vnto Gods glorye, and hereof ought we to begynne, and after to debate other controuerſies, you ſhall haue me ready vnto all theſe thynges, which if I can not obtaine, but that you wil nedes perſeuer to play the man of warre: I do The Pope is a warrier. proteſte here, that I appeale to a general counſell, in the ſame maye all griefes be decyded, and I requyre that the ſame maye be called ſo ſhortlye as may be. Where he ſpeaketh of two lightes, he followeth herein the wordes of Innocentius the thyrd, which applieth the two great lyghtes, that God created, the one to guyde the day, the other ye nyght, to the byſhops and princelyke dignitie. But that whiche miniſtreth Godly thinges to be muche more excellent then that which gouerneth polytike matters only: And loke what different is betwyxte the ſonne and the mone, ſo great a diuerſitie is there betwyxt the office of the high byſhop, & a kinges office. Whan Ceſar had made this aunſwere to Clemēt, he wryteth alſo to the coledge of Cardinalles, the ſixt day of October, ſignifiyng that he is not a little ſory to heare that byſhop Clement is confederated with the French kyng, who reneweth warre agaīſt him afreſhe, & how the biſhop hath ſent him letters of defiance, which he ſuppoſeth were writtē by their cōmon aſſent. wherat he marueleth not a little, conſidering there is no kyng yt beareth more loue and affection to the churche of Rome, than he: Witnes Parma & Placence, whiche being cities of the Empyre, and plucked from it of late, he hath not withſtanding reſtored to the churche, all be it he was by no ryght bounde ſo to do: And the princes and ſtates of Germanye cōplayned vnto him at Wormes, of ſondry iniuries done by the courte of Rome, and required a recompence, but he for a ſingular loue, & naturall inclination towardes the churche of Rome, paſſed ouer their requeſtes with deaf eares: And where as great ſedition and trouble enſued therupon through out all Germanye, and the Princes there had appointed another counſel, he for the indemnitie of the biſhop & church of Rome, countremaunded the ſame vnder a great penaltie, and to appeaſe A counſell promyſed. their myndes he put them in hope of a general counſell to be holden out of hande: Wherfore the byſhop hathe done hym great iniury, whiche hath done ſo muche for his ſake, that he hath by the ſame meanes loſt the good wylles of the princes of the Empire: he deſyreth them therfore to admonyſhe the byſhop of his duty, that he appointe a counſell, and perſwade hym to incline his mynde to peace, rather then to warre: whiche if he refuſe, and wyll differre the counſell, that then

they would call it, for if the chriſtian cōmon wealth ſuſteyne any loſſe, or dammage, eyther for the want of a counſell or for long delaye of the ſame, it ought not hereafter to be imputed to him. After the newes came out of Hongary of the great ouerthrowe there, the prynces ſet forward their Ambaſſade appointed at Spires to the Emperour, with the great ſpede. And for the more expedition, they intreate the Frēche kyng, to graunt them a ſaufeconduicte, to paſſe into Spayne through Fraunce: whiche he graunted, preſcribing them a certen tyme to paſſe in, and toke an occaſion hereby to wryte vnto them the .vj. of Octobre. The frenche kyngs leters to the prynces of Germany. That for the loſſe of Hongary, the death of Lewis the kynge, and the daunger that approched Germany, he had conceiued an inwarde ſorowe in his minde, and nothyng leſſe lamented yt the publique wealth alſo peryſhed through ciuile warres: it was not ſurely lōg of him that Chriſtome is not quiet, but this to be the Emperours faulte, who refuſeth al honeſte, and reaſonable conditions of peace: And for ſo much as he is neither moued, with the cōmon loſſe & deſtruction, nor with the moſte vnworthy death of his brother in lawe king Lewis, nor yet with the miſerable eſtate of his owne ſiſter now a wydowe, nor cōſidereth not in what daunger ſtandeth Auſtriche, they ſhal do wel & according to their dutie, if they can exhorte & perſwade him vnto peace, to kepe loue & amitie with kinges that dwell nere hym, and refrayne this vnmeaſurable couetouſnes: for this ſhould be more honorable for hym, than if he ſtyll endeuour to get other mens landes, and poſſeſſe all him ſelfe alone: his progenitours kynges of Fraunce, haue often times fought many battelles with the ennemies of chriſtentie: the ſame myght nowe be done with their powers ioyned in one, if the Emperour be ſo mynded: wherfore in caſe they can deuiſe to bring this thing to paſſe, he wyll beſtowe on the Turkyſhe warre al his force, and him ſelfe alſo: but if not, no man blame hym, if he aſſaye to recouer by force of armes, ſuche thynges as by good wyll he can not, for it ſtādeth him vpon rather to ſeke for peace, which is nerer the Turkes daunger thā he is. Whan Ceſar was aduertyſed of theſe letters, the .xxix. of Nouē
               bre, The Empe. confuteth the letters. he writeth to the Princes, and firſt he rehearſeth howe mercyfully and gently he vſed the Frenche kynge pryſoner, howe he ſet hym at lybertie, howe he gaue hym in marriage his eldeſt ſyſter, to hym in degree of ſucceſſion the ſeconde. And where as he, all thynges beyng quyeted, as he ſuppoſed, was takynge his iourney into Italye, to the entent he myghte bende hys whole force agaynſte the perpetuall ennemyes of the Chriſtiane Religion, he breakynge his fidelitie, and makynge a league wyth Byſhop Clement and certen others, and deuydynge emonges them the kyngdome of Naples, whiche they had alreadye in hope conceyued to be theyr owne: Renewed mortall Warre. By meanes whereof he coulde not delyuer the countrey of

Hongary from the violent fury of the Turkes being forced to defende his owne limites. And where as he pretendeth to lament the death of kyng Lewis, and deſtruction of Hongary, it is a playne diſſimulatiō, to the intent he myght by ſome meane put to ſilence ſuch as founde his letters, and do conſtantly affirme, that the Turke attēpted this warre through his inſtigation. When he was in Spayne, and ſynce his retourne home alſo, he confirmed by his letters the obſeruation of conue nauntes: but for as muche as he hath his kingdome, liyng in the middes of all Europe he is careleſſe, and ſeketh warres & contention, therby to make his profite. Beſides the wrytinge before mentioned, there came forth in the French kinges name an Apologie in his defence, declaring An apologie for the frēch kyng. the cauſes, why he ſtādeth not to the peace of Madrice. Wherunto an anſwere was made in the Emperours behalf at large. For as muche as the Turke had Buda with a great parte of Hongary, & oppreſſed the people miſerably, being a great terrour to Germany: Certē princes of the Empire conſulted at Eſlyng, to write ſpedely to the Emperour, The princes letters to the Emperour. intreating him to repaire into Germany as ſhortly as might be, in conſideration to the great daunger, that than hanged ouer the Empire. in theſe letters, written the .xix. of Decēbre, they make mentiō of the Ambaſſade that they were determined to haue ſent vnto hym: but becauſe they ſhould haue trauailed through Fraunce, & the kynge wold graunt them ſaufe conduict, but only for .iiij. monethes, wherof one was paſt, & before the Ambaſſadours ſhould mete together, the time wold be much ſhortned. Therfore to auoyd the daunger, they haue determined to differ the ſame vntil the next aſſemblie of the Empyre, whiche they haue appointed at Regenſburg, the firſt day of April next folowyng, to treate of the Turkyſh warre, truſting ye either by yt time, An aſſemble at Regenſburg. they ſhal haue ſome better occaſiō to ſende, or yt he ſhal haue ſome intelligence of the thing in ye meane time. Al be it that Ceſar wrote thus to the byſhop of Rome & his Cardinals, yet wold it preuaile nothing, but the cōfederatours ſending vnto him Ambaſſadours, as was agreed vpō, require him to depart frō his armies, to reſtore Sfortia Duke of Millan, to receiue the money for his raunſome, & ſend home the kyngs ſonnes whome he deteineth as pledges, & to repay the money, that he borowed of the kyng of England, hereunto anſwered the Emperour, at Ualolete the .xij. of February. That he cā not diſmiſſe his armies in any ſhort time: notwithſtāding he wil not refuſe to take truce for thre yeres or more, & to ſēd the armies on both partes agaīſt the Turke our cōmon ennemie, & in ye meane time to treate of peace. Sfortia holdeth his landes of the Empire, and is accuſed of treaſon, he can not therfore be reſtored, before his matter be examyned. Wherfore let hym anſwere to the lawe and his accuſers, and he wyll appoynt hym indifferent iudges: To reſtore the kynges chyldren vpon the receipte of the

money, he can not, and the ſame is agaynſte the kynges promeſſe, othe and fidelitie. Where they require him to repaie the kinge of England his money, he marueleth not a litle, conſydering they haue no cō
               maundement of him in this matter, for the kyng & he be ſuch frendes, as a mony matter can not breake their frendſhyp: Wherfore ſeinge the requeſtes be vnſitting, he willeth them to bryng forth others: for his part he wyl do nothyng obſtinatly, but ſhalbe content to beare with many thinges for the cōmon wealthes ſake. Wherfore the Ambaſſadours thus departing without any thing concluded, they renewe the warres againe wt all their force & power. In thoſe daies Iohn Frederick ſonne & heire to the prince electour of Saxony, married Sibille Iohn Fridmarrieth Sibille of Cleue. daughter to Duke Iohn of Cleaue. the lady Catharine yt Emperours yongeſt ſiſter, was promyſed him, & writinges made of the ſame: But when this alteratiō of religion chaūced in Saxony, they ſwarued frō their couenauntes. And Hawnart which was then Emperours Ambaſſadour in Germany, ſayd plainly, that there was no promiſe to be kept with Heretikes following herein (as I ſuppoſe) the fote ſtepes of the coūſel at Conſtance, as in dede the Duke of Saxony reciteth in a certen writing. Emōges others of themperours captaines was Charles Duke of Bourbon, who going with a certen power to Naples, by the way toke the citie of Rome, & ſacked it the next daye after he there Rome is ſacked. arriued, being the ſixt day of May. Clemēt the byſhop, the Cardinals and other prelates, fleing in to Caſtell aungell, were beſeged a certen tyme, being trenched in on euery ſyde: whiche after they had endured ſiege ſeuen monethes, were at the laſte deliuered by the Emperours commaundement. It is harde to expreſſe with wordes the great crueltie and oultrage of the Germanes and Spanyardes at Rome. For beſydes the cruell ſlaughters, deſtruction, ſpoyling and raueſhynge of women, they left of no kynde of contumelious reproches & mockinges of the biſhop and his Cardinalles. The Emperour excuſed the facte diligently, affirmyng that it was not done by his commaūdement. And chiefly he wrote therof to the king of England: that albeit he ſuppoſeth the thyng to haue happened vnto hym by the iuſt iudgement of God, who auenged the wronge and iniurie done vnto hym: yet he ſayeth, he wil ſo vſe the matter that this ſame calamitie, ſhalbe the beginning and occaſion of the helth of the common wealth. Whan newes were brought into Spayn of the ſackīg of Rome, Ceſar immediatly cōmaū
               ded to ceaſe frō playing of pageantes & interludes whiche were thē ſet forth for ioy of his ſon Philip, newly borne. The king of Englād anſwe The king of Englande. red nothīg to themperours letters: and the biſhop of Rome being captiue, vnto whom he bare a great zeale & reuerence, & themperours power increaſing daily, he fixed his mind vpō warre, ſending ye Cardinal of yorke ambaſſadour into Fraunce. To the coūſel of Regēſburg came

the Prynces, but ſent their Ambaſſadours only. Wherfore there was nothing cōcluded, ſauyng that they ſent letters to the Emperour, the xviij day of May, ſignifiyng that for diuers cauſes his preſence were requyſite and nedefull. In this tyme ſprange vp a newe kynde of doctryne, of ſuche as are called Anabaptiſtes. They condempne the baptiſme of infantes, and are baptyſed agayne them ſelues, teachyng that The begynning of Anabaptiſtes. all thynges ſhould be common. Againſt theſe wrote Luther, Zwynglius, and diuers others. And the magiſtrates puniſhed in euery place. They boaſte of viſions & dreames, and at Sangal a town in Swycerlande, one of them cut of his brothers head, in the preſence both of father and mother, whome he had perſwaded, that God had cōmaunded hym ſo to do: but being apprehended of the magiſtrate, he ſuffered the lyke punyſhment. Now, how muche they increaſed, and what cō
               motions they ſtyred vp in Germany, hereafter ſhalbe declared. This yeare the Senate of Straſborough decreed that none ſhoulde from henceforth be buried within the citie, and appointed certen places for the buriall of the dead without their citie. When the Frenche kynge heard that Rome was taken, makyng league with the kyng of Englande, he ſent a great armie into Italy, by the conduicte of Lautrech The Frēche Armye. a Gaſcon, to reſcewe the byſhop. Who comming into Lumbardy, and ayded by the Uenetians, taketh firſt Alexādria, and after Pauie, partly by force, and partly by compoſition, but the ſouldiours in their rage and fury, for that the king was there taken, after a woūderful ſlaughter of the townes men, ſpoyled the citie. The .xxvij. day of Iuly, Charles Duke of Burbon, lately ſtayne in the aſſaulte at Rome, was condempned The Duke of Baurbon conoempned at Paris. at Paris, by the court of parliamēt of treaſon, his name and memoriall accurſed, his Armes plucked downe, and his landes and goodes confiſcated. Anthony Prate Chauncelour, gaue the ſentence. This Duke bare a mortall hatred to the kynge, and what tyme he went to beſege Marſeilles, as is mentioned before in the fourth boke, for becauſe at the ſame tyme the kynge of Englande toke the Emperours parte, he wrote to the Cardinall of Yorke, emonges other thinges that he would ſpare no paynes nor peryll, that kyng Henry might by his helpe recouer the ryght and tytle that he hath to Fraunce. For Englyſhe men doe clayme all Fraunce to be theires, for a two hundreth Englande hath title to Fraunce. yeares ſince and aboue, eſpeciallye Normandye, Gaſcoyne and Gwyne: In theſe letters therfore did Bourbon prouoke the kynge to clayme and chalenge his ryght. Whiche letters the Frenche kyng afterwardes chauncing vppon, conceyued muche more hatred againſt Leonarde Ceſar. hym. There was in the dukedome of Bauarie one Leonarde Ceſar a profeſſour of the Goſpel, who being apprehended by the cōmaundemēt of the byſhop of Paſſauie, defendeth theſe opinions. that faythe onlye doth iuſtifie: that there be only two Sacramentes, Baptiſme and the

Lordes ſupper: the Maſſe to be no ſacrifice, not to profite the quicke nor the dead. The confeſſion of Syns to depende of counſell and not of commaundement: that Chriſte only hath made ſatiſfaction for ſynnes: That the vowe of chaſtitie byndeth not: That the ſcripture maketh no mention of Purgatory: That there is no difference of dayes: That the dead be not interceſſours for vs: That in diuine thinges mā hath not free wyll. When he was examined, he woulde haue declared theſe thynges to the people more at large, but he coulde not be ſuffered. Emonges other there was Eckius, who reaſoned altogether in Latin, that the people ſhould not vnderſtand, but the other anſwered him in the vulgare tongue, neither yet coulde he cauſe him to doe the lyke. In fyne, being condempned by the byſhops owne mouthe for an heretyke, he was burnt the .xvj. of Auguſt, by the commaundement of William Duke of Bauar, vnto whoſe iuriſdiction he was cōmitted, after his condempnation, for the byſhop leſt he ſhoulde in deede defile Hopocriſy of byſhops. the ſacred thynges, and become prophane and irregular, gyueth not ſentence of lyfe and death.
            What tyme Ferdinando who was the Emperours depute in Germany, was after the death of kyng Lewis created kyng of Boheme, and contended with Uaynode of tranſiluania for the kyngdome of Hongary, Philip of Baden, ſubſtituted in his place, appointed a counſell of the Empyre in Ceſars name, cōmaunding them to be at Regēſburg, at the beginning of Marche in the yeare followyng, to conſulte of Religion, and the Turkyſhe warre. The ſenate and people of Bernes, whiche are of moſte fame and power emōges the Swycers, cō
               ſydering The power of Bernes. howe the diſſention about religion encreaſed daily, and that the Miniſters of the churche not at all one doctrine, doe aſſigne an other diſputation within their Citie, at the .xvij. of Decembre: And ſettyng it forth in wryting, called vnto the ſame all the byſhops nere about them, as the byſhoppes of Conſtance, Baſyll, Sedune and Loſanna. Warnyng them to come them ſelues, and brynge their diuines with them: or els to loſe all their poſſeſſions, that they haue with in the precincte of their lymites. After this, they nombre the clergie with in their iuriſdiction, appoyntyng that the Scripture onely of the olde and newe Teſtament, ſhoulde be of force and authoritie: To all that wyll come thether, they graunt ſaufe conduicte: And make this lawe, Lawes of their diſputacion. that all thynge be done quietlye wythout chydynge and brawlynge, that euery man ſhoulde ſpeake his mynde frelye, and pronounce it in ſuche ſorte as euerye mans ſayinges myght be written: And what ſo euer ſhold there be agreed vpō, that the ſame ſhold be ratified & obſerued through out al their domions. And to thintent men myght know what thynges ſhoulde be decided, and comme thether all prepared, they propounded ten concluſiōs, which the miniſters of their church,

Fraunces Colbe, and Bertholde Haller, dyd profeſſe, and ſayde: they would proue by the Scriptures. Whiche are theſe, that the trewe churche, wherof Chriſte is the only head, procedeth of Gods word, perſeuereth in the ſame, and heareth none other mans voyce: that this ſelf Theames or concluſions. ſame church maketh no lawes, without Gods worde: therfore are we not otherwyſe bounden to mens traditions, bearyng the name of the churche, but in as muche as they be conſonant to Gods worde: that Chriſte only hath made ſatiſfactiō for the ſynnes of the whole worlde. Therfore if any man ſay that there is any other waye of ſaluation, or meane, to put away ſynne, the ſame dothe denye Chriſte, howe it can not be proued by the teſtimonie of Scripture, that the body and bloud of Chriſt, is really and corporally receiued: that the vſe of Maſſe wherin Chriſt is preſented and offered to his heauenly father, for the quicke and the dead, is againſt the Scripture, and a contumelie to the ſacrifice, which Chriſt offered vp for vs: that only Chriſt is to be called vpō, as the mediatour and aduocate of mankynde to God the father. that there ſhould be any place after this lyfe, wherin ſoules ſhould be pourged, is not to be founde in the Scriptures: wherfore all thoſe prayers and ceremonies, yearely Diriges and Obites, whiche are beſtowed Prayers for the dead are ſuperfluous. vpon the dead, alſo Lampes, Tapers, and ſuche other thynges, profite nothyng at all: That any image or lykenes ſhould be ſet vp to be worſhypped, is againſt the holy Scriptures: therfore if they be errected in churches for that intent, they ought to be taken downe. That matrimony is to no kynde of men prohybited, but for to auoyde fornication, is commaunded and permitted vnto all men by holy wrytte. Where as euery whoremonger is euen by the teſtimony of Scripture, ſequeſtred from the communiō of the churche: That the ſyngle life vnchaſt, and fylthy, is moſte vnſemely for the order of prieſthode. What tyme the men of Bernes had wrytten their letters, concernynge theſe matters vnto all the Heluetians, exhortyng them both to ſende their learned men, and to ſuffer all others to paſſe ſaufelye through their countreis, the Lucernates, Uranites, Unterualdians, Engianes, Glareōs, Soloturnians, and they of Friburg, exhorte them with long letters, to leaue their enterpryſe, ſayinge that it is not lawfull for any nation or prouince, to alter the ſtate of religion, but the ſame to belonge to a generall counſell: wherfore they deſyre them, that they wold attempte no ſuche wycked acte, but contine we in the religion, whiche their parentes and elders haue obſerued. Fynally they ſaye that neyther they wyll ſende, nor ſuffer any of their men to come, nor graunt ſaufecōduit to any others to paſſe through their countrey. All this not with ſtandyng the men of Berneſſe, procede in this matter, and at the daye preſcribed, whiche was the .vij. of Ianuary begynne their diſputation. There came none of the byſhops before named. They of Baſyll, Zuricke,

& Abbecell, alſo the Shafuſiās, Sangallians, Mulluſiās, & their neighbours of Rhetia, ſent theirs: moreouer thei of Strauſborough, Ulmes, Auſpurg, Lindaue, Conſtance, and Iſne, dyd lykewyſe. The doctours of the ſame citie before named, began the diſputation, & their concluſions defended Zwynglius, Oecolampadius, Bucer, Capito, Blanrer, and diuers others: And there impugned them emonges others Conrade treger, an Auſten freer of great fame, who at the laſte what tyme he ſought for helpe beſydes the Scriptures, and the maiſters of the diſputation would not permitte hym ſo to doe, for that it was forbydden by the lawe, he departed out of the place. The diſputation ended the .xxvj. of Ianuary, and the forſayde concluſions approued by the common aſſente of the moſte parte, were ratified and obſerued not only at Bernes, but alſo proclaimed by the magiſtrates, Religion reformed. in ſondry places there aboutes, Maſſes, Aultars, Images, abolyſhed in all places. They of Conſtance had chaunged certen thynges before. And when they had made a lawe againſt whoredome, adultrye, and diſhoneſt or ſuſpected company, theſe that are called Cannons, departed The prebids departe. thence in great diſpleaſure Ambroſe Blaurer, was preacher ther, who was a gentleman borne, but had profeſſed him ſelfe a Monke in the Abbey of Alperſpacke, in the Dukedome of Wyrtinberge, whyche Ambroſe Blaures. by the readyng of Luthers workes chaunged his mynde and his cote together, returnyng home agayne to his frendes. His Abbot woulde haue had hym agayne, and wroote earneſtlye to the Senate of Conſtance for him. Wherfore Blanrer expreſſeth the whole matter in writyng, and propoundeth certen conditions, where vpon he was contēt to retourne, but they were ſuche as the Abbot refuſyng, he remayneth ſtyll at Conſtance: Where after the diſputation at Bernes, Images, Aultares, Maſſe, and Ceremonies, were vtterly abolyſhed. Lykewyſe they of Geneua, in remouinge their Images and ceremonies, dyd Religion reformed at Geneua. imitate them of Bernes, wherfore the byſhop and clergie, forſoke the citie in anger. The Religion being thus altered, they of Bernes renoū
               ced the league made with the Frenche kynge, prohibitynge the hyred warfare, as they of Zuricke had done, and were contented with that yearely penſion that the kyng payeth them to kepe peace. And wrote The victory of the goſpel the daye and yeare, wherein they forſoke the Popyſhe religion, vpon apyllour in golden letters, that it myght be an euerlaſtyng memory all to their poſteritie. I ſhewed you how the Cardynal of Yorke, was ſent into Fraunce. When they were agred vpon the matter, both kinges The kinges of Fraūce & Englād Amballade to ye Emperour. ſent their ambaſſadours to the Emperour: And the Frenche king, requireth to take his raunſome & delyuer his ſonnes that were pledges: The kyng of Englande agayne his debte to be payde him, which is threfolde: firſt thre hondreth thouſande Crownes that he lent hym, ſecondarely, fyue hundreth thouſande, for not obſeruing the contracte

of Matrimonie, thirdly foure yeares penſion, whiche the Emperoure promyſed hym, as before in the third boke is declared. When the Emperour hereunto had aunſwered, not after their myndes, the kynge of Englande alſo ſent hym defiaunce by an Herault of Armes, who at the ſame tyme was conſultynge, howe he myght be deuorced from Catherine the Emperours haunt, and Marry an other, whiche he did afterwardes, as ſhalbe recyted in his place, the Emperoure in his letters, to other kynges accuſed the Frenche kyng moſte greuouſly, that he kept not his fayth and promyſe, and had ofte tymes ſayd ſo muche to the Frenche Ambaſſadours. Where vpon the kynge in his letters wrytten at Paris, the .xxviij. of Marche, which he ſent by an Herault: By the talke ſayth he, whiche thou haſt had with ſome of myne, I perceiue that thou braggeſt certen thinges, that founde to my diſhonour: The Frēche kings inuectiue againſt the Emper. as though I had eſcaped thy handes againſt my fidelitie: And nowe, al be it that he, whiche after the compacte made, hath put in pledges, is hym ſelfe quytte from bonde, ſo that I am hereby ſufficiently excuſed, yet neuertheleſſe in the defence of my honour, I thought to wryte this briefly vnto the. Therfore if thou blame this facte of mine and my departure, or ſayeſt that euer I did any thyng, contrary to the dutie of a noble Prynce, I tell the playnly, thou lieſt. For I am determined to maynteyne myne honour and eſtimatiō whyleſt I haue a day to lyue. We nede not many wordes therfore, and if thou wylt ought with me, thou ſhalt not nede hereafter to wryte, but appointe the place, where we may fyght hande to hande: For if thou dareſt not mete me, and in the meane tyme ceaſeſt not to ſpeake euyll of me, I proteſt that all the He offereth the Emper. the combat. ſhame therof belongeth vnto the, for by our combat all the ſtryfe ſhall be parted. I tolde you before of the contention betwene kynge Ferdinando and the Uayuode of Tranſiluania. Whan the ſame burſt out in to a cruell warre, and Ferdinando was of the greater power, the Uayuode in the moneth of Apryll, wryting his letters to the ſtates of The empyre. After the lamentable death of kyng Lewis, ſayeth he, I The letters of Iohn Uaiuode, to the ſtates of the Empyre. was by the common aſſent of the nobles, choſen and crowned kinge of Hongary: except three, whome pouertie, hatred, and hope of better fortune, had ſeduced, that forgettyng the wealth of their countrey, they ſubſcribed to Ferdinando kyng of Boheme. And what tyme I was wholy addicted to ſuccour my countrey, to recouer that was loſt, and by the ſame meanes to procure your quiet, beholde he inuadeth my Realme with violence, taketh certen Townes, and by thoſe whiche were of his faction, was created kyng at Poſonye. I marueled not a lytle, and it greued me alſo exceadingly, that this nation ſhould be moleſted by hym whiche ought moſte of all to ſuccour and releue the miſery of the ſame. It had not bene harde for me at that tyme, to haue gyuen hym the repulſe, but I would not haſarde raſhely the remnant

of the power lefte of ſo manye ſhypwrakes and loſſes of that Realme, hath had of late, & I complayned vnto Clement the ſeuenth, to Fraū
               ces the Frenche kyng, to Henry kyng of England, and to Sigiſmūde kyng of Pole. And in dede the kynge of Pole, ſendynge his Ambaſſadour, without my knowledge, entreated him that he wold not in this daungerous tyme make away through ciuile diſcorde to let in the foreyne enemy, whiche after neyther he, nor yet any other ſhould be able to kepe out, but that he would kepe peace with me, & ioyne his power to myne to reſiſte the common ennemye. And where as Ferdinando anſwered, that he would attempt nothing againſt ryght and equitie, it was agreed vpon, that a certen daye, fytte men ſhould be ſent to debate the matters of controuerſie: I was content, and ſendyng alſo my Ambaſſadours vnto you, and ſubmytting my ſelfe vnto your arbytriment, I made requeſt, that you woulde gyue none ayde to myne aduerſarie: but what tyme they came into Ferdinando his countrey beyng taken and deteyned as pryſoners, againſt the lawe of all natiōs, His Ambaſſadours takē
                they could not declare their commiſſion: And from you they ſhoulde haue gone to the Emperour. And al be it that this ſame was an extreme wronge & iniury, neuertheleſſe at the daye appoynted by the kyng of Pole, I ſent certen others that were very deſyrous of peace, both of themſelues, and alſo by my commaundemēt: Notwithſtanding Fardinando his men propounded thinges ſo farre out of reaſon, that ther could be nothyng concluded. Whyleſt theſe thinges were a workyng, certen of the nobilitie, entyſed by the crafte and polycie of Ferdinādo, breake their fidelite, which before they had gyuen me. And for ſomuche as the waye is layde, that I can neyther come nor ſende vnto you, I thought good to declare vnto you by my letters, howe vniuſte warre he attempteth, peraduenture intending to recouer the ſame that his auncetours, Frederick and Maximilian Emperours, haue loſt here to fore for the one of them, when he was triumphyng, and thought hym ſelfe ſure of the kyngdome of Hongary, myne vncle Emeryck expulſed out of the whole countrey. And my father Stephen Sepuſe, when Matthie was kyng, did diſconfite them both in ſuche ſorte as he adioyned Uienna to Hongary. And I my ſelfe beyng very yonge, gaue the repulſe to Maximilian, whan he moued warre againſt vs, & wold haue done the lyke to his enemy alſo, but that he contendeth with me rather by craft and ſubtyltie, than he doth by power and manhood. Hytherto haue I borne with this iniury as I might. But thinke with your ſelues (moſte noble Prynces) howe greuous a thynge it is to be caſt downe out of the hygheſt degree of power & dignitie to the ſtate of a priuate man. I ſuppoſe there can none be found, ſo mylde and patient, that ſufferyng ſo many iniuries, woulde not loke about hym on euery ſyde for all the ayde he myght get. Wherfore, ſeyng that at no

tyme ſynce I receyued the gouernment of the commō wealth, I haue refuſed any conditions reaſonable, nor wyll not yet doe, and had rather doe any thyng than ſtyre vp cyuyle warre. and myne aduerſarye proceadeth obſtinately, I doe proteſte, that it ought not to be layde to my charge, as blame worthy, if for myne owne defence, I ſeek the beſt meanes I can: For in caſe the common wealth doe ſuſteyne thereby any dommage, that maye not be aſcribed vnto me, that hath ſoughte all wayes to haue peace, but to myne ennemie, whiche inuadeth an other mans Realme, through great iniury. He hathe layde dylygent wayte in all wayes and paſſages, that nothynge be conueyed vnto you: Notwithſtandynge I ſuppoſe you haue hearde, howe he forſoke Kyng Ferdinādo forſoke kyng Lewis his brother in lawe kyng Lewys: vnto whome, beyng ofte and earneſtly requyred, he ſent neyther men nor munition, nor any other ayde, agaynſt the violence of his ennemie. And why? for he loked after his death to be kyng: Moreouer the common ayde of the Empyry, appoynted for Hongary, he ſent to his brother to diſquiet Italy. Where as I ſent to kynge Lewys at the ſame tyme, my brother with three thouſande men of myne owne coſtes and charges, and woulde haue bene at the battell my ſelfe, had I not bene commaunded by the kyng to remayne in Tranſiluania: My brother dyed in the battel ryght valeantlye. Ferdinando promyſed by an othe, that vnleſſe he dyd fyrſte recouer Belgrade and certen other caſtelles of the Turkes, he wold not take vpon him the gouernment: but his fayth fayled herein, for the Turkes haue inuaded further, deſtroyed and ſpoyled the coūtrey, and haue wonne the caſtell of Iaice, the chiefeſt fortreſſe of all Boſna. Whiche Caſtel kyng Matthias, with a great loſſe of his men, recouered in times paſt of the Turkes, & mine vncle Emerick, defēded the ſame afterwards, induring a long ſege, & the kinges haue fortified ſynce that time, to their exceading great charges, & now loſt by our valeaūt captaine, yt made ſo many goodly promiſes. and I thinke not lōg to, he wil for very neceſſite cal vpon you for ayde, as though he ſtode in daū
               ger for the defence of Germany, but his mynde is an other waye. For he intendeth not to warre vpō the Turke, vnto whom he is cōtent to pay tribute yearely, & hath ſent his Ambaſſadours thither for the ſame purpoſe: but he myndeth with your men and money to helpe his brother in Italye, to deſtroye me, and brynge the Realme of Hongarye into bondage. And ſeyng the matter is thus, I moſt earneſtly beſeche you, to forſee that this priuate iniurye donne vnto me, turne not to the great hynderaunce of the common wealth. And after a whyle he wrote alſo to the Emperour, muche lyke to this in effecte, exhortinge Ferdinādos title to Hongary. him to appeaſe his brother. And thus much for ye defēce of his caſe, but Ferdinādo grounded him ſelf vpō the cōpoſition whiche themperour Maximilian had made wt the Hongarians and their king Ladiſlaus,

in the yeare .M. iiij .C. xci. by the whiche it was prouided, that if Ladiſlaus died without heire male, that then Maximilian and his heyres deſcending in of the right line, ſhold poſſeſſe that kingdome. Wherfore whan Lewys the ſonne of Ladiſlaus was dead without iſſue, as I tolde you before, Ferdinando nephewe to Maximilian by his ſonne Philip, and Archeduke of Auſtriche, and moreouer hauīg maried the ſyſter of kyng Lewys, affirmed the kyngdome to be his by good right. And this ſelfe ſame tyme, the Lantgraue of Heſſe, and the prince electour of Saxony, muſtering their mē, prepared thē ſelues vnto warre, the cauſe therof was this. One Otto Paccius a Lawer and a gentle man borne, one of the chiefeſt councellours about George Duke of Saxony, by occaſion of talke, admonyſhed the Lantgraue to loke to his owne thynges. For nowe of late had Ferdinand, the Marques of Brandenburge, the Cardinall of Mentz and Saliſburge, George the Duke of Saxon, William and Lewis, Dukes of Bauer, and certen byſhops, as Bamberge, and Wirciburge, made a league to deſtroye him, the Duke of Saxon electour, and Luthers religion: And for the more credit of the thing, he ſhewed him the copie of the confederacie, The duke of Saxon & the Lantgraue prepare thē to warre. promyſing hym alſo the principall. Whyleſt they leuie their Armies, & make preparation for the warres, all men marueled muche wherfore it was, and what would come of it, ſome ſayde one thynge, and ſome an other, as in ſuche caſes is accuſtomed. Whan they had all thynges in a redynes, ſendyng abroade their letters and meſſengers into all partes, thei publiſhed the copie of the cōfederacie, which was brought vnto them, and wrote alſo vnto them whiche were thought to haue made this league, and ſent their Ambaſſadours, to knowe what their intent was. But they al pourged them ſelues euery man ſeueral, and ſending abrode their letters, affirme it to be a forged matter, and that it can not be proued. And Duke George, ye Lantgraues father in law, vrged him chiefly to bryng forth the partie that tolde hym, whiche if he did not, he wyll thynke none other wyſe, but that it is his own deuyſe, to ſtyre vp ſtryfe, and diſturbe the quietnes of German ye. Their fyrſt attempt ſhoulde haue bene to haue ſet vppon the byſhoppes that were next them, and therfore they toke vp and waged men, as many as they could get vpon ſuche a ſoden. But when Paccius coulde not ſhewe the dede it ſelfe according to his promyſe. Than the Lantgraue begaune to waxe colde in the buſynes: And at the laſte, by the mediation of countie Palatine, and Richarde Archebiſhop of Treer, they dimyſed their armies, vpon condicion, that the byſhoppes ſhoulde paye vnto the Lātgraue for the charges of this warre, a hūdreth thouſand ducates, the Archebyſhop of Mentz, fortie thouſande, Wirciburge as muche, and Bamberge, twenty thouſande. Afterwardes, what tyme the Ambaſſadours of the prynces did mete at a day preſcribed, whom

in dede this accuſation did touche Paccius, whome the Lantgraue there preſented, was conuicted of falſihode. Yet by his meanes put at lybertie, whan he had wandered in ſtraunge countreis certen yeares, at the laſt was beheaded at Andwerpe. When the matter was thus Paccen beheaded. pacified, the prynces confederated of the Sweuicall league, accuſed the Lantgraue, that he had done wrong and iniury to their felowes: And where a new ſturre had lyke to haue growen vpon the ſame, the matter in fine was quieted at Wormes, about the ende of Decembre, by the interceſſion of the Palſgraue. There be ſome that thinke it was not altogether nothyng, that he had ſpoken of the conſpyracie: And the aſſemblie of certen princes at Regenſburg, foure yeares before that encreaſed the ſame ſuſpicion. Wherfore it is ſuppoſed that ſome ſuche thing was conceaued, but not brought to perfection, nor fully determined. Whiche thyng I doe not here affirme for a certentie, but leaue vnto euery man his owne iudgement. The aſſemblie of the Empire which I ſhewed before, ſhold haue bene in the beginning of the ſpring tyme at Regenſburg, was in this warlyke preparation, not at all, the Emperours deputie, ſending worde that they ſhould not come there. The Frenche kynges letters wrytten in the later end of Marche, the Emperour receiued the ſeuenth daye of Iune: Afterwardes ſendyng an aunſwer by an Herault of armes, the .xxiiij. day of Iune, frō Moū
               tiſon: The Emperours aunſwer to the Frēch king. I blame the not, ſayeth he, nor accuſe the for departing home, for the ſame was done by my leaue and permiſſion: but for that thou diddeſt not returne againe into my cuſtody, captiue, as thou diddeſt promyſe me by thy fayth, thou wouldeſt, vnleſſe thou fulfilleſt the conditions of peace, lyke as in dede it is to be proued by wryting ſubſcrybed with thyne owne hande. This in dede if thou haddeſt done, thou haddeſt played the parte of a Iuſte man, and of a worthye Prynce: But nowe for ſo muche as thou haſt herein broken thy faith I affirme, and that without any lye, that thou haſt done ſhamefully and wyckedlye. And where as thou deſireſt to haue a place appointed for the cōbate, I am content, and do aſſigne the place by the Ryuer that runneth beſyde fount Arabie, and Andey, whiche thou oughteſt in no caſe to refuſe. For if thou diddeſt their credit thine owne lyfe and thy chyldrens, two yeres paſt what tyme being ſet at libertie to retourne home, thou gaueſt them to me for pledges, thou mayeſt aſwel now alſo committe thy ſelfe to the ſame aſſuredly. And to the intent it be not differred by long delay, let noble men be ſent thether on both parties, that are ſkilfull in ſuche matters, whiche ſhall eſpye out a place conuenient, and agree vpon the kynde of weapons, and appoynte a certen daye. But in caſe I receyue none aunſwere from the within fourty dayes, after the receipt of my letters, what thy mynde is herein, the fault of the delaye and all the ſhame ſhall remayne towarde the, and to the cryme of falſifying

thy fayth ſhall this be added alſo. Theſe letters the Emperour delyuered vnto the Herault, that he goyng into Fraunce, ſhould reade them before the kynge openly, or if he refuſe to heare them, than he cō
               maundeth him to deliuer them to the kyng to reade.
            When the Herault came at the lengthe, the kynge ſyttyng at Paris Themper. Heraulde came at Paris. hearyng of a ſermon with his nobles about hym; demaunded of hym if he had brought the maner of the combat? He ſayde, he had both that and ſomwhat to ſaye beſydes that, and more howe he had in commaundement to reade it before hym, or els to delyuer it to his owne handes, whiche he beſought hym that he myght doe. But the kynge vnderſtandyng ryght well the Emperours requeſt herein, and lothe to haue the thyng read openly, fallyng at woordes with the Herault, arroſe and would neyther heare hym ſpeake any more, nor receyue anye letters of hym, as in deede the Emperours men affyrme in theyr wrytinges. The firſte of Auguſt, the Emperour wryting his letters from Ualolete, calleth a counſell of the Empyre of Spyres againſt the An aſſemble at Spires. beginning of February, to treate of Religion and the Turkyſh warre. He excuſeth hym ſelfe by certen affayres, by meanes whereof he can not be there preſent, appoyntyng of his deputes, his brother Ferdinando, Friderike Palatyne, William of Bauer, the byſhop of Trent, and of Hyldeſſeme, Lantrechus the Lieutenaunt of the Frenche kynges Armie, after he had taken Pauie and Alexandria, as you haue hearde, wyntered he and his Armie at Bononie. And in the begynning of the ſpryngtyme went forewarde, and beſeged Naples, whiche was kept Lantrech be ſegeth Naples. and defended by Alphonſus Daualus, Ugo Moncada, Ferdiando Alarco, Philibert, prynce of Orenge, and Ferdinando Gonzago.
            But in the moneth of Iuly a ſore Peſtilence conſumed a great part of his Armie, and Lantreth hym ſelfe alſo in the moneth of Auguſte, and before hym Mounſour Uaundemont, brother vnto Anthony duke of Lorayne, whiche ſerued the kyng in hope to attayne to the kingdome of Naples, for that the houſe of Gaunte, whereof the houſe of Lorayn hath alſo his ofſprynge, affirme it to be their ryght.
            After the diſputation of Bernes, Religion was altered in ſondrye places, wherupon the preachers at Strauſborongh, emonges other Contention about the Maſſe. errours of the biſhop of Romes doctrine, taught chiefly that the maſſe was wicked, and a great blaſphemy to Gods holy name: wherfore it ought to be abrogated & the right vſe of the Lordes ſupper inſtituted, vnleſſe they could proue theſe thinges by the teſtimonies of holy ſcripture, they wyll refuſe no kinde of puniſhment. Againe the byſhops miniſters taught otherwyſe, which bred no ſmal contention: whom afterwardes, the ſenate for bycauſe they refuſed to diſpute or conferre wt 
               The papiſts forboden to preache. the others, cōmaunded to ſylence. The byſhop in his letters to the ſenate, exhorted them to perſeuer in the auncient religiō of their elders.

The Senate deſyreth hym agayne, as they had done oftentymes before, that ſuche thinges myght be ſet forth as appertayned to the trew ſeruice and glory of God, and the reſidue taken away and abolyſhed: for the ſame belongeth to his office. But he notwithſtandinge that he would ſome tyme appoynte a metynge and a daye for ſuche matters, would do nothyng in ded, but only put them in feare with his letters, wherin oftentimes he mingled with intreatinges, threateninges, that they ſhould alter nothyng.
            And when he was almoſte in diſpayre of the thynge, he intreateth the Senate of the Empyre, whiche was at that tyme at Spyres, by The Ambaſſadour of the chamber imperiall to Strauſbor. their authoritie to ſet in foote in the matter. Who ſendynge their Ambaſſadours ſolemnely, at the later ende of Decembre, requyre them not to put downe the Maſſe: for that it is neyther in the power of the Emperour nor of other ſtates, to chaunge the auncient Religion of theyr forefathers, but eyther by a generall, or els by a prouinciall counſell: whiche if they ſuppoſed to be farre of, or ouer long to, that they would differre it at the leſte vntyl the next aſſemblye of the Empire, and there put vp their requeſtes: where they doubted not, but that they ſhoulde receyue a reaſonable aunſwere. for it is forboden by the lawes, that a priuate Magiſtrate may vndo ſuch thinges as be agreed vpon by the common conſent of the whole worlde: wherfore it is reaſon that they ſhould obtayne this at their handes: For if they ſhould obſtinatly procede in their enterpryſe, and worke by force and violence, both the Emperour theyr hyghe Magiſtrate, and kynge Ferdynando alſo his depute throughout the Empyre, would take the matter right greuouſly: And they lykewyſe, accordyng to ther office and dutie, muſt bothe informe the Emperour therof by their letters, and alſo ſee ſuche redreſſe in the thyng as apperteyneth. Whiche they would be loth and vnwilling to do: wherfore they deſire them aduyſedly to waye the matter & followe good counſel, for the ſame ſhalbe to the Emperour moſt acceptable, & for thē ſelues moſte profitable. When the ſenate had made anſwere to the Ambaſſadours, what their purpoſe was, they departed, & ſhortly after the byſhop of Hildeſſeme, came vnto thē in themperours The biſhops letters. name, with the like exhortation. Furthermore the biſhop of Strauſborough writeth letters to diuers of the ſenatours, which were gentlemen that helde their landes of hym: That for as muche as they were bounden vnto him by their othe & fidelitie, they ſhould as much as in thē lieth, holde wt the maſſe, & not ſuffer it to be aboliſhed. In ye meane time the ſenate, whā the thing had bene aboue two yeres in cōtrouerſie, & the preachers called vpō thē in their ſermōs daily, & the citezēs alſo were ſuters, callig the whole nūbre of .ccc. as in matters of weight & difficultie is ther accuſtomed, doth declare yt in caſe they ſhuld aboliſhe the maſſe, what daūger they were in by themperour, if they did it not,

howe muche God would be offended, wherfore they graunt thē leaſure to conſider, and require them to conſulte together ſo, that at their next aſſemblie, by their common wyll and conſent, the matter may be determyned. Wherfore when the daye came, their ſentence that were againſt the Maſſe preuayled. Where vpon a decree was made the .xx. of February, that the Maſſe ought to be ſuſpended and layde downe, vntyll ſuche tyme as their aduerſaries could proue it to be a ſeruice acceptable before God. And this decree to take place aſwel within their The Maſſe put down at Stanſbor. Citie, as without, in all places ſo farre as their iuriſdiction ſtretcheth, and afterwarde by their letters certifie the byſhop of the ſame: which was newes to hym as heauy as leade, as he wrote agayne hym ſelfe in his next letters. There was alſo great diſſention about Relygion, certen yeares at Baſill, and in fyne the ſenate decred that there ſhould Diſſentid at Baſil for religion. be one vniforme doctrine through out the whole citie, and touchyng the Maſſe whiche as yet was ſayde in a fewe places after an open diſputatiō had, it ſhould be determined by voyces, what were to be done therewith. But where as the Papiſtes defende their Maſſe with touthe and nayle, and in their parſons rayled agaynſt the others vnpunyſhed, the Burgeſes choſe certen to put the Senate in remēbraūce of their promiſe, and to requyre that thoſe Senatours which are a let to the thynge, myght be diſplaced. when this coulde not be obtayned the Citezens flocke together and mete in the gray Freres church, firſt without Armure, and after with weapons keepe the gates, Towres They of Baſill take armure. and ſtrong places of the Citie, with watche and warde. The Senate was glad to graunte them certen requeſtes to apeaſe their furye, referryng the cauſe of their iudgement, that firſt were ſent vnto them.
            In the meane tyme, certen of thoſe that were appoynted to make prouiſion in the Cytie for the reſte, chaunced to comme into the chiefe churche, and one of them with his ſtaffe, thruſte at the Image of a ſaincte, in ſo muche that it fell downe and brake: Upon whiche occaſion they ſerued mo in lyke caſe, but when the Prieſtes came thether, whiche were much offended with their doynges, they becauſe they woulde not paſſe their commiſſion, departed without any further bable. When worde hereof was brought to the Cytizens in the market place, and reporte made that their fellowes ſtoode in daunger of their Images put downe. lyues, by and by were three hondred Armed men, ſent to the heade Churche to helpe them. Whan they came thether, the others were gone. But leſte they ſhoulde appeere to haue commen thyther for nothyng, they breake downe all the Idols and Images, they coulde fynde there, and from thence goe to all other Churches and doe the lyke. And when certen of the Senatours, ranne foorth to appeaſe the tumulte, the Cytezens ſayde vnto them, that, that you haue bene conſulted about theſe thre yeres, the ſame ſhall we diſpatche in one houre,

to the intent we ſhall haue no more contention about images. Thus did the Senate condeſcende to al their requeſtes, and twelue Senatours were diſplaced, and emonges others Henry Meltinger, that tyme boroumaiſter, and Lucius ziegler, captayne of the bourgeſes. A decree was alſo made, that as well within the citie as without in all their lyberties, the Maſſe, with all maner of images, ſhould be abolyſhed, The Maſſe put downe. and that the Senate from henceforth ſhould admitte two hondreth and thre ſcore burgeſes to conſulte with them of all matters cō
               cerning Gods glory and the common wealth. Theſe decrees made the citezens retourne home ioyfull, and all their anger was wreaked vpon their images. The thyrde daye after whiche was Aſſhe wedneſdaye, the images were diſtributed to the poore to burne for want of Fewell. But what tyme they fell out about the partyng, and the matter came from woordes vnto hande ſtrypes, they agreed that they ſhoulde be brent. Wherfore there were nyne ſtakes or heapes made Images brēt on 
                     •
                  ſh wedneſday. before the head churche, and ſet a fyre and burnt.
            And ſo it fortuned that the ſame daye wherein the byſhoppes miniſters are wont to marke mens foreheades with Aſſhes, to the intent they ſhould remembre them ſelues to be earth and aſſhes, was vnto the whole citie for conſuming their Idolles into aſſhes, mery and ioyfull. The men of Zurick, Bernes, and Solodure hearyng of this tumulte, ſent Ambaſſadours to be meanes betwene thē. but tofore they came thether, the matter was appeaſed. I tolde you a lyttle before of The aſſemblie of Spir. the aſſembly at Spyres, whiche the Emperour had appointed to cō
               mence at the beginning of February, but it began not tyll the Ides of Marche. Thither came many princes and ſtates: the Prynce electour of Saxony, brought with hym Melanchton, fyrſt they treated of Religion, and after muche deciſion, a decree was made, as we ſhall tell you hereafter. The Byſhoppes and their complices, dyd what they coulde to ſequeſtre the Duke of Saxon and other Prynces, from the Cities, that they ſhould not take counſell and agree in one, whiche they hoped well to brynge to paſſe, for as muche as they dyffered in opinion, touchynge the Lordes Supper. And Ferdinande with his colleges callyng before them the Ambaſſadours of certen cities, charged them ſore that contrary to the Emperours decree, they had altered many thynges, and fynally exhorted them to be confourmable to the myndes of others, leſt through their diſſention the aſſemblye be The papiſts ī Swicerlād make leage with kynge Ferdinando quite diſſolued. They make aunſwere, that the alteration is not iniurious to the Emperour, but that they are deſyrous of concorde, and woulde doe anye thynge for the Emperours ſake, not refuſynge to ſtande to the iudgement of a lawfull counſell. When two the moſte floryſhynge Cyties of the Swycers, Zuricke, and Bernes agreed in one Religion, the Lucernaites, Urites, Swites, Unternaldians and

Engians, whiche abhorred moſte this doctrine, make a league with kyng Ferdinando. Clement byſhop of Rome the .xiij. day of Aprill, ſendeth Iohn Thomaſe of Mirandula, to exhorte the prynces to warre againſt the Turke: And al be it that he hath ſuſteyned great loſſes of late yeares, yet promyſeth he to aſſiſte them with ayde, and to doe his endeuoure, that the Emperour and the Frenche king being accorded, the counſell may begynne immediatly, to the intent that Germanye may embrace again the ſame religion that other countreis do. In this aſſemblye, the Senate of the Empire woulde not permitte Daniel Miege Ambaſſadour for the citie of Straſborough, to ſitte in counſel, The Amb
                     •
                   of Srauſborough excluded. for by cauſe the Maſſe was abrogated, before this counſell imperiall, not withſtanding that they were intreated to the contrary, wherfore Iames Sturmius Ambaſſadour for the ſame citie, ſayed vnto them, that in caſe they were thus diſplaced, contrary to the lawe & cuſtome of the Empire, let them not loke from henceforth that they wyll beare any part of charges. But all might not preuayl, and Ferdinando hym ſelf aunſwering the interceſſours bad, that any other citie, that obſerued the Emperours decrees, ſhould be ſubſtituted in the place of the other. After a longe diſpute of Religion, the fourmer actes of Spires were repeted, and a new decree made on this wyſe. They which haue hitherto obſerued the Emperours decree, let thē obſerue the ſame ſtyl, vntyll the generall counſell, and bynde the people to do lykewyſe: but The decres of Spires. ſuche as haue altered their Religion, and can not nowe departe from the ſame, for feare of ſedition, let them ſtaye from henceforth and alter nothynge beſydes, vntyll the tyme of the counſell: Furthermore that their doctrine, whiche teache otherwyſe of the Lordes Supper, than the churche doth, be not receyued, nor the Maſſe abolyſhed, nor that in ſuche places where this newe kynde of doctryne is, anye man be letted to go to Maſſe that wyll: The Anabaptiſtes alſo ſuch as defende their opinion obſtinately, ſhall ſuffer death: the miniſters of the churche are commaunded to teache according to the interpretaciō receiued by the church, referring al diſputable queſtions to be in the coū
               ſell decided. Moreouer that all ſtates kepe the common peace, & none to hurte other for the cauſe of Religion, neither one to take the defence of an others ſubiecte: they that ſhall do otherwyſe to be accompted in the numbre of outlawes. This decree, reſiſted the Prince electour of Saxony, George Marques of Brandenborge, Erneſt and Frances, Certen princes reſiſt the ſame. Dukes of Lunenborough, the Lātgraue, & counte Anhald, who ye .xix. of April recite openly in wryting, the cauſes why they doe not conſent thereunto. And firſte they doe repete the decree of the former aſſemblie, whereby euery man hathe his Religion permitted him frely, vntyll the counſell: from this maye they not departe, nor infrynge thoſe thynges, whiche after great delyberation, were for a common quiet

eſtablyſhed, and with their ſygnetes and othes alſo confirmed: They woulde in deede be glad, after the example of their progenitours, to do all thynge that myght content the Emperour, and as for their goodes and lyues alſo, they wyll ſpende them wyllinglye in his hyghnes ſeruice: but this preſent cauſe, coucerneth the euerlaſtyng ſaluation of all men. Wherfore they deſire them not to be offended with them, for that thei herein diſſente from them: for like as the former decree was made by the common aſſent of all: ſo can not the ſame be broken with out all their conſentes. They wyll not be againſt, that they ſhall in their own countrey, eſtablyſh what religion ſhal ſeme good vnto them, beſeching God to illuminate the hartes of all men, with the light & knowledge of his truthe: And where as there hath bene diſſention, and controuerſie about religion certen yeares, it was declared in the counſel at Norinberge, who haue bene the authours, and cauſers therof, as well by Who be the authors of diſſention. the confeſſion of the byſhop of Rome hym ſelf, as alſo by the requeſtes of Prynces and ſtates of the Empyre, which were delyuered to the byſhoppes legate, to the numbre of foure ſcore: wherof notwithſtanding as yet no redreſſe is made: And that of al conſultations, this hath euer bene the ende, that for the debating of controuerſies, and refourmyng of vices, there is nothyng better than a generall counſell. And where as the ſame left a parte, they haue nowe decreed, that ſuche as haue chaunged their Religion, and can not nowe without muche trouble forſake the ſame, ſhal alter nothyng from henceforth, that can they neither cōmende nor allowe, vnleſſe they ſhould diſcredite the doctrine, whiche they haue profeſſed hitherto, as both true and Godly, & graunt moreouer that they ought to leaue the ſame, if thei might with any tumulte or vprores: And what thynges els were that, thā to denye gods worde, whiche is taught them purely and ſyncerely? whiche were the moſte heynous offence that coulde be committed: For they muſt confeſſe it, not in wordes only, but in very deede alſo: Moreouer what an hynderaunce this abnegation would be and howe muche preiudiciall to the fauourers of the Goſpell, it is eaſy to coniecture. As cōcernyng the Maſſe, it is ryght well knowen, with howe ſtrong and inuincible teſtimonies of holy Scripture, the preachers within their dominiōs, haue confuted the Popiſhe Maſſe, and in ſteade therof, inſtituted the Lordes ſupper, according to the inſtitution of Chriſte, and the maner by the Apoſtles obſerued: wherfore they can neither admitte this part of the decree, neyther permitte their ſubiectes to heare Maſſe, whiche is abolyſhed: For though the byſhop of Romes Maſſe, were neuer ſo good and godly, yet if they ſhould haue in their churches two cōtrary Maſſes, al mē may wel perceiue what grudge & diſſentiō would there vpon enſewe. Moreouer where they do preſcribe, what they ſhal commaunde their owne ſubiectes, and what lawes they ſhall make with

in their owne dominions, they can not a lytle maruell, conſyderynge that they them ſelues would not ſuffer any man to doe the lyke with them. Furthermore what thyng is taught in their churches, touchyng the preſence of the body and bloud of Chriſte, is ſo euydent to all men, that it nedeth no further declaratiō: Notwithſtandyng, as they haue ſayde oftentymes, ſo thynke they it good now alſo, not as yet to make any decree againſt thē that teache otherwiſe, for that the Emperours commiſſiōs (teach the Latin beneth,) maketh no mentiō therof. And agayne for as muche as the maynteners of that doctrine, are nother called nor hearde: whiche in ſo weyghty matters is muche to be conſidered, that nothyng be determyned at any tyme, and they not hearde ſpeake, whome the matter doth chiefly concerne. And where as they Howe ſcripture ſhoulde be expoūded. ſaye that the Goſpell muſt be taught after the interpretations approued by the churche (that is very well) but all the ſtryfe is, which is the trewe church: But ſeyng there is no doctrine more certen than Gods worde, and beſydes that nothyng ought to be taught, and ſuch places of Scripture, as appeare to be ſome what obſcure, can not be better expoūded, than by other more manifeſt places of the ſame Scripture, therfore wyll they dwell herein, endeuourynge that the bookes of the olde and newe Teſtament, may be taught ſyncerely and playnly: For this is the onely meane and waye, that is euermore certayne & ſure. And as for mens tradicions, they are grounded on a weake foundation: The decree of the laſt aſſemblie, was enacted for peace and concorde: but in caſe this decree ſhould take effecte, it would opē the waye to muche trouble, and diſpleaſure: for euen nowe all be it the decree of Wormes was ſuſpended, doe ſome Princes ſeke to make ſome of their ſubiectes to forfyte their goodes, for not obſeruyng that decree, where The decre of Wormes. of men may eaſely cōiecture what wyll inſewe, if the ſame decree ſhal nowe take place agayne, and that ſome of them wyl vſe force, and cō
               pelle men to ſuche thinges as can not be done with a ſaufe conſcience. But that is not well ſpokē, that the fourmer decree was penned with ſuche wordes, as many did abuſe the ſame thyng, tyl the counſell were called, they myght doe what they lyſte: this is bruted of them chieflye, whiche are lytle afrayde of the laſt iudgement, whan all thynges ſhal come to lyght: for their partes, they wyll not refuſe to aunſwer, before indiferent iudges, to ſuche as wyll ſaye that they haue in anye poynte broken the ſame decree. Whiche thynges ſtandyng thus, they can not conſent to this their decree: And howe they wyll aunſwere the matter both openly before all men, and alſo to the Emperour hym ſelfe. And in the meane tyme, tyll eyther a generall, or els a prouinciall counſell of Germany, ſhalbe called, they wyll do nothyng that ſhall deſerue iuſte reproufe. Unto this proteſtation of Prynces, certen of the chief cities, laying their heades together, did ſubſcribe, as Strauſborough, Norē
               berge,

Ulmes, Conſtance, Rutelinge, Winſſeme, Meminge, Lindane, Campedune, Hailbrune, Iſne, Wyſſeburge, Norling, and Sangall. Thorigicall of Proteſtantes. And this is in dede ye firſt original of the name of Proteſtaūtes, which not only in Germany, but alſo emonges foreyn nations, is nowe cō
               mon and famous. Ferdinando was departed out of the aſſemblie of Princes, before thei had proteſted, notwithſtanding that the Duke of Saxon and his felowes required him to tary a litle. After this the proteſtantes deuiſe a certen appellation, wherein they doe appeale from the decree made at Spires, vnto the Emperour, to the next lawful general or prouinciall counſell of Germany, and to all iudges that be not ſuſpected, and determined alſo to ſende Ambaſſadours to the Empeperour. Not long after this, the men of Zurick and Bernes, ſent forth their armies againſt their ennemies of the fiue townes that made league Ciuil warre emong the Swicers. with Ferdinando, declaryng why they ſo did, by wryting. And emonges ſondry cauſes and iniuries, whiche they recite, this is one, yt what tyme certen of their Citezens came for money that was dewe vnto them, the Snites whypped them naked, and the Unterualdiās had in deſpyte, hanged vp their Armes, and alſo the Armes of the Cities of Baſil and Strauſborough vpon the gallous, and howe they haue all ioynctely made a league wyth kynge Ferdinādo, to oppreſſe Religion, and to roote them out of the coūtrey, wherby they haue not onlye infringed the lawe of nature, but alſo broken the bondes that were betwene them, in conſpiring with their moſte vtter and mortall ennemie, whome to ſubdue, they haue long and many yeares, euen frō the firſt beginning of their league, with one aſſent ioyned together al their force and power. When both armies were ready to ioyne in battel, by the mediation of their neyghbours, and by them of Strauſborough, the matter was taken vp. Ferdinādo had ſent thē ayde, which came as farre as the Rhine. emōges other thinges it was agreed vpō, that they ſhould haue no warre for religion, and that from henceforth they ſhould abſteyne from all opprobriouſe wordes vnder a great penaltie. The Frenche kynge conſyderynge the ſtate of his chyldren, Miſhappes of the frēche kyng. whiche he had lefte pledges in Spayne, and what euyll ſucceſſe he had of his warres in Italye, hauynge loſte bothe his Armie and alſo his chieftayne Latrechus. And more ouer Androwe de Aure of Genes, a Captaine of the Sea, moſte ſkylfull, who about the ſame tyme that Lantrech the Coronell dyed, reuolted from the Frenche kyng to the Emperour, reſtoryng his countrey vnto lybertie: he inclined hys mynde to peace. Wherfore at Cambrey a Cytie in Artoys, mette the Ladye Margaret, the Emperoures Aunte, and Ales the kynges The peace of Canbrey. mother, and many other Nobles, and emonges others, Erarde Marchiane, Cardinall and Byſhop of Liege, whyche concluded a peace in the moneth of Auguſte, wherein they recite the decree, which was

made thre yeare before in Spayne agaynſte the Lutherians, whiche they newely ratified: the other conditions were partely altered. For the Emperour permitteth the Frenche kyng to inioye Bourgundy in caſe he haue a ſonne by his ſiſter. And the kyng paieth vnto the Emperour for the delyuery of his ſonnes, twēty hōdreth thouſand crownes, accompting herein the debte dewe to the kyng of Englande. Not lōg after the Emperoure imbarked hym ſelfe in Spayne and arryued at Genes. At what time alſo Soliman the Emperour of Turkes, by the prouocation of Iohn Uaynode made by his Ambaſſadour Hierome Laſke, a Hongarian, a man of an excellent wytte, marcheth with an armie innumerable, through Hōgary into Auſtrice, and in the moneth of Septembre, layeth ſege to Uienna, the chief citie of that countrey. He aſſayed to vndermyne it, and where as he had ouerthrowen the The Turke beſegeth Uienna. walles, he gyueth the aſſaulte deſperatly: but ſeynge the Souldioues of the garnyſon, whiche were Germaines, whoſe chief captaine was Philip the Palſgrane, defendyng the breache moſte valiauntly by the ſpace of one moneth, about the eight day of Octobre, he raiſed his ſiege and departed without his purpoſe, many thouſandes of mē, in his retourne partely ſlayne, and partly lead away into myſerable and vyle captiuitie. At his departure he created the Uayuode, kynge at Buda. The ſweating ſicknes This yeare alſo was Germany ſore afflicted with a newe kynde of diſeaſe called the Sweathing ſicknes. Men were ſodainly takē with a peſtilent ſweate, and within foure and twenty howres eyther they died or amended. And before the remedye was knowen, many thouſandes peryſhed. It began at the Ocean ſea, and in a very ſmall tyme ſpred ouer all Germany, and with vnſpeakeable ſpede, lyke a fyre con
               
                  ••
               med all thynges farre and nere, it is called in Germany the Engliſh ſickenes. For in the firſt yeare of Henry the ſeuenth kyng of England, whiche was the yeare of our Lorde M .cccc. lxxxvj. the ſame death began in that Ilande, and becauſe in a new diſeaſe, the remedy was not knowen, it made a wounderful deſtruction. Moreouer this yere was ſmall plenty of wyne and corne: wherfore all thoſe thynges whiche God in his diſpleaſure is wonte to caſte vpon vnthankefull people (ſedition warre, ſycknes and penurie) were powred vpon Germany the Sondry plages. ſame tyme all at ones. The ſame tyme at Collen, Peter Fliſted, and Adolphe Clarebacke, two learned men were impryſoned for that, touchyng the lordes ſupper, and other opinions they beleued otherwyſe Two clerks brenct at Collon. than the papiſtes. The Senate of that citie hath authoritie, to leade to pryſon ſuche as be offendours, but the Archebyſhop only hath power of lyfe and death: And it maye be that whome the Senate hath condempned, the Archebyſhoppes officers may acquite and ſet at lybertie. but theſe men being deteyned in pryſon halfe a yere and more were nowe at the laſte condempned of both partes, and brent, to the great

lamentation and compaſſion of many. Some layde the blame therof in the diuines that were preachers, whiche cried out daily that Gods wrath muſt be appeaſed with the deathes of theſe wicked mē, for whō he plaged vs with a newe kynde of diſeaſe. This Adolphe was a well fauoured mā, learned and eloquent. And as they were lead to the fire, they declared the maner of their beleue, and comforted one another by the teſtimonies of ſcripture, in ſuche ſorte that all men had their eyes & mindes fixed vpon them. I ſhewed you before how Luther & Zwinglius, Luther and Zwinglius diſpuie at Marpurg. differed in opinion, touching the Lordes ſupper: And bycauſe there was muche contention about it, the Lantgraue found the meanes that the learned men on both parties, ſhould mete at a certen daye at Marpurge, to conferre vpon the matter frendlye: Out of Saxony came Luther, Melancthon and Ionas: From the Swycers Oecol
                  •
               
               padius, Zwynglius: From Strauſborough, Bucer, Hedio: From No rinberge, Oſiander. And beſydes theſe many graue and well learned men: but Luther and Zwynlius, only did reaſon the matter: But after that this forſayd diſeaſe, was then comen thether, they brake of the diſputation, by the commaundement of the Lantgraue, concludinge thus: That for as muche as they conſented in all the chiefeſt pointes of The maner of their agrement. their doctryne, it was agreed that frō henceforth they ſhould abſtaine from all contention, beſechyng God that he woulde ſhewe foorth hys lyght alſo in this controuerſie, and ſet them at a concorde. And thus they departed frendly. In the beginning of Octobre, you haue hearde howe the Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue, were about a league three yeare ſynce at Spires, and nowe after this decree was made, they intended the ſame more earneſtly, wherof a draught was drawē at Norenberge, and after debated, further more in other places, but becauſe they were not all of one opinion, touching the Lordes ſupper, it was long before they were accorded, wherfore they apoynted another aſſemblye at Smalcalde, at the eyght day of Decembre. What Eraſmus boke againſte Goſpelers. tyme Ceſar was arryued in Italye, Eraſmus of Roterdame, who for the alteration of Religion, and for the auoyde of ſuſpition, was gone from Baſyll to Frybourg, a towne of kyng Ferdinandos, in the moneth of Nouembre, ſet forth a booke intituled againſt them, that falſly boaſt them ſelues to be Goſpelers: but toucheth in dede the whole nū
               bre. For emonges many other thinges, he ſayeth he knewe not one of thē, whiche appeared not to be made worſe then he was before. This was aunſwered by the deuines of Strauſborough, whome it concerned moſt, and them of Baſill, but chiefly Bucer. When the Emperour was comme to Bononie, Fraunces Sfortia, whiche was before in Fraunces Sfortia. league with the byſhop of Rome and the Frenche kyng, after he had pleaded his cauſe before hym, was by the interceſſion of Clement the vij. reſtored to the Dukedome of Myllan, vpon condition to pay hym

nyne hondreth thouſande crownes, the one half the ſame yeare, the reſydue within ten yeares, and the Emperour for a pledge, reſerueth to hym ſelfe Comes, and the caſtell of Millan, vntyll the payment of the firſt yeare be made.
         
         
            
               ✚ The ſeuenth Booke of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the ſtate of Religion, and the common Weale, during the Empire of Charles the fyfte.
            
               
                  ❧ The argument of the ſeuenth Booke.
               THe Ambaſſadours of the Proteſtantes ſent to the Emperour, do appeale from the anſwere he made them at Placence, where they were ſtayed. Wherof being aduertyſed, the Proteſtantes aſſemble at Smalcade. Stauſborough entreth in to league with thre cyties of the Cautons. The Emperour returnyng from his coronation, commeth to Auſpurge, where the Proteſtantes offer their doctrine, whiche their aduerſaries go about to confute, and the meane whyle, certen are nominated to accorde it. The Emperour perſwadeth with Princes of the Proteſtantes, who notwithſtanding the threatnynges euyll wordes and replications there made, and the ſcaunders wherwith they were charged, perſiſted in their ſayde confeſſion, and hauyng geuen their laſt aunſwere, departe home. Eckius and Faber, forgyng of confutations againſt Straſborough and other townes, are lyberally rewarded. The compacte of Pruſelande was here made fruſtrate. The notable decree of this aſſemblie at Auſpurge, is red. The Ryuer of Tibre ouerfloweth at Rome. Melanchthon being heauy for this decree, is comforted of Luther, who was come nere vnto Auſpurge: Bucer went to agree hym and Zwynglius. Commaundement came to make Ferdinando kyng of Romaynes, whiche the electour of Saxony and other Prynces reſiſte.
            
            
               I Saide before howe the Proteſtantes ſent their Ambaſſadours to the Emperour. Thoſe were The Ambaſſadours of ye Proteſtants to the Emp. Iohn Khinger, Alex Framentrute, and Michaell Cadene of Norynbergh, which goyng as far as Genes, vnderſtode there of the Emperours commyng out of Spayne, and afterwardes the nynthe of Septembre at Placence, make theyr waye and meane by Mercurine Cattunarie, who was made Cardynall the daye before by Henry Earle of Naſſow, Alexander Schweiſſie, and Alphouſe Ualdeſe, a Spanyarde.

The Emperour appointed to heare them the .xii. of Septembre: Not withſtanding he warned them to compryſe their requeſtes in writing and to vſe no long circumſtance, for becauſe of his ſondrye and moſte weighty affayres. Whan they came before him at theyr day, he admoniſhed them eftſones by an interpretour, to knit vp the matter in fewe wordes. They in lyke caſe as they had in commaundement, repete in ordre the decree of the Empyre, made thre yeares paſt, that is newlye taken awaye by an other decree: whiche if it ſhoulde be of force, great trouble would come therof: Wherfor the Prince electour of Saxony, and his fellowes and the Cities, alſo ioynynge with them, dyd there proteſte openly that they would not conſent to this decree: And their requeſt is that he would not take this thyng diſpleaſauntly, or in euyl parte: For they wyll do nothyng vntyll ſuche tyme as there ſhall be a counſell, but that whiche they truſte, ſhal be allowed both before God and hym alſo: offeryng them ſelues in the meane tyme, after the example of their aunceſters, to doe any thynge for the wealth and dignitie of hym and of the Empyre, eyther to ſerue in the warres agaynſt the Turke, or in any other charge, they ſhall be put to: Moreouer they beſeche hym that in caſe it ſhall be reported to hym otherwyſe, he would gyue no credit therunto, but truſt vnto this information, and conceaue no diſpleaſure agaynſt thē, vnleſſe they be firſt heard to make their purgatiō: eſpecially, ſeyng they make alwayes offer, that if they maye be more ryght inſtructed by the ſcriptures, they wil do nothyng obſtinatly or againſt their dewty: Wherfore they deſyre hym to accepte thē in to his defence and protection, and as ſhortly as may be to aunſwer them mercyfully and louyngly by wrytyng: And becauſe the whole matter can not be declared by mouthe, as he hath alſo commaunded, therfore haue they comprehended in wrytyng, what thynge ſo euer is nedefull for the further knowledge of the matter, whiche they delyuer vnto him. the Emperour aunſwereth them by an interpretour, that he The Emperours aunſwere. hath heard what their ſute is, and lyketh well alſo the obſequiens ſeruyce, that they offer in theyr Prynces behalfe, wherfore whan he hath talked with his counſell, he wyll make them an aunſwer reaſonable. Fynally the twelth of Octobre, he gaue them an aunſwere in writing as their requeſt was. That he vnderſtode by kyng Ferdinādo his brother, and the reſidue in commiſſion with hym, of the decree made at Spyres, before thei came to him. and howe he is ryght ſory for the diſſention that is amongeſt them. And for as muche as it is his dewtie to forſee that ſuche thynges happen not, or at the leſte whan they are chanced, to ſee them refourmed, therfore after longe delyberation, had with priuie counſell of the whole matter, he findeth howe the ſame decree was made, to the intent nothyng hereafter ſhould be altered, that there ſhould be no place for any newe ſecte from henceforth, as there

be many al ready euyll fauoured enough, and that peace and concorde myght be had throughout the Empyre: Therfore the Duke of Saxon and his fellowes, ought of ryght to haue conſented to al theſe thinges: for both he and other Prynces, ſet as muche by the healthe of theyr ſoules, and tranquillitie of their conſciences, as they doe: And he for his parte, no leſſe deſyreth a generall counſell, for a ſtaye to the common wealth, than they do: whiche not withſtandyng were not all together ſo nedefull, if the lawes and decres (as that of Woormes and others whiche are made by comon aſſente of all ſtates) myght be obſerued, as they them ſelues wyll graunte that ſuche decrees oughte to be fyrme and ſtable: Whiche thynge conſidered, and ſeyng that the vſe and cuſtome is, that loke what the more parte of the ſtates of the Empyre do decree, the ſame may not be diſolued by a fewe perſones, therfore hath he in his letters to the Duke and his fellowes commaunded them, that they doe accepte this decree as ratiſfied, and attempte nothyng againſt it, but obeye the ſame vpon theyr allegeaunce that they owe vnto hym and the Empyre: If not, it wyll come to paſſe that for aucthoritie and examples ſake, he muſt punyſhe them extremely: but he ſuppoſeth that his letters be already delyuered vnto them, or wylbe ſhortelye, and that they wyll obey his cōmaundemēt, wherof he wold be ryght glad, eſpecialy at this tyme, wherin he is credibly infourmed, howe the great Turke (the common ennemy of chriſtendom) is at this preſent marchynge through Hongarye with all his power into Germanye. Daunger of the Turke. Wherfore it were now requyſite to haue domeſtical concorde, to the intēt this myghty and cruell ennemy myght be repulſed, againſt whome he intendeth, ſo ſone as he ſhal haue ſtayed all thynges in Italy, to bende all his force and power. wherfore he truſteth, that they conſyderyng well the daunger, wyll doe that: whiche they are bounden of dutie. What tyme the Ambaſſadours had red this aunſwere, The Ambaſſadours appeale. they delyuered an appellation, whiche was ready made to Alexander Schneiſſie, callyng wytnes to the thyng, as the maner is. Who at the fyrſt would not receyue it, but in fyne he was content to take it, and caried it to the Emperoure, and the ſame daye at after none he retourneth, and hauyng ended his other talke, he ſayeth howe the Emperour commaundeth them, not to ſtyre one foote out of their Inue, that they wryte nothing home, nor ſende any of their men, til he bring them further newes, in payne of for fayting life & goodes, if they ſhould do other wyſe. Why left this charge was geuen, it fortuned yt Michaell Cadene, was not within his lodging, and being hereof immediatlye certified by a ſeruant, he wryteth the whole matter to the Senate of Norinberge, and diſpatcheth awaye his letters with great expedition for he was not bounde vpon fidelitie as his fellowes were. At the length the laſt daye ſauyng one, of Octobre, at Parma, whether they

were cōmaūded to folowe Nicolais Granuellane, who executed the office of Cardinall Mercurine lieng ſicke, ſhe weth them, that all be it Grāunulane The Emperour taketh in euyll parte the appellation that was ſent hym, yet doth he neuertheleſſe permytte them to retourne home in to their countrey: But he commaundeth Michaell Cadene to remayne ſtyll vnder payne of death, if he diſobeye: the cauſe wherof is this.
            The Lantgraue when he came forth had geuen hym a booke fayre garnyſhed, whiche conteyned briefly the ſomme of the Chriſtiane doctryne to the intent he ſhould delyuer it to the Emperour. He vpon an occaſion when Ceſar went to Maſſe did preſent it, and the Emperour A boke preſented to the Emperour. agayne delyuered it to a certen Spanyſhe Byſhop, to vnderſtande what it was. He fortuned to lyght on the ſame place, where as Chriſt warneth his Diſciples that they deſyre not ſoueraignitie, for the ſame is not theyr profeſſion, but the kynges of the gentyls doe vſurpe vnto them ſuch authoritie: that place had the authour emōges other things expounded, declaryng the dutie of ſuche as be miniſters of the church, but he lokyng vpon it ſuperficially, when the Emperour aſked hym The honeſte of a byſhoy. what it was, he made aunſwere as though the booke toke away the authoritie of the ſworde from the Chriſtian Magiſtrate, and permitteted only the Gentyls to vſe it, whiche were farre from the Chriſtian Religion. And for this cauſe was he ſtayed, Granuellan ſayde this moreouer howe the Emperoures pleaſure was, that he ſhoulde delyuer the lyke booke to the Byſhop of Rome: And where he ſought to excuſe his doynges, and receyued no pleaſaunt aunſwer, perceyuyng by the wordes of Granuclane, what dannger he was in, he tooke his horſe priuely and roode to Farrare in poſte, and from thence goyng to Uenyſe, retourned home. When the Senate of Norenbergh, had receyued Cadenes letters before mentioned, immediatly, they certified the Duke of Saxon, the Lantgraue, & theyr fellowes therof, the. xxiiij of Octobre: the matter being debated, they agreed to mete at Smalcaldia, about the ende of Nouēbre. Thyther came the Duke of Saxon An aſſemble at Smalcald and Iohn Frederick his ſonne. Erneſte and Frances, brethren Dukes of Lunenburgh, Philip the Lantgraue, and certen counſellers of George Markes of Brandenburgh, moreouer theſe cities: Strauſborough, Norinberge, Heilprune, Rutelynge, Conſtance, Menynge, Campodune, Ulmes and Lindaue. It is mentioned before how the Prynces and certen of theſe Cities differed in opinion touchynge the Lordes ſupper, wherfore they of Strauſborough had already made a league, with them of Zuricke, Bernes, and Baſyll, whiche were A league of thē of Stranſborough, Zuricke and Bernes. both nerer vnto them, and accorded better in Religion, to the intent they myght at all tymes be able to defende them ſelues from iniurye. The condicions were, that if they ſhoulde be attempted with force of armes for Religion ſake, that then thoſe cities ſhould ſende ayde and

men, as many as ſhalbe requiſite, yet ſo that they of Strauſborough, ſhall gyne vnto euery thouſand of fote men, two thouſād crownes by the moneth, in parte of recompence. Agayne if it be their chaunce to be firſt aſſauted, the citie of Strauſborough ſhal ayde them with no mē, but with thre thouſand crownes euerye moneth, whyleſt the warre ſhall endure. Moreouer if their ennemies be founde in any part of the others dominions, not to eſcape free, but to ſuffer accordinge to the lawe of Armes. If they ſhall be warred vpon all at ones, then euerye cytie to beare theyr owne charges: Strauſborough ſhall in tyme of peace, ſende vnto Zuricke when they may conuenientlye, ten thouſande poundes of gunne powder, and as many raſers of Wheate, vnto Baſyll: Wherof ſhall be nothyng ſpent, but in tyme of warre, then to delyuer it out to the townes men, vpon a reaſonable price. If they ſhall come to ayde them of Strauſborough, they maye ſpende of the powder ſo muche as ſhall be nedefull: and in the warre common to them both, they to paye the one halfe for the ſame.
            This league was made for fyftene-yeares, the fyft daye of Ianuary. When this was knowen, Fridericke Palatyne, preſydent of the The chambre wryteth to Strauſh. counſell imperiall, addreſſed his letters vnto them aboute the ende of the ſame moneth, ſignifiyng howe it is commonly reported that they haue made a league with certen townes in Swycerlande: whereat he marueyleth not a lyttle that they whiche are bounden to the Empyre, ſhould enter into league with others without the conſent of the Emperour, and the ſtates of the Empyre, and all be it that moſte men affirme it to be trewe, yet wyll not he credite the thynge, before he ſhal vnderſtande it by them ſelues. Wherfore he requyreth them to declare playnely by wryting vnto hym (whiche repreſenteth the place of the Emperour) what the league is, and what conditions they are agreed vpon. The Proteſtauntes had appoynted an other aſſemblye at Norinberge, The Proteſtantes aſſē
                  ble at Norinberge. whyther came the Ambaſſadours of certen Prynces and cyties, who for ſo muche as it was thought howe the Emperour would call a counſell ſhortly, agreed vpon this only, that in the meane tyme they ſhould conſulte what to propounde in the ſame, and euerye moneth, to aduertyſe the Duke of Saxon, what thynges they thought mete, that the reſte myght vnderſtande it by hym.
            And thus departed the fourth Ides of Ianuarye. In the meane whyle the Emperour, whiche was come to Bononye the fyfte daye of Nouembre, the one and twentye daye of Ianuarye, diſpatchynge An aſſemble at Auſpurg. his letters into Germanye, ſommoned a parliament of all ſtates at Auſpurge, the eyght daye of Apryll chyefiy for the cauſe of Religion, & The Emperours coronatiō at Bonony. the Turky ſhe warre. After the foure and twenty daye of Februarye, he was not wtithout great pompe and ſolempnitie, inueſted by the Byſhop of Rome, whan he had fyrſt taken his othe, to be the cōtinuall

defendour of the Byſhoppes dignitie: Before he came at Bononye, as he ſhould enter within the lymites of the byſhoppes iuriſdiction, there were three Cardinalles ſent by the byſhop of Rome, to demaunde and take his fidelitie, that he ſhould neuer do any iniury to the libertie of yt churche. He aunſwered in ſuch ſorte as he declared, that he would loſe no part of his right ſignifiyng ſecretly, that Parme and Placence, belonging to the Dukedome of Millan, whiche townes the churche of Rome poſſeſſed at the ſame tyme. Departing out of Bononie, he created Fridericke, Duke of Mantua. In tymes paſt Mantua was a free citie of the Empyre, but afterwardes being ſore afflicted with vprores & ciuile tumultes, they choſe Lewys Gonzaga to be their gouernour, for expulſyng of a Tyraunt called Paſſeryne, the yeare of our Lorde M .ccc. xxvii. whoſe nephewes ſonne Iohn Frances, the Emperoure Sigiſmunde created Marques, the yeare .M.cccc.xxxiiij. the ſeconde daye of Septembre, and remayneth in the ſame eſtate vntil this time. The firſt that came to Auſpurge, was the Duke of Saxony, with his ſonne Iohn Fridericke: in the trayne that came behynde, was Philip Melaucthō, Ihon Iſelbe Agricola, Iuſtus Ionas, and George Spalatine, the cytie Ulmes, ſent to mete and welcome the Emperour, but The diuines of yt proteſt. they were longe or they myght be ſuffered to come to his ſpeche, in fine he requyred them to renounce the proteſtation of the yeare before, and promeſſe to be obedient from henceforth. The men of Auſpurge had muſtered eyght hondreth footemen, to kepe their Towne: whan the Emperour hearde of it, he commaunded them to be diſcharged, and he appoynteth and ſweareth others in theyr ſteade, & requyred one gats of the Cytie to be delyuered vnto hym, certen dayes before that he came thether. Cattinarie that was newly made Cardinall, dyed this tyme at Iſprouke, and Granuellane had his rowme. And about this The lady Eleuour commeth into Fraunce. tyme alſo, the ladye Elenor with the kynges two ſonnes Fraunces and Henry, whiche had bene pledges for their father in Spayne foure yeares, came nowe home into Fraunce. After a whyle that the byſhop had inueſted themperour, he ſent vnto king Ferdinādo, Peter paulle Uerger, his legate, with great authoritie: Unto whome he gaue in cō
               maundemēt eſpecially to deuiſe with Ferdinando, that he ſhuld endeuour Uergerius yt popes ambaſſadour. to let & hinder yt prouincial coūſel of Germany yt in no wyſe there ſhould any be holden. He handleth his cōmiſſiō right diligently & ſeketh al meanes poſſible to hynder the Lutherians, and extended his lyberalitie towardes Iohn Faber, Eckius, Chocleus, and Nanſeas, that they ſhould play the men: and made Eckius a Cannon of Ratiſbonne, as the biſhops legate, in whoſe preſence, the right of Election ceaſſeth. the Emperour came to Auſpurg at the Ides of Iune, and in his company the Cardinall Campegius with the byſhoppes full authoritie. The Emperour had purpoſed to haue rydē into the citie in the middes

ther Ferdinando and the Cardinall, but becauſe it was againſt the maner of the Empyre, the Archebyſhop of Mentz and Collen, rode before hym, and after hym Ferdinando and Campegius. The nexte day was Corpus Chriſti day: the Emperour therfore wēt deuoutly to the churche, and the Cardinall of Mentz ſayde Maſſe. All the Prynces were preſent, except the Duke of Saxon, the Lantgraue, the two Dukes of Lunenboroug, George of Brandenburge, and the Countie Anholde. The princes that woulde not heare Maſſe. The Emperour in dede had both wylled them to be there, and to put their preachers to ſilence: but thei neither came them ſelues, nor yet impoſed ſilence to their preachers, which they ſayd they could not, for as muche as the ſame aſſemblie was appointed to the intent al mē might ſpeake their conſciences. Two dayes after was a proclamation made, that the preachers on both ſydes ſhould kepe ſilence, til the cauſe of religion were decided, notwithſtanding howe the Emperour in the meane time, ſhould appointe certen that ſhould preache without the reproche of any mā, this was proclaimed by the herault, vnder a great penaltie. The twenty of Iune, the parliament began, and the Emperour goyng to heare Maſſe, as the maner is, cōmaundeth the Duke of Saxon to be there, & to beare the ſworde before him. For that is the of The office of the Duke of Saxon. fice of the houſe of Saxon in ſuch Solēnities: he aſked the aduiſe of yt preachers, who ſaid, how that, he might be there preſent, for as muche as he was called forth to do his office. Then wēt he not to heare maſſe as gods ſeruice, but to execute his office, accōpanied wt George Marques of Brandenburg: none of the reſt came there, from maſſe he came to the court of parliamēt. There Frederick coūte Palatin, excuſeth the long abſēce of themperour, & repeteth the cauſes of the calling of that aſſēblie. After this was recited a lōg oration writtē (as the maner is) wherī was aſwel declared the cauſe of themperours departure out of Germany into Spayne, & of his lōg abode there, as alſo of his returne now, & the callīg of this aſſēblie, which is inſtituted chiefly for two cauſes, thone for eſtabliſhing of religiō, for the which ſins his depature, he hath heard to his great griefe, what tumultes and commotions haue bene in Germany, the other for the Turkyſhe warre, cōſidering what turmoyle of late the Turkes haue made in Hongary taken Beigrade, The Turks victorye in Hongary. and many other fortes & caſtels, ſlayne kynge Lewis, & wonne all the towres & fortreſſes, betwixt the riuers of Saue & Draue, ſpoyled and brent the whole countrey, & ſlayne of mē ful many a thouſād, how ſins that alſo they haue inuaded Slauonie, lieng aboue the Goulfe of Ueniſe, from whence, after they had doue exceadynge muche miſchiefe, in ſlaughter, burnyng, ſpoylyng, deſtroying, and rauyſhynge, they led awaye .xxx. thouſande in to moſte myſerable captiuitie, and howe this laſte yeare they made an incurſion into Auſtriche with an Armye

innumerable, and beſeged the chiefe citie Uienna, deſtroyed the countrey farre and nere, tyll they came almoſte to Lincie, workyng all the crueltie that coulde be imagined, cuttinge a ſondre in the myddes, yonge infantes, deffouring and rauyſhing yong maidens and wyues, and driuing them awaye before them, lyke a ſorte of beaſtes: At the whiche tyme he was fully determyned to haue cōmen with his whole The Turks crueltie. power againſt them, and ſo he wrote to his brother Ferdinando, & the Prynces and captaynes, that were beſeged in Uienna, that they ſhoulde defende it valeauntly, and loke certenly for his commyng, but hearyng that the Turke had leuid his ſege, he chaunged his purpoſe, ſuppoſyng it moſte requiſite to ſette all thynges at quiet in Italy, and to conferre with byſhop Clement, for the eſtablyſhyng of religion here in Germany: to the intent yt peace and cōcorde, and one vniformitie of Religion had in all places, the Turke may the better be reſyſted of all handes, and ſtronger armies ſent againſt hym, than haue bene: For al be it he toke not Uienna at this preſent, but caried his Armie back agayne, yet lefte he behynde hym in the borders, garyſons and captaines, not only to vexe Hongary, but Auſtriche alſo and Stiria and all other places nere: And ſeyng that he hath his limites extended vnto ours, there is no doubte, but at the next occaſiō he wyll retourne with a greater power to the vtter deſtruction of all, eſpecially Germanye: wherfore to be very neful & requiſite to cōſulte nowe how that houge and cruell ennemy, whiche ſeketh to brynge all men vnder his ſubiection, yea to bannyſhe them quyte out of the bondes of nature, may not only be reſiſted, repulſed, and diſcomfited: but alſo ſubdued, vāquiſhed, and dryuen out of all Europe. Wherunto we haue nede to be contributaries for greater ayde of Men and mony, the highe byſhop hath promyſed him for his parte largely and liberally, and although he hathe bene at all the charges of his coronation at Bononie him ſelfe alone, whiche hath coſt hym a great quantitie of treaſure, yet in ſo holye and neceſſary a buſineſſe, he wyll doe that, whiche ſhall become his eſtate: and lykewyſe his brother kyng Ferdinando, whiche is nowe ſet forth as a ſtrong bulwarke of chriſtendom, but chiefly of Germany, to flāke the Turkyſhe rage. And alſo other kynges and Prynces, wil not faile to helpe vs, wherin he hath wrytten to ſome alreadye and wyll be in hande with the reſte: And where there hath bene diſſention in religiō euer ſynce, the firſt begynnyng of his empyre, to his great diſcomforte, he according to his office and dutie, intendyng to prepare a remedy in tyme, made a decree at Wormes by their common aſſentes, whiche if it had bene obſerued, Germany had not bene theſe yeares paſt ſo ſore afflicted: with the ſedicion of the commonaltie and the wycked ſecte of the Anabaptiſtes: And where as at ſondry aſſemblies touchyng the ſame, nothynge coulde be concluded hytherto, thinkyng that his preſens

ſhoulde be auayleable herein, he hath called this aſſemblie to the intent that euery man may herein propounde what he wil in writing, that the matter may ſo muche the ſoner and more eaſely be vnderſtāde and determined, and that he wyll both in this and all other cauſes of the Empyre, do that thynge that ſhall concerne his office and dewtie, for the loue he beareth to the common wealth and countrey, and requyreth that all others, would bryng hyther with them the lyke mind and affection euery man for his parte. The Prynces after deliberatiō taken, iudged it mete firſt to treate of relygion. The fourth daye after in the conſiſtory before the Emperour and the other Prynces, Cardinall The oration of Cardinall Campega. Campege made an oration in Latin, exhorting the whole numbre there preſent, that in matters of religion, they would folowe and obey the Emperour, commending his vertue and deuotiō: And that he wil in the name of the high byſhop do his endeuoure, that all maye profeſſe one and the ſame fayth that their mindes being reconciled, they might moue warre againſt the Turke. This done the Ambaſſadours of Auſtriche The cōplaiſ of the Ambaſſadour of Auſtriche. come in and declare what an ouerthro we they haue had by the Turke, and deſyre ayde. After this the Marques George, the electour of Saxony, the Dukes of Lunenburge, and the Lantgraue, intreate the Emperour, that he would heare the confeſſion of their doctrine compryſed in wrytinge: he commaundeth the writing to be exhibited, The confeſſion of the proteſtantes and layde downe: agayne thei for as muche as the ſame thing concerneth their eſtimatiō, their lyfe, landes, and goodes, and alſo their euerlaſting ſaluation, and for becauſe happely the thyng hathe bene other wyſe reported vnto hym than it is in dede, requyre hym inſtantlye to be heard. The Emperour, commaundeth them to come home to his houſe the next daye, but the wryting to be deliuered hym nowe. They agayne vrge hym and beſeche hym as earneſtlye as they could deuiſe: ſaying howe they had thought ful little, that this ſhould haue bene denyed them, ſeing that he is content to heare others, that be their inferiours muche, in matters of leſſe importaunce. But when he would alter nothyng of his purpoſe, they requyre him to leaue them their boke, tyll ſuche tyme as it hath bene read opēly: which graunted, they came the next daye, and in the audience of all the Prynces and ſtates, the Emperour hym ſelfe being preſent, recite it ouer: Afterwardes they delyuer it vnto hym wrytten bothe in Latin and Dutche, and if they ſhall doubte in any thyng, they offer a further declaration, and in caſe the matter can not be determined at this preſent, they do not refuſe to abyde the counſeell ſo often tymes promyſed and looked for. The Emperour, whiche had layne all the wynter from Nouembretyl March at Bononie in the ſame place with the biſhop of Rome, endeuoured as muche as he myght to appeaſe this controuerſie in Religion without a counſel. For by this meanes he knewe he ſhould pleaſe Clement beſt,

whoſe intent was, that in caſe the matter could not be quieted by gē
               tle meanes, it ſhuld be oppreſſed by force of armes. Therfore the .xxvj. of June he calleth before him in his owne hous, the Ambaſſadours of al cities, & declareth vnto them by Frederick the Palſgraue, howe in the aſſemblye at Spires a decree was made, wherunto the moſte parte did conſent, where he was right glad: but that certen others contemned the ſame, for the which he was as ſory: Wherfore he requyred thē, not to ſwarue away from the reſt, orels to ſhewe the reaſon, why they ſhould not obey. Hereunto aunſwered the Ambaſſadours of the cities of Proteſtauntes, that they had done nothing contrary to their dutie: For they haue no leſſe deſyre, than their elders haue had, to perfourme their fayth and obedience: but where as he woulde knowe the cauſe why they dyd not admytte the decre, they deſyre ſome tyme to make aunſwer: and after the ſeuenth of Iuly, they put vp their aunſwere in wrytyng, in effecte lyke vnto that, whiche they ſent the yeare before, by their Ambaſſadours into Italy. Two dayes after that, the Emperour cauſeth one to demaunde of the Duke of Saxō and his felowes, whether they wyll exhibite any thynge more? They ſaye nothing els, but a brief ſomme of the ſame confeſſion, whiche they haue delyuered already. After he commaundeth the Ambaſſadours of the Cities, that where they ſaye, how they can not for conſcience ſake, kepe the decree of Spyres, they ſhould drawe articles briefly, of the thynges where with they founde them ſelues greued: And he delyuereth the confeſſiō of Saxonie, to the reſydue of the Prynces to be ſkanned. And they agayne, to their diuines, amonges whome Faber & Eckius were pryucipall. A conſultation of the Proteſtātes doctryne. Who wrote a confutation againſt it, whiche after the Prynces had heard red, many iudged it to be much extreme, and thought mete that certen ſhould be choſen, to reade ouer both their wrytynges, and to qualyfie them, but their opinion preuayled, whiche ſayde it ſhoulde thus be exhibyted to the Emperour, and the whole matter be referred vnto hym. In the meane tyme, they of Strauſborough, Conſtance, Memming, and Lindaue, preſent the Emperour with a confeſſion of A confeſſion of the Zwinglians. their doctryne. For touchyng the Lordes ſupper they beleued otherwyſe, than did the Duke of Saxon and his fellowes. The Emperour debatyng the matter with the byſhoppes Legate, framed an aunſwer to the doctrine of Saxon, and ſheweth it vnto the Prynces the fyrſte daye of Auguſt. The wyndyng vp of it was vehement and harde, cō
               maunding them to obſerue it vnder paine of outlawing: But through the coūſel ye of Prynces, this thing was mitigated: Wherfore the third daye of Auguſte, he ſendeth for al ſtates, and declareth to them by Frederick Palſgraue, how he hath long and much conſulted vpon the cō
               feſſion of the Saxons doctryne, how he hath alſo commaundeth certen honeſt and well learned men, to examyne it, and to iudge what is

Godly therin, and what is againſt the conſent of the churche: whiche they haue done accordingly and haue declared their myndes in an other wrytynge, whiche alſo he alloweth. After this was the confutation of the confeſſion rehearſed in this ordre. They had deuided the Saxons bookes in two partes. The firſt part conteined .xxj. chapters of doctrine: of theſe ſome they receiued, and ſome they reiected, certen thinges were partely admitted, and partly refuſed, alledginge manye teſtimonies out of the fathers and counſell. They forſoke theſe good Thinges refuſed. workes deſerue nothing: Iuſtification to be aſcribed to faith only: and not vnto workes, alſo that the churche is the congregatiō of the godly, that we can not make ſatiſfaction for ſinnes: that ſainctes be not interceſſours for vs, other thinges they admitte after a ſorte, as ceremonies, Matters receiued. moreouer that the true body and bloud of Chriſte was in the ſacrament, ſo as Chriſt ſhould be vnder both the kyndes, and the wyne and the bread, cleane chaunged: they allowed their articles of confeſſion, ſo that the people were bound to confeſſe them euery yere at Eaſter, tellyng all their ſynnes diligently, and receiue the Lordes ſupper, and beleue that there be ſeuen ſacramentes of the church: prouided alwayes that no man were appointed to inſtructe the people, but by the byſhoppes leaue and conſent. Moreouer that all lawes and decrees of the churche ſhould be obſerued, and in ſuche places as they be abolyſhed, be reſtored. The ſeconde parte comprehendeth fyue thynges chiefly, the communion of the Lordes ſupper vnder bothe kyndes, as they terme it, is reiected: and the Emperour deſyred, that herein they would followe the conſent and cuſtome of all Chriſtendome. For the marriage of Prieſtes, he ſayeth it is to hym maruell they wyll requyre it, ſyns it was neuer vſed, from the Apoſtles tyme vnto this day: wherfore it may in no wyſe be graunted: Their Maſſe is admitted, ſo that That the Maſſe is a ſacrifice. it be conſonant to the vſe of the Romane churche: But in caſe it be altered, it is reiected: and alſo affirmed, that the Maſſe is a ſacryfice for the quicke and the dead, neyther that the priuate Maſſe oughte to be abolyſhed: For Daniell had prophecied long before, that when Antichriſte ſhoulde come, the dayly offeryng ſhoulde ceaſe: whiche thyng is A fayre expoſition of Daniel. not yet come to paſſe, ſaue only in ſuch places where the Maſſe is layd downe, and the Aulters deſtroyed, the Images brent, in the whyche churches nothyng is ſonge nor read, nor no lyghtes burne any longer, there in deede is the ſaying of the Prophet repreſented and verified: Wherfore all men muſt take dilygent hede, that they geue none occaſion, of the comyng of Antichriſte: the monaſticall vowes to be grounded aſwell vpon the authoritie of the newe Teſtament, as of the olde, wherfore they deſerue punyſhement whiche contrary to their profeſſion, haue forſaken their ordre: That the biſhop haue authoritie not only to teache, but alſo to gouerne the common wealth, & therfore ought

not to be abridged of their ryght and priuilege, whiche they haue obteyned through the liberalitie of their elders. Not to abſtayne from fleſhe on dayes forboden, not to faſte in the Lent ceaſon, not to cōfeſſe Good ghoſtly fathers. their ſynnes, is an obſtinate frowardnes, and not Chriſtian lybertie. Theſe beyng recyted, they confeſſed howe there were many thynges, that woulde be refourmed: The Emperour promyſeth to doe his endeuour, that both theſe thynges maye be redreſſed, and the ſtate of the churche alſo refourmed, & ſayeth, howe he truſteth ſurely, for as muche they are agreed vpon dyuerſe thynges, that the Proteſtantes wyl retourne to the boſome of the churche, and ſubmitte them ſelues vnto hym: whiche if they doe, there is nothynge but they maye be bolde to craue and loke for at his hande: but if not, then muſt he nedes do as becometh the protectour and defendour of the churche. Wherunto the Prynce of Saxony aunſwered for him ſelfe and his fellowes. For as muche as they promiſed at the fyrſt, that if they went about the reconſiliation of Religion, they woulde then doe what ſo euer they myghte with a ſaufe conſcience: Moreouer if that any errour coulde be founde in their doctrine, and proued by the teſtimonies of Scripture, they would not ſtande in it: furthermore that if they requyred a further declaration, it ſhould be geuen: And nowe ſeynge that of this their doctryne, ſome articles be admytted, and ſome refuſed: it is requiſite, that they ſhoulde confyrme theyr thynges the more playne and manifeſt reaſons: wherfore they deſyre to haue a copie of the confutation. After two dayes, when the Emperour had taken long delyberation, he ſayde they ſhoulde haue a copie, but vnder this condition, that they ſhould put forth no part therof in prynte: Alſo he wyll haue no further diſputation in the matter, requyryng them to be ordered by hym: but they ſhewe hym howe they can not receyue it vppon that condition. The next daye whiche was the ſyxt of Auguſt, the Lantgraue departed The Lantgraue departeth from Auſpurg. from thence with a ſmall company, leauing his deputes. The Emperour toke this diſpleaſauntly, and commaunded the Senate that they ſhoulde ſuffer none to departe out of the Citie by the poſternes in the nyght ceaſon. And the nexte daye ſendyng for the Duke of Saxon and his fellowes, he diſſembled not his diſpleaſure, requyryng them to tary tyll the later ende: and he wyll do what he can to make a cōcord. They excuſe the Lantgraue by his wyues ſycknes, and ſhewe hym howe he hath lefte his deputes, and ſaye that they wyll not departe: Notwithſtandynge they maruell to ſee the gates kept with watche & warde: For it hath not ben thus accuſtomed in any aſſemblye of the Empyre. Ceſar excuſeth the matter, to be done ſor a murther committed, and for the diſſention that is betwene the Germaynes and Spanyardes: but if any lyke trouble chaunce hereafter, he wyl do nothing therein without makyng hym fyrſt priuie to it, whiche is high Marſchall

of the Empyre. The Duke anſwereth, that if any thyng happen wherin his duty is requyred, he wyll be ready, as it be commeth hym: Duke of Saxon Marſchall of the Empyre. And ſo were the warders remoued from the gates the ſame daye. About this tyme ended the warre of Florence, wherof I ſhal ſomewhat declare by the waye. What tyme Rome was ſacked as I ſayd before, and the byſhop taken, the Florentines expulſed the houſe of Medices, and after ayded the Frenchemen at the ſege of Naples. But when the byſhop was reſtored, to the intent he myght reuenge his kynſfolkes, The warre of Florence ſending his Ambaſſadours into Spayne, made a league with the Emperour, promyſing him emonges other thinges to crowne hym, in caſe he wyll punyſhe the Florentynes, after their demerites. The Emperour The Pope made a league with ye Emperour. was content, and ſhortly after arriueth at Genes. Thyther came the Ambaſſadours of Florence to craue pardon. Unto whome Ceſar after he had ſore blamed them, made this aunſwere. Albeit they had deſerued great punyſhement, yet might their fact be pardoned, in caſe they would receiue againe the byſhop of Rome, for other way is there none, to haue peace. When they were come home with this anſwere, after that the matter longe and muche debated, the opinion of one or two preuayled, whiche ſayde they would defende their lybertie, to the vttermoſte of their power, and inferred that not only the byſhop, but alſo the Emperour hym ſelfe was through long warres muche impoueryſhed and wanted money. Notwithſtāding, whan the Emperour was come to Bonony, thei ſent other Ambaſſadours, but thei through the byſhoppes counſel, would not be receiued. Wherfore being beſeged with the armies of the biſhop of Rome: and the Emperour, whan they had prolonged the warres, almoſte by the ſpace of one yere: In the moneth Florence rendred. of Auguſt, they fell to a compoſition with Ferdinando Gonzago, the Emperours general of his armie. Afterwardes the Emperour addreſſing his moſte effectuall letters, appointed Alexander Medices, (vnto whome he had promyſed Margaret his baſtarde daughter in marriage) to be their Prince and ruler. And he builded there a maruelous ſtrong Caſtell, the begynning of their ſeruitude and bondage. Florence loſeth her libertie. When the towne was ones rendred, the byſhop of Rome Clement, chopped of the heades of certen of the Senatours and ſet a new ordre in the commune wealth, being aſſured that Alexander ſhould be their gouernour, according to the Emperours promiſe. Now to our purpoſe agayne. After muche debatinge, at the Ides of Auguſt, ſeuen were choſen on eche ſyde to frame the matter to a concorde. Of the chatholyke ſyde were theſe, the Byſhop of Auſpurg, Henry Duke of Brunſwike, Certen choſen to accord Religion. two lawayers, and thre deuines, Wimpine, Eckius, & Cocleus: of the Proteſtātes, George Marques of Brādenburg Iohn Friderick of Saxon, two Lawyers, thre diuines, Melancthon, Brentius, and Schnepſius. Theſe agreed vpon diuerſe thinges, but their chief controuerſie

was about the Maſſe, the marriage of Prieſtes, the Lordes ſupper, monaſticall vowes, and the iuriſdiction of Byſhoppes, but eſpecially for the Maſſe, and Uotaries, for herein woulde the catholikes nothyng at all relent: For other matters, though they dyd myſlyke them, yet they ſayde, myght be ſuffered vntyll the counſell: They permitted alſo prieſtes to haue wyues, ſuche as were maried already, but others not, all this for auoyding of further trouble: touchyng the power and Iuriſdiction of byſhoppes, they of Saxony graūted more, than the Lantgraues men, the Dukes of Lunenburgh, or they of Norinberge, would allowe. Then toke they a leſſe numbre, on eyther ſide thre. Melancthon, with the two Ciuiliās, and Eckius with as many. But in fyne they could not agree. Whyleſt they were conſulting together, the Emperour doth ſolicite George the Marques of Brandenburge, by the byſhop of Mentz and others of the ſame familie, and the The Proteſtantes were laboured. Duke of Saxon, by Friderick Palſgraue, the Erle of Naſſo, and by George Truckeſſe, that thei ſhould leaue of their enterpriſe. He ſought to drawe awaye the Duke of Saxon from the reſte as pryncipal, and where he deſyred to be inueſted in his Duckdome after the cuſtome of the Empyre, he denied it, vnleſſe he would firſt reconcile him ſelf to the churche of Rome: and tolde to the other playnely that vnleſſe he wold obeye, he would take from him the wardſhyp of his nephewe Albert the ſonne of his brother Caſimire. And they went about to perſwade with the Lantgraue, that in caſe he would agree vnto the Emperour, Ulriche the Duke of Wyrtemberge, ſhould be reſtored, and that an agrement myght be had by the Emperours meanes, betwene hym and the Erle of Naſſoe, for the rule of Chattes. In this Aſſemblie the byſhop of Rome had graunted to kyng Ferdinando, all maner of Plate and ornamentes of golde and ſyluer, of all the churches in Germany, for the Turkyſhe warre, and alſo to take a ſubſydie of the clergie, but the Princes woulde not ſuffer it, ſollicityng the Emperour to make yt decree fruſtrate. The .xviij. of Auguſt, Eraſmus of Roterdame, wryteth to Cardinall Campegius from Friburge. Howe the Emperours Eraſmus writeth to Campegius power is in dede great, but all men doe not acknowledge this name: The Germanes do ſo acknowledge it, that they rule, rather thē obey: Luthers doctryne is ſowen abroade throughout Germany farre and neare, in ſo muche that the chayne of this miſchiefe reacheth from the Ocean ſea, vnto the vttermoſte borders of Swycerlande. Nowe if the Emperour ſhall attempt to accomplyſhe the byſhop of Romes deſyre in all thynges, it is to be feared, leſt he ſhall haue but fewe to commende his doinges: Moreouer in what great daunger of the Turke we ſtande in, whoſe power all the force of Europe is ſkant able to reſyſte: The Power of the Turk And what a thynge it is to fyght with vnwyllyng ſouldiours, it is manyfeſt by mo examples than one. The Emperour doubtleſſe is of

nature inclyned to peace. Neuertheleſſe by a certen deſteny haled and inforced to warres. Fraunce and Italy, haue bene ſore afflicted wyth warre nowe of many yeares. But this warre wyll doe more harme than all the reſte, if it be not well forſeen: Men are commonly perſwaded, that all theſe thynges are done through the inſtigation and counſell of the hyghe byſhop. But the feare is, leſt a great parte of the peril, redounde to the Emperour him ſelfe: Thei that loue ſectes, are in dede worthy of punyſhement, but yet ought rather a reſpecte to be had, for the preſeruation of the common wealth: The ſtate of the churche was in tymes paſt full miſerable, whan the Arrians, Pagans, Donatiſtes, and the Manycheis, ſowed abroade their opinions, and alſo the Barbarous nations made warre. Notwithſtandyng it waded out of all theſe daungers at the length. For verely tyme it ſelfe wyl at laſte bring remedy alſo, vnto moſt daungerous diſeaſes. The Bohemers were The Bohemers. borne with al, though they did not acknowledge the byſhop of Rome. If the ſame were alſo permitted to the Lutheriās, it were not amiſſe, in his conceipt: and all be it this were verye muche, yet were it a great deale leſſe euyll than warre. The ſeuent daye of Septembre, the Emperour ſendeth for home to his houſe all the Pryntes and ſtates catholicke about none: And two houres after for the duke of Saxōs and his fellowes, and commaunding all others aſyde, ſauyng his brother Ferdinando, the byſhoppes of Conſtance, and Hiſpalia, Granuellan and Truckeſſe, he ſpeaketh by Fredericke Palſgraue on this wyſe: how he The Empeoracion to ye Proteſtātes. had truſted aſſuredly, that beyng ſo frendly and gently warned, after their confeſſion exhibited, they would haue taken his parte. And all be it that his hope was in vaine, yet at the requeſt of the Princes he was content, that certen ſhould be choſen on eyther partie, to conferre and to make an agrement. And thus was he brought agayne in to a newe hope of a concorde. But nowe he vnderſtandeth to his great grief that they diſſente from the others in the chiefeſt opinions, whiche is cleane contrary to his expectation, for he wold neuer haue thought, that they beyng ſo fewe in numbre, wold haue induced ſuche newe fanglednes, againſt the auncient & ſacred cuſtome of the whole vniuerſal churche, or chouſe vnto them ſelues a ſeuerall religion ſo farre differinge frō the biſhops of Romes religion & his, from king Ferdinandos & al the princes & ſtates of the Empire, yea & from all the kinges and princes of the whole worlde. But now for as much as their deſire is to haue a generall counſel & here to haue a quiet decree made, he whiche chiefly coueteth quietnes, wyll deuiſe with the byſhop of Rome and other chriſtiā Prynces, to haue one called ſo ſoone as they can agree vppon a place: This wyll he vndertake to brynge to paſſe, but yet vnder this condition, that in the meane tyme, they ſhall obſerue the ſame Religion, that

he and other Prynces doe: For to procure a counſell, and to ſuffer this gere to hange waueringe, and not to prohibite this newe fanglednes, euery man ſayeth plainely howe ſore and preiudiciall it woulde be to hym, and others. They make an delyberate aunſwere, that neyther Their aunſwere to the Emperour. they haue brought vp newe ſecte, nor ſwarued frō the Chriſtian churche. In that he refuſed not a counſell, they gyue hym great thankes, deſyryng hym that ſo ſhortely as is poſſible, there maye be had in Germany a lawfull and a free counſell, as in the laſte and former aſſemblye of Spyres it was agreed vpon. But to receiue again the ceremonies of the Romyſhe churche ones aboliſhed, they can not, with a good conſcience. The Emperour after long conſultation aunſwereth them agayne by Truckeſſe, that he hath red ouer diligently all their diſceptation, and fyndeth that they ſwarue very muche from the Chriſtian churche: Marueylyng alſo at the lyghtnes of the other parte, that they would graunte to ſo muche, and agayne at their ſtyffenes that would not take theyr offer. And where they craue a counſell by the decrees of the Empyre, it can take no place in them, which refuſed the laſt decree, proteſted againſt it, and appealed from it: whiche appellatiō notwithſtanding, he maketh none accompte of. For reaſon woulde that the leſſe parte ſhould be comfourmable to the more. But howe ſmall an handfull are they, to be compared with the great byſhop and hym, and with the reſt of the Chriſtian Prynces?
            Wherfore he deſyreth to knowe, whether they wyl maynteyne any further talke or diſcourſe of the matter, for he wyll ſpare no payne nor trauayle to brynge them to an attonement: whiche if they ſhall refuſe to doe, and yet perſeuer in theyr purpoſe, than muſte he doe as becommeth the protectour of the churche. And becauſe it is now nere night, he gyueth them leaue to take aduiſement tyll the morrowe.
            The next daye whan all the States were aſſembled at the howre appoynted, Pontane a Ciuilian, was ſet to aunſwere for the Duke and his companions. If the Emperoure in dede doe vnderſtande the whole matter, he wyll than geue credite to their fyrſte tale, and doubt not but that theyr doctryne ſhall be adiudged by the teſtimonie of a Godly and a free counſell to be agreable to Gods worde: Wherfore it is the leſſe to be marueyled, that they dyd not receyue ſuche thynges as were of late offered and graunted.
            That appellation of neceſſitie was obiected againſte that parte of the decree, where it made agaynſte the doctryne of the Goſpell, and the maner of the primatiue churche: For the reſte they doe obeye. Agayne that counſell was promyſed in the begynnyng of the aſſemblie longe before the decree was made. And not there onelye, but alſo in all other aſſemblies of the Empyre. Thys was euer the

opinion of all men: Wherfore ſeyng that they haue appealed both vnto hym, and alſo to a free counſell, they truſte he wyll not diſanulle the thynge, tyll ſentence be lawfully geuen: But whether the leſſe parte in this controuerſie, ought to gyue place to the more, it is not to be diſcuſſed in this place. And for their appellation, whiche was done of neceſſitie they wyll make further aunſwere at the counſell. Where as therfore all the fourmer aſſemblies, haue determined vpon a counſell, they beſeche hym that he woulde not breake thoſe decrees, but gyue his cō
               ſent herein, to the good wylles and deſyre of all other ſtates. And where alſo he offereth his paynes to haue the matter debated further, they rendre him great thankes. How be it, it is manifeſt by that which is done already, how much they did ſubmitte them ſelues at the laſte. And where he marueleth at the Byſhoppes ſyde, that they woulde graunte ſo many thynges, it is eaſy to coniecture therby what iudgement he is of. And therfore were it in vayne to treate any more therof, for as much as it ſhould be but a let and a hynderaunce to other matters. But they wyll not be agaynſt it to deuyſe howe peace maye be kepte throughout the Empyre, as they offered in the begynnynge. In the meane tyme they wyll doe nothyng but that whiche they truſte wyll be allowed of God, and of a lawfull counſell: beyng commaunded a ſyde, at the laſt they were called in agayne.
            And for as much as the matter was weyghty, the Emperour ſayd, he woulde take good aduiſement therein, and deſyred the Duke of Saxon, whiche was the chiefeſt of them, that he woulde not depart. And in deede Georde Truckeſſe, and Uehus, a doctour of Ciuile, had A decree made. deuyſed a reconcilement touchyng the Maſſe and Uowes, but it was in vayne. Wherfore the Emperour chouſeth out certen of the Romyſh Relygion to make a decree, the effecte wherof was this.
            That the Duke of Saxon and his fellowes, had exhibited the confeſſion of their doctryne, whiche was afterwardes confuted by the teſtymonies of holy Scripture. And howe through his great paynes, and trauel of other ſtates, the matter was brought to this concluſion, that they receyued certen opinions of the churche, and certen they did refuſe. Wherfore to declare him ſelfe howe deſyrous he is of peace, and howe he coueteth to doe nothyng vpon a wyll, of his ſingular humanitie and gentlenes, he graunteth them ſpace to take aduiſement in, vntyll the .xv. of April, to the intent they maye in this meane whyle, waye and determyne with themſelues, whether they can be content in the other articles to profeſſe the ſame, that the byſhop of Rome, and he doe, and all the reſt of chriſtendome. In the meane tyme he wylleth, that all men kepe peace throughout the Empyre, and that neither the Duke of Saxō nor his fellowes, ſuffer in the meane time any new thynge to be prynted concerning Religion within their dominiōs, alſo

that they alter nothing els, that they neyther allure nor compelle any man vnto their Religion. And that they do not let their ſubiestes, that would followe the olde Religion. Moreouer that they do not diſturbe Religiouſe perſones, but that they may ſaye their ſeruice, heare confeſſion, and miniſter the Lordes ſupper after their wonted facion: How they ſhall conſulte with him and the other ſtates, to punyſhe the Anabaptiſtes, and Sacramentaries. Fynally becauſe there hath bene no counſell of a longe tyme, and manye thynges are to be refourmed as wel in the Laitie, as the Clergie, therfore wyll he labour and ſollicite the byſhop and other Prynces, that within halfe a yeare, one ſhall be A counſell promyſed. ſommoned, and begynne a yeare after.
            The Duke of Saxon and his fellowes, after conſultation had, ſet Pontane to make aunſwere, that where the decree mentioneth, how theyr doctryne was confuted by the Scriptures, that do not they cō
               feſſe nor graunte. But to thynke thus, that it is ſo grounded vpon the Scriptures, that there is nothynge to be founde in it that is vngodly, and that would they haue proued manyfeſtly, if they had obteined a copie of the conſutation: Notwithſtāding leſt it ſhould be paſſed ouer Scripture is the touche ſtone of all doctryne. in ſilence, they haue made an aunſwere as ſone as they hearde it red, to ſo muche as they could beare in memorye, whiche al be it, it dyd not aunſwere to euery partycular, for want of the copie: yet doubte they not, but if it would pleaſe the Emperour to peruſe it, he ſhoulde fynde theyr doctrine as yet fyrme and ſtable, and neyther pearſed nor ſhaken with any of theyr aduerſaries weapons.
            Whē he had thus farre proceded, he delyuereth this Apologie to the Emperour: whiche after Fridericke Palſgraue receiued of him, at the An Apologie deliuered but not receiued. Emperours beckenynge, whome Ferdinando had whyſpered in the eare, he delyuer it agayne. After this Pontane proceadeth, where as it is decreed, that they ſhoulde not alter or publyſhe anye thynge in prynte, they haue in the laſt aſſemblye, touchyng this thyng made ſuch aunſwere as they thought was ſufficiēt, and be yet of the ſame mynd, and wyll doe nothynge, that may be iuſtly reproued: Moreouer they haue nothynge a doe with ſectes. And although the doctrine be trewe whiche they profeſſe, yet dyd they neuer brynge any man to it by compulſion, nor wyll not hereafter. As touchyng the Anabaptiſtes, & ſuch as doe contempne the ſacrament of the Altar, they neuer ſuffered any ſuche kynde of men within theyr lymites, but theyr diuines haue preached agaynſt them: And the Anabaptiſtes haue alſo bene punyſhed, in ſuche ſorte as no ſuche ſectes can take roote or remayne emonges thē. Fynally, for as muche as this is a matter of moſt weyghty importāce, whiche verely concerneth eyther the euer laſtyng ſaluation or damnation and loſſe of their ſoules, and for becauſe the Ambaſſadours of their fellowes, whiche are abſent, haue nede to aduertyſe thē of all thinges,

they doe earneſtly beſeche hym, to graunte them a copie of the decree, to the intent they may conſider and condeſcende vpon an aunſwere agaynſte the daye. The next daye the Emperour ſent them worde by The Emp. to ye Proteſt. the Prynce electour of Brandenburge, that where they ſo ſtoutelye affyrme theyr doctryne to be trewe and Godly, he can not maruell enough, conſyderynge howe it is not onlye confuted nowe euen by the authoritie of ſcripture, but alſo condempned in all former counſelles longe ſyns. And he marueyleth ſo muche the more, for that they doe aſcrybe vnto hym and the reſydue of Prynces errour and falſe Religion, for if that ſhoulde be trewe, as they ſaye, than ſhoulde bothe his and the Dukes of Saxons progenitours alſo, whiche haue kepte and maynteyned the ſame Religion, be accompted for Heretikes: Wherfore he can not be perſwaded, nor graunte, that theyr doctryne ſhould be eſtablyſhed by the teſtimonye of Goddes worde.
            And where of a ſyngular clemencie and loue of peace, he hathe wylled the decree to be thus deuyſed, and herein hathe abaſed hym ſelfe ouer muche, therfore he requyreth them, that they wyll admytte the ſame, in lyke caſe as other Prynces doe, and conſyder with them ſelues, that vnleſſe they ſo doe, what great occaſion they ſhall gyue to muche michief: for the whiche they ſhal rendre a ſtrayght accompte to God one daye. Moreouer howe it was neuer ſet forth by no wryting Prayers mixt with threatnings that it ſhould be lawfull to ſpoyle men, and afterwardes to excuſe it thus, as though he that hath ſuſtayned loſſe, ſhoulde make no reſtitution: And as concernynge the Apologie wrytten againſt the confutation, he had ſhewed them before, that he would admytte no further diſputation about Relygion, for as muche as he maye not, nother is it any part of his office: And for this cauſe hath he refuſed it: For vnleſſe they wyll allowe and confirme this decree, he wyll doe as he ſhall ſee cauſe, that thynge whiche ſhall be come his eſtate & office. The Marques ſayde this moreouer, howe they knewe what trauell and paynes the reſte of the Prynces and ſtates had taken; that this controuerſie myght be ended quietly. And nowe beſought them to way with them ſelues, howe muche it were bothe for their priuate profyte, and alſo to the common wealthes to obey the Emperour and admitte the decree, whiche vnleſſe they wyll do, doubtleſſe al the other ſtates wyl do herein what ſoeuer themperour ſhal cōmaunde thē: For they haue The conſpiracie of the Papiſtes againſte the Proteſtātes. promyſed hym already vpon their fidelititie, that they wil in this quarell ſpende with him al their ſubſtaunce, their bloud and their life alſo, to fyniſhe vp the matter: and he hath promyſed theim againe, to bende hytherwardes all his force and power, and not to departe out of the limites of the Empire, before he haue brought it to paſſe: And that he was commaunded to ſaye this muche to them by all the Prynces and ſtates. Agayne the Proteſtauntes maynteyne theyr doctryne to be

agreable to Gods worde, whiche the gates of hell are notable to reſiſt, and the ſame to be further declared, in the wryting lately preſēte, but for the decree made, they can not alowe it with a ſaufe conſcience: wherfore thei deſyre to haue a copie therof, to the intent after good deliberation, they maye frame a determinate aunſwere, whiche ſhall be as conformable, as Gods worde ſhall permitted them: And in al other cauſes, they wyll not ſticke to ſpende lyfe and goodes for his ſake: but to heare that the Princes and ſtates haue bounden them ſelues to the Emperour in ſuche ſorte, they can not a little maruell, conſyderynge they haue giuen them none occaſion ſo to do, and that there is nothing whiche they are not ready, after the example of their aunceſters, to do for the Emperour, and when nede requyreth, wyll not be the laſt. And where as he ſayed, that no man ought to be ſpoyled of his goodes, they The proteſt. ſpoyle no mā
                doe confeſſe the ſame alſo and herein are nothynge culpable: For as touchynge Religious houſes, they haue oftentymes proteſted, ſo to vſe the matter vntyll the counſell, as it maye be certenly ſene and perceyued, that they ſeeke not their owne priuate lucre or commoditie: After muche deliberation, the Emperour aunſwered them agayne by the Marques of Brandenburge, that he wyl not confeſſe, nor graunt, that which they baoſte of their religiō: And that he hath alſo a regard to his conſcience, and his ſoules health as well as they, and wyll cleaue to the auncient Religion of the olde fathers: In the decree made, there can nothyng be chaunged: if they wyll allowe it, well and good, if not he hath an occaſion gyuen hym to deuyſe with the reſt for an other decree to be made wherby theſe newe ſpronge vp ſectes maye be plucked vp by the rotes, Germany ſet vp at quietnes, and the aunciēt Religion of the churche, fayth, and cerimonies, be had in eſtimation: whiche thing belongeth chiefly to his office and dutie: For except they wyll be ordered, he wyll declare all to the hyghe byſhop, and to other kynges, and vſe both their counſell and ayde herein: Unto that where they ſaie, they haue gyuen none occaſion of offence, there is much to be obiected: For their preachers were a great occaſion of the cōmotion & ruſticall warre, wherin almoſte an hondreth thouſande were ſlayne: The proteſt. accuſed of ſedition. And many thinges haue bene done in their dominions to the open reproche, contempt and mockery of the byſhop of Rome and of hym, and of other ſtates alſo: therfore not to be ſo clere without blame as they would make it. Moreouer that the prynces and ſtates haue of no priuate affection, but according to their duty offered their aſſiſtaunce, eſpecially ſeynge howe they wyll admitte no waye of vnitie and concorde: Fynally he wylleth and cōmaundeth them to reſtore in to theyr The drone bees deſyre to be reſtored into the hyue. former eſtate, the Abbottes, Moūkes, and other eccleſiaſtical perſons, whiche they haue expulſed. For he heareth their dayly complayntes, & is troubled almoſte continuallye about the reſtitution of them. After

a lytle reſpyte, the Proteſtantes do replie thus. For as muche as they can not obtayne the Copie of the decree, nor tyme to conſulte of the whole matter, it is but foly to make any further diſcourſynge thereof: Wherfore they do committe the whole cauſe vnto God, in whom thei repoſe the chiefe hope of their ſaluation. But where they are charged with the ſedition of the commons, thei be vtterly clere in that matter: for what they did at the ſame tyme, and howe they ſpared neither coſt peryll, nor paynes, it is manifeſtly knowen to all men: And the cauſe & originall of that ſedition, was declared alſo foure yeares ſynce in the aſſembly of Spyres. Wherfore it is not well done to lay this thyng to their charge, but therein they ſuffer iniurie: for if there be any man that wyll trye the lawe with them, in this or any other matter, they refuſe not to abyde iudgement. Wherfore they beſeche hym, he woulde conceaue no hainous diſpleaſure againſt them, nor be incenſed wt hatred & malice: cōſidering that al they haue is as well at his commaundemēt, as any thyng els of the other ſtates. When they had thus ſayde, they axed leaue, and departed, leauing certayne of their coūſellers for their deputes. But before they went, the Archebyſhoppes of Mentz and The excuſe of ſome to ye Proteſtātee. Triers, and alſo the Palſgraue, ſent to declare vnto them, that the ſame that the electour of Brandenburg, ſpake of gening their ayde and aſſiſtaunce for the defence of Religion, was done without their commaundement: whiche thynge alſo they hyd not from the Emperour, ſhewyng him howe they had none occaſion of ennemitie or diſpleaſur againſt them: Wherfore in caſe they had conceaued any euyll opinion againſt them, they deſyred them to leaue it. The Prince of Saxony was content with that purgation, and bad them againe to loke for al good wyll and frendſhyp at his hande. The next day after they were gone, the Emperour calleth before hym all the ſtates, and firſt he commaūdeth the Ambaſſadours of the cities by Truckeſſe, that they ſhuld not departe before the end of the Aſſemblie, after that declareth what had bene done with the Duke of Saxon and his fellowes, and becauſe the cities of Strauſborough, Conſtance, Memmyng, and Lyndaue, had exhibited a ſeuerall byll by them ſelues, he ſheweth howe he wyll treate with them in lyke caſe. After are debated other matters of A deluge at Rome & in Selande. the Empyre, chiefly of the Turkyſhe warre. This tyme at Rome the Ryuer of Tiber ouerflowed exceadingly to the great terrour of the citie, by reaſon that the wynde blewe ſore againſt the ſtreame, & droue backe the courſe of the water from the ſea, wherfore it did much hurte. A lyke deluge and more cruell, was in Hollande and Zelande, where the Sea brake in ouer the walles, that are made to kepe it out in thoſe parties, and drowned al the countrey farre and nere. Finally the xiiij. daye of Octobre, whan al the ſtates beſydes the Proteſtauntes were called and aſſembled in the courte, the decree was red to the Ambaſſadours

of the Cities, who requyryng a Copye, were ſayde naye, but it was repeted ones or twyſe. When al for the moſte parte had allowed it, they of Auſpurge, Ulmes, Hales, and Franckeforth, deſyred further delyberation: the eight day after the deputes of the Duke of Saxon & his fellowes, declare vnto the Archebiſhop of Mentz, whiche is chief emonge the Prynces: that if they maye haue their Religion quiet vntill the counſell, they are alſo contented to become cōtributaries with them for money and ayde towardes the Turkyſhe warre, wherfore the next daye beyng called into the courte, there was red before them a certen tenure of the peace, wherin they only were compriſed whiche had conſented vnto the decree made, where about roſe a contention. the Ambaſſadours affirming, that it concerned them nothynge at all, or if it did, howe it ought to be vttered with playner wordes, to take awaye all ambiguitie. They ſaid, how they would moue it to the Emperour. After two dayes, the Emperour ſent for home to his houſe, thē of Strauſborough and their fellowes, and before all the ſtates commaundeth A cōfutatiō of Zwilius doctrine. the confutation of their doctryne to be red openly, a wrytyng long and tedious, and alſo where it touched the Lordes ſupper ful bytter and ſower. The authors therof were John Faber and Eckius. And for becauſe the argument was odiouſe, they left out no kind of excuſation, wherby to kyndle the Emperour and Prynces agaynſt them, the ende was this. For as muche as in their Religion, they profeſſed an opinion contrary to al the reſte, and allowed that moſte heynous errour of the Sacramēt, had alſo caſt their Images our of their churches, abolyſhed the Maſſe, and plucked downe Colleges, builded in tymes paſt through the lyberalitie of kynges & Emperours, maynteyned ſondry ſectes, and diſperſed their bookes wrytten of ſuche matters throughout Germany: therfore he requyreth them eftſones to come to amendement and receyue agayne the auncient Religion, for otherwiſe wyll not he fayle to do the thing which his office requireth. They aunwer not long after, that in this confutation they were charged with many thinges that were vntrue, for in ther cities is nothyng Their aunſwer to the ſame. done out of ordre, but the ſame is extremely punyſhed: wherfore, ſeing thei be clere in cōſcience, the cauſe weightie, the cōfutation ouerlong, & can not be aunſwered, before they make certificat home to their cities, they deſyre fyrſt therfore to haue a copie, ſecondarely, that credite be not geuen to this accuſation, before ſuche tyme as their pourgation be heard and examined: In all other matters they wyll do any thyng for his ſake. The Emperour ſayeth, he wyll take aduiſement, and the fyſt daye after ſhe weth them by the Marques of Brandēburge, how they can haue no copie. For that was for weightie cauſes denied of ye Duke of Saxony, and all diſputatiō of fayth is nowe prohibited: But if they deſyre to be reconciled, and retourne agayne to the churche, he is content,

that they ſhall heare the confutation red agayne ones or twyſe: but he chargeth them to profeſſe the ſame kynde of doctrine, that al other Prynces and ſtates do, and to gyue ayde againſt the Turke: for vnleſſe they forſake theyr ſtubburnes, he wyll worke by the counſell of the byſhop of Rome and other kynges, as ſhal become hym. After this they make a further ſute to obtayne a copie, and the ſame not graunted, to haue peace and quietnes in their Religion tyll the begynnynge of the counſell, and therin to haue their cauſe decided, and they wyl in the meane time geue theyr ayde againſt the Turke ſo farforth as their power wyll extende, or els could they graunte nothing. The Maques promyſed them, to be a petitioner for them to the Emperour. At after noone was red vnto them a graunt of peace, wherein were only conteyned ſuche as receiued the decree, as was rehearſed before to the deputes of the Dukes of Saxon and his fellowes, wherunto they aunſwered in lyke caſe, that the ſame touched them nothyng, and deſyred to knowe further of the Emperours pleaſure herein. In this meane whyle had they of Ulmes, Auſpurge, Franckeforth and Halles, forſaken the decree made as concerning Religion, and vrged ſore to haue a couſel. But Faber and Eckius, craue a great rewarde of the Princes, for makyng the confutations, and had it. And promyſe from hēceforth to beſtowe theyr trauayle in the defence of the Romyſhe Religion. For they and dyuerſe others ſought preferment by the meanes of Luther, and in dede Faber was afterwardes by kyng Ferdinando made byſhop of Uienne. Wherupon Eraſinus of Roterdame, was wont to ſay Poore Luther maketh many men ryche. merely, howe poore Luther made many ryche. In the meane ceaſon the Saxons and their fellowes, put vp a ſupplication to the Emperour, intreating hym to eſtablyſhe a peace throughout the Empyre, that no man be put in trouble or daunger for Religiō. But where this coulde not be obtayned, they wryte an Epiſtle to all ſtates, makyng a brief rehearſall what thinge hath bene done, deſyryng that the names of their Prynces be not put in to the later ende of the decree emonges the reſte. And for as muche as they haue ſued for peace in vayne, they ſaye howe they can graunte none ayde to the Turkyſhe warre. More ouer, where it is prouided in the decree, that they only ſhall haue place in iudgement and counſell chamber, whiche allowe the decree made, they requyre that the ſame may be chaunged and amended: for els can they beare no parte of the charges, whiche the chambre requyreth. What tyme they had thus denounced, they departed the next daye, beyng the .xij. of Nouembre. I ſhewed you in the fyft booke, howe Marques Albert of Brandenburge was by the kyng of Pole made Duke of Pruſelande. But the Emperour beyng ſued vnto by Walter Cronberge, diſallowed all that treatie or cōpacte as made to the dammage of the Empyre: and the .xiiij. daye of Nouembre pronounceth it

to be of none effecte. The fyft daye after, in the Emperours preſence was the decree recited before all the ſtates, and after a long diſcourſe The decree of Auſpurg. of the handlyng of all matters, the Emperour decreeth, that they ſhuld no longer be ſuffered that teache otherwyſe of the Lordes ſupper, than hath bene obſerued hytherto, that in the Maſſe, eyther common or priuate, nothyng be altered, that chyldren be confyrmed with chreſme, & ſycke folkes annoynted with oyle conſecrated: that no Images be remoued, and where they be taken awaye, to be reſtored: that the opiniō of them that denye man to haue fre wyll be not receyued, for that it is beaſtly and alſo contumeliouſe againſt God: that nothyng be taughte any where, agaynſt the authoritie of the magiſtrate: that the opynion, that fayth only iuſtifieth take no place: that the Sacramentes of the church be in numbre and place accuſtomed, that the ceremonies of the churche, rites, obſequies for the dead and ſuche other be obſerued: that benefices vacant, be imployed vpon mete perſones: that ſuche prieſtes and men of clergie, whiche haue maried before this tyme, be depriued of their benefices, whiche immediatly after this aſſembly ſhal be geuen to others. But ſuche as forſakyng theyr wyues, wyll retourne to their olde profeſſion and be abſolued, the byſhop may reſtore, by the conſent of the byſhop of Rome, or his legate. But the others to haue no refuge in any place, but banyſhed or extremely punyſhed: that the prieſtes be of honeſt conuerſation, their apparell decent and commonly, that they auoyde all ſclaunder. That the preachers exhorte the people to heare Maſſe, to praye to the virgyn Mary, and other ſainctes, to kepe their holy dayes and faſting dayes, to abſtayne from meates forbodene, to releue the poore, to tell the Monkes howe they may not forſake theyr profeſſion and ordre, briefly that nothyng be altered in Religion: they that ſhall do otherwyſe, to loſe bodye and goodes. that where as Abbeys be pulled downe, they be reedified, and what ſoeuer hath bene taken awaye from the clergie, to be reſtored, that the wonted ceremonies and rites, may be accomplyſhed. And ſuche as be followers of the olde Religion, dwellyng within the lymites of the cōtrary parte, and allowe this decree, ſhall be receyued in to the protectiō of the Empire, and ſhall flitte whether they lyſte without any hynderaunce. that the byſhop of Rome ſhalbe called vpon to apoynte a counſell in ſome place conuenient, within ſyxe monethes, that afterwarde the ſame may begynne as ſhortly as may be, and at the furtheſt within a yeares ſpace: that all theſe thynges be ratified and eſtablyſhed. Al exceptions, or appellations made to the contrary, to be voyde and of none effect. And to the intent this decree may take place and be obſerued, as cōcerning religion, the force and power that God hath geuē them, ſhalbe wholy applied hereunto, and their lyfe and bloude alſo ſpent in the ſame quarell. Duryng this Parliament, Luther by the commaundement of his

Prynce, was at Coburge in the borders of Frankony, to the intent he myght be nerer Auſpurge, in caſe the matter requyred his aduyſe or counſell. And though he were abſent, yet to the intent he myght ſome Luth. wrote a booke to ye byſhoppes. what further the commō benefit, he wrote a booke to the byſhoppes, & Prelates in that aſſemblye, wherein he ſheweth what the ſtate of the churche hath bene, vnder the byſhop of Rome, what wicked doctrine, what ſhamefull errours: And with moſte weightye wordes, admoniſheth thē of their dutie, chargeth them to be of cruell & bloudy mindes, and agayne exhorteth them, not to let ſlippe the occaſion, nowe to redreſſe their euyll: He ſheweth them howe his doctrine is agreable to the bookes of the Prophetes & Apoſtles, and proueth that is in vaine, what ſoeuer they conſulte or imagine againſt God. In this malyce & threatheninge of the Emperour and Byſhops, Melancthon was diſcouraged and careful in his mynde, not for his owne cauſe, but for poſterities ſake, and gaue hym ſelfe wholy to penſiuenes, wepynge, and mournynge. But when Luther knewe therof, he comforteth hym Luther comforteth Melancton. with ſondrye letters: And for as muche as it is no mennes matter, but the cauſe of almyghtie GGD, he admonyſhed hym, that layinge al thought and care a parte, he caſte the whole burthen vpon hym. And why ſayeth he, doeſt thou thus afflicte and tourment thy ſelfe? If God hath geuen his ſonne for vs, why do we tremble and feare, why doe we ſyghe and lamente? Is Sath an ſtronger than he? Wil he that hath geuen vs ſo great a benefite, forſake vs in lyghter matters? Whye ſhoulde we feare the worlde, whiche Chriſte hath vanquyſhed? If we defende an euyll matter, why doe we not chaunge or pourpoſe? If the cauſe be iuſt and Godlye, why truſte we not to Gods promyſes? Certenly the Deuyll can take no more from vs but our lyfe: But Chriſt liueth and reigneth for euer, in whoſe protection conſiſteth the veritie. He wyll not ceaſe to be with vs, vnto the Worldes ende.
            If he be wyth vs. I beſeche you where ſhall he be founde? If we be not of his churche, doe you thynke that the byſhop of Rome, and our other aduerſaries, be of it? We be ſynners in dede dynerſe wayes, but yet for all that Chriſte is no lyer, whoſe cauſe we haue in hande. Let kynges and nations fret and fume, as muche as euer they lyſte: He that dwelleth in heauen, ſhall laughe them to ſkorne. God hathe gouerned and maynteined this cauſe hetherto without our counſell: the ſame ſhall alſo from henceforth, bryng it to the ende wyſhed for. Luthers opinion of mistraditions. Touchyng lawes and traditions of men, that you wryte of, the aunſwere is not harde: For both the fyrſt cōmaundement, and al the Prophetes alſo, doe cōdempne ſuche maner of workes: They may be a bodely exercyſe: but if they come ones to worſhyppyng, it is idolatry. As for any agremēt it is in vayne loked for: for neyther can we depoſe the byſhop of Rome, neyther can the true doctrine be in ſafetie, ſo longe as

Popery ſhall endure. In that you wyll haue the Lordes ſupper to be communicated wholy, and geue no place to your aduerſaries, whiche holde it to be indifferent, you doe well. For it is not in our arbitremēt, to decree or ſuffer any thynge to be vſed in the churche, whiche hathe not Gods worde to beare it. They crye out that we condempne the whole churche: but we ſaye how the churche was violently taken and oppreſſed with tyrannye, when the communion was deuided in the middes, and therfore to be holden excuſed, as the whole Synagoge was excuſed, that in the captiuitie of Babylon, it kepte not the lawe of The church oppreſſed wt Tyranny, is to be excuſed Moſes & other ceremonies, beyng by force prohibited that they coulde not doe it. Take hede in any wyſe that you graunt not to the byſhops ouer muche iuriſdiction, leſt more trouble enſue there of hereafter. All this treaty of a concorde in doctryne is cleane agaynſt my mynde: For the labour is ſpent in vayne, vnleſſe the byſhop of Rome woulde abolyſhe all his kyngdome. If they condempne our doctryne, whye ſeeke we an vniformitie? If they do allowe it, why do they mainteyne their olde errours? But they condemyne it openly. Wherfore it is diſſimulation and falſhode, whatſoeuer they go about, they labour ſore (as it appereth) about their ceremonies: but let them fyrſt reſtore the doctryne of fayth and workes: Let them ſuffer the churche to haue Miniſters that wyll doe their dutie. They requyre that Monkes maye be ſet agayne The papiſts are accuſed of rerages. in poſſeſſion: let them reſtore to vs agayne ſo manye innocent & Godly men, as they haue murthered, let them reſtore ſo many ſoules, deſtroied through their wicked doctrine, let thē reſtore thoſe great rycheſſe, gotten by fraude diſceiptfully, let thē reſtore Gods glory, with ſo many contumelies, diſhonored. Whan they ſhall haue made ſatiſfactiō for theſe thynges, we ſhall than talke with them vnto whome the poſſeſſion Bucer laboreth for a cō
                  corde. belongeth. Where as Luther and certen others differed only in opinion touching the Lordes ſupper, whiche the catholykes reioyſed at, and the reſt muche lamented, Bucer, by the Duke of Saxons procurement, went from Auſpurge to Luther, for an agrement, and receyued ſuche aunſwere as he miſlyked not, in ſo much as he went thēce to Zwynglius and the Zwycers, to the intent they might be ioyned nerer in mynde and opinion. When the ſtate of thynges ſtoode thus, & all was full of diſpleaſure The Lantgraue maketh a league for ſyxe yeares, with the cities of Zuricke, Baſill and Strauſborough, that if The Lantgraue made a league wt Strauſbotough Zurick and Baſyn. any be attempted with force for Religion, they ſhoulde ayde one an other This was concluded in Nouembre. The ſame tyme the Emperour addreſſeth his letters to the Duke of Saxon, commaunding him to be with him at Collon, the .xxi. of Decembre, for certen weightie affayres of the common wealth. Whiche after he had receiued the ſame, the .xxviii. of Nouembre, the ſame daye came a meſſenger with letters from the Archebiſhop of Mentz, wherein was wrytten, how the Emperour

had required hym to cal to an aſſemblie to Princes Electours, to create a kyng of Romaynes. Wherfore he cited him to appeare at Collon the .xxix. of Decembre, for this appertaineth to the byſhops office, as before hath bene declared. Whiche thinge ones knowen, the Duke of Saxon diſpatchyng his letters to the Lantgraue and to all other Prynces and cities that were Proteſtantes, prayeth and exhorteth them to mete at Smalcalde, at the .xxii. of Decembre: Neuertheleſſe in the meane tyme, he ſendeth ſpedely to Collon Iohn Frederick his ſonne, and with hym certen of his priuie counſell, to be there at the daye appoynted by the Emperour. By whome he declareth, how this citation of the archebiſhop of Mentz is not rightly nor orderly done, & how by this creation of the king of Romaines, the right and libertie of the Empyre is infrynged, and alſo the lawe of Charles the fourth broken, wherfore he wyl not allowe nor ratifie their enterpriſe. After that all were aſſembled at Smalcalde, they deuiſe a league, not offenſiuely The league of the Proteſtantes at Smalcalde. but defenſiuely. Unto this ſubſcribed immediatly all the Princes, and moreouer Albert and Gebart, Erles of Manſſteld & Maidenborough and Bremen: But Strauſborough, Ulmes, Cōſtance, Lindaue, Mē
               ming, Cāpedowne, Heilbrune, Ruteling, Biberack, & Iſne, do receiue it in ſuch ſorte, as firſt to infourme their cities therof, & within ſyx wekes to make an directe anſwere, what they wil do herein. It was furthermore decreed to follicite by their Ambaſſadours, the king of Denmarke, the Dukes of Pomerane, & Megelbourg, the cities of Embeck Northēme, Franckfourth, Brunſwick, Gotinge, Minda, Hannobria, Hildeſſeme, Lubecke, Stetine, & other hauon townes. When the byſhop of Rome vnderſtode, what was yt end of the aſſemblie at Auſpurg The cōplait of the Pope to the kynge of Poole. he wrote his letters to the kyng of Pole & others, how he had truſted aſſuredly, that the authoritie & preſence of the Emperour, ſhould either haue quenched or quieted Luthers hereſie: for vpō this hope, & for this cauſe chiefly he came to mete the Emperour at Bononie, to the intent he might encourage him forward (who notwithſtanding of his owne accorde was wel willing) for if this thing had ben brought to paſſe, religiō had bene ſtaied, many mens ſoules ſaued, which through this hereſie are nowe in daūger, & then might remedy haue ben foūd againſt the Turkiſh fury: but where as he vnderſtādeth al well by thēperours as alſo by the letters of his legate, how they can not only be in no wiſe reformed, but are waxed alſo more obdurate, he which through yt wyll of God, gouerneth the ſhyp of Peter, in a time ſo tēpeſtuouſe, & ſuſteyneth the greateſt part of the whole care for the ſame, conſultinge wt his The Pope is a ſayler. Cardinals, cāfinde no better remedy, thā the which his predeceſſours haue vſed, yt is a general coūſel: wherfore he doth admoniſh hym ſynce the matter is brought to this iſſue, that either hym ſelfe preſentlye, or els by hys Deputes woulde further ſo holye a cauſe: For he entendeth,

ſo ſhortly as may be, to appoynte one in Italy in ſome place conuenient. Theſe letters were dated the firſt daye of December. The xxiiii. daye of Decembre the Prynces confederated at Smalcalde, The Proteſtauntes letters againſt Ferdinando wryte vnto the Emperour, howe they heare it commonly bruted, that he pourpoſeth to create his brother Ferdinando kynge of Romaynes, who maketh great ſute for the ſame. But what authoritie and ryght the Princes Electours haue herein by the lawe of Charles the fourth, howe when the Emperour is dead, an other is to be choſen in the name of the whole Empyre, it is knowen to all men: Notwithſtandinge he being alyue and in helth, and no ſuche chaunce happened, howe the Archebyſhop hath cited them to Collon, againſt the preſcripte of the lawe, and agaynſt the cuſtome of the Empyre: They heare moreouer, howe the reſidue of the Electours wyll come thyther at his requeſte, to accomplyſhe the ſute of Ferdinando, as it were by conuenaunt and promyſe: for this report is ſpread farre and neare: Wherfore they haue thought good to admoniſhe hym of certen thynges. And al be it they had leuer abſtayne from ſuche kynde of talke, yet for as muche as they loue both hym and theyr conntrey and eſpeciallye the lybertie therof, which they haue receyued of their aunceſters, agayne for becauſe now in this later ende of the worlde, many thinges are done captiouſly and craſtely, they can not otherwyſe doe. Fyrſt therfore, he knoweth ryght well how circumſpectly howe depely, with what wordes and bondes he bounde hym ſelfe to the Empyre, how he gaue his fayth by an othe, that he woulde obſerue the lawe Carolyne, whereupon the lybertie of the Empyre chiefly dependeth, howe he promyſed & cōfirmeth by an othe, yt he would neither him ſelf do any thing againſt it, nor ſuffer any other to do. And certenly theſe conuenauntes may not be infrynged, broken or chaunged, without the conſent and aduyſe of all ſtates: But nowe in caſe during his lyfe and proſperitie a kyng of Romanes ſhuld be choſen, and that his naturall brother, makynge ſuite and labour for it, he ſeeth hym ſelfe howe directly it were againſte the lawe, againſte the ryght and lybertie of the Empyre, agaynſte promyſe and conuenaunt and the fayth that he oweth to the common wealth, confyrmed by a ſolemne othe: Moreouer howe incommodiouſe alſo it were for hym and howe chargeable to the whole Empyre to haue two Rulers at one tyme, whome they muſt obeye. And becauſe they woulde be ſory if any ſuche thynge ſhoulde be layde to his charge for breakynge his fidelytie, or alſo vnto them for their ſloughtſulnes in defending the cō
               mon wealth, therfore do they erneſtly beſeche him to impute this their writing to the loue of him & their coūtrey, and to the world that now is that he would call to his remembraunce thynges paſt, and by his office and aucthoritie prohibite the creation of this new kinge, that he woulde conſyder well wyth hym ſelfe, to how many euils & miſchiefes

this thinge wyll hereafter geue occaſion, vnleſſe it be forſeen: ſignifyeng howe they wryte alſo touching the ſame matters to the reſydue of the electours, truſting that they wyll worke for the profit of the cō
               mon wealth, and do their endeuour that there be no diuiſion made amonges the ſtates of the Empyre: for the reſt they will doe as muche for his ſake as their habilitie and power wyl extende to. Afterwardes the Duke of Saxon writeth his ſeuerall letters to the Prynces hys colleges: that for as muche as he was ſomoned to Collon by the arche The duke of Saxons letters to the Princes. byſhop of Mentz, therfore hath he ſent thither his ſonne and certen of his coūſayle, which ſhal do in his name that ſhalbe requiſite: He requireth them to leaue of their enterpriſe, and to waye with them ſelues, what a preiudice and diſcommoditie, this wilbe vnto thē and al theyr poſteritie, for to breake the right libertie and honour of the Empyre: he deſyreth them alſo that in ſuche thinges as his ſonne and counſellours haue to treate with them of, they woulde ſo vſe them ſelues as it may appeare and be perceiued, that they loue the common wealth of their countrey. The Duke of Lunēburge, the Lantgraue, Counte Anhald; and the Erles of Manſfelde, wrote vnto the Electours at the ſame time long letters of the ſame effect, admoniſhing them righte erneſtlye, that they doe not ſuche an open wronge to the lawes & to their countrey: ſayeng howe it is reported, that the matter is handled with brybes and promeſſes, whiche is alſo openly agaynſt the lawe Caroline. After this, the laſte of Decembre as well the Princes as cities before named, by cōmon aſſent wryte their letters to the Emperour, wherin they recite the treatie of religion at Auſpurge, how long they ſued for peace, what aunſwer he made, & alſo what maner of decree was there made afterwarde. And al be it he him ſelfe did mitigate the wordes of the Electour of Brandēburge, affirming that he had made a compact with the reſt of the Princes for his owne defence only, and not to offende others. Yet if that authoritie be committed to the chambre imperiall, as the decree purporteth, to whome can it be doubtful, but that the ſame thinge apperteyneth both to force and violēce? but ſeyng that both they and their aūceſters haue ſhewed many teſtimonies of great good wyll to him and his progenitours, they beſeche him in as muche as he hath mitigated the ſaying of the Electour of Brandenburge, he woulde alſo qualifie in deede and take away the terrour of confiſcation, to the intent they may be aſſured, that vntyll the ende of a Godlye and free counſell, they ſhall nede to feare no violence. The cauſes which the Emperour alledged to create a king of Romains at the firſt cōmunication wt the princes in Collō, were theſe: Firſt becauſe that he The cauſes of creating a kyng of Romaines. had ye rule of ſondry realmes & nations, & could not be always in Germany: agayne for yt the ſtate of chriſtendom was troubleſome, namely in Germany, by reaſon of the diſſention in Religion, and for the violent

power of the Turkes, for the late ſedition and rurall warre, and for diſobedience within the Empyre: Wherfore he thought it very neceſſary, and for the profit of the common wealth, that there ſhould be a kyng of Romaynes choſen vnder hym, as it were an other head of the Empyre in his abſence, which ſhould be wyttie, cyrcumſpect, induſtrious, of great power, that loued peace and concorde, and were ſkilfull in matters of the Empyre, and in euery poynte ſuche a one, as he myght repoſe his whole truſte and confidēce in. And he knoweth none more mete for that charge, than his brother Ferdinando, king of Boheme and of Hongary: For his realmes and dominions, are a defence vnto Germany againſt the Turkyſhe oultrage. The Princes electours, after delyberation had intreate the Emperour, that he woulde not forſake Germany, but to ſette and plante himſelfe there: but where he perſiſteth ſtiffe in his opinion, conferrynge their counſels together. The fyft daye of Ianuary, they proclayme Ferdinando kynge of Romaynes. The Duke of Saxon as muche as laye in hym, by his ſonne proteſted that this election was faultie, and ſhewed the cauſes why, and that he coulde not allowe it. Longe before they departed from Auſpurge. The brute was, that Ferdinando ſhould obtayne that dignitie. Afterwardes they went all from Collon to Aquon: where Ferdinādo was crowned kyng, the .xvj. day of Ianuary, and Ferdinando proclaimed kyng of Romaines. ſtreightwayes were letters diſpatched into al partes of Germany to ſignifie the ſame. Ceſar alſo commaundeth by his letters patentes, that all men ſhall acknowledge him for kyng of Romaines, and therof ſent his ſeueral letters to the Proteſtantes. This done, from Aquon the Emperour wēt to Bruſſel in Brabant.
         
         
            
            
               ✚ The eyght Booke of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the ſtate of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne of the Empyre of Charles the fyfte.
            
               
                  ❧ The argument of the eyght Booke.
               THe Proteſtauntes from Smalcalde, ſent letters to the kinges of Fraunce & of Englande, agaynſt ſondry falſe reportes, and ſollicite the kyng of Denmarcke, and the cities by the ſea coaſte, to entre into their league. Into this league the Swycers are not admitted. The kyng of Fraunce (who is deſcended of the Almaines) aunſwereth their letters, ſo doeth alſo the kynge of Englande. About the ſtrife of the creation of kyng Ferdinando. An aſſemble was holden at Franckforth, where was alſo debated the controuerſic betwixt the byſhop of Bamberge, and George Marques of Brandenburge. The Emperour appointeth a metyng at Spyre. whether the Duke of Saxon being moued to come, excuſeth hym ſelfe. Conditions are put in wryting, whiche graunted, the Proteſtauntes offer them ſelues to be there. The fyue Cantons geue battell to them of ʒ uricke, wherein ʒ wynglius is ſlayne, Shortly after dieth Ecolampadius. A peace is graunted to the Proteſtauntes vntyll a counſell. Chriſtierne kyng of Denmarke, is committed to pryſon. The Turke inuadeth Auſtryche, but he is thence repulſed. The Pope by his Ambaſſadour, ſent to Duke Iohn Fredericke (who had lately ſuccedeth his father) the conditions of the counſell. The Duke and his aſſociates, after deliberation, make hym 
                     〈◊〉
                   full aunſwere by wryting.
            
            
               IN the firſt aſſembly at Smalcalde, this emōges other thynges was agreed vppon: that for as muche as their aduerſaries did aggrauate the cauſe and profeſſion of the Goſpell with manye ſclaunders, and broughte it euerye where in to great hatred, they ſhoulde wryte pryncipally to the kynges of Fraunce and of Englande, that they would not credite, nor be perſwaded herin. The proteſt. letters to the kynges of Fraunce & of Englande. Wherfore the .xvj. daye of February, the Proteſtauntes wryte their ſeuerall letters to them both, of one effecte. How they knowe vndoubtedly of the olde complaint that hath bene of long tyme, concernyng the vice and faultes of the clergie, whiche many notable men, and of late memory, in Fraunce Iohn Gerſon, and in Englande Gerſon. Collet. Iohn Colet, haue ſore noted & reprehended: the ſame thing hath happened of late yeares in Germany. For where as certen freers wēt about with indulgences & pardōs, whiche they ſo highly cōmended to the great contumelie of Chriſte, & no leſſe daunger of mens ſaluation, yt they got a ſhameful & an vnreaſonable gayne therby. And being gētly admonyſhed by certen good & wel learned men, that thei ſhould not ſo do, did not only abſtayne from ſuche vſage, but alſo cruelly condempned them for Heretykes, whiche gaue them good counſell, in ſo muche that they were conſtrayned to ſtande in the defence of the trewthe:

vpon whyche occaſion many other thynges were eſpyed and reprehē
               ded, but the aduerſaries whiche through their impudent marchādiſe, gaue occaſion of offence, woulde neuer be in quiet, tyll this doctryne whiche reuealyng their crafty iuglyng, was without dewe examination, condempned for wycked. And to the intent they might wholy oppreſſe it, haue brought it into great hatred with the Emperour and other kynges. Neuertheſſe the truthe breakyng out lyke the ſonne beames diſcouered the faultes moſte manifeſtly, whiche of euyl cuſtomes, and prepoſterous iudgementes, were crepte in to the churche, in ſo muche they could not be denied by the byſhop of Rome hym ſelfe, whē they had bene exhibyted before to the Emperour by the ſtates of the Empyre, in the aſſemblie at Wormes. and after had bene treated of in all aſſemblies of the Empyre, all men iudging for certentie, that for reformation therof there were no waye better than a free and a lawfull counſell, wherewith the Emperour was alſo content. But at his commyng out of Spayne into Germany through Italy, he was addicted wholy at Auſpurge, to quiet the matter without a counſel. And ſo thei diſcourſe the whole treaty at Auſpurge, as hath bene before reherſed, and howe for the ſore decree there made, they were compelled to appeale to a free and Godly coūſell, leſt they ſhould both haue hurt theyr conſcience, and offended God moſte greuouſly. Afterwardes thei confute Their appelation. the falſe opinions and ſclaunders, that theyr aduerſaries aſcribe vnto them, to bryng them into hatred with all men, and chieſlye that the doctrine whiche they do profeſſe, is againſt the authoritie of Magiſtrates and dignities of lawes: but their confeſſion exhibited at Auſpurge, doth fully aunſwere this matter, wheren is the office and ſtate of a Magiſtrate, by theyr doctrine declared to be of Gods ordinaūce, and agayne the people taught to owe all due obedience to the Magiſtrate, for Gods cōmaundement and for cōſcience ſake: ſo that it may be truly ſayde, that the learned men of this tyme and doctrine, haue more hyghly commēded the dignitie of lawes and Magiſtrates, than any former age hath done. for els ſeing they are alſo appointed of God to haue rule and gouernment of others. What madnes were it for thē, to permitte that doctrine, whiche ſhould geue licencious lybertie, take awaye obedience, and ſtyre vp the people againſt them? Wherfore after this and dyuers other thynges they ſaye, howe that for ſo much as theſe ſclaunders are reported by them, and howe it forceth very much for the cōmon wealth of chriſtendome, that they beyng kynges of ſuch wyſdome and authoritie, ſhould be ryghtly infourmed in the matter: therfore haue they thought good in their owne purgatiō to wryte this much vnto them, earneſtly deſyring them to geue no credit vnto ſclaū
               ders, nor to conceaue any ſiniſtre opinion of them, but to keepe theyr iudgement in ſuſpence, tyll they may come to the place, where to make

theyr purgation openly, whiche thing they chiefly deſyre: they beſeche them alſo to exhorte the Emperour, that for the weyghty importaunce of the matter, and the profit of the whole churche, he would call a godly and a free counſell in Germany ſo ſhortly as myght be: And that he woulde worke no extremitie againſt them, vntyll ſuche tyme as the cauſe may be lawfully decided & determyned. For hitherto haue they alwayes done their duty to the common wealth of the Empyre, and nowe that they profeſſe this doctrine, they are brought in daunger, of no ſelfe wyll nor obſtinacie, but for Gods worde and glory: whereby they haue the better hope alſo, that they wyll graunte to theyr requeſtes herein. For it were hyghe prayſe worthy, if they coulde throughe theyr aucthoritie and mediation bryng to paſſe, that theſe controuerſies be not decided by force of armes, but that an vpryght iudgement be had, that abuſes maye be remoued, the Churches reconciled, and no force or violence done vnto mens conſciences. Finally if they maye vnderſtande by their letters of theyr good wylles towardes them, it ſhall be to theyr great cōforte. In February, the Duke of Saxon ſummoneth all his fellowes to be at Smalcade the .xxix. of Marche to cō
               ſulte howe to reſiſte the force of their ennemies, if any thynge be attēpted againſte them: thoſe were the Prynces and cities before mentioned. But the Duke being diſcraſed, ſent thether his ſonne Iohn Frederick. At the former meting it was agreed to ſollicite Fredericke the kyng of Deumarke, and the cities by the ſea coaſte of Saxonie, touchynge their league. And nowe that they met agayne, reherſall was made what had bene done in the meane tyme, and what aunſwere euery one made. And the kyng in dede ſaide howe he fauoured the doctrine of the Goſpel, but in his realme were ſo many biſhoppes of great The biſhops of Dēmarke reſute the Goſpell. power and aucthoritie by reaſon of their rycheſſe, clientes, and noble kyndred, that he coulde not enter into this league as kyng, but as concernyng his other countreis, lieng within the Empyre, he was contēt, Henry the Duke of Megelburge, excuſed the matter, for that his deputes had ſubſcribed to the decree of Auſpurge, notwithſtandinge he would be no ennemy to them. Berninus Prince of Pomerane, was not againſt it, but that his elder brother had as yet in maner yt whole gouernment. They of Lubecke refuſed not, but for as muche as they had bene at great charges in the warres, they deſyred that the ſame myght ve conſydered. And if it fortuned that Chriſterne kyng of Dē
               marke, whome thei had holpe to dryue out of his realme, ſhould warre againſt them, they deſyred to knowe, what ayde they ſhould looke for agayne at theyr handes. The citie of Lunenbourge ſayde, that loke as theyr Duke Erneſt would doe, ſo woulde they alſo. Afterwarde they conſulted about geuyng theyr voices, for ſodayne ayde, leuieng of money for continuall ayde, chouſyng of Captaines, and receiuing of thoſe

that would be of the ſame league. After that they appointed theyr attourneis and aduocates, to aunſwere for them in the lawe, if the Emperour or any other, ſhould attempte ſute againſt them. And to this parte of defence, adioyned them ſelues, George Marques of Brandē
               burge, Norinberge, Campedowne, Heilprune, but the league they refuſed. It was decreed moreouer that open crymes ſhould be puniſhed by eche man in his dominion. Before the league was made, they toke the aduyſe and counſell, not only of lawyers, but alſo of the diuines. And Luther taught alwayes, that they myght not reſiſte the Magiſtrate, and ſet forth a boke of the ſame matter. But where as the lawyers in this conſultation dyd affyrme, howe the lawes did permitte in The lawes permitte yt the inferiour Magiſtrate maye in ſom caſes reſiſt yt ſuperiour. ſome caſes to reſiſte, and howe it was nowe come to the ſame point, that the lawes made mencion of: Luther confeſſed playnlye, that he knewe not this to be lawfull before, but for becauſe the Goſpell doeth not impugne nor abolyſhe the polityke lawes, as he hathe alwayes taught. And agayne, for as muche as in this doubtful and daūgerous tyme, many thynges may happen, ſo as not only the lawe it ſelfe, but alſo the force of conſcience, and neceſſitie may dryue vs to take weapons, he ſayeth, howe they make a league in their owne defence, whether the Emperour hym ſelfe or any in his name, ſhoulde moue warre againſt them. In a booke alſo ſet forth he declareth firſte howe obſtinate the Romiſhe ſyde was in the conuocation at Auſpurge, ſecondly, he warneth all men in generall, that they obeye not the Magiſtrate, commaunding them to take in hande any ſuche warre. And he reciteth manye and moſte deteſtable errours of the Romyſhe doctryne, whiche he ſayth, are mainteined of them that warre in thoſe campes. Wherein he ſayeth is great wickednes: he ſheweth alſo howe greatly mens myndes are lyghtened, by the knowledge of the Goſpell, warnyng men to tempre them ſelues from entryng in to wycked warres. They appoyted an other metynge at Frankefurte, the fourth daye of Iune, wherein they ſhould determyne, whether they of Zurick, Bernes, or Baſyll, ſhoulde be receyued into the league without exception of any opinion or doctrine, and the cities make a determinate anſwer, touchyng the preparation for their defence. And alſo an aunſwer was framed in the meane tyme by the Duke of Saxon to the Emperours letters, wylling them to take Ferdinādo for kyng of Romanes, which thynge they wil not graunte to. But whyleſt they were yet at Smalcalde, they receyued letters from the Emperoure, pourportinge howe Newes of yt Turkes cō
                  myng. the great Turke was comyng with an exceading great Armie, to inuade Germany: wherfore he charged them without exception to prepare their ayde to reſiſte: They make aunſwere, howe they wyll, after thenſample of their progenitours, refuſe no charge or dutie, that they owe to the cōmon wealth. But he knoweth what threatning wordes

the Marques of Brandenburge ſpake vnto them at Auſpurge in his name, and the reſt of the Prynces, and what thynges were there decreed againſt them, howe they haue both there, and ſynce ſewed vnto hym for peace, and can get no graunte nor anſwere. Wherfore to ſende their ayde agaynſt the Turke, whan they can obtayne no peace at home, but are dryuen to loke dayly for outlawyng and violence, were to vnarme them ſelues and to cut their owne ſenewes. Howe be it if he wyll graunte them peace and quietnes, frō the lawe and ciuile warre for Religion, vntyll the tyme of the counſell: they wyll doe agayne for theyr partes, not only in the Turkyſhe warre, but alſo in all other affayres that concerne the common wealth, that thynge whiche ſhall be their dutie, requeſting him to ſignifie vnto them, by the ſame Ambaſſadours, what his mynde and pourpoſe is herein. In the moneth of Marche, Rychard Archebyſhop of Treers, departed out of this lyfe, The Archebyſhop of Treers departeth. not without the ſuſpicion of poyſon: and one of his houſe being racked for the ſame, through his conſtance and ſtoutenes, eſcaped the daaunger. This byſhop was of great authorite emonges the Electours, for his experience, and frankenes in ſpeakyng. Whan they of Ulmes had aſked leaue of the Senate of Strauſborough, Bucer went thether & Bucer ſet order in yt churches at Uimes, ſet an ordre in the churches, preſcrybing them a forme of Religion, by the aduyſe and counſell of Oecolampadius, and Ambroſe Blanrer. About this tyme, the Lady Mary the Emperours ſyſter, which was maried to Lewys kyng of Hongary, came into Flaunders, whom the Emperour made Regent of all the baſe countreis, in the place of hys The quene of Hungary made regēt of Flaūders aunte Margaret lately departed. Clement the ſeuenth, was at ſute with alphonſe Duke of Farrare, for the cities of Rhegio, & Mutina: at the length makyng a compromiſſe, they put it to the Emperours arbitrement, who being at the ſame tyme in Brabant, gaue ſentence with the Duke of Farrare. The Frenche kyng aunſwereth to the letters of the Princes and cities of Proteſtauntes the .xxi. of Aprill. How he deſyreth The aunſwere of the Frēch kyng to the proteſtauntes. nothing more than the concorde of all Europe, and is right glad that they do alſo bende the ſame waye, and couet to haue a counſel: for the ſame appeareth vnto hym to be not only profitable, but alſo ryght neceſſary: And ſo ofte as he chaunceth into talke of refourming the cō
               mon wealth: He iudgeth alwayes thatthere can be no ſurer foundation, than if that holy ſpyrit (vtterer of all truthe) myght in this caſe be preſident. Whereunto if others would geue lyke conſent, and a place myght be aſſigned for the counſell, voyde of all daunger and ſuſpicion, where as euery man myght ſpeake his minde frely, & nothyng be chief geuen to affections, than in dede there were good hope that all ſhould be well. And where as they are carefull, leſt he ſhould beare them the leſſe good wyll by reaſons of the ſclaunders of their aduerſaries, they nede not to be afrayde: for he is not wont to credit thynges lightlye,

that are reported of his ennemies: but ſeing there is ſo great & ſo auncient frendſhyp betwene the kynges of Fraunce, and Prynces of the Empyre, what vngentylnes were this of his allies and frendes, to cō
               ceaue The amitie of Fraunce and Germa. a ſiniſtrall opinion, eſpeciall and they not harde? for how muche he ſetteth by this olde amitie, hereby it is well perceyued, that what tyme he hath warre with the Emperour, yet haue the Germaynes & the citezens of the Empyre free acceſſe into Fraunce, and libertie to paſſe from thence againe, whan their marchaundiſe & buſines is done, as muche at their owne pleaſure as if they were at home, in ſo muche as Fraunce may very well be called the manſion place of the prynces and citezens of Germany. And al be it theſe thynges be cōmonly knowen, yet are they not ſo great, but that when occaſiō ſhall ſerue, he wyl do muche more for them, in caſe as they do profeſſe, they ſhall not refuſe the decree of a free and Godly counſell, for to haue the controuerſie decided by waye of diſputation, rather then by yt ſworde, lyke as theyr requeſte is, ſo ſemeth it vnto him alſo to be both more honeſte and profitable for the common wealth: whiche ſhall ſuffer great miſfortune in caſe the matter come to handſtripes. Where he ſpeaketh of the familiaritie and alliaunce betwyxt Fraunce and Germanye, thus it is. The A ſtory of yt kyng of fraunce. Germanes of Franconie bordering vpon Swaues, in times paſt makyng inuaſiō into Gawles ſubdued the people about Treers, Gelderlande, Cleauelande, and ſo down to Terwen and Tourney, and vanquyſhed Amiens, Beanuois and the Soiſſons: ſetlinge them ſelues at the laſt in that parte of Gawles, which is yet called Fraunce vnto this day, the chief citie wherof is Paris. And where as many of their kynges there reigned and enlarged their dominiō, at the laſt the gouernemēt cam vnto Pipine, & alſo to his ſonne charles, which was after for his worthy actes called Charlemaigne. All people ſaluted hym with Charles the great. the tytle of the Emperour Auguſte, he poſſeſſed Germany, Italy, and Fraunce. Afterwarde his ſonne Lewis, and his ofſpryng were kinges of Fraunce. Wherunto kyng Fraunces doth aſcribe his originall, and ſayeth howe he is lineally deſcended of the ſtocke of Frankons. The ſame perſwaſions vſed he alſo, what tyme after the death of the Emperour Maximilian, he did ſeke the dignitie of the Empyre. For knowyng that by an aūcient lawe, no ſtraūger myght attayne the crown imperiall, he went about alſo to proue hym ſelfe a Germayne. But in dede the laſte kynge of Fraunce of the heyremales of Charlemaigne, was Lewys the fifte, who died without iſſhewe, in the yeare of grace nyne hōdreth foure ſcore and eyght: whan that poſſeſſion of that kingdome Lewys the fyfte. had remained in the ſame familie two hondreth and eight and thyrty yeares. After his death the ſucceſſion had deſcended by ryght to Charles Duke of Lorayne, vncle to kyng Lewys: But Hughe Capet, Hugh Capet Erle of Paris, as they reporte, whoſe mother fetched her petygrewe

from great Charles, diſcomfiting and takynge the Duke of Lorayne pryſoner, vſurped the kyngdom, and left it to his ſonne Robert, whoſe heyres males continued afterwardes vntill kyng Fraunces. Some there be that ſaye howe that this Hughe Capet was of lowe and baſe hyrth, but the moſte parte of the wryters of Frenche Cronicles recite his originall, as I haue ſayde heretofore. Henry the eight, kyng of England, writeth to them agayne the thyrde day of Maye. That he hath The anſwer of the kynge of England red their letters to his great cōtentation, for as muche as they be inclined and bent, that true religion remayning ſtyll ſaufe, and peace conſerued the faultes and abuſes of the churche and clergie maye be refourmed, and all ſuche thynges redreſſed, as haue bene eyther by the wyckednes or ignoraunce of men, corrupted and depraued. Moreouer howe he toke great diſpleaſure to reade ouer the whole diſcourſe of their procead inges: That a reporte in dede went of them, that was not very good, as though they ſhould maynteine certen franticke perſonnes, whiche ſought to diſturbé and tourmoyle all thynges vpſyde downe. But he gaue therunto no credite, firſt for becauſe that Chriſtiā charitie doth ſo requyre, ſecondly; knowyng for certentie, that ſuche kynde of ſclaunder can take no place in mē of ſuche dignitie, Nobilitie and wyſdome. And all be it he would neuer haue beleued anye ſuche reporte, before he had certenly tried and knowen it to be true: Yet for as muche as they haue thus pourged them ſelues, he is glad for thys cauſe, that he was not diſceaued in his opinion and iudgement. And where as they deſyre a refourmation, in that they doe agree with his mynde, and the opinion of all other good men. For the ſtate of worldly thynges is after ſuche a ſorte, that lyke as mans body, ſo alſo in the cō
               mune wealth and publique adminiſtration, there is nede of continual remedies: wherfore they deſerue great prayſe, that can lay to ſuch medicines The commō
                  wealth hath nede of many remedies as wyll ſo heale and cure the diſeaſe, that they doe not brynge to an outrage the matter. And doubteth not but that their endeuoure tendeth to the ſame ende: Notwithſtanding howe they had nede to take diligent care of that ſorte of men who ſeke alterations, woulde haue all men a lyke, and brynge the Magiſtrate in contempt. For he hath had certen of that ſecte within his Realme, whiche came thether out of Germany. And for becauſe in their letters they mētioned of the obedience vnto Magiſtrates, therfore he thought good to admoniſhe them at fewe wordes, that they geue no man ouermuche lybertie: For if they beware of this, and ſeke a reformation, they ſhall doubtles doe hygh ſeruice vnto the common wealth. Howe he alſo deſyreth chiefly a generall counſell, beſechyng God to ſtyre vp the hartes of Prynces vnto this deſyre: And hath ſo good an hope of them in all thynges, that there is nothyng, that he wyll not ve glad to doe for their ſakes: And wyll be a peticioner for them to the Emperour, that meanes of peace

and concorde may be founde, and wyll worke ſo herein, as they them ſelues ſhall from tyme to tyme, thinke beſt for theyr purpoſe. When the daye came of their aſſemblie at Franckefourth, the Ambaſſadours of the Cities, as it was agreed vppon, declare what they thought touchyng the creation of the kyng of Romanes. And after long conſultation, they founde that it was not expedient for the title & ſtyle of king The opinſō of the cities of the kynge of Romains Ferdinando, to enter in to any ſute or trouble. For ſo long as the Emperour lyueth or is within the lymites of the Empyre, the whole power is his: And in his abſence it commeth in dede to Ferdinando, but as to the depute or lieutenaunt of the Emperour: They haue at ſondry tymes promyſed to do what ſo euer laye in their power. And nowe in caſe they ſhould reſiſte the creation of the kynge, many woulde iudge that promeſſe to be vayne, and therfore would beare thē the leſſe good wyll, and woulde alſo worke againſt them, whiche els woulde haue done nothyng at al againſt the cauſe of Religion. It is alſo to be feared leſt ſuche as would haue ioyned them ſelues vnto this league, wyll be affcayde nowe of this, and withdrawe them ſelues. For yt which cauſe they may not be againſt the election of kyng Ferdinando, but holde it indifferent as it is: But if Ferdinando ſhall commaūde any thyng cō
               trary to Gods worde, they wyll not obeye it, or if he attēpte any force, then wyll they worke after the preſcripte of the league, and defend to the vttermoſte of their power. But the Prynces wrote vnto the Emperour and Ferdinando, that they could not allowe that thing which was done againſt the cuſtome and lybertie of the Empyre, nor attrybute vnto hym the tytle of kyng of Romaynes. The Duke of Saxon in his letters to the Emperour, added this moreouer, that if the matter The Duke of Saxons doubte of yt Swycers. might be lawfully vſed, he would not be vnlyke his aunceſtours. As concernyng the Swycers whome the citie would gladly haue receyued into their league, the Duke of Saxon anſwered by his Ambaſſadours, that for as muche as they were of a contrary opinion, touchyng the Lordes ſupper, he myght haue no fellowſhyp with them: Howe muche they were to be eſtemed for their ſtrengthe and power, he was not ignoraunt, but he myght haue no reſpect vnto that, leſt it ſhoulde come to an euyll ende, as the Scripture witneſſeth to haue chaunced vnto thoſe, whiche for their defence, haue not cared what ayde they haue ſought. Durynge this aſſemblie, letters were brought from the Duke and Lantgraue, to the Ambaſſadours of the other Princes and cities, pourportyng howe the Archebiſhop of Mentz and Lewys the The Palſgraue and yt archbyſhop of Mentz interceſſonrs. Palſgraue, had leaue of the Emperour to treate of a peace, and had requeſted them by letters to graunte alſo to the ſame: For then woulde they appoynte a tyme to mete. After deliberation had, the Ambaſſadours aunſwere, that they be contended. Wherfore when the Duke & the Lantgraue had made reporte agayne, howe they miſliked not the

ſo that the proceſſe in the lawe myght ceaſe in meane tyme: They hauing firſt obteyned this of the Emperour, appointed the daye, the laſt ſauing one of the moneth of Auguſte. Wigande byſhop of Bamberge, A controuerſy of the byſhop of Bā
                  berge with the Marques of Brandenburg. had certen yeares before complayned to his fellowes of the Sweuicall league, of George Marques of Brandenburge, for certen wrōges and iniuries whiche he had done vnto hym, as hynderynge his eccleſiaſticall iuriſdiction and lyuing, and compellinge the prieſtes to thys falſe kynde of doctrine, and if they refuſed, erpulſynge them and imployinge the churche goodes to prophane vſes. And for as muche as this was contrary to equitie and iuſtice, and againſt the decrees both of the biſhop of Rome and the Emperour, he requyreth that according to the league, they would ayde and aſſiſte hym herein. Wherfore this yeare in the moneth of Iulye, a daye was appoynted at Norlinge for the hearynge of this matter, whether came at the requeſt of the Marques, the Ambaſſadours of the Proteſtantes: And of the byſhops ſide, were the byſhops of Auſpurge, Wircinburg, and Aeſter, as his coadiutours and counſellours. When the plantife had propounded & charged him with iniuries, requiring the iudges to procede, and gyue ſentence after the preſcripte of the league. The defendaunt in thinges cō
               cerning religion, and iuriſdiction eccleſiaſticall, put in an appellation, The Appellation of the Marques. wherein he appealed from their decrees and iudgement to a generall counſell. The iudges ſayde howe they would not admitte theyr ſentence geuen. This cauſe did not concerne the Marques George only, but alſo his nephewe Albert, whiche was his worde. In the meane tyme the Emperour calleth a counſell imperiall at Spyres, at the Ides of Septembre, for the appeaſyng of the controuerſie in Religion: But the eleuenth kalendes of Septembre, came vnto the Duke of Saxon, the Erles of Naſſowe and Nuenar, men of great authoritie, nobilitie and vertue: and by the Emperours priuitie, moue a reconciliation The Erles of Naſſowe & Neuenar. and to treate with hym of fyue thynges, the Lordes Supper, the cerimonies of the churche, the churche goodes, the ayde nedeful againſt the Turke, & the Election of king Ferdinādo. And where it appered by their wordes how the Emperour was perſwaded that he allowed the doctrine of Zwinglius, & the opinion of the Anabaptiſtes, he aunſwereth that what kynde of doctrine his is, and what his miniſters doe preache and teache, is ryght well knowen by his confeſſiō exhibited at Auſpurg, in the which he pourpoſeth through Gods grace to remayne, duryng his lyfe, and that he had neuer to do with Anabaptiſtes, nor greatly with the Zwinglians. And deſired thē to pourge him herein to the Emperour: They ſayd, how they knew it before this to be ſo, neuertheleſſe they woulde declare it ſo to the Emperour, who no doubt, would be glad and ioyfull to heare it: For the reſte of theyr

demaundes they were agreed, they ſhould be differred vntyl the next aſſemblie of the Empyre, whether they deſyre hym eyther to come him ſelfe or to ſende his ſonne: He ſayeth howe he woulde be glad to gratifie the Emperour in all thynges, but he is now aged and vnhable to trauayle, and beſydes that there be certen weyghtie cauſes, for the whiche he can neyther come hym ſelfe nor ſende his ſonne, vnleſſe the Emperour wyll graunte a ſaufe conduicte for hym and his trayne: Upon what conditions the Duks of Saxon wyll come to the aſſemble. Agayne where ſo euer he ſhall become, he can not want the preaching of Gods worde, nor haue preſcribed hym a certen kinde of meate: furthermore if the diſputation ſhall be touchyng Religion, it is requyſite that he bryng with hym Luther and others, whiche muſte alſo haue ſaufecouduicte: Fynally howe he hathe oftentymes made ſuite to the Emperour, to be inueſted in his owne Dukedome, after the cuſtome of the Empyre, and for other thynges whiche he coulde neuer obtayn, all be it he made many fayre promyſes.
            And nowe in this laſte aſſemblie at Auſpurge, Fridericke Palſgraue, The interceſſours and Proteſtant. aunſwered him ſo in his name, as it did eaſely appeare that the Emperour is ſore offended with hym: vpon whiche conſyderations he can not come, vnleſſe he maye through their mediation, obtayne the Emperours ſaufe conduicte in dewe ſeaſon: And than he wyll come without fayle. About the later ende of Auguſte, the Ambaſſadours of the Archebyſhop of Mentz and the Palſgraue, mette with the Ambaſſadours of the Proteſtauntes at Smalcalde, ſpeakynge muche of the loue and zeale that theyr Princes bare to theyr countrey, who ſeynge that they coulde not agree at Auſpurge, and conſyderynge the great daunger that myght enſue of that diſſention, would neuer reſte tyll the Emperour had graunted them leaue to treate of peace. Wherfore they thought it good to call agayne in queſtion ſuche thynges as coulde not be agreed vpon at Auſpurge, and to begynne where they lefte there. The others ſaye agayne, howe the Proteſtauntes knewe not what thynges ſhould be propounded, and therfore gaue them no certen commiſſion to determyne any thyng, but wylled them to ſende home in wrytinge ſealed, that whiche ſhoulde be propounded, and ſo they muſt do, and none otherwyſe. And whan after much altercation in wordes, they could not otherwyſe cōclude, at the laſt it was agreed that they ſhould mete at Spyres at a daye, whiche the interceſſours ſhould aſſigne, after that the pleaſure of the Duke and the Lantgraue herein were knowen, who ought in dede ſo ſhortly as myght be, in the name of them ſelues and their fellowes to ſignifie their mynde therin. Letters of yt Duke & the Lantgraue to the interceſſours. This was decreed the ſeconde daye of Septembre. And in the beginnyng of Octobre, the Duke and the Lantgraue, wrote to the Archbyſhop & to the Palſgraue, & repetinge the treaties of the Ambaſſadours before ſayde, they declare howe there coulde be no good done therein

without diuines: And howe they continewe iin the ſame Religion ſtyll, whiche they profeſſed at Auſpurge. And where as in all aſſemblies both when the Emperour was abſent, and nowe alſo of late being preſent, a counſell was promyſed, whiche ſhoulde forthwith be called and commenced, they truſted that the Emperour would ſhortly procure one in Germany: wherein they and their fellowes will open their doctrine more at large: In the meane tyme, they beſeche them to be meanes to the Emperour, that there be no extremitie wrought within the Empyre, but that ſuche as nowe do or hereafter ſhall profeſſe the Goſpell, may lyue in quiet vntyll ſuche tyme as the decree & authoritie of a lawfull counſell may determine the matter. And if they ſhall thynke good to treate howe to conclude the peace, and appointe a daye for it, they wyll ſende theyr Ambaſſadours thither. And if in theyr doctrine exhibited at Auſpurg, any man ſhall thynke to fynde an errour, and wyll ſhewe it, or if he cannot proue it, to ſtande to the teſtimony of Scripture, that would they and all their fellowes be glad of: And if it ſhall pleaſe the Emperour to aſſigne a daye for it at Spires, graunting a ſaufe conduicte for them, their fellowes, and for Luther, whome they intende to bryng with them, amonges other miniſters of their churche, and wyll permitte them to haue free and open preachinges of Gods worde, and the vſe of the Lordes Supper, according vnto Chriſtes inſtitution, preſcribyng no difference or choyce of meates: than wyll they either come themſelues, or els ſende theyr deputes with large commiſſion, and make declaration of their doctryne vnto all men. And if at the ſame metyng, theyr doctryne can not by the Scriptures be confuted, than truſte they that the Emperoure wyll no further moleſte them, but that they may ſtyll perſeuer in the ſame Religion. And for as muche as they haue appealed to a lawfull general counſell, and as yet nothyng is founde in theyr doctrine, that is agaynſt Gods worde where alſo by the order of the lawe and equitie, duryng the appellation no extremitie ought to be ſhewed vnto the partie that appealleto; their truſt is; that the Emperour wyll the rather at theyr requeſtes, ſuffor Germany to haue peace and quietnes. I ſhewed you before of an aſſemblye, that ſhould haue bene in Septembre at Spyres: But the Emperour being aduertiſed by ſondry letters and meſſengers of the Turkyſhe preparation, prorogeth the ſame to the moneth of Ianuary followynge, appoyntynge the place at Regenſpurge, that he myghte be ſo muche the nearer Auſtriche, where he perceyued the warre, woulde be. I ſhewed you before in the ſyrt booke, howe the warre whiche they of Zurycke and Bernes, would Warres in Swycerlāce haue made vppon the fyue townes, was pacifyed by the interceſſion of other Cities: But this yeare the Sore brake out agayne, and thoſe two Cities, ſteppynge all ſtreightes and paſſages, woulde permitte

no victuall to be brought vnto them. This was when the dayes were at the longeſt. And where as great trouble was lyke to enſue therof, Condicions or peace. the Frenche kyng and certen other cyties of the Suyſſes, laboured to take vp the matter, and drewe certen conditions of peace, but all was in vaine. Than did they of Zuricke and Bernes, declare by wryting, with what great wronges and iniuries they were cōſtreyned to ſtop their victualles: And now for as muche as they refuſe the cōdicions of peace, whiche the interceſſours haue deuiſed and propounded, they declare their malicious hartes againſt them, and howe they haue brokē the fourmer conuenauntes made betwene them, wherfore it is lawefull for them to cut o
                  •
                theyr victualles: And if any hurte come therof, it ought to be aſcribed vnto them, whiche ſeeke nothyng elles but diſſention, this was the nynth daye of Septembre. And what tyme theſe fyue townes were in great want and penury; the nynth of Octobre, they armed them ſelues ſecretly and marched forwarde: And before any man was ware of them, come vnto the borders of Zurick, where as laye a garriſon of a thouſand men or more. Which ſent diuerſe meſſengers into the citie to warne their men to come to them with ſpede, but their ennemies approched ſo faſte, that they coulde hardely come to their reſkewe. For when they were come to the toppe of the Hylle, whereby they muſt nedes paſſe; they ſawe theyr men in great daūger, in the next valley. Than exhorting & incouraginge one an other, they ranne downe the hyll, who myght go foremoſte, but the nature of the hylle was ſuche, as there coulde but one go downe at ones, whiche was the cauſe, that where as they coulde not marche in ordre of battell, they were of a greater multitude vanquyſhed and put to flyghte. This was the eleuent daye of Octobre. Amonges the nombre of them Thei of Zarick diſconfited. that were ſlayne, was Zwynglius. For it is the maner of Zuricke, that when they go forth in warfaye, the chief miniſter of theyr churche goeth with them. Zwynglius alſo of hym ſelfe beynge a man of a ſtoute and bolde courage, conſyderyng that if he ſhoulde rary at home, The death of Zwyng. and they ſhoulde go by the worſe, what diſpleaſare he ſhould ſuſteyne, as one that in his Sermons woulde encourage others, and hym ſelfe faynte, whan any daunger was, would nedes take ſuch 
                  ••
               te as other did. They ſhewed great crueltie vpon his dead corps, and their hatred towardes him was ſo muche, that theyr malice was not ſatiſfied with A beaſtlye cruelite. his death. He was fourty and foure yeares olde, foure yeares yonger than Luther.
            At the ſame moneth of Auguſt before, was ſeen a blaſyng Starre, & at the ſame tyme died Lewys the Frenche kynges mother, ſyſter vnto Charles Duke of Sauvy. The citie of Bernes, hearyng of this ouerthrowe, comforted them of Zuricke, promyſing to ſende them ayde, & to come with their whole power to auenge them of their ennemies:

Whan they were all commen together, whiche was aboute the eight daye after the battell, and they of Bernes, whiche before deſyred to take the matter in hande alone, were than nothyng haſty, the citie of Zuricke, whiche had ayde ſent them from the Schaffuſians, Mulluſians, and alſo from Sangall and Baſill, of the whole numbre choſe out certen enſeignes, whiche ſettynge foorth in the nyghte, laye in the Hylle beſydes Mencinge, pourpoſynge whan the Moue roſe, to take the towne of Tugie thereby, vpon the ſodayne. But theyr ennemies whiche had encamped them ſelues not farre from thence, knowynge of this by eſpeiall, went thether ſpedely, and ſet vpon them beynge a ſlepe, the .xxiiij. daye of October. And to put them in the greater feare, they made a wonderfull clamourous outcrye. Many were ſlayne on An other ſlaughter. both partes. And all be it the fyue Townes had the vpperhande, yet woulde they of Zuricke nothyng relent in their Religion. At the laſt through mediation, a peace was concluded, whereunto was added that they of Zuricke, Bernes, and Baſill, ſhould forſake the league whiche they had latelye made with the cytie of Strauſborough and the Lantgraue: lykewyſe ſhoulde the fyue townes breake of their league with kyng Ferdinando. And hereof were obligations made and ſealed in the later ende of Nouember. Oecolampadius departed out of this preſente lyfe, as it was ſuppoſed, for the inwarde ſorowe and The death of Oecolampadius. thought, he conceaued for the death of Swynglius, whome he loued intierly: he wanted but one yeare of fifty, there be of his workes written vpon certen of his Prophetes, whiche of learned men are muche commended. At the .xxix. daye of December, the Ambaſſadours of the Proteſtauntes, mete agayne at Frankeforte to finiſhe vp the reſt, concernyng the preparation of their defence. In the which aſſemblie, the cities of Goſlarie & Embecke, were receiued into their league, & a litle be fore that, they alſo of Eſlyng. But George the Marques of Brandenburgh, and the citie of Norinberg, Campedown and Hailbrune, were abſent. For all be it they profeſſe that ſame Religion, yet were they not of that league. The Emperour in the begynning of Ianuary, toke his iourney from Bruſelles, to go to Regenſpurge for the aſſemblie before mentioned. By the waye when he came to Mentz at the begynnynge The Aſſemble of Regē
                  ſpurge. of February, the Archebyſhop there and the Palſgraue, intreate hym agayne for peace, whiche the Emperour grauntinge vnto, they aduertyſe the Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue, wyllynge them to doe the lyke: Wherfore by theyr letters ſent to and fro, they appoynte to mete at Schwinfurte, a towne Imperiall by the Ryuer of Moene, at the begynning of Apryll. There dyd they begynne to treate of a peace, whiche ſhoulde continue vnto the generall counſell. The Prynces that were interceſſours, were there preſent, and by ordre geuen by the Emperour, do propounde theſe conditions.

That beſydes the writyng exhibited at Auſpurge touching Religion, they ſhould alter nothing, teache nothyng, nor publyſhe any thing, but Conditions of a peace betwene the Emperour and Proteſt. remayne in thoſe boundes, vntyll the tyme of the counſell: ſo as they haue nothyng to doe with the Zwynglianes and the Annabaptiſtes. Neither that through the occaſion of Religion, they do allure vnto thē other Prynces ſubiectes, and permitte any of their Miniſters to preache out of their owne countrey: that they abſtayne from wordes of reproche: that they diſturbe not the iuriſdiction, rytes, and ceremonies of the churche, that they geue their ayde agaynſt the Turke, and obey the decrees of the Empyre, whiche concerne the common wealthe and politike gouernaunce, that they be obedient to the Emperour & kynge of Romaynes. And if they haue made any league againſte the Emperour, kyng or other ſtates of the contrary Religion, to abolyſhe the ſame: If they wyl thus do, they truſte how the Emperour and the king, wyll leaue and forget all diſpleaſure paſte. The Duke had ſent thether his ſonne Iohn Fridericke, being him ſelfe ſore ſicke. There was alſo Fraunces Duke of Lunenburg, and Counte Anhalde, agayn the Ambaſſadours of other Prynces & cities, whereunto came alſo the Nortuſians and Halbeſtans of Swelande. After muche debatyng, the interceſſours aduertiſe by their letters, the Emperour of the whole matters, who was than at the aſſemblie of Ratiſbonne, to knowe his further pleaſure in matters. Unto that demaunde, whiche was that the Duke of Saxon and his fellowes, ſhould obey the kyng of Romains. They wryte an aunſwere to the Emperour, what lacke they fynde, & and what they woulde requyre hym to doe therein. and deliuered the ſame ſealed to the interceſſours the .xvij. daye of Apryll, the effect wherof was, that Ferdinando ſhould not take vpon hym to be kyng of Romaines, but in caſe the Emperour had nede of a coadiutour, that than by the aduyſe and counſell of the Prynces Electours, he ſhould ſo interprete the lawe Caroline, makyng an acte therof for euer, ye it myght be done lawefully after this ſorte. That as longe as the Emperour lyueth, Conditions of creatinge a kynge of Romaynes. there ſhould neuer hereafter be choſen a kynge of Romaines, vnleſſe the ſeuen Princes Electours, and ſixe other Prynces of the Empyre ioyned with them, iudge it ſo mete to be done. And what tyme it ſhall appeare to be for the profite of the common wealth, that than the Archebyſhop of Mentz ſhall appointe the reſt of the Electours, & ſyxe other Prynces to mete in a place conuenient for a further conſultation to be had therin: And whan they ſhall haue conſidered the whole matter diligently, that than the Prynces Electours only with the kyng of Boheme, ſhall haue authoritie to electe a kyng of Romaynes, who ſo long as the Emperour lyueth, ſhall gouerne the cōmon wealth in the Emperours name onlye, and otherwyſe to take vppon hym none aucthoritie or gouernment. That the Princes and ſtates of the Empyre,

be not bound to him by any fidelitie or othe, except it be after the Emperours death. And whan a newe kynge ſhall be created, that he be ſworne after the order of the lawe Carolyne, and that it be not in the Electours power to alter ye ſame. He that ſhalbe proued to haue done contrary to that othe, or els be had in great ſuſpicion therof and maketh not his purgation, ſhalbe depriued of all ryght of Electourſhyp for euer. Moreouer that there be not choſen three kynges ſucceſſiuelye of one houſe of Prynces, that none be choſen kyng of Romaynes, except he be of ſome houſe of the Princes of Germany. Suche thynges as are eſtablyſhed by the lawe Caroline, concernyng the kynges election, neyther the Emperour nor kynge of Romaynes, maye chaunge. Whan it ſhal ſeme good to the electours to create a king of Romaines, that they ſhall not nede to ſignifie the ſame before to the Emperour: Neither that it ſhalbe lawfull for the Emperour in this caſe, to commaūde the Archebyſhop of Mētz, to aſſemble the Princes electours: but what tyme there ſhall appeare iuſt cauſe, to electe a kynge of Romaynes, duryng the lyfe of the Emperour, that the Archebyſhop at a certen daye call his company to Franckfurth: And that it lie not in his authoritie to appointe the aſſemblye els where, vnleſſe his collegues doe vpon weyghtie conſiderations permitte hym, that the Archebyſhop of Mentz ſhall not demaunde the Crowne, Scepter, and other ornamentes of the Empire of them of Norinberge, but by the conſent of his peres. Neyther that he diminiſhe anye parte of thre monethes, which after they be ſommoned, is graūted to the Prynces to haue cō
               ference together, for it may be daungerous to the Empyre and cōmon wealth, if one or two comyng not in tyme ſhould be abſent. That whileſt the Electours conſulte at Frankeforth, all others be ſhut out. If any of thoſe matters be infrynged, that thē the Electours be not bonde eyther to repare thether, or there to remaine, and what ſoeuer is there done to be voyde and of none effect. That neyther the Emperour nor king of Romans in Italy, Fraūce, or other places do permitte harmes of the Princes Electours to be borne before hym, or their offices to be executed, but by the Electours them ſelues or their deputes. That the kyng of Romaynes do not ſolemnyſe his laſte coronation, vnleſſe eyther the electours or their deputes be preſent, that neyther the Emperour nor kyng of Romaynes, be a let to the Ambaſſadours of foreine kynges and Princes, wherby they may not come to the counſelles of the Empyre, there to propounde their matters: for that this apperteyneth both to the lawe of nature, and is alſo a thyng full of humanitie & ciuile dutie. That neither the Emperour nor kyng of Romaynes, in caſes of the Prynces of the Empyre, take vpon them any authoritie of determining, but ſuffer the ſame to be lawfully decided, in place where they ought to be. That ſuche thinges as ſhal apperteine to the honour,

welth, and preſeruation of the Princes and of the Empyre, and ſuche as the Emperour hath promyſed vpon his fidelitie to obſerue, he doe maynteyne, and in caſe any thynge be otherwyſe done to refourme it, and bynde the kynge of Romaynes by a lawe, to obſerue the ſame. And if the Emperour woulde after this ſorte expounde and confyrme the lawe of Charles the fourth, the Duke of Saxon woulde not faile to doe his dutie: when ſo euer the common wealth ſhould requyre any ſuche conſultation. But in caſe the interceſſours coulde not obtayne theſe thynges of the Emperour, that they woulde not refuſe any lawfull hearyng of the matter. Yet ſo that in the meane tyme king Ferdinando, ſhould neyther take vpon him nor vſurpe any gouernement of matters of the Empyre nor authoritie: namely ouer thē, & ouer Williā and Lewys, brethren Dukes of Bauier. And if this wyl not be graū
               ted them, that then the Emperour would heare thē openly in the coū
               ſayle of the Princes and other ſtates: where they wyll declare, vpon how weightie and iuſte cauſes they diſalowe this election. And for ſo muche as for the refuſall of the ſame, they perceyue how they incurre, not only with the Emperour, but alſo with foreine kinges and natiōs in to the ſuſpicion of rebellion, they deſyre muche that the Emperoure would not take it diſpleaſaūtly that they ſhould make theyr purgatiō, as well within Germany, as alſo without the lymites of the Empyre, for this muſt they do of neceſſitie. Where amonges other thynges it is ſayde, that the Electours ſhould ſweare after the ordre preſcribed in the Caroline, thus it ſtandeth. What tyme they be comen to Franckeforth, when maſſe is done they go vp to the Aultar, and there lay their The othe of theelectoars handes vpon the holy boke (as they call it) and certen wordes beynge ſpoken, take a ſolempne othe, by the fayth that they owe to God and to the Empyre, that they wyll choſe a newe and hyghe Magiſtrate, ſuche a one as they ſhall thynke moſte worthy, mete, and neceſſary for that office, ſo farreforth as thei can coniecture by their wytte and iudgement, without any compacte, bribe, rewarde, or promyſe. Where they accompte the Dukes of Bauier to be of their numbre, this is the conſideration. They alſo miſliked the election of kyng Ferdinando, & takynge their counſell herein, entred into league with the Duke of Saxon, the Lantgraue, and the Frenche kynge, to defende the lybertie of Germanie: And indede the kyng of Fraunce delyuered into cucuſtody of the two brethren, Dukes of Bauer, an hondreth thouſande The Dukes of Bauer miſliked the election of Ferdinādo. crownes, to be alwayes in a readines, if nede requyred. The Prynces that were interceſſours make aunſwere hereunto the .xx. day of April. Howe they treate of theſe matters for a concorde, neyther had they thoughte that they woulde haue propounded theſe thynges. For in that they haue choſen a kynge of Romaynes, the Emperour yet lyuyng, they haue moſte weightie cauſes, whiche were at the ſame tyme

declared to Iohn Fredericke his fathers deputie there, and if nede requyre, may be yet more playnely expounded, but ſynce this matter cō
               cerneth not them only, but the Emperour alſo and the kyng, and reſidue of their fellowe Prynces, they wyll not make many wordes therof, but leaue it alone, to the intent they may come more eaſelye to the reconciliation of the reſt. Neuertheleſſe if they be conſtrayned to make aunſwere for their doinge, they wyll not refuſe iudgement herein, and doubt not to approue their doynges in ſuche ſorte, that nothinge can iuſtly be layde to their charge. But in caſe theſe thynges ſhould be reported to the Emperour, they feare muche that it ſhould not only take no place, but alſo let and hynder the whole treatie of peace. Wherfore that both truce may be taken, and a reconcilement may be had, as wel for Religion as for the Election, and that neyther be ſeparated from yt other, they erneſtly beſeche bothe the father and the ſonne, Dukes of Saxon, that they would conſyder the thyng, and forſake their opiniō. And in ſo doing they doubte not, but that the Emperour and the king woul put them in good aſſuraunce, that this election ſhoulde not be hurtfull to them nor to their heyres: and woulde ſhewe them beſydes all the pleaſure they coulde, as well in matters of Religion as otherwyſe. For that Religion ſhoulde haue peace graunted, and the matter of election remayne vndertermined, they feare muche that this coulde not be obtayned. Thus verely doe they frendly counſell them, and requyre them to take it in that parte, and ſo vſe thē ſelues, that they may perceyue their aduiſe is regarded, and their diligence well imployed. Hereunto aunſwereth Duke Iohn Fridericke the fourth daye after: The aunſwer of the Duke to the iterceſſours. that he loked for no ſuche aunſwere of them. For where they ſayed lately amonges other thinges, that the kyng of Romaines was elected for the welth and dignitie of the Empyre, they oughte of neceſſitie to to aunſwere to this poinct, for the ſatiſfiynge as well of his father as his fellowes, who are perſwaded that this electiō is not good nor profitable to the Empyre. And where as they ſuſteyne the perſones of interceſſours, he had thought certenly that they woulde neuer haue defended the matter, but haue left the ſame doubtful and vndetermined: for ſuch thinges as they haue ſpoken do not concerne them that be interceſſours, but ought to be referre dvnto that time whā theſe things ſhall come in comon conſultation. In dede at Collon, what tyme the Emperour deſyred to ioyne with hym his brother Ferdinando, in the fellowſhip of the Empyre, he adledged certen cauſes, why it ought ſo to be: But thoſe ſemed not to be ſo great, as therfore the lawe Caroline, the ryght and libertie of the Empyre ought to be infringed. At what tyme, he and other of his fathers Ambaſſadours did aunſwere them, why it ought not ſo to be done. Wherfore the thynge that was ſpoken in the laſt place, nowe they repete agayne alſo: that in caſe the

Emperour wyll not admitte theyr requeſtes, that then the matter determined in lawfull iudgement, where the reaſons of theyr refuſall may be heard. And ſeyng they treate of equitie, he ſuppoſed they wold alſo in this caſe haue founde out ſome way and honeſt meane and profitable for the Empyre. But in as muche as it is not ſo done in this cō
               trouerſie, he wyll no further moleſte them herein. But vndoubtedlye his father and his fellowes wyll declare (yet to the iniury of no man) howe the lawe of libertie of the the Empyre, are by this meane infringed: he truſteth alſo, that for ſo much as theſe thynges concerne the honour and preſeruation of the common wealth, the Emperour wyl not take them diſpleaſauntly. In the reſte of theyr demaundes, that ſame The craft of the Papiſtes firſt poinct, whiche is touching the Zwynglians, was ment, that the Prynces myght be ſequeſtred from the moſte parte of the cities: and in this treaty the interceſſours did ſo expounde it, that if the Zwynglians would acknowledge theyr errour and forſake it, they myght alſo be compryſed in this peace: if not, to be refuſed, & neyther to ayde A cancorde. them nor enter into league with them. But the laſt yeare at Smalcalde, the Proteſtantes were accorded. And what time thei of Strauſborough, and certen cities of Sweuia, had more playnly expounded their opinion propounded at Auſpurge, concerning the Lordes Supper, their declaration was excepted of the Saxons. And therfore now with one mynde they aunſwere all one and the ſame thynge to eueryry requeſte, and at the length propounde theſe conditions of peace. That they which at Auſpurge did exhibite the confeſſion of theyr doctrine, and an Apologie of the ſame, and ſuche as hereafter ſhall receiue the ſame doctrine, do conſiſte within theſe lymites, and renewe nothynge furthermore, vntyll the counſell, ſo often tymes promyſed and poynted vpon: That they ioyne not with them, as concernyng theyr doctryne, whiche teache otherwyſe of the Lordes Supper, & of Baptiſme, than is ſpecified in their wryting exhibited at Auſpurg: that thei neyther allure vnto them, nor maynteyne an other mans Subiecte, through the occaſion of Religion. Howe be it if it ſhall be lawfull for any men, eyther by lawe or condition, to go whether they wyll, whan they ſhal haue firſt declared the ſame to their Lordes or Magiſtrates, they may flitte and remoue if they wyll, and be receiued. That they ſende forth no preachers without their owne limites to preache, vnleſſe that eyther the Magiſtrate of that place, deſyre or permitte hym ſo to doe, whan any aſſembly ſhall happen to be there. For if he refuſe, than it ſhalbe lawfull for them to doe it at home: And if they ſhalbe eyther at the counſelles of the Empyre, or ſende the power agaynſte the Turke, let them at ſuche tymes vſe theyr owne preachers, and alſo the Lordes Supper, accordyng to Chriſtes cōmaundement, let them abſteyne from the reproches: not withſtanding let the Miniſters of the

churche, according to their dutie, reprehende errours and vices with a modeſtie, and ſhewe them the thynge that is ryght. That ſuch as be of their Religion, be not ſecluded from the chamber imperiall: that the eccleſiaſticall iuriſdiction remayne in place as it nowe is. And that it ſhall not be lawfull for byſhoppes to moleſte or brynge in trouble any man for profeſſyng this doctrine. That ſentences geuen concernynge Religion, iuriſdiction, Ceremonies, churche goodes, whiche are not yet put in execution, be differed tyll a generall counſell. Let them vſe the churche goodes, whiche remayne in thoſe places, wherunto thoſe gooodes do properly appertayne, neyther let any thyng be violentlye taken from any man, and that the yerely reuenewes be brought to the ſame places, as they haue bene of olde tyme accuſtomed, tyll the counſell, ſhall otherwyſe determine it: In al ciuile matter, let euery man do his office and dutie, let all men tende the common wealth, and ſhewe mutuall faith and beneuolence. When the matter was brought vnto this poynt and woulde come no nerer, the interceſſours continue ſtyll theyr purpoſe, and to the intent that all thynges myght be reported to the Emperour more ſpedely, they appointe an other metynge at Norynberge, the thyrde daye of Iune. And there at the laſte, albeit the ful The Emperour of neceſſitie graunteth peace to Germany. agrement was not had, yet for as muche as the Turke inuading Auſtriche, neceſſitie requyred to make all the power againſte hym that myght be gathered, the Emperour doth eſtablyſhe an vniuerſall peace throughout Germany, and decreeth that no man be moleſted for Religion, vntyll the tyme of the generall counſell, and if there be none vntyll the ſtates of the Empyre, ſhall fynde an other meane, to redreſſe this controuerſte: vnto ſuch as ſhal do otherwyſe, he appoynteth great punyſhement: And ſayeth he wyll do all his endeuoure, that it may be called within this half yeare, and begynne within a yeare after. And if this can not be obteined, that then the matter ſhalbe diſcuſſed in the counſell of the Empyre: wherfore he chargeth and commaundeth that all ſuytes and proces in the lawe, commenced for Religion, ſhal in the meane tyme be let falle and ſuſpended. And if any thyng be otherwyſe done againſt the proteſtauntes, he commaūdeth it to be voyde and of none effect. Agayne the Proteſtauntes which were than ſeuen Princes, and .xxiiij. cities, offer vnto hym their obediences and ſeruice, and promyſe him ayde againſt the Turke. This peace was concluded by The 
                     ••
                  ibre of Proteſt. the interceſſours the .xxiij. of Iuly, and the Emperour, whom they aduyſed by letters and meſſengers confirmed it the ſeconde of Auguſt, & cauſed it to be proclaymed openly, commaunding the counſell of the Empyre and other iudges to obey the ſame. It was decreed in the counſell at Auſpurge, that the iudgement of the counſelles chamber, ſhould be refourmed. Wherunto the Emperour appointed two in his name, and moreouer choſe the archebyſhop of Mentz and the Palſgraue,

Prynces Electours, alſo the byſhop of Spyres, and of Strauſborough, and Philip the Marques of Brandenbourgh. Euery one of theſe ſent his depute to Spyres, at the begynnynge of Marche, who made there certen lawes, whiche concerned partly the iudges, pattly the aduocates, and partly the ſuters. Which they exhibited to the Emperour in this aſſemblie at Regenſpurge, who lyked the reformation well, and added a fewe thynges to the ſame. In the laſte booke before The aſſemble at Regēſpurge. this, you haue hearde howe the Emperour vnded the conuenantes betwene Alberte Duke of Pruſe, and Sigiſmunde king of Pole. But where as Albert perſeuered in his purpoſe, he was outlawed at this tyme by the Iudges of the Emperiall chambre, at the ſute of Walter Cronberge. Whiche thynge whan the kynge of Pole vnderſtoode, he ſent his Ambaſſadour to this aſſemblie, to declare howe the lande of Pruſe hath of olde tyme bene vnder the defence and tuition of his realme. Wherfore he deſyreth that this ſentence of outlawerye maye be reuerſed. But Cronberge with a long oration had the thyrde daye of Iune, proueth it to be vnder the iuriſdiction of the Empyre, and to belong nothing at al to the kynges of Pole. And al be it that his predeceſſours, vanquyſhed in battell, were conſtrained to geue their fidelitie to Caſmire, father vnto Sigiſmunde, yet was the ſame cleane contrary to the conuenauntes made before tyme, whiche thynge he is able to proue by the teſtimony of Albert him ſelfe, who cōfeſſed the ſame eight yeares ſynce in the aſſemblie at Norinberge. Therfore requyreth he, that the requeſte of the kynge of Pole ſet a parte, the ſentence geuen agaynſt Alberte may be put in execution. This yeare Chriſtierne kynge Chriſtierne kyng of Denmarck is taken. of Denmarke, who had bene ten yeares a banyſhed man, prouyded a nauie, intendyng to recouer his kyngdome, but he was taken on the ſea, and committed to warde, and about the ſame tyme died, hauing a towarde young man to his ſonnne, and broughte vp with the Emperour his vncle. The chiefeſt conſultation in this aſſemblie was about the Turkyſhe warre. And whan newes came daylye by letters & meſſengers, The Turck inuaded Auſtriche. howe the Turke had ſent before great bandes of horſmen to the Ryuer of Danubius, and alſo the Ambaſſadours of Auſtriche, and of other countreys nere, had declared in what daunger they werein, they decreed to geue their ayde, ſo as al the ſtates of the Empyre ſhuld ayde, not with mony but with ſoldiours. Wherfore the .xxvj. daye of Iuly, ended this aſſembly, and al men prepared them to warre. At the Ides of Auguſte, the Duke of Saxon, Prynce electour, ended his lyfe, and Iohn Fridericke his ſonne did ſuccede him. Whan Solyman The death of the Duke of Saxon. the Emperour of Turkes, was come to Belgrade, he taketh the waye on the left hande, and attempteth the towne and caſtell of Giunte in vayne, being manfully defended by Nichas Iurixe: after that he ſent forth Captaine Caſon with fiftene thouſande horſemen to ſpoyle the

countrey, who inuaded the countrey as far as Lintzie aboue Uienne and deſtroying all farre and nere, leaueth no kynde of crueltie vnpractiſed, but in his retourne, he fel in to the lappes of our horſemen, which were made out to kepe hym from the ſpoyle, and ſo beyng fought with The ſlaughter of yt Turkyſh warre. in ſondry places to his vtter deſtruction, at the lengthe hym ſelfe was ſlayne. Solyman tournyng more and more on the left hande, marcheth vnto Gratin a towne of Stiria. Whiche thynge ones knowen, the Emperour beyng than at Lintze, taketh aduiſement what was beſte to be done. At the laſt it was determied, that he ſhould encampe with his whole armie at Uienna, abydyng his ennemie there.
            Thus in fyne Solimā retyreth, without any notable exploict done. The Emperour had intreated the Frenche kyng for ayde, but he made him aunſwere, as the Emperour that tyme reported, that Germanye was able enough to reſyſte the Turke alone.
            The kyng of Englande alſo wrote agayne ſomewhat doubtfullye: The byſhop of Rome Clement, ſent hym ayde by the conduicte of Hipolitus a Cardinall of the houſe of Medices. The Swycers beyng requeſted by the Emperour, would not for all that ſtyre one fote. This yeare was ſene a blaſyng Starre in Septembre and Octobre, before A blaſyng Starre. the ſonne riſing. After the Turke was retyred with his armie, the Emperour miſlykyng their aduyſe, that thought good to purſue the ennemye, diſchargeth his armie, for that wynter was at hande, and from Uienne toke his iourney into Italy. And being at Mantua, he appointeth in his letters wrytten to the ſtates of the Empyre, that his The Empe. goeth into Italy. brother kyng of Romaines, ſhall gouerne the cōmon welth in his abſence, he was for weightie cauſes gone in to Italy, and there woulde treate with the byſhop of Rome, concerning a counſell, as it was decreed at Ratiſbone: He wylleth all menne therfore to maynteyne the peace whiche was of late proclaymed, and be as obedient to his brother as they would be to him ſelfe. Departyng from thence to Bononie, he entred into talke with Clement the ſeuenth, deuyſynge amonges other thynges of Religion and a generall counſel. He maketh alſo a legue with hym, and with the reſydue of the Prynces in Italy, in wordes to mayntayne the peace and quiet of Italy. But in verye deede to kepe out the Frenche men.
            The Embaſſadours of the Frenche kyng, were ſore againſt it, but the byſhop admoniſhed them not to be ſo erneſt, priuely ſignifiyng that it ſhould not long endure, for the Emperour had brought with hym a great nombre of Spanyardes, which the byſhop wold fayne haue diſpatched out of Italy. And for this cauſe made the league, obſer
                  〈…〉
               g the The Pope ſerueth the tyme. occaſion of tyme. The Emperour ſhortly after ſayled into Spayne in the moneth of Marche: And not longe after that the byſhop of Rome ſendeth a legate into Germanye, Hughe Rangon byſhop of Rhegio:

And whan he came to the Duke of Saxō accompanied with the Emperous Ambaſſadour, he made a long oration, the effect wherof was this. How after muche and long conference had betwene the byſhop The Oratiō of the Popes Ambaſſad. to the Duke of Saron. and the Emperour, about the controuerſie that is in Religion, in fyne they concluded, that for the remedy therof there is no waye better thā a generall counſell, wherof they perceiued, the Prynces of Germany to be alſo very deſyrous. And this to be the cauſe of his meſſage, euen to declare vnto hym and the other Prynces, how both the byſhop and the Emperour are determined to haue a counſell free and common for all men, ſuche as the olde fathers were accuſtomed to haue in tymes The Popes policie. paſt, whoſe myndes vndoubtedly were gouerned by the holye ghoſte, prouided alwayes that ſuche as ſhall repare thyther, make faythfull promeſſe to obſerue the decrees therof, for els ſhould all their labour be ſpent in vayne, if they ſhould make lawes whiche none woulde obſerue and kepe: As concerning a place both for holſome ayre and plentye of victuall commodious, the byſhop thinketh either Placence or Bononie not vnmete for the purpoſe, or els Mantua, whiche is a citie of the Empyre, nere vnto Germany, of a goodly ſituatiō and plentiful of all thynges neceſſary, of the whiche thre it ſhall be lawfull for them to choſe one: Whereunto if the kinge of Romaines he and other Prynces of Germany, woulde make ſome reaſonable aunſwere: Than the byſhop conſulting alſo with other kynges, would cal the ſame within this halfe yeare, to begynne within one yeare after, to the intent ſuche as dwel very farre of, may prepare thē ſelues to take their iorney.
            Whan he hadde ſpoken this and more, he deliuereth certen Articles compryſed in wryting to the Prynce Electour from the byſhop of Rome. Afterwardes the Emperours Ambaſſadour ſpeaketh on this wyſe. For as muche as in al former aſſemblies, the recōciliation of religion The Oratiō of the Emperours Amb. hath bene hetherto attēpted in vayne, & is ſuppoſed that by a coū
               ſel the matter might be pacified: therfore hath the Emperour of late obtayned that ſame of the byſhop of Rome (that is to ſay) that it be holdē after the ſame maner, time & place as his Ambaſſadour hath declared. And therfore is he ſent of the Emperour, to beare witneſſe that the byſhop of Rome is content to haue a counſell, and becauſe his Ambaſſadour hath ſpoken ſufficientlye of the whole matter, he nedeth to ſaye no more, but to deſyre hym to credite his tale, and make hym a frendly aunſwere. The Duke of Saxon ſayeth, that becauſe the matter is weightie, he wyll take delyberation, this was at Weymer. After a fewe dayes the Duke aunſwereth, that where the Emperour and the byſhop haue agreed vppon a counſell, he is exceadinge glad, The Duke of Saxons aunſwere. for the ſtate of the common wealth doth chiefly requyre ſuch a one as oftētimes the Emperour hath promiſed the Germanes, wherin ye cauſe may be duely examined, according to the preſcripte of Gods worde.

Whiche if it might be, he would nothing doubte, but that all thinges ſhould go wel: he wil both pray vnto God to graunt this and alſo admoniſhe the people vnder his iuriſdiction to do the lyke: he will applie his whole ſtudie hereūto, and moue his fellowes alſo to be carefull for the ſame: he would be glad moreouer to make a preſent aunſwer, but there be many others of the ſame religion, who with his father Duke Iohn, profeſſed the ſame doctrine in the aſſemblie at Auſpurge before the Emperour, ſo that he can not aunſwere of him ſelfe alone, without making them priuie, neither is it expedient for the cauſe ſo to doe. For better it is that the ſame be done by comon aſſent. And for as much as the Emperour & the byſhop the laſt wynter in their letters wrytten to the ſtates of the Empire from Bononie, put them in hope of a counſell, therfore did he & his fellowes appoint a day, the .xxiiij. of Iune, to mete at Smalcalde, to conſult of the whole matter: wherfore he deſireth thē not to be offended with this differment of time, for ſo ſone as his fellowes mete at their day preſcribed, they ſhal haue anſwer either by Ambaſſadours or by letters ſhortly after: And he wold through Gods grace ſo demeane him ſelf, that not only this preſent age, but alſo the time to come, ſhold perceiue right wel that he wyſhed for nothing more, thā that the pure religion & doctrine, & peace, not only of Germany, but of the whole comon wealth of Chriſtendom, might alſo floriche, and that the Emperour his chiefe ſouereigne might haue his due honour & dignitie. Afterwarde whan his fellowes were come, with good deliberation The Prote. aunſwere to the Pope & Emperour. they framed an anſwere by commō aſſent in their letters the laſt of Iune. Howe they gaue great thankes to the Emperour, whiche for Gods glory & preſeruation of the cōmon wealth had taken ſo muche paynes of a good zeale they doubted not. And therfore pray God ſo to confirme & direct his mynde to yt ende, that the truthe may be ſet forth and embraced. And falſe doctrine, wicked worſhipinge, & rites abolyſhed, and that all errours being cleane weded out of mens myndes, Gods true ſeruice, & other godly vertues, may agayne take place: For they chiefly deſire a counſel wherin the matter that is in controuerſie, may duely and orderly be decided. Suche a counſell alſo the Emperour hath promyſed long ſynce, and that in all aſſemblies of the Empyre, with great deberation hath bene decreed, to be kepte in Germanye. Wherof ſprang the diſſention of Religion. For all this diſſention ſprange vp fyrſte of that welle, that certen impudent perſones ouermuche extolled indulgences and pardons. At whiche tyme alſo other errours were perceyued and detected. And all be it that byſhop Leo condempned this doctryne, whiche brought thoſe errours to lyghte, yet haue they hetherto impugned that condempnatiō with the teſtimonies of the Prophetes and Apoſtles. And therfore hath a counſell ben alwaye thought moſte nedefull, as well of other Prynces and ſtates of them, wherin the cauſe myght be examined

and openly tryed, what is true and what is falſe: for that they ſawe howe many thynges were crept into Religion, whiche were to be refourmed. And therfore in the aſſemblies of the Empyre, it was decreed, that there ſhould be a free and a chriſtian counſell, eyther of all nations, or els of the prouince of Germany: by thoſe eſpeciall wordes, leſt that eyther the ſentēce of the byſhop, or the force and power of any other man, ſhould be preiudiciall to the cauſe. Agayne that in all this cauſe iudgement ſhould be geuen, not after the byſhoppes decrees and opinions of Scholemen, but accordyng vnto holy Scripture. For yf any mans power ſhould be of more force than the Scriptures, than due examination, who doubteth. But that he that ſhoulde contende againſte the byſhop, ſhoulde loſe his labour, and ſtryue agaynſte the ſtreame: Wherfore not without great conſiderations it hath been decreed that the counſell ſhould be holden in Germany: And the Emperour alſo content it ſhoulde ſo be, but nowe theſe requeſtes of the byſſhop to be vtterly againſt the decrees of the Empyre, confyrmed by the ſeales of the Emperour and the other Prynces. For all be it he ſpeaketh of a free councel, yet doubtles he intendeth an other thynge, whā 
               How a free counſel is to be vnderſtād he goeth about to haue kynges and Prynces bounden to hym: For in caſe he woulde haue it free, what ſhoulde this obligation nede? But nowe ſeyng that he is wholy bent this waye, certenly this is his purpoſe, that vnder the name of a counſell, he maye maynteyne his power and aucthoritie that no man ſhall reprehende his faultes and errours, or if any doe atttempte it, that he ſhall not eſcape vnpunyſhed. They knowe not what other men wyll doe, but ſurelye this demaunde of his, is wrytten in ſuche ſorte that it rather maketh them afrayde of a counſell, than prouoketh them to it: for who woulde bynde hym ſelfe after this ſorte, eſpecially beynge not yet knowen, what ſhall be the ordre of the counſell, the fourme and maner: whether the byſhop wyll haue his adherentes to beare there moſte aucthoritie, or whether the controuerſies ſhall be determined accordyng to the holy Scriptures, or after the traditions and lawes of men grounded vpon no Scripture at all. The lybertie of the Counſell, is alſo reſtrayned, in that he wyll haue it kept after the olde accuſtomed maner.
            They doe not refuſe the former counſelles that are conſonant to the Scryptures, but ſuche as haue bene in our tyme or a lyttle before, The coūſels are ſwarued from their old puritie. whiche haue attributed more than reaſon wold to the byſhop of Rome and decrees of men, farre differing from the auncient counſelles: therfore where he ſayeth it ſhall be after the olde accuſtomed maner, this is his crafte and policie, that there ſhall not be that lybertye of ſpeache and geuinge of ſentences, as they both deſyre, and alſo the cauſe requireth, but that iudgement ſhall be geuen accordynge vnto his lawes and vſurped power, whiche he taketh vppon hym, as by certen of the

laſt coūſelles it is manifeſt: but by this vſage and hadling of matters, can neither the churches be pacified, nor the troubled conſcience quieted, but are brought into further darkenes & bondage: wherfore ſeing that the biſhop hath not as yet ſatiſfied the requeſtes of the Emperour and ſtates of the Empyre, they erneſtly deſyre, that Ceſar conſidering The Empe. part to d
                     〈…〉
                  d Religion. the weightines of the cauſe, whiche concerneth the vniuerſall cōmon wealth, and all nations would ſee, that the matter might be handled indifferently: For this is his office and dutie, & this may he doe by the lawes. When in dede the byſhop impugneth the truthe: for it is to be forſeen and prouided, that the plaintife or defendaūt be not alſo iudge in the cauſe. For all nations haue great hope in this counſell, and doe The Pope is plentife, defendaūt & iudge. both wyſhe and pray, that at the laſte mens conſciences (troubled and ſore afflicted with doubtfull diſſentiō) may be made free, ſet at libertie, and taught the way of ſaluatiō. For theſe many hondreth yeares hath not bene ſo muche contention about ſo weighty matters as is at thys preſent. And this ſtryfe aryſeth of ſondry errours and vices, whiche haue ſpronge longe before our tyme: But and if men be diſceaued of theyr expectation, and ſhall haue no ſuche councell as hathe bene promyſed, what ſorowe and grief that thynge wyll be to mens hartes, it is eaſy to coniecture. Agayne if the byſhop ſhall refuſe the dewe examination & triall of the matter, it is to be feared leſt the cōmon welth and ſtate of the churche, ſhall be tourmoyled with ſorer tempeſtes thā it hath bene hitherto: But where as the ſtates of the Empyre, haue in all theyr aſſemblies cōdeſcended vpon an vpright counſel, they diſtruſt not, but they will perſeuer alſo in the ſame, vtterly refuſing the ſnares The Popes ſnares. and bondes, wherwith the biſhop intendeth craftly to catche thē, truſting that other kynges & Princes wyl do the like. For the bonde that he goeth about, is full of craft & deceitfulnes, neyther can there be true iudgement, vnleſſe the myndes of all men be franke & free: ſo that if he procede thus, & hold the counſel after his owne pleaſure, they wyll cō
               mitte the whole matter vnto God, whiche doubtles will defende his owne cauſe & doctrine. Howe be it in caſe the matter ſhould ſo come to paſſe, that the byſhop ſhould be permitted ſo to do, they wold take further aduiſement, what were thā nedeful to be done: And if perchaunce they ſhalbe ſūmoneth & ſe that they ſhalbe able to do any thing for the glory of Gods holy name, they wil come thither by ſaufe cōduict, whā they are made wel aſſured, or ſend their Ambaſſadours to propounde what ſoeuer the neceſſitie of the cauſe ſhall requyre, neuertheleſſe vnder that condition, that they wyll in no wyſe admytte thoſe requeſtes of the byſhop, nor acconſente to any counſell that is contrarye to the decrees of the Empire: For they can not ſee howe this interpriſe of the byſhop, can make for the contynuall peace of the churche and the common wealth: Neyther is it alſo ſemelye for hym ſo to doe, in caſe he

would execute the office of a true Paſtour, whiche is to haue a care for all men, and to feede them with the true doctrine of Chriſt. Whiche The biſhops office. thynges ſtanding thus, they deſyre them to cary this theyr aunſwere to the Emperour and the biſhops, and that the Emperour whom thei do reuerently acknowledge to be their chief ſouereigne appointed of God, do not take the ſame in euyll parte, but that he woulde fynde the meanes that the counſell myght be had according to the decrees of the Empyre, and that the whole controueſie may be decided by vertuous men, and nothyng ſuſpected. For certenly this appertayneth to his cō
               mendation and vertue, to employe al his power and aucthoritie to the aduauncement of true doctrine, and not to the eſtablyſhynge of theyr crueltie, whiche nowe theſe many yeares haue perſecuted innocent perſones, only for the profeſſion of the Goſpell, and holſome doctryne. For the reſidue they committe all that euer they haue vnto the Emperour, neyther is there any other thyng, whiche they wyll not be glad to doe for his ſake. At the ſame tyme with kyng Ferdinando, was the byſhoppes Ambaſſadour Peter Paule Uerger, whome I ſpoke of in Uergerius. the former booke. And becauſe the byſhop of Rhezo was an aged man and ſickly, Clement commaunded Uerger, that in caſe any impedimēt happened vnto him, he ſhould ſupplie his rowme: but he geueth hym an eſpeciall charge, that he beare alwayes in memory what his mynd and wyll is, touchyng the counſell: Let hym loke therfore that in no wyſe he doe paſſe the boundes of his commiſſion, no not one fynger breadth, nor that he dryue not hym to ſuche an exigent, that he muſt of neceſſitie kepe a counſel, though king Ferdinādo would neuer ſo fayne haue it ſo, and vrged The Pope ſleeth the coū
                  ſell. hym ſtreightly therunto
         
         
            
            
               ✚ The nynth Booke of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the ſtate of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne of the Empyre of Charles the fyfte.
            
               ❧ The argument of the nynth Booke
            
               GEorge Duke of Saxon marketh ſuche as fauoured the Goſpel, and accuſeth Luther to the Electour of Saxony his coſyn. Pope Element meting the Frenche kyng at Marſeilles, geueth his Niece in marriage to Henry Duke of Orleaunce. The Dake of Wirtenberge, dryuen out of his countrey. Henry the eight kyng of Englande, putteth away Quene Katherine his wyfe, and forſaketh the Pope. The Pageaunt of the ſpirite of the graye freers of Orleaunce, is recited. The Lantgraue recouereth the Duke dome of Wittemberge. The agrement betwene kyng Ferdinando and the Duke of Saxon, and the articles of peace betwixt Ferdinando and 
                     〈…〉
                  ich Duke of Wirtemberge, are reherſed. Clement dieth. Paule of the houſe of Ferneſe, ſuccedeth. perſecutiō at Paris, by reaſon of certen placardes, the kyng pourgeth him ſelfe to the Germaynes therfore. The Emperour taketh the citie of Tunnes. Moore and the byſhop of Rocheſter, are beheaded. Pope Paule by his legate Uergerius ſommoneth the counſell of Mantua, wherfore the Proteſtauntes metyng at Smalcalde, ſende their aduyſe in wrytinge. The Lorde Langey being ſent thether by the kyng of Fraunce, ſolliciteth them to a league, and debated diuers matters: wher vnto the Proteſtauntes made aunſwere. The kyng of Englande alſo ſent thether, to declare what woulde be the ende to attende for ſuche a counſell. The league of Smalcalde is renewed, into whiche are newly admitted ſondry Prynces and Cities.
            
            
               WHan they had made this aunſwer, they appoynted diuines, and lawyers, to delyberate vpon the action for the counſell to come, and determined to ſet forth the byſhops aunſwere in prynte, and communicate the ſame to forein kynges and nations. Alſo to ſende Ambaſſadours to the Iudges of the chamber, who contrary to the Emperours proclamatiō, graunted out proces againſt certen, in cauſes of Religion, whoſe iudgement, vnles they ſurceaſed they would refuſe. Moreouer to ſende an Ambaſſade to the Archebyſhop of Mentz, and to the Palſgraue, which were interceſſours: And laſt of all to reporte vnto the Emperour the whole matter in wryting. I haue tolde you oftener than ones, howe Duke George of Saxony, bare malice to Luther priuely, and hated his doctrine The craft of Duke George to fynde out the Lutherians. openly. And where as he vnderſtode that diuers of his ſubiectes did holde opinion, that they ought to receyue the Lordes ſupper after the commaundemēt of Chriſte, he charged the Miniſters of his churches, to geue vnto all ſuche as after the olde cuſtome at Eaſter, confeſſed their ſynnes, and receiue the Sacrament after the byſhop of Romes lawe, certen tokens, whiche they ſhould afterwardes deliuer vnto the Senate, to the intent it myght be knowē, who were of the Romyſhe,

and who were of Luthers opinion. So were there founde in Lipſia, whiche is the head Towne of that countrey, to the numbre of Luthers coū
                  ſell. lxx. without tokens. They had conſulted with Luther before, what was nedefull to be done: Who wrote vnto them, that ſuche as beleued certenly howe they ought to receiue the whole ſupper, ſhould doe nothing againſt their owne conſcience, but rather ſuffer death: Wherfore being thus encouraged, they ſticke vnto it, and whan the Prince called them before hym, geuing them two monethes reſpite to deliberate, and they woulde not alter their purpoſe, they were bannyſhed the town. Luther in his letters to them of Lipſia, called Duke George the Apoſtle of Sathan, whiche thinge breade muche trouble: For Duke George did accuſe hym before his coſyn the Electour of Saxon, howe he had not only rayled on hym, but had alſo ſtyred vp his ſubiectes to rebellion. The Prince Electour in his letters charged Luther withal, and amonges other thynges ſayth, that vnleſſe he can make his purgation herein, he muſt of neceſſitie punyſhe hym. Wherfore vpon this occaſion, Luther wryteth a booke, wherein he confuteth this accuſation, declaryng howe he gaue them counſel not to reſiſte their Prince, Luthers purgation. commaunding them not to doe wickedly, but rather to ſuffer death or exile, whiche concerneth no rebellion. For that is to be aſcribed vnto them that teache howe the Magiſtrate ſhoulde be reſiſted by force of armes, and they are ſedicious in deede, of whome alſo Peter the Apoſtle hath prophecied, but this belongeth to the profeſſion of the Goſpel, to be condempned as ſeditious: Chriſt hym ſelfe was for this cauſe put to death moſte vnworthy, as though he would haue bene kyng of Iewes, Chriſte was called ſeditious. and haue made the people to rebelle againſt the Emperour.
            After to the ſame booke, he adioyneth an epiſtle, wherwith he doth comforte thoſe banyſhed men of Lipſia, admoniſhyng thē to take their exile paciently, and alſo to geue God thankes whiche hathe graunted He comforteth the eri
                  
                     •
                  es. them his conſtancie of mynde, and perſeuerance. I ſhewed you of the league concluded, betwene the Emperour and Clement the ſeuenth, but when the Emperour was retourned into Spayn, Clement at the requeſt of the Frenche kyng toke ſhipping and arriued at Marceilles in harueſt tyme: and for the more intier frēdſhip, he marrieth his niece Pope Clement cōmeth to Macilles. Katherine Medices, vnto Henry the kynges ſonne Duke of Orleans, a younge Prynce of fiftene yeares of age. And becauſe the occaſion ſerueth, I purpoſe here to ſpeake a litle touching ye houſe of Medices. and Sylueſter, Euerarde, & Iohn, were the firſt accompted of that name, whiche were all Senatours of Florence: but the fyrſt that ennobled that houſe was Coſmus, who was the rycheſt marchaunt, not only of his owne citie, but alſo of all Italy. His ſonne Peter had two ſonnes, Laurence, and Iulian. And Iulian had a ſonne borne after he was dead, called Iuly, who was afterwardes Clement the ſeuenth. Not

withſtanding that they reporte diuerſly touching his byrth: Lawrēce had the ſonnes, Peter, Iulian, and Iohn. Who was made byſhop of For many ſuppoſe hym a baſtarde. Rome, Leo the tent: Iulian had no chyldrē. Peter expulſed out of Florence, and at the lenght drowned in the mouth of Lyre, by reaſon of a tēpeſt, left a ſonne named Lawrence, who married Galla of the houſe of Bolonois, and by her had this Katherine, of whome here mention is made. Clement which made his abode at Marſeilles, a moneth and ſomewhat more, to gratifie the kyng and his nobles, made foure frenche Cardinalles, whome he perceiued to be moſte in fauoure with the A conſecrating of Cardinalles. kyng. Odet Chaſtilion, Philip Bolon, Claude Gifrie, and Iohn Uenerie, byſhop of Liſiens. No man doubted but this affinitie pretended an alteration of the ſtate of Italy, and many marueled at the vniqualitie of the mariage: In ſo muche that Clement hym ſelfe, as the report Unmete mariage. goeth, was doubtfull, and woulde not beleue that they ment good erneſt, before the mariage was ſolempniſed. Within a fewe monethes after, the Lantgraue goeth to the French king, the cauſe wherof was The Lantgraue goeth to the Frēch kyng. Duke Ulrich expulſed this. In the yeare of our Lorde. 1519. Ulriche Duke of Wirtemberge, was driuen out of his countrey by the confederatours of the Sweuicall league, for takyng of Rutelyng a towne imperiall, whiche was in confederacie with them. Which Prouince firſt the Emperour had of the reſt, and after in the diuiſion of the inheritaunce, Ferdinādo receiued it of the Emperour. In the aſſemblie at Auſpurg, certen princes were peticioners that the Duke whiche had bene eleuen yeares in exile, might thā be reſtored: But it was in vayne, for the Emperour reciting the cauſes from the beginning, for whiche he was exiled, dyd create his brother Duke, there openly of that countrey. Wherfore the Lantgraue being a dere frende, and a nere kinſman to Duke Ulriche, thought to attempte ſome thing at this preſent: but being diſapoynted by certen, which had promyſed theyr ayde, he differred the matter, vntyll better oportunitie ſerued. And nowe in the Emperours abſence, cō
               ſidering how the Sweuicall league made for eleuen yeares, was diſſolued, he goeth into Fraunce, and layeth to pledge the Countrey of Mount Pelicarte, vnto the kyng for a ſumme of mony, in the name of The Lantgraue boroweth monye of the Frēch kyng. Duke Ulriche, vpon condicion that if he redeme it not within thre yeres, to be than the inheritaunce of the realme of Fraunce. Beſides this ſome of money, the kyng alſo promyſed him to lende hym another ſom, in hope that the lande ſhould not be redemed. At this tyme fortuned a wonderfull alteration in Englande, and the occaſion was this. Henry A great alte ratiō in Englande. the ſeuenth kyng of Englande, had two ſonnes, Arthur and Henry. Arthur maried Katherine daughter to Ferdinando kyng of Spayne, diyng without iſhewe. Henry the father, who coueted much that this alliaunce with the Spanyarde myght continue, by the lycence of the byſhop of Rome Iuly the ſeconde, deuyſeth to marrie this Katherine

to his other ſonne alſo, whiche was kyng after him, who departed the yeare of grace. 1509. Wherfore Henry the eight of that name, after he had maried her, his father beyng dead, and he nowe of manye yeares Kyng Hēry. ſufficiently eſtablyſhed in his kyngdome, propoundeth this ſcrupuloſitie of his conſcience, to certen byſhoppes, and calleth in queſtiō, whether it were lawfull to marrye his brothers wyfe, and of longe tyme abſtayned from her company. The byſhoppes hauynge priuate talke with the Quene, by the kinges aſſignement, declare vnto her, that the byſhop of Romes lycence was herein neyther good nor lawfull. She aunſwereth that it is to late nowe to examyne the licence, whiche ſo longe ſynce they had allowed. She had dyuerſe tymes miſcaried of chylde, and brought forth none that proſpered, ſauynge one daughter called Marie. The byſhop of Rome committeth the hearynge of the matter vnto two Cardinalles, Campegius, whome he ſent into Englande, and the Cardinalle of Yorke. After longe and muche debatyng whan the kynge was put in hope from Rome, that ſentence ſhould be geuen on his ſyde, Campegius in maner at the ſame inſtant, that iudgement ſhould haue paſſed by the byſhop of Romes admonyſhement, The inconſtancie of Pope Clement. began to drawe backe, and fynde delayes. The cauſe wherof, as men ſuppoſe, was that through the death of the Duke and captaine Lawtrech, and diſtruction of the Frenche armie about Naples, & that Androwe de Aurie, the moſte experte man of the ſea, forſakyng the Frēch kyng, was fled vnto the Emperour. All the whiche thynges chaunced ſo at the ſame tyme, that the byſhop was afrayde to offende the Emperour, being nephewe to Quene Katherine, whiche had ſuche lucky ſucceſſe in all his aſſayes in Italy. Wherfore Campegius in fyne retourned without any thyng determyned, wherwith the kyng toke excedyng muche diſpleaſure. Neuertheleſſe, leſt it ſhould appeare that he ſhould do anythyng vniuſtly, the kynge ſent into Fraunce, Italy, and Germany to enquyre the opinions of all vniuerſities. And the moſte part conſented to the kyng, and emonges other the diuines of Paris, The vniuerſities of Paris & others. approued the kynge by the vniuerſitie Seale, and as it was thoughte were lyberally rewarded therfore. But amōges others of the quenes maydes, there was one of an excellent beautie, called Anne Bolen, whome the kyng began to fantaſy, in ſo muche as men myght eaſelye quene Anne loued the Goſpell. perceyue that he entended to marrie her to his wyfe. Whan the Cardinall of Yorke perceyued this, whiche was chief about the kyng, and as they ſaye, authour of the diuorſement, he chaunged his purpoſe, admonyſhyng the byſhop of Rome by his letters, that he ſhould not approue the diuorſement: For than ſhoulde an other ſuccede Quene Katherine, whiche was infected with Luthers opinions. Whiche thyng whan the kyng vnderſtode by his Ambaſſadour that was ledger at Rome, he was ſore offended. And not longe after for this and other

thinges whiche he had practiſed in 
                  〈…〉
               e, where he was Chauncelour of the Realme, and had thre of the beſte byſhop
                  〈…〉
               hes, York Dureſme and Wyncheſter, firſt he diſplaced hym from his office and after taketh away two of his byſhoprikes: And in concluſion, what time he leading a priuate lyfe at home, had ſpooken certen wordes that were arrogant, and importing a deſire of reuengement: the kyng ſent Syr William kingſtone Captaine of the garde, to diſcharge his houſe, and brynge hym to London: but fallyng in to a vehement 
                  〈…〉
               ixe by the way he dyed, and was buried at Leceſter. But the byſhop of Rome to the The death of Cardinall Woolſey. intent Campegius myght haue ſome excuſe to departe, reuoked the ſute into his own handes. And perceiuing that the marriage of quene Anne would be to hym preiudiciall, he warneth the kyng full ofte, and goeth about alſo to feare him with threateninges, that he ſhould leaue of his enterpryſe. But whan he could not preuayle, to pleaſe the Emperour, he gaue ſentence with his a
                  〈…〉
               t Katherine, this yeare the .xxiij. of Marche, where as the kynge had a yeare before married an other, forſakynge Katherine, & proclaiming his daughter Marie a baſtarde. The Lady Mary a baſtarde. But after he perceiued, that ſentence was geuen againſt hym, he conceaued a mortall hatred againſt the byſhop. And immediatly maketh a lawe, whereby he declareth him ſelf to be head of the church through out Englande, aboliſhyng the byſhop vtterly, and commaundeth vnder payne of death (and maketh it treaſon) if any man aſcribe vnto the The kinges hatred againſt the Pope. byſhop of Rome the ſupremacie: he denieth alſo the yearely penſion, whiche was wont to be geuen to the biſhoppes Collectour. And with moſte weightie wordes enacteth, that from henceforth no monye be conueyed to Rome: and this did he by the conſent of the whole nobilitie and commons of the Realme, by ordre of the hyghe courte of parliament. Fraunces the Frenche kynge, was thoughte to haue furthered very muche this diuorcement to the intent he myght thus cleane with drawe him, from the frendſhyp of the Emperour, concerning the trybute payed to Rome, thus it ſtandeth. Inas kyng of Britane, aboute Inas kyng. the yeare of our Lorde, fiue hundreth and forty, for the opinion of Religion and deuotion, made the Realme tributory to the byſhop of Rome, as it is leaft in memory, in ioynyng euery houſe to paye a penny. Wherfore the byſhoppes had their Collectours cōtinually there to gather this annuall ſtypende, called of the common people Peter pence. The byſhoppes collectour at this tyme, was Peter Uan, who retourned not to Rome, but remayned ſtyll in Englande. And where as this money had bene continually payed frō that time, vnto theſe our daies, kynge Henry firſte of all men, made a reſtrainte therof, and an inhibitiō 
               The contē
                  tion betwen Eraſmus & Luther. that it ſhould be payed no more. You haue heard how Eraſmus and Luther wrote one againſte the other of free wyll, in the fourthe booke: And this yeare their contention began a freſhe. And Luther takyng

an occaſiō by one of his frendes epiſtles, chargeth Eraſmus ſore, as though he ſhould call the chriſtian Religion in doubt, mocke it, and condempne it: And alſo alledgyng certen places of his owne workes, goeth about to proue the ſame, and ſheweth that in his wrytyng he is ambiguous, and with his eloquence practyſeth a kynde of Tyraunye. And for as muche as in Godly thynges, he trifleth & dalieth thus with doubtfull wordes, where as he coulde & oughte to ſpeake more playnly, he aduoucheth that all thynges ought to be conſtrued agaynſt him. Wherunto Eraſmus afterwarde aunſwered and that ryght ſharpely, for he feared moſt of al other thynges, left his workes ſhould loſe their grace and authoritie. About this tyme in Fraunce, the Grey freers of The traged! of the Grey freers. Orleaunce, wrought a terrible and a bloudy enterpryſe: And thus the thinge was. The Mayers wyfe of the citie prouided in her wyll, that ſhe would be buried without any pompe or noyſe. For whan any departeth in Fraunce, the Belmen are hyred to goe about the Citie, and in places moſte frequented, to aſſemble the people with the ſounde of the bell, and than to declare the name and title of the partie deceaſed, alſo wher and whan they ſhal be butied, and laſt to exhorte the people to praye for the dead. And whan the coarſe is caried forth, for the moſte The ſolēne burieng in Fraunce. parte theſe beggyng freers go with it all to the churche, and many torches are borne before it: and the more pompe and ſolempnitie is vſed, the more is the concourſe and gaſyng of people: but this woman wold haue none of all this gere done for her. Wherfore her huſbande which loueth her well, followed her mynde herein, and gaue vnto the Graye freers in whoſe churche, ſhe was buried beſydes her father and her grandfather, ſyxe crownes only for a rewarde, where as they looked for a great deale more. And afterwardes, whā he cut down a wood & folde it, the freers craued to haue part therof without money, and he ſayde them nay. This toke they in maruelous euyll parte. And where as they loued hym not before, they deuiſe now a waye to be reuenged, ſaying that his wyfe was damned euerlaſtingly. The workers of this tragedy, were Coliman and Stephen of Arras, both doctours of diuinitie, and the firſt in dede was a coniurer, and had all his trynkettes Falſe doctours. and furniture concerning ſuche matters in a redineſſe. And they vſed the matter thus. They ſet a yoūg man yt was a Nouice, aboue ouer the vaulte of the churche: And when they came to mumble vp their mattyns at mydnyght, after their accuſtomed maner, he made a wonderfull noyſe and ſhryking a lofte: than goeth this Colman to croſſynge & coniuring: but the other aboue woulde not ſpeake, beynge charged to make a ſigne, to declare if it were a dume ſpirit, he ruſtleth & maketh a The dume Spirite. noyce agayne: that was the ſigne and token. Whan they had layd this foundation, they go to certen of the chiefeſt in all the citie, that fauour red them moſte, and tell them what an heuy caſe is chaunced at theyr

houſe, yet do they not vtter what it is, but entreate them to take the paynes to come to their ſeruice at night. When they came and the ſeruice was begonne, he that was a loſt made a great noyſe: Beinge demaunded what he would, and who he was, he ſignified that he could not ſpeake: than is he commaunded to aunſwere to their interrogatories by ſigne, there was an hole made, where by laying to his eare, he might heare and perceyue what the coniurer ſayde. Than was there Queſtions moued to yt dome ſpirit. a table at hande, wherupon being aſked a queſtion, he clapped & beat, ſo that he myght eaſely be heard beneth. Wherfore he was fyrſte demaunded whether he were any of them, that haue bene buried there. After that rekening vp their names in order, whoſe bodies had there bene buried, at the laſte they come to the Mayres wyfe: there by a ſigne made, he ſheweth that he is the ſpirite of her. Than they queſtioned with her, whether ſhe were dampned, and for what deſerte or offence? Whether it were for couetouſnes, pryde, or letchery, or that ſhe did not the workes of charitie, or els for this newe ſprong vp hereſye, and Lutheraniſme? Furthermore what ſhe ment by this noyſe & diſquietnes? Whether that her body being buried within holy grounde, ſhoulde be digged vp and caried to ſome other place? Unto all theſe thinges he aunſwered by ſygnes in like caſe as he was commaunded, wherby he affirmed, or denied any thynge, in ſo muche as he ſtroke vpon the table twyſe or thryſe.
            And whē he had thus ſygnified that Luthers hereſy was the cauſe of her dampnation, and that her body muſt be taken vp, the freers deſyre the citezens that were preſent, to beare witnes of ſuch thynges as they had ſene and heard, & ſet their handes to it in wryting. But they taking aduiſement, leſt they ſhould both offende the Mayor and bring them ſelues in trouble, refuſed to ſubſcribe. Notwithſtāding the freers take the pyxe with the hoſte, as they terme it, and all the reliques of ſainctes, and cary them to an other place, and there ſay their Maſſes. Which thing is acuſtomably done by the biſhop of Romes lawe, what tyme a churche is ſuſpended, and muſt be hallowed againe. And when the byſhops iudge deputed, whome they call officiall, heard of this, he came thether to vnderſtande the matter better, and aſſociatynge hym ſelfe with certen honeſt men, cōmaundeth them to coniure in his preſence, & would haue choſen certen to go vp into the Uault, to ſe in caſe any ſpirit doth appere there. But Steuen of Aras, was ſore againſte this thinge, and exhorted them inſtantly it might not be, ſayinge that the ſpirite ought not to be moleſted. And albeit the official did earneſtlye vrge them to coniure before hym, yet coulde he not bryng thē to it. In the meanetyme the Maior makynge his frendes priuie what he would doe, went to the kynge and enfourmed hym of the whole matter. And for as much as yt freers, by reaſon of their priuileges, refuſed to

come vnto iudgement, the kyng choſe certen out of the court of Parliament at Paris, to examine the matter, and gaue themfull authoritie. The ſame did alſo Anthony Prate Chauncelour, and the Cardinal that was the byſhop of Romes Legate in Fraunce. Wherfore hauing no exception, they were caried to Paris, and conſtrayned to make anſwere: but they woulde confeſſe nothyng. Yet were they kept a parte, The game prayers called to paris and the Nouice whiche Fumeus a Senatour, had at home with him, being often tymes examined, woulde vtter nothyng, fearyng, leſte he ſhoulde after be murthered of them, for ſclaundering their ordre: but when the iudges had promiſed hym that he ſhould eſcape free, & ſhould come no more in the Freers handes, he declareth the whole matter in ordre, and brought before the others, aduouched the ſame. They albeit they were conuicted, and in maner taken with the deede, yet refuſed their iudges, and bragged of their priuileges: but that was in vayne, for they were condempned in open iudgement, that they ſhoulde be caried agayne to Orleaunce, and put in pryſon. And afterwardes The condēpnation of fal 
                     〈…〉
                  rs. brought openly to the Cathedral churche, and ſo to the place of puniſhment, where malefactours are executed, and there ſhoulde confeſſe their owne wyckednes.
            But euen at the ſame time chaunceth aperſecution againſt the Lutherians, which was the cauſe that the ſame ſentence albeit, it was to gentle for ſo great an offence, was not put in execution. For becauſe the Perſecution againſt Lutherians. name of the Lutherians was moſte odiouſe, they feared, leſt the puniſhment of theſe men, ſhould not haue bene ſo muche thought dewe for theyr offence, as done to the reproche of the ordre: And what ſoeuer miſfortune happened vnto them, many iudged that the ſame woulde be a moſte pleaſaunt ſyght, and ſpectacle for the Lutherians. And this ordre of Franciſcanes, was of the common people eſtemed holye: And what time they were caried out of Paris, certen women moued with pitie, followed them vnto the gate of the vniuerſitie, with manye teares and ſyghinges. After they came vnto Orleaunce, and were beſtowed in ſeuerall pryſons, they beganne to boaſte agayne of theyr liberties and pryueleges, and at lengthe after longe impryſonment, they were diſcharged and ſet at lybertie, without any punyſhement. Whyleſt they were pryſoners, they wanted nothynge, but hadde all thynges miniſtred vnto them aboundauntly, eſpecially of women. Had not theſe perſecutions and fyrynges before mentioned, letted the thing, the kynge had determined, as in dede it was reported, to plucke downe all theyr houſe, and make it euen with the grounde.
            But in the Romyſhe kyngdome were wonte to be very many ſpyrites. Spirites in the Popyſhe kingdome. For it was beleued certenly that dead mens ſoules dyd walke after they were buried: Wherefore they ſhewed that eyther they were dampned, or els for a tyme were tourmented, in the fyre of

purgatory, and woulde ſollicite their nereſt kynſfolkes and frendes to ſucour them. And moſte commonly requyred them, eyther to performe their vowes and pylgrimages, which they had behight to ſome ſainct in their lyfe tyme, or els to cauſe a trentall of maſſes to be ſayd for thē. Whiche thynge increaſed maruelouſly the opinion of Purgatory, and brought the maſſe in to highe authoritie, and was to the prieſtes gainful aboue meaſure. But after that Luthers doctrine was ſpred abroad Luthers apt 
                     〈…〉
                  ō touching the ſpirites. and knowen, thoſe ſpirites by lytle and lytle, vanyſhed cleane out of ſyght. For Luther taught by the ſcriptures, howe the ſoules of dead men were at quiet reſt, loking for the laſt daye of iudgement, and that ſuche terrible noyſes and viſions, were ſtyred vp by the deuyl, who letteth none occaſion ſlyppe to confirme mens myndes with idolatrie & falſe opinions, and to quenche the benefite of our ſauiour Chriſte.
            Whan the Lantgraue had bargayned with the Frenche kynge, in the begynnyng of the ſpring tyme, he leuied his armie: And than wrytyng their letters both vnto kyng Ferdinando, they declared the cauſe of theyr enterpryſe. And whyleſt Ferdinando referreth the matter to the trial of the lawe, they marche forwardes with their armie, and the fourtene day of May, chauncing to mete with theyr ennemies, which were twelue thouſand foote men, they ſhotte of theyr ordinaunce, and put them to flyght beſydes the towne of Lauſene in the lande of Wirtemberge. The generall of Ferdinando his armie was Philip Counte The victory of the Lant. Palatine, who at the ſame battell had his hele ſtryken of with a great pece. In the chaſe many were drowned in the Ryuer of Neccar, wher into they ran headlong, for feare of their ennemies that purſued them. Whan the battell was done, all men for the moſte parte of the Dukedome of Wirtemberge, yelded them ſelues to their naturall Prynce Ulrichus: Aſperge ſituated vpon a verey hyghe mountayne ſtandyng alone, alſo Urach, Tubinge, and Nipha, all ſtronge caſtelles of nature in fine rendred alſo. Ferdinando the fyrſt of Maye, ſet forth a proclamation, that no man ſhoulde ayde that faction, but that al men ſhould reſiſte them to the vttermoſte of their power, and had wrytten to the Proteſtauntes his ſeueral letters, touching the ſame matter. And likewiſe had the Emperour done a litle before, and openly no man did aſſiſte them. And al men marueled, to what end this ſtiring wold grow to. About the tyme of this warre, the archbyſhop of Mentz, & George Duke of Saxon, the Lantgraues father in lawe, ſought the reconcilement of kyng Ferdinando, and the Prince Electour of Saxon.
            And at Cadamea town of Boheme, the laſt day of Iune ſauing one, they concluded a peace with thoſe cōditions. For religiō no force to be attempted, nor any ſute in the lawe commenſed, and the ſame peace Conditions of peace. that Ceſar hath made to be obſerued. Ferdinando in the Emperours place ſhall brynge to paſſe, that the Iudges of the chamber ſhall ſurceaſe

from al proces againſt the Proteſtauntes, amonges whome notwithſtanding neyther Anabaptiſtes, nor Sacramentaries, nor any other ſuche lyke ſectes be comprehended. The Duke of Saxon and his fellowes ſhall acknowledge Ferdinādo for king of Romaines, & gyue him that title. Ferdinando ſhall againe within a certen tyme deuiſe ſo with the Emperour, & other princes Electours, that a decree be made after this ſorte. Whan tyme ſhall hereafter require to make a kynge of Romaines, duryng the lyfe of the Emperour, that than the Electours do firſt aſſemble and conſulte, whether the cauſe be iuſte and reaſonable, and if it ſo appere, that than they do proceade after the Tenure of the lawe Carroline. That whiche ſhall be otherwyſe done, to be fruſtrate. And vnleſſe this decree be made within ten monethes, than the Duke & his fellowes not to ſtande bound to theſe cōdicions: and that within the ſame time, the Emperour ſhall alſo cōfirme the Dukes ſucceſſion in the poſſeſſious of his father & progenitours: Ferdinando ſhal alſo endeuour, that the Emperour do ratifie ſuch compactes of matrimony as are betwixt the Dukes of Saxō and of Cleaue. Whileſt thei treate of theſe matters, they take in hande alſo an other peace making. And the Duke of Saxon offereth for the Lātgraue & the Duke of Wirtemberge, as their ſubſtitute, that they ſhal ratifie, what ſo euer they ſhould agree vpon. After muche debating, the Dukedome beinge wholy recouered, they cōdicioned thus. Ulrich the Prince & his heires Condicions betwixt Ferdinando and Duke Ulri. males, ſhall holde the Dukedome of Wirtemberge of kyng Ferdinando as Archeduke of Auſtriche, and ſo to be his wardes and clientes, & if it fortune the houſe of Wirtemberge to be without heyres males, than the Princes of Auſtriche to poſſeſſe that region, to holde the ſame of the Empyre whiche they ſhalbe bounden therunto. Ulriche to acknowledge Ferdinando for king of Romaynes, & to make no league againſte hym: That the Lantgraue, and Duke Ulriche reſtore ſuche goodes, as they haue gotten in this tyme of warre, to their owners: that they doe conſtreyne no man to chaunge his Religion: that it ſhall be lawefull for ſuche as are fled for feare or for ſhamefaſtnes to retourn home. And they that lyſte, to take theyr goodes, and goe where they wyll. The peces of ordinaunce, that were for the defence of Auſpurge, ſhall remaine to kyng Ferdinando: the kinges debtes, for his own priuate affayres, he him ſelfe ſhall paye, but that which was employed for the cōmoditie of the countrey, the Duke ſhal aunſwere: For ſuche landes of the Dukedome, as are holden of the kyngdome of Boheme, the Duke and his heire ſhall holde ſtyl of Ferdinādo & his heires as kings of Boheme: That Philip the Palſgraue, and the reſidue of the pryſoners, be let go without raunſome: that the Lantgraue and the Duke ſhall ſubmitte them ſelues, & aſke pardon of kyng Ferdinando either in their own perſons, or by their deputes, & than Duke Ulriche to receiue

full ſtate and poſſeſſion of kyng Ferdinando: Ferdinādo ſhall entreate that the Emperour will alſo forgeue thē, for the charges of the warre, nothinge to be required on either parte: that the Lantgraue and the Duke, ſhall ſende vnto Ferdinando, out of their armes, fyue hondreth horſe men, and thre thouſand fotemen, whiche ſhall immediatly go to the ſege of Munſter, of their coſt and charge, there to promyſe their fidelitie to Ferdinando by an othe, and if nede requyred to ſerue him for a thre monethes. For at the ſame time was Munſter a towne of Weſtphalia, kept by the Anabaptiſtes, beſeged, as hereafter ſhalbe declared. Wherfore king Ferdinando requyred of thē this aide, for the winning of the towne. Whan the Duke had by this meane, recouered the countrey of Wirtemberge, & made his peace with Ferdinando, before the yeare was ended, he repaied the French king his money, & recouereth the poſſeſſion of Mompelicarte. And the lone money, the king forgaue The liberal
                     〈…〉
                  
                  tie of yt frēch kyng. him, whiche was no ſmall ſomme. This peace making did Peter Paule Uerger the byſhops legate, toke not very well. And in Clements name, did expoſtulate ſore with king Ferdinando, that he had taken Luther & princes into his amitie. And he anſwered that he dyd it in cōſideratiō of the time, for the auoyding of further trouble. What time Duke Ulriche was expulſed, his ſonne Chriſtopher, being a child of .iiij. yeares olde, was firſt brought vp vnder the tuicion of his vncle Williā Duke of Bauer, after that he was remoued frō thence to Inſprouek a towne of Ferdinandos, in the countie of Tirol. And whē after the Turkes retire, as I ſayde before the Emperour retourned into Italy, he through the motion & aduiſe of his frendes, cōueyeth him ſelf out of the Emperours traine, & repareth again into Bauier. For being the ſole & only heire, this was thought to be the deuiſe yt he ſholde haue bene lead into ſome ſtraūge countrey, & made religious: but after that his father was reſtored, he wēt into Fraūce, & attended vpon the frēch king. When the matter was pacified, the Lātgraue ſent a meſſager wt letters to the Emperour in Spain, & the cōditions of peace in writing The Lantgraues letters to the Emperour. craning pardon for him ſelf & for duke Ulrich, & from henceforth promiſeth al due obediēce for him & for the other. This was in the moneth of Iuly: And in Septēbre following, the Emperour anſwereth hym by letters frō Ualentia, how that he vnderſtode the whole matter already The Empe. aunſwere. by his brother Ferdinādo: vnto whome he hath written his mynde in this behalf, & now ſheweth him more by his Ambaſſadour, by whō he may vnderſtand of his clemencie and deſire of peace and quietnes. Wherfore he doth admoniſhe him to perfourme in deede the thinges which he hath promiſed in wordes, vſing him ſelf obediētly, & eſchewig all troubleſome coūſell. During the warres of Wirtēberge, Fraunces Sfortia married yt Emp. Nece. Sfortia, duke of Millā, taketh to wife Chriſtine, ye daughter of Chriſtierne, king of Denmarck captiue, the Emperours nece by his ſyſter.

The Frenche kyng would haue moued warre agaynſt hym: But the death of Clement the ſeuenth, with whome (as I ſayde before) he had The death of Clement the ſeuenth. made a league, was ſuppoſed to haue bene the lette and delaye therof. For he being diſeaſed in the ſtomack, whan after the aduiſe of his phiſicion Curtius, he had chaunged his diet, being an aged man, dieth in this moneth of Septembre, and had to his ſucceſſour Paule the third Paule ye .iii. ſurnamed Farneſius, whiche ſhortly after, made Alexander his young Nephewe by his Baſtarde Sonne Peter Aloiſe, and his Nephewe Aſcanius, by his baſtarde daughter Conſtance, bothe Cardinalles.
            After that he calleth home Peter Paule Uerger oute of Germany, to vnderſtande the ſtate of the countrey: And he conſulteth with his Cardinalles, howe the counſell myght be differred, tyll ſuche tyme as by their priuie practyſe, they might fynde the meanes to ſet the Emperour and other kynges together by the eares. In concluſion they agreed to ſende Uerger againe into Germany, to make promyſe of a generall counſell, and that he ſhould ſo handle the matter, that their craft and ſubtiltie were not ſuſpected, as it was in Clementes tyme: And Paule was 
                     〈…〉
                  r than Clement. that he ſhould aduertyſe the prynces howe the counſell ſhould be holden at Mantua, and there to entreate of the condicions: And that he ſhoulde chiefly marke what forme of diſputation the Proteſtauntes would ſeke to haue, that ones knowen, he myght after preſcribe vnto them ſuche lawes, as he knewe they woulde not come there for the ſame. He had alſo commaunded him, to incenſe the hartes of Prynces The practiſe of Prelates. againſt the kyng of Englande, whoſe Realme he intended to geue awaye for a pray, to hym that coulde get it: And that he ſhoud ſee more ouer whether that Luther and Melancthon, myght throughe anye meanes be broughte from their purpoſe. Alſo certen Cardinalles and byſhoppes were choſen to deuiſe, ſome refourmation for the Clergie, whiche in fyne was made and pupliſhed, as in place ſhalbe declared.
            Kynge Ferdinando was cauſer, that Paule ſent againe Uerger, ſaying that he was a very fitte man for the purpoſe. At this tyme Andrewe Gritte. was Andrewe Gritte, Duke of the ſtate of Uenyſe, a man of great authoritie for his ſingular wyſdome and experience. Who what tyme he liued at Conſtantinoble, had a baſtarde ſonne called Lewys: whiche Lewys his ſonne. being there brought vp frō his yougth, where he had a good witte, & by his ſyngular induſtrie had attayned to great ryches, and throughe his lyberalitie had gotten many Frendes firſt by the gentlemen of the courte, and after by the meanes of Ibrain Baſcha, who at that tyme myght doe all thynges alone: he was ſo well knowen with the Emperour Soliman, that he was alſo admitted vnto his priuate talke. Thus vſing the oportunitie of tyme through the beneuolence and liberalitie Hongary. of the great Turke, he came in to Hongary with great power & dignitie, to poſſeſſe that part of Slauonie, that is next vnto the borders

of Uenife to his own priuate vſe, & to kepe the nether part of Hongary, wherof Belgrade is chiefe, for the Emperour of ye Turkes. He had a ſonne named Anthony, biſhop of Quineueeccleſia: whom biſhop Clement purpoſed, for his father & grādfathers ſake, to haue made Cardinall: But in the meane whyle that Lewys was in hope of no leſſe than a kyngdome, and had in muche reputation of all men: And that his father was glad exceadingly of the good and lucky ſucceſſe of his Sonne, by occaſion of a grudge and a faction reyſed againſte him, he was taken by his aduerſaries and beheaded, aboute the ſame tyme that Paule ſucceded Clement. In this meane tyme beginneth anewe perſecution in Fraunce, againſte them that were anye thynge ſuſpected Perſecution in Fraunce. of Lutheraniſme, wherof in dede the occaſion was this. In the citie of Paris and certen other places, and euen within the kynges palace, aboute one tyme, in the night ſeaſon, ſondry billes, were ſet vp againſt the maſſe and other poinctes of Religion: And ſtreight wayes inquyrie and ſearche was made, and many were apprehended, ſome by information, and ſome by ſuſpition, whiche after they were racked, were brent alyue and vnſtrangled, whiche was terrible to beholde: For they beyng faſtened to an engyne, and lifted vp in to the ayre, wer The punyſhment of the Godly. after let downe into the fyre from on hyghe, and there fynged & ſkorched, were hoyſed vp agayne: and at the length the hangeman ſhoulde cut the corde, and they fall downe into the fyre vnderneath them. And ſuche alſo as were any thynge learned, had their tongues cut out, leſt either thei ſhould vtter the cauſe of their death, or declare vnto the people The crueltie of Iohn Morin. the ſomme of their doctrine. And for this buſines, was Iohn Motine, the Lieuetenaūt Criminell, a very mete miniſter: For as he could moſte craftely ſmel and ſearche them out, that were any thynge at all ſuſpected, ſo lykewyſe whan he had founde them in execution and extreme A booke of marchaūted. punyſhement, he paſſed in all extremitie. Neuertheleſſe at the ſame tyme came forth a booke in Frenche without the name of the authour, againſt Romyſhe marchauntes, tempered with mirth and grauitie. And firſt he ſayeth howe that marchandiſe is a kynde and trade of lyfe, neyther diſhoneſt nor vnprofitable for the common wealth, ſo it be voyde of fraude and auarice. For of this kynde of men. Chriſte toke his ſimilitude what tyme he commaunded that the talentes receiued ſhould be occupied that they might be made gainfull. Whiche place in dede is to be vnderſtande in a miſtery: for nothynge leſſe becommeth the paſtours and miniſters of the churche, than the leſt ſuſpicion of filthy lucre. Notwithſtanding almighty God being offended with the wickednes of men hath ſuffered to enter into his churche, not only ryche and welthy marchauntes, but alſo theues and murtherers. For who wyll not call hym a thefe, that eyther ſelleth an othermans goodes for his owne, or counterfeited wares, for ryght and true? Is not

the bier foule diſceaued? But this thyng hath chaunced vnto vs longe ſynce: For in ſteade of true ſhepeheardes, are crept in exceadyng rauenyng wolues. And al be it that no mans witte or tongue is ſufficiētly able to expreſſe theyr craft and ſubtiltie, yet wyll I touche it a little. Wherfore theſe marchauntes of whome I ſpeake here, are craftie beyonde Crafty marchauntes. all meaſure, and haue ſo auaunced their trafficke, that there is not ſo lytle a corner any where, that they haue not fylled full of theyr ſtuffe. And al this through a pretenſed kynde of fayned holines. In apparell they differ from the reſt, and for the moſte part are all ſhauen in the crowne: Neyther maye any others, than ſuche as haue the greate beaſtes charact, or Balles marke, be permitted to occupie that trade of marchaundyſe. Theſe only ſell and ſell againe, and chaunge, and that Buſy marchauntes. at al times: For other marchauntes ceaſe from their buſynes vpon holy dayes, eſpecially on principall feaſtes: Agayne they followe and occupie for the moſte part, but one kynde of marchaundyſe as Woulles or Sylkes, or els Corne or Wyne, or els Cattel, or Metall, or Groſſery wares: But theſe marchauntes let ſlippe no time of the yeare, and thei occupie al maner of wares, and nothing eſcapeth their handes, nother men, women, nor young chyldren, as well borne as vnborne. For they reape againe of all thinges in generall: Unto their luſte ſerueth heauen and hell, the earth and tyme it ſelfe, yea in all creatures lyuinge, & without lyfe, wyne, bread, oyle, flaxe, milke, butter, cheſe, water, ſalte, fyre, and perfumes. Of all theſe thynges can they wrynge out golde & A ſtraunge chaunge. ſyluer, to the wonderfull loſſe of people, both concernyng their goodes and chiefly their ſoule, hauing infected and vtterlye extynguyſhed the true doctrine of God. What thinke you it not a point of a ſubtile marchaunt to ſell a thyng and that very dere, wherof the bier hath none other commoditie, ſauyng only the ſyght of the thing? Other marchaū
               tes, whan they ſet forth their wares to ſell, are wonte to ſay commō
               ly, you ſhall ſee for your loue, and by for your money: but theſe do farre otherwyſe. If any man departe, they are ſtreightwayes readye to demaunde of you, whether you wyll haue the beſte croſſe, and the beſte bere cloth whan the corps goeth to burieng, or els yt worſte, or the beſt ſauyng one: for as you ſhall choyſe, ſo ſhall you paye accordingly. I beſeche the what haſt thou for thy money, or what thinge carieſt thou awaye beſydes the ſyght therof? For they laye vp their wares againe, & the next daye ſell it to an other for as muche. It is a lyke policie, to encreaſe the pryce of the thynge for the better apparell of the marchaunt, The Price of the maſſe is derer ſom tyme after as the parſō is. for in caſe the abbot, or the biſhop do ſay you a maſſe, it muſt coſte more than if a monke or a chaplayne ſaye it. In the whiche thynge in deede they differ nothing from common harlottes, for the gayer the whore is, the derer ſhe ſelleth her filthines. But what pratty ſleyght is it, to ſell the ſelfe and ſame thynge at one inſtaunt to ſondry men, and they

neuer the wyſer: eſpecially 
                  〈◊〉
                ſuche places where is great reſort of people. There cometh a man of honour or worſhip into the freers church, & deſireth to haue a maſſe, the freer doucketh: and ſayeth by and by ſyre: And furth with an other craueth the ſame, and lykewyſe the thyrde, or more alſo, at the laſte commeth he forth diſguyſed, and whan maſſe is done, taketh the whole rewarde of euery of them. And thinke you this is nothynge? This gere doth not wante a wylie wytte: And for the moſte parte you ſhall fynde, that they nede lytle other thynge to make their profite of than crafte and pollycie. It fortuneth that a poore woman commeth into the churche, & ſetteth vp a candell before an image: my marchaunt the prieſt is at hande, whiche fyngereth the candell, putteth it out, and ſelleth the ſame to ſundry others, one after an other. For al the ſorte of them occupie waxe, the poorer ſorte, as I haue now tolde you, but the greatter cobbes, in ſealyng their letters and other writinges of the whiche ſorte be thoſe that are commonly called Officialles, Commiſſaries, Seale kepers, Notaries, and ſuch other lyke. But that great Choploch whiche ſo farre exceadeth all others, that he placeth him ſelfe two degrees aboue God, for where as God is called the od marchaunt. 
               Sanctus deus, he wyll be called Sanctiſſimus, that is to ſaye, holy God, and the other moſt holy father: he in dede vſeth no ware, but by a maruelous artificial policie, thaungeth leade into golde, farre exceadinge all the Alcumiſticall multipliers that euer were, agayne he ſelleth hartes very dere, namely redde or purple, whiche after the byers haue ones gotten on their heades, they are as bragge and as proude as pecockes, and iette vp and downe in all places, where is great reſorte of people, to ſhewe and ſet forth them ſelues, and moſte commonlye frequente the courtes of kynges, and Emperours, with whome they are checkmate. For they haue wonderfull great prerogatiues, and maye enioye as many byſhoprikes and benefices as they lyſte, without any charges or paymentes. And againe they are of that numbre whiche are in election to clyme to the hygheſt degree and ſeate of dignitie. After whoſe example, the doctours of Louen, and of Paris, namely the Sorboniſtes, do ſell their cappes alſo to the Batchelars of diuinitie, and of their charges, fare ryght delicately. But here woulde I fayne Pope Iohn a woman. knowe, for as muche as Iohn the eyght of that name, was a woman, and deliuered of a chylde going a proceſſion, in the thirde yeare of her byſhopryke (I ſaye) I would fayne know firſt, whether ſhe were choſen by the vertue of the holy ghoſte? Again whether her doinges were to be approued and ratified, what tyme ſhe ſolde Cardinalſhippes, byſhoprikes, & Abbotſhippes? Finally what is to be thought of the prieſts marke, that ſhe receiued. But I returne to my purpoſe, which is to declare that in all the whole worlde, is there not to be founde, more fyne crafte and ſubtiltie, than is in theſe kynde of marchauntes. Do we not

ſee howe they haue gotten into their handes, Empyres, kyngdomes, countreis, cities and great poſſeſſions? Haue they not oftentymes depoſed Couetous marchaunts kinges and Prynces, ſpoyled them of their Realmes and dominions, and brought them into muche myſery? And nowe are they of ſuche force and power, that they kepe al theſe thynges by ſtronghand, Proude marchauntes. and wyll tourmoyle heauen and earth together, rather than they wil forgoe or loſe one iote. Oh vnſatiable woulues: howe ryghte in tymes paſte, haue the Prophetes and Apoſtles, namely Paule and Peter, paynted and ſet you forth in your colours. Other marchauntes force no man to bye their wares: but theſe doe compell men, wyll they nyll they to bye. And if any do refuſe their baggage, they crie out vpon him Heretike, to the fyre with hym. There dieth a very poore man, leauing behinde him wyfe and chyldren, not able to helpe them ſelues: A pitiefull caſe ſurely, and the poore wydowe were worthy to be releued, but what do they? They not only haue no compaſſion vpō her, but hauing an eye to their praye, immediatly after that they haue mumbled vp a fewe prayers, muſt haue money and good chere, and beſydes that the parſon and vicar wyll haue for a mortuary, or a coarſe preſent, the beſt thynge that is about the houſe. But what greater iniurye can be Theuiſhe marchaunts done, than to ſell a thynge that is not his owne, yea and to ſell it vnto thoſe that haue moſte ryght to it, and to ſondry men one thyng. Tel me, I pray the, who bought the belles & hanged them vp? Unto whō belongeth the churche flowre? Is it their patrimony? no forſouthe. Why than do they ſel the ryngyng of the belles, and the church floure, ſo dere and ſo oftentymes? Perauenture they wyll ſaye, it is the right of the churche. I graunt, but not of that churche, whiche Chriſte hath waſhed, inſtituted, and iuſtified, but of the ſame wherein they walke, that is replenyſhed with theftes, robberies, and all other kynd of vice. For Chriſte commaundeth all theſe thynges to be geuen frely. But it is a ſporte and a pleaſaunt ſyght to ſee, howe the Rauens wyll ſtryue amonges them ſelues for the carion. For when any ryche man is dead, Brawlynge Freers. by and by come they flockyng and ſwarming, gaping eche man for his praye full buſely, eſpecially thoſe that are called beggyng freers. For the graye freers contende with the Dominickes, and the white freers with the Auſten, oftentimes about the buriyng, a kynde of people that is idle, ſloughtful, and not only vnprofitable, but alſo very chargeable, and worthy to be whipped out of euery good common wealth. Theſe thynges that I haue ſayde, can not be denied, and are ſene dayly: and yet is this miſerable worlde ſo aſſotted, and mortall men ſo blynded, that they can not vnderſtande with what ſpyrite they are moued.
            Whan a benefice or prebende is fallen (Lord God) what buſie ſuite, what gadding and prickyng vp and downe, what diligent inquiſition Selling of benefices. is made to knowe the yearely value, what it is worthe to be abſent, &

what to be reſident vpon it, what profites arryſe of the chriſtenyng of childrē, of mariages, pilgrimages, & reliques of ſaintes, & what may be leuied of buriynges, habites, and diriges, by legacies and laſte willes. But the moſte auauntage is gotten by ſuche ſainctes, as for ſome notable propertie and power are ſore feared, as ſainct Laurēce, and S. Angry ſalutes. Anthony, S. Roche, and ſuche other angry ſainctes, whiche muſte be pleaſed with vowes and great giftes. But oh ye kinges and Princes, why do you wynke at ſo wicked and deteſtable thinges? Why do you ſo longe ſuffer ſo paciently, ſo many great enormities? They wyll in dede refuſe to be reformed by you, and yet doubtles haue you the rule ouer them, whether they wyl or no. For God hath geuē you the ſword and authoritie to punyſhe: And why do you not vſe the ſame than, and be auenged of this moſte cruell kynde of extortioners? God requyreth this dutie at your handes, whiche if ye do neglecte, he wyll not leaue it vnpunyſhed. Would to God you were as diligent in auauncing his glory, as they are vigilante and circumſpect in handlyng of their matters, for they let ſlyppe none occaſion. They kepe ſo good watche, that Wyly marchauntes. nothing can eſcape them, hauing as many eyes as had eyther Ianus or Argus. If they here the ſound of the bel, they runne thither ſtreight, if any welthie perſone be ſicke, they put them ſelues in preaſe, and will neuer awaye tyll they haue their rewarde: At euery mariage wil they be, and muſt bleſſe the brides bed, and ſaye ouer it certen praiers, chaſt and holy men (I warrant you) whiche liue a ſengle lyfe moſte filthely, to the entent they may more at libertie, play their partes in all naughtines. And this whiche I haue ſpoken here of marchauntmen, concerneth alſo marchaunt women called nunnes, wherof ther be ſondry orders. Idle N
                     〈…〉
                  
                But it can not be expreſſed with wordes, what idolatry and wickednes, all this rabble had induced. At the laſt arryſe thou O God, & auenge thy ſelf for the glory of thy name, into whoſe league or ſocietie, no man ought to preſume to come. And where as this foreſayd buchery, began in the moneth of Nouembre: In Ianuary followyng, the kyng came to Paris, and to appeaſe Gods wrath, he goeth a pylgrymage to diuers ſainctes, with an vncredible nombre and concourſe of people. They worſhyp at Paris ſainct Geneuefa a virgin, aboue al other ſainctes. Whoſe image was nowe caried about with great pōpe, and ſolempne proceſſion. Whiche is neuer wont to be done, but in tyme S. Geneuefa yt goddes of Paris. of extreme daunger, whan either Gods wrath is pacified, or that they muſte fyght a great battell or els when they feare great penury and ſkarſitie of corne and wyne. For than flye they vnto her, as vnto the laſte ancker, and only porte of theyr ſuccour: And the people are perſwaded, that her helpe was neuer yet deſyred in vaine, in ſo mutch as ſome wyll ſaye, howe God can do verey mutche, but ſaynct Geneuefa is the ſauiour of Paris. It is caried of foure butchers, by an olde

cuſtome, whiche prepare them ſelues hereunto certen dayes before, by faſting and prayer and there be officers appoynted to make rowme & waye, whiche is not done without great payne. For when the image is borne about, the people runne vnto it on euery ſyde with great deuotion, and well are they that may touche it with theyr fyngers ende, or els with theyr cappe or handkerchief, ſo that the thronge and preaſe of people is beyonde all reaſon. Whan maſſe was done, and the kyng had dyned in the byſhops palace by our ladies churche in the preſence The kinges oration. of his chyldren, and the foreyne Ambaſſadours, and al his nobilitie, he made an oration full of affections, teſtifying the inward ſorow, which he had conceaued of the preſumption and naughtines of theſe wicked perſones: Than after he had made a longe diſcourſe concernynge his obedience to the churche: he exhorted them all to beware of the peſtiferous ſecte, for none ſhould eſcape without punyſhement that was taken with the maner. And if he knewe any part of his owne body infected with this contagion, he ſayed he woulde teare it away, leaſt it ſhould growe any further. But to make amendes towardes God, the ſame daye were ſyx brought forth, whiche beynge faſtened to the engines, as before is ſayde, in ſondry places, as the kynge ſhould paſſe by home to his owne houſe, were burnt, the fyre beyng kyndled at the ſame inſtaunt, that the kyng ſhould go that waye by, and they beſeching hym of mercie and pardon. It is the cuſtome of Fraunce to doe execution at after none: And there when ſilence is proclaimed, are redde the cauſes of his punyſhemen: But whan any man is executed for hereſy, The maner of execution in Fraunce. if it be touchyng the iuſtification of fayth only without reſpect of workes, or againſt praying to ſainctes, or if he haue affyrmed that Chriſte only is the byſhop and aduocate of mankinde, or if he haue eaten fleſhe on dayes forboden, whiche is death with them, there is no ſuche thyng ſpoken of, but generally is reported to haue offended the diuine Maieſtie, and bene cōtumelious againſt the virgyn Mary, & other ſainctes, and to haue broken the lawes of our mother holy churche. An therfore the people beleue that there is nothynge more hurtfull, and wicked in The Lutherians are ab borred. all the worlde than this kynde of people: And it is cōmonly ſeen there, that whan they are burning in flammes of fyre, the people wyll gnaſhe theyr teeth at them, and euen in the myddes of theyr tourmentes, wyl curſe and deteſte thē as wicked and vnworthy to loke vpō the ſonne. And where as the Turkes Ambaſſadours were at the ſame tyme in Fraunce, and the kyng hymſelfe had heard, that he was for this ſame cauſe, brought into hatred and ſuſpicion throughout Germany: And that this fyryng had offended manye, the firſt day of February, he addreſſed his letters vnto all the Prynces and ſtates of the Empyre, excuſyng The Frēche kinges letters. both the commyng of the Turkes Ambaſſadours into Fraūce, by the example of others, whiche haue ſent & receyued Ambaſſadours

from the Turke in lyke caſe: And alſo the burnyng of Lutherians, ſaiyng that he was conſtrayned to be ſeuere, againſt his owne nature & wyll, by reaſon of the raſhenes of certen whiche vnder the pretence of Religion, intended the deſtruction of the common wealth, and ſo excuſeth the matter as though it had bene for rebellion, and not for Religion, that theſe men were executed. At the firſt beginning of the ſpring tyme, the Lantgraue went vnto king Ferdinando, as in the yeare before The Lantgraue. it was agreed vpon for a full reconcilement, and there founde he Peter Paule Uerger, newly come thither from Rome. Who vpō this occaſion did his meſſage to the Lantgraue, concerning the counſel before mentioned, but he taking deliberation, made him none other aunſwere. After yt Uerger traueling to the reſt of the Princes, applied his buſines with diligence. And a fewe monethes after, the Lantgraue, Duke Ulriche alſo, went vnto kyng Ferdināde. For where as it was conuenaunted that they ſhould both come and aſke him pardon, commyng at ſeueral tymes, it was eaſely graunted. Howe beit, Duke Ulriche was ſore offended, both with the Lantgraue and alſo with the Duke of Saxon, that they had conſented that he ſhoulde holde his landes of the houſe of Auſtriche, and was of long tyme doubtful, whether he woulde ratifie the peace made or no, at the lengthe by the perſwaſion of his frendes, he went to Ferdinando, according to the conuenauntes. In the moneth of Aprill, the Emperour tooke ſhippinge at The Emperour voiage into Barbaria. Barchin, and tranſported his armie into Barbarie. And whan he had wonne the citie of Tunnes, and taken the caſtell of Golete, he reſtored the kynge of that countrey Muleaſſes, being of Mahumetes Religiō, whome Barbaroſſa the Turkes admirall had before expulſed, byndyng hym to paye him tribute, and after he had fortified the Caſtell, with a ſtrong garnyſon, he ſayleth into Sicilie. Unto this warre, byſhop Paule, ſent certen Galleis furnyſhed, by the cōduicte of virginie Urſine, & alſo did permit him to take tenthes of the clergie in Spaine. Barbaroſſa through our mens negligence and ignoraunce ſteppynge Barbaroſſa. aſyde eſcaped: And firſt he fled to Hippon, and from thence to Argiers, where he repared his nauie and returned to Conſtantinople.
            In Englande were two notable men, Iohn Fyſher byſhop of Rocheſter, and ſyr Thomas Moore knyght, both very well learned. For Rocheſtr & More beheaded. the fyrſt wrote ſondrye bookes againſt Luther, and Moore alſo, whileſt he was Chauncelour, whiche is the chiefeſt office there, extremely puniſhed ſuche as were ſuſpected to be of Luthers doctrine. They neither approued the kings diuorſemēt, & much leſſe the act of Parlamēt, which denying the byſhop of Romes ſupremacie, affirmed ye kyng to be head of the church of Englād: wherupōbeing both apprehended, wher they perſeuered obſtinatly ī their opininiō, th
                  •
                yere in ye month of Iuly

they were beheaded. The byſhop of Rome had made Rocheſter Cardinall, whyleſt he was pryſoner in the Towre, which thyng was ſuppoſed Rocheſter Cardinall. to haue kyndled more hatred againſt hym.
            Afterwarde about the ende of Octobre, Fraunces Sfortia Duke of Millan died without iſſewe, whiche gaue the occaſion of a newe The death of Sfortia. warre, as ſhalbe ſhewed hereafter. In the meane tyme the Emperour came out of Sicilie vnto Naples, and in his letters written the laſte daye of Nouembre to the Proteſtauntes, he ſayd in dede that he wold obſerue the peace of Norinberge, notwithſtandyng he was informed howe thei had taken churche goodes and did withholde the ſame, and whan iudgement was geuen, that they ſhould make reſtitution, they refuſed, alledging the pacification of Norinberge: which appereth vnto hym vnreaſonable, and can not but diſcontente and offende hym. About this time alſo went the prince Electour of Saxony vnto kyng Ferdinando in Auſtriche, and hauing diſpatched his buſines, for the whiche he went thether, in his retourne home at Prage, the chief citie of Bohemy, met him the byſhoppes Legate, Peter Paule Uerger, who declared vnto hym his meſſage touchyng the generall counſell, Uergerusto the Duke of Saxen. whiche the byſhop Paule intended (as he ſayed) to holde at Mantua, free, Godly, and lawfull, without any condicions, whereunto al other Prynces had conſented, for he had bene with them all, namely in Germany. Wherfore if he ſhould nowe refuſe it, men woulde ſuppoſe that nothinge could contente hym. When both the Emperour and kynge Ferdinando are willyng with the thing and the place: and the byſhop ſo erneſtly deſyreth the ſame, that vnleſſe he brynge it to paſſe, he wyll doubtles be wery of his lyfe. Therfore nowe the tyme requyreth, that he ſhould declare howe muche he loueth the aduauncement of Gods glory and the common wealth, willing him not to let paſſe this preſēt oportunitie, whiche he ſhould hardely at any tyme hereafter recouer. And albeit he woulde nothynge further the counſell, yet neuertheleſſe ſhould it procede, and Chriſt they truſted would not fayle them. Wher vnto the Duke of Saxon ſayd, whā he had deuiſed with his fellowes, The Dukes aunſwer. he wold make him an anſwere, requiring him to deliuer vnto him ſuch thinges as he had ſpoken in wrytinge. Wherfore at the kalēdes of Decembre exhibiting a wryting, he declareth thinges more at large, and otherwyſe than he had ſpoken before, howe other Ambaſſadours were ſent vnto other kinges, and he vnto king Ferdinando & the Princes of Germany, how Mantua is the place agreed vpon by the Emperour & other kynges, & that Germany is ful of Sacramētaries, Anabaptiſts, and ſuche other ſectes, that it is to muche daunger for other nations to kepe a counſell emonges them, for they are for the moſte parte Franticke and without all reaſon. Agayne ſuch as ſuppoſed, that the byſhop woulde gyue place in his ryght, that hath bene of ſo longe time confirmed

to be farre diſceaued: And they alſo that beleue howe the Emperour can holde a prouinciall counſell of Germanye, agaynſte the byſhops wyll, are as muche abuſed. And where as they talke of a ſaufe conduicte and pledges for theyr commyng into Italy, there is no cauſe why it ſhould ſo be: For Mantua is a Citie of the Empyre, nere vnto Germany, and nexte the dominions of the Emperour and the Uenetians, wherfore there is no daunger. Finally he ſayeth howe he wil go to kyng Ferdinando, abiding there for their aunſwere. He had been Uergerus ſpake with Luther. before in Saxony, and had ſpokē with Luther at wyttemberge. And in his retourne to kyng Ferdinando, he met with the Duke comming from thence homewarde.
            The Proteſtauntes were appointed before to mete at Smalcalde the ſixte of December, for other matters. Wherfore the .xxi. of the The anſwer of the Prot. ſame, they framed an aunſwere for the byſhops of Romes Ambaſſadour, whiche they ſaye is not ſo exacte as the thynges requyreth, yet for as muche as he deſyred to haue the ſame with expedition, playne & manifeſt. And firſt howe they haue declared their myndes concerning a counſell, both in diuerſe aſſemblies, and alſo two yeare ſynce, to the Emperours and byſhop Clementes Ambaſſadours: For they alſo wyſhe to haue a lawfull counſel, for the preſeruation of the cōmon wealth and common ſaluation of all men, and haue required this of the Emperour ioyntly with other Princes, who alſo thought it nedefull hym ſelfe, doubting not but all good men do deſyre ſuche a counſell, as may helpe and profite the common wealth. For it greueth many good men, that the true and holſome doctrine is through the wicked crueltie of certen men euery where oppreſſed, the members of the churche tone a ſondre, and open crymes mainteined: but ſuche crueltie becommeth Crueltie is vnſemely in churchmen. not the Rulers of the churche. Wherfore if euer there were any, nowe is moſte nede of a counſell, that bothe the olde accuſtmed vyces maye be roted out, and alſo vniuſte violence and crueltie be reſtrayned, and the churche from henceforth ſet in due ordre. They therfore wyll not fayle the common wealth herein, but wyll ryght gladlye come vnto ſuche a counſell, as in ſondrye aſſemblies of the Empyre hath bene agreed vpon: Beſechyng God that all the doinges there, may redounde vnto his glory, and the ſaluation of men. And wher as the biſhop hath choſen Mantua to be the place, they truſte aſſuredly that the Emperour wyll not in this poynte ſwarue from the decrees of the Empyre, and his owne promyſe alſo, in as muche as it was prouyded, that the counſell ſhould be holden in Germany.
            For where he ſayeth it is daungerous keping of the ſame there, the truthe is farre other wyſe, for what peryll can be there, where all the Prynces and Cyties are obedient to the Emperoure onlye? Where the Cyties be ſo ordered that they defende ſtraungers from iniuries,

and ſaue them from all peryll? Therfore oughte it chieflye to be kepte there, to the intent that matters in controuerſie, might duely be debated, that men might frankely ſpeake, and iudge vpryghtly, and feare no force nor faction, but ſaye theyr myndes freely. Two yeares paſte, Clement the ſeuenth promyſed a counſell, with conditions verye captions. And nowe the chiefeſt point is craftely left out, touchyng the lybertie of the counſell and more of the treatie, and partlye referred to Their craft is ſpied. the Byſhop of Rome, whoſe office they ſaye it is to call and ordre the counſell. Nowe is the byſhop whiche hath ſo ofte condempned theyr religion and doctrine, their opē enemie. But in caſe they ſhould permitte theyr aduerſary to geue iudgement, than coulde not the counſell be free: wherein by the aduyſe of the Emperour and other Prynces. Mete men ſhould be choſen out of the whole numbre, whiche accordyng vnto Gods worde, might heare and determine the cauſe: For a counſell is the iudiciall ſeate not only of the byſhop of Rome, but of all other ſtates alſo: for it is to be proued by the examples of the primatiue churche, and alſo by holy ſcripture, that Prynces and other ſtates haue in tymes paſte been admitted in counſelles, for the hearyng of matters. But whereſome woulde haue the byſhoppes power to be aboue the authoritie of the whole churche, it is agaynſt all reaſon and full of tyrannye: For it belongeth as well to the Emperour and other ciuile The Empe. may order counſels. ſtates to ſet in foote in counſelles, and to choſe experte men, eſpeciallye in ſuche cauſes, where the byſhoppes errours be impugned, that is to wytte falſe doctrine and Idolatry for this thynge is permitted alſo by the byſhop of Romes lawe.
            And feinge that this is the vniuerſall cauſe of all men and concerneth Pepes concempned of Hereſy. the whole common wealth, it is the Emperours parte and other Prynces to forſee, that vpryght iudgement be had: For both other byſhops of their owne people, and alſo byſhoppes of Rome haue in times paſte bene condempned for Hereſy and obſtinacie, of the Emperoure and the churche together.
            And at this tyme there is contention of manie weightie matters, whiche the byſhop doth defende not in wordes only, but alſo by wycked and cruell decrees, puniſhyng moſt ſharpely, ſuche as obey not the ſame. For as muche therfore as he is an aduerſary, and ſuſteineth the one halfe of the ſute, the thinge it ſelfe requireth that the whole church, the Emperour & other kinges take in hande to preſcribe an ordre, for the deciding of the matter: wherfore as they haue done euer, ſo they requyre nowe alſo, that the matter maye be handled vpryghtlye, accordynge to the examples of holye wrytte, and the olde primatiue churche. And if it ſo maye be, they wyll not be behynde with theyr partes, truſtynge that truthe ſhall come to lyghte, and the glorye of our Sauioure Chriſte be aduaunced and tranquillitie be reſtored

to the Churche, but if it be otherwyſe, there is no doubte but greater commotions wyll arryſe therof, than hytherto hath bene ſeen: for their partes, they wil at no tyme neglecte the common wealth. And as they can not forſake nor ſhrynke from the true doctrine, ſo lykewyſe in all other matters, they will do all thynges for peace and concorde.
            The kyng of Fraūce whiche was fully determined to make warre in Italy ſent Ambaſſadour Williā Bellaye, to this aſſemblie at Smal The oration of the Frēch Ambaſſad. calde. Who the .xix. daye of Decembre, had there an eloquent oration. And firſt he excuſeth the kynges ſeueritie in punyſhynge certen of his owne ſubiectes, whiche not withſtanding was nothing preiudicial or hurtfull to their cauſe of Religion, though ſome euill tongues dyd reporte ſo, no more than it was diſpleaſure to him, what tyme they with all their force did ſuppreſſe the rebellion of their commons, and punyſhed the Anabaptiſtes, doing yet nothing without iuſt cauſe. wherfore he diſtruſteth not but they be men of ſuch wyſdome and grauitie, that they wyll of no lyght reporte conceaue any euill opinion of ſo noble a kynge that is their frende, who was nowe for vrgent cauſes (not here to be ſpoken of) conſtrayned againſt his nature to vſe extreme puniſhment, Folyſh pitie marreth a citie. leſt hauing ſo large a Realme, he ſhould through ouermuche lenitie, ſet open the wyndowe of wickednes, to the temeritie of manye. And touching their religion and doctrine, the kyng wyll not take vpō him the perſone of the iudge, but in dede lyketh many thinges well, & the reſt he leaueth vndiſcuſſed. After this he goeth about to wynne theyr fauour, and confuteth theyr opinion whiche had warned them to be ware of forayne Ambaſſades: For he proueth that the ſame doth tende to theyr owne hynderaunce and bondage: ſayinge that there is no people ſo ſtronge that can long proſper and floryſhe, vnleſſe they be mainteined by the league and amitie of theyr neyghbours. But the frendſhyp of the kynges of Fraunce, and the Prynces of Germanye, Of Fraunce and Germany one ofſpring. hath bene of ſuche auncientie, and both nations procedinge of one originall, and lye ſo borderynge together, that they maye be not onlye an ayde and ſtrengthe, but alſo an honour and beautie, the one vnto the other.
            Therfore whan the kynge hearde ſaye howe the Germaynes dyd hardely agree amonge them ſelues, he was ryght ſorye, and as muche as in hym lyeth, wyſheth a reconcilement: fearyng leſt this diſſention in Religion, ſhould come to ſome ſorowfull ende.
            Wherfore vnderſtandinge that for theyr owne preſeruation, they were nowe here aſſembled, the kynge had ſent hym to declare vnto them his aduiſe to be thus.
            That for as muche as a free and general counſel could not as yet be obtained, the Germains within thē ſelues ſhold aſſemble altogether & come to ſome vnitie & concord, for the furtheraūce of the which cauſe,

in caſe they be ſo contented, he will choſe out certen well learned men and experte diuines in Fraunce, and ſende them into Germany to be at the ſame reconcilement, or els if they woulde ſende ſome of theirs in to Fraunce for the lyke purpoſe, they ſhould do him a maruelous great pleaſure. In the meane tyme, he doth exhorte them to be at peace amonges them ſelues & knitte their mindes with mutual conſent & brotherly loue, and the king wyl neuer ayde their ennemies, neyther with his helpe nor counſell, in caſe they continue their good wyll towardes hym, as they haue done alwayes hitherto. In the beginnyng of this booke, I ſhewed you howe the iudges of the imperiall chamber contrary to the Emperours decree, made out proces againſt the Proteſtauntes: The iudges of the chamber trouble yt Proteſtātes. For the iudges in dede wer of the Romiſh religiō, and what tyme the Emperour was retourned from the warre of Auſtriche into Italy, they at the ſuite of the clergie, whiche had complayned on the Proteſtauntes, attempted the lawe againſt them: And albeit the Emperours proclamation were to the contrary, yet did they proceede againſt them. The proteſtauntes wrote herein to the Emperour, And the Duke of Saxon him ſelfe traueled to kynge Ferdinando, who cō
               maunded the lawe to ceaſe, and ratifieth the peace made by the Emperour, but that would? not ſtaye them. Than did the Proteſtauntes vtterly refuſe their iudgement, as ſuſpected and their enemies, declaryng the cauſes wherfore. But that would not be admitted, for they were encouraged by the Emperours letters, whereby he gaue them The Emp. letters. authoritie to iudge, whiche were matters of Religion and which not, ſo that after that they proceaded not onlye in doubtfull cauſes, but in ſuche alſo as concerned religion and nothyng els. After this the Duke of Saxon obtayneth a newe commaundement from the kyng Ferdinando, but all was in vayne. Finally after muche adoe Ferdinando conſented that he would fynde the meanes to ſtaye all matters in the lawe, whiche the Duke and his fellowes had touchyng Religion, cō
               pryſed in the peace of Norinberge: Unto ſuche thynges as the French The anſwer of the Proteſtauntes to the Frenche Ambaſſad. Ambaſſadour had ſpoken, this anſwere was made. Albeit that of the execution done, reportes went diuerſly, yet for that he ſayeth, how thei went about ſedicion, they can not be muche offended with the kynges doynges herein, whiche in deede woulde ſuffer no ſuche thynge them ſelues in their owne countrey: Neuertheleſſe they woulde wyſhe, the kynge ſhould haue a reſpecte vnto ſuche as do profeſſe the pure doctrine of the Goſpell, whiche they proteſted in the aſſemblye at Auſpurge, and not to punyſhe them with the reſt, for it can not be denied, but many falſe and wicked opinions, are crept into the churche, which vnlearned and malicious perſones, do defende with great crueltie, to maynteyne their lucre and Authoritie: and they through a maruelous polycie do forge oftentimes great crymes, vpon the good and innocēt perſones,

to exaſperate the kynges mynde agaynſt them: But ſeyng that it is the propre office of kynges and Princes, to ſeeke Gods glorye, to The duty of Princes. pourge the churche of crrours, and to inhibite vniuſte crueltie, they deſyre inſtantly that the ſame moſte mightie kyng would wholy applye him ſelfe hereunto, for if he ſo doe, than wyll they ſuppoſe that he beareth a frendly and louyng mynde towardes them, which they wyſhe to be lucky, and fortunate to his highnes, & to the churche. Touchinge the auncient alliaunce and frendſhyp betwixt the kynges of Fraunce and the Prynces of Almaygne, all his talke was to them ryght pleaſaunt, and they wyll to their powers endeuour, that the ſame mutuall loue and amitie may long continue. And as concernyng the reconcilement of opinions in religion, they deſyre nothyng els but that the matter may be heard indifferently, and determined by a lawfull counſell: And for as muche as it is not the office of the byſhop of Rome only, to appointe the counſell, but that the ſame thynge alſo concerneth other kynges and Princes, they deſyre the kynge to forſee, that there be no violent counſell called, in a place ſuſpect & perillous, to the intent that vnder the name of a counſel, the true doctrine be not extinguiſhed, but that in ſo weyghty matters as concerne the preſeruation, and peace of the vniuerſall churche, and euery particular perſone, free diſputations and vpright iudgement be had accordingly: Whiche thinge ſhould get the kyng immortal fame and thankes, not only in this preſent age, but alſo in tyme to come, ſo longe as the worlde ſhould endure. As for the conferens to be had betwene the learned mē of Fraunce and Germany, it requireth a long deliberation and diuerſe cōmiſſions extende not to ſuche matters. But ſo ſone as any thyng may be determined herein they wyll aduertyſe the kyng by their letters. For they deſyre nothyng more than that holſome doctrine myght be ſet forth and auaunced: laſt of all, where he ſayde howe the kynge would geue none ayde againſt them, they were very glad to heare thereof: wherfore in all thynges that concerne not the Emperour and the Empyre, they alſo wyll aſſiſt no man againſt hym. The Ambaſſadour had alſo priuate talke with Pontane, with Melancthon, with the Lantgraues learned men, and with Iames Sturmins, of ſondry doctrines, and declared what was the kynges opinion in euery article, and the myndes alſo of other learned men in Fraunce, eſpecially of Paris. Of the byſhop of Romes ſupremacie, The kinges opinion of matters in controuerſie of the Lordes ſupper, of maſſe, of the inuocation of ſainctes, of Images, of free wyl, of purgatory, of iuſtification, of monaſtical vowes, of marriage of prieſtes: And that in moſte of theſe thynges, the kyng agreeth with the booke, that Melancthon hath wrytten of common places: touchyng the byſhop of Rome the kynge is wholy of Philippus The commō
                  places of Malancthon. opinon, that he is not chief ſupreme by Gods lawe, but by mans lawe as he affirmeth, but the kyng of England denieth both. And certenly

the byſhop vſurpeth ouermuche authoritie, whan he taketh vpō hym to depoſe kynges and Emperours, whiche nowe he entendeth to put in practyſe againſt the kynge of Englande, albeit that the kynge & alſo diuers Cardinalles, iutreate him to the contrary. The diuines ſay he is head of the churche by Gods lawe, but when the kyng demaunded the place they could not ſhewe it. He miſliketh alſo the defence of pourgatory: For of that wel, ſpryngeth maſſe, dirige, and al theyr marchaundiſe. But if the maſſe were taken away, their combes were cut, The maſſe mainteineth purgatory. and they ſhould no lōger be able to defende their authoritie. And whā the kyng had graūted them certen monethes, wherin they ſhold proue purgatory by Scripture, they aunſwered at the lengthe, howe they oughte not to reache their enemies weapons, whiche they myght vſe againſt thē. As touching monaſticall vowes, the kyng ſuppoſeth that it might be obteined of the byſhop, that none ſhould be taken in yong, Monaſticall voues. and before the vowers were of type yeares, and that it ſhould be lawfull for them to depart thence whan they woulde and mary: And thinketh not good to deface theyr houſes, but to conuerte them in to Colleges, wherein yought may be brought vp in learnyng and vertue. The diuines would in any caſe haue prieſtes to liue vnmaried, but the king had deuiſed this meane waye, that ſuche as haue maried wyues, ſhold remayne ſo ſtyll, but the reſt not to mary, or if they did, to abſteyne frō the miniſtration of the churche. For concerning y• whiche is alledged of Paphnutius, who in the counſell of niece, perſwaded the mariage of Paphnutius. prieſtes, the diuines aunſwere, that it can not be proued, that prieſtes haue maried at any tyme, Not withſtandynge they wyl not deny but that they had wyues, before they were admitted to the ordre of prieſthod. As concerning the lordes ſupper to be receyued wholye or vnder both kyndes as they terme it, the kynge had conference herein with The Lordes ſuppervnder both kyndes Clement the ſeuenth, and truſteth alſo that it wylbe obtayned at this byſhoppes handes, that it ſhalbe lawfull for euery man to receiue after his conſcience. Moreouer the kynge affirmeth, that a hondreth yeare ſynce in Fraunce, they receiued the whole ſupper, not in the myddes of the churche, but in chappelles, as he had heard old men make relatiō. And agayne the kynges of Fraunce do receyue the whole communiō. And where as the kynge obiected this vnto them, the diuines made aunſwere that kynges were anoynted as well as prieſtes, and that the Scripture ſpeaketh of a Prieſthode Royall: And that the ſame whiche is lawfull for kynges, is not to be permitted to others, in lyke caſe. Furthermore in mattins and other dayly ſeruice, the kyng doth acknowledge that many thinges may be cut of, and many taken cleane away. And that Clemēt the ſeuenth committed the charge here of vnto Cardinall Crucei, a Spaniarde, whoſe boke of the ſame thing remayneth, whiche the diuines of Paris haue condempned for hereſy:

whiche be ſuche a kynde of men, that wyll condempne not onlye the Germaines, as wicked and erring in Religion, but alſo the byſhop hym ſelfe with all his Cardinalles, and the caſe require it. But ſeynge the whole matter is full of difficultie, the kyng is altogether addicted to haue the churche reſtored to vnitie and concorde. And how he hath talked herein with the Dukes of Bauier, whom he fyndeth ſtiffer, thā the diuines of Paris. Finally he exhorted them, to admitte no place of counſel, but by the kyng his maiſters, and alſo the kyng of Englandes aduiſe, whiche wyll conſent both in one. Moreouer how certen yeres paſt. Lewys the Frenche kyng, contended that it was not laweful for The kynges of Fraunce and Nauane ercommunicated. Iuly the byſhop, to appointe a counſel without the conſent of the Emperour and other kynges. And the kyng of Nauarre was than of the ſame opinion, and where as Iuly did excommunicate them both, Ferdinando kyng of Spayne, by this title inuaded Nauarre: And that the kyng is nowe alſo of that mynde and opinion, neyther wyll he admitte any counſel, vnleſſe the place be ſure and not ſuſpected or apt for iniury, and wherin a man may ſpeake his mynde frely. Beſydes the talke before mentioned, he was earneſtly in hand with them, to enter into league with the kynge. And this was the principall cauſe of hys Ambaſſade. But where they did except the Emperour, againſt whom they ſayde, they myght attempte nothynge, he departed without his The proteſt. would make no league wt the kyng. purpoſe, and to certen he ſpake in counſell, how he marueled, that they would neglecte ſo mightie a kyng, and ſayde, the tyme woulde come, wherin they would wyſhe to haue redemed his frendſhyp derely. The kyng of Englande alſo Henry the eyght, ſent thether his Ambaſſade, the chief wherof, was Edward Foxe byſhop of Hereforde, who in the begynning made his relation. For as muche as the aliaunce and kinred the oratiō of byſhop Fore Ambaſſa. for the kynge of Englande. is great, betwene the kynges of England & the Princes of Saxō, the kyng can not but beare muche good wyll towardes hym and hys cōſortes, eſpecially ſynce their chief endeuour is to ſet forth Gods true knowledge vnto others. And al be it that for this cauſe only, they haue ſuſteyned great reproche, yet doth he miſlyke them neuer a whyt therfore, nor iudgeth otherwyſe of them than of ſuche good men, as contrary to their dutie, and without a reaſonable cauſe wyll doe nothing, and to haue this reſpect only that through the true preachynge of the Goſpell, Gods glory myght be aduaunced. And of the ſame deſyre is The alteration of Religion in Englande. the kyng alſo, whiche is ſufficiently enough declared, by the alteratiō that is now in Englād. For by the kinges cōmaundemēt, a great part of Errours are abolyſhed, and by commō aſſent of the whole Realme, the byſhop of Rome, with all his deceiptfull iugglynges, are frō thence cleane banyſhed, in lyke caſe as it is in Saxony. And for ſo muche as the ſame deſyre and good wyll is common to them both, the kyng hath a wonderfull great affection towardes them, that they woulde thus

procede, and profeſſe al one doctrine: for that ſhould doubtles eſtablyſh a continuall peace and quiet. And what commotions haue arryſen of the diuerſitie of opinions, the kynge vnderſtandeth. And the Anabaptiſtes, by theyr example haue declared: The byſhop nowe pretendeth as though he would calle a counſel: and certenly if there remayne any diſſention, and they doe not agree in their doctrine, it wyl make much againſt them, whan they ſhall come to the counſell. Wherein notwithſtandyng he imputeth not the fault to the diuines, for the ſtate of the churche was neuer ſo quiet, but at ſome tyme there hath been diſſention: Whiche thynge is alſo proued by the example of Peter, Paule, & The ſtate of the churche troubleſome Barnabas. Therfore is an vniformitie to be ſought for, that maye be grounded vpon the ſure foundation of Scripture. And the byſhop of Rome endeuoureth with all his myght, to let that peace and concord. Wherfore the kynge is of this opinion, that ſo longe as his authoritie, tyranny and crueltie endureth, it is vnpoſſible to come to agrement: for that the kynge hath lately deliuered his realme of Englande, out of that moſte fylthie bondage, and reſtored it vnto lybertie, that Idole & Antichriſte is nowe ſtarke madde, and where as he can work no miſchief openly, he goeth about fraude and gyle, and with falſe forged ſclaunders, to incenſe kynges againſt hym. And al be it he woulde do any thynge to mainteyne his authoritie: yet is this his deuyſe and polycie, to ſtyre vp cruell warres, and ſet one in an others toppe. And the kynges pleaſure was, that he ſhould thus declare vnto them, not for that he ſtode in feare of the byſhop, for he was ſo furnyſhed with all thynges, that he cared neyther for hym, nor yet for all his adherentes, but to the intent they might clerely perceyue what Antechriſtes purpoſe The rage of Antichriſt. is, chieflye at this preſent tyme, whan he pretendeth to holde a counſell, but in his mynde intendeth farre an other thynge. The kyng doeth confeſſe and graunte, that a lawfull diſputation were very profitable and expedient for the common wealth. But yet for all that, it ought to be forſeen in any wyſe, that ther be no ſuch coūſel had as ſhal intreate only to eſtablyſh the biſhoppes authoritie. Wherfore he requyreth and admonyſheth them, that they wyll allowe no counſell before a common peace be made through out chriſtendome: Moreouer he wiſheth that Gods true Religion and ſeruice maye be reſtored, whiche thinge to accomplyſhe and mayntaine, he is content to ioyne hym ſelfe with them. And that theſe are the thynges which they were commaū
               ded to declare vnto them. And moreouer required thē that they might hereafter haue further conference in theſe matters priuately with certen appointed perſones. For the kyng bare ſuche an affection towards them and their Religion, that he would employ herein al his treaſure, and hym ſelfe alſo. Whereunto they made aunſwere, and commending the kinges good wyll, do ſhewe howe their chief deſyre is, that the doctrine

of the Goſpell myght be ſpred far abrode. And whatſoeuer they do herein, to be done of dutie: And all be it they haue ſuffered for the ſame great rebukes and iniuries, and although thei haue procured thē ſelues hereby moſte heinous diſpleaſures, and haue oftentymes endured the malice and threatnynges of many, yet haue they nothynge relented, nor ſlacked therfore their enterpryſe, in ſettyng forth that moſte holy thyng. And the only cauſe of ſo great hatred & Malice was, that they had forſaken wicked errours and falſe doctrine. Now where the kyng promyſed his ayde herein, & ſo ample maner, where alſo he hath expulſed and banyſhed out of his Realme, the tyranny of the byſhop of Rome, from whence as out of a well ſprang all wicked idolatrye, they are glad and ioyful to heare it, and beſeche God that he may thus procede. Moreouer where he doeth admonyſhe thē to beware, that there be no diſſention in their doctrine, they gyue hym harty thankes: but doubtles there is no controuerſie at all, & they doe perſeuer in the ſame doctrine, whiche they profeſſed at Auſpurge. For as concernynge the Anabaptiſtes, they be with thē extremely punyſhed, vnleſſe they come to amendement: And that they alſo reigne chiefly in thoſe places, wher the doctrine of the Goſpell is prohibited. The talke alſo of the byſhop, and of his craftie dealynge, pleaſed them very muche, and that the byſhops legate is nowe in Germany, makyng promyſe of a counſel to be holden at Mantua, and howe he had talked herein with the Prynce Electour of Saxony. But what deliberate aunſwere they made vnto his demaundes, is compriſed in wryting, whiche he ſhall haue deliuered vnto hym to beare vnto the kyng, to the intent he may vnderſtāde what is their mynde herein, for the kynges ſocietie and coniunction, wherof he ſpake, they yelde him harty thankes. And alſo to the intent that this ſo holſome doctrine may kepe his ryght courſe, they wil ſpare neyther paynes nor peryl, and doubte not, but God wyl gouerne theſe affayres, although their aduerſary doe neuer ſo muche contende, and ſpurne againſt them. And for becauſe he deſyreth to conferre of theſe thynges more at large with ſome men priuatly, they haue choſen certen for the ſame purpoſe, with whome he may cōmunicate his things, praying him to reporte of them ſo vnto the kynge, as theyr good wyll towardes hym, may appere the better through his commendation. Whan the Duke of Saxon was retourned from kynge Ferdinando The proteſt. league is renewed. to Smalcalde the twelfte of Decembre, on Chriſtmas euen, a decree was made, that the league whiche laſted one yeare longer, ſhoulde be renewed for ten yeares, and howe the reſte of their furniture ſhoulde be prouyded, and were agreed to receyue into the ſame league ſuch as were wyllynge and deſyrours, ſo that they profeſſe the doctrine propounded of them at Auſpurge, and woulde beare with them ſcot and lotte. Emonges whome were the Prynces of Pomerane, Ulriche

Duke of Wyrtemberge, Roberte Bauier Prynce of Bipounte, Aulpurge, Franckeforte, Kempten, Hamborough and Hannobria. And herein toke ordre howe to withſtande & defende themſelues, againſte the vniuſt iudgement of the Emperiall chambre. At the ſame tyme alſo was William Erle of Naſſowe, admitted into the league. And albeit that the Lantgraue by reaſon of the controuerſie that was betwixt The Erle of Naſſowe. them for the lande of Chattes, did not aſſente, yet if any wrong were offered him for the profeſſion of the Goſpell, he ſayde he woulde not fayle him, in caſe he deſyred his ayde. This yeare alſo the Senate The Goſpel receiued at Auſpurge. of Auſpurge, all diſſention at the length taken cleane awaye, receyueth the doctrine of the Goſpell, and wrytinge their letters vnto Luther, intreate hym that he would ſende them faithful miniſters of the churche, and amonges others, Urbanus Regius.
         
         
            
            
               ✚ The tenth Booke of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the ſtate of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne of the Empyre of Charles the fyfte.
            
               
                  ❧ The argument of the tenth Booke
               THe citie of Munſter through the preachyng of Barnarde Rotman, receaued the Goſpell wherupon the clergie with theyr byſhop forſoke the place, neuertheleſſe a reconcilemēt was made by the Lantgraue. There came thether out of Hollande an Anabaptiſte called Iohn of Leiden, who hauing wonne Rotman and diuers others, infected the whole citie with his poyſon, in ſo muche as they of that ſecte being ſet on miſchief, became ſtrōger, had all thinges in common, and married many wylles. Iohn of Leiden, after the death of Iohn Matthewe, is declared the chiefeſt Prophet and ſhortly after kyng vniuerſall hauing his cheyalry, and power of life and death. The citie being beſeged, a metinge was appointed at confluence to enforce the ſiege. The Anabaptiſtes had ſent letters to the Lantgraue, and a booke of their doctrine, whiche Luther than impugned. The citie being in extreme famine, at the laſt was ſurpryſed and wonne. The kyng and his companions were taken priſoners, whoſe execution is after recited. About this buſines of Mū
                  ſter was an aſſemblie appointed at Wormes. The Duke of Sauope beſegyng Geneua, is repoulſed. The kyng of Fraunce prepareth an armie to go towardes Millan, and by this occaſion here is mentioned of the ryght whiche he pretendeth to haue there. The Emperour beynge aduertyſed of his enterpriſes, commeth to Rome and accuſeth the kyng, and ſolliciteth the Pope to holde a counſell. The Proteſtauntes make a league with the kyng of Englande. The Pope publiſheth the counſell to be kept at Mantua. There is warre betwyxt the Emperour and the Frenche kynge. The Archebyſhop of Collon reformeth his countreis.
            
            
               NOWe muſt we come to the ſiege of Munſter, Munſter a citie of Weſtophalia. the Metropolitane citie of Weſtphalia. But firſt are certen thinges to be repeted, euen from the beginning vntyll ſuch tyme as the citie was finally taken, and the chief malefactours executed. I ſpake of Thomas Mūcer in the fiſt boke, howe he reyſed a tumulte of the communaltie, and ſhewed what his doctrine was, and alſo howe he endeth his lyfe. Out of his ſchole procedeth The original of Anabaptiſtes, their doctrie and maners a kynde of prople, whiche for their practiſe and doctrine, are called Anabaptiſtes, of whom alſo is ſome thing mētioned before, for thei prohibite the chriſtening of children, and are thē ſelues baptiſed again, affirming that all others ought to do lykewyſe, and take away al efficacitie from the former baptiſme. They pretende certen outwarde holynes. They teache howe it is not lawful for the chriſtians to go to the law, nor to beare office, nor to take an othe, neither to haue any thynge priuate, yt al thīgs ought to be cōmō vnto al mē. And thꝭ at ye begīning,

but afterwardes thei propounde a great deale more heinous matters, as I ſhall hereafter declare. And whan they began to ſpreade ouer all Germany, and that Luther, & almoſte all other learned men inueyhed againſt them, and the Magiſtrate alſo punyſhed them, in ſo much that there could no great nūbre of them cleaue together. At the length they placed them ſelues in this forſayde citie, whiche in dede was of great ſtrengthe, and that fortuned thus. Not farre from the citie of Munſter is there a churche of ſainct Morice, wherin in the yeare of our Lorde M .D. xxxij. Barnarde Rotmā, preached the Goſpell, and had a great Rotman a Preacher. audience out of the citie. And he where they deuiſed to receiue him in to the citie. The catholickes to hinder that, gyue hym a meane ſumme of money, to the intent he ſhould go to ſome other place, to exerciſe him ſelfe in learning. So he departeth to certen places, where he thought to attayne to ſome further knowledge. After a fewe monethes retourneth, wherewith they beinge ſore offended, doe their endeuour to debarre him from preaching, but that was in vayne, he had ſo great fauoure of the people. Within a whyle certen of the beſte and principall Senatours, receyue hym into the Citie. And where he was kept out of the churche, they ſet vp a pulpet for hym in the churche porche, and heare hym without. But where as his audience encreaſed daylye, requeſte made, that the churche myght be open for hym, or els ſhould the dores be broken vp.
            And he not longe after, through the aduiſe of certen that the people had choſen, writinge his letters into Heſſia not far of, the Lantgraues countrey, deſyreth that certen good and well learned men myght be ſent thether to helpe hym to preache the Goſpell. Wherfore a couple were ſent thether from Marpurge. And when they came thether, they conſulted with Rotman, and thre others howe they myght bannyſhe the byſhop of Romes authoritie fyrſte of all, that after they myghte teache the Goſpel, to the more profit of the hearers. For the compaſſing wherof, this waye ſemed vnto them beſt.
            They drawe out certen articles of the byſhops errors, to the numbre of thyrty, and delyuer them to the Senate, beynge in the meane tyme ſo prepared, that vnleſſe they could proue by the Scriptures that all theſe were directly againſt Gods worde, they would refuſe no punyſhment. The Senate cōmaundeth the catholiques of the clergie to come into the court, & there propoundeth vnto them the forſayde articles of errours. And for becauſe they haue alwayes pretended, that theyr doctrine was pure and grounded vppon Goddes worde, and the Preachers denye the ſame, and wyll ieoperde theyr lyues, to proue it. They demaunde whether they wyll confute by the Scriptures, ſuche thynges as are obiected. Beyng thus ſpoken vnto, and perceyuynge that the Senate tooke pleaſure in the thynge, they

aunſwere in fewe wordes, that they haue nothyng to alledge for them ſelues: And where they haue affirmed hitherto, their doinges to be The papiſts cō ſeſſe their ignoraunce. ryght and good, that was done by wening and ignoraunce. Than the Senate, for as muche as they were conuicte of falſe doctrine, and had nothyng to ſaye for them ſelues, and confeſſed their owne naughtines: commaundeth from henceforth, that they teache no more, but geue place in all churches to theſe newe Preachers, whiche haue detected their errours. After by the conſent of the Senate and the common people, churches were aſſigned to euerye of them where they ſhoulde preache. Whiche thynge the Popyſhe prieſtes toke very diſpleaſauntly, eſpecially thoſe that were of the cathedrall churche, beynge for the moſte parte gentlemen borne of good houſes. Who at what tyme they coulde not otherwyſe preuayle, departe thence in great diſlikynge and go vnto the byſhop of the citie, and layinge their heades together, doe The papiſts forſake the citie. deuiſe to ſtoppe all wayes and paſſages, that there ſhould no corne be brought vnto the citie. And a lyttle whyle after, whan all the wayes were ſtopped on euery ſyde, the byſhop and the others afore ſayde, for a further conſultation to be had, come to Telget which is a litle town a myle without the citie: from whence was a meſſenger ſent to the ſenate with letters of this effect. That they ſhoulde forſake their enterpryſe, and reſtore the olde and former ſtate, or els they would take thē for their ennemies. The byſhop was countie Fraunces Waldeck. The laſt before hym had Frederick, brother to the Archebyſhop of Collon: Frederick forſaketh the byſhoprike. But he eyther for that he coulde not haue his health in thoſe parties, or els for becauſe he ſmelled ſome thynge, not long before, forſoke the place of his owne accorde, and was content to lyue a priuate lyfe at home in his countrey. The Munſterians conſulting of the matter, deteyne the meſſenger, & ſetting forth vpō Chriſtmas euē at night, about They of mū
                  ſter oppreſſe the papiſtes i
                  •
                .C. of them, & coming vpon thē ſoden, taking the towne, & keping the gates yt none ſhold eſcape, they apprehend thē al. The biſhop was gone thēce the day before as it happened. By & by they cary the priſoners in to the citie, amōges whom wer the chief of the clergie, & diuers others of the nobilitie. The ſenate demaundeth of thē, what their intēt is, and whether they purpoſe hereafter to diſturbe the preaching of yt Goſpell. They make a gentle anſwer how they wyl do their endeuour, that the ſame doctrine may floryſhe, wherupon a cōuenaunt is made, the copie Condicious of peace. wherof the Senate ſent vnto the Lantgraue, requeſtinge him for the Goſpell & common wealthes ſake, he would further this matter. Who ſendeth certen of his counſel, by whoſe meditatiō it was cōcluded that being reconciled in their myndes, & forgetting al diſpleaſure paſt, both partes ſhould obſerue the peace, that the Goſpell ſhould be preached in ſyxe churches, that al wicked & ſuperſticious Religion ſhould be aboliſhed, that in the cathedrall churche nothyng ſhould be altered, neyther

that the citie ſhould imagine, that the ſame cōcerned them any thyng: This cōcluſion of peace was confirmed with the Seales of the Lātgraue, of the Biſhop & his clientes, of the nobilitie and cōmon people, the foretenth day of February, the yeare of ſaluation M .D. xxxiij.
            Whā al thinges were thus pacified, cōmeth a certen Cobler to Mū
               ſter out of Hollande, one Iolm Leidan, a ranke Anabaptiſt. Who after he was acquainted with the preachers of the Goſpel, demaūded of Iohn Leidā an Anabap. them priuatly, whether they ſuppoſed, that yonge childrē were rightly chriſtened? Which after they had affirmed, he, that was wholy addict to the contrary opiniō, began to ſmile, and contempne theyr anſwere. Which thing once perceiued, Barnarde Rotman (before mētioned) exhorteth the people in his ſermō to pray, yt they may kepe ſtill the trewe doctrine, & maynteine it, that it be not infected of fantaſtiēall perſons, namely of Anabaptiſtes, which now alſo are priuely crept in amongs them, and kept company with others, whoſe opinion, if it ſhoulde preuaile, not only the ſtate of the cōmon wealth, but of religiō alſo, ſhould become miſerable. About the ſame time came thither alſo Hermā Stapred, Herman Stapred. who beyng cōpagnion to Rotman, inueighed openly againſt the chriſtening of Children. He was ſcholler to Henricke Rollie, whiche a lyttle before was executed at Utreight for thopinion of Anabaptiſme. And he was another occaſion of this newe doctrine. And nowe was the matter comen ſo farre, that there was a great brute of the Anabaptiſtes throughout the citie, albeit that as yet the thynge was cloſſelye and ſecretly wroughte. For no man was admitted, vnleſſe he were of theyr ſecte: beſydes that the chiefe aucthors, did not profeſſe theſe thynges openly, neyther taught they, but in the night when other mē were a ſtepe, than practiſed they theyr miſteries. But whan the thinge was knowen, and many citezens ſore offended, whiche ſaid it was not ſuffrable, that a newe doctrine ſhould be priuatly taught in the night, by a decree of the Senate, they were commaunded to departe the citie. The Anab. baniſhed the citie. But they went out one way, and came in by another, braggyng how God had commaunded them there to remayne, and defended theyr cauſe earneſtly. Which thing troubled the Senate, & alſo ſtroke them with a ſoden admiration: Wherefore, for the auoidinge of a further tumulte and daunger, the Senate commaunded the preachers, aſwell of the Anabaptiſme, as of the Goſpel, to come before them, and certein other learned men with them. Than did Rotman bewray his opinion Rotman became an Anabaptiſt. which he had kept cloſe vntill that time, and condemned the chriſtenynge of children, as wycked and deteſtable: But Herman Buſche chieflye, defended the contrarye opinion before the Senate in ſuche ſorte, that they were commaunded to get them oute of the Cytye immediatlye by a common decree. And where they alledged that they myghte not ſafelye paſſe throughe the Byſhoppes Countrey, the

Senate both obtayned for them a ſaufe conduicte, and gaue them alſo money to beare theyr charges: but they whiche longe before were determined to go no whither els, went priuely to the followers of theyr ſecte, and lurked there for a certen ſpace. In this meane tyme before they came abroade agayne, the Senate ſhut vp all the churches ſaue one, fearyng leſt the Anabaptiſtes (the numbre of whome encreaſed dayly) accompanied with their teachers, ſhoulde haue driuen the preachers of the Goſpell out of the churches.
            Afterwardes in the moneth of Nouembre, the Lantgraue at the requeſt of the Senate, ſent two thether to preache, Theodoricke Fabritius, The conſtā
                  cie of Fabritius. and Iohn Melſinger. And he in dede vnderſtanding the trouble towardes and affrayde of the daunger, retourned home agayne: but the other aboade ſtoutely, admonyſhyng the citezens diligently to beware of the Anabaptiſticall doctrine, and keepe ſtyll this courſe and perſeuered tyll the Anabaptiſtes gettinge the vpper hande, droue the reſte out of the Citie, as hereafter ſhalbe recited. And to the entent thei ſhould fynde lacke in nothyng, he penneth out a certen fourme of doctryne and eccleſiaſticall adminiſtration, whiche was allowed of the Senate and the commōs. Moreouer by the leaue of the Senate, Peter Peter Wirtemie. Wirtemie began to preache agayne: but he had made but a fewe Sermons, before he was through the inſtigation of Rotman, expulſed of the Anabaptiſtes. Who nowe waxinge fierſe, prouoked Fabritius and others to diſputation. And the Senate did conſente, that the matter ſhould be tried by the Scriptures only, and by ſuche other like wrytinges as were agreable to the ſame. And that there ſhould be certen well learned men, as arbitrers, who conſyderynge the ſentences and reaſons on eyther parte, ſhould determine the caſe, and what they decreed to be ratified, to the intent that in fine all controuerſie ſecluded, peace might be reſtored to the churche. But this cōdition Rotman and his fellowes refuſed. Wherfore whan they would not abyde iudgement, they began to be diſpyſed. But to the intent they myght waſhe out this ſpotte, they inuente an other waye more eaſye.
            One of them, as though he were moued with the ſpirite of prophecie, A Prophet inſpired. tuneth vp and downe the citie, crying repente, repente, and be baptyſed agayne, if not the wrath of God ſhall nowe ouerwhelme you.
            At this began the common people to ſturre, and as many as were chriſtened agayne, cryed out after the ſame maner as he dyd. Many for feare of Gods anger, that they ſo much bragged of abuſed through ſimplicitie, beyng in deede otherwyſe not euyll, followe their myndes herein: Others alſo for ſauyng of their goodes, were rebaptyſed, for the Anabaptiſtes puniſhed ſore theyr aduerſaries, and the beſt was the loſſe of theyr ſubſtaunce: This was at the ende of Decembre.

And nowe agayne were they crept out of their dennes, that we ſpake of before, and reſortyng to the market, make an outcrye, and cōmaund that all whiche are not rebaptiſed ſhould be ſlayne as Paganes and wicked men. After this they take the common pieces of ordinaunce & Eiuile war in the citie. munition, they inuade the towne houſe, and do muche miſchief to many. And others, to the intent they myght defend them and theirs from the ſpoyle and iniurie, kepe againſt them an other ſtronge place of the citie, and take diuers of them. This contention with the Anabaptiſtes that kept the market, and had fortified it on euery ſyde, continewed ſo longe tyl at the laſt they came to a compoſitiō, geuing pledges on both parties, wherby it was agreed that euery one ſhould follow his own Religion, that they ſhould go home and kepe the peace. In the meane tyme Rotman and Cnipperdoling; whiche was the chief of that faction, notwithſtandynge that they had commended the compoſition, Cnipperdolyng. yet ſendynge their letters priuely into Townes nere by, warned men of their ſecte, that leauing all their goodes behynde them, they ſhoulde repare vnto them with all poſſible diligence. And what ſoeuer they left behinde them, they ſhoulde receiue ten tymes as muche in recompence. They being allured with ſo large and ample promiſes came thether in great nombres, both men and women, hauing an aſſured hope to attaine to better fortune, eſpecially ſuche as were poore and not able to lyue at home, reſorte to the citie of Munſter. But the tounes mē, eſpecially thoſe that had any great ſubſtaunce, when they ſawe theyr citie full of ſtraungers, conueyed them ſelues thence as well as they myght, leauing the Anabaptiſtes and the other multitude. This was about ſhroftyde in the moneth of February .M.D.xxxiiij. And what tyme the one parte was thus weakened, the Anabaptiſtes, doe chouſe newe ſenatours, all of their owne factiō, and alſo make new conſelles, and one of them was Cnipperdolyng. And ſhortly after they fyred the churche of ſaint Morice in the ſuburbes, and all the other buyldinges thereabout. Than ſpoyle they all the churches, and vndermyne the cathedrall churche within. That done they flocke together in euerye ſtrete, and crye firſt repente, repente: And by and by, auoyde thence quickly ye wicked men, vnleſſe you intende to hazarde your lyues. Finally they aſſemble in armure, and al that were not of their ſecte, immediatly they thruſt out of the citie, without reſpect of age or ſexe, in ſo muche that in that hurly burly, diuerſe women miſcaried of chylde. And as ſone as they had put them to flyghte, ſtreight wayes they toke their goodes. And albeit that this happened yt day before, that they beſieged the citie, yet neuertheleſſe where as certen of thē that fled, chaū
               ced into the byſhoppes handes, he toke them as his ennemies, and dyuerſe of them loſt their heades, and emonges others one or two preachers of the Goſpell. And the ſame Peter Wirtemie beyng in daunger

amonges the reſt, at the requeſt of the Lantgraue, was preſerued. Whiche thynge moued the reſidue of the honeſt citizens, that all be it they were mynded to forſake the towne, yet ſeyng the preſent daūger without, they were in a maner conſtrayned to tary agaynſt their wil. At this ſame tyme the chiefeſt Prophet amonges them, for that name they doe vſurpe to themſelues, Iohn Mathewe commaunded them, that loke what golde or ſyluer euery man had, he ſhoulde brynge it all Iohn Matthewe the high prophet foorth vnder payne of death, and for the ſame purpoſe was a common treaſure houſe appointed. The people beyng fore aſtonied at this cruel decree, durſt not but obeye: Neyther myght any man diſceiue or begile thē of any part, for two certen yonge maydens that prophecied, coulde declare what fraude was vſed, neither did they only bryng their own, Maydens do prophecie. but toke alſo to their owne vſe the goodes of thē, whome they had expulſed. After this the ſame Prophet cominaunded, that no man from henceforth ſhould haue or kepe any booke, ſauing the holy Byble: All others he commaunded to be brought forth and brent. This commaū
               dement ſayde he, was geuen hym from aboue, therfore were bookes brought thether in a wonderfull numbre, and all conſumed with fyre. It chaunced at the ſame tyme, that one Hubert Trutelynge a ſmyth, had ſpoken ſome thynge in ieſte againſt them, whiche named them ſelues Prophetes. Whan this was knowen, they called the people together, Ieſtyng p
                     •
                  
                  nyſhed. and commaunded them to put on harneſſe: by and by the mā was accuſed and cōdemned to die: whiche thinge aſtonied the people maruelouſly. Than the chief Prophet before named, taketh this poore man and caſteth hym downe flat vpon the grounde, & thruſteth his ſpeare into hym, yet he gaue him not his deadly wounde, although he pearſed hym with great violence: that done, he commaunded him to be caryed away to another place. Then caught he a boore ſpeare out of a young mans hande that ſtode next him, and as he laie iobbed him in with the ſtaffe heade, and ſeyng that the man would not by & by die for all this he ſayde howe it was declared vnto hym out of heauen, that his tyme was not yet come to dye, and that God had graūted him his pardon. Notwithſtandyng he died within a fewe dayes after. Whiche thyng whan the Prophet knewe, he toke a long moriſpike, and rode vp and The prophet inſpired wt 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . downe the towne a great pace, crieng that God the father had commaunded hym to diſcomfite the ennemies without the citie, and put them to flyght. Whan he came nere to their campe, a ſouliour encountred with him & ran him through. And albeit yt his falſe prophecie was thus detected the ſeconde tyme, yet had his fellowe Prophetes ſo bewitched men, and made the matter ſo fayre to the common people, that they were ryght ſory for the loſſe of hym, ſaying that there hanged ſome great plage ouer them, that ſo worthye a man was taken from them. The next prophet vnto hym, Iohn Leidan, bad them be of good

comforte, for it was reuealed vnto hym longe before, that he ſhoulde thus ende his lyfe, and that he ſhould marry his wyfe. Two daies before Eaſter, they ran in to euery churche, and there range all the belles at ones. And after a fewe dayes Cnipperdoling prophecieth, that ſuch Cnipperdoling prophecieth. as are placed in high dignitie, ſhalbe caſt downe, and others preferred to their rowmes that be of lowe and baſe degree: than he commaundeth that all churches ſhould be deſtroyed, affirminge earneſtlye that this commaundement came from God. Therfore was he obeyed, and the commaundement whiche he ſayd came from heauen, was accomplyſhed with great diligence. Not longe after this Iohn Leidane, deliuereth the ſworde of execution vnto Cnipperdoling, and appointeth hym to be hangeman, for thus it hath pleaſeth God, that he whiche From the horſe to the Aſſe. had before borne the hygheſt office of conſulſhyp, ſhould now haue the loweſt office of the hangeman. He not refuſyng, toke his offer in very good part alſo. Whan the byſhop had nowe by the ſpace of two or thremonethes, borne the whole charges of this warre alone: Herman the Archebyſhop of Collon, and Iohn Duke of Claeue, ſent hym money, munition and certen bandes of horſemen and fotemen for his ayde. And the Archebiſhop wēt alſo to the campe, taſiſt hym with his coū
               ſell, and not longe after the citie was aſſaulted in diuers places. But when they were out of hope to wynne it by aſſaulte, they buylded ſeuē bulwarkes or fortes about the citie to take away their victualles, and put into euery forte an enſeigne of fotemen, with certen bādes of horſmen to wynter there. And for the continuance of the ſiege of warre, whiche aſwell concerned others, the byſhop of Munſter deſyred ayde of thoſe Princes and cities, that are of the prouince of Rhine, by reaſon they were nere at hande. For the whiche cauſe an aſſemblie was appointed at cōfluence the .xiij. daye of Decembre of the yeare .M.D.The diuiſiō of Germany into prouice xxxiiij. for all Germany is deuided into ſixe prouinces, into Frankony, Bauier, Swelande, Saxonie, the coaſte of the Rhyne, and Burgundy. Within the whiche limites all Princes and cities are of an aunciēt cuſtome, accōpted in the aſſemblies of the Empyre. But now is Saxonye deuided into hyghe and lowe, and agayne the baſe countrey of Germany, Weſtphalia and Auſtriche, are added hereūto, ſo that now the Empyre conteineth ten regions. After the aſſaulte was attempted in vayne, Iohn Leidane gaue him ſelf to reſte, and ſlepeth thre whole daies together, and what tyme he did awake, he ſpake not a worde, The ſalſhod of Leidane. but at the laſt called forpaper, wherin he wrote the names of twelue men, wherof certen were gentlemen, whiche as the twelue trybes of Iſrael, ſhould rule and gouerne all thynges: for this ſayde he, was the Twelue iudges. wyll of the heauenly father. When he had thus by the meanes of theſe twelue men, prepared awaye for his kyngdome, he propoundeth certē opinions to the preachers, whiche he requireth to haue them confuted

by the teſtimonies of Scripture: for if they can not, than will he vtter them to the people, that they may be approued and ratified. The ſome wherof was this, that a man was not boūden to one wife, but might The Paradoxes of iohn Leiden. lawfully marry as many as he liſt: But whan the preachers reproued his opinion, he calleth them into the counſell houſe, and the twelue mē alſo. And when they were all come thither, he taketh of his cloke, and throweth it on the grounde, and the newe Teſtament withall: Witneſſing and ſwearing by the ſame, that the thinge whiche he had propounded, was reuealed vnto him from heauen. Therfore he thretneth them with right high wordes, as thoughe they ſhould not haue God to be theyr frende, vnleſſe they conſented to him.
            In fine, they agree in opinions, and the Doctors preache of Matrimony three dayes together. And ſtreight waies he marieth three wyues at ones. Wherof the one was the wife of the aforeſaid great Prophet Iohn Mathew. Whoſe example afterwardes others folow, in ſo muche, as it was all accompted a praiſe, to be often married.
            But diuerſe honeſt citezens, which miſliked their doynges, geuing a notice throughout the Citie, called all ſuche as profeſſed the doctrine Sedition in the citie. of the Goſpell into the market place. And afterwardes apprehended the Prophet, and Cnipperdolinge, and all their Preachers. Whiche thing when the raſcall people vnderſtode, they came in armure, tooke away the priſoners from them, and ſlewe of them about fiftie wt great crueltie: For they tyed them vnto trees, or pillers, and ſhotte them in with dagges, theyr highe prophet greatly commendinge them, & wylling them that would do God pleaſure to ſhoote firſt: howbeit others were otherwiſe murthered.
            At the eight kalendes of Iuly, arriſeth a newe prophet, which was a Goldſmith. Who calling an aſſemblie of the people into the marketplace, declareth vnto them, howe it is the will and commaundement of the heauenly father, that Iohn Leidane ſhould poſſeſſe thempire of the whole worlde. And that he marchyng forwarde with a puiſſaunt Iohn Leidā inuadeth the kingdome. armie, ſhould diſtroy all kinges and princes without reſpecte, & ſpare only the multitude, at the leaſt ſuch as loued righteouſnes. And that he ſhould poſſeſſe the ſeate of Dauid his father, vntill ſuche time as the father ſhould reuoke the kingdome into his owne handes: And howe the wicked beyng deſtroyed, godly men ſhould reigne in his life.
            When theſe thinges were openly declared, Iohn Leidane immediately fell downe vpon his knees, and liftyng vp his handes vnto heauen, ſaid: Men and brethren, this thing knew I many dayes ſins: Yet would I neuer ſpeake it. For to the intent it might be of better credit, A new king of Anabap. the father hathe vſed another miniſter. And beynge thus made kinge, forthwith he diſplaceth the xii. men, and after the cuſtome of kynges, chouſeth vnto him nobles, and commaūdeth alſo, that a ſworde with

á gylte ſeabarde, two crownes, a cheyne, a ſ
                  ••
               ptre, and ſuche other like ornamentes, ſhould be prouided for him of pure golde. After that he appointed certen dayes wherin he wyll heare them openly that haue any ſutes to hym. As ofte as he came abroade, he was accōpanied with His pompe his nobles and officers of houſhold. Next after him followed two yōgmen ryding, wherof the one of the ryght hande, caried the crowne and the byble, and the other bare the ſworde drawen: with the lyke pompe went his chief wyfe, for he had diuers at ones. In the market place was prepared for hym an highe ſeate, hanged with cloth of golde, ſuch complaintes and ſutes as came before him, were all for the moſte part concerning wyues and diuorcementes, whiche were then moſte common caſes, in ſo much as many which had liued together a long time, were now firſt diuorſed. And it fortuned that what tyme the people ſtoode thicke about him, preaſing to heare, beholde Cnipperdoling lea peth forth & creping vpon the mens heades and ſholders that ſtoode the madnes of Cnipper. thick together, and breathing into their mouthes ſayd vnto euery one, the father hath ſanctified the, receiue the holy ghoſt. At an other certen tyme, when he daunced before the kyng, thus ſayeth he, was I wonte to playe in tymes paſt with my whore? and the father hath commaunded me to do lykewyſe before the kyng. And where he was ouer tedious and could make none ende, the kyng being offended departed: thā getteth he vp into the kynges ſeate, and toke vpon him to be king: But the kynge retourning in the meane tyme, plucked him down headlōg, and kepeth him in pryſon thre dayes. During the ſiege, they compyle & ſet forth a booke, whiche they call a reſtauration: wherein amonges other thinges they teache that the kyngdome of Chriſte ſhalbe of this The boke of reſtitution. ſorte, before the laſt daye of iudgement, that his elect and choſen ſhold reigne, the wicked being vtterly deſtroyed in all places. They teache moreouer, howe the people may put downe the Magiſtrate. Further more, albeit the Apoſtles had no commaundement to vſurpe any iuriſdiction, yet ſuche as are nowe miniſters of the churche, ought to take vpon them the ryght of the ſworde, and by force to eſtablyſhe a newe common wealth, and that no man ought to be ſuffered in the churche, whiche is not a true chriſtian. Againe, that no mā can be ſaued, vnles he make all his goodes common, and kepe nothing priuate to hym ſelf. They ſaie alſo, that Luther and the biſhop of Rome be falſe prophetes, yet of both is Luther the worſe. Finally they ſaye, how the mariage of ſuch as are not lyghtened with the true fayth, is polluted and filthie, and rather to be reputed for whoredome or aduoutrie. Theſe opinions Who wrote againſt thē. of their were comfuted chiefly by Melanchthō, Iuſtus Ionas, Menius, Urbanus Regins, whoſe workes full of eloquence remayne touching the ſame. Than a fewe weakes after, the newe Prophet that I ſpake of, blewe the trompet in euery ſtrete and commaūded all men to

arme them ſelues, and repayre to the head churche porche: for the enemy muſt be driuen from before the citie. Whan they came thether they fynde their ſupper ready, and being commaunded, there ſate downe to A ſupper. the numbre of foure thouſand. Afterwardes alſo ſuppe thei which had watched in the meane tyme 
                  〈◊〉
                a thouſand. The kyng & the quene with theyr familie ſerued, what tyme they had eatē wel, and that ſupper was almoſte done, the king him ſelfe reacheth bread vnto euerye one with theſe wordes, take, eate, ſhewe the death of the Lorde. And the Quene geuing the Cuppe, ſayeth, drynke, and ſhewe the Lordes death. This done, the Prophete before mentioned goeth in to the pulpet, and demaundeth of them, whether they wyll obey Gods worde. Whan they had all ſayde yea. It is the heauenly fathers commaundement ſaith he: to ſende forth preachers of his worde, to the numbre of twenty eight. whiche going into the foure partes of the worlde, may preache the ſame doctrine that is taught in this Citie. Than he reciteth The Apoſt. of Munſter. their names, and ſhe weth whether eche man ſhall go. Wherfore ſixe were ſent to Oſenbridge, as many to Warrēdorfe, eight to Soeſt and as many to Coſ
                  •
               elde. And than the kynge and the Quene ſuppe with the reſt of the ſeruitours, and the Preachers that were appoynted to be ſent forth. In ſupper tyme the kynge ryſeth vp and ſayeth, he hath a little buſines that the father hath communded him, it chaunced that a ſouldiour was taken pryſoner, whome the kyng accuſeth of treaſon as an other Iudas, and beheaded hym his ſelfe. After this he The kinges murther. retourneth to his ſupper, and telleth merely what he had done. After ſupper theſe foreſaid eight & twenty were ſent away about nyght, and beſydes their charges, euery man had deliuered him a piece of golde, whiche they were commaunded to leaue in ſuche places as would not admitte their doctrine. Whiche ſhould be a token of their deſtruction and death euerlaſting, for refuſyng of peace and holſome doctrine offered. Who ſetting forth, whan euery man came to his place, they cried throughout the townes, that men ſhoulde repent and do penaunce, or The preachers of Mū
                  ſter. els they ſhould ſhortly be deſtroyed, they ſpread their clothes vpon the grounde before the Magiſtrate, and threwe down vpon the ſame the pieces of golde whiche they had receiued, affirming how they are ſent of the father to offer them peace, which if they wyl receyue, thei bid thē to communicate their ryches. But if they refuſe ſo to doe, than do they by this ſygne witneſſe their acte and vnthankefulnes. For this is the ſame tyme that all the Prophetes haue ſpoken of before, wherin God would haue ryghteouſnes obſerued, through out the whole vniuerſall worlde. And whan the kyng ſhal (accordyng to his duty) haue brought the matter ſo to paſſe, that iuſtice ſhall reigne in all places, than ſhall Chriſt deliuer vp the kyngdome to his father.. What tyme they had ſpoken thus, they were apprehended, and fyrſt by gentle meanes, and

afterwardes by tormentes being examined of their beliefe, and kynde of lyfe, and the fortification of the citie: They make aunſwere howe They be racked. they only haue the true doctrine, and that woulde they witneſſe and ſtande to the death. For ſince the Apoſtles tyme hitherto, the worde of God was neuer preached ryghtly: neither hath there bene any iuſtice. And that there be foure Prophetes, wherof two are iuſte, Dauid and Iohn Leidane, and two vniuſte, the byſhop of Rome, & Luther, who is worſe than the other is. Being damaūded why they did expulſe the innocent people out of the citie contrary to their fidelitie and promyſe, taking their goodes, their wyues and their childre, and by what place of Scripture they could proue, and defend this their iuſtice? They ſay that nowe is the tyme come, wherin Chriſt ſayd, how the meke ſhould poſſeſſe the earth. And yt after the ſame ſorte in times paſte, God gaue the goodes of the Egiptians vnto the people of Iſraell. Afterwardes ſpeakyng of the numbre of men and victualles within the citie, they affirmed that diuerſe and many had aboue fiue wiues. Moreouer howe they loked dayly for a greater power out of Hollande and Friſelande. So ſone as they ſhould come, the kyng would marche forwarde with his whole Armie to ſubdue and cōquere the world, deſtroying kinges and Princes, for that they had not miniſtred iuſtice. After their racking, whan they perſeuered ſtyl in their purpoſe, and would acknowledge Their obſtiuacie. no Magiſtrate, beſides their owne kynge, they were rewarded with the loſſe of their heades. Neuertheleſſe one eſcaped. But nowe was the citie on euery ſyde ſo narrouly and ſtraightlye beſieged, that there was no waye to go out. Wherfore the citezens fearing famine, & being carefull for their owne perill, thought to apprehende the kynge, and ſende hym to the byſhop boūde. But the king hearing therof, choſe The Kynge taketh hede to hym ſelfe. out twelue amonges them all, whiche he thought were moſte faithful vnto him and called them Dukes, and appointed to euery of them a garde, and ſome part of the towne to kepe, leſt there ſhould aryſe anye tumulte amonges the people. Than maketh he promyſe to the multitude, howe at Eaſter they ſhould be deliuered, both from ſiege and penurie But vnto the twelue Dukes whiche he choſe, he promiſed more ample thinges a great deale, telling them howe they ſhoulde haue the chiefe rule and gouernment, namyng alſo what coūtreis, townes and Caſtels, he would geue vnto euery one of them. He ſayd, he would only ſpare the Lantgraue, for that he truſted that he woulde take his parte at the length. I ſhewed you before of the aſſemblie appointed at Confluence, in the moneth of Decembre, for the ſtates of the prouince of Rhine. Unto whom alſo Friderick the Prince Electour of Saxony, annexed him ſelfe of his owne accorde. In this aſſemblie, after conſultation had, was decreed to ayde the byſhop of Munſter immediately, with thre hundreth horſemen, and thre thouſande footemen,

for ſyxe monethes: ouer the whiche garryſon and the whole warre alſo, Wiricke, Countie Oberſted had the charge. They decreed moreouer, to ſollicite the reſidue of the ſtates imperiall for their ayde. And becauſe the Emperour was in Spayne, to entreate king Ferdinādo, that againſt the moneth of Aprill, he aſſigne a generall metyng for the ſame purpoſe. After this they admoniſhe them that were beſeged, by their letters earneſtly wrytten, that they ſhould leaue & forſake theire enterpriſe, whiche was ſo diſhoneſt and wicked, as nothynge could be more: And vnleſſe thei would obey, and ſubmit them ſelues vnto their laweful magiſtrate, they do proteſte that the byſhop (who nowe beſegeth them) ſhal not wante the ayde of the whole Empyre. This was at the ende of Decembre. And at the Ides of Ianuary, in the yeare a M .D. xxv. Thei write again with many wordes in dede, but to ſmal purpoſe, yet ſo as they cōmended and mainteined their quarel: but vnto that, whiche was obiected vnto them for makynge of a kynge, they aunſwered nothynge at all. Howe be it in theyr letters to the Lantgraue, they go about to excuſe the matter, ſpeakinge many thynges of the ſalle and deſtruction of all wickedmen, and of the deliueraūce and kyngdome of the Godly in this lyfe. And ſende him withall, the booke of Reſtauration, before mentioned, admonyſhyng him to amende, and that he attempte no warre againſt them, as other wycked Prynces doe, for they are holy men and good people. The Lantgraue readinge ouer their booke and their letters, noted what he thought blame worthy, and cōmaunded his learned mē to aunſwer it. And for as muche as they had in fewe wordes and thoſe abſcure written that their king was not ſo muche of theirs, as of Gods appointment, he demaundeth of thē, wherfore they did not expreſſe thoſe places of Scripture, wherby they thought it lawefull thus to doe? And why they dyd not confirme the thynge before with ſignes and wonders? For of the cōminge of Chriſte, God had declared longe before by all the Prophetes, ſo euidently, that it was well knowen, not only of what houſe or familie, but alſo whan and where he ſhould be borne. They had alſo requeſted that the matter might be heard, wherunto the Lantgraue anſwered, that the ſame might not now take place. For ſo much as they had takē vpon them the aucthoritie of the ſworde, and had bene the workers of ſo muche miſchiefe: For all men ſee what marke they ſhoute at, certēly to ſubuerte all lawes and common wealth. And lyke as their intente is wicked and deteſtable, ſo is nowe their requeſte to haue their cauſe heard, fayned and diſſembled. He doubtles ſent vnto thē faythful preachers and miniſters of the churche, of whome they were ryghtlye inſtructed. And where as they nowe contēpning their doctrine, do reſiſt the errours and miſchief of Anabap. the magiſtrate, take other mens goodes, mary ſondrye wyues, & haue choſen them a newe kynge. Where alſo they denye that Chriſte toke

the humane nature of the virgyn Mary, where they affirme that man hath free wyll, where they compell men to make their goodes cōmon, where they ſaye there is no remiſſion for a ſinner that falleth, all theſe thynges are againſt the lawes both of God and man.
            Whan this anſwer was brought vnto thē, they wryte agayne, and ſende a booke with all compyled in the vulgare tōgue, of the miſteries A booke of yt mi
                     ••
                  ries of ſcripture. of Scripture. And againe in an Epiſtle they amplefie their cauſe, and defende their opinions. And in this booke they deuide the courſe and tyme of the whole worlde into thre partes, & the fyrſt age from Adam to Noe, they ſaye was deſtroyed with the Deluge of water, the ſecōd wherein we are nowe at this daye, ſhalbe conſumed with fyre, but the The diuiſiō of the world. thyrde ſhall be cleane a newe worlde, wherein iuſtice ſhall reigne: neuertheleſſe before this laſt tyme ſhall appeare, this preſent age muſt be pourged by fyre, but that ſhall not be tofore that Antichriſte ſhall be reuealed, and his power vtterly abolyſhed. Thā ſhall it come to paſſe, that the ſcate of Dauid, whiche is decayed, ſhal be newly erected, and Chriſte ſhall poſſeſſe his kyngdome here in earth, and the wrytinges of the Prophetes ſhall be accomplyſhed. And that this preſent worlde now, is lyke the tyme of Eſaw. For iuſtice kepeth ſilence, and the Godly are perſecuted. But as after the captiuitie of Babylon, ſo nowe alſo This preſēt age cumpared to Eſaw the tyme of reſtauration is at hande, to delyuer vs from all theſe myſeries, and to rendre vnto the wycked aboundantly after their demerites, as in the Apocalipſe is declared: And that in this ſame Reſtauration goeth before the worlde to come, to the intent that all the vngodlye beynge deſtroyed, the houſe and ſeate of iuſtice, myght be prepared and beautified.
            Whan the Lantgraue had red this booke, he ſet in hande the Miniſters of his churche to wryte againſt it. The reſidue of the ſtates imperial aſſembled at Eſſinge, do miſlyke the doinges of them that were at cōffuence, affirming that they had no authoritie to impoſe or charge them with any burthen, vnleſſe it had bene by the conſent of the Emperour and all ſtates. In the moneth of February, Corne within the citie waxed very ſcarſe, in ſo muche that ſome alſo died for honger and wante of meate. It fortuned that one of the Quenes, pitieng the people had ſayde to the reſt, howe ſhe ſuppoſed that God woulde not that men ſhould peryſhe thus with famine.
            The kyng whiche had his ſtoore houſes furnyſhed at home, not only The kynge beheaded the Quene. for neceſſitie, but alſo for riot and voluptuouſnes, after he knewe it, brought her forthe in to the Market place, and all the reſte with her, and commaundynge her to knele downe, ſtroke of her heade, and whan ſhe was dead, vttered her to haue played the whore.
            This done the reſidewe ſyng, and gyue thankes to God the heauē
               lye father. After that the kynge daunceth wyth them and exhorteth

the reſt of the multitude, whiche had nothynge lefte them but breade and ſalte, to dauncynge and mery paſtymes. Whan Eaſter came and no deliueraunce appered at all, the kyng whiche had promyſed ſo ſtoutely, to inucnte ſome excuſe, fayned him ſelfe ſicke for the ſpace of ſyxe dayes: After he commeth abroade amonges the people, and telleth thē howe he hath ryden on a blynde Aſſe, and that God the father hathe A blynd aſſe layde vpon his backe the ſynnes of the people. Wherfore they are now made cleane, and delyuered from euery ſpotte. And this to be the deliueraunce whiche he promyſed, wherwith they ought to holde them cō
               tented. Luther amonges other thynges whiche he ſet forth in the vulgar tongue, about this tyme, wrote alſo of this tragedye of Munſter. Luthers writig of Mūſt. Alas ſayeth he, howe ſhould I complayne or lamente thoſe wretched men? for the thynge it ſelfe declareth, that there dwell deuylles thycke and threfolde: but yet ought we to praye the infinite mercy of God herein, and haue good cauſe ſo to doe. For albeit that for the contempt of the Goſpell, the reproche of Goddes holy name, and the ſhedyng of innocent bloud, Germany hath iuſtly deſerued to be plaged, yet hathe God hetherto reſtrayned the force and violence of Sathan, and hath not permitted him to haue the reignes at libertie, but mercifully admonyſheth vs, and by this tragedye of Munſter, nothinge at all artificious, calleth vs to the amendement of lyfe. For vnleſſe God had brydeled God bridleth the power of Sathan. hym, and holden hym backe, I doubte not, but that moſte ſubtille fynde, and wylie artificer, would haue handled the matter farre other wyſe. But nowe that God hathe made a reſtraynte, he rageth and tourmoyleth, not ſo muche as he woulde, but ſo much as he is permitted. For the wycked ſpirite, that ſeketh the ſubuerſion of the Chriſtian fayth, goeth not this way to worke, to perſwade the marriage of many wyues.
            For ſeyng both the vnlawfulnes and the fylthye beaſtlynes of the thynge, is apparent in the ſyght of all men, he perceiueth well enough that men woulde abhorre it. In dede the politicke and ciuile gouernemēt may through this meane be diſturbed, but the kingdom of Chriſt muſt be attempted with other weapons and Ingines.
            He that would circumuente and deceaue men, maye not affectate rule and gouernment, and playe the tyraunt: For all men diſalowe By what meanesmen be diſceaued this, and ſee playnely what his intente is. But he muſt attayne thereunto by ſecrete meanes, as it were by certen bypathes. To goe in olde and euyll fauoured apparell, to looke with a graue countenaunce, to hange downe the heade towardes the grounde, to Faſte, to handle Croked necked cattell. no Money, to abſteyne from Fleſſhe, to abhorre Matrimonye, to eſchewe bearynge of offyce as a prophane thynge, to refuſe gouernemente, and to profeſſe a wounderfull lowelynes of mynde.

This I ſay, is the ready way and meane, to deceyue them that be alſo ryght wyſe, and the whiche couertly and priuely ſetteth open the way to a kyngdome. But it is ouermuche impudencie, for a mā to take vpō him ſelf to be king, & for his fleſhly luſte to mary as many wyues as he The craft of an ignoraūt Deuyll. fanſieth, this is not ſure ye policie of any ſkilful deuyl, but of one yt is yet rude & ignorant, or if he be expert, thā aſſuredly God hath him ſo boūde in a chayne yt he can worke no more craftely. Whiche doubtles he doth for this intentethat we ſhoulde feare his deitie, and amende our liues, before he let loſe that cunning deuyl, whiche certenly wyll aſſaulte vs muche more fierſly. For if this deuyl being but a ſymple grammarian, hath ſtyred vp ſo muche trouble, what ſhal we than do, whan Sathā of muche more knowledge, being an expert Lawyer, and a perfite diuine, ſhall make towardes vs with full ſayle. Wherfore there is no great feare of this ſo vngoodly a deuyll. I ſuppoſe alſo that all that be in the citie, lyke not well this ſport and game playe, but that many are ryght ſory, whiche not without ſyghynges and teares, deſyre of God to be delyuered, as chaunced certen yeares ſynce, alſo in the ſedition of the countrey men. And woulde to God, that in the whole worlde there were no craftier Deuyll than this of Munſter: So that God would not take his worde from vs, I beleue there are but fewe that woulde geue any credite to ſo groſſe and ſo drunken a maiſter. And yet ſurely whan Gods wrath is kyndled, there is no errour ſo abſurde Gods wrath or vnſauery, whiche the Deuill can not perſwade, as we ſee happened in the doctrine of Mahomet. For albeit, it is altogether folyſhe, yet the lyght of Gods worde beyng quenched, it toke force and ſtrengthe, and is ſpread abroade in ſuche ample maner as you ſee. And if God had not infrynged the deuiſe and enterpryſe of Muncer, the ſame woulde haue come to paſſe alſo in Germany. For Sathan can rayſe vp a great By what meanes the deuil is vanquiſhed. flamme through Gods permiſſion, of a verey ſmall ſparke: neyther is there any better waye to quenche the fyre, than by the worde of God: for where as ye armure of our ennemies is al together incorporate, it cā neyther be ſubdued with tropes of horſemen, nor yet by the force of munition or other warlyke furniture. But our Prynces and Byſhoppes go the contrary waye to worke. They hynder the doctrine of the Goſpell, by the whiche only the myndes and hartes of men can be healed. And in the meane tyme, exercyſe cruel punyſhement, to bryng the body from the Deuyll, but they leaue hym the better part of man, whiche is the harte and the ſoule: whiche thyng ſhall haue like ſucceſſe wyth thē, as it had with the Iewes in times paſt, who thought to quēche Chriſt by his croſſe and paſſion. But as concerning thoſe thinges, which they of Munſter haue wrytten and ſet forth, I ſuppoſe the thynge ſtandeth thus, and theyr wrytinge lately publyſhed maketh me ſo thinke, wherin they haue gallantly paynted out theyr owne furye.
            
               
For fyrſt touchinge faythe they teache verey abſurde thynges, and of Chriſte, as though he were not borne of the virgyn Mary, not withſtanding The errours of the Munſterians in fayth. that they confeſſe howe he came of the ſeede of Dauid. But they do not ſufficiētly declare the thinges, and aſſuredly Sathan bringeth vp ſome monſtre. This in dede doth he ſignifie nothinge darkely, that the ſeede or fleſhe of Marye, can not delyuer vs, but he laboureth in vaine: for the Scripture ſaith that Chriſt was borne of the virgin Mary, whiche vocable ſure in al tonges is referred vnto the chyld In baptiſme. whiche conceiued of the fleſh and bloud of his mother, & takyng ſhape, is brought forth into the worlde. Againe, where they condempne the baptiſme of the tyme paſte as a prophane thinge, it is vnwittely done of them. For they do not iudge or eſteme that worke as a thyng ordeyned of God, but of man only. But in caſe euery thing ought to be diſpiſed & caſt away that wicked men geue or haue, I maruel ſurely wherfore they do not aſwell contemne gold, ſyluer, and other ryches, taken from the wicked, and inuente ſome newe metall or other deuiſe. For lyke as theſe are, ſo is alſo baptiſme, the worke and creation of God. Whan the wicked ſweareth, he abuſeth the true name of God: If he haue not the true name of God, he offendeth nothyng. He that robeth or ſtealeth, breaketh the commaundement of God: In caſe he haue not the true commaundemēt of God, he ſynneth not: ſo likewyſe if the former baptiſme be nothyng, than ſuche as are waſhed therewith, haue not erred. Why thā do theſe fellowes deteſt the Chriſtening of though it were a wycked thyng, where it is nothynge at all, as they them ſelues doe confeſſe. If the mariages of this fourmer tyme, were to be accompted for whoredome and adultery, becauſe they were contracted Of mariage of ſuche as wanted faith (as they ſaye) I praye you do not they graunt them ſelues to be whore ſonnes all the packe of them? Nowe if they be baſtardes and miſbegotten, tell me why doe they enioye the landes and patrymony of the citie and of theyr aunceſters? Reaſon woulde in deede that for as muche as they are of that ſorte, they ſhoulde inherite no lande but in this their newe kynde of matrimonie, ſhould prouyde them newe poſſeſſions and ryches, whiche myght haue a more honeſt tytle: For it is not ſemelye, that ſo holy and Godlye people as they doe pretende to be, ſhoulde lyue of the vnlawfull and baſtardelye goodes of Harlottes, muche leſſe take them frō others, by vyolence and playne robberye. And as touchynge theyr foolyſhe kyngdome, there be ſo many and open crymes in this one thynge, that it nedeth no longer diſcourſe: And certenly that whiche is ſayde, maye ſeme ouer muche and not greatly neceſſarye, eſpeciall ſeynge that all theſe matters are ſufficiently treated and declared of others.
            In the aſſemblye of the Empyre, whyche Kynge Ferdinando, at the requeſte of the Prynces, kepte by his Deputes, in the Moneth

of Aprill at Wormes, the cities whiche hitherto had geuen no money, do proteſte in the beginning, that their comming thether was not for The aſſemblie at Wormes. the decree made at confluence, but only to obeye the Emperour & king Ferdinando. After they had great altercatiō with the Princes, about contribution. At the length they condeſcended to giue ayde for fyue monethes, twenty thouſand crownes monethly, they decreed moreouer that what tyme the citie ſhould be wonne or taken, the innocent people ſhould be ſpared, and that ſuch good men, as either be there beſeged, or els are fled thence, ſhould be reſtored to their goodes. Whan this decree was made, the byſhop of Munſter deliuereth his armie vnto Oberſten. But where as the money was ouer negligētly leuied, and almoſt in dede to late, there coulde no notable exploicte be done. And the captaynes them ſelues, for lacke of money, were oftener than ones in daunger of their lyues, through the ſedicion of the ſouldiours. What tyme the matter was brought to ſuche an extremitie within the citie, that many died dayly for famine, many alſo departed thence, and went a broade ſo pyned and hongerſtoruen, that their very ennemies had pitie and compaſſion vpō them: The Captaines ſent worde to the The citie was required to rendre townes men, that in caſe they would deliuer the king & certen others, they ſhould haue no harme. Whiche albeit the citezens woulde fayne haue done, yet were they ſo afrayde of the kynges crueltie, & vigilācie, that they durſt attempte nothynge, for he was ſo obſtinate, that ſo lōg as any thyng remayned for him ſelfe & a fewe others to eate, he would neuer rendre. Wherfore the captaynes wryte againe, and bidde them ſende out no more from hence forth, not ſo muche as women or childrē. This was the firſt day of Iune: The next day they wrote an anſwer, The cōplait of ye Munſterians. complayning that their matter could not be heard, and ſaid they were afflicted without deſert of their parte: For if any man coulde detecte them of errour, they would do as ſhould become them. After this they doe expounde a certen place of Daniel, of the fourth beaſt which was much more cruell than all the reſt. The concluſion of their letters was, that they would through Gods helpe perſeuer ſtyl in this confeſſion of the veritie. All whiche thinges were thus wrytten after the kynges mynde. But whan thynges were brought to a maruelous extremitie Two eſcaping betraye the citie. in the citie, two certen men eſcaped out, the one of them was taken of the ſouldiours, the other vpon his fidelitie came to the byſhop, and eyther of thē ſhewed the meane how to wynne the citie. Countie Oberſten and the byſhop, hearyng bothe their tales, the two and twenty of Iune, ſommoned the towne, charging the citezens to rendre it vp and yelde them ſelues, that the people might be ſaued, and not peryſh thus for honger. They cauſe Rotman to aunſwer on the walles, the kynge ſtanding there by, in ſuche ſorte as they would not relent nor chaunge their purpoſe. Two dayes after about aleuen a clock in the nyght, the

fotemen were brought cloſely to the citie, and certē choſen ſouldiours, through the conduict of the two men eſcaped, got ouer the dyche vp to walle, and ſlewe the watche: others followyng thē, fynde the poſterne gate open, and about fiue hondreth with certen captaynes and enſignes entred the citie. Than the tounes men being aſſembled together, ſtayed the reſte that would lykewyſe haue inuaded, and longe it was or euer they coulde put them backe and ſhut the gate, that done, they geue charge by and by vpon thoſe that wer come in, and ſlew many of them. And whan they had foughten ſore by the ſpace of one houre or The wynnyng of Mū
                  ſter. two, the ſouldiours that were encloſed, ſtept to the next gate, that was kept with a ſmall garde, and breake it open perforce, and ſo made way for their fellowes without, which immediatly preſſed in with a ſtrōg power. And wheras the townes mē at the firſt made reſiſtaunce, and kept the market place, whiche they had wel fortified for their own defence, at the laſt the matter being deſperate, and many of them ſtayne, at the firſt encountre, they craued and founde mercy. But the kynge & Cnipperdoling were taken at the ſame inſtante: Botman being out of The kyng is taken. all hope to liue, running amōges his ennemies where they were thickeſt was ſtayne, leſt he ſhould come into their handes alyue. Whan the Citie was won, the Byſhop toke to hym ſelfe the munitiō and half Rotman deſperate. the ſpoyle, after diſcharging his armie, he reſerueth to him ſelfe two enſeignes only to aſiſte him in the citie.
            Than followed an other counſell imperiall at Wormes, in the moneth of Iuly, wherin kyng Ferdinando by his deputes, propounded and demaundeth, whether that the citie beyng nowe taken, they ſhall treate furthermore howe to deſtroye all the Anabaptiſtes: He admonyſheth them alſo to call vpon the Byſhop of Rome for a counſel. Thei ſaye that as touchyng the Anabaptiſtes, it hath bene all redy ſet forth by diuers proclamations, what is mete to be done. And the Byſhop The byſhop of Munſter demaundeth his charges. hath bene oft enoughe ſollicited for a counſell euen by the Emperoure hym ſelfe: neyther can they doe any thinge more therein. In the ſame counſell the byſhop of Munſter requyreth to be recompenced for his charges, and cōplayneth that the money promyſed was not yet paide. Whan nothyng els could be concluded, and very fewe ſtates alſo wer there preſent: An other metinge was there aſſigned againſt Nouembre, wherin they ſhoulde take ordre for the accomptes and charges of the warre, and howe the commō wealth of Munſter hereafter ſhould be gouerned. Whan the daye was come, Ferdinando his Ambaſſadour in fewe wordes repeteth the cauſes of that aſſemblie, and that amonges other thynges they myght deuiſe alſo, how the citie lately taken, maye remayne from hence forth in the olde religion. After this the Byſhoppes Ambaſſadour declareth what charges he hath bene at all this warre tyme, what great ſomes of money he hath borrowed, and

Howe after the citie was taken, for the auoyding of tumultes and 
                  •
               ut ther daunger he was enforced to buylde two fortes in the citie and to manne them: Of all the which thinges he deſyreth that a cōſideration might be had. Hereunto aunſwere was made that the byſhop had the greateſt part of the ſpoyle, all the munition, & alſo the citezens goodes. All the whiche thynges do in dede apperteyne to the common wealth of the Empire: wherfore reaſon would that of al theſe thynges an eſtimate ſhould be made, and ſo much be out of the charges diducted, and than the ouerplus to be aunſwered accordinglye. After it is decreed, that the byſhop of Munſter ſhould be vnder the Empire, according to the olde cuſtome, that all the Nobilitie of the citie ſhould be reſtored, & the citezens alſo that are fled awaye ſo that they be not Anabaptiſts. Touching Religion the Byſhop ſhall take ordre therein accordinge to the decrees of the Empyre, that in the ſpring of the next yere following the Ambaſſadours of the Prynces ſhould go to Munſter, and vnderſtande the ſtate of the citezens, that they ſaue the innocent people, and deſtroye all the fortifications made by the Anabaptiſtes, and that the byſhop ſhall alſo caſte downe the two fortes whiche he hath buylded within the citie. And that he execute immediatly the king, Cnipperdoling, and Crechtinge, pryſoners according to their demerites, and kepe them no longer.
            To that point concerning Religiō, the Duke of Saxon, the Lantgraue, the Duke of Wirtemberge, and Countie Anhalde, proteſted openly, that they would neuer aſſente to. The cities alſo profeſſed the ſame, neyther would they haue the olde fortification defaced, for the newe they were not againſt. The kyng and his two fellowes were The kyng & his fellowes caried about 
                     〈…〉
                  
                caried hither and thither vnto Prynces, for a ſhewe and mockery. By the whiche occaſion the Lantgraues preachers enter in diſputation with the kynge, touchynge theſe opinions chieflye of the kyngdome of Chriſte, of Magiſtrates, of Iuſtification, of Baptiſme, of the Lordes Diſputation with ye king 
                     〈…〉
                  
                ſupper, of the incarnation of Chriſte, and of Mariage, and by the teſtimonies of Scripture priuayle ſo farre, that albeit they did not chaūge him wholy, which ſtroue and defended his opinions ſtifly, yet did they turne him & cōfounde him, ſo that in fyne he graunted to many things, whiche not withſtanding he was ſuppoſed to haue done to ſaue his lyfe. For whan he retourned vnto him the ſeconde tyme, he promyſed if he myght haue his pardon, to brynge to paſſe, that the Anabaptiſtes whiche were in Hollande, Brabant, Englande and Freſelande, an exceadyng great numbre, ſhold kepe ſylence, and obey the Magiſtrates in all thynges. Afterwardes the ſame preachers reaſoned with his fellowes alſo, both by mouthe and wryting, of mortification, of Chriſtening of Chyldren, of the communion of goodes, of the kyngdome of Chriſte. What tyme they were brought to Telget, the kyng beyng demaunded

of the Byſhop, by what authoritie he durſt be ſo bolde to vſurpe ſo muche libertie vpon his Citie and people? He aſked hym again who gaue him that power and aucthoritie ouer the Citie? And wher The bolde aunſwer of the kyng. the Byſhop made aunſwere, that by the conſent of the College & the people, he had that rule and iuriſdiction: And I (ſayde he) was called hether of God. At the thirtene kalēdas of February, thei were brought again to Munſter, & cōmitted euery man to a ſeuerall pryſon. And the ſame daye alſo, came the Byſhop thether accompanied with the Archbiſhop of Collon, and the Ambaſſadours of the Duke of Cleue. The ſpace of two dayes followyng, was ſpent in Godly admonitions, that they myght be reduced from their hereſy: And in deede the kynge confeſſed his faulte, and fled vnto Chriſte through prayer. The other two neyther woulde acknowledge any offence and yet ſtode obſtinatly in their opinions. The next daye the king was brought vp to the ſkaffold and tied to a poſt: There were two hangemen ready and eche of them a payre of tonges read hote: at the three firſt pulles he helde his peace, afterwarde callyng continually for Goddes mercy, whan he had bene The cruell death of the kyng. thus turmented an howre and more, and at the laſt was thruſt to the harte with a ſharpe poynted dagger, he left his lyfe: and his fellowes had the ſame punyſhement. Whan thei were dead, they were faſtened to grates of iron, and hanged out of the hygheſt towre of the Citie, called ſaynet Lambertes, the king in the myddes a mans height aboue the other two.
            In the moneth of Ianuary, of this preſent yeare, died the lady Katherine Dowager, whome Henry the eyght kyng of Englande, had The death of quene Katherine. put away thre yeares before. I ſhewed you in the fourth booke, howe Fridericke Duke of Holſte, was by the helpe of the Lubeckes, made kyng of Denmarke. After whoſe death there arroſe mortall warre betwene his ſonne Chriſtiane that was kinge after him, and the Citie of Lubecke. But where as the Duke of Saxon, the Lantgraue, Erneſt Duke of Lunenburge, and the Citie of Breme, Hamborough, Maydē
               burge, Brunſwicke, Lunenburge, and Hildiſſeme, intreated a peace. This yeare in the moneth of February, all was pacified. Than had Charles Duke of Sauoye, a certen ſpace maynteyned warre againſt the Citie of Geneua, beynge ayded by the Byſhop of the ſame Citie, or The warre of Geneua with ye duke of Sauoy. ſet on rather, partely for the profeſſion of the Goſpell, & partly for other matters. And the Citie of Geneua, was ioyned in league with the Citie of Bernes in Swicerlāde of whome at the length receiuing great ayde, they gaue the repulſe to their ennemies. And they of Bernes marching further, ſubdued al that laye cōmodious for their countrey, euen to the loke of Geneua. The reſidue of the Swicers alſo, that bordered The ayde of Bernes. vpō Sauoye, did the ſame. Whyleſt this was a working, the kynge of Fraunce, whiche had longe before purpoſed to warre in Italye, but

eſpecially ſynce the death of Fraunces Sfortia, leuieng his Armie in the begynning of the ſpryng tyme, maketh warre alſo with the Duke The Frēche king againſt the Duke of Sauoye. of Sauoye his vncle, for a controuerſie of inheritaunce, whiche he ſaid was due vnto him, poſſeſſed and deteyned by the Duke. Who beynge already much inpoueryſhed by the Swycers, and therfore an vnmete matche for ſo puiſſaunt an ennemye, was in ſhort tyme diſpoſſeſſed in maner of his whole Duckdome. For the kyng paſſing ouer the Alpes, inuadeth alſo the countrey of Piedmount, and amonges other taketh Turrine, the chiefeſt town in thoſe partes & fortifieth it with workes and ſtrength of men, by the conduict of Philippe Schabotte Admirall. The Duke of Sauoy had marryed Beatriche daughter to Emanuell kyng of Portugall, and the Emperours ſyſter Iſabel. And in the former tyme, he addicted him ſelfe to neyther of them: but now where he ſemed to incline to the Emperour, he ſtyred vp the king his nephew by his owne ſyſter Leweſſe againſt him. Some reporte howe byſhop Clement, what tyme he was at Marſeilles, as in the laſt booke is recited, The Popes counſel to inuade Sauoy gaue the kyng this counſell, that in caſe he intended to recouer Millan, he ſhould firſt ſeke to be lorde of Sauoy and Piedmonte, adioyning to the ſame. Howe ſoeuer it was, the kyng in the yeare followyng, after a certen newe cuſtome ordeyned through out the Realme of Fraunce legions of Souldiours, to the numbre of forty thouſande, Legions of Souldiours. whiche ſhoulde exerciſe their weapons, and be in a readynes, when tyme of ſeruice came. For where as aunciently the kynges of Fraunce haue alwayes maynteined cheualry, and their whole force hathe bene horſemen, this man would haue alſo footemen ready monſtered, that he ſhold not euermore haue nede of forein ſouldiours. And the kynges purpoſe was to leade forth his armie, and make warre thereby in Lū
               bardie, to the intent he myght recouer the Duckdome of Millā, which he had before enioyed ſyxe yeares together, and contented that it was his, and the right of his children by Ualentine his grandmother, ſiſter to Philippe Uicecounte, the laſt Duke of Millan of that familie. And thus the matter ſtandeth. The houſe of Uicecoūtes, bare a noble brute The houſe of vicecoūtes in Lumbardie. And the firſt of them is accompted Otho, Archebyſhop of Millan, who in the tyme of Raffe Emperour, expulſed the Turrians, a noble and worthy familie, whome his nephewe Matthewe, his brother Theobaldus ſonne, ſucceded after hym Galeace, Actius, Luchine, Iohn, Matthew the ſeconde, Galeace the ſeconde, Barnabas, Iohn Galeace, whom the Emperour Wēceſlans created the firſt Duke of Millan. He had two ſonnes, Iohn, and Philippe, which died both without iſſewe, and one daughter, Ualentine. Fraunces Sfortia, a ſtoute warriour, married the baſtarde daughter of Philip, and by that occaſion vſurped the Dukedome of Millan, ſecludyng Ualē
               tine, Philippes ſyſter, whome Lewys, Duke of Orleaunce, brother to

Charles the ſixt, kyng of Fraunce, had maried. Sfortia had thre ſonnes, Galeace, Lewis, Aſcanius. Wherof Lewis inuaded the Dukedome, The Frēche kinges title to Millan. and begot two ſonnes, Maximilian and Fraunces. The Duke of Orleaunce, had by Ualentine, Charles, Philippe and Iohn. Charles was father to Lewis Duke of Orleaunce, whiche was after king of Fraunce, the twelfth of that name. Philippe died without iſſewe Iohn Erle of Engoleſme, had a ſonne named Charles, father to kyng Fraunces, who toke Maximilian Sfortia priſoner, and ſubdewed all Lumbardie. But Leo the tenth and the Emperour, diſpoſſeſſing hym agayne, reſtored Fraunces Sfortia an exile. Who being nowe dead, kyng Fraunces to reclayme his ryght (as he ſaieth) and to be auēged, moueth warre agayne. For that after the death of Sfortia, the Emperour had taken the poſſeſſiō of Lumbardie, by Anthony Leua, whō he left his depute there, what tyme he ſayled into Barbaria, as before is mentioned.
            Wherfore ſo ſone as he had anye knowledge of the kynges enterpryſe, he leuieth immediatly all the power he myghte in Germanye and other places, to come into Italy. And coming frō Naples to Rome in the beginning of Aprill, within a fewe dayes after his repayre, he required that a Senate might be called, wherin before the byſhop The Emperous oration againſt the Frēche king and a great numbre of Cardinalles, and the Ambaſſadours of foreyne Prynces, he had a graue and a vehement oration againſt the Frenche kyng, who breakyng league, of an olde hatred and malice, hindreth & impecheth his moſte worthy and Godly enterpriſes. The ende of his oration was to declare, that he was ready to fight with him the combat, to the intent that through the priuate loſſe of one of them two, rather than by publique domage of the whole worlde, the warre might ones haue an ende.
            Before he departed from Naples, The Uenetians entred into league The Uenetians league with ye Emperour. with him againſt the Turke, the rather for that they hoped well, that he would delyuer the poſſeſſion of Millan to ſome priuate man. For the ſtates of Italy, chiefly the Uenetians, wouldneyther that the Emperour nor yet the Frenche kyng ſhould enioye the goodly Dukedome of Millan. And therfore in theſe former yeares, they conſpyred oftentymes, one whyle againſt the Frenche kynge, an other whyle againſt the Emperour, that Fraunces Sfortia myght be reſtored, of whome they ſuppoſed to ſtande in leſſe daunger. For the league which Clement and the Uenetians made againſt the Emperour, ten yeares before, was for this cauſe only. Thinkyng that the Emperour hauyng diſplaced Sfortia, would haue kept to his owne vſe, all Lumbardie, whiche in dede they ſuppoſed would be to their great hinderaunce. And where at the interceſſion of Byſhop Clement (ſixe yeares paſt) he reſtored Sfortia at Boloigne la graſſe, he got him wonderfull fauour

and great good wyll. At Naples alſo the Emperour finiſhed vp the mariage of his baſtarde daughter, with Alexander Medices, whome he had made Duke of Florence, as I tolde you in the ſeuenth booke. The Duke of Florence marieth the Emperours baſtarde. This Alexander was the baſtard ſonne of Laurence Medices, which had to father Peter, whiche was drowned in the mouth of Lire, as in the laſt boke is mentioned. You haue heard howe Uergerius was ſent into Germany. Whan the Emperour was arriued at Naples, the byſhop calleth hym home againe, who returning with great expedition, whan he came to Rome, declareth his Ambaſſade, how the proteſtauntes required to haue a free and a Chriſtian counſell, and that within the precinct of the Empyre, in a place conuenient, as the Emperour had made them promyſe. Of Luther and the reſt, there is no hope Luthers conſtancie. vnleſſe they be diſpatched out of the way. And as concerning the king of Englande, the Proteſtauntes wyll not aſſente to it, and the reſte of the Princes are very colde.
            Howe George Duke of Saxonye, affirmeth that there is great daunger of the Lutherians, whiche can not be otherwiſe eſchewed or auoyded, vnleſſe the Emperour and the Byſhop make warre againſt them ryght ſhortly. Whiche thynge whan the Byſhop vnderſtode, he ſendeth hym to Naples with all ſpede, to recite theſe thynges to the Uergerius ſent to the Emperour. Emperour, eſpecially concernyng the warre to be attempted agaynſte the Lutheriās. Aterwardes whā the Emperour was come to Rome, he was earneſtly in hande to haue a counſel called, and coueted greatly to cary with hym the letters patentes of the ſame: The Byſhop ſaid he was content, notwithſtāding he woulde chouſe ſome citie in Italy, and preſcribe therein certen conditions neceſſary for the churche of Rome. Hereunto the Emperour ſo that he woulde do it ones, he cared for no more. For he would bryng the greater parte of Germany to followe hym herein, ſo therfore the Byſhop chouſeth out nyne of that nū
               bre to make the wrytte. Thoſe were Campegius, Ceſius, Simonet, Ginucius, Cōtarene, Poole, Cardinals: The Archebiſhop of Brunduſe, The diuiſers of the b
                     •
                  ll. the Byſhop of Rhezo, and Uergerius thā made byſhop of Modruſe, and not long after of Inſtinopulis. All theſe together, firſt in the Byſhops preſence, afterwardes ſeuerally by them ſelues deuiſe the forme of Somoning the counſell.
            You haue heard before of the Ambaſſadours of Englande, with whome it was accorded at Smalcalde vpon certen conditions, that the kyng ſhould ſet forth the pure doctrine of the Goſpell, whiche they profeſſed at Auſpurge, and maynteyne the ſame with them in a lawefull counſell, if any ſuche ſhalbe: that neyther of them admitte the calling or place of a counſell, but by cōmon aſſent. Neuertheleſſe if it may appere by certayne and manifeſt reaſons, that any ſuche counſel is like to be, as hath bene declared to Peter Paule Uerger, the Byſhoppes

legate that it be not refuſed: but in caſe the byſhop continue his purpoſe, that than his enterpryſe be letted, and by open proteſtation be refuſed. And lyke as the kynge hath ioyned hym ſelfe to their religion, ſo lykewyſe to ioyne with them in league alſo, and to be called the Patroneand The king of England is patrone of ye Pro
                     •
                  . league defendour of the ſame. That common opinion of the ſupremacie of the Byſhop of Rome, to be vtterly reiected for euer. If anye warre be attempted againſt other parte for Religion or other cauſe, that no ayde be geuen vnto hym that inforceth the ſame. That for the defence of the league the kyng ſhal paye one hundreth thouſand crownes, wherof the one halfe the confederatours ſhall and may employe, whā nede ſhall requyre, the reſt of the charges to be borne of their own money, whiche they ſhall contribute amonges them: but if the warre ſhal longe endure, and the force of the ennemy driue them to it, thā the king to diſburſe two hundreth thouſand crownes, for as much as they if the lyke chaunce ſhould fortune, ſtande alſo bounde, not only to ſpēd their goodes but their bloud and lyfe alſo. And of this ſomme alſo the like conſideration to be had as before, and that it be not emploied to any other vſe, than to defende the league, and the remainder to be reſtored whan the warre is finiſhed. That the Ambaſſadours ſhall wryte to the kyng hereof, and whan they knowe his mynde, to aduertiſe the Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue therof, that after a commō Ambaſſade The engliſh Ambaſſad. wynter at Witteberg
                     •
                  
                maye be ſent vnto hym. Whan the Ambaſſadours had ſent theſe requeſtes vnto the king, going than to Wittemberge they paſſed away the reſt of the wynter there. And in the meane whyle reaſoned with the diuines there of certen articles, but their chiefe controuerſie was about the mariage of Prieſtes, the Lordes ſupper, the Popyſhe maſſe, and monaſticall vowes. But their chief deſyre was, that the diuines would approue the kynges diuorſement, but they ſayde, they coulde not do it by the ſcriptures. And whan they had alledged many thinges to perſwade the matter, and this one chieflye that the byſhop Clement varied in his ſentence, and had declared to the Frenche king in priuate talke, what he thought: The diuines anſwered, that in caſe it were ſo, the king had great cauſe ſo to do. But where they vrged thē to ſay the cauſe was moſt iuſt, to that would they not graūt. And now when letters were come out of Englande, pourporting the declaratiō 
               The kinges letters to the Proteſtants of the kynges mynde herein, the Ambaſſadours do aduertiſe the prince Electour hereof. And the .xij. day of Marche at Wittemberge, whether the Duke was at that tyme come, ſpeaking firſt many thinges of the kynges great good wil, declare how the moſt part of the requeſtes do content him, if a fewe might be amended. And albeit that in England all thinge is quiet, neither is there any cauſe wherfore the kynge ſhould feare any man, and if happely any cauſe hath bene, the ſame is now taken away by the death of his wyfe forſaken, neuertheleſſe to

recouer and mayntayne the true doctrine, he doth not refuſe to de
                  •
               ray the ſomme of money whiche they requyre, ſo that the league goe forwarde, and hereof wyll treate more at large with theyr Ambaſſadours. And where they offer vnto hym this honour that he ſhoulde be defendour and paîrone of the league, he geueth them great thankes, and acknowledgeth their good wil. And although he vnderſtandeth, with howe muche enuie and diſpleaſure, the ſame is annexed, yet for the common wealthes ſake, he could be contente, if they can agree vppon the fyrſt and ſeconde demaunde. For vnleſſe there be an vniformitie in doctrine, he ſuppoſeth that this charge can not be greatly to his honour. But he would chiefly wyſhe that the learned men of his Realme and theirs, myght be wholy of one opinion. And where he ſeeth The king of England requireth a cō
                  ference of lerned men. well that the ſame wyll not be, vnleſſe certen places of the confeſſion and Apologie of their doctrine, maye before through priuate talke be ſome thynge qualified. Therfore he deſyreth them inſtantlye to ſende their Ambaſſadours, and amonges them ſome one that is excellently learned, whiche may conferre with his diuines of the whole doctrine and ceremonies, and determine the matter. And where he ſheweth him ſelfe ſo lyberall vnto them, he requyreth agayne, that in caſe anye man attempte warre againſte hym, fyrſte they wyll ayde hym eyther with fyue hondreth horſemen, or els with ten Shippes well manned and fournyſhed for foure monethes. Further more, that vpon his own charges, they ſhall prouyde hym two thouſande horſemen, and fyue thouſande fote men. Finally that the ſentence whiche the diuines of The kinges deuorcemēt. Wittemberge prononced touchinge the diuorcement made, they wold approue alſo, and defende in the next counſell. The Duke aunſwereth that for as muche as the whole matter concerneth his conſortes, he wyll make them priuie to it, and vſe their counſell in the ſame.
            After the foure and twenty daye of Aprill, was aſſigned for all to mete at Franckeforth, both for this and other cauſes. And firſte they preſcribe there a fourme for their Ambaſſadours to followe, whiche ſhould be ſent into Englande, wherein it was prouided amōges other thinges, that whan they ſhall come thether, & perchaunce cōclude vpō a league, that in al thinges they do except by expreſſe wordes, the Empire, & the Emperour, vnto whom they are bounde by their othe & fidelitie. Ambaſſadour for the citie was appointed Iames Sturmius, Receyued in to league. and the diuines were Melanchthon, Bucer, and George Draco.
            In this aſſemblie, were receyued into the league Ulriche Duke of Wyrtemberge, Bernine and Philippe brethren, Dukes of Pomerane George and Ioachime bretherne, Countes of Anhalde. Moreouer the cities of Auſpurge, Franckeforte, Kempten, Hamborough, Haunobria: they treated alſo of other thynges appertayning to the league and defence therof, & of the iudgement of the imperial chāber. It was

decreed moreouer to ſende meſſengers and letters to the Emperour, thereby to aunſwere to the Epiſtle ſent them frō Naples. And where as George Duke of Saxon, for the exceadyng hatred he bare to Luthers doctrine, was oftentymes at great cōtention and ſute with the Prynce Electour of Saxon, this mans father, and at the laſt an agrement was made, and nowe broken againe by the ſayde Duke George diuerſe wayes. The Prynce Electour declaringe the whole matter by his Ambaſſadours to his conſortes in this aſſemblie, requeſtyng to be aſſiſted with their ayde and counſell, in caſe he attempte anye force or violence. After the aſſemblie brake vp the tenth day of May.
            And in the begynning of Iune, the kynge of Englande hauyng cō
               dempned The lamentable death of Quene Anne. his wyue Quene Anne, of adultrye and inceſte, but vniuſtly as it is ſuppoſed and proued ſynce, cauſeth her head to be ſtryken of, after that ſhe had borne hym a daughter, calleth Elizabeth. And with her were executed certen Gentlemen of the kynges priuie chaumbre, Noreis Weſton; Brewton and one Markes, whiche contrary to his conſcience (as it is reported) for hope of preferement ſubſcribed to a byll, whereby he condempned both hym ſelfe and all the reſte.
            For where the Lorde Admirall Fizt Williams, that was after Erle of Southhampton, ſayde vnto hym, ſubſcribe Markes, and ſee what wyll come of it, he ſubſcribed, and receyued therfore a rewarde vnloked for. And alſo the Lorde of Rochforte the Quenes brother, through the falſe accuſation of that errant ſtrompet his wyfe, whiche afterwardes ſuffered therfore, accordynge to her deſertes. Whiche doulfull tragedie toke cleane awaye the Ambaſſade, that ſhould haue been ſent into Englande.
            Whan the warre was hotely begonne betwene the Emperour and A counſel is called. the Frenche kyng, Paule the thyrde publiſheth a wrytinge vnder his Bulles of lead, the ſomme wherof is, to call a counſell at Mantua againſt the .xxiij. day of May, in the yeare followyng, commaunding al Archbiſhops and byſhops, & other heads of churches to be there at the ſame day, vnder the penaltie by the eccleſiaſticall lawes preſcribed, for diſobediēce. Furthermore he chargeth & deſireth the Emperour, kings and princes, & al others, which either by lawe or cuſtome haue intereſt to be there, for the loue of Chriſte & the cōmon welthes ſake, to come in perſone, or if they be otherwyſe letted, thā to ſend their Ambaſſadours with their full authoritie, to remayne tyll the ende of the counſell, that the churche may be refourmed, hereſies weded cleane out, and warre attempted againſt the ennemies of Religiō. This was the effect therof whereunto ſubſcribed ſixe and twenty Cardinalles. The ſeuenth of Iune, kyng Ferdinando ſent Iames Sturcelly, a Ciuilian Ambaſſadour from Inſprucke to the Swycers. I heare ſaith he, how the Frē
               che kyng hath requyred your ayde, but not obteined, which was to me

great pleaſure, and I haue aduertiſed the Emperour hereof. And certenly reaſon would it ſhould ſo be. For the Emperour gaue none occaſion of this warre, but was fully reſolued this ſommer to haue warred vpon the Barbarians and the ennemies of our Religion. Notwithſtanding Againſt the Frēch kyng. the Frenche kynge immediatly after the death of Fraunces Sfortia Duke of Millan (albeit he hath no right nor title therunto, & a compoſition made touchyng the whole matter certen yeares paſte) contrary to the conuenauntes ſought to renewe warre, and to recouer Lumbardy. And at the ſame tyme paſſing the Alpes with a great armie, inuaded the Duke of Sauoye, a Prynce of the Empyre, to the intent that hauing ones ſubdued his countrey, he might haue the way open to paſſe further. And nowe that the Emperour hath leuied an armie to reſiſte hym, as he was in dede conſtreined, I am informed that he craueth nowe ayde agayne of you. Neuertheleſſe for as muche as he breakyng his fidelitie hath commenced warres a freſhe, I deſyre you that you doe not aſſiſte hym. Whereby you ſhall do the Emperour and me pleaſure, and preſerue the quiet of your owne commō wealth, The Proteſtantes ſend to the Emp. In this meane while the Proteſtantes had ſent an Ambaſſade to the Emperour in Italy, to make their purgation in that he had charged them by letters to haue taken the churche goodes, and further more to complayne of the iudges of the Emperiall chamber. But before the Ambaſſadours were arriued, the Emperoure, the ſeuenthe of Iulye, had ſent letters to the Proteſtauntes, from the Towne of Sauilie. ſignifieng how he hath at al tymes both preſent and abſent, by his letters The Empe. letters to the Proteſtant. and Ambaſſadours, ſought the quiet of Germany, and hath both promyſed them peace in theyr Relygion, and alſo perfourmed the ſame. And nowe for as muche as the Frenche kynge, againſt whome he is enforced to rayſe an armie, maye perauenture by falſe ſuggeſtion perſwade with them, that he would now take occaſion to breake that treuce of Religion, therfore hath he thought good to admonyſhe them by his letters, to beleue no ſuche thinge, but aſſure them ſelues, that he woulde obſerue his promyſe, neyther would he moue warre vpon any man for religion, nor ſtyre vp any trouble in Germany: for all this preparation of warre is to mainteyne his ryght and authoritie. Wherfor let them quiet them ſelues, and ſtyre not, what ſo euer they ſhal heare: For this ſhall be both to hym acceptable, and to them alſo profitable.
            Whan the Emperours power was come altogether, he marched The Empe. inuadeth the French prouinces. through the myddeſt of Italye with a ſtronge armie, tyll he came in to prouynce of Fraunce. The kynge had incamped hym ſelfe at Auignion, betwyxte the Ryuers of Rhoſne and Druence, and deſtroyinge the countrey. Whereinto he perceiued the Emperour woulde come, and kepyng hym ſelfe from geuynge the battell, he brought his ennemies into great perplexitie and myſerie.
            
               
For the Emperour enforced through the penurie and ſcarſcitie of all thynges, and the loſſe of manye thouſandes, whiche died for famine and peſtilence, and alſo for the death of Anthony Leuie, diſchargeth the reſte of his Armye and retourneth to Genes.
            An other Armie of his, that warred this ſommer in Uermandoys, Peronne beſeged. beſeged the towne of Peronne, by the cōduicte of Henry Erle of Naſſowe, but preuayling not, leuied the ſiege about the ſame time that the Emperour retyred in the prouince, and the reporte of eyther newes brought vnto Paris the ſame daye, reioyſed the citie exceadynglye. For they were in verye great feare, and the Preachers in their Sermons to the people inuehed ſore againſt the Emperour. And the kynges Lieutenauntes began to intrenche the cytie, and kepte the gates with watche and warde. William Furſtemberge a Germane, ſerued the Frenche kynge in this warre.
            About the begynning of this warre ended his lyfe the Frenche The death of Fraunces the Dolphin kynges eldeſt ſonne Fraunces, the Daulphin, eyghtene yeares of age, the reporte went that he was poyſoned, and one Sebaſtian de moute Cuculo an Italian, beyng had in ſuſpicion, was fyrſte racked, and after torne in pieces with ſondrye horſes at Lions. And the kynge afterwardes in his letters to the Prynces of Germanye, amonges other made a greuous complainte hereof, againſt Anthony Leuie, and Ferdinando Gonzage the Emperours Lieutenauntes, in whome he layd all the blame. Herman Archebyſhop of Collon, of long tyme intending A reformation of Collon. a reformation of his churche, holdeth at this tyme a counſell of his owne prouince, callynge to it as the maner is, the Byſhoppes within his iuriſdiction, of Liege, Utreicht, Munſter, Oſenbridge, and Myndes. Herein were decrees made of ceremonies and doctrine, and after ſet forth in a booke compyled by Iohn Gropper wherein were al Popyſhe Ceremonies for the moſte parte paynted out with new colours, whiche booke dyd not contente the Byſhop than, as hereafter ſhalbe declared.
            About this tyme alſo in the moneth of Iuly, Eraſmus of Roterdam The death of Eraſmus departed out of this lyfe, an olde man of thre ſcore and ten yeares, and was buried at Baſill. Howe excellently learned, and howe eloquent a man he was, and howe muche al learnyng is bounde to hym, his own workes ſhall teſtifie. By occaſion of puttyng downe papiſtrie in Englande, and ſuppreſſing of certen Abbeyes, vnder thre hundreth markes of yearely valewe, there aroſe a commotion in Lynkcolneſhyre, in a Commotion in Linkcolnſhyre. market towne they call Lowthe, ſtyred vp by Doctour Mackerell a falſe Monke, who named him ſelfe captayne Cobblar, and after that it was appeaſed by the Duke of Southfolke the kynges Lyeutenaunt, an other began in Yorke ſhyre, a grear deale worſe. For thoſe Rebelles were manye and ſtronge, and came as farre as Dankcaſter,

where the Duke of Northfolke met them with the kinges power, and when they ſhould haue ioyned together in battell by the mediation of the Erle of Shrewiſbury, which was a man welbeloued of the commons, the matter was taken vp without bloudſhed. Their chief Captaine was Robert Aſke, who was after executed for his treaſon, with certen others of the Nobilitie his adherentes. Unto the letters which Captayne Aſke. the Emperour wrote in Iuly, the Proteſtaūtes anſwer the nynth day of Septembre, and where it pleaſed hym to wryte ſo gentle and ſo lyberally, they ſhewe hym howe they conceaue great pleaſure in theyr mindes: for albeit they did neuer diſtruſte his promiſe, yet for as much as diuerſe reportes of his diſpleaſure came to their eares, and agayne for that the iudges of the imperiall chamber and others, makyng none accompte of the peace concluded, did procede diuerſe wayes agaynſte them, they had ſome cauſe to doubte and feare the matter. But nowe that he hath wrytten againe ſo louingly and playnly, they are out of all doubtes, that he wyll perfourme the ſame, and refuſe the ſclaunderous reportes of their aduerſaries: lykewyſe wyll they doe, and geue no credite vnto ſuche as ſhall otherwyſe reporte of him, and in al other thinges alſo, doe according to their dutie, than came they to the counſell which the Byſhop had lately appointed at Mantua. And for as muche as the Emperour had oftentymes promyſed them a free counſell in Germany, and eſpecially in the peace concluded at Norinberge, and what this ſhall be, they can not perceiue by the wryting, they deſyre hym that he woulde ſee the matter myght be indifferently heard and vſed. In this ſame moneth the byſhop of Rome publyſheth an The Pope wyl reforme the court of Rome. other wryting and ſayeth howe in the meane tyme tyll the counſel begynne, he wyl refourme the holy citie of Rome, the head of all chriſtendome, and maiſtres of doctrine, maner and diſciplyne, and waſhe it cleane from all ſpottes and vyce, to the intent that his owne houſe being firſt well pourged, he may after more eaſely take ordre for the reſt, and becauſe the nature of man is full of imbecillitie, neyther can he do ſo great a thing alone, and alſo diſpatche other affaires of the common wealth, therfore hath he choſen certen Cardinalles, whome the liuing God hath ioyned to hym, as the coadiutours and companions of his cure and of office, to be the workers of this neceſſary and holſome buſynes, the Cardinall of Oſtia, Sauſeuerine, Ginute, Simonet, and with them thre byſhops, whome he commaundeth all men to obeye vnder a great penaltie.
            In the moneth of Octobre the Emperour imbarketh him ſelfe at The king of Scottes maried yt Frēch kinges daughter. Genes to ſayle into Spayne. The Frenche kynge came afterwardes to Paris, and on new yeares day, gyueth in mariage madame Magdalene his eldeſt daughter, to Iames the fift, kynge of Scottes, who came into Fraunce in Autumne before. And in maner about the ſame

tyme Laurence Medices, through treaſon in the nyght, murthered Alexander Medices Duke of Florence, of his owne kyndred and familie, The Duke of Florence ſlayne by his coſyn. whan he had allured hym home to his houſe, putting hym in hope to enioye a noble matrone, that was his neyghbour, who in beautie & honeſt fame, farre excelled others. Who being ſlayne, the gouernment came vnto Coſmus Medices, which after by the Emperours conſent, married Elenor daughter to Peter Toletane Uiceroy of Naples.
            At the Ides of Ianuary, the kyng of Fraunce came in to the court of Parliament at Paris, whiche thinge is ſeldome accuſtomed. And there in a great audiēce, he maketh a ſore complaint of the Emperour, and declared cauſes, why the countries of Flaunders and Artois, whiche the Emperour holdeth of the kynges of Fraunce, as his elders haue done alſo, ought to be called againe to the patrimony of Fraūce. The ſpeaker hereof was Capell the kynges aduocate, and he named The Swycers ſewe to the king for the Goſpellers. hym not Emperour, but Charles of Auſtriche. In the meane tyme the cities of Zuricke, Bernes, Baſyll and Strauſborough, make ſute to the Frenche king, for ſuch as were impriſoned for Religion, intreating hym that the exiles myght be reſtored, the kyng graunted partly vnto their requeſtes, but yet accompliſhed not their deſyre. Wherfore whan they had receyued their aunſwere the foure and twenty of February by Annas Momorantie the Coneſtable, and ſuſpected that the kynge through his impulſion, dealt the leſſe frendly with them, the Ambaſſadours vſed afterwardes the helpe of the Quene of Nauarre, the kinges owne ſyſter, a very good ladye, and whiche bare a great zeale to the true doctrine. In this meane whyle the kyng hauing muſtred his men, in the beginning of Marche leadyng his army towardes Arras, beſegeth the towne and ſtrong caſtell of Heſdine, whiche he had rendred Heſdine rendred. to hym within a moneth.
            At the ſelfe ſame tyme came to the kynge an Ambaſſadour from the byſhop of Rome, Reignalde Poole an Englyſh mā borne, of the bloud Cardinall Poole the Popes Ambaſſadour to the Frenche kyng. roial, lately made Cardinal. The cauſe of his ambaſſade was thought to be to worke ſome miſchief againſt the kinge of Englande. About the ſame tyme that the kyng of Scottes maried the Frenche kynges daughter, the byſhop had ſent him for a preſent a fayre ſworde, riche, & well wrought, and did exaſperate him againſt the kyng of Englande. For the byſhoppes are accuſtomed on Chriſtmas daye at nyght, amō
               ges other thinges, with certen ceremonies to conſecrate, as thei terme A ſworde hallowed. it, a ſworde, whiche after for an honour and token of beneuolence, they geue or ſende vnto ſome man to whome it lyketh them. Sixtus the fourth was firſt authour of this cuſtome, as is mentioned in the booke Pooles boke againſt king Henry the eyght. of their ceremonies. Afterwardes Cardinall Poole wrote a booke, whiche he had intitled, a defence for the vnitie of the churche. And he addreſſeth his ſtyle and ſpeache vnto king Henry, and reprehēdeth him

ſore, that he toke vpon him to be head of his churche, for that title to be longe only to the Byſhop of Rome, whiche is the Uicar of Chriſte and Cold reaſōs for the popes ſupremacie. the ſucceſſour of Peter, whome Chriſte appointed Prince of the Apoſtles: For he it was only that aunſwered, how Chriſte was the ſonne of God: vpon hym as vpon a Rocke, Chriſte buylded his churche. And howe Chriſte prayeth for his fayth that he being conuerted, myght alſo conuerte his brethren: And that Iohn, after Chriſtes death did euer obeye Peter. And what tyme they made haſte bothe to Chriſtes Sepulchre, he wold not go in before, but gaue him this honour. The cure and charge to fede the ſhepe, was committed chiefly to hym of Chriſt. And the nette alſo ful of fyſſhe, whiche many were not able to hale vp was drawen vpon the ſhore by Peter alone.
            Than hath he a long diſcourſe of the deathes of the byſhop of Rocheſter, and ſyr Thomas Moore, deteſtinge his crueltie. Moreouer, howe the kyng had afflicted all the ſtates of his realme, And into how muche myſery, he had brought a moſte floryſhynge kyngdome, what daunger he ſtode in of the Emperour, for the diuorſement of his Aunt, and ſubuerſion of Religion, and ſheweth hym how he neyther can nor ought to loke for any ayde, eyther of his owne ſubiectes or any other men, whiche hath deſerued ſo euyll of the common wealth. And tourning his tale to the Emperour, with many wordes ſtireth him vp, prouoketh He incēſeth the Emper. againſt the king of Englande. him and prycketh hym forewarde, to auenge that notable reproche done vnto his familie, and ſayeth howe the Turkyſhed ſeede is ſowen abroade in Englande, and in Germany, ſignifiyng the doctrine that is contrary to the byſhop of Rome. Finally after many opprobrious wordes and ſharpe rebukes, he prouoketh hym to regentaunce, & telleth hym howe there is none other remedy, but to retourne agayne to the boſome of the churche, whiche ones he defended by ſetting forth of bookes, greatly to his honour. This booke printed at Rome, bearyng no date, was of long tyme kept cloſe, and at the laſt after manye yeares, it came to one or two in Germany. And he ſayeth, the cauſe of his wrytinge therof was for that the kynge had deſyred hym to wryte his opinion. And albeit that certen learned men in Englande, whiche had done the lyke, had loſt their lyues, yet could not he whiche was ſo muche bounde vnto hym, diſſemble what his opinion was, neyther ought it to be imputed to hym as raylynge or curſed ſpeakynge: for he doeth both of his naturall diſpoſition and alſo by a certen ordre of life, cleane abhorre that vice. But in that he endeuoureth to reduce him agayne into the waye, which deceiued by flatterers, was ſtrayed farre out of the ryght pathe, he geueth hym a great benefite. Kynge Henry had brought him vp in his yought in good letters, and done very much Poole was vnthankful. for him. But whan this alteration was in Englande, whiche I haue ſpoken of, and he myſlyked it, Paule the thyrde, through the commendation

of Contarene, made hym Cardinal, and ſent for hym to Rome. They that are familiarly acquaynted with him, ſay, how he knoweth His hipocriſie & falſhod. ryght well the doctrine of the Goſpell, and ſuppoſe the cauſe to haue been why he wrote ſo againſt kyng Henry, to auoyde the ſuſpicion of Lutheraniſme. He cauſed the booke to be printed at Rome of his own coſte and charge, as they reporte. And taking to him ſelfe all the Copies, gaue it to reade only to the byſhop him ſelf, and to the Cardinalles, and others of his dere frendes: for vnto ſuch he wold be commended and feared on the other ſyde, leſte if it ſhould be red openly of all men, he ſhould incure the rebuke and obloquie of them, that had oftentymes heard hym ſpeake the contrary.
         
         
            
               ✚ The eleuenth Booke of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the ſtate of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne of the Empyre of Charles the fyfte.
            
               
                  ❧ The argument of the eleuenth Booke
               THe Proteſtantes hauing declared to the Emperour by ambaſſade three poyntes, Heldus cō
                  ming to Smalcald, maketh them anſwer, to the which they reply, and vrge a fre counſel, ſuch as was promiſed: vpon this the Pope ſendeth the Biſhop of Aſte. The Proteſtants ſet forth an Apologie vpon the refuſal of ſuch a counſel, and writ therof to the French king. The king of England writeth againſt this coū
                  ſaile of the Pope.
            
            
               I Spake of the Citie of Auſpurge in the nynthe booke, and of the chaunge of Religion there, for the whiche cauſe the Clergie being for the moſte parte of noble houſe, forſoke the citie. Wherupon the Senate in a writing directed to the Emperour, A wryting of Auſpurg. kyng Ferdinando, and all the ſtates of the Empyre, declareth the cauſe of their doynges, howe frendly they dealte with them, how many thynges they ſuffered, and howe ſcornefully they behaued them ſelues, and howe often they went about to ſtire vp ſedition in the citie. Whereunto not long after, Chriſtopher the byſhop aunſwered for him ſelfe and the reſte, and after many contumelious

wordes, exhorteth the Emperour and Princes, that for as muche as the daungers concerneth aſwel them as him ſelf, they would loke to it in time. You haue heard in the laſt booke of the Ambaſſadours which The Prote. Ambaſſad. to the Emp. the Proteſtauntes ſent to the Emperour in Italy, to whom they gaue commaundement chiefly thre thynges to treate of. Firſt to confute the brute whiche was rayſed vp, that they ſhoulde haue made a league with the kynge of Fraunce and of England, ſecondly that the Emperour would reſtrayne the iudgement of the counſell chaumbre, thirdly that ſuche as were come into their league, ſince the compoſicion of the peace at Norinberge, myght inioye the ſame peace. Whiche requeſtes the Emperour in dede hearde, but being wholy occupied with warelyke matters, he ſayde howe he woulde ſende his Ambaſſadour into Germany, who ſhould make them aunſwere. Wherfore at his departure from Genes, into Spayne, he ſent Matthie Helde his vicechaū
               celour, Heldus the Emperours Ambaſſad. into Germany. Whan the Proteſtauntes vnderſtode that by their Ambaſſadours nowe retourned, they appoynte a generall metyng at Smalcalde, the ſeuenth daye of February.
            And becauſe the daye of the counſell approched nere, neyther was there any doubte, but that the Emperours Ambaſſadour would haue ſome talke of the ſame, they were agreed alſo to bring with them their chiefeſt diuines. Wherfore at the daye aſſigned, beſydes the Prynces & Ambaſſadours of the cities, came thether Luther, Melanchthon, Bucer, Oſiander and diuerſe other. Whan the Ambaſſadour was come to Smalcalde, the fyftene daye of February, he ſpeaketh thus before them all. Howe the Emperour had commaunded hym to doe his meſſage, His sration at Smalcald only to the Duke of Saxony and the Lantgraue. But for as muche as they haue thought good, to make their conſortes alſo partakers of the ſame, he is contente to followe their mindes herein: he ſaith in dede that he knoweth not al the Ambaſſadours of the league, wherfore in caſe there be any amongs them, whom this anſwere of the Emperous doth not concerne, there is no cauſe why they ſhoulde ſuppoſe that any treaty is made with thē, but chiefly they of Auſpurge, which haue oftentymes ſollicited the Emperour both in Italy and Spayne, about Religiō, and nowe alſo lately at Genes by their Ambaſſadour. Unto whome the Emperour ſayde, howe he would ſende his Ambaſſadour into Germany, whiche ſhoulde make them an aunſwere. And they not abyding his commyng, haue altered the ſtate of Religion, not without both the contempte and alſo making of the Emperour. Therefore whan he came to Auſpurge, beinge conſtrayned of neceſſitie to chaunge his purpoſe, he treated with them nothynge at all, and hath wrytten to the Emperour the whole matter, as it ſtandeth. After whā he had exhibited the teſtimoniall of his Ambaſſade, he procedeth. And where they had ſo diligently pourged them ſelues of the Frenche and

Englyſh league, the Emperoure was ioyfull to heare it, whiche doeth both credit them, & alſo cōmendeth their vertue, that they haue ſo wittely eſchewed the Frenche practiſes, full of diſceirfulnes. Afterwards The Frēche practiſes. diſcourſing the warre of Sauoy, and ſpeakynge many thinges of the Frenche kyng, ſayde that he was not only a lette vnto the Emperour, that he could not bende his whole power againſt the Turke, but alſo that he conſulted with the Turkes, & prouoked thē to inuade Criſtendome. And that this is alſo his daily practiſe, to ſtyre vp ſtryfe and ciuile warre in Germany, and nowe endeuoureth al that he may to perſwade them, that the Emperour wyll not kepe promyſe with them. He deſireth them therfore not to credite his crafty counſelles: For the Emperour to be of ſuche honour and vertue, that he wyll not ſhrinke from his promyſe: And that may they well perceiue by mo experimēts than one. As touchinge the iudgement of the imperiall chambre. The Emperours commaundemēt was, they ſhould meddle with no caſes of Religion: But they aduertiſed him by their letters, that there was oftentymes controuerſies, whiche partely concerned religion partlye not. And therfore the Emperour cōmaunded thē, that of ſuch matters as thei ſuppoſed were ſequeſtred from religiō, thei ſhould iudge indifferently. For it were pitie but the lawe ſhould haue his courſe. And ſeyng the Emperour hath commaunded them to ſurceaſe from determining matters of Religion, they ought to be contente there with. And if the iudges haue done ought, contrary to the Emperours decre, they ſhall not eſcape free, but ſhalbe puniſhed according to the lawe made at Regenſpurge. But the Emperour againe admoniſhed them, that they would do nothing raſhely, neither preſcribe the imperiall chambre. For this thinge is neither lawfull nor voyde of ſeditiō, and ſhould The iudges of the chāber ſeme to be done in contempt of the Emperours iuriſdictiō, and to the reproche of the iudges, whiche ar partly men of noble houſes, and partly of excellent learning and vertu. And therfore requireth them, not to hynder the lawe. Unto their thirde requeſte whiche is, that ſuche alſo as be not compriſed in the peace of Norinberge, ſhoulde inioye the benefite therof, he ſayeth: the Emperour can not with a ſafe conſcience graunte it, for that they haue promyſed and ſubſcribed to the decrees of the Empyre, whiche are contrary to this Religion. And if eche man ſhould be ſuffered to ſwarue from his promyſe whan he liſte, that wer the ready waye to breake the pacification of Norinberge. Wherfore whan the Emperour ſhall knowe more certenly of their procedynges, he wyll do than as ſhall ſeme ryght and reaſon. In the meane tyme he requyreth them, to obſerue the peace them ſelues, and to ſee that it be not broken of others, whiche his truſte is they wyll doe, conſiderynge that the counſell is ſo nere, whereof they haue wrytten to the Emperour, and is the fourth thyng, whiche he hath in commaundement to

treate with them of. And after vſeth a great and long perſwaſiō with them, that ſeing the Emperour and all other kynges and nations, intende to be there and to further it, they wyll not refuſe nor be agaynſt the ſame: wherein the Emperour deſyreth to vnderſtand playnly their myndes. For in caſe they ſhould refuſe, take exceptions and make delaye. The Emperour thynketh both that a moſt Godly purpoſe ſhold be ſtopped in the middes of the courſe, and that ſtraungers woulde alſo conceaue of them a ſuſpicion, that they loued rather the vexation of the common wealth, than peace and quietnes. And ſeyng the Emperour hath this reſpect only, that Gods glory be ſet forth, and the ſaluation of men be conſydered, he exhorteth, and earneſtly requyreth them, that they would ſatiſfie herein his deſyre and the common wealthes alſo. He hath alſo in commiſſion, that if anye controuerſie ſhall happen in this matter, he ſhall ſolute and appeaſe the ſame, wherunto his wyl and diligence ſhalbe ready. If they deſyre alſo any further declaration of his talke with them, he woulde not refuſe. The next daye after he had thus ſpoken, he treateth ſeuerallye with the Duke of Saxony, howe the Emperour beareth him an eſpeciall good wyll, but the lette that he hath declared not theſame hitherto hath bene the diſſention about Religion. But ſeing that there is great hope, that all that matter ſhalbe quieted by the counſell already called, he deſyreth hym to further the ſame, and to ſende his Ambaſſadours thether, to the intente that all diſcorde taken awaye, he may declare his good wyl towards hym. For if he refuſe, and take exceptions, what diſpleaſure wyll come of it, he knoweth well enough. Moreouer for as muche as the Turke maketh great preparation to inuade Germanye, he requyreth hym to ſende hym the ayde decreed at Regenſpurge againſt the Turkes force, or if chaunce that the Turke come not to the field, nor attempte Germany, that then he woulde ſende hym the ſame ayde agaynſt the Frē
               che kyng, who hath inuaded Sauoye a prouince of the Emperour. Laſt for becauſe the Emperour hath borne the whole charges of theim periall chambre of long tyme alone and hath conſumed great treaſure in his warres, he requyreth that after the olde cuſtome of the Empyre, he would be contributary, for the portion of money hereunto belōging, as the reſidue of the Prynces haue alſo promyſed. The Duke ſayeth The Dukes aunſwere. that in as muche as theſe thynges concerne not hym alone, but his cō
               ſortes alſo, he wyll take deliberation. After the .xxiiij. daye of February all the confederatours make aunſwere together. And firſt wyſhynge vnto the Emperour longe health and preſeruation, as concernynge them of Auſpurge, they haue heard the whole matter by their Ambaſſadours, and ſay howe they can not ſequeſtre them from theyr fellowſhyp: Touchyng the Emperours warre with the Frenche kyng, they are not a lytle ſory, ſeyng the ſame to be commodious for the Turkes

the ennemies of the Empyre. For that the Emperour hath taken in good parte, their purgation, and mynded to kepe the peace made at Norinberge, they are ryght glad and thanke hym. But touchynge the Iudgement of the Imperiall chamber: where he ſayde, howe ſore it ſhould greue the Emperour, to ſtoppe the courſe of the lawe: They ſhew how there was a difficultie in the thinge, what time the Archebiſhop of Mētz & the Palſgraue, were interceſſours. How after much & long deliberation, there appered no ſurer way to eſtabliſh the cōmonwelth, than to graūte peace to religion, & to al matters annexed to the ſame, till either a general counſell of Europe, or a prouincial counſel of Germany migh be had. For vnleſſe it might ſo be, & except yt all maner of matters that procede of religion, might be cōpriſed together, howe lightly occaſion of trouble may be geuen, was both than conſidered, & nowe may be alſo perceiued. The wordes alſo of themperours proclamation, ſet forth at the ſame time, declare this ſufficiently. And that it was neuer their minde, to pretende any other cauſe, ſaue only matters of religion, neither are the iudges of the counſel chāber in their opiniō, able to proue the cōtrary. But now where he ſayth, how themperour gaue them authoritie to iudge of qualitie of matters, it is to them greuouſe. For they accōpt al thoſe actions to concerne religion, whiche in dede can not be decided, vnleſſe the controuerſie of religion be firſt in a lawful counſel determined. Which thing they haue many times ſignified both to themperour and kyng Ferdinando, by letters & Ambaſſadours. For this queſtion of Religiō is preiudiciall, & ought to be determined by a counſell, before ſuche matters be examined, as depend vpō the ſame. And ſeing that benefites are imployed for deſert & dutie, they can not ſuffer yt thoſe, which wtin their dominions folowe a cōtrary religiō, frō their doctrine to enioye the goodes of the church, in as muche as either they wil not, or can not execute their dutie. And for ſo muche as the matter cōcerneth the cōſciēce of the mynde, there remaineth no place to right of poſſeſſiō or of reſtitutiō. And ſeing yt whē the cōpoſitiō was made at Norīberg, they expreſſeli named al actiōs & ſutes, which hanged then eyther in the chāber or other courtes of iudgemēt, exhibiting thē to the interceſſours as matters of religiō, who promiſed than to fynde the meanes, yt themperour ſhould exempt thē frō iudgement. The ſame thing alſo king Ferdinādo toke vpō him in thaſſēblie of Cadane, & by thoſe wordes of proclamatiō, where thēperour cutteh of all ple, all authoritie to iudge of the ſtate of matters, was cleane taken away frō the iudges of yt imperial chāber. And although they wold not report euil of thē, yet many, ſeyng thē ready to geue ſentence agaynſte them, wer incouraged to rather to comēce their actiōs, which thing is to be prouoked by mo wayes thā one. For what time their men do require iugedmēt in any thyng they ar not only admitted, but alſo with contumeliouſe wordes reiected. As of late they of Humborough were

by them cōmaūded to reſtore the clergie of their citie not only to their goodes & poſſeſſions, but alſo to their olde religiō & al their iuriſdictiō. And where as they could not ſo do wt a ſafe conſcience, they were condemned in a great ſōme of money. And therfore themperour may ſe by this one fact what their mynde & purpoſe is. For either is thꝭ a matter of religion or els there is none at al: And if they may vſe the matter after this ſorte, than was the truce made in vayne. And in caſe by this meane the rites & ceremonies that are chaūged, may be reſtored, there ſhal nede no general counſel, wherunto notwithſtanding themperour him ſelf ſaith, that al theſe thinges do belong. Wherfore vpō iuſt & neceſſary cauſes they haue refuſed that iudgemēt, whan after diuerſe exceptiōs they could preuaile nothing. Now as touching the perſons of the iudges, there can not paſt one or two of our religiō be found in the whole cōpany: but what decre was made at Regēſburg, in thꝭ behalf, is not vnknowen. For the more fierſly that any of thē impugneth our doctrine, the better is he there accepted. And euē by their coūtenaūces it may be eaſly perceiued, what affectiō thei beare vs, in hādlīg of matters. Whiche thing being thus, they doubt not, but that themperoure wyll cōmaunde thē to ſurceaſe. And in caſe themperour thinke, yt anye prophane matter be mixed with matters of religiō, they refuſe not the due examinatiō of the ſame, ſo that in the meane tyme, the iudgement of the imperial chāber may ceaſe. And for ſuch as are cōmen into their league ſince the pacification of Norinberge: in the former yeres the interceſſours did require them at Scwinforte, that they ſhould receiue no mo into their league & nūbre, but than they refuſed the ſame. And whan they came after to Norinberge, they perſeuered in the ſame opinion. But where he ſayd, that many had promyſed & cōdicioned, not to alter their religion, ſome of them anſwere thus, that they made no promyſe at al, ſome againe made exceptions in their priuate compoſitiōs, that they might thus do, and ſome in dede promiſed, but vpō condiciō that themperour put thē in hope to procure a coūſell to be called wtin ſixe monthes, which ſhould begin within the yere after. But wheras yt was longer delayed, & they in the meane while through Gods benefit, vnderſtode more rightly the true doctrine, thei could differre it no longer, & thought it their duty to profeſſe yt thing, which they knew to be true & Godly: For yt byſhop of Romes lawe ſo teacheth, yt if a man hath alſo bounde him ſelfe by an othe to do any thing yt is wicked, he is not bound to performe it. And again, like as their aduerſaries will not refuſe, if any of their nūbre ſhould fall to take their partes, no more may they alſo, if any may eſcape from them, and come into their felowſhyp, let him, but that he maye ſo doe. Wherfore they beſeche the Emperour that he woulde reſtrayne the Iudges, and ſuffer not them onlye, but others alſo, whyche are ſynce come to them, to enioye the benefyte of

the peace: for if it be otherwyſe, or that thei haue any wrōg offered thē, they can not forſake their league fellowes or lyke profeſſours of doctrine, in that neceſſitie, which they declared alſo to Ferdinādo at Uiē
               na: For their cauſe is alone with theirs, which if the iudges of the chā
               ber ſhal take vnto thē, & preuente the counſell herein, who doubteth it to be extortion & open wrong, againſt the which they are conſtrained, euen by the lawe of nature, to defende thē ſelues. But what diſcōmoditie will come therof, & what wilbe the ende of it, Themperour of his wiſdome can conſider. Thei doubtles wiſhe for peace, & couet to gratifie themperour in all thinges, yet ſo as all men may haue fre acceſſe to the true doctrine. And if they may this obtayne, they wylbe the more preſt & ready to accōpliſhe that, which the Emperour & king Ferdinā
               do require, touching the Turke, & charges of the chābre. Cōcerning the counſaile, wherunto themperour ſo greatly perſwadeth them. They haue red the copie of the letters which Paule the third hath publyſhed touching the ſame, & perceius therby that he is not of the ſame minde & opinion, that themperour is of. For although Adrian the ſixt in thaſſē
               blie at Norinberge cōfeſſed there by his legate, yt in a maner al thinges at Rome were ſore corrupted, promiſing to do his endeuour that they might be reformed. Yet was Clement the ſeuenth, his ſucceſſour with in two yeares after, cleane of an other minde, as appered by his legate ſent to the next aſſemblie, in ſo muche as themperours lieutenaūtes, & other Princes, by a decree there made, ordeined a fre general councell might be holden in Germany, in the which coūſel what errour or vice ſo euer had crept into the church, might be takē away. This decre was afterward cōfirmed by thēperour at yt ſuite of tharchbiſhop of Mēzt & the Palſgraue Prince Electour. Howbeit this Clement, a yeare after, propoūded a counſel farre otherwyſe, thā was ſpecified by the decrees of thempire, & had aſſigned the place in Italy, which thā they refuſed. The ſame thing afterward did Paule the third, whom they anſwered alſo, following the lyke trade as they did before. And nowe alſo doeth the byſhop of Rome attempt the ſame (although couertly) as did Clement the ſeuēth openly by expreſſe wordes. For herein doth he by a certen implicatiō condēne their doctrine, where he ſpeaketh of late ſprōg vp hereſies. For that he meaneth the ſame of this doctrine, & intendeth to plucke it vp by the rootes, it is manifeſt by thexecution & puniſhmēt that he putteth innocēt perſones to, for profeſſing this ſame doctrine, & yet he through a ſhameleſſe diſſembling, pretedeth as though he wold reforme thoſe horrible e
                  •
               rours & vices of his church, of the which, theſe many yeres, ſo many good & learned men haue cōplained. And yt themperour being through his crafty policy perſwaded, prouoketh thē to ye counſel which he would not do, if he knew his fraude & diſceiptfulnes. The ſame craftes he vſeth alſo, what time by his legates, he ſolliciteth

kynges and Princes, yea and them alſo to admitte the counſell, to the intēt he may haue thē as fauourers & mainteiners of his wicked purpoſe, & by the confirmation of the counſel, myght thē ſelues condemne their owne doctrine. By the whiche craft Iulian the Apoſtata diſceaued in times paſt the Chriſten ſouldiours. And although the byſhop of Rome ſuſteineth the perſone of their aduerſary, yet taketh he vpō him the authoritie of iudge, againſt al right & equitie, and hath all others, conſenting to him herein, whiche are bounde to him by othe & manye wayes. But how vnlawful the ſame is, & how it ought not to be graū
               ted thē, themperour doubtles & other kings in their opiniō, can iudge. For yt the byſhop of Rome hath brought errours into ye churche, & a doctrine cleane cōtrary not only to Gods worde, but alſo to the auncient toūſelles & doctours, & mainteineth the ſame, & that he hath alſo made exceading many lawes againſt Gods cōmaundemēt, wherby the true knowledge is vtterly oppreſſed & defaced, the ſame vereli haue their diuines through Gods gift declared. And therfore do they intēde, to accuſe the byſhop & his fellowes in any lawfull counſell, of theſe ſo great matters, & to coudēpne thē of the ſame. How alſo through euil craftes, and diſhoneſt meanes, yea through force & guyle they achiefe their dignities, how filthie a life they leade, what euil examples thei geue, how they do no part of their dutie, how thei neglect ſuch as are cōmitted to their charge, & wallowe in all wickednes of lyfe, it is ſo wel knowen & tried, yt it nedeth no further declaratiō. For the which cauſes alſo, it is not lawfull for the biſhop (euen by the teſtimony of his owne lawe) to appoint there coūſel, muche leſſe to be iudge in the ſame. Neither may his ſworne clientes vſurpe the perſone of the iudge, ſeing they may not in dede, be any part of a lawful coūſel. moreouer the place of the coūſel is appointed in Italy, cleane cōtrary to the decrees of themperour & ſtates of thempire, which he ſcornefully diſpiſeth. Thei know not more ouer as yet, whether other princes of Chriſtendom wil allowe yt place, & that there be weighty cauſes for the which it ſhold be daūgerous for them & theirs to come thither. For albeit they ſhould haue a ſaufe conduicte, yet for ſo muche as the byſhop hath there his clientes euerye where, which hate this doctrine moſt bitterly, ther is great daūger of lieng in wayte, & priuie cōſpiracies, which in thoſe parties are much to be feared. Furthermore ſince this matter is moſt weighti, & ſuch as vnder the ſonne can arriſe no greater, which doubtles cōcerneth either euer laſting ſaluatiō or dānatiō. And ſeing that the greatnes of the matter requireth, yt they ſhould in great nūbre wt the miniſters of their churche & preachers be there preſent, & not to cōmit ſo weighty a matter to their deputes & proetours alone, it ſhould be a great griefe vnto thē, to paſſe out of the limites of thempire & go into Italy, leauing their coū
               trey & people, in ſuche grudge of mindes as is now in Germany, wtout garde, and their churches any long time without preachers. Wherfore

they moſte humbly beſeche that the Emperour would way with hym ſelfe all theſe poinctes diligently, and ſeing he is the high and ſupreme magiſtrate, vnto whom chiefly belongeth the ſetting forth of the trew doctrine, that he wold applie him ſelf wholy, that the true knowledge of God might be aduaunced, for they doe embrace no wicked kynde of doctrine, nor ſeke any other thyng, than the glory of Gods holy name. And this aunſwere concerning the counſell agreed vnto, alſo the Ambaſſadours of George Marques of Brandenburge, and of the cities of Norinberge, Halles, and Hailbrune: in other thinges they medled not, becauſe they were not of the league. What time the Proteſtantes had thus ſpoken, Heldus the Ambaſſadour aunſwereth by and by, & ſpeaking The anſwer of Heldus. many thinges againe of the great good will of the Emperour & of the Frenche kyng whiche had conſpired with the Turkes to the diſtruction of the cōmon wealth, he cometh to that matter touching the iudgement of the imperial chambre, and ſayeth in deede that peace is graunted for matters of Religion, & no man to ſay the cōtrary, but all the ſtrife to conſiſte in this which be matters of religion, & which not. And where as they take ſuche for caſes of religion, as others do accō
               pte for ciuile & prophane, how farre againſt reaſon is it, that the thyng ſhould not be debated, & the cauſes & obiectiōs of either part be heard, & ſo procedeth further to the meaning of yt ſame matter. And as touching ſuch as are lately receiued into their league, yt Emperour thiketh thus that they yt be not cōpriſed within the peace of Norinberg, are bounde al to the decrees of thempire, & ought to yelde to ye authoritie of the coū
               ſel. And for aſmuch as themperours minde is wholy addicte to peace & cōcorde, he requireth eſtſones, yt they wyl ayde him wt men & mony, for the Turkiſh warre, & nedeful charges of the imperial chābre. And if the Turke inuade not, yt thā they wold a few monthes, aſſiſte themperour with like ayde againſt the French king: whiche if they wil doe, it ſhall not repēt thē of yt ſeruice, wherin he deſireth to know a direct anſwer, that he may aduertiſe themperour therof. And as concerning the coū
               ſel, they thē ſelues knowe what labour & trauayle, themperour had to bring it to paſſe. And how his truſt is, yt in the ſame ſhalbe appeaſed all cōtrouerſie, yt is in religion wt quietnes, & the ſtate of the cōmō wealth be reformed to the glory of God, & preſeruatiō of men. Wherfore them perour truſteth aſſuredly that they ſhould make none exceptions, nor ſwarue from the reſt of men, for if they ſhould perſiſte herein, it would be grieffull for him to heare. And after he had againe vſed ſondrye perſwaſions, & amonges other, that the Emperour would through ſaufeconduicte ſaue them harmeleſſe, he requyred to haue a determinate aunſwere herein, and beſydes the names of them, which are come vnto them, ſynce the peace of Norinberge: Wherein was wrytten that Marques George, the cities of Norinberge, Weyſenburg, Hailbrine,

Winſem and Hales, were of the ſame Religion, but not of the league. Wherefore in the Emperours name he deſyred to knowe what their league was, and the condition of the ſame. The ſelfe ſame daye came thether the Romyſhe legate, the byſhop Aques, with letters from the The Popes Ambaſſad. byſhop of Rome to the Duke of Saxon, exhorting him to come to the counſell, whome the byſhop of Rome ſent into Germany, in the place of Peter Paule Uerger, hopinge well that the newe Ambaſſadour ſhould ſome thing haue brought to paſſe, but he alſo loſte his labour, & was as little regarded, in ſo muche that on a certen day, whan he deſired to ſpeake with the Lātgraue, he tolde him he was at no leaſure, and in maner at the ſame inſtant, went to ſee howe Luther did, who at the ſame tyme laye ſore ſycke of the ſtone. Which thyng the Ambaſſadour The Popes Ambaſſad. viſpyſed. myght ſee out of his lodging. Uergerius had geuen this Ambaſſadour inſtructions of the whole ſtate of Germany, and how euery man in the byſhops behalfe muſt be enterteined and vſed. The fourth daye after, whiche was the laſt of February, the Proteſtauntes aunſwer Heldus. That for the Emperour him ſelf, they neuer doubted, but that he woulde obſerue the peace made, whiche he hath alſo promiſed, both in publique and priuate letters, but the imperiall chamber contrary to the expreſſe wordes of the compoſition, ſealed and confirmed by the Emperour, hath taken vpon them to heare and determine, and to call before them diuerſe for the alteration of Religion, for Rites, ceremonies and churche goodes, whiche thyng were playnly exempted in the pacification concluded. But the iudges of the imperiall chamber being alſo of a contrary Religion, & bounden by their othe to geue ſentence, as well after the preſcript of the byſhop of Romes lawe, as of the Emperours, doe lyttle regarde the compoſitiō of the peace, but procede directly againſt it. Wherfore they haue iuſt cauſe to refuſe theyr iudgement, and to deſire a reformation, and that for diuerſe conſiderations, whiche are alſo before mentioned. For firſt the iudges of the imperiall chamber, are for the moſte parte of a cōtrary Religion, they are bounde by an othe to iudge after the decrees of the Byſhop of Rome, as wel as after the lawes of the Empire. Thei beare fauour to our aduerſaries, and that manifeſtly, and frowne vpon vs and our fellowes. They medle with mere matters of Religion, contrary to the Emperours proclamation. Finally they haue condēpued our cōfederatours of Hamborough, only for matters of Religiō, in a great ſomme of gold & ſo would procede againſt others in caſe they were not refuſed. And as touching the names of them that are come into their league ſynce the peace making, they had long ſynce wrytten and ſent to the Emperour in Italy by their Ambaſſadours. Who ſeing the tyme of the counſell ſo longe differred, ioyned them ſelues in league with thē, iudgyng it mete to preferre their conſcience, before any ciuile bonde: laſt where

hedeſyreth to knowe the fourme and maner of their league: thei maruell that he will requyre it, conſidering that the Emperour knoweth it well inough, and made meanes by the interceſſours at Norinberg, that they ſhould haue left it: but they made hym ſuche aunſwere than, as he moued them no more herein, howe their aduerſaries haue geuen the occaſion hereof. For what miſchiefe they haue deuyſed againſt thē, it is right well knowen. And this league of theirs is ordeined to iniurie no man, but to defende them ſelues, and is framed of ſuche condicions as if nede require, it may be declared to the Emperour or any man els without any ſhame at all. And as concerning ſuche thynges as he ſpake of the counſell, and of the Emperours mynde towardes the common wealth, they lyke very well all. Howe they do beleue alſo that the Emperour knoweth not the byſhoppes minde herein, & therfore procureth the counſell ſo erneſtly. But what opinion the Emperour hath of the biſhop, thei wil leaue vndiſcuſſed. Neuertheleſſe for as much as his wrytte is cōtrary to the Emperours minde, and altogether ſuſpicious they can not diſſemble, what they thinke thereof. For before the counſell do begyune, he hath condempned their doctrine, not only in word, but in dede alſo: and alſo it is wel knowen, how that in all aſſemblies, where religion is treated of, albeit thei ſee that the Scripture maketh againſt them, yet wyl they preſume and take vpon them the authoritie of determination. And although they are mynded in a lawefull counſel, to accuſe the byſhop and his complices, of falſe doctrine, hereſy and The Popes errours. impietie, yet is there no doubte, but that he will after his accuſtomed maner be both partie and iudge alſo. For that is his entent, the wrytte it ſelfe witteneſſeth, whiche if they ſhould ones allowe, it were in vain and to late afterward to talke of any conditions or fourme of diſputation in the counſell. And whether this be ſuche a counſell than as the Emperour and the ſtates of the Empyre haue in diuerſe aſſemblies agreed vpon, they leaue it to the opinion of any indifferent iudge. For euermore thoſe wordes a free and a Chriſtian counſell were wyſelye & pourpoſely added, and the ſame in deede not to be ſo taken, as that it ſhould be lawfull only, for euery man to ſpeake his minde there, but alſo that neyther the biſhop nor his adherentes, which are depely bound through their fidelitie and promyſe, one to an other, ſhould pronounce ſentence in their owne cauſes. And the other ought not ſo to be interpreted, as though there were no place in the counſell for the Turkes and ſuche others, but that accordinge vnto holy Scripture, all partes of doctrine might be examined and determined. And how they know moreouer, that not in one countrey only, but euery where alſo in the The Popes vnreaſonable authoritie. whole worlde, are Godly and learned men diſperſed here and there: whiche thinge refreſheth their ſpirites to thinke vpon, conſiderynge & hopyng that in caſe this vnreaſonable power of the byſhop of Rome

might be diminiſhed and that all thinges ſhoulde not depende vpon one mans cōmaundement, it would come to paſſe that not only their diuines, but alſo diuers other good men in ſondry countreis, whiche being now oppreſſed with his tyrannie hyde thē in coruers and ſayde nothyng, would applie their whole ſtudy and endeuour to the refourmation of the churche. And now as concerning the place of the counſell, they knowe not where it ſhould better be choſen, than in Germany. For albeit the counſell doth alſo appertayne to other nations, yet chiefly it concerneth the Germaines, whiche muſt come thether them ſelues with the miniſters of their churches, where as other kynges & Prynces may do the thing by their deputes, after the olde wōted maner of long tyme accuſtomed. Furthermore what the ſituation and cō
               moditie of Mātua is, they wyl not diſpute of, but there is now warre in Italy, but in caſe there were none, yet haue they lately declared, why that place ought to be of them ſuſpected. How the Duke of Mā
               tua him ſelfe is affected, they wyll not reaſon, but his owne brother is one of the chiefeſt Cardinalles, whiche maketh muche to encreaſe the ſuſpition. Therefore if other nations ſhall heare one of their reaſons, wherfore they doe refuſe both the place and fourme of pleadyng, they doubte not but they wyll allowe the ſame, and if they did not, than ſhould they in dede conceaue of them a wronge opinion. The Emperour Of the place of the coūſel. knoweth alſo that in Germany be many cities as commodious for the pourpoſe, as Mantua, and the whiche ought chiefly to be reſpected, muche commended for equitie and iuſtice. For thoſe ſecret and priuie conſpiracies to diſpatche men out of the waye, are not ſo well knowen and practiſed in Germany as they be in ſome other places. And where as thei cleaue and ſticke on this wyſe to the decrees of the Empyre, and wyll not permitte them ſelues to be remoued from the ſame, it ought to ſeme no maruell nor newes to the Emperour. For alſo in tymes paſt Liberius Biſhop of Rome, the frende and fawtour of Athanaſius, required the Emperour Conſtantine to call a counſell at Alexandria, where the defendant and plaintiues dwelled. And albeit that the ſame place was nothing commodious for the Weſt churche: And although the Emperour alledged that Athanaſius and his fellowes were by the conſent of the whole worlde condempned, and excō
               municated: Albeit that he contended Liberius to be one man emōges Athanaſius. Arrius. Liberius. all others, that ſought to diſturbe the publique quiet: Yet neuertheleſſe did he relent nothyng, and than whan the Emperour had denied the ſame, a long time after, the errour of Arrius reigned, but in fine the doctrine of Athanaſius had the vpper hande, and preuayled for euer. And who is able to recite, what bloud was ſpilte, in the quarell of his doctrine: And the condition of their Religion to be like vnto the ſame, whether aconuenient place be geuen or otherwyſe. For a lyke cauſe

alſo ſuche as were at the counſell of Baſill, refuſed Ferrare, where as Eugenius the byſhop had ſummoned an other counſell. The Emperour Henry the ſeuenth, had a great ſute and cōtrouerſie with Robert kyng of Sicilie, & had cited hym to appere to Piſa: but the ſame was thought vnreaſonable to the byſhop Clement the firſte, whiche bothe defended the kyng & alſo ſhewed reaſons, wherfore he was not boſide to come thether, nothynge ſo weighty as theſe of ours. Therfore wher they no we refuſe ſuche maner of counſel, the faulte ought not to be imputed vnto them, but to the byſhop. For ſo ofte as they haue referred their matter to a counſell, they ment it of ſuche a counſell as the Emperour and ſtates of the Empyre had decreed: For they were not ignorant, that in caſe the byſhoppes might be permitted, to haue the whole orderyng of the matter, but that they would worke all to their owne auauntage, and oppreſſing the true doctrine, woulde eſtablyſhe theyr owne wyckednes. And yet for all that doth Paul the thyrde ſo collour the matter with wordes to the Emperour, as though he woulde vſe the thynge vpryghtly and ſincerely, where he intendeth the contrary. Moreouer what counſell they requyred, thei haue declared by writing The craft of Paule the. to Peter Paule Uerger the Ambaſſadour, not only of Clement, but alſo of Paule the thyrde. And where as he ſayth that the Emperours mynde is, that errours and vices might be reformed, there is none apparence therof at all in the byſhops wryting. For in caſe he intended a true and a nedefull reformation, he would not haue cōdempned theyr doctrine before they were heard. And albeit they diſtruſte not the Emperours equitie, and are ſo muche the more ſory that they can not gratifie hym herein, yet are they nothing furthered through this his good wyl and diligence. For albeit the Emperour him ſelfe be preſent at the counſell, yet is it well enough knowen, what authoritie the biſhoppes wyll permitte eyther hym or other kynges alſo, to haue in ſuche maner of caſes: For the moſte that they wyll graunte to, ſhalbe perauenture to vſe their counſell in matters, for as to determine any, they wyll not Popes haue Emperours in ſubſectiō. permitte them, but reſerue that authoritie to themſelues only, to the entent that in caſe the Emperour and ciuile Magiſtrates went ſome thynge to farre, they myght hereby as with a bridel hamper them in, & in fine determine al thinges at their own pleaſure. They deſire therfore, that the Emperour would not be offeded with them, in that they ſeke to eſchew theſe ſnares of the biſhop where with he wold intrappe them. For this is geuē naturally euen vnto brute beaſtes, to ſhunne the place, where they knowe they are layde in wayte for to be taken. Furthermore it is commonly knowen, howe the matter was handled in the counſell of Conſtance, with the Emperour Sigiſinūde. For albeit The counſel of Cōſtaſice. he had graunted a ſaufeconduicte to Iohn Huſſe, yet did the byſhops deminiſhe his authoritie, ſaying, howe it was lawfull neyther for him Iohn Huſſ
                     •
                  .
               
nor no man els to preſcribe or meaſure them in this behalf: wherwith the Emperour being vāquiſhed, gaue place to their authoritie whiche they chalenged to them ſelues, not with out ſighinge in their opinion, but yet to the miſerable deſtruction of hym, who truſtinge vppon the ſaufe conduicte, fell into that calamitie. Wherby it appereth euidently, how muche the Emperour is able to helpe thē herein, though he wold neuer ſo fayne, after they haue ones intrapped them, and encloſed thē as it were in a pinnefolde: therfore muſt they worke circūſpectly, and yet for all that, leſt any thyng ſhould be imputed to them, they are ready not only to abyde lawfull iudgement, but alſo moſte earneſtly beſeche the Emperour, to waye and pounder theſe ſo weightie matters diligently, and to call a lawfull counſell in Germany, wherin neither the byſhop nor his conſortes ſhall occupie the place of iudgemēt. And if the byſhop wyl let or impeche the Emperour in ſo doing, and ſhal not permitte a ſincere counſel to be holden in Germany, they do proteſte opē
               ly, that the faulte is not in them, that the matter is not brought to a cō
               corde. What incommoditie alſo ſhall ariſe therof, the ſame to be wholy aſcribed to the Byſhop: in concluſion they requeſte hym to make this ſame reporte vnto the Emperour, and declare their good wylles and dutie to wardes hym. Whan the matter was thus decided amonges them, And Heldus had promyſed them to make relation to the Emperour of all thynges, the Proteſtauntes decree alſo howe to mainteyne The Proteſtaun
                     •
                  es decre for mainteining Miniſters. the miniſters of their churches in lyuing, for the erecting of free ſcholes that their churches and common wealth might neuer want learned men, laſt of ſuche thynges as concerne their league and defence. As concerning the Turke, they had aunſwered the Ambaſſadour before, that if they and theirs might haue quietues in other matters, they would be glad and wyllynge to ayde the Emperour againſt hym, but nowe the brute went, howe kyng Ferdinādo prepared warre againſt John Uayuode, and therfore requyred ayde. In the whiche perplexitie, leſt haply they ſhould not do theyr dutie to the common wealthe, it was decreed in the abſence of Heldus, that the Duke of Saxon, and the Lantgraue, ſendynge abroade eſpialles of the common charges, ſhould get intelligence what thynges were a brewyng, & if the Turke entended to inuade Germany, that they ſhould than aſſemble agayne, to conſulte what eche mans dutie is herein.
            Moreouer to the entent that all men myght vnderſtand, what iuſt Reaſon why the Proteſt. refuſe the Counſel. cauſe they had to refuſe the counſell they condeſcended to compryſe the whole matter in wryting. Whiche after wardes they ſet forth in print, and ſpeaking of foreine kynges and nations: Paule the thyrde (ſaye thei) hath ſent forth his bulles of late, to ſommō a counſel at Mantua, to begynne nowe at the .xxiij. daye of May, and alledgyng certen cauſes therof. Moreouer he hath ſente his Ambaſſadours to kynges and

Prynces as well Germanes as others to aduertyſe them of the counſell, and to exhorte them, eyther to come thither thē ſelues, or ſend their protectours. And where he moued vs alſo by his Ambaſſadour here vnto, and ſo did the Emperour in lyke maner, the thynge it ſelfe requireth that we ſhould therfore declare, what peryll and loſſe it were not for vs only, but alſo for the whole common wealth of Chriſtendome, if men ſhould obeye hym herein. And notwithſtandyng that the cauſe of our determination is iuſt and reaſonable, yet is there no doubte, but our aduerſaries be of ſuche nature, that they wyll blame our doyng, & conſtrewe it to the worſte parte. For to the entent they may bryng vs and our cauſe into hatred, they wyll affyrme doubtleſſe, that we can abyde no examination nor iudgement, and that we deſpyſe al other nations, amonges whome there haue often bene many excellent learned men. This wyll they ſaye moreouer that it is wickednes to refuſe the decrees of the counſell, for that it is the hyghe iudicial ſeate of the churche, whiche all men are bound to obey. They wyl forge alſo, as though we were aſhamed of our doctrine, or afraid to come to light, or els that we ſought contentiō where no nede is, and can not endure 
                  •
               n vniuerſall quiet. Nowe if this myght be verefied of vs in dede, it were not only wicked, but alſo deteſtable be heard of. Wherfore we muſt of neceſſitie ſhewe the reaſon of our doynge, and we truſte than, that all good men whether they be in Germany or other places, wyll not only credit no ſuche thynge of vs, but wyll alſo doe their endeuour, that this moſte weyghty cauſe of all others may be handled vprightly, and that the byſhop of Rome be not permitted, vnder the forged and coloured name of a counſell, to oppreſſe the manifeſt truthe by a kynde of tyranny. For we ſhal declare that we do not only profeſſe the pure doctrine, but alſo reſpecte nothyng els but Gods glory, and the preſeruation of the common wealth, and that there can be no obſtinacie, or frowardnes obiected vnto vs. And fyrſt to proue that we do not contemne the iudgement of other nations or of the churche, hereby it appereth manyfeſtly, that al our care is leſt the byſhop and his clientes, ſhould take vpon them the authoritie and iudgement, and that all thynges myght be decided by mete and no ſuſpected perſones. Whiche thyng we truſt that all Godly men would lykewyſe wyſhe for. For where as in dyuerſe countreis there remayne certen olde wrytinges, and complayntes of the falſe doctrine, vices, and idolatrie, that were than crept into the churche, we doubte not, but in the ſame places at this daye there be ſome Godly and learned men alſo, whiche vnderſtande the ſounde doctrine, although being oppreſſed with the byſhoppes tyrannye, they are conſtrayned to holde their peace. Theſe in dede of iuſte deſerte Who ought to be at the counſell. ought to be preſent at the coūſel, that they myght ſpeake their myndes frely. For it is not to be accompted a free counſell, that is gouerned by

the byſhop and his fellowes, whiche defende falſe doctrine by power and violence, and of an olde cuſtome make decrees contrary to Gods worde. For Chriſte what tyme he inſtituted this highe iudiciall ſeate, commaunded that all matters ſhould be referred to the churche, that requyred a reformation. By the whiche ſelfe wordes he excludeth all tyranny and lordſhyp. It is alſo a ſclaunder, where they ſaye perhaps that we are a feard to come abroade and can not abyde the opē light. For in the aſſemblie imperial at Auſpurg, we profeſſed our doctrine openly, before the Emperoure and all the ſtates of the Empyre. Againe The Preachers of the Goſpel haue brought godly workes to lyght. this ſelfe ſame doctrine is preached openly in our dominions, and our learned men haue ſet forth bookes of the ſame, and diuerſe of our aduerſaries do confeſſe, that through our mens wrytinges, ſondrye articles are called agayne to lyght, whiche laye before hidde in darkenes. For nowe the true doctrine ſhyneth agayne, of penaunce, of faythe in Chriſte, of the remiſſiō of ſynnes, of good workes, of true worſhipping, of the vſe of Sacramētes, of the authoritie of the keyes, of Magiſtrates, of the traditions of men and ſuche other lyke thinges. Neither are we aſhamed of the Goſpell (as Paule ſayth) but haue an eſpeciall deſyre, that we myght declare our mynde in theſe thinges before al men. And where it is alſo obiected to our preachers, that they ſhoulde haue It is falſe yt they ſtyre vp 
                     〈◊〉
                   hereſies. reyſed vp agayne the hereſies before time condempned, neither ſhould nede therfore further diſputation or hearing, it is falſe & may be eaſlye excuſed, before them that haue red our confeſſion and the defence annexed to the ſame. For the doctrine that we confeſſe is not newe, but the verey conſent of the primatiue churche, as moſte clerely doth appere. Neyther haue we admitted any hereſy or wycked opinion, but our men haue reſtored the doctrine of the aunciēt fathers, which was oppreſſed by biſhops and monkes. It is vntrue alſo, that is reported of vs, that we ſhoulde delight in diſſention, for we are ſory from the botome of our hartes that the Chriſtē commō wealth is thus deuided, & to haue a concorde deſyre a lawfull counſell. But for as muche as the byſhop and his fellowes do cōdempne the true and neceſſary doctrine, and do tormente and perſecute the profeſſers thereof, exhorting others to do the ſame, we can not but miſlike their cruel tiranny. For God wil be honored through the confeſſion of his name, and it is wickednes for any man to ioyne hym ſelfe to the byſhops tyranny whiche ſo rageth. Moreouer it is manifeſt that we beare and ſuſteine all maner of charges of the common wealth, as the reſidue of the ſtates do. Whereby it is to be ſeene, that we woulde alſo gladly accorde with others in relygion, Byſhoppes ſtyre vp prices. in caſe it were lawful. Beſydes this we vnderſtande what daū
               ger hangeth ouer vs for the ſame. For the byſhoppes haue nowe theſe many yeares, declared manifeſtly, what they go about, and how they incenſe kynges myndes againſt vs. And were it not extreme madnes,

to abide all theſe ſo great daūgers, and to be at ſo great charges with out iuſt cauſe? But we knowe aſſuredly that we owe this dewtie vnto God. And that there is nothing to be ſo much reſpected, as his commaundement, and take God to wytnes, that we ſeke for nothing els. Nowe that we haue confuted theyr ſklaunders, we will come to the ſeconde part. Emonges ſtraungers many parauenture ſuppoſe, yt we of a certen curioſitie haue impugned ſome light faultes, which for kepinge of a quiet, mighte better haue bene diſſembled, eſpeciallye conſydering that the ſtate of worldly thinges is ſuche, that in a common wealth be euer remaining ſome thinges, whiche muſt be wincked at. But the matter ſtandeth farre otherwiſe.
            For fyrſt in dede errours and falſe opinions may not be diſſembled with. For Chriſt commaundeth vs to beware of falſe teachers: Againe Falſe doctrine is not to be borne with. the controuerſie is not about light errours, but touching the doctrine of faith, and the true knowledge of God, which is the principall pointe of the Chriſtian life, and ſincere worſhipping of God, which ought not to be paſſed ouer in ſilence, but to be obſerued purely, and diligentlye taught in the Churche. And it can not be denied but this doctrine was wholy extinguiſhed, and a newe brought in for it, to the greate contuinelie of Chriſt. Moreouer we do reprehende diuerſe and ſundrye errours and wickednes, which others alſo haue eſpied longe before our daies, and therfore deſyred a counſell, that the wrong beyng redreſſed concorde might be reteined: But in this our time a Counſell is muche more nedefull, for as muche as the ſame errours and vices do remaine in ſundry places, and ſtrife and contention is arriſen, and many therefore are in daunger of their lyues, that be innocent perſons. For theſe therfore ſo weightie conſiderations, not onely we, but themperour alſo Why the innocentes be in perill. and the reſidew of the ſtates and Biſhoppes, haue determined that acounſell is chiefly neceſſary for the Church, wherin the pure doctrine might be mainteined. For vnleſſe it were of ſuche ſort, they ſawe right well, howe it would ſtyre vp a greater confuſion: But behold, whileſt we loke for ſuch a counſell, the Biſhops Buls come forth quite contrary to the decrees of thempyre. And becauſe it doth not cōcerne vs only but alſo the whole commen wealth of Chriſtendom, we haue thought nedefull by this publike writyng to teſtifie and declare, wherefore we diſcommende this counſell. For the power and Authoritie of Iudgement belongeth not onely vnto Biſhoppes, but vnto the churche. Of which numbre verely are all kinges and all other ſtates. Wherfore al Tha
                     •
                  thoritie of iudgement is in the churche. beit the Biſhoppe of Rome were nothing at all accuſed, yet were not this to be graunted him, that he alone and his ſhould be iudges, excludyng other miniſters of the churche: but ſeyng manifeſtly that he is a partie & one of the ſuters, much leſſe ought it to be permitted, becauſe it is both againſt Gods lawe and alſo the lawe of Nature:
            
               
But we accuſe the Biſhop of Rome of no ſmale crimes, neyther do we diſpute onely of his vſurped Authoritie and abhominable liuinge, but we reprehende his doctrine, his lawes and wicked Religion, that is, we accuſe him as giltie of Idolatrie and Hereſie. Whiche crimes The Pope is accuſed of Idolatry & Hereſye. beyng obiected, the Biſhoppe ought not, but the churche to geue iudgement, as the olde lawes of the Biſhoppes them ſelues do teſtifie. Furthermore the Biſhoppe is not only one of the parties, but becauſe he hath condemned oure doctrine longe before, he hathe heaped vpon him ſelfe the greater ſuſpition: And ſeyng it is thus, who can doubte, what his iudgement ſhalbe in the counſell concernynge our doctrine? For it is not to be thought, that he will contrary to his olde cuſtome, permit any other man to haue the determination of matters.
            And wheras in his writynge, he ſpeaketh nothyng of the maner of treatie in the Counſell, we haue iuſt cauſe to ſuſpecte all thynges the more. For he calleth them onely thither, which are bounden vnto him Like lippes like lettuſe. diuerſe wayes, of whoſe good willes he is aſſured: And he proteſteth alſo this to be the cauſe of calling the counſel, that the Hereſies ſprong vp of late might be weded out. And albeit, the ſame may be taken largely, yet is there no doubt, but he meaneth it of our doctrine. For it is not credible, yt he ſpeaketh of his own errours. Yea, after he ſent forth an other writynge touchinge the reformation of the Courte of Rome, wherein by expreſſe wordes he confeſſeth that the Counſell is called for this intent, that the Peſtiferous Hereſie of Luther might be aboliſhed. And ſo in dede at the fyrſt, he couered his mynde craſtely, that his writte myght haue ſome ſhewe, but he diſcloſed it afterwarde.
            Wherfore there is doubte, but that he is fullye bente, to roote oute The craft of the Pope. our doctrine. And what madnes were it than for vs to allow this his intention? For this goeth he about: that ſuche as receiue his writyng, ſhoulde confeſſe oure doctrine, to be wicked and Hereticall: Moreouer that Kynges and Princes whiche admitte the ſame, ſhoulde be bounden to aide and aſiſte him.
            Therfore ſeing the thing concerneth the vniuerſal common wealth, we beſeche all men, that they will conſider diligentlye, thys his crafte and policie. For it is to be marueiled, whie he conceaued his writynge with ſuche wordes: And there is a doubt, whether he did it to the intent to feare vs from the Counſel, or by the approuing of the writte to haue vs intrapped. But amonges vs aſſuredly there is no doubt, but that themperours mynde is, to further the common wealth, neyther do we thinke that he will allowe this forme of writte. But the Byſhoppe hathe not onely appoynted the Counſell, but hathe alſo pronounced ſentence againſt vs. For he will not permitte that the matter may be tried by the Scriptures, but he will aledge his own lawes, &

cuſtome, and certen Counſelles of the latter time to proue the matter. But we chiefly hold & affirme, ye mens traditions that are contrary to Gods worde oughte to be reiected. For we admit the doctrine of the church, but the Byſhops errors & tyrannie ought not to be coloured wt the title of the church. Tholde church neyther receiued any law cōtrarie to the Scripture, nor attributed ye vnmeaſurable power to the Biſhop of Rome which he now taketh vpon him ſelfe. And againe y• ſorte of men, which do condemne & perſecute by the doctrine of the goſpell, be not the church, but paricides, the generatiō & ofſpring of Cam. And in old time in dede godly Biſhops dyd oftentimes refuſe coūſels, ſeing Thoſſpring of C
                     〈…〉
                  . the ſame to be called, not to defende the veritie, but either for the main tenaūce of ſome wicked opinon, or els to eſtabliſhe ſome mē in Authoritie. Themperor Cōſtantine had aſſigned a counſel at Antioche: But Maximus Biſhop of Hieruſalem, albeit, it was not farre of, came not thither, for becauſe he knewe themperors minde, & what the Arrians intended. And although Athanaſius came to the coūſell at Tyrus, yet taried he not long, for yt he ſaw the chiefeſt of the coūſel plaie the parts both of the accuſers & Iudges. And for yt he ſaw certen accuſers procured againſt him. There was holdē a great counſel at Sirmiū, a town in Hungry againſt Photynus, for the matter was weightie. And albe it themperour cōmaunded the Biſhops to come thither, yet wold not they of the weſt partes obey him, for that they ſawe there a numbre of Arrians there encreaſed, & ſuſpected yt ſome falſe opinion ſhoulde there be decreed. That time was Oſius Biſhop of Corduba, a famous man, whom themperor, at the requeſt of the Arrians, commaunded alſo to come thither out of Spaine: When he was come, he approued yt perilous counſell of Sirmie, which brought afterwardes a great conſuſiō to the church, & for this cauſe was Oſius ſore reproued of Hilarie, whiche came not there. Cyrillus Biſhop of Hieruſalē neuer came at their aſſemblies, which denied Chriſt to be of the ſame ſubſtannce wt the father, & is accompted the fyrſt, that euer appealed from the counſell by writyng. There was a Counſell kepte at Millan, and the Biſhoppes called thither by the Emperour: But what time Paulinus, Biſhoppe of Treuers, and a fewe others, ſawe, howe Anxentius the Byſhoppe of Millan and his mates went about an euill purpoſe, they departed, The Counſell of Mill
                     〈…〉
                   broken of. brake vp that Counſell. After this ſort did thoſe worthy men flie at ſuſpected counſelles, leſt they ſhould be made partakers of the crime. And for aſmuche as the Biſhop ſignifieth plainly that this counſell is inſtituted to confirme his Authoritie, we beſech al men that they wold not impute this refuſal to vs, as a fault blame worthy. Finally the very place of the counſell we can not like for diuerſe cauſes. For it is fitte to offer iniurie, and altogether ſuch, as ſhould let the libertie of ſpeche.

And beſydes there is muche hatred conceaued againſte vs in foreine nations through the ſclaunders of our aduerſaries, as though Religion and honeſt liuing were exiled from among vs: which perſwaſion, when mennes mindes be thus prepared, is not without great perill. Wherfore it were very expedient for this cauſe onely that the counſell ſhould be holden in Germany, to the entent that ſtraungers might ſee the order and maner of oure Churches and Cities. And not throughe falſe ſclaūders to hate the trew doctrine. The weightines of the cauſe alſo requireth, yt many of vs ſhould come to the coūſell oure ſelues, but to forſake our own limites, is no maner way for vs expedient. And ſeyng yt for moſt weightie cauſes, it was decreed, yt the counſel ſhould be holden in Germany, we ſe not wherfore we ſhould depart frō the ſame Conſidering therfore yt this caſe cōcerneth the preſeruation of al Chriſtendome, we beſeche al kinges & princes, to geue no credit vnto oure aduerſaries, but herunto rather to applie thē ſelues, yt the trew knowledge of God might be reſtored: For they cādo nothing yt ſhal more redound to theyr honor. The Biſhop laboreth to this ende, yt he mighte perſwade thē to practiſe crueltie: the which thei ought moſte chiefly to abhorre. For euē for this cauſe are they placed in this degre of dignitie, yt they ſhold honor Gods holy name, & be a light vnto the reſt through their good enſample, & to defende innocēt perſons frō wrōg & violēce. And if there ſhal euer at any time be any lawfull counſell, thā ſhal we ſo defende our matter there, yt all men ſhall vnderſtande, how that our endeuours haue bene euer annexed, with the preſeruation of the common wealth. In this aſſemblie were theſe. The Duke of Saxon, Erneſtus & Fraūces bretherne Dukes of Luneburge, Ulriche Duke of Wirtemberge, the Lantzgraue, Philip prince of Pomerane, the three Erles of Anhalde, & Albert Counte Manſfelde, beſides many Ambaſſadors, of the cities with moſt large & ample cōmiſſion. For they were admoniſhed what thinges ſhould there be treated. Before they departed thence, which was the vj. day of March they addreſſe their letters to the French king, wherin firſt they excuſed the matter, that they had The Poteſt. letters to the Frēch king. not ſatiſfied his Ambaſſadoure in the former aſſemblie, and ſhewe the cauſe alſo, whie they ſende no Ambaſſadours as nowe vnto him. Thā they deſyre him to continew his frendſhippe, and ſeynge they haue ſet open to him all waies to come to a concorde in religion, and yet haue nothing preuailed, that he would recompence this theirendeuor, with his fauor and beneuolence. Fynally they declare what their mynde is touchyng the Counſell, and deſyre to knowe what he hathe alſo determined to do herein. The kinge afterwardes maketh Aunſwere, at the tenth kalendes of Iune, he accepteth theyr ſatiſfaction and promiſeth largely concernynge hys continuall amitie towardes them, confutyng the ſclaunders of his aduerſaries in a wrytynge, the whiche he ſent with all, and ſaieth that this is his opinion of the counſell, and

euer hath bene, that vnleſſe it be lawefull, and in a ſure place, he wyll neuer allowe the ſame: neyther doubteth he, but the kynge of Scotlande his ſome inlawe, will alſo folowe his mynde herin. He a lytle before at the beginning of Maye, was retorned home with his wyfe, which after aboute Midſomer, ended her life there. The queene of Scottes dieth.
            
            In the meane time the Biſhoppe of Rome deferreth the Counſell till the kalendes of Nouember, and the cauſe thereof (he ſaieth) is, for that Friderick the Duke of Mantua, mindeth to fortifie his citie with garniſons of ſouldiours, and to employe coſt therupon: which thinge hath happened contrary to his expectation, and ſaith he is ſore affraid leſt many, folowyng his decree, are already commen to Mantua, and happely beyng excluded, are dryuen to retourne home againe: for the which chaunce he is in dede very ſory, but yet taketh the matter leſſe greifefully, foraſmuche as the thinge hath fortuned throughe another mans faulte, and not his.
            And not longe after the king of Englande in his owne name, and The king of England re ſuſeth the Counſell. the nobles of his Realme, publiſheth a writing. That there is a Counſell called by the Biſhoppe of Rome, which he hath none authoritie to do, and called at ſuche a time, whan mortall warre is betwene themperour, and the Frenche kynge, and the place appointed at Mantua, whither it is neyther ſaufe nor commodious for all men to come. He in dede deſyreth a Chriſtian Counſell wyth all his harte, but vnto the Byſhoppes Counſell, he wyll nether come him ſelfe, nor yet ſende hys Ambaſſadours. For this is alwayes theyr facion, that for theyr own l
                  •
               cre ſake, they wyll in ſuche maner of aſſemblies, oppreſſe Chriſt and his veritie: And for his parte, he will haue nothynge to do with the Biſhoppe of Rome, nor regardeth no more his Decree, than the wrytynge of anye other Byſhoppe: Addynge that Counſelles were wont to be called by the authoritie of the Emperour and kynges, which maner ought to be reſtored, eſpecially at this tyme, whan the Byſhoppe hath ſo many graue perſonages to accuſe him. Yet neuertheleſſe can he neither be reprehended, without the daunger of a mans life, nor accuſed preſently: but in a lawfull Counſel: nether is there any prouiſion made for him or his by ſaufconduicte, and thoughe there were, yet manifeſt daungers ſhoulde let hym, that he coulde not come: for it is no newes to the Biſhoppes to falſefie theyr faith, and to ſprincle, and deſile them ſelues with innocent bloude: And albeit it ſhould be lawfull for others to repaire thither, yet were it no ſaftie for him, whome the Biſhop hath laide waite for, whō he hateth deadly, whom he ſeketh to bring in hatred with other kinges, for none other cauſe aſſuredly, than for that his Tyrranny is exiled out of his realme, and his yerely reuenewes taken away: which thinge in very dede he taketh in moſt euill part, and ſo much the worſe for that he feareth leſt other kinges, warned throughe his example, will hereafter do the like.
            
               
And nowe alſo is the counſell proroged vntyll the kalendes of Nouē
               bre. And yet not the place appointed where it ſhould be holdē: and the faulte is imputed to the Duke of Mantua. Is not this to delude the whole worlde? The Duke of Mantua is ſurely blameles, which wyll not receiue ſo great a multitude into his citie being vnfurnyſhed of a garriſon, but all the blame is to be aſcribed to him alone, who doeth nothing ſyncerely, but worketh al thinges by craft and colluſion. And now in caſe he ſhall aſſigne an other place for the purpoſe, he wyll eyther appointe it in ſome citie of his owne, or of ſome Prince yt is bound to him: For he hath him ſelf ryght ample and large dominions, and in the ſame many goodly cities, which his predeceſſours haue gotten by force and ſubtiltie, & he with as ſmall fidelitie kepeth. But ſeing there is no hope to haue a true coūſel, as men of witte and iudgemēt do ſuppoſe, he thinketh it beſt, that euery Magiſtrate in his own dominions ſeke the reformation of Religion. And if perchaunce the Biſhop ſhould obiecte vnto them, cuſtome, the ſame taketh no place. For euen by the teſtimonie of Cypriane, cuſtome that is grounded vpon no counſell, as he hath ſayde before, but if any man haue an other way that is better, A proper ſaying of Cipriane. he wil not refuſe it. The Emperour remained al this yere in Spaine, but his armie in Flaunders, by the conduict of Counte de Bure, wan by aſſaulte the towne and caſtel of Sanpulle in Artois, in the moneth of Ianuary, and put al to the ſworde, and from thence went and beſeged the citie of Terowen, but yet in vayne. There at the length was a truce taken for ten monethes in thoſe parties only: For in Piedmōte was hote warre neuertheleſſe, and the town of Cherie was taken by Terowē beſeged invain aſſaulte of the imperialles, who made a wonderfull ſlaughter both of ſouldiours and citezens. And whan after the garriſon of Turrin ſuffered great penury, being on euery ſyde beſeged, and ſtopped from virtualles, the Frenche kyng in harueſt tyme, leuied a power and ſente thether his eldeſt ſonne Henry the Daulphin, and Mommorācie, who making waye and entring perforce, releued their preſent famine. In the moneth of October, the armie of kyng Ferdinando, wherin were the horſemen of Saxony, and Meiſſen, of Franckonie, and Auſtriche, the Carinthians, Bohemers and Hongarians, whome the Germaines cal Huſſares, beſeged the towne Exechium vpon the Ryuer of Draue, whiche was kept with a ſtrong garryſon of the Turkes. And Ferdinando his armie deſtroyed. where they tracted the tyme, and were conſtrayned for wante of victualles to leuie the ſiege, in the retire they fel into the lappes of their ennemies, which had layd for them ambuſches in the woodes, and kept all the ſtraytes, that they could no way eſcape. In this diſtreſſe firſte certen Centurions and captaynes of ſouldiours, and the Hongarians fled, after alſo went Cacianer the kinges Lieutenaunt. But the reſte who deteſted the ſhame of running away, exhorting them ſelues vnto

manhode, eſpecially the horſemen of Almaigne, aboade the charge and violent force of their ennemies, but in fine, being vāquiſhed of the greater numbre, were all for the moſte parte ſlayne, and manye of the captaynes taken priſoners, and led to Conſtantinople in to moſte miſerable captiuitie. The fourth Ides of Octobre, the kyng of Englande had The birth of kīg Edward the ſixt. a ſonne borne at Hamptoncourt, Prince Edwarde, by Quene Iane Semer, whome he maried after the death of Quene Anne. In the meane whyle the byſhop of Rome, for ſo muche as truce was taken be twyxt Fraunce and Flaunders, went about to procure the like alſo in al other places, to the entent that through this occaſiō he might worke his purpoſe, and ceaſed not tyll he had brought it to paſſe. The biſhops deuiſe was, as it is reported, that ſetting them at peace, he myght ſtire The Pope hateth the kyng. them vp againſt the kyng of England, whom he hated vnto the death and againſt the Lutherians. About this tyme alſo Chriſtina the Emperours nece by his ſyſter Quene of Denmarke, Ducheſſe of Millan, leauing Italy, retourneth into Flaunders, through Germanye, and there was a treaty of a mariage betwene her and William Duke of Cleaue, but it toke not effect. Than alſo the men of Gelderland began Rebellion in Gelderland. to rebelle againſt their Prince Charles Egmonde, whiche was al his lyfe tyme of the Frenche parte, and therfore ſore hated of the Burgundians: and than as it was ſayd, went about to make his country Frē
               che. He was ſo chaſed out by his owne people euery where in this outragious tumulte, that he had ſcarſly a towne or two lefte hym to flye into. He was alwayes a great mainteiner of the biſhop of Romes doctrine, Pope Paule euil reported and abſtained not from ſore puniſhment. Paule the third in the firſt beginning of his byſhoprike, made his two yonge nephewes Cardinalles, as before is wrytten. For the whiche thing being euyll reported of, he vouched ſaufe to call other worthy men alſo, both in nobilitie and learning to the ſame degre of honour, partly to aſſwage the enuie and diſpleaſure, partely to haue mete champions, whiche were able to defende hym by their learnyng and eloquence, amonges whome was Caſpar Contarene, Reginalde Poole, Iohn Bellie, Frederick Fregoſe, vnto whom within a ſhorte ſpace after, he added moreouer Sadolete, Alexander, and Bembus. And purpoſed alſo Eraſinus, as in a The Pope entended to make Eraſmus Cardinall. certen Epiſtle to a frend of his, Eraſinus himſelfe reporteth. There remayne alſo certen Epiſtles written of Sadolet to Eraſinus, wherin after he hath ſpoken muche of the great good wyl of the byſhop towardes hym, he ſayth that within ſhorte tyme he wyl auaunce him to hyghe dignitie. Contarenus was a noble man & a Senatour of Ueniſe, for his learnyng ryght famous, and beyonde all expectation, whan he had craued nothynge, was ſodaynly promoted to this dignitie.
         
         
            
            
               ✚ The twelfth Booke of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the ſtate of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne in the Empyre of Charles the fyſte.
            
               
                  ❧ The argument of the twelfth Booke
               POpe Paule by his deputes ordeyned a reformation, touching the abuſes of the Churche, as permutations, voiſomes, benefices incompatibles, Cardinalles courtiers, Chaplelaynes, Courtiſanes, Pardoners, and the Colloquies of Eraſmus prohibited. The Proteſtauntes mete at Brunſwycke, whether came the king of Denmarke. Perſecution aryſeth at Pans. The Pope, the Emperour, and the Frenche kyng, mete at Nice, there the kynge kiſſed his foote. A Colledge and a Frenche churche, are erected at Straſborough. The kyng of Englande burneth the bones of Thomas Becket. The Prince Efectour of Brandenburgh, aduertiſeth the Duke of Saxon, of the preparation of the great Turke. A ſecte of Antmomians aryſeth. The conſpiratie of Heldus and the Duke of Brunſwycke, are diſcouered, by the takyng of his Secretary. An aſſembly is holden at Franckeforte: decrees are there made, and appointment mode for a conference to be had for the peace of the Proteſtauntes, whiche to let Duke Henry of Brunſwicke, leui
                  
                     •
                  th an armie. George Duke of Saxon, ennemy of the veritie dieth, Henry his brother ſuccedeth hym. The kyng of Englande hauyng ſet forth a booke againſt the counſell of Uicence, callſeth certen articles to be made concerning Religion. They of Gaunt rebell. The Emperour hauing ſaufeconduicte paſſeth through Fraunce. The Uenetians make peace with the Turke, but certen Senatours had diſcloſed their ſecretes.
            
            
               I Haue ſhewed you before how the Counſels wer deferred til the kalendes of Nouēb. but the ſame alſo was made fruſtrate: Notwithſtandyng the Biſhoppe, to the intent he myght feed men with hope, and ſeme to do ſome thinge, had longe before choſen out certen of his owne ſect amōges the whole numbre, and had ſtreightly commaū
               ded them, that they ſhoulde eſpie oute diligently the faultes of the Clergie, and all flatterie ſet apart declare them vnto him: He releaſed them alſo of their othe, yt they myghte ſpeake their mindes franckly, and had commaunded them to kepe the thinge cloſe & ſecret. There were choſen Caſpar Contarene, Peter Theatrire, Iames Sadolete, and Renalde Poole Cardinals: Fridericke, Archebiſhop of Salerne, Hierome Aleander, Archbiſhop of Brunduſe, Iohn Mathew Biſhoppe Uerone, Gregorie Uenet Abbot, and Thomas, maiſter of the ſacred Palace.
            Theſe in concluſion after conſultation had, comprehended the hole matter in writing, & addreſſinge theyr ſtile vnto him, extolle him with great praiſes for the zeale he hath to the trueth, wherunto the eares of certen Biſhoppes in times paſt haue bene ſtopped, chiefly through the faulte of flatterers, whiche haue aſcribed vnto them ouer muche Authoritie,

what tyme they haue affirmed them clearely to be lordes of althinges, and haue power to do what they liſte: For out of this welſpring, as out of the horſe at Troy, haue ſpronge into the churche ſo many euils, wherwith now it is moſt greuouſly afflicted. Therfore is his wiſedome and vertu great, who conſidereth that the remedie muſt be fetched from thence, from whence the beginning and cauſe of the diſeaſe proceded, who followyng the doctrine of S. Paule, wilbe a miniſter and a ſteward, and no lorde: And for aſmuche as he hath committed this charge vnto them, they willyng to obey him herin, haue accordyng to theyr meane wittes, drawen certen Articles, whiche do concerne him▪ the Biſhoppes, and the Churche. For where he ſuſteineth a The Pope hath a double office. double perſon, and is not onely the Biſhop of the vniuerſall Chriſtian Churche, but alſo the Prince of many Regions and Cities, they onely touche ſuche thinges as concerne the Eccleſiaſticall adminiſtratiō: for the ciuile commen weale, he gouerneth with muche commēdatiō and wiſedom. And fyrſt of al., they ſay, moſt holy father, in like caſe as Ariſtotle commaundeth, that lawes be not raſhly altered, ſo ſemeth it vnto vs alſo, that theccleſiaſticall lawes be in any caſe diligently maynteyned, and not infringed without ſome vrgent cauſe: For there can no greater plage inuade a commenwealth, than what time thauthoritie of lawes is weakened and diſolued, whiche oure predeceſſours would haue to be kept as ſacred and holy. The next pointe is, that the Biſhop of Rome, Chriſtes Uicar, whan, for the Authoritie he hathe of Chriſte, he geueth or graunteth anye thinge, he take no money or rewarde for the ſame: For ſeynge that all theſe thinges are giuen freely, Chriſt will alſo that the ſame be freely diſtributed to others. This foū
               dation once laide, it muſt be foreſene, that you may haue very manye mete miniſters of the churche, to gouerne it for mens ſaluation. In the which numbre the Biſhoppes occupie the chiefe place: but herein is a great abuſe, in that all kinde of men are receiued into this ordre confuſely, and without reſpect, neither commended for their learninge, nor honeſt lyuing, and diuerſe alſo very yong. Wherof arriſe ſundry offences, Wherof 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  meth the cō
                  tempt of the Clergie. and holy thinges come in contempt, and growe oute of reuerence. It ſemeth good vnto vs therfore, that firſt in the citie of Rome, you appoint certen to make a choiſe of ſuche as deſyre to take orders, and after commaunde all Biſhops to do the like euery mā within his owne Dioceſe: And that you ſuffer none to be admitted without the conſent of the ſaid commiſſioners, or Biſhoppe. Let the youth alſo that purpoſe to be made priſtes, haue a Scholemaſter appointed to bring them vp in learnyng and vertuouſe maners. Moreouer in geuing of Benefices and ſpirituall promotions it is farre a miſſe, in ſuche eſpecially as concerne the Cure and charge of ſoules. For here haue they this reſpect on lie, that the Beneficed man may be well prouided for, laying apart all

care of his flocke. Therfore whan ſuche an office is geuen chiefely if it be a Biſhopricke, it muſt be diligently forſene, that they be good men, Who ought to be made Biſhoppes. and learned, which both can and will gouerne the Churches themſelues, as they are bounden by the law. Therfore may not an Italian enioy a benefice in Spayne, or in Englande, nor a Spaniarde or an Engliſhman in Italy.
            Furthermore, there is much fraude vſed, what tyme a man leaueth his benefice, and reſygneth it to another, reſeruing to him ſelf an yerly penſion, many times alſo the whole profytes. For no penſion maye be reteined, vnleſſe it be for the pore, or ſome other godly vſe. Becauſe the fruits are annexed to the benefice, and ought no more to be ſequeſtred from it, than the bodye, from the ſoule. And he that hathe the ſame, is bounden to vſe the commodities therof honeſtly, and ſo much as ſuffiſeth, the reſidew to employ vpon ſuche vſes as is beforeſayd. Notwithſtandyng it ſhalbe lawfull for the Biſhoppe, if the caſe ſo require to impoſe this bondage, that he ſhall pay a certen thing yerely to ſome pore man, eſpecially beyng of the Clergie, wherby he may liue more honeſtly and better at eaſe. Againe they offende exceadingly in permutatiōs for all thinges are done for lucre: And albeit it is not lawefull to gyue Unlawefull to geue benefices by legacye. Benefices by legacie, yet is there a ſubtill way founde by wyttie men to defeate this law, and benefyces are giuen to another, yet ſo, as they haue theyr reentrie agayne into the fame with the whole profytes and miniſtration. And thus commeth it to paſſe, that he beareth the name of a Biſhoppe, which hath no right or Authoritie, and he whiche is indede and poſſeſſion Biſhop, hath not the name at all. And what thing els is this, than to make to him ſelfe an heyre? Biſhoppe Clementrenewed an olde lawe, wherby it was forbydden that the ſonne ſhoulde A priſtes ſon may not inioy his fathers benefice. not enioy his fathers benefice: but yet is this permitted, truly with an euill example: For it can not be denied, but the greateſt part of ſclaunders arryſe of this, that the churche goods are conuerted to priuate vſes. Hitherto many haue loked for a redreſſe of this thynge, but nowe they are in vtter diſpayre, and ſpeake and thinke full euill of vs therefore. An other euill vſe is to geue out vouſons of benefices, as it were in a reuertion, where an other mans death is wiſhed and looked for: And others that better deſerue to haue it, are ſecluded from it, & matter miniſtered of muche ſtrife and contention. What ſhall we ſaye to thoſe benefices, whiche becauſe they coulde not be employed vpon one man alone, were called commonly incompatibles: but herin is tholde diſcipline neglected, and to ſome one alſo is permitted to haue diuerſe Biſhoprikes, which ſemeth vnto vs worthy reformation. Herunto belongeth theſe pluralities, totquotes, and vnitynge of benefices, whan many benefices be ioyned together as the partes and membres of one body. What? is not this to delude the lawes? Finally nowe is this diſeaſe

crept in alſo, that Biſhoprickes are giuen vnto Cardinalles, and that many vnto one: Whiche thynge ſemeth vnto vs in dede a matter of importaunce, and chiefly to be refourmed. For the offices of Cardinals and Biſhoppes be diſtinct, and diuerſe, and agree not in one perſon: for the Cardinalles were ordeined for thys cauſe onely that they ſhould remayne about you (moſt holy father) and neuer departe from your ſyde, and ſhould gouerne the vniuerſall Churche together with you: But vnto Biſhoppes it belongeth to fede theyr flocke committed Why Cardinals were fyrſt made. to them of God, which in dede can not be done, vnleſſe they be preſent with them, as we ſee the Shepardes be with their Shepe.
            Moreouer the thynge it ſelfe doeth harme by that example. For with what face or audacitie, ſhall we redreſſe the faultes of others, which are moſt apparent and beſt ſene in our fellowſhyppe? For they A
                     •
                  arice and concupiſcēce let counſels. may not thinke, that becauſe they are placed in dignitie, they may therfore take more libertie, no, but let them vnderſtande, that they oughte rather to vſe more temperauncie, for becauſe they ought to ſhine before others in life and maners: neyther muſt we folow the Phariſeis, whiche made lawes, and themſelues kept them not, but Chriſt, who floriſhed in word and worke. This libertie alſo is a great let to good Counſels, whan the minde is before poſſeſſed with luſt and Auarice. Beſydes this, diuerſe cardinals frequent the courtes of kynges, to obteyne of them Biſhoprikes, and for this cauſe are ſo addicte vnto them, that they dare vtter nothynge frankely. And woulde God this waye were inhibited. And the Cardinals otherwiſe prouided for, that they might honeſtly fynde them ſelues and theyr families, and that Equalitie were obſerued herin, that the yerely reuenewes of all were egall. Which thinge ſemeth vnto vs not harde to be broughte to paſſe, if we could, forſaking all couetouſnes, folowe the foteſteppes of Chriſt. Whan theſe faultes are redreſſed, and mete miniſters in the Churche appointed, it is chiefly to be loked to, that the Biſhoppes do inhabite amonges theyr owne people, for they be the huſbandes of the Church. But what more heuie or ſorowefull ſighte can be ſhewed, than euerye where to ſe congregations forſaken, and flockes deſtitute of Paſtors, deteyned in the handes of Hirelinges? Therfore oughte they to be extremely puniſſhed, whiche leade their flockes to deſerte, and to be excommunicated or outlawed onely, but alſo to loſe theyr liuinges for euer, vnleſſe they craue pardon of you within a ſhort tyme. For by auncient lawes it was decreed, that a Biſhoppe might not be aboue three wekes abſent from his congregation. We ſe alſo that very many Cardinals are abſent from Rome, and do nothynge that properlye belongeth to their office. We graunt it to be expedient that certeine of them be reſident in theyr owne prouinces. For by them, as by certein braū
               ches and rotes of trees ſtretched out farre and wide in the Chriſtiane

worlde, men are kept in theyr dewtie and dewe obeidience of this our common wealth: but yet were it requiſite, that the moſt parte of them were by you called againe to Rome: For ſo ſhoulde they bothe execute theyr office, and alſo theyr preſence ſhoulde be there bothe honourable and profitable to the courte of Rome. Moreouer in punyſhynge of crimes and vices, there wanteth a greate ſeueritie of diſcipline. For ſuche as haue offended and deſerued puniſhment fynde a meane, wherby to conuey themſelues out of the iuriſdiction of their Biſhoppe, or iudge ordinary, or in caſe they cannot do this, than go they to the maſter of the Pentionaries, and fyne with him for a pece of money. And that do they chiefly, that are of the clergie, which thing doeth offende many. Wherfore we beſeche you in the bloud of Chriſt, wherewith he redemed, waſhed, and ſanctified his churche, that this licentious libertie, may vtterly be aboliſhed. For ſeyng that no common wealth maye longe endure, wherein ſynne is vnpuniſhed, howe muche more ought the ſame to be looked to in the Churche? Emonges the Monckes alſo, Many filthy actes of Monkes. are many abhominable Actes committed, wherefore we thinke good that their Colledges and Couentes be diſſolued, not ſodēly, or through violence, but ſo, that no mā from henceforth be admitted into that order. For ſo ſhall they by litle and litle decay. And afterwardes may honeſter men be placed in theyr houſes. Neuertheleſſe we thinke mete, that all yong Nouices which haue not yet profeſſed religion by a vow ſolempnely made, be preſently remoued from thence. There muſte alſo be diligent hede taken, that they be mete perſons, which are ſet to here confeſſion. And herin ought the Biſhoppe to haue a vigilante eye, but chiefly that there be nothinge done for money. For the ſame free gyfte which we ſpake of before, concerneth not you onelye, but all others in like maner. Moreouer in the houſes of Nunnes, and ſacred Uirgins, namely▪ where they be gouerned of Monkes, are many, and that open crimes committed after a moſt filthy and deteſtable example, therfore muſt the ouerſight of ſuche be takē from the Monkes, & cōmitted vnto others, of whom no perill or ſuſpicion can be had. Now wheras in many places, and chiefly in Italie, certen wicked opinions are diſputed not onely in vniuerſities, but alſo in churches, it deſerueth muche diſpraiſe. Therfore the Biſhoppes muſte be charged, that in ſuche places wheras vniuerſities or Scholes be, they admoniſh the teachers, that they propounde no ſuche thynge herafter, but inſtructe and bringe vp youth in vertue and feare of God, nor that they haue any open diſputations of matter of diuinitie, but within theyr priuate houſes.
            Likewiſe muſte Princes and Magiſtrates be admoniſhed, to giue commaundement to the Printers, that they ſet not forthe all ſortes of bokes, but ſuche onely as be permitted. There is commonly read in al ſcooles a boke of Colloquies, compiled by Eraſmus of Roterdā, wherin

be many thynges, whiche may beate in to younge and tender myndes, vngodlynes, and infecte the frayle and bryckel age. Therfore this and ſuche other lyke bookes muſt be bannyſhed the Scooles. Further more where it is permitted to Monkes, that haue profeſſed Religion The cowle maketh not the Monke. by a vowe, to put of theyr owne wede and putte on other apparell, we thinke it not well done, for the garment is as a badge of the monaſticall vowe. Therfore if they ones forſake theyr cootes, let them be depriued of theyr lyuinges and all eccleſiaſticall function. Alſo ſuche as cary about the relyques of ſaincte Anthony, and other lyke, are in our iudgementes worthy to be vtterly abolyſhed, for through innumerable ſuperſtitions they brynge the ignoraunt people in to erroure, and playnly abuſe them. Oftentymes alſo, they a
                  •
               e permytted to marrye, whiche haue taken holy orders, but this ought to be graunted to no man, but for vrgent cauſes, as whan the whole ſtocke and defence of a Realme is brought to one man. And becauſe the Lutherians permitte all men to marry without reſpecte, therfore muſt we more ſtifly reſyſte the ſame. Nother may they be ſuffered to mary together, which are at the ſeconde degree of bloud or affinitie, vnleſſe it be vpon moſte weyghtie conſiderations, but ſuche as are further of, maye haue more lybertie graunted them, and that to be done without money, excepte perauenture they haue fyrſt had carnall copulation, than is it lawfull to punyſhe them by the purſe, and the money to be employed immediatly to good vſes. But the vyce of Simonie, whiche hath his name of Simony reigneth in the churche. Simon magus reigneth ſo in the churche nowe adayes, that men are nothynge aſhamed: For they offende herein moſte boldely and ſeke to be aſſoyled by geuyng of money, and the benefices thus wyckedly gotten, they enioye this not withſtanding. We doe not denye but youre holynes may pardon theyr offence touchynge the punyſhement which they haue deſerued, but that the occaſion of tranſgreſſynge may be taken awaye, we thynke you had nede to deale more ſtrayghtly, and not to remitte the punyſhement: For what more ſhamefull or deteſtable thyng can be, than this bieng and ſellyng? There muſt be a prouiſo had that the clergie geue not away by legacie any part of the churche goodes, without great cauſes, leſt that to the hinderaūce of the poore, ſome other ſhal haue aboundaunce to ſpende in riot and voluptuouſnes. Alſo licence is graunted for euery man to chouſe a chaplaine where he lyſte, and to haue maſſe in priuate houſes: whiche ought not raſhlye to be graunted, leſt that ſecrete thinges ſhould come in contempt, and eſpecially the chiefeſt ſacrament of all. Iudulgences and pardōs ought not to be geuen ſo commonly, but only ones in the yeare, and that in great cities. Uowes may not lightly be chaunged, nor conuerted to an other worke, vnleſſe it be correſpondent to the vowe.
            Sometyme the laſt wyl of the teſtatours is wont to be chaunged,

whiche happely had bequethed ſome portion of money to Godly vſes, and that chaunceth cōmonly by reaſon of the pouertie of the heires, or wylmakers, but there muſt hede be takē, that vnleſſe the teſtatour fall in pouertie, ſo that the wil can not well be perfourmed, it be not ſuffered. For it is wickednes els to alter the deades wyll. And nowe that we haue declared our mindes in thīges cōcerning the vniuerſal churche, we ſhal adde to the ſame a fewe caſes, whiche properly belong to the byſhop of Rome. Where as this citie & churche of Rome is the mother and maiſtres of all churches, it were comlye and decent, that it Harlottes honoured at Rome. ſhould excelle others in Religion and honeſtie of life. But in the churche of S. Peter, haunte many vnlearned & filthie prieſtes, appareled with ſo vile garmentes, both of their owne & of their churche, that it were alſo vndecēt to the like worne in the priuate houſes of the poreſt ſorte. And in theſe garmentes ſay maſſe, to the great offence of the lokers on. Therfore muſt the Archedeacon, or the Cōmiſſarie be cōmaū
               ded, that firſt in this citie, and after alſo in other places, ſuche filthines be auoyded out of mens ſight. What ſhall we ſaye of the vnchaſte women and ſtrompetes, whiche in apparell and all kynde of ornamentes differ nothing in this citie, frō matrones of honour, rydyng vpon their Mules through the middes of the citie, euen at none dayes accompanied with the familiar frendes and ſeruaūtes of the chiefeſt Cardinalles and ſuche other like. Certenly we haue not ſene ſuche intemperancie, and diſſolute liuing vſed, in ani other citie, but in this which ought in dede to be a ſpectacle and enſample to the whole vniuerſall world. Theſe Courtiſanes are alſo maynteyned to inhabit gorgeous houſes, which doubteles is great ſhame. There be alſo in this citie great contentions and factions: It is your parte to amende all theſe thinges, & it ſhalbe requiſite yt you oppointe certen Cardinalles mete for the purpoſe, to appeaſe all ſtrife, and to reconcile the myndes of the citezens. Laſt of all, the prouiſion of the wydowes & other pore people, properly apperteineth to your charge. And theſe are the thinges moſte holy father, whiche we haue thought mete to be refourmed: And albeit we were vnmete for this charge, yet haue we done that laye in vs, & vttered our cōſcience vprightly, & we are entred into a great hope, yt vnder your gouernment we ſhal ſee the church pure & cleane, & quiet, to the perpetuall & immortall glory of your name. You haue takē to you the name of Paule, wherfore we truſt it will come to paſſe, that after his example, you will embrace the churche with a certen earneſt & ſeruent zeale. God choſe Paule as a ſingular inſtrument, to preache the Goſpell to the Gentyles: ſo truſte we alſo that you are choſen to cal again to light the name of Chriſt, by the gētyles defaced, to remedy publique diſeaſes, to reduce the flock of Chriſte into one ſhepefolde, and tourne away Gods wrath, which hāgeth now ouer vs, dewe for our offēces.

This reformation was in deede conceaued in woordes, but neuer brou
                  •
               ght to effecte, nor publiſhed. Finally the byſhop delayeth the coū
               ſell from the beginninge of Nouembre to the kalendes of May in the next yeare followyng, and aſſigneth the place at Uicentia, a large and a plentifull citie belongyng to the ſtate of Ueniſe, and ſendeth thither three Cardinalles, Campegius, Simonet and Brunduſe, whiche Preſidentes of the coūſel ſhould both begynne the treatie, and receyue them that came. The byſhop would haue had the matter of reformation kept cloſe as is ſayde before, but it was not longe hydde. And what tyme it was brought from Rome, into Germany, Luther anſwered it in the duche tongue, and Iohn Sturmius in the Latine, framynge theyr ſtyle to the commiſſioners 1538 of the reformation. Before Luthers booke was ſette out a picture, whiche playnely declared the argument. For the byſhop was placed in an hyghe ſeate, and certen Cardinalles ſtanding about him, whiche with foxes tayles tied to ſtaues lyke beſomes, ſweepe all thinges vpſyde downe. There was amōges theſe Cardinalles, Nicholas Archebyſhop of Capua, who coulde abyde no reformation. He beinge ſente by Biſhop Paule (as it is crediblie reported) contended ſore that The Cardi▪ of Capua cā abide no reformation. nothynge ſhould be redreſſed at all. And amonges other thinges, he ſayde howe than, the Lutherianes would make their boaſt, that they wer driuē of thē ſo to doe in maner by compulſion. Wherupon the Byſhop and the Cardinalles were cōtenthed to be perſwaded to alter no thing. And yet he him ſelfe, that ſo letted them, is reported to haue ſent a booke priuely to a certen frende of his in Germany, whiche manye men take ſo, as though he would haue both the byſhop and the ſayde commiſſioners lawghed to ſcorne for their labours. Others thynke that the biſhop was made priuie to that booke of reformation, that by ſetting forth of the ſame, there might appeare in hym ſome wyll of amendement of thynges, and yet vnderſtande it by an other meane, as though he hym ſelfe would haue done greater thinges, in caſe he had entended to haue publyſhed any ſuche like matter. And as touchynge the colloquies of Eraſmus, thus it ſtandeth. Amonges manye other workes wherby Eraſmus wonderfully auaunced learning, he made The Colloquie of Eraſmus. alſo a booke of Dialogues for chyldren. And ſeyng it red ſo gredely, he ofte augmented the ſame. And as he was a man of an excellent witte, and of great eloquence, he toke pleaſure to wryte of ſondry argumentes taken out of naturall thynges, and of the lyfe of men. And with a certen maruelous dexteritie, and ſtyle moſte pleaſaunt, he ſetteth forth precpres of Godlye and vertuouſe maners, and noteth with all by the ſame occaſion, olde accuſtomed errours and vices, whereof commeth this complaynte of hym. In the moneth of Februarye, the Frenche Momorāci
                     •
                   made conſtable of Fra
                     •
                  . kyng made Annas Momorauncie, Coneſtable of Fraunce, whiche is the hygheſt degre of honoure there.

This office had bene euer voyde ſynce the death of the Duke of Bourbon. For the kyng beyng greuouſly offended with his treaſon, had beſtowed the ſame vpon no man vntyll this tyme. And the ſame office hath had but bare lucke, in more than one or two, whileſt they abuſing their authoritie, haue ſtyred vp againſt them, either the kynges them ſelues, or the nobilitie. In the meane tyme the Proteſtauntes aſſemble at Brunſwicke about the ende of Marche, to treate of matters cōcernyng their league. And they receyue Chriſtiane kyng of Denmarke in Chriſtiane kinge of Dē
                  marke receiueth the goſpell. to their league. He was ſonne of Frederick, and had receiued the doctrine of the Goſpell, and had appointed Iohn Pomerane, whome he called from Wittenberge, to ſet ordre in his churches, and by him was annoynted and crowned kyng. Iohn alſo Marques of Brandēburg, the brother of Ioachim prince Electour, made meanes by the Duke of Saxon, to be admitted into the league. He therfore was appointed to treate with him vpon certen cōditions at his retourne home, and thā to receiue hym in all their names. The ſame requeſte alſo made Albert Duke of Pruſelande, whome ſyxe yeares before the chamber had outlawed, and that was the chiefeſt cauſe whye he was not receyued in The Duke of Pruſe is outlawed. to this ſocietie. Neuertheleſſe they promyſed hym all their fauour and good wyll. Whan the Duke of Saxony, the Lantgraue and their cō
               ſortes, were goyng to this aſſemblie, Henry Duke of Brunſwycke, denied to geue them ſaufe conduicte, whan they ſhould paſſe through his countrey. For euen than he imagined warre, as hereafter you ſhall heare. In the Duke of Saxons company was Maurice, nephewe to Duke George by his brother Henry, a young man of ſeuentene yeares olde. Henry was of the Proteſtauntes Religion, and therfore the Duke toke his ſonne Maurice, beyng his kynſman, to bring vp. The kyng of Denmarke hym ſelfe came than alſo to Brunſwicke.
            In the nynth booke I ſpake of the perſecution that was in Fraūce for Lutheraniſme. It were long to recite al, but this yeare at the Ides of Apryll, whiche was than nyne dayes before Eaſter, a young gentleman of Tolouſe, learned, about twenty yeares of age, was brent at Paris for eatyng of fleſhe, not alyue in dede, but yet ſo as beinge hanged A gentlemā of Tolouſe burnt at Paris. ryght ouer, he felte the fyre kyndled vnder hym, whiche after the maner there was accompted as a great benefite, for that he in priſon before he was brought forth to execution, feared with the cruell wordes of Morine the iudge threatenyng hym, confeſſed that he had done wyckedlye and agaynſte Religion.
            For the maner of repentaunce is there only, that he ſhal ſuffer with the leſſe torment. But ſuche as abyde conſtant are moſte cruelly tourmented. Two younge men of Flaunders were in the lyke daunger, but admonyſhed therof by a certen Senatour, learned, and of a good iudgement, they eſcaped death by flyeng awaye.
            
               
In the moneth of May the Biſhoppe of Rome goeth to Nice a hauen towne in Ligurie: Thyther alſo came the Emperoure, and the Themperor the frenche king and the pope, meets at Nice. Frenche kynge, at his requeſt chiefly, he with a Nauie out of Spaine, and the kynge by lande, accompanied amonges others, with a power of Almaignes, whiche were lead by Wylliam Countie Furſtēberge. After a longe treatie, albeit they coulde not throughlye agree, yet a trewee was made in the moneth of Iune for ten yeares.
            Here was the lady Margaret the Emperours baſtarde daughter enſured to Octauius Duke of Parma, the Byſhoppes nephew by his ſonne Peter, whom Coſmus duke of Florence woulde fayne haue maried after the death of Alexander Medices.
            The two kynges ſpake not together in this place, albeit the Byſhoppe deſyred it muche: But a fewe dayes after, whan he was departed, they mette at Aegnes Mortes, a Towne of the Prouince, in the mouth of the Riuer of Rhoſne, whither the Emperour retorninge into Spaine, came with his Nauie at the Ides of Iulye. The kinge had ſent to mete him Uelius his Ambaſſadoure, and Galleis to conduicte him. Whan the Emperour came nere vnto Aegnes, the Coneſtable of Fraunce was there readye to entreate hym, that he woulde arriue there with his Nauie: For he ſaied the kynge woulde be there within theſe two houres, and would come into his Barke to him. Whan the Emperour ſawe that the reſt of the Shippes (which were ſcattered the daye before by reaſon of a miſte) were come together, he putteth into the hauen. And not longe after commeth the kynge alſo, and accompanied amonges others, with Anthony Duke of Loraine, and the Cardinall his brother, goeth ſtreight waye to the ſhippes. The Emperour goynge forth as farre as the ladder of the ſhippe to mete him, receaueth him in. But it can not be ſpoken, what embracynges, and gratulations were there.
            Whan they were ſet downe in the Sterne of the Shippe, the nobles aboute the Emperour come and ſalute the kinge lowly and right curteſly. There the Emperour ſent for Andrewe Aurie his Admirall, Prince of Melphite, who forſoke the kynge tenne yeares before, as is Andr
                     •
                  w de Aurie. mentioned in the ſixte Booke, to come and ſalute the kyng: Whan he came, the kynge ſaid, Prince Andrewe, for as muche as you are frende and ſeruiture to the Emperoure, And that it is his pleaſure, that I ſhould ſpeake wyth you: I am contente to gratifie him herein, whom I eſteme as my brother. After whan they had talked familiarlye and frendly together by the ſpace of an howre, the kynge departeth. The next day in the mornyng. As ſone as it was light day, the Emperour gyueth commaundement by a Trompet that no man go a lande: but he himſelfe garded wyth certen of his nobles, ſaileth out to dyne with the kynge.

When he came to lande, the kinge and the quene, and his two ſonnes moſt gently do embrace him, and lead him into the Palace towardes euenynge, themperour aduertiſeth Androwe de Aure, who remained The meting ofthemperor & the kynge. within borde, howe, at the requeſt of the kinge and the queene his ſyſter, he purpoſed to lie in the towne that night. And the next day at after diner to retourne to his Nauie. Whiche he did for this intent, leſte he ſhould, throughe his abſence, conceaue ſome falſe ſuſpicion in hys minde. Wherfore the next day, the Emperour came againe to the ſea, accompanied with the king, and all his nobles: And whan they had drunken together in the Emperours cabben of the ſhippe, they departed great frendes. Which thing once knowen at Paris and other places, they ſonge Tedeum, and made bonefyers. The Biſhop had requeſted them at Nice, whan the peace was concluded, that they woulde go to the counſell Uicentia, and ſende thither ſuche Prelates as they had than in theyr companyes. And alſo to ſende commaundement to the reſt at home, to repayre thither in like maner: But when they had excuſed them ſelues of both thoſe thinges. And the Cardinals, whiche he had ſent thither aduertiſed him that there was great ſolitarineſſe. Againe he deferreth the day of the Counſell till Eaſter folowyng, ſendyng abrode his letters touching the ſame matter, the fourth kalendes of Iuly, whan he was retornyng homewarde, at Genes. At the fyrſt metyng the kyng kiſſed his right foote, as he ſate in his chayre, and after, The Frēche kinge kiſſed the Popes right foote. the reſt of the nobles: Notwithſtandyng there were diuerſe in the kinges traine, that refuſed to do it, although the Coneſtable had warned them before, as Chriſtopher, Duke of Wirtemberge, william coū
               tie Furſtemberge, Germanes, Mareſchall Marchan, a Frencheman, and George Gluchie, the Ambaſſadour of the kynge of Denmarke. At the ſelfe ſame time departed out of this life Charles Ecmonde Duke of Gelders: In the former boke you haue harde, howe he was in a maner turned out of al his poſſeſſions: And brought to this diſtreſſe, whā he laye ſicke, he deuiſed with his coſin, William duke of Cleaue, who after by the conſent of the nobilitie and commons, brought all to hys owne gouernement, not without themperours highe diſpleaſure, as ſhalbe declared in his place. A litle before that dieth alſo Erarde Marchian, Cardinall, Biſhoppe of Liege: no man tourmented more for Religion, The Biſhop of Liege made his graue yet liuing. than he. In the Cathedrall churche of Liege, he had many yeares before builded him a Tombe moſt ſumptuous, and had Maſſe and Dirige ſonge for him yerely, as the Papiſtes are wonte, for the deade. For he iudged theſe merits of prieſtes to be more auaileable to him beyng a liue: wherunto they do attribute the deſerte and rewarde of eternall life. They that knewe the man well, affirme that he did this for a certen oſtentation, for that he was moſt deſyrous of vayne glorie, and toke pleaſure in that pompe and ſolemnitie. This time were the Engliſhe

Bibles in printyng at Paris, which by the kinges commaundement, Engliſh Bibles were printed at Paris. ſhould be had in all churches through out Englande: but after it was knowen, it was prohibited, and the Printer was in daunger. In Fraunce they haue not commonlye the Scripture in the vulgare tongue: neither doth it want ſuſpicion, if any man chaunce to read the Newe Teſtament, or ſuche a like thinge in Frenche: neyther is is lawfull for any to ſtudye the Scripture, but ſuch as profeſſe Diuinite: but the common ſort of men know nothing at all, and the towne wiues, whan they go to here Maſſe, cary with them bokes of Latin prayers, which they mūble vp after a ſorte, knowing not what they ſaye at all, and are perſwaded, that the ſame is to God more acceptable, than if they ſhould praie in their mother tonge. This is a practiſe of the prieſtes The ignoraunce of the people is gainefull to prieſtes. vnto whom the ignoraunce of others is gainefull.
            The Biſhoppe retourning home in the begynnyng of Auguſt, was receiued into the citie of Rome, with a merueilous pompe and triumphe. And all the ſtretes and waies, beyng hanged and ſpired with rich and coſtly carpets, and poſies written in euery place, wherin they extolled him wonderfully, for reſtoryng peace vnto the world, and recō
               ciling the Princes.
            This yeare at Strauſeborough was erected a Colledge, or a grā
               mer A colledge erected at Strauſ
                     •
                  . Scoole for youth, by the meanes chieflye of Iames Sturnne, a principall Senator: whiche in ſhorte time, thoroughe the diligence of learned men ſo floriſhed, that there repared thither not onely from the furtheſt partes of Germany, but alſo out of foreine nations, the maner of teaching the youth, and diuiding them into fourmes, and the whole order was deuiſed by Iohn Sturmie, whiche he fyrſt exhibited to the Senate, and afterwardes in a booke put forth, he declareth it more at large. And wheras many were fayne to flie for Religion and conſciēce ſake, out of Fraunce and Flaunders, and the Senate appointed them a churche, wherof Iohn Caluine was fyrſte for certeine yeres the ſuperintendent, Iohn Caluin. Peter Brulie. and after him Peter Brulie of whoſe ende I wil ſpeake herafter. But in Englande Thomas of Canturbury, was of long time had in great reuerence: And his body was ſhryned in ſiluer, and hanged rounde about with coſtly Iewelles of Gold and precious ſtones, beyonde meaſure. And amonges others, there was one riche Iewell, called the Regal of Fraunce. This yeare did king Henry take him out of his ſhrine, and burne his Reliques. This Thomas, ſurnamed Becket, Thomas Becket. was in time paſt Archebiſhop of Canturbury. And where he ſtode ſtyffe in defending the liberties of the Clergie, he fell into the diſpleaſure of the kyng of Englande Henry the ſeconde of that name, & commaunded into exile, he fledde to the Biſhoppe of Rome Alexander the thyrde, who at that tyme, for themnitie of themperour Friderick Barbarouſſe, was in Fraunce. At the length Thomas Becket by the interceſſion

of him, and of Lewes the vij. kinge of Fraunce, was reconciled, and retourned home, the ſeuenth yere of his exile. And when afterwarde he troubled certen Biſhoppes that toke the kynges parte, and did excōmunicate them, the kyng beyng againe offended, ſaid he was in a miſerable eſtate, that could not liue in quiet for one prieſt: he lamē
               ted alſo that there was no man aboute him, that woulde deliuer him from ſuche diſquietnes: whiche wordes ſo ticled many, that, knowing it ſhould be no diſpleaſure to the kinge, they went to Cantorbury, and ſlewe Thomas. The kynge pretended a great ſorowe: And ſendynge Ambaſſadors to Rome to make his purgation, in fyne entreated the Biſhoppe to ſende inquiſitours into England: to enquire and examine the matter. And what time the Biſhoppe at the laſte had ſente two Cardinals, and the murther could not be ſearched out, the kyng pourgeth him ſelfe by an othe: And becauſe of the former hatred, and wordes ſpoken, there was ſome ſuſpecion and fault in him, in concluſion, he was reconciled vpon this condicion, that after the yeares he ſhuld go into Syria, and warre vpon the Saracenes. This murther was committed in the yeare of mans ſaluation .M.C.lxxi. And not longe after, the memoriall of Thomas waxed famous, throughe miracles, which the Monkes of Canturbury ſayd he wrought: Whereof when the Biſhoppe of Rome was aduertiſed by the Legates, that came out of Englande, he Canoniſed him, and made him a ſaint.
            What time the metyng was at Nice, Ioachim Marques of Brandenburge, prince Electour, the ſonne of Ioachin, in the beginninge of Iune, ſent his Ambaſſador, Euſtace Schlebie to the Duke of Saxon with theſe inſtructions: howe Sigiſmunde kinge of Pole, and Iohn Wayuode kynge of Hungary, had aduertiſed hym, that the Turkes made great preparation to inuade Hungary, and ſo fortifiyng Buda, to make an incurſion into Germanye: And this ſame did themperour Newes of the Turkes approche. of Turkes ſignifie vnto Uayuode: And where it was once inioyned, his father in an open aſſemblie, that whan he had any intelligence of Turkiſhe matters, he ſhould aduertiſe the other ſtates therof, therfore can not he alſo, but performe this dewtie to the common wealth, and is not a litle moued at theſe newes, for the chaunce and calamitie of his natife countrey: For this therfore and for other cauſes he went to kyng Ferdinando into Luſatia: But he had both before his comming and when he was there alſo, receiued letters and meſſagers touching the ſame thinges: Wherfore in caſe he ſhould not be reſiſted, there is no doubt but they, which lie nexte him ſhould ſe ſhortly in theyr countrey that moſt cruell enemie: For all the way from Buda vntill theyr frontiers, is there nother Caſtell nor Towne fortified, able to hold out ſuch a power, no mountaines nor ſtreight paſſages to ſtoppe his carriage, ſauing onely the citie of Uratiſlauie, and the towne of Lignice: For as

for of the ſituation of Morauie and Sileſie, and howe champion and fruietfull a countrey it is, he knoweth well enough, and nedeth no rehearſall. And albeit he hath promyſed ayde to kynge Ferdinando, for the common daunger, yet he ſeeth howe lytle ſuche maner of ayde is able to helpe, for the greatnes of the caſe requyreth al the ayde and power of the whole Empyre. But for as muche as the ſame haplye can not be obtayned without a generall aſſemblye, and vnleſſe ail Germany be quieted. And agayne the preſent daunger wyll permitte no long delaye, therfore hath he in talke moued the kyng that he woulde wholy diſpoſe him ſelfe vnto this thynge onlye, that a fyrme and ſure peace myght be concluded. Wherunto kyng Ferdinando had anſwered ryght honorably, and promyſed his endeuour, and to further the cauſe to the Emperour, ſo that he might vnderſtande what he and his league frendes, furthermore demaunded. And ſeing it ſtandeth thus, he deſyreth hym to geue his mynde hereunto, and open vnto hym vnfaynedly, ſuche conditions of peace as he thynketh mete to be intreated of: And he hym ſelfe wyll deuyſe and that in his owne name, that Ferdinando ſhall preferre them to the Emperour, in ſuche ſorte as he truſteth that the treatie ſhalbe commodious to the vniuerſall worlde. And nowe alſo maye the Turkes violence more eaſelye be reſiſted, for as muche as Iohn Uayuode is reconcyled to kynge Ferdinando, as the kynge hym ſelfe tolde hym in counſel, for he would not haue it bruted abroad, leſte it ſhould come to the Turkes care. Certen yeares paſt and hetherto hath a great part of Hongary bene plucked awaye from Chriſtendome through ciuile warres, but nowe their myndes are appeaſed and all diſpleaſure paſte, there is a goodlye occaſion offered of well doynge: Wherfore eftſones he beſecheth hym, that he would help the cauſe of the common wealth.
            This Marques had maried the daughter of Sigiſmunde kyng of Poole, whiche was nece to Iohn Uayuode by his ſyſters ſyde, and hereof came that frendſhyp and familiaritie betwyxt them. He had alſo than receyued the Religion of Saxony, and ſet forth a booke of the The Marquſes of 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  denburge of the Proteſtantes Religion. ſame, but kepte hym out of the league, and was otherwyſe wholy addicted to the Emperour and kynge Ferdinando, and reteyned certen ceremonies, and ſought to quiet offences.
            The Duke of Saxony ſignifieth the whole matter by his letters to the Lantgraue. And the twelfth daye of Iune after, they wryte bothe to this Marques of Brandenburg on this wyſe. Albeit the matter is of muche importaunce, and altogether ſuche as they oughte to make their fellowes priuie to, yet doe they ſee what diſcommoditie myghte come thorowe delaye, eſpecially conſideryng how the Turke flacketh nothyng of his fierſenes, and they haue alſo conſulted ouerlonge, how to quiet Germany and to withſtande hym with all their powers, for

where he aduertiſed them by his Ambaſſadours, that it were nedefull to reſiſte that moſte cruell ennemie, truthe it is and they confeſſe, that the common wealth requyred no leſſe. But they ſtād in that caſe, that they had chiefly nede of ſuche a peace as were honourable, trewe, ſyrme, and nothyng doubtfull. For in caſe they ſhould ſpende theyr treaſure on the Turkyſhe warre, & the meane whyle, haue vnquiet neighbours at home, he ſeeth him ſelfe howe vnmete and hurtefull the ſame would be vnto them. They for their parte are verye deſyrous of peace, whiche if they can not obtayne, and therfore in doubtfull matters, diminiſhe no parte of their power, and in the meane time the cōmon wealth ſuſtayne any damage, there may no blame therof be imputed to them, but all together vnto thoſe that refuſe the conditions of peace. Moreouer they ſuppoſe, that it ſhould concerne the kinge Ferdinādo, and others that border on the Turkes, that relatiō were made of theſe thinges vnto all the ſtates: Where alſo hetherto there is no counſel imperiall called, it is not for the profite of the commō wealth. For though perchaunce the time wil not permitte that publique ayde ſhould be decreed ſodaynly, and nede requyreth to craue ayde of ſome men. Yet is the Turke of ſuche power, that he is able to continew in warres many yeares: And wil not ceaſe tyl eyther he hath obteyned his pourpoſe, or hauing an ouerthrow be cōſtrayned to breake vp warres for a time. Wherfore they thinke an aſſemblie of the Empyre, to be very expediēt, that both the peace of Germany therein myght be eſtabliſhed, and cō
               ſultation had conſerning the Turkiſhe warre. And this later to be of ſo great force, that albeit al thinges were quiet in Germany, yet neuer theleſſe a common aſſembly to be nedefull. Nor it ſkileth not greatly, if perchaunce kyng Ferdinādo, can not well be there in the Emperours name, ſo that Ambaſſadours be ſent with full commiſſion and authoritie. Whiche thing if he can bring to paſſe, the ſame ſhalbe cōmodious for the Emperour, and for all Germany. Howe be it leſte they ſhoulde in any point fayle the common wealth, or hinder the cōmoditie there. of, they woulde haue in a readynes ſuche ayde, as they for their partes are acuſtomed and oughte to finde, to be alwayes readye to ſerue, whan nede ſhall require: Neyther doubte they, but theyr fellowes wil do the ſame, but vnder this condition, that kyng Ferdinando immediatly obtayne for them of the Emperour a ſure and vndoubted peace: And the whiche all other Princes of the Empyre, that be of the Byſſhoppes Religion, ſhall ratifie. That done, and the ſuites and actions of the chamber ſet apart, their ayde ſhalbe ſtreight wayes ready. But in caſe the Emperour by reaſon of his abſence, can not brynge all the Prynces heeeunto in time, at the leſte he perſwade theſe to be of his opinion, William & Lewis, Dukes of Bauier, George Duke of Saxony, the Archebyſhop of Mentz, Collon and Treuers, alſo the Biſhops

of Saliſburge, Maydenburge, Breme, Bamberge, Wyrtenburge, Munſter, Auſpurge and Aeſlet. But in caſe they can not be perſwaded, that then the Emperour and kyng Ferdinando doe confirme the ſame peace, for them ſelues and for all their ſubiectes, and make promyſe do their endeuours that other Prynces alſo maye geue theyr aſſente to the ſame: whiche in caſe they ſhall refuſe to doe, yet ſhall they neuer ſwarue from this conuenant. And ſo ſhortly as may be, for this and other cauſes, ſhall call an aſſemblie of the Empire. If this be done they truſte that their league frendes alſo wyll be ready to ſende theyr ayde, lyke as they themſelues are determined to doe, in caſe their league frendes be agreable to the ſame, and that as well they maye enioye the benefyte of this peace, whiche came into their league after the compoſition of Norinberge, as ſuche as ſhal repare vnto them hereafter. Moreouer that the ſame may extende, not only to the Princes of the Empyre, but alſo to the kyng of Denmarke. And to the entent it may well appere howe deſirous they be of peace, for as muche as the ſtate of the Empyre can not be ſo ſoone aſſembled, therefore wyll they appointe an aſſemblie of their company at Iſenacke, againſt the. xxiiij of Iuly, to be there with moſte ample commiſſion. Wherfore it were well done, if he could brynge it to paſſe, that the Emperour and kyng Ferdinando, he hym ſelfe alſo and the Palſgraue, ſent their Ambaſſadours thither. Whan they had aunſwered on this wyſe, they diſpatched their letters vnto their league frendes requyringe them to be at that daye at Iſeuacke, a towne of Turingie. The Marques had cauſed his Ambaſſadour to ſhewe them, that in caſe they were ſo content, he wold deuyſe that the Palſgraue who tēdred alſo the cōmon welth ſhould trauayle in the ſame matter. With the letters to the Marques of Brandenburge, they ſent alſo the whole treaty, that they had with Heldus the Emperours Ambaſſadour, that he myght clerely perceiue the whole matter, whiche thynges receyued, the Marques intrateth kyng Ferdinando, that he would immediatly preferre this matter to the Emperoure, to fore he retourned out of Italy, into Spayne: After he requireth the Palſgraue, to take this matter in hāde together with hym, he maketh aunſwere, that albeit the Proteſtauntes had not ſpoken to hym herein, yet woulde he not refuſe, but his men were gone, whiche were wonte to ſerue hym in the ſame affayres: wherfore he wylleth hym to ſende his counſellours all vnder one, and if the matter ſhould afterwardes requyre his preſence, he would not fayle. Whan the daye came, the Marques by his Ambaſſadours declared this firſt to the Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue, and after to all the reſt, at Iſenacke, for the Prynces them ſelues were not preſent. And he wylled them to deſyre the Palſgraue to take this trauayle and payne, and that an other daye myght be appoynted, wherin to mete agayne: In

the meane whyle the matter may be brought to paſſe with the Emperour, that his conſent alſo and aucthoritie may be had. Moreouer he requeſted them, that they woulde not be ouer ſtreight laſed, but to graunt to ſo muche as they myght with a ſaufe conſcience. For kynge Ferdinando wyll ſlacke no maner of dilygence, neyther doubteth he but that the Emperour is alſo greatly inclined to peace.
            Hereunto the Proteſtauntes aunſwere from Iſenacke the fifte day of Auguſte, that to make a concorde they are very deſirous, ſo that the Emperours wyl and cōmaundement be accordingly. Further though they thinke it not nedefull for them to intreate the Palſgraue, whiche is of him ſelfe well diſpoſed, and if the Emperour cōmaunde hym, wil not refuſe it, yet wyll they wryte vnto him, and whan the Emperours pleaſure ſhalbe knowen, by the aduiſe of him and the Palſgraue, they wyll aſſigne a daye, wherin they ſhall mete all to treate of the forſayd matter. In this aſſemblie was receyued into their league the lady Elizabeth, The lady Elizabeth ſiſter to the Lantgraue is receiued in to the league of Proteſt. the Lantgraues ſyſter, a wydowe. The cities alſo of Halles & Hailbrune, made ſute to be admitted by the mediation of them of Auſpurge, and Ulmes. Here were heard alſo euery mās complaintes, but eſpecially the cauſe of the Goflarians, whome Henry Duke of Brunſwycke had ſore oppreſſed. Wherfore, they agreed to requeſte the Marques, that he woulde obteyne of the Emperour, through the meanes of kyng Ferdinando a precept, wherby the Duke of Brunſwicke may be compelled to aunſwere the matter: For otherwyſe, the ſtate and cō
               dition of the Goflariens is ſo miſerable that they can not forſake them in that diſtreſſe. Hitherto was alſo newes brought of the peace concluded betwene the Emperour and the Frenche kyng. And the aſſemblie brake vp the nynth daye of Auguſte.
            This yeare ſprang vp a ſecte of them, whiche are called Antinomians. The fecte of Antinomiās Theſe doe affirme that repentaunce is not to be taught by the ten commaundementes, and impugne thoſe, whiche teache that the Goſpell is not to be preached, but vnto the myndes that are firſte ſhaken and broken through the declaration of the lawe: But they determyne that what ſoeuer the mans lyfe be, were it neuer ſo ſinfull, yet is he iuſtified if he beleue only the promyſes of the Goſpell. The chiefe of them was Iohn Iſlebie, ſurnamed Agricola. But Luther doth plainly confute theſe thynges, and proueth that the lawe was not geuen, to Iohn Iſleby the intent it ſhould iuſtifie, but to declare ſynne, and to feare the conſcience, and therfore ought fyrſte of all to be taught, and than the Goſpell, whiche ſheweth vnto vs the ſonne of God, the mediatour and aduocate of mankynde. In fyne Iſlebie admoniſhed by Luther priuatly, and by the conference of the ſcriptures better inſtructed, was perſwaded to be of Luthers opinion, and afterwarde by open wryting witneſſed the ſame, confeſſing his errour.
            
               
In the laſte booke you haue heard muche ſpeaking of Heldus, whom the Emperour ſent Ambaſſadour into Germany. He receiuing of the Proteſtauntes not ſuche aunſwere as he woulde, goeth to the moſte parte of all the Princes, and deuiſing a ſclaunder, as though the Proteſtauntes could abyde no right nor hearing of matters, and had refuſed moſte reaſonable conditions of peace by hym propounded, began to moue them to a league, wherof he proteſted bothe the Emperoure and kynge Ferdinando to be aucthours, and reſted not before he had brought it to paſſe with ſome. Thoſe were the Archebyſhops of Mētz and Saliſburge, William and Lewys, Dukes of Bauier, George A lege of the Papiſtes againſt the Proteſtātes Duke of Saoxony, Ericke and Henry Dukes of Brunſwicke. And for this matter they aſſembled at Norinberge, & the league was made vnder this title, that in caſe any man were iniuried or moleſted, for the byſhops Religion whiche they call the olde, the others ſhoulde aſſiſte him with their aide. Therfore thei called it holy, as ordeined for Gods glory and defence of the churche,. It is decreed for eleuen yeares.
            The Frenche kyng returnyng from Nice, came to a cōmunication with Marie the Emperours ſyſter, Regent of Flaunders, at Compegue a towne of the Swycers. Some men thought that all her dryfte was, that by the occaſion of this newe made peace, and frendlye metynge at Aeguesmortes, ſhe myght turne awaye the kynges mynde, from the Duke of Cleaue, who poſſeſſed Gelderlande. And by the opinion of the kynges amitie, myght make hym ſore afrayde. Ye haue hearde much of the iudgement of the Imperiall chamber. They being euermore lyke them ſelues, and nothyng relentynge of their wonted rygour, had lately outlawed the citie of Myndin for a ſute betwyxte The citie of Mynden ou
                     •
                   lawed. them and the clergie of their citie, whiche thynge ones knowen, the Duke of Saxony, and the Lantgraue in their own names and their league frendes, publyſhe a wrytynge at the Ides of Nouembre: wher in they recite in ordre what trouble they haue had with the chamber theſe certen yeares paſte. And becauſe they can neuer be quiet, and vpon moſte iuſte cauſes haue bene refuſed. And yet neuertheleſſe procedyng obſtinatlye, haue nowe preſcrybed theyr fellowes, the citezens of Myndyn, they doe admonyſhe and praye all Prynces and ſtates, that they would repute the ſentence geuen as vniuſte, and not ſuffer them ſelues to be ſtyred vp to any violence. For if it were other wyſe, and that the ſentence were put in execution, they would not ſure neglecte the iniuries of their confederatours. In the meane tyme the Emperour beyng moued by kyng Ferdinando, as before is ſayde, ſent his letters in to Germany, declarynge his good wyll towardes the common wealth. And howe muche he deſyred to appeaſe thys controuerſie in Religion. And becauſe a fewe dayes paſte he receyued aduertyſement, that the Proteſtauntes alſo dyd not refuſe the concondicions

of Peace, and required a treatie, ſo that his conſente were therto, therfore he vnto whome nothynge is lieuer than the publique tranquilitie, doeth both allowe this waye, and maketh his deputes, the Archebyſhop of Londe, and Matthie Helde, or one of them, and geueth them ful aucthoritie by theſe preſentes, that they together with the counſellers of his brother kyng Ferdinando, and the other Prynces that be interceſſours, may treate and determyne the matter: what ſoeuer they ſhall doe, he wyll ratifie. Theſe letters were dated at Toledo the .xxv. daye of Nouembre. And whan they were afterwardes brought into Germany, the twelfth daye of February, was aſſigned at the whiche daye all ſhoulde mete at Franckefurte.
            I tolde you a litle before of a league made at Norinberge. The chief ryngeleaders hereof were Lewis Duke of Bauier, and Henry Duke The Duke of Brunſwick deſyrous of war of Brunſwycke, whiche was wholy addicted to diſturbe the common quiet. And did his endeuour to ſtyre vp warre agaynſte the Proteſtauntes. And where he had about the ſame tyme receyued letters from the Archebyſhop of Mentz, on the morowe after Chriſtmas day he aunſwereth at fewe wordes committing the reſte in credite to hys Secretary Stephen Faber whome he ſente withall.
            And the laſt daye ſaue one of December, it chaunced not farre from the towne of Caſſel, that the Lantgraue going a hunting, mette with him, and an other yonge man of the Archebyſhop of Mentz, that had brought the letters. There the Lantgraue after the Almaigne facion, demaunded of the younge man, which firſte mette hym, what he was? I am ſayeth he, ſeruaunt to the Prynce Electour of Brandenburge: what is the other? And he lykewyſe whan Stephen nowe came nere hym, he aſketh of hym ſelfe, what he was? He aunſwered as the other had done, he enquireth whether he was goyng? He ſayde to Spyres: howe doeth the Prynce? in health. After beyng demaunded, whether he woulde iuſtifie theſe thynges to be trewe? He ſayde yea that he woulde, and ſo was dimiſſed. Afterwarde whan he was gone a little waye, one of the Lantgraues ſeruauntes tolde, howe that it was the Duke of Brunſwickes Secretary, whiche after that an other had alſo affirmed that knewe hym, the Lantgraue ſent to fetche them back to Caſſelle, tyll he came from huntynge hym ſelfe. In the meane tyme The Lantgraue intercepteth the Dukes letters. Stephen Faber, whyleſt he was in the Stowffe, plucketh out of his boſome a lether bagge, and takynge out of it certen letters, haſteth out of the doers: one of the houſhold ſeruauntes perceiued it, and gaue notice to the Stewarde, who as it chaunced was there preſent, lookynge downe out of the ſtowffe wyndowe into the courte vnderneth wherfore being aſked for his letters, he draweth thē out of his boſom: The Steward receiueth thē into his cuſtody, and delyuered them to

the Lātgraue, whan he came from hunting. Thoſe were two letters wherof the one was directed to the Archebyſhop of Mentz, the other to Matthie Helde. And with al were certen tables of remembraunce, or inſtructions of thinges he had incredite. And ſeing the matter was of it ſelfe very ſuſpicious, and the notes within the table increaſed the ſuſpition more, the Lantgraue openeth them both. The ſomme of the Archebyſhoppes letters was this: That he had receyued his letters, and reioſeth muche, that he hath hym in contynuall remembraunce, and that he is all his to commaunde, and howe he hath ſent vnto him Stephen his Secretary, a truſtye man, by whome he maye vnderſtande the whole matter, and what newes was brought hym out of Bauier: Unto whome he deſyreth hym to geue credit. After he wyſheth well to hym and theyr adherentes, but his aduerſaries he commendeth to Sathan, of the ſame effecte he had wrytten alſo to Heldus, howe he had ſent agayne Stephen with inſtructions, he deſyreth to heare hym gently, and gyue no leſſe credite to hym, than if he ſpake preſently to hym in perſone, ſo longe as he lyueth, he wyll take the Emperours parte, howe ſo euer the matter falleth out. Neyther doubteth he but the Emperour wyll deuyſe for all thynges well enough. In the remembraunce of the Archebyſhop was this. How the Lantgraue was vnquiet, and could take no ſlepe nor reſte, and was ſo geuen to huntynge, that he was almoſte madde: Wherby the thing myght the better be done. And ſome parte of it was already brought to paſſe: And what the Lantgraue goeth aboute, is not vnknowen to to the Dukes of Bauier, and is moſte certen; that he wil make warre againſte the one of them two: Wherfore he muſte perſwade the fellowes of his college to come into the league. He ſhall doe very well alſo to addicte him ſelfe wholy vnto this league, and haue reſpect to them, of whome beynge ones forſaken, he receyued muche diſpleaſure. Howe the Duke of Bauier and he intende to talke together, and by conferryng their counſelles to determine ſome thyng. Moreouer how the ſtate of Sweuia are moued vnto this league, and the matter brought almoſte to an ende.
            The inſtructions to Heldus were theſe. How his truſte is, that the Emperour wyl come ſhortly out of Spayne, and that if he perſeuer cō
               ſtante in his purpoſe all thynges ſhall procede well. For than he truſteth that other kynges alſo, whiche as yet haue not vttered them ſelues, wyll fauour the ſame waye. And if all the confederatours be of the ſame mynde and wylle that he is of, there ſhall wante nothynge. But howe ſoeuer others vſe them ſelues, he wyll euer remayne conſtant, and obedient to the Emperour. Howe he thynketh it good that the chamber cōmaunde the Lantgraue, to laye aparte his weapōs, in the meane whyle wyll he and the Duke of Bauier, be in a readines:

And if he do not obeye, that than the chamber may cōmaunde the Duke of Bauier and him to forſee that the cōmon wealth ſuſteine no dā
               mage, & inioyne other Prynces alſo to geue their aſſiſtaunce after the forme of the league. What time theſe thinges were thus come to light becauſe there was great daunger towarde, and the occaſion of warre was ſought of them, the Lātgraue furthwith wrote his letters to his father in lawe Duke George, and declaringe the whole matter as it ſtoode, ſheweth how he hath great wrong offered him, & how he maketh no preparation for warre. About the ſame time, Matthias Helbus, rode in great poſt haſte through Fraūce into Spayne to the Emperour. Afterwardes the Lantgraue wrote to king Ferdinando, and to his ſyſter Mary, Regent of Flaunders, to the Princes Electours, & the Dukes of Bauier, after the ſame ſorte as he did to Duke George 1539. his father in lawe, and maketh his purgation. Whan the Duke of Brūſwicke perceiued that the matter was diſcloſed and heard of the Lantgraues letters, he aunſwereth, that he hath not ſuſteined wrong at his handes only, whiche nowe hath taken his Secretary, but alſo by the Duke of Saxon the laſt yeare, whan by the commaundement of kyng Ferdinando, in the Emperours name, he went to Duke George of Saxony, and againe comming home from Norinberge, what tyme the league was made, than did he laye wayte for him. Unto this the Duke of Saxon aunſwereth. For as muche as he denied him and his fellowes ſaufeconduicte, whan they went to brunſwicke, againſt the lawe and cuſtome of the Empyre, he coulde thinke none otherwyſe of hym, but to be his ennemye: he had dyuerſe tymes before gone with two or thre with hym, diſguyſed in ſeruauntes apparell, that he ſhould not be knowen through his and his brothers countrey priuely, neyther did he whiche knewe this well enough, empeche or lette him. But after he would haue the paſſage ſtopped for hym and his league frendes, why ſhould he thinke to haue more libertie with other men, than he wyl graunt vnto them? Wherfore vpon this occaſion they began to write one againſt an other, which not long after ended in moſt ſharpe and bitter inuectiues: hauing in dede the beginning of the Duke Inuectiues vnmete for Princes. of Brunſwicke, whiche after a rare example amonges Princes let paſſe no kynde of raylyng and opprobrious wordes, as bokes ſet forth in prynte doe declare. Whyleſt theſe thynges are a workynge, dieth Iohn Duke of Cleaue, leauyng William his ſonne and heyre, whome The death of Iohn Duke of Cleaue Conradus Hereſbachius, from his chyldhode had inſtructed in good letters and maners. What tyme they were come to Franckefurte, in the moneth of Februarye, accordyng to the appoyntment. After much ſondrye and ſharpe debatynge of the matter, they concluded at the laſt the nyntene daye of Apryll vpon theſe conditions.
            The Emperour, to the intent a cōmunication of learned mē may be

had cōcerning religion, graunteth to the cōfederatours of the doctrine profeſſed at Auſpurge, whiche are nowe in that numbre, truce for .xv. monethes, and commaundeth, that in this meane tyme they be not moleſted in any caſe concernyng Religion. The peace of Norinberge and the Emperours decree at Regenſpurge, are alſo for this tyme ratified. And if duryng the tyme of this truce, they can not fully agree in Religion, yet ſhall that peace be of force, vntyll the nexte aſſemblie of the Empyre. And if perchaunce there be an aſſemblie before the truce be expyred, yet neuertheleſſe that peace ſhall take place, vntyll the other aſſemblye. In the meane whyle, during the tyme of this truce the Emperour doeth ſuſpende all ſuites and actions in the lawe commenced againſte the Proteſtauntes, and alſo the outlawyng of the Cytie of Myndin, and if anye thynge be otherwyſe done, he commaundeth it to be fruſtrate. Where it is wonte to be obiected vnto them, as though for the profeſſion of this Religion, they myght not conſiſte in iudgement, the ſame ſhall take place no longer, but they ſhall enioye the benefite of the lawe without exception.
            Agayne the Proteſtauntes ſhall moleſte no man, and durynge this truce, ſhall take none in theyr league, yet ſo as no man ſuſteyne anye wronge in the quarell of their Religion: The Emperour ſhall alſo forſee that no man be receyued more ouer in to the contrary league. The Proteſtauntes ſhall permytte the clergie to enioye all thoſe yearelye profites whiche they haue at this daye.
            By the conſent of the Emperour, a daye ſhall be aſſigned at the kalendes of Auguſte, at the whiche daye ſhould mete at Norinberge the Cathoqliues and Proteſtaūtes, ſuch as were good men and deſirous of peace, and not contentions or frowarde. Thoſe ſhal chouſe out a certen numbre of diuines, whiche quietly and frendly may conferre of religion: with them alſo ſhalbe ioyned others, that profeſſe not diuinitie, but yet experte men and ſobre. Moreouer, the Emperour and kynge Ferdinando if they lyſte, maye haue their deputes in this conference: and what ſoeuer ſhall there be agreed vpon by conſent of eyther partie ſhalbe ſignified to the ſtates yt be abſent, who approuing the ſame, the Emperours Ambaſſadour alſo ſhal ratifie it, or els the Emperour him ſelf in the next aſſēblie of thempire, after he ſhal haue cōfirmed, ſhal cō
               maund to be kept inuiolate. Both parties ſhal lay away ye preparatiōs vnto war, & he yt ſhal ſeme to go about any thīg, ſhalbe enforced to ſhew the cauſe why he doeth it, yet ſo as no mā be inhibited to kepe a defēce neceſſary, in al other thīgs, the law of thēpire ſhalbe of both parties obſerued. In this truce are cōprehēded neither Anabaptiſts, nor others yt followe a doctrine cōtrary to the cōfeſſiō of Auſpurg. The proteſtātes ſhal haue in a redines ayde for the Turckiſh warre, yt ther be no delay: And whan the Princes Electours and other principall ſtates, ſhall at

the Emperours commaundement ſende their deputes to Woormes, at the .xviij. daye of May, the Proteſtaūtes ſhall ſende theirs alſo, that they may conſulte of ſoden ayde againſt the Turke, and what ſomeuer there ſhalbe agreed vpon by the conſent of the more parte, to the ſame ſhall they alſo ſubſcribe. And if the Turke ſhall moue warre duryng the tyme of the truce, they ſhall reſiſte hym with the reſte. And theſe thynges to be ratified, in caſe the Emperour within ſyre months ſhall allowe the ſame, begynning from the kalendes of May. And in the meane tyme, that agrement concerning the truce, and not to augmente the league, ſhalbe of force. And in caſe the Emperour do not declare his mynde within the ſame tyme, 
                  •
               yet ſhall the peace of Norinberge, be in as full ſtrength and vertue hereafter as it was before. The Emperours depute here was Iohn Archebyſhop of Londe, for Heldus was gone into Spayne as before is ſayde. And kyng Ferdinando alſo ſent thether his Ambaſſadours. The Proteſtauntes were there many, and the Duke of Saxon him ſelfe and the Lantgraue, whiche brought with them certen diuines. The Palſgraue and the Marques of Brandenburg, both Electours, did intreate as meanes. The Duke of Saxon amonges other thynges proteſted this at that The Duke of Saxony woulde not geue to Ferdinando the title of kyng of Romains tyme, that he would not attribute to Ferdinando the title of the king of Romains, but ſtode to the conuenaūtes of Cadame & Uienne, that ſame Archebyſhop of Londe was a Germayne borne, and counſellour to Chriſtierne kyng of Denmarke, who beyng expulſed, was alſo exiled and loſt his byſhopryke, than came he agayne into Germany & attended vpon the Emperour, and afterwardes was made byſhop of Conſtaunce. Whyleſt this treaty was at Frankefurte, certen bandes of Souldiours were aſſembled in Saxony, and were commaunded by their gouernours to go lye in the countreis of the citie of Breme, of the Duke of Lunenburge, and others of the ſame Religion, and there to remayne tyll the campe remoued. It was kept very ſecrete at the firſt, by whoſe conduicte or aucthoritie they were leuied, but at length it was certenly knowen that they were muſtred by Henry Duke of Brunſwycke, and his brother Chriſtopher Archebyſhop of Bremen. They that were i
                  〈…〉
               ried by them, complayned in dede to the imperial chāber, but it was in vayne. The Proteſtaūtes afterwardes through their induſtrie, leſt they ſhould do any more harme, procured the ſame men to ſerue them, whome notwithſtanding they vſed to the iniurie of no man. At the requeſt of the Princes that wer interceſſours, Stephen Faber, was ſet at libertie by the Lantgraue, who gaue him paſſeporte. He had ſayde of his owne accorde, that he woulde not retourne to his Prince, for that he truſted hym no more. But whan he was releaſed, he went ſtreight way to him. In this aſſemblie William Duke of Cleue, by his Ambaſſadour, did exhibite a wrytinge to the Proteſtauntes,

wherin he declared by what ryght & tytle he poſſeſſed Gelderlande. And prayed them that they would be meanes for him to the Emperour, and to commende his cauſe alſo to the Emperours Ambaſſadours there.
            The Frenche kyng, had aduertiſed Ulrich Duke of Wirtenberge, The Frēcha kyng geueth toūſel to the Duke of wittemberge. by his Ambaſſadour, that he heard ſaye, howe he through the motion of his confederatours, was determined to make warre vppon certen Byſhoppes in Germany. But this pourpoſe did not he alowe, and for his good wyll he beareth hym, doth admonyſhe hym that he do it not: For if he did, he ſhould offende the Emperour and kyng Ferdinando, vnto whome he was lately reconciled, and bryng him ſelfe and al that euer he had into great Daunger. The Duke geuyng him thankes for the good admoniſhement (ſayth) he is ſclaundered, and howe he ſuppoſeth the ſame to be reyſed vp by the Dukes of Bauier, who hathe faſly ſowen a lyke bruite of hym in Germany, he deſyreth hym to geue no credit to it. For it is neither his entent, nor yet his fellowes, to ſtyre vp any trouble, or to attēpte any thyng by force of armes, vnleſſe they be conſtrayned. And doubteth not alſo, but when they ſhal heare therof, they wyl pourge them ſelues herein. Wherfore whan he had declared this to his fellowes at Franckefurte, the Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue, the .xix. daye of Aprill, addreſſe their letters to the kynge. And ſaye howe they vnderſtande by Duke Ulriche, what reporte of The Duke of Saxon & the Lantgr. write to the Frēch kyng them was made vnto hym: but to be a ſclaunder forged by their ennemies and euill wyllers: For they entende to make no warre, and how muche they deſyre peace, that can the Princes tell, that were interceſſours. For albeit they are more wayes than one prouoked, albeit theyr fellowes citie is outlawed, and a league made of dyuerſe, for the defence of vniuſle decrees, though bandes of Souldiours by them hired for great and vnaccuſtomed wages, are nowe ſpoyling the countreys of their league frendes, yet are they quiet and ſtyre not one whytte. for they loue their natiue countrey and remitte all iniuries for the cōmon wealthes ſake. But their aduerſaries are lead with a certen impudent hatred, and followe no temperate wayes, nor wyll admitte no lawefull reaſonyng, but ſeke only that Germany maye ſwymme with ciuile bloud. And ſeyng it is thus, they deſyre hym not to credit theſe falſe reportes but to geue his ayde, that the churche maye be quieted by godly meanes: For this is properly the dutie of kynges, to maynteine truthe and innocencie. And where as they defende the cauſe of Religion, it is done of none euyll pourpoſe, but of a certen Godly dutie: for they doubte not, but that the doctrine whiche they doe profeſſe, is agreable vnto Gods worde, whiche they maye in no wyſe forſake. Duke George of Saxon 
                     •
                  irth.
            
            About the ende of this aſſemblie, the .xxiiij. daye of Apryll, died George Duke of Saxony, without chyldren: For his two ſonnes were

departed before without iſſewe, whereof the one had maried Elizabeth the Lantgraues ſyſter, and the other one of the houſe of Mandeſfielde. Wherfore Duke George by legacie maketh his heyres, his brother Henry, and his ſonnes, Maurice, and Auguſte, vnder this condition that they alter not the ſtate of Religion. Whiche vnleſſe they ſhall perfourme, he geueth his whole landes to the Emperour and to kyng Ferdinando, vntyll ſuche tyme as eyther he or his ſonnes, or the nexte kynſman of that familie, doe accomplyſhe this condition. This wyl of his ſo made, he ſheweth firſt to the Nobilitie and cōmons of his countrie, beinge nowe olde & ſickly, and wylleth them to confirme the ſame by an othe neuer to alter this his laſt wyll. But they fearyng leſte it ſhould be the occaſion of warre betwene the kinſmē, intreate him that he would be content, to ſende to his brother Henry: For they truſte that he wyll conſente to alter nothing in Religion. Whereupon Ambaſſadours were ſent to perſwade with him, and whan they had alledged Ambaſſadours ſent to his brother Henry. ſondry reaſons, and eſpecially ſayd, how there was muche ready Money, and a great quantitie of Plate and goodly ſtuffe, whiche ſhould come wholy to his handes, in caſe he would obeye his brothers wyll. He aunſwered them by and by thus: Certenly your meſſage ſemeth vnto me to reſemble the ſame that is writtē in the Goſpel, what tyme Sathan promyſed Chriſte the kyngdomes of the whole worlde, ſo that he would falle downe and worſhyp hym. Doe youthynke that I ſette ſo muche by any ryches, that I would therfore forſake the truthe and pure religion? Aſſuredly you are farre abuſed if you ſo thinke. Wherfore whan they had this anſwere, and were departed without their purpoſe, before they came at home, Duke George had lefte hys lyfe. His brother Henry going immediatly to Dreſda, and other townes, bindeth the people to hym by an othe, which was the more eaſely done, by reaſon he was in league with the Proteſtauntes.
            Moreouer the Prince Electour of Saxony, hearyng of his death, haſteth home with all expedition, that if nede were, he myght ayde Henry. The Princes of the Popyſh parte, for the loſſe of ſo ſure a pyllour, and ſo lucky ſucceſſe of the Proteſtauntes, were ſore agreued, eſpecially the Archebyſhop of Mentz, and the Duke of Brunſwycke, as hereafter you ſhal heare. Thus had Duke George a ſucceſſour and heire cleane contrary to his wylle. And he whome he hated moſte of all men duryng his lyfe tyme, namely Luther, was ſent for by the new Prince to Lipſia, to preache and to alter the Religion.
            About this tyme in the moneth of May, appered a blaſyng ſtarre, and ſhortly after departed Iſabel wyfe to Charles the Emperour, for whome the Frenche kyng, ſo ſone as he heard therof kepte a ſolempne funerall at Paris, as the maner of kynges is. I ſhewed you before of the counſell of Uicence, whiche the byſhop of Rome had proroged tyll

Eaſter of this yeare. But ſeyng than that none would come, he publiſheth his letters the tenth of Iune, wherin he prorogeth the counſell no more, but ſuſpendeth it at his owne pleaſure, and ſenate of his Cardinalles. The kyng of Englande had certen monethes before ſet forth another wryttyng touching this Synode of Uicence, and declareth howe the Byſhop deludeth the whole worlde. For where he excuſed hym ſelfe by the Duke of Mantua, it was a playne mockery: For ſeing he taketh vppon hym ſo great anothoritie, why did he not compelle hym? If he coulde not, wherfore ſhoulde he commaunde men to come to a place vncerten, and the whiche is not in his power. Nowe albeit he hathe choſen Uicence for the ſame pourpoſe, yet is there no doubt, but the 
                  〈…〉
               enetians, men of ſo great wyſdome, wyll no more ſuffer their citie to be peſtred with ſuche a multitude without garmſons of Souldiours, than woulde the Duke of Mantua, and that in fyne there wylbe as ſmall reſorte thether, as was to Mantua. There fore it is but deluſion, what ſo euer he doeth, neyther oughte he to be permitted in this diſſolute lybertie any longer. There is nothynge in dede better nor more commodious than a lawfull counſell. But whan they are applied vnto priuate lucre and commoditie, and to the eſtablyſhynge of certen mens aucthoritie, they brynge a wonderfull deſtruction to the common wealth. Whan the name of the counſell and of the churche was nowe common in euery mans mouthe, Luther ſetteth forth a booke of either of them in the vulgare ſpeache. And fyrſt he treatefh of the aſſemblie of the Apoſtles at Hieruſalem, whiche is mentioned in the .xv. of the actes: After he reciteth the contrary opinions of the Doctours, eſpecially Auſten and Ciprian, concernyng baptiſme, & by the ſame occaſion he maketh mention of thoſe lawes, that are called the Canons of the Apoſtles, and proueth by manifeſt reaſons that thei The Can
                     〈…〉
                   cōmonly called of the Apoſtles are falſe. be falſe and countrefeated, and thoſe that geue them that tytle, to deſerue death. Than doeth he recite in ordre thoſe foure counſelles which were of chiefe authoritie, the counſell of Nyce, Conſtantinople, Epheſus, and Calcedonie. And declareth for what cauſes they aſſēbled ther, and what they decreed in euery of them. After he commeth to the principall queſtion, and ſheweth what is the aucthoritie of a. counſell. Wherfore he ſayeth howe a counſel maye not confirme any newe doctryne, nor commaunde any newe worke, neyther bynde mens myndes with newe ceremonies, not to intermedle with ciuile gouernementes, nor to make any decrees, to eſtablyſh the authoritie of a few. But the dutie therof to be, to abolyſhe and condemne newe opinions contrary to holy Scripture, and newe ceremonies whether they be ſuperſtitious or vnprofitable for the churche. And ſuche thynges as are brought in controuerſie, to examine, and determine after the written text of Gods worde. After this he diffineth the churche, & ſheweth

by what tokens it ought to be knowen, and by a comparyſon made, declaring what Chriſte and his Apoſtles taught, he ſayeth howe the Byſhop of Rome, whiche hath brought into the churche a farre cōtrary doctrine, and by wicked meanes hath pylled the whole world with intollerable exactions, ought to be condempned, and dryuen to make reſtitution. Amonges diuerſe other thynges wherby in the ſame boke he declareth what blyndenes men were led into vnder the Byſhop of Rome, and howe ſhameful and vyle was the Religion, he ſayeth how A Freers were maketh the deuyll afrayd. it was come thus farre, that a monke or a freers wede, was thought to be ſufficient to bryng a man to eternall lyfe. And manye not onlye meane folkes, but alſo great Prynces, would be buried in a freers garment. Thoſe that ſhall come after peraduenture wyl not beleue it, but yet is it true and wont to be commonly done in Italy. And in our me mory, Fraunces Marques of Mantua the ſeconde of that name, put into his laſt wylle, that he myght be buried in a gray freers cote: The ſame did Albertus Pius, Prynce of Carpes in Paris: And Chriſtopher Longelie a Bourgonnion, buried at Padwey, a man excellently Langelius Oration againſt the Lutherians. learned, and a great Ciceronian, who alſo wrote an Oration againſt the Lutherians, in lyke caſe as Alberte did diuers againſt Eraſmus of Roterdame. Immediatly after the death of Duke George, Henry the Duke of Brunſwycke, rydeth to the Emperour into Spayne thorowe Fraunce.
            About the ſame tyme, Henry the eyght kyng of Englande, calleth a Parliament, wherein amōges other thinges were enacted certen decrees for Religiō, called the ſyxe Articles, as followeth that vnder the The ſyr Articles. four me of bread and wyne, was the true and natural body and bloud of Chriſte, and that after the wordes of conſecration, there remayned no more ſubſtaunce of bread and wyne, that the receiuing of the whole ſupper of the Lorde was not neceſſary to ſaluation, and that Chriſt is wholy cōteyned vnder both kyndes. How it is not lawful for prieſtes to marry. That the vowes of chaſtitie ought to be perfourmed. That priuate maſſes were to be reteyned. That auricular confeſſion is good and neceſſary. To ſuche as thought and did otherwyſe, was appoynted punyſhement dewe for heretikes. And the ſame tyme, the kynge ſtoode in termes to marry the Lady Anne of Cleue, a mayde of an excellent The Lady Anne of Cleaue. beautie, which after ſhe was affianced, within a few monthes was ſent to Caleis, whether the kyng had ſent the Lorde Admirall & others with his ſhyppes to receyue her, and tranſporte her into Englande, But he hymſelfe accompanied with all the Nobles and Gentlemen of the Realme, receiued her vpō blacke Heath, and brought her to Grenewitche, where ſhortly after they were married by the Archebyſhop of Canturbury. Some ſaye howe the Biſhoppes had perſwaded the kyng to cōſent to the ſyxe Articles, to the intent they myght bring

the Archebyſhop of Cantorburye and the Lorde Crumwell, whiche were great fauourers of Religion, out of aucthoritie & creditie. This yeare in the mōth of Auguſt, Barbarouſſe the Turkes Lieutenaunt, Barbarouſe taketh Caſtel neweſ. taketh by aſſiege, Caſtelneufe a towne in Slauonie, borderinge vpon the Goulfe of Ueniſe, and ſleying all the Souldiours, leadeth awaye many captiue. A yere before in the moneth of October, the Emperour and the Uenetians beyng of one confederacie had wonne it. And the Emperour in dede put in a garriſon of foure thouſand Spanyardes, and made captayne Fraunces Sarmiento. Whiche chaunced to the Uenetians contrary to their expectation, for that they ſayde the town ſtanding in that coaſte, ought rather to be theirs. Therfore not longe after, when they more & more miſlyked this ſocietie, and ſawe it wold be very daungerours for them, aſke truce of the Turke and obteyne it.
            In maner at the ſame tyme aroſe a ſedition at Gaunte. Whiche citie Rebellienat Gaunte. is of great force and aucthoritie in thoſe parties, and hath oftentymes made many ſore bickeringes for their lybertie with the Gouernours of Flaunders, in whoſe dominion it ſtandeth. The Emperour hauing intelligence hereof, where he firſte had thought to haue gone through Italy into Germany, he altered his purpoſe, and determined to paſſe through Fraunce, ſeyng the kyng required hym inſtantly ſo to The Emperour paſſeth throughe Fraunce. doe, and promyſed hym all thynges franckely. In the meane tyme the Palſgraue and the Marques of Brandenburge, interceſſours, addreſſyng their letters to the Emperour of the pacification at Franckfurte, had requyred hym to permitte a conference of learned men to be had at Norinberge. But he ſayde, that the death of his wyfe, and certen other affaires, would not ſuffer hym to entende ſuche matters. Whan the interceſſours had ſent a copie of theſe to the Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue, and yet had not ſignified whether the Emperour had confirmed that truce of .xv. monethes. The .xix. daye of Nouember, an aſſemblie was appoynted at Aruſtet, a towne of Turingia. Here they conſulted to augmente their confederacie, & for their nedefull defence in caſe the Emperour wyll not allowe the peace makyng at Franckefurte, for well diſpoſyng the churche goodes, to ſende Ambaſſadours into Englande, touching the ſyxe Articles, and to mitigate the kinges mynde, to moue the Frenche kynge, that innocente perſones be not tormented, for Religiō. Moreouer to ſende Ambaſſadours to the Emperour ſo ſone as they ſhall vnderſtande of his commyng into Flaunders. And for becauſe certen of the confederatours were abſent, and other ſome had not commiſſion to determine of certē matters, an other daye was aſſigned at Smalcalde at the kalendes of Marche, wherin to treate of the reſte. Here were receiued into the League the men of Rigen a citie in Linonia, whiche were at cōtencion with their Archebyſhop, lyke as many others were in Germany. Neyther wer they

receyued vpon other condicion, than to be defended in the counſel chā
               ber by the commō procurers, & therfore payed to the confederatours, a thouſande and fyue hundreth crownes.
            Henry Duke of Saxon, was taken into the league two yeares before without any charge, becauſe he was but poore, but yet vpon condition, that if he were at any tyme enriched, he ſhould beare like charge with the reſte: Nowe therfore that he was auaunced to this goodly inheritaunce in this Aſſemblie they treated with hym touching the ſame, whiche aſſemblie ended the tenthe of Decembre. The Prynces were not there preſent, but had ſent their deputes. And the Duke of Saxon had ſent Iohn Dulcie and Fraunces Burcarte vicechauncelour into Englande in the moneth of Nouembre, to be is his name preſent at the marriage betwene the kynge and the Lady Anne of Cleane, for he had married her ſyſter Sibille, as is mentioned in the ſy
                  ••
                booke. Wherfore vpon this occaſion, they were enioyned at Arnſtade to treate with the kyng in the name of the Proteſtaūtes, for theſe matters before ſayd. The Emperour receyuing a ſaufe conduictetoke his iourney with a ſmall company in the moneth of Nouembre. Whan he came to the frontiers of Fraunce borderynge vpon Spayne, he met the kynges two ſonnes, Henry and charles, which were come thether in poſte, and the Conſtable which was gone thether long before with a great parte of the nobilitie of Fraunce: of whom being receyued and conduicted through the myddes of Fraunce & the greateſt cities, whā he came to Loche in Burges, he mette with the kynge hym ſelfe, who was than ſcarcely amēded of a late diſeaſe. After paſſyng through Or leaunce, on Newe yeares daye, rydynge in the myddes betwene the kynges two ſonnes, he entred into the citie of Paris, and the Conſtable 1540. bare the ſworde before him. For no kinde of ioyful myrth and gladnes, no honour or ſolemnitie that the mynde of man coulde delight in, The Emperour entreth into Paris. was left vndone. Thether came the Byſhoppes Legate, Alexander Farneſius, Cardinall, who together with Cardinall Bellaye the Byſhop of the citie, Receiued the Emperour into the Cathedrall churche at Paris. Where the Emperour remaining ſeuen dayes, afterwardes departeth, the kynge hym ſelfe accompanying hym into Uermandois, and his ſonnes brought hym as farre as Ualencenes, a towne in Henaulte. The kynge was brought into a great and almoſte a ſure hope to recouer Millan, but it chaunced farre otherwyſe, as hereafter I purpoſe to declare. What tyme the Emperour was with the Frenche The Emperours and Frēch kings Ambaſſade to the Uenetians. kynge in Fraunce, they ſent both their Ambaſſadours to the Uenetians moſte nobly accōpanied. The Emperour ſent Alphonſe Daualle gouernour of Millan, and the king, Claudie Hannebalde Lieutenant of Piedmonte. Theſe exhorted the Senatours with a longe diſcours to ioyne them ſelues in amitie with theſe two moſt myghty Princes

and to put to theyr good willes and power to ouerthrow the Turke. But they, whan they had moſt honorably dimiſſed the Ambaſſadors, The Uenetians Ambaſſador to the Turke. conſidering the thing more diligently, thought mete to reconcile them ſelues to the Turke, with whom they had trewce already. Wherfore concluding at the laſt, to rendre vnto him Nanplia, and Epidaurum, they obteyned at his hande peace. Some ſaye, that the Frenchemen, albeit, exhorted them openly, as did themperours Ambaſſadour, yet ſecretly, whiſpered in their eares, that they ſhould prouide for themſelues, & not enter into ſuch a daunger, for the which they were fyrſt like to ſmarte: the king him ſelfe, in an Apologie againſt themperour, reporteth that the common wealth of the Uenetians, of him deſtroyed, was through his meanes releued, and recouered. Aloiſius Bardnarius, the Ambaſſadoure of the Uenetians, ſente to the Turke for peace, 
                  〈◊〉
                as commaunded fyrſt to offer al other conditions, and reſerue thoſe two cities for extreme neceſſitie. But the Turke, which by priuie eſpiall, knewe the determination of the Senate longe before, did expoſtulate with him, that he did not declare his commiſſion plainely and directly. And without thoſe two places deliuered, would not conclude. Who beyng amaſed, ſeyng the priuities of the common wealth were The ſecrets of the ſenate vttered to the Turke. bewrayed (full ſore againſte his will) permitteth him to haue them at laſte.
            But whan he was retourned to Ueniſe, and had declared the whole matter, the Senatours greatly aſtonied, after moſte diligente inquiſition, apprehende certen, and fyndynge them giltie, cut of theyr The trators executed. heades.
            One of them was fledde into the Frenche Ambaſſadours lodgyng (the Biſhoppe of Mompelier) as into a Saintuary: wherefore officers were ſent to haue ſearched all the houſe: But whā they might not be ſuffered to enter, the Senate commaundeth certeine great pieces to be fetched out of theyr ordenaunce houſe, to ouerthrow the lodging: Wherupon the Frenchmen conſyderinge theyr owne daunger, bring him forth vnto them. The Senate afterwarde, wrote vnto the kinge, the cauſe why they ſo dyd, leſt he ſhoulde thynke his Ambaſſadour had ſuſteined wrong. When themperour came into Flaunders, Themp. arriueth in Flaunders. kyng Ferdinando comming out of Auſtriche, met there alſo: After the Proteſtantes Ambaſſadors, as it was condeſcended at Arnſtad, who the xxiiii. daye of February, beyng admitted to the Emperours ſpeach at Gaunt, welcome him into the low countrey, pourge them ſelues of the euill reportes of theyr aduerſaryes, and complayne of the Duke of Brunſwike, and the Iudges of the Chaumber, declare how deſirous they be of peace, and by howe many waies they haue ſought it, which they nowe deſyre him to graunt and eſtabliſhe for euer.
            
               
The Emperour telleth them before Granuella, that after he hath conſulted of the matter, he wyll make them an aunſwere. And in maner about the ſame tyme that they ſent this Ambaſſade to the Emperour, The Prote. wryte to the Frēche king they wrote alſo to the Frenche kynge, reioyſinge muche at the great good wyll and amitie betwene the Emperour and hym: And with a long proces intreate hym, in this cōſent of mindes, to further the cauſe of Religion and publique quiet to the Emperour. At the kalendes of Marche, the Ambaſſadours of the Princes & cities of Proteſtauntes An aſſembly at Smalcald met at Smalcald, as was appointed, with whom alſo came theſe diuines, Ionas, Pomerane, Melancthon, Cruciger, & Bucer. And they were inioyned to deuiſe a fourme in wryting, wherwith they ſhoulde thinke mete to treate with their aduerſaries, for the cōciliation of religion. In this aſſemblie they cōſulted of ſuch matters as were left vndiſcuſſed at Arnſtad, as before is ſaid. In the meane time Dulcie and Burcarte, were returned out of Englande, & the ſeuenth day of Marche, they make reporte at Smalcalde of the ſtate of Religion in England, that for the decrees made the yere before, there is no great puniſhement, Latimer. Shaxton. notwithſtanding Hugh Latimer byſhop of Woorceſter, and Shaxton byſhop of Saliſbury are deteined in priſon for Religiō, and as yet not releaſed. The Lorde Cromwell, whiche is in moſte authoritie The Lorde Cromwell. doth appeaſe and mitigate the kynges mynde, and that alſo the kyng him ſelfe in familiar talke, opened vnto them his mynde, & ſuppoſeth thus, that the diuines of the Proteſtauntes thinke not rightly cō
               cerning the mariage of prieſtes, the lordes ſupper vnder both kyndes, and of the priuate maſſe, & requireth them to write vnto him of theſe & other neceſſary queſtions at large, alledging the cauſes and reaſons of their opinions. And he wyll ſee agayne, that the learned men of his Realme ſhall wryte an aunſwere, that thus a waye may be made to come to the knowledge of the truthe. Moreouer Cromwel and certen others thinke it mete and expedient to ſende a great Ambaſſade to the kinge, and Melancthon with them. For if any meane agrement in religion might be had, the kynge woulde beſtowe a great ſomme of money vpon a league, that he purpoſeth to make with them, not onlye in the cauſe of Religion, but in generall: for the kyng marueleth greatly, why they are confederated for Religion only: for the tyme wyll come that they ſhalbe attempted with warre, vnder a contrary title.
            And a fewe dayes after, the diuines exhibite their wryting, the ſome A wrytinge exhibited by the diuines. wherof was this. Not to ſwarue from the ſteppes of the confeſſion at Auſpurge, and the Apologie afterwardes annexed to the ſame. Which ſentence afterwardes all the diuines that were abſent did approue by their letters ſent thether. This tyme came Henry the Duke of brunſwick The Emp. aunſwer to the Proteſt. to Gaūt. The day before the Ides of March, thēperour anſwereth ye proteſtātes Ambaſſadours by Cornelles Scepp, gētly ſo ſo, but

yet in ſuche ſorte as it coulde not be wel perceiued, whether he would graunte them peace or not. Wherfore the Ambaſſadours by the Emperours leaue going a litle aſyde: by and by retourne, and deſire hym to inhibite the proceſſe of the Imperiall chamber, and graunte them peace whereunto the Emperour ſayde, he had no more to aunſwere them at this tyme, he woulde take further delyberation. This aunſwere was recited at Smalcalde the tenth daye after. And on Eaſter munday, which was than the .xxix. of Marche, came thether the Princes them ſelues. That tyme was a certen contention and hatred betwyxte Granuella and Heldus, which in fine came to this ende that Hatred betwixt counſellers. Heldus being diſplaced, departed from the courte, and lyued a priuate lyfe. For the other was aboue hym in authoritie, and brought Heldus into hatred and obloquie, for that he was ouer vehement in counſell matters and other affaires, and had conſtreyned the Emperour, thinkyng nothyng leſſe, to haue warres in maner againſt his wyll. And whan Granuella had geuen certen manifeſte inſtructions of his wyll and mynde, to be inclyned to peace and concorde, beynge requeſted of the Proteſtauntes, he perſwaded the Emperour alſo to the conditiōs of peace. And he hymſelfe at the begynning, as though it had bene in his owne name ſent to Smalcalde interceſſours and Ambaſſadours, Theodoricke Manderſchitte, and William Nuenarie Erles, men of great wyſdome and dignitie, notwithſtanding the firſt taried by the waye ſore ſycke. Their demaundes were reaſonable enough, neuertheleſſe they ſignified this, that the Emperour was almoſt perſwaded The falſe perſwaſiō of the Emper. as though they cared not for Religion, neyther deſyred peace in theyr hartes, but altogether ſought to conuerte the churche goodes to theyr priuate vſes, delyghted in diſcorde, & bare him no good wyll, but were more addicte to take their partes, that were his open ennemies. And theſe things were reported to the Emperour partly by their aduerſaries, partly by the Frenchemen, as it is ſayde for a certentie. For what tyme the Emperour went through Fraunce, and all thinges were lyke to growe to a perfite frendſhyp, then were certen thinges diſcloſed, and the Proteſtauntes letters vnto the kyng, ſhewed vnto the Emperour, ſome do impute this to the kyng him ſelfe, and other ſome to the Conſtable who was than of chief authoritie, & ſought al meanes poſſible to quiet and agree the Princes, and dyd beare the Proteſtantes no good wyl, becauſe of Religion.
         
         
            
            
               ✚ The thirtene Booke of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the ſtate of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne of the Empyre of Charles the fyfte.
            
               
                  ❧ The argument of the thirtene Booke
               THe Proteſtauutes make aunſwere to the Emperour demaundes, ſhewyng how they haue more regarde to Religion, than to churche goodes. They confute alſo the argumentes of the kyng of Englande, touchyng the ſyxe Articles. The Emperour hauing punyſhed them at Gaunt, ſendeth letters to aſſigne a metyng for the proteſtauntes, againſt whome ſpeaketh Alexander Farneſe the Popes Legate, who had followed the Emperour out of Fraunce. In the meane tyme the Frenche kyng made a league with the Duke of Cleane, whoſe ſyſter the kyng of Englande than refuſed. At the aſſemble of Hagenawe certen poinctes of Religion were agreed vpon the reſydewe were referred to the conuention that kyng Ferdinando aſſigned at Woruies: Whether Granuellan ſendyng firſt Naues, came afterwarde alſo hym ſelfe, and made an Oration: And after hym Campeigius the Popes Legate. The conference brake offe, and all was differed to yt Iourney of Regenſpurg. In this meane whyle Luther anſwereth a booke ſet forth by the Duke of Brunſwycke, where is ſpoken of the dere mantell of the Archebyſhoppes. The counſell beyng begonne at Regenſpurge, Granuellan preſenteth the booke of the Interim. The Duke of Cleaue commynge into Fraunce, marrieth the daughter of Nauarre.
            
            
               VNto the Whiche thinges the Proteſtauntes the eleuenth daye of Apryl make a long aunſwere, The anſwer of the Prot. to Grāuellā
                declaryng their innocencie in ſuche thinges as they were of the Emperour ſuſpected. And the chief & only cauſe why they to their great charges & peryll do profeſſe this doctrine to be done neither for any priuate cōmoditie, or for pleaſur or diſpleaſure of any perſone or other reſpect at all, ſaue only that God requyreth this dutye of them, that they ſhould profeſſe the name of his ſonne and the Goſpell. For he commaundeth vs to flye from Idolatrie and warneth vs moſt ſtraightly, that we do not allowe their crueltie, whiche perſecute the true doctrine. And as touchynge the churche goodes they ſhewe vnto what good vſes they imploye them. And of all the diſſention that is, others to be authors thereof and not they. Than they diſcourſe the cauſe of Religion at large, and confute that ſclaunder that they ſhould be more inclyned to the Emperours ennemies, than to hym, by the goodly and large offers, whiche for his cauſe they refuſed, and by the ayde and aſſiſtaunce, whiche they haue geuen hym in his warres.
            Finally they requyre, that Monſer Granuellan who to his great cōmendation, hath euermore hytherto perſwaded the Emperour frō ye bloudy coūſels of their aduerſaries, to peaceable wayes, wold preferre

to the Emperour the complainte of the chamber, and intreate hym to graunte them peace, ſo often ſought and deſyred. What tyme they had made this anſwer, at the Ides of Apryl, they ende theyr intreaty. And appointe the diuines to make a confutation, of the ſyxe Articles enacted A confutatis of the ſix Articles. by the kyng of Englande, and the booke afterwarde to be ſent thether, to the entent that in caſe the diuines of Englande wyll aunſwer it, and that there be any hope of agrement, a further communication may be had: but to make any league with him otherwyſe than for Relion only, no man there thought expedient. It was alſo there decreed to intreate the kyng for ſuche as were perſecuted in Fraunce for Religion, but firſt to learne the ſtate of Fraunce, and howe the kynge is affected, and whether it maye be thought that the mediation wyll take place. There were dyuerſe other decrees, touchynge the churche goodes, and ſeueral complayntes, and that they of Haylbrune, ſhould abolyſhe the Popyſhe Maſſe, which remayned as yet in certen churches. Fynally they determine, what is nedefuull to be done, in caſe the Emperour eyther refuſe peace, or aunſwere doubtfully, or the Chamber procede after their olde maner, or if there be a power reiſed vp againſt them pryuelye.
            Whileſt theſe thynges were a workyng, the Emperour doth great Great execution done at Gaunt. execution of Gaunt, making the chiefeſt Rebelles to hoppe headles, he taketh away all their armure and weapons, all their priuileges and commodities, he buyldeth a Caſtell, and placeth there a Garniſon in the neckes of them. That citie was euer wonte to rebell againſt theyr Princes, as I haue alſo declared before. This parte played they with Charles of Burgundy, the Emperours great graundfather, and with Phylip his father before that, with Lewys Erle of Flaunders, great grandfather to the ſame Philippe by his motherſyde. All the whiche this Emperour ſemeth to haue reuenged. For they were neuer ſo ſubdued, as thys tyme.
            The eyghtenthe daye of Apryll, the Emperoure addreſſed hys letters to the Duke of Saxony, and the Lantgraue. Howe he hathe The Emp. letters to the Prooteſtāt. talked wyth hys brother Ferdinando Kynge of Romaynes, amonges other thynges of the State of Germanye, but eſpeciallye of the diſſention in Religion whiche he woulde fayne were appeaſed. For lyke as here tofore he hathe omytted nothynge herein, ſo is he nowe alſo of the ſame mynde ſtyll: So that they wyll acknoweledge this zeale of his, and not abuſe the ſame. And that deſyre of peace whiche they haue longe ſynce pretended in wordes and promyſes, they wyll nowe perfourme in deed: He hath vſed many yeares nowe ſondrye and gētle meanes of treaty, but with them it hathe not priuayled hetherto. And nowe is the matter come to that poynte, that vnleſſe it be ſhortlye remedied, there wil followe a great diſſolutiō of the cōmon welth,

and a maruelous ſturre of all ſtates. And although it be ſo, yet of his benigne gentlenes he appointeth them againe an other aſſemblie at Spyres the ſyxte daye of Iune, or if perchaunce plage or infection of ſickenes wyll not permitte them then ſuche place as his brother Ferdinando ſhal appointe, to deuiſe by what meanes this great daunger that hanged ouer Germany may be auoyded. Willing them to be ther preſent them ſelues at the daye aſſigned, all lettes ſet aparte, vnleſſe it be ſyckenes, and than to ſende their chief counſellours, ſuche as be louers of peace, mete for the treatie and priuie to their doings. And that they ſignifie the ſame to their fellowes, to the entent they be there, at the daye. And thether ſhall come his brother Ferdinādo, who can further declare of his mynde and wyll, and of theyr Ambaſſade ſent vnto hym. And that they ſo frame them ſelues for the preſeruation of them ſelues and the countrey, that all diſſention beyng taken awaye, they may ſo muche the better conſult of the other affayres of the Empyre. And there is no cauſe to feare any daunger, for he wylaſſure thē vpon his fidelitie, and graunteth them the benefite of the peace of Norrinberge, and wyll ſuffer no man to doe againſt it, yet ſo as they agayne doe offende no man. Unto whiche letters they aunſwered the .xv. day The anſwer of the Prot. to the Emp. letters. of may. For that he followeth the counſelles of peace, they geue hym moſt harty thankes. And where he admonyſhed them that they ſhuld acknowledge his ſtudious deſyre, and not abuſe the ſame, there is no cauſe they ſaye why he ſhould thinke otherwyſe of thē and their cōfederates and league frendes. For there is nothing more derely beloued of them than peace. And that the matter hath not ben agreed vpō hetherto, it ought not to be imputed vnto thē, but to the greatnes of the cauſe, and to their aduerſaries, whiche coulde abyde no declaration of their doctrine. Nowe where he would haue them to be there preſente at the daye appointed, they wyl gladly obeye. Howe beit becauſe they woulde not that the kynge ſhoulde trauell in vayne, they wyll ſhewe their fantaſye: for it is not vnknowen to his hyghnes, that euerſynce the fyrſte beginning of this controuerſie, after muche delyberation in the aſſemblies of the Empire, this waye only ſemed beſte vnto al men, that eyther a lawefull counſell myght be had, or els a prouinciall Synode of Germany: but ſythe that for the ſhortnes of tyme, that ſemed litle to purpoſe, it was deuyſed at Franckefurte, to haue a communication of the matter, and a decree was made of the ſame. And ſeynge the matter is weightie, wherein the ſaluation of man cōſiſteth, it can not be ſhortly determined, if it ſhould be purpoſely done, and therfore ſhould be troubleſome and paynfull both to kyng Ferdinando, and to them alſo and others, to traue in ſuche matters, to fore any communication be had, or the waye prepared: wherfore that whiche pleaſed all men at Franckefurte, ſemeth nowe beſt vnto them alſo, that in caſe a

conuocation of Germany can not be had, a communication myght be appointed: For in their iudgement, there can no better way be founde as they declared alſo of late to Counte Nuenar: wherein they truſte that holy Scripture, euen by his commaundement ſhall occupie the chief place, and that whan their aduerſaries ſhall ſwarue from the ſame, they maye be called agayne into the waye. And albeit they maye not go thether without makinge their fellowes priuie to it, and the tyme is ſo ſhorte that they can not aſſemble before, yet whan the thing ſhalbe cōmenced, and that there ſhalbe any hope to do any good there, they wyll not let to come thether in perſone. Requiring hym that he would graunte the ſaue conduicte, whiche he promyſed, not onlye to their Ambaſſadours, but to their deuines alſo. For as muche as they ſhal haue moſte to doe in this matter: laſte they deſyre to vnderſtande his pleaſure herein. I tolde you before of Cardinall Farneſius, he went with the Emperour from Paris in to flaunders, ſcarſely yet come to mans ſtate. In ſo muche that the Emperour toke it in very euill part, that the Byſhop had not ſent ſome man of rype yeares and counſell.
            What tyme therfore they did conſulte of Religion and the Turkiſh An oratiē or a yeūg Cardinall. warre, and Granuellan had ſpoken his mynde, at the laſte the young Cardinall in the preſence of the Emperour and king Ferdinando, ſaid his fantaſie, inueighing chiefly againſte the Lutherianes throughout his whole oration. And amonges many other thinges, he ſayd it could not well be diſcerued, whether were more againſt Chriſte, the Proteſtantes, or the Turkes. For the one of them ſhewe their crueltie onlye The Prote. 
                     〈◊〉
                   to Turkes. againſt the body, but the others drawe the ſoules alſo into euerlaſting perdition. Farneſius had ioyned with hym Marcellus, Ceruinus, byſhop of Nicaſtre, as gouernour of all his counſelles, who in the ſame legacie was made Cardinall. This Oration of Farneſius coming abroade a fewe monethes after, was ſet forth in prynte, and Iohn Caluine made a comentary to it, leſte any man ſhould miſtake it.
            At this tyme, the Duke of Cleaue came to the Emperour, to be at a point with him for the poſſeſſion of Gelderlande, but it woulde not be. And therfore returnyng home agayne, he began to conſulte with the Frenche kynge. For whan he was out of hope to recouer Millan, the Emperour offering hym ſuche condicions, as he woulde lyttle haue A priuy hatred of yt frē
                  che kynge againſt the Emperour. thought, he tourned his mynde wholly from his frendſhyp, yet couertly, and complayned, that he was ſo farre abuſed. And than began to miſlyke the Conſtable, whiche had put hym in this great hope, & was the cauſe that the Emperour paſſed through Fraunce, and could neuer abyde hym after, where before he did all thynges. When he therfore ſought all meanes priuelye, howe to moleſte the Emperour; and the Duke of Cleaue was not able to ſuſteyne ſo great a ſute and diſpleaſure alone, they beganne to entre into mutuall bandes of amitie. The

Frenche kyng had a nece the lady Iane, daughter to his ſyſter Margarete Quene of Nauarre, of eleuen yeares of age, the greateſt inheriter in all Fraunce, both of an excellent beaultie, and well brought vp, vnto whoſe frendes the kyng made ſute, & eſpecially to the Quene his ſiſter, that ſhe myght be maried to the Duke of Cleaue, & brought The Duke of Cleaue ioyned with the Frenche kynge. it to paſſe, as ſhalbe recited in his place. At this tyme dyd the Byſhop of Rome warre vpon the Peruſians, for that they refuſed to pay a certen cuſtome for ſalte and other thynges that he had reyſed vpon them. And ſo brought the citie vnder his iuriſdiction. And for a like cauſe expulſed Aſcanius, a man of great power, of the houſe of Columnois, out The Pope warreth vpō ye Peruſiās. of all his dominions. The Cardinall Farneſius, hauing done his commiſſion, ſeyng the peace did not take effecte betwixt the Emperour & the Frenche kyng. And alſo vnknowen to hym, a daye was aſſigned at Hagenaw for the Proteſtauntes to decide their cauſe in, he departed out of Flaūders, & came to Paris about the Ides of May. And at the feaſte of Pentecoſte in the Cathedral churche there, he conſecrated Anthony, Uncle to madame Deſtampes, the kynges darlinge, Cardinall of Medone, ſetting vpon his head a purple hatte, latelye brought from Rome. And ſalutyng the kyng by the waye, he goeth with great ſpede to Rome. Afterwarde kyng Ferdinando toke his iourney from Bruſſelles, to goe to the aſſemblie at Hagenaw, for it could not be holden at Spyres, by reaſon of the plague. Unto this aſſemblie the Frē
               che kyng alſo ſente Lazarus Bayſius, by the aduyſe of the Emperour for eyther of them diſſembled theyr grief, and the matter was hetherto handled with flatteryng wordes. And the firſt daye of Iune the kyng of Fraunce ſet forth a ſore proclamation againſt the ſowers abroade of Hereſie and the falſe doctrine of Luther and his companions. And the twelfthe daye after the ſame was imprinted and proclaimed at Paris. Aboute this tyme the kynge of Englande beheaded the Lorde Cromwell, whome he had from lowe degree auaunced to hyghe dignitie The Lorde Crumwell beheaded. and a little before made Erle of Eſſex, he forſaketh the lady Anne of Cleaue, and marrieth Catherine Hawarde Nece to the Duke of Norfolke. The Lord Cromwell was the maker of the marriage with the houſe of Cleaue. And where after the kynge loued Hawarde, he The kynge marieth Katherine Hawarde. was thought to be perſwaded by hir, that Cromwel, whom ſhe iudged be a lette vnto her matters, might be diſpatched out of the waye. He was a man alſo not wellbeloued of the Nobilitie, and was ſuſpected, as though he ſhould ſeke the diſtruction of the Papiſtes. In the meane tyme the Duke of Brunſwicke, accuſed moſte heinouſly boeth the other Proteſtantes, and chiefly Henry the Duke of Saxony, that The Duke of Brūſwik accuſed the Proteſtaun. contrary to the wyl of his Brother George, and condition expreſſed in his Teſtament, he had altered the ſtate of Religion, that he moleſteth the Byſhoppes of Merſeburge, and Miſene, in their iuriſdiction. And

that he kept to hym ſelfe the money that his brother lefte to the vſe of the league, to the ſome of .lx. thouſande crownes. Wherfore he admonyſhed the Emperour, to compell hym to doe his dutie, whiche if he ſhall refuſe, to diſpoſſeſſe hym of the inheritaunce, after the fourme of the wyll. And he wrought not this alone, albeit he was principal, but certen others alſo of the ſame confederacie.
            Nowe wyll I ſpeake of the aſſemblie at Hagenaw, whiche began the fyue and twenty daye of Iune. When kynge, Ferdinando was The aſſemble of Hagenawe. come thether a moneth before. A fewe dayes before the cōmencement, the Proteſtauntes had ſpoken to the Palſgraue, to the Archebyſhops of Collon and Treuers, to Ericus, Duke of Brunſwick, and to the byſhops of Auſburge and of Spyres, euerye man ſeuerallye at his owne houſe, that they would entreate the peace. Ferdinando therfore at the forſayde daye, callyng the Proteſtauntes before hym, declareth vnto them the cauſe of that aſſemblye. And becauſe the Prynces came not them ſelues, whiche the Emperour thought verely they woulde haue done, he wylleth them to ſhe we their commiſſion and aucthoritie. After he nameth interceſſours Lewys the Paulſgraue, Iohn Archebyſhop of Treuers, Lewys Duke of Bauier, and William Byſhop of Straſborough. When they were contente with them, they beganne the treaty. Thether came alſo the diuines of the Proteſtantes, a great number, Iuſtus Menius, Piſtorius, Urbanus Regius, Bucer, Brentius, Blanrer, Oſiander, Shirepſius and many others. Melanchthō fell ſore ſycke by the waye. Theſe preached at home euery man to their company, but chiefly what tyme al the Ambaſſadours mette together to conſulte vpon any matter. But Ferdinando whan he vnderſtoode it, forbade them: the Ambaſſadours agayne ſhewed hym, howe they Preachyngs forbydden. preached not openly, but only priuatly, neyther was there anye cauſe why he ſhould be offended. The Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue, were about to come, in caſe the talke had gone forwarde, and taried vpon the frōtiers, to the entent that hearing newes therof, they might haue bene there by and by. The interceſſours requyre the Proteſtātes to deliuer them in a brief ſomme the Articles that are in controuerſy, they ſay, how they did exhibite the ſomme and confeſſion of their doctrine ten yeares ſynce at Auſpurge, & an Apologie to the ſame, whiche they ſticke vnto, and to none other beyng ready to make aunſwere, if any man fynde lacke therin. And for becauſe they knowe not what thynge chiefly their aduerſaries do reprehende therin, they haue nothyng to exhibyte, but the ſame is rather to be requyred at their hādes to ſhewe what they ſuppoſe to be contrary to Gods worde: Whiche if they doe, and that the matter come to diſputation, as was thoughte mete at Franckefurte, they wyll not be againſt a cōcorde. They ſhew them againe within a fewe dayes after, that foraſmuche as they dwel

ſtyll in their confeſſion exhibited at Auſpurge, they doe fynde in readinge of the treaty there, that certen thinges were brought to a conciliation, and certen not. Nowe that the reſte alſo myght come to a reconcilement, they wyll doe their endeuours, and deſyre them to vtter their myndes herein. The Proteſtauntes agayne ſaye, that there was in dede a talke of certen Articles, but nothyng concluded, nor anye agrement at al made there. Thus the matter being debated to and fro, where the Proteſtauntes requyred that they myght come to diſputation, and they againe ſayd, howe it was cōmaunded them by the king and the Emperour, that they ſhould procede accordinge to the treaty at Auſpurge. Kyng Ferdinando the .xvi. daye of Iuly, callyng them al Ferdinādos requeſt. before hym, foraſmuche ſayth he, as the matter ſtandeth thus, that nothyng can nowe be determined, and that chiefly for the abſence of the Duke of Saxō & the Lātgraue, an other day muſt be appointed, wher in the Ambaſſadours & learned men of both partes ſhall mete of lyke number, to conferre of the Articles profeſſed at Auſpurge. And than after a longe controuerſie betwyxt the kyng and the Proteſtauntes, for the peace of them and all their confederatours, about the reſtitution of churche goodes, and the iudges of the chamber, Ferdinando the .xxviij. daye of Iuly maketh a decree, and reciting the whole matter, The decree of Hagenaw appoynted the day for a cōmunication to be at Wormes the. xxviij daye of October, vpon condicion that the Emperour be ſo content.
            The Prynces Electours, the Dukes of Bauier, and the Duke of Cleaue, and the byſhoppes of Madenburge, Saliſburge, and Straſburge, are commaunded to ſende thether their counſellours, and the Proteſtauntes alſo theirs, ſo that there be eleuen on eyther part. And alſo as many Scribes, to wryte diligently what euery man ſayeth, & the conference to be had of the Proteſtantes doctrine profeſſed at Auſpurge, and that requeſt be made to the Emperour, that he wyll call a counſell of the Empyre. And in the meane tyme he commaundeth all men to obſerue peace, and abſtayne from violence, vnder a great penaltie, appointed by the Emperours commaundemēt. Prynces before mentioned at this aſſemblie were Chriſtopher the byſhop of Trent, & Henry Duke of Brūſwycke, but he went home before the matter was ended. The greateſt peace makers in this aſſemblie were the byſhop of Collon, and the Paulſgraue Electours, and alſo the byſhop of Auſpurge: For all the reſte were extreme agaynſt the Proteſtauntes. Duryng this aſſemblie, died Iohn Uaiuode kyng of Hōgary, leauing The death of Iohn Uayuode king of Hungary. behinde hym a younge ſonne, Stephen whome Iſabell daughter to Sigiſmunde kyng of Pole, had borne hym a lytle before, whiche was a cauſe alſo, that kyng Ferdinādo beyng aduertyſed therof by letters, haſted homewarde.
            About this time alſo were certen townes and villages of the Proteſtantes

ſet on fyre in Saxony & there aboutes, and burnt vp cleane. This wicked acte, was ſayde to be done by the Duke of Brunſwyck, Fyres in Saxony. as ſhalbe declared hereafter. The ſeconde kalendes of Iuly, Robert Barnes, Doctour of Diuinitie was brent at London in Smithfield. He was for a certen tyme fled out of Englande for the doctrine of the Doctor Bernes burnt in Smithfielde Goſpell, and what tyme he vnderſtode, howe kynge Henry gaue his mynde to the knowledge of the truthe, he retourned home agayn, and was after in the Ambaſſade ſent into Germany, and was one of them whiche treated with the diuines at Wittēberge, touching the kinges diuorſement, as is wrytten in the tenth boke. But where as the kyng had exiled the name of the byſhop of Rome, but kept ſtyl his doctrine, this man whiche loued the truthe, was chieflye by the meanes of the byſhop of Wyncheſter, this daye executed, after he had proteſted hys fayth openly there in the place of execution. And with hym alſo were Thre Prot. burnt, and thre Papiſtes hanged all at one tyme. brent two others of the ſame Religion. And the ſame daye in the ſelfe ſame place were three others hanged vpon the Gallowes, that helde with the ſupremacie of the byſhop of Rome, ſo yt neyther rāke Papiſts nor erneſt Proteſtauntes eſcaped puniſhement. In the moneth of Auguſt, ended his lyfe at Paris Williā Budey, maiſter of the requeſtes, a man of great learning, and worthy to be had in perpetuall memory, The death of Budey. for this cauſe only, that he and Cardinal Bellaye, byſhop of Paris, did counſell and perſwade Fraunces the Frenche kyng, to do a moſte noble acte, that is to appoint great ſtipendes, for the readers of tongues and good artes at Paris. For out of this welſpryng, no mā can beleue what clere and plentiful ryuers flowe out, not only into Fraunce, but alſo into other countreis. The lyke hath Henry the eight done in Englande both in Cambridge and Oxforde. And Buden would be buried without any ſolemnitie. This yeare was notable by reaſon of an intollerable heate and drought: Than alſo was excellent good wyne. In An erceadig hote ſōmer. the meane tyme the kyng of Fraunce, diſpatchyng abroade his letters to all his byſhoppes, commaunded them to go a proceſſion in all places. For albeit he had peace with the Emperour, whiche he would not willingly breake, yet feared he greatly leſte the olde enemye of mankynde, would ſtyre vp warre by his miniſters or euer it were longe. The Emperour being aduertiſed by the letters of his brother Ferdinando and the interceſſours of the whole matter, cōfirmeth the decree of Hagenawe. And wryting his letters from Utrecht at the Ides of Auguſt, exhorteth the Proteſtauntes to ſende their Ambaſſadours & diuines to Wormes at the daye aſſigned, and ſendeth ſaufe conduicte for them all. And becauſe of his affayres he can not be there hym ſelfe, he ſayeth he wyll ſende thether ſome notable man of his: And he doubteth not, but the byſhop wyl ſende thether alſo to quiet the cōtrouerſy.
            
               
He promiſeth moreouer an aſſemblie of thempire, whither he will come in parſon, vnto the which aſſemblie alſo, the ſumme of this talke muſt be referred.
            Afterwardes at the Ides of Octob. in other letters, dated at Bruſſels: he maketh Granvellan his deputie, giuing him full authoritie at the communication to be had. That time was Granvellā at Bizanſe, in highe Burgundie, the towne where he was borne. And beynge ſo occupied with other affayres, that he coulde not come thither by the day, writyng his letters to the Archebiſhop of Mentz, and to the reſidew of the Princes, appointed to this talke, the ſeconde daye of Nouembre, he ſendeth before Iohn Nauie of Lucemburge, to excuſe hys longe tariyng: For after he had wronge oute Mathew Helde (as is before ſaid) he called forth this man, as more obſequious and agreable to his maners, and placed him in his rome. In the meane time themperour Nauius hath the place of Heldus. calleth a counſell of thempire, that in the moneth of Ianuary, they ſhould al be ready at Regenſpurge. After whan Granvellan him ſelfe came to Wormes, accompanied with his ſonne the Biſhoppe of Arras, and certen Diuines of Spaine, Muſcoſa, Maluenda, Carrobello, ſhewing fyrſte his commiſſion, and the Emperours letters, the xxv. daye of Nouembre he made an Oration. And excuſynge the matter, that neither themperour, nor king Ferdinando were there, he declareth The oratiō of Granvellan at Wor. the louing and frendly minde that themperour beareth to the common wealth, who wiſheth for nothing more earneſtly, than that this olde feaſtred ſtrife might be taken awaye, wherewith not onely the Church, but alſo the common wealth is ſore afflicted: For he doubteth not, but they them ſelues ſee the preſent calamitie, and wil iudge that a reformation of the Churche is neceſſary: Therfore can there nothing concerne their dewties more, than throughe godly counſels to remedy this euill, that it ſpread abrode no further: For in like caſe, as it is the part of good Citezins, to quenche the fyre that happeneth by caſualtie: ſo muſt you do for all the worlde in this caſe, that peace and concorde may be reſtored. Furthermore, let them wet with them ſelues, and ſet before their eies, what an heape of euilles haue throughe this diſſention, as it were, ouerflowed Germany: For to paſſe ouer murther and miſchief, religion is deſtroyed, Charitie out of men herts The euils that cōmeth of the diſcention in Religion. cleane quenched, all reuerence of the olde Catholike churche taken away: finally, the great miſery can not be ſufficientlye expreſſed by any mans eloquence: In times paſt Germany hath floriſhed both in Relion, and in all kinde of vertu, but nowe it hath very muche degenerated And is accompted the cauſe and author of all the diſcommodities of the vniuerſall commune weale. And vnleſſe a remedye be founds for this diſeaſe, all thinges will go to ruine. And for aſmuche as themperor,

hathe appoynted thys diſputation, to thentente that bothe the truth myght be ſearched out, & gods glory auaunced, they muſt bring with them a mynd neyther ambitious nor couetous, but godly & moderat, hauing only a regarde vnto Chryſt, who now with his armes ſtretched foorthe as he wold imbrace, deſyreth the ſame of all menne: This is alſo the only wiſh of the high biſhop, of themperour moſt Auguſt & of king Ferdinando: Therfore he beſecheth them, for the death of Chriſt, & for all loues, that they woulde amende oure lordes coate, which is rent & torne on euery ſyde, remembryng the name of Chriſt, which was geuen them in holy baptiſme, remembring alſo the noble prouince of Germany, the natife countrey of them all: For except they be reconſyled, it is to be aſcribed vnto them, what miſchiefe ſome euer ſhall arryſe hereafter, of this theyr obſtioate mynde: but yf they wyll handle ſo weyghty a matter with modeſtie & ſobrietie, the ſame ſhalbe bothe to God moſt acceptable, and themperour will alſo accepte it in ſteade of a very greate benefyte: who wyll afterward do his endeuour, that in the nexte aſſemblie of thempire, the matter ſhalbe wholy accompliſſhed. After the death of Uayuod, the tutours and reſt of the nobles ſent ambaſſadours to the Turke to commend the childe vnto The Turke receiueth the infant of Uayuode. hym: who promiſeth to defend him, and with all ſendeth hym giftes. Fernando alſo, when he knew therof, ſēdeth Hieroſme Laſcie which certen yeres paſt had forſaken the Uaynode, from Hagenaw to Conſtantinople, that by a fit man he myght appeaſe the Turke. After whē he came home, he thought it beſt to make warre before the Quene beyng a wydow, and the tutours of the infante were furniſhed. Which knowen, the Turke throweth hys Ambaſſadoure in pryſon, as moſte priuie of Farnando his counſel, and alſo ſendeth ayde, who not withſtanding Laſcus committed to priſed. being letted by reaſon of the winter, came ſomwhat to late, The nexte daye after that Granuellan had hys oration, They beegan to deuyſe of the notaryes and ſcribes, and on eyther ſyde were choſen two, whyche ſhoulde penne, and kepe althynges diligentelye. By the Proteſtantes were aſſygned, Caſpar Cruciger, & Woolfangus Muſculus, diuines. After the eyght daye yf December, Thomas Campegius, Biſſhop of Feltre, the Roomiſſhe Legate, had an oration, in the preface wherof ſpeakyng many thynges concernyng peace, whych is ſo greately commended vnto vs of Chryſt, lamentyng alſo the ſtate of Germany, affyrmeth that ſerten biſſhops of rome, but eſpecially paule the thyrde, haue done what they can, to put of this calamitie from it, and for the ſame cauſe of late, called a counſell at Uicence, but when certen monethes paſſed, and no man came, he was conſtreined to differre it tyll an other tyme: but themperoure whyche is that eldeſt and obedient childe of the churche of Roome, the Protectour alſo and the aduocate, hathe appoynted this conference, as a certen preparatiue,

to the treatye that ſhalbe at Regenſpurge: by whoſe wyll and aſſent, and by the Byſhops cōmaundement, he is coomen thither to intreat them that they would applye theyr whole endeuours to vnitie & concorde for ſertaynly the biſhop of Rome will do herein what he can, ſauing his holines. The preſidents of this aſſemblie toke order at the beginning, that no man ſhould be made priuie to theire talke, vnleſſe he be of the nomber appoynted, and that the actes therof ſhould not bee publiſhed, till themperoure wer firſt aduertiſed of all together: moreouer, they required that the Proteſtantes would compriſe, & exhibite in wryting, ſuch articles as they wer fully reſolued to ſticke vnto. Of theſe matters & of the maner of the othe, of the nōber alſo of the diſputers, and of geuing of voyces, they had a longe altercation: For when the catholickes perceyued that the counſellours of the Paulſgraue & the Marques of Brādenburg electours, & alſo of the Duke of Cleaue were inclined towardes the Proteſtants, fearing leſt they ſhoulde be ouer coōmen with voices, of a ſet pourpoſe differred the matter from day to day, tyll ſuch tyme as they had other worde from themperour The papiſts ſeke delayes as herafter I ſhall declare. And the ſecond daye of Ianuary, they doe propounde new and ſtraunge condicyons, that of the whole nomber ther ſhould be choſē two diuines to reaſon the matter: that the ſcribes ſhould wryte theyr argumentes, and delyuer them to the preſydentes that the leſſe parte ſhoulde not bee bounden to followe the opinion of the greater, vnleſſe themperoure and the ſtates of thempyre ſhoulde thynke it expediente: that the notaryes ſhoulde not write all the talke of the reaſoners, but the bare ſentences, whether they wer agreed vpon or left in controuerſie: that the decree of Auſpurge, and ſuch other lyke, ſhoulde neuertheles be of force. But the Proteſtantes agayn require, that foraſmuche as ther bee .xxii. on bothe partes appoynted to conferre: euery man mighte ſpeake hys mynde. And that not only the bare ſentences, but alſo the Argumentes and reaſons, with the probations of the ſame be committed to wrytyng. They declare alſo that it is vnreaſonable in this moſt holy cauſe of al others, to follow the opinion of any part, & not rather the preſcripte of gods worde, or to compell any man, that he ſhoulde eyther thynke or ſpeake againſt it. Whileſt the time was thus prolonged, the Proteſtantes oftētimes cōplain thereof and deſire, that the diſputation of the doctrine propounded at Auſpurge, may accordinge to the decree of Hagenawe, be forthewith commenced, eſpecially conſyderyng the ſame to be a frendly diſceptation and not captious, to thentent a certen way vnto concorde might be prepared. The diuines alſo which were there very many, required the ſame, as Melancthon, Capito, Bucer, Oſiander, Brentius, Caluine, Aleſius, a Scot ſent thither by the marques of Brandenburge & diuers others, vnto whom wer annexed, Symon Grineus, and Iohn

Sturmius. At the laſt aboute the Ides of Ianuary, the catholickes chooſe Iohn Eekius, and thothers Melancthon, to diſpute together. A diſputation betwixte Eekius and Melancton. And firſt of all to thentent they might procede in order, they Reaſon of originall ſynne, by courſe, in open conſiſtory: but beholde, the thirde day after the diſputation began Themperours letters wer brought to Granuellan and to the reſt of Ambaſſadours, wherin he differreth the whole matter vntill the aſſemble at Regenſpurge, commaunding chiefly the Proteſtantes to come thither, & Granuellan to repare vnto hym with all ſyede. Theſe letters beyng red in the conſiſtorie, the xviii. daye of Ianuary, Granuellan, exhorteth them, to obey themperoure, and come vnto Regenſpurge: for he is very deſyrous of peace: And yf he him ſelf by occaſion of talke hath ſpoken any thyng roughly, he deſyreth them not to take it in euell part, and promiſeth to beare hys good wyll towards the publyke weale. Whereunto the Proteſtantes ſay, how they are ryght ſory, that the diſputation had not begō a great whyle ſouner, and that they cānot now procede further therin but for aſmuch as themperour doeth ſo commaund, they muſt obey Wherfore they wyll now retourn home, to declare howe all thinges ſtande, and doubte not, but their Princes and cities will gratifye thē
               perour herin: Notwithſtandyng in caſe it be longe or euer they come or ſende, they ar to be holden excuſed, by reaſon the time is but ſhorte. In thys aſſemble, was alſo Peter Paul Uerger, biſhop of Iuſtinople in worde, as for the Frenche kyng, but ſent in dede by the Biſhop of The oratiō of Uergerivs. Roome, who ſuppoſed that he myght ſerue hys tourne better, beynge there in another mans name, he made an oration of the vnitie & peace of the churche, and ſettyng it foorthe in prynte, he gaue it there to dyuers. Wherein he goeth about chiefly to proue that we maye not ones thynke vpon a counſell prouinciall, for that ſame Aſſembly dyd repreſente a certen ſhew of the lyke thyng, and ſemed to prepare the waye: for the Byſhop coulde abyde nothynge worſe, and Uergerius knewe hys mynde full well. By hym therefore, and by ſuche others of the biſſhops miniſters, the thynge was letted and at the lengthe dyſſolued. For in tractyng of the tyme, & fyndyng of delayes, they ſeeke ſtartyng holles, and wayes to eſcape. In the begynnyng of Ianuary themperoure takyng hys Iorney from Bruſſels, came vnto Mentz, the head citie of Lorayne, from thence by Spires he goeth to Regenſpurge, & by the way ſent thoſe for ſayd letters to Grāuellā, he traueled by Norinberge, whiche citie he had not ſene before, and was receyued with moſte ſumptuous preparation. The eleuenth day of Februarye Philyp Schabotte Admirall of Fraunce, a man of great honour, beyng, brought into ſuſpicion with the kynge for not acquitinge himſelfe in The admiral of fraūce condemned. the warre of Sauoye beefore mentyoned, after longe and mooche inquiſityon of hys demeanoure, was condemned of extortyon, and

treaſon, and depriued of al his honour & dignities, which he had moſt ample, without all hope of reſtitution, and was committed to priſon at Uincen, not farre frō Paris. William Poiet Chaūcelor of Fraūce gaue this ſentence at Mellon, at the which Iudgement were all the notable men, and Iudges in the lawe, in all Fraunce. Albeit that ſentences geuen after this ſort, are wont euer to be diſſolued or altered, yet by the kynges authoritie not longe after he was cleane releaſed, as ye ſhall heare afterwardes. About this time alſo Maurice the ſon of Henry Duke of Saxonie, maried Agnes, daughter to the Lantzgraue. In the moneth of Marche diuers Princes and ſtates reſorted A greate aſſemble at Regēſpurg. to Regenſpurge, when themperor had taried for them a certen ſpace. Thither came alſo the Lantzgraue, with a great company, almoſt atthende of Marche. And the nexte daye wente to themperor with his garde about him, of whom he was receiued right gentlye. The duke of Saxonie ſent thither a moſt honorable Ambaſſador, and Diuines among whom was Melanchton. From the Biſhoppe of Rome alſo came Caſpar Contarene, a right famous Cardinall. There were preſent, the prince Elector of Brandenburg, Friderick and Otto Henry, Paulſegraues, William and Lewis dukes of Bauier, Henry duke of Brunſwike, Charles duke of Sauoie, George marques of Brandenburge, Philip Duke of Pomerane, moreouer the Biſhops of Mentz, Saliſburg, Breme, Bamberg, Spires, Auſpurge, Eiſtet, Conſtance, Luthers boke agaiſt the Duke of Brunſwick. Hildeſſene, Brixie & Paſſaw. Aboute this time came forth (and was brought to Regenſpurge) a boke of Martin Luthers very vehement written in the vulgare tounge againſt the Duke of Brunſwycke. In the laſt boke before this, I mētioned of this dukes inuectiues againſt the Duke of Saxon, and the Lantzgraue: And where in a booke ſet forth of late, he called the Duke of Saxō Heretike, rebel, Cain, Monſter, Eeſope, hauing nether vertu, or qualitie of body, nor yet of mind, whom Luther alſo him ſelfe (whom he maketh his god) doth laughe at and contemne. Luther thinking the ſame to concerne his eſtemation, anſwereth ſharpely, and ſaieth it is a ſclaunder. And for aſmuch as the aduerſaryes take vpon them the title of the Churche, by diuers and ſundry argumentes brought in, he proueth that they haue cleane forſaken the trew Church, & by a compariſon made, he ſheweth that the Biſhoprike of Rome, which hathe altogether defyled and corrupted the trew doctryne of Chryſt, to be Antechriſt, of whom ſo manye yeares ſynce Daniell and the Apoſtles haue prophecyed. After he obiecteth vnto them, that they flye from the lyght, & though they ſpeake muche of a lawfull counſell yet dare they not abyde it, but yf youre church be holy, (ſayth he) why is it afearde of a counſell, or what nedeth it any reformation? or yf it nedeth, why cal ye it holy? will ye alſo redreſſe youre holynes.

We neuer deſyred a counſell to refourme our churche: For God hathe already ſanctified it with his worde, pourged it from all the Romiſhe fylthynes, and reſtored the trew doctrine: howbeit our life doeth not anſwere to this profeſſion, neither do we perfourme in dede ſo muche as both we are bounden and wiſhe to do: but this was alſo the complaint of the Prophetes and Apoſtles whileſt they liued. And that felicitie ſhal than happen vnto vs, what timr we being deliuered out of this ſynfull body, as out of a priſon, ſhall obtaine the like condition wt Angels. We deſyre a counſell, to thentēt our churches might be openly Why the Proteſt. deſyre a counſell. heard, and that your doctrine, contrary to the doctrine of Chriſte, might be condemned, that men beyng called agayne from it, mighte knowe and folow the trewe Religion of Chriſt: Nowe where ye obiecte vntd vs rebelliō and diſobedience, it is falſe, euen by the teſtimonie of the ſtates imperiall: who know that our Princes are obeidient to themperour in all thinges: For beyng called to any Aſſemblie, or to go a warfare, they haue bene euermore ready: But if ye raile thus on vs becauſe we obey not thēperours decres that condēne our doctrin: We are glad and geue God thankes, for ſhewing no obeidience that way. For the thing that is dew vnto god only, ought not to be giuen to themperor, which ſhould be Gods Client. God hath giuen him gouernement Themperor Gods client. ouer realmes and nations, but he alone will gouerne his church with his worde, neyther doeth he admit any man into the ſocietie of this honor. Themperor hath more than ynough to do, concernyng thadminiſtration of the common weale. For vnto this office hath God appointed him, and preſcribed him theſe limites. But if he procede any further, than doeth he inuade and vſurpe vpon Gods iuriſdiction. The Duke of Brunſwike had written in his inuectiues amonges other thinges, that Luther had reiſed vp this Tragedye of Religion, at the motion of Duke Friderik, for enuy that Albert Arch biſhop of Mentz had the Biſhoprike of Madenburge. Wherunto Luther anſwerynge, this ſclaunder (ſaieth he) commeth to the Duke of Brunſwicke by the ſuggeſtion of Mentz: And where he diſſembleth to know, whan he knoweth beſt of all, I ſhall declare the cauſe & original of al this buſines. In the ſeuentēth yere of grace aboue a thouſande What moued Luth. to writ againſt the papiſtes. and fyue hundreth. Iohn Tecell, a Dominicke Frere, caried about pardons to ſell in Germany. This Tecel themperor Maximiliā had once condemned to die, and had commaunded to be drowned in the riuer at Inſpruck, but through the interceſſion of duke Friderick, whoſe chaunce was to be there at that time, he eſcaped the daunger. He (I ſay) amonges other thinges taught, howe he had ſo great authoritie of yt biſhop of Rome, yt although a mā had deflowred yt virgin Mary, & had gottē hir wt child, he had power to forgeue hī for money.

Moreouer he did not onely forgeue ſynnes paſt, but alſo what ſo euer a man liſted to commit herafter. And within a while after that, came The blaſphemie of frere Tecell. forth a Boke with the armes and title of Biſhop Albert: wherein the Pardoners wer cōmaunded, moſt diligently to ſetforth to the people the vertu of thoſe iudulgences. Wherfore it was knowen that Tecell was hired by the ſaid Biſhoppe to make thoſe outrageous ſermons. For Albert was lately than created Archbiſhop of Mentz, vpon condicion, that he ſhoulde redeme his Palle from Rome of his owne coſtes A moſt coſtly ſtole or palle and charges. For thre Biſhoppes of that citie wer deceaſed within ſhort ſpace, Bertolde, Iames, and Uriell, and it was ouer chargeable for the Colledge to beare ſo great a burthen, and ſo often times. For that Palle ſtoode them in as good as xxx. thouſande crownes or euer it came at home. So dere coulde the Biſhoppe of Rome ſell a ſory piece of clothe: This money had the Marchantes of Auſpurge diſburſed: A meane to get money by pardons. wherfore to pay them, Albert deuiſed this kinde of gaine. And the Biſhop did graunt it him, yet ſo, as the one halfe ſhold be brought to Rome, to the buildyng of S. Peters Church. But that time knew I none of all this gere: therfore wrot I to the Biſhoppe of Mentz, in humble wyſe, exhorting him that he woulde inhibite thoſe criers: but he anſwered not one worde. The Biſhoppe of Brandenburge beyng alſo moued, admoniſhed me to ceaſe, and not to bring my ſelfe in danger. After this I propounded certen Theames, contrary to thoſe of Tecels, which within a fewe dayes were caried ouer all Germany, and were gredely red of many: For all men complained of Pardons eſpecially of thoſe that Tecell taught. And becauſe there was neuer a Biſhoppe, nor yet doctor that durſt gaineſay them, for that Tecel feared all men with the Biſhoppes thunderbolt. My name began to be ſpoken of, that there was founde one at the length in all the worlde, that did reſiſt. But that vaine glory was not to me verye pleaſaunte. For I ſcarſely vnderſtode than, what the name of Indulgences mēt. This is the fyrſt originall and cauſe of this motion, whiche came not of duke Friderick, but proceded of the Biſhop of Mentz, by the practiſe of his collector and briber Frere Tecell: Wherfore if there be anye thing nowe that nippeth him, let him thanke himſelfe therfore. An other cauſe of this trouble gaue that moſte holye father, Leo the tenth, what time he curſed me, and excommunicated me, and manye in all places did triumphe ouer me, neyther was there anye man ſo vnlearned, Luther is curſed of the Pope. that did not practiſe his ſtyle to write againſt me. I thought aſſuredly at the fyrſt, that the Biſhoppe would aſſoile me, and condemne Tecell, for that the Canon lawe maketh for me, whiche teacheth plainely, that Iudulgences can not deliuer ſoules out of Purgatory: But lo, whileſt I loke for a ioyfull ſentence from Rome, I am ſtriken with the thonderbolt, and condemned for the moſt wicked mā aliue.

Than began I to defende my doynges, ſettinge forth many bokes of the ſame, inſomuche that the matter was brought at the laſte into the aſſemblie of thempire. Thus did the wollen threde, wherof the Palle was made, breede matter of contention. And nowe is the ſame ſo faſt A wollē halter to ſtrangle the pope wrought, and of ſuche ſtrength, that the Biſhoppe of Rome is in daū
               ger, to be ſtrangled withall. And ſeyng it is ſo, let thē impute the fault to them ſelues, which ſo impudently and exceſſiuely handled the matter. I maye well laughe in my ſleue: For he that dwelleth in heauen hath ſtrikē them, and would not ſuffer ſo great wickednes to raigne any longer, and hath brought his people out of yt darkenes of Egipte, into the moſt cleare light and pleaſant ſyght of the ſonne. This Palle ſo often here mentioned, is geuen onely to Archbiſhops, and as a ſyngular benefite, to a fewe other Biſhoppes, of the whiche numbre the Biſhop of Bamberge in Germany is one. And it is made with thys The maner of makynge this Palle. Ceremonie. In the Feaſt of S. Agnes the Uirgyn, whiche is the xxi. day of Ianuary, what time they come to Agnus dei in the Meſſe, two white Lambes are, laide vpon the Aultar, which afterwarde are deliuered to the Subdeacon of S. Peters churche. And they put them forth to paſture, and whan ſhering time commeth, do clippe them, of the which Woll mingled with other woll, whan it is ſponne into fine threde, are made theſe Palles, which are not paſt three fingers brode and hange downe from the ſhoulders to the midde breaſt, and to the Reines of the backe, like a ſtoale: and at eche ende, are thinne plats of leade of the ſame breadth. Beyng thus wouen and wrought, they are caried to the bodies of Peter and Paule, and there certen prayers beyng ſaid ouer them, they are left there al that night. The next day the ſubdeacons receaue them againe, and keps them diligently, vntil ſuch time as ſome Archbiſhoppe that hathe nede of one, or his Proctor do ſue for it. And than it is deliuered with many ceremonies, & they that haue the cariage therof are inioyned, that they remaine not aboue one night in a place. This ware whiche is neither coſtely, nor curiouſlye wrought, do the Archebiſhoppes redeme of the Biſhoppe of Rome for a wonderfull ſome of money. For it is not lawefull for him to weare the ſame that his predeceſſor did, but euery one of them is bounden to purchaſe a newe for him ſelfe at Rome: Againe in caſe he become Patriache, or Metropolitan of another churche, throughe promutation, or any other meane, althoughe he had bought one before, yet muſt he of neceſſitie bie another againe. Of ſuche kinde of pillage, greate complaintes Complaints of pillage. haue bene often made of all nations, as I ſhewed you in the fourth boke, but chiefly in Germany.
            And in the yeare of our Lorde, a thouſande fyue hundreth & xviii. what tyme Leo the tenth in the aſſemblie of Auſpurge, by Cardinall Caietan exhorted Maximilian and the Princes to the Turkiſh war,

and went about that all ſtates ſhould pay money, and the Cleargye for theyr partes, the tenthes: Anſwer was made him, yt there was no hope, to obteine that of theccleſiaſticall perſons, who were ſo manye waies, and by newe policies pilled, and poled by the courte of Rome:
            And the people, if anye thinge ſhoulde be impoſed, woulde make great exclamations, that they haue ſo oft geuen theyr money for thys Theſe Fyeres were ſet on by the duke of Brū
                  ſwike. purpoſe, and maruell how it is conſumed, or whither that money goeth, that is gathered yearly in Germany. I tolde you before of ſundry fyers, that were kindled of late in Saxonie: Whan diuerſe of the malefactours were apprehended and taken in ſundry places, and examination had, they teſtified, howe they were hired for money, by the captaines and officers of Henry duke of Brunſwike, and ſet on by them to do it. And this they affirmed to the laſt breth. For this cauſe therefore, and for other matters, the Lantzgraue, and thambaſſadours of Saxonie, accuſe the duke of Brunſwicke to the Emperor at Regenſpurge, and exhibite in writyng the ſeuerall confeſſion of euery one of theſe make fyers. And ioinetly with them, did William of Brunſwik accuſe his brother Henry ſore, who had kept him many yeares in pryſon. Whan all the moſt part were commen together, they began to ſit the fyft day of Aprill. And in thēperours name, as the maner is, was propounded, what trauaile and paine he had alwayes takē, that the The treatie of Regenſpurge publike weale might be well eſtabliſhed. And after a longe diſcourſe of all that he had done, aſwell for the appeaſynge of the controuerſye that is, in Religion, and reformation of the churche, as alſo for the defence of thempyre againſt the cruell inuaſions of the Turkes. In fine themperor demaunded of them all, but chiefly of the Proteſtauntes, that they would geue him leaue to choſe out certeine to conferre, and herein to truſt him, who will do nothing that ſhall not concerne the preſeruation of the countrey. Whan they had this graunted him, the xiij day of Aprill, he appointeth, by Friderike the Paulſgraue, to thys The choſen by themp. talke, Iulius Pflugius, Iohn Eckius, Iohn Gropper, Philippe Me lanchton, Martin Bucer, Iohn Piſtor, that they ſhould treate of the oppinions that be in controuerſie, and after make reporte and bringe them to him and the princes. Againe the two and twentie daye of Aprill, he calleth them vnto him, and gyueth them a great charge, that in the handling of this matter, they ſhould giue nothing to affections but that all pertialitie ſet apart, they ſhould onely haue reſpecte vnto Gods glory. They full modeſtly do excuſe themſelues, and require al, that other more mete, might be appointed, ſauing Eckius: For he ſaid The raſhnes of Eckius. he was well prepared and fourniſhed: but where themperor dyd inſtant them to take it vpon them, they were content, and alſo intreate him, that he would aſſigne ſome to be as preſidentes of the diſputation

& others to bee as witneſſes and hearers of the matter. And ſo he commaundeth Fridericke Palatine and Granuellan to bee as governours: and willeth Theodorycke Countie Manderſchit, Eberhart Ruden, Henry Haſie, Fraunces Burcarte, Iohn Figius, Iames Sturmins, to be there, to beare witnes. And when all theſe came together, the, xxvii. day of April, Fridericke the Palſgraue admoniſheth the Collocutours that they ſhould ſeriouſly go to the matter and conferre together frendly. After Granuellan exhibiteth a booke written A boke preſented to the Collocutours. which he ſayd was delyuered to themperour of certayne good & well learned men, as fit for a reconcilement: and that themperour woulde to thentent they might haue a lawful argument, and matter to treat of, that they ſhoulde reade ouer the ſame booke alſo, and waye it, and looke what they ſhoulde all allow therein, to commende, and The contēts of the boke. the reſt to correcte. This booke contayned theſe articles following, of the creation of man, and before the fall, of the integritie of nature, of freewill, of the cauſe of ſynne, of originall ſynne, of the iuſtification of man, of the church, and of the tokens and authoritie of the ſame, of the notiſe of the woorde, of repentaunce after the fal, of the authoritie of the churche, in diſcerning and interpretyng the ſcripture, of the ſacramentes, of order, bapteſme, confirmyng, of the lordes ſupper of penaunce, abſolution, matrimony, vnction, of the bond of charitie, of the dignitie of the churche, and of the authoritie to eſtabliſhe the weale publicke, of images, maſſe, and miniſtration of the ſacramentes, of the diſcipline of the churche, bothe for the miniſters, and the people. In The Proteſtantes letters to the Frēch king for ſuche as wer perſecuted for the goſpell. the moneth of May, the Proteſtantes wryting their letters frō Regenſpurg to the Frenche kynge, entreate for ſuch as at the ſame tyme in Fraunce, for the profeſſion of the goſpell, wer partly in priſon, partly in exile, partly hyd in corners, and led a miſerable lyfe. And becauſe many were receyued into fauour, incaſe they woulde abiure, they require that he woulde releaſe them from that condicyon, declarynge howe heynous a matrer it is to wounde the conſcience. The cauſe of thys perſecution; was by a ſentence geuen agaynſt the Merindolans in the prouince, by the preſident Bartholomew Chaſſanie a lawyer, which beyng terrible and cruell beyonde meaſure, put the poore men in a wonderful feare: not withſtanding the full execution therof was differred tyll an other tyme, and the perſecution of thys yere was but a balle playe in compariſon of that, whiche followed foure yeares after, as ſhalbe recited in hys place. Whyleſt theſe thynges were done at Regenſpurge, the Duke of Cleaue, hauing themperour hys heuye The Duke of Cleaue goeth priuely into Fraunce. Lorde, for the poſſeſſion of Gelderlande, goeth priuely into Fraunce, appoynting ſuch as he would haue with hym, a day and a place wher they going an other way, ſhould mete hym, what tyme, therfore he arryued at Paris aboute thende of Aprill, being receiued of the kynges

officers and conducted throughe Orleans, the ſixte daye of Maye he came to the kyng at Amboſe a towne in Turin by the Riuer of Loire who imbracing him none otherwiſe than the father would his owne ſonne, ſent word immediatly to the kyng of Nauarre, and hys ſyſter, that they ſhoulde repayre vnto hym with all expedition, and brynge theyr Daughter with them, for they wer the ſame time in Gaſcoigne. And after they wer coommen, the kyng by and by began to entreate of the maryage: And albeit the parentes than did not greatly lyke it, and the yonge mayde alſo was ſomewhat vnwyllyng, not ſomoch of her owne iudgement, or contempte of hym, as by the whiſpering and perſwaſyon of ſertayne whych diſpyſed Germanye, as rude and barren in compariſon of the delycacye and pleaſauntenes of, Fraunce, yet vanquiſhed by the kynges authoritye, whiche iudged the ſame affinitie very fit for hys pourpoſe, at the laſt they gaue place. Wherfore at the Ides of Iune the maryage was ſolemniſed, the kynge hymſelfe The Duke marieth the daughter of Nauarre. leadyng the bryde hys nece to the churche and the Cardinall of Turnon played the preſt. The kynge gaue them a goodly dyner: And ther were thambaſſadours of Roome, Englande, Portugall, Ueniſe and Saxonye: For themperours had made an excuſe. After a fewe dayes the Duke retourned homewarde leauing his yong ſpouſe in Fraunce whom her mother woulde haue to remayne with her tyll ſhe wer of rype yeares for a man. Before the Dukeof of Cleaue came into Fraunce the kyng had enlarged the Admirall that we ſpake of before, and ſent hym home to hys owne houſe, and after in the moneth of May commaunded The Admirall reſtored. hym to come vnto hym, whom receiued moſt gently, he reſtored to hys former dignitie and called as it wer out of hel, into light agayne, and after a ſtraung example and ſeldome heard of, made the ſentence geuen agaynſt hym, by all the princypal iudges of hys realm cleane fruſtrate, partlye for hatred of the conſtable, as it is thoughte, and partly at the requeſte of madame Deſtamps, whych was allyed to the Admirall by a new affinitie: Therfore Memorancie the Counſtable, which loued not thadmirall, his egall, and was oute of the The conſtable put out of the courte. kynges fauoure, for themperours paſſage, as before is ſayed, beyng had in contempt, gotte hym home and led a priuate lyfe, where before he had ruled the Kynge wholye hymſelfe alone. (?)
         
         
            
            
               ✚ The fourtenth Boke of Sleidanes Commentaryes, concernyng the ſtate of relygion, and the common Weale, duryng the reigne of the Empyre of Charles the fyfte.
            
               
                  ❧ The argument of the fourtenth Booke.
               IN the proceſſe of the communication, they treated of an order to be eſtablyſhed in the churche: ſondry aduyſes and aunſwers bee there gathered. Eckius diſpray ſyng the booke there preſented, accuſeth hys fellow collocutours. Themperoure hauing intellygence of the Turkes commyng, remitreth thys colloquie to the counſel, Fregoſe & Rincon thambaſſadours of the French kynge to the greate Turke, at taken and ſlayne, Wherupon the Baſtarde of Maximilyan is areſted, The Turke taketh poſſeſſion in the cytie of Buda. Thēperoure arryueth at Argiers. The plage is in Germany, and great calamities in Auſtriche. A ſupplication of the princes of Auſtriche to kynge Ferdinando that they myght haue the Goſpell: Wherunto he aunſwereth. After the ouerthrowe in Hongary, an aſſemblye was holden at Spires, where Oliuier beeing for the French kynge, made a longe Oration. Cardinall Maron the Popes Ambaſſadour offereth a counſell at Trcent. Luther Wryteth a booke intitled the ſermon of Soldiours, comparyng papiſtry, with the Turkes Alcorane: The warre beyng proclaymed, betwene the Frenche kyng and the Emperour, Marten van Roſſem inuadeth Brabante, decrces are made in Fraunce agaynſte the Lutheranes. Farell preacheth at Mentz.
            
            
               ABoute the ende of Aprill the diſputation The colloquie of lerned men at Regtnſpurg began as I ſhewed yon before, but Eckius was vnpatient and froward, for both he abhorred the booke, and miſlyked hys fellowes and a lyttell after fell into an agewe, ſo that he coulde not bee there: yet went his fellowes to him, and conferred with hym of al thynges. And certen places of the boke exhibited, were throughe conference amended by common aſſent, but of ſome other they coulde not agree, of the churche and authoritie therof, of the ſacrament of the body and bloud of Chryſt, of the recytall of ſynnes, of ſatiſfaction, of the vnitie & order of theccleſiaſtical miniſters, of ſainctes, of maſſe, of the vſe of the whole ſacramente, of the ſingle lyfe. So was the booke deliuered vp to themperoure, as it was corrected, and the Diuines of the Proteſtantes had written theyr mindes, vpon theſe forſayd opinions, which were leafte in controuerſy, this was the laſt of Maye. Themperoure commendeth theyr good endeuour, and lyketh it well. And incaſe the matter herafter do ſo require, he exhorteth thē to ſhew the like goodwill and dilygence. Than in the eyght day of Iune, in the conſiſtorie

before the Princes and other ſtates he maketh relation, what hathe ben done, and howe farre they haue proceded: howe the collocutours haue handled the matter dilygentely, and haue reconcyled dyuerſe, & weyghty articles of doctryne: And touching the reſt, that are not yet agreed vpon, the diuines of the Proteſtantes, haue opened theyre myndes. After he exibiteth vnto ether of them boothe the wrytinges, requiring them, that ſo ſhortly as may bee, they woulde conſulte thervpon, and vtter theyr mindes in either of them. And moreouer would conſyder, howe the ſtate of the weale publike, as well ciuile, as eccleſiaſticall maye or ought to be reformed: he for hys parte will leaue nothyng vndone herein, doubtyng not, but the biſhops legate is alſo inclyned to the ſame. The Senate of Princes conſiſteth for the moſte parte of Biſſhops. Therefore the nomber of them preuayled, whyche The worſe parte ouer cometh by the nomber of voyces. bothe reiected the booke exibited by themperoure, and alſo the whole treaty of the collocutours: and the reaſon therof was cōpriſed in writing ſomewhat extremely: but what tyme the Electours, and certain other prynces, that loued the common wealth, would not aſſent therto, another wryting was framed and delyuered to themperoure the ſecond day of Iuly, wherin they doo admonyſhe hym, that as the advocate and defendour of the churche, he doe communicate the whole matter with the Byſſhops Legate, accordyng to the decree of Hagenaw, eſpecially thoſe articles, which the collocutours haue agreed vpon: and that they bee wayghed dilligentlye, whether there bee anye thynge in them, that eyther in ſence or in woordes is agaynſt the doctryne of the godly expoſytours, or alſo the cuſtom of the church: moreouer incaſe any thyng be darkely ſpoken, that it may be declared, and that after that done, he hymſelf do make reporte to the ſtates of their opinion, and what his mynde is touching the ſame, and that he wold be in hande with the Proteſtantes, that they woulde be contented to be inſtructed in the reſydewe of the articles that be in controuerſie: or yf that can not be obtayned, that than the matter be referred, either to a generall counſell, or els to a prouinciall Sinode of Germanye. Amonges the ſtates wer ſertayne that hyndred the reformation of Relygion: and it is thought that by their motion, the whole treaty was referred to the Biſſhops legate. Themperoure aunſwered to the ſame the .vii. day of Iuly. How he had ſuppoſed that the collocutours wold haue vttered theyr myndes more playnly, eſpecially conſyderyng that they had the booke ſo long by them, but for aſmoche as they ſtick herein, he wyll follow theyr counſell, and will know the legates mynd in euery poynte, to thentent he will omit nothynge, that conſerneth hys dewtie. The Proteſtantes alſo declare vnto themperour by wryting what theyr mynde is, and open more at full, the doctryne reconſyled, and ſhew that it is not harde, to accord the reſte in lyke caſe, and ſaie:

that they kepe thē ſelues to their confeſſion at Auſpurge. Than touching the third requeſt of the Emperour, cōcerning the ciuil gouernment Meanes to reſtore theccleſiaſticall function. of the cōmen wealth, they ſay howe the lawes yt were made .xi. yere ſince at Auſpurge, muſt be put in vre & execution, and ſhew how theccleſiaſtical function may be reſtored if the goſpel be taught ſincerely, if according to the aunciēt lawes the miniſters of churches may be choſen by the cōſent of the people, if the biſhops doe retaine ſtyll in their own hādes the ciuile miniſtration, & for aſmuch as of an old cuſtome, they them ſelues neither wil nor can do it they appoint others to execute their ſpiritual office, & finde them of their reuenewes: if the miniſters of the churche may be frely permitted to mary. If yt foule bying & ſellyng, whiche is of ſondry ſortes, & of Simon Magus is called Simony, may be vtterly taken away, if the goodes may be ſo diſtributed Simonſ muſt be takē awaye. as the law made long ſince preſcribe, if chyldrē be brought vp invertue, & in their yougth learne the firſt principles of the chriſtiā doctrine: if notable offēdours be expulſed out of ye cōmuniō of the church, til they come again to amēdement, & that the Magiſtrate do his duty herein, & aboliſhe al idolatrie, if theccleſiaſtical iudgemētes might be had, & as it were cenſours or maiſters of maners apointed, to enquire diligētli of the behauiour of the miniſters & people, & of their faultes & vices. Themperour, as I told you before doth cōmunicate the whole matter with the biſhops legate, & nd requireth him inſtantly, that the ſtate of the cōmon wealth, but chiefly of the church, myght be refourmed. The popes Legate. Wherunto the legate anſwered, for as muche as the proteſtātes in certen opinions do ſwarue from the cōmon conſent of the churche, and yet there is ſome hope that in fine they wil come into the way againe, he after diligent cōſideration of the whole cauſe, thinketh mete that there be no further determinatiō made touching any matter, but that the whole treaty be referred to the byſhop, who aſſuredly wyl either by a generall counſell, or by ſome other meane fitte for the tyme, deuyſe that thing in this controuerſie: that ſhal profit the whole common wealth, but chiefly of Germanye. Afterwarde to the intent he might ſeme to be deſirous of a refourmation, he calleth home to hym al the byſhops, & there geueth them leſſons how they ſhould demeane thē ſelues in al things, gouerne their families, & haue care of the flock cōmitted to their charge, how they ſhould beware of errours, appoint learned preachers to reſiſte them, & beſtow their benefices vpon mete perſones, how they ought to imploy the churche goodes to the vſe of the poore, and not to ſpende thē in riot or in any ſuperfluous vſe howe they ſhould ſe yougth brought vp in good litterature, & knowledge of The diligence of the proteſtantes iu teaching of children. tongues, which thing the proteſtantes do exceadingly, & by yt meanes allure all yougth vnto them, & infecte them with their doctrine, how it is the dutie of the biſhops to warne the parētes yt thei ſēde not their children to ſuche places, where there is daunger of hereſie, with diuers

other lyke thinges, which after he delyuered in wryting to byſſhops that deſyred it, and alſo themperoure. Who the .xii. day of Iuly, reporteth to all the ſtates, what aunſwere he had made. And for by cauſe it appeareth that there can be nomore determined in this aſſē
               bly concernynge relygion, and the Turke maketh great preparation both by ſea and lande, to inuade Chriſtendome, he thinketh it chieflly requiſite, that the treaty be brought to an ende, and that decrees bee made concernyng religion, peace, and ayde againſt the Turke: wherfore he requireth to know theyr mindes, whether they thinke it expedient, that thoſe articles of doctrine, which the collocutours haue, accorded, ſhalbe receyued till a generall, or an other imperyall counſel, to thentent the controuerſy of Religion, for the whiche they haue ſo many yeares bene tourmoyled, may be ſomewhat abated, that the reſidue not as yet agreed vpon, may hereafter more eaſelye be brought to an vniformitie. For he wyll go ſtreight way to the Byſhop, that he may certenly knowe what to truſt to, & as ſhortly as he can wyll retourne into Germany, to ſe to the common wealth. prouided always that theſe thinges be nothing preiudiciall to the decree of Auſpurge. Whan the diuines of the Proteſtantes had red the two forſayd wrytinges The diuines of the Prote. aunwer to yt Popeslegate of Contarene, they aunſwer with one accorde, and ſhewe that he doth them wrong, and ſay that conſidering his learning, they loked for much better things at his hande: & where alſo he exhorteth the Princes to puniſhment and crueltie, they reproue him therfore exceadingly, and byd him not thinke that they wil euer allow ſuch errours as thei nowe do condemne, or at any time retourne vnto that churche whiche defendeth ſo manifeſt vices. Whan Contarene in the meane tyme heard that his aunſwere was diuerſly taken, by thaduiſe of certen, he ſendeth to the ſtates the third wryting, how he wil not aſſent ye the articles newly accorded, ſhalbe receiued vntil the coūſell, but referreth al thinges in general to the highe Byſhop.
            The next day after the ides of Iuly, the Princes Electours, make The princes electours anſwer Themperour. anſwer to Themperours demaunde, & ſaye howe they are contented that the articles agreed vpō, ſhould be receiued vntil the time of a coū
               ſel, for the ſame is both expediēt for the auoiding of further incōueniē
               ces hereafter, & wilbe alſo a great helpe vnto a further agrement: and if there be any hope that the reſt myght at this tyme be accorded, they deſire him to ſhew his fauour herin: but if the ſhortnes of time wil not ſuffer it, yt thā according to his fre ꝓmeſſe, he wold deuiſe wt the biſhop and other kinges that there might be wt al expeditiō a coūſell appointed in ſome cōuenient place of Germany, either general or prouincial, & that he wold ſende his legate thether, & if the ſame can not be obteined as they haue no truſte it ſhall, that than he wold retourne againe into Germanye, and declare the ſame fidelitie to the countrie, that

he hathe doone hitherto, and eſtabliſſhe peace and quietnes. But the Proteſtantes deſyre themperour, that he wolde commaund the articles of religion al ready accorded, to be enacted and taught: for ſo ſhal the truthe be opened more and more, and this ſhalbe as a waye to amende the diſeaſes of the churche. And that alſo he wolde take awaye and abrogate the decree of Auſpurge, as vnprofitable for concorde, or at the leſtwyſe leaue it in ſuſpence: what their opinion is concernyng the counſel, and how they wil not permit the biſſhop or his cliētes to be iudges therof, and of what ſorte it ought to be, they haue declared heretofore, and remayne in the ſame opiniō: and if percaſe ſuch maner of counſel wil not be had, and that ther be any aſſemblie of the ſtates, in germany by his cōmaundement, in the ſame wil they declare their doctrine. After the other princes, amonges whom the biſſhops were chief, and with them the two bretherne Dukes of Bauier, and Henry The anſwer of the popiſh princes. of Brunſwicke, declare, what theyr aduiſe is, to themperour ſeuerally, which was that ſo many vices, ſectes, hereſies and diſſentions, did now not only in Germani, but alſo in other places, in maner through out chriſtendō ouerflow, that they could not be holpen, but by a counſell: and that there ſhoulde now be any alteration of religion and ceremonies, thai had ſo many yeares continewed, they could in nowiſe geue theire aſſent, eſpecially, conſidering, that the biſſhop by his legate doth promiſe a counſel, and he him ſelfe will moue him herein preſently: and ſay, how they are determined to ſticke to the old religion, coū
               ſels, & doctrine of their forefathers which hath continewed from the apoſtles tyme vnto this day. And alledgeing moch other matter, but to no great pourpoſe, they thinke it moſt expedient, to differ the cauſe of religion vnto the counſell, eſpecially, for that the biſſhops legate is of the ſame opinion, the reſidew of the cities, whyche were not of the nomber of Proteſtantes, Collon, Mentz, Spier, wormes, Tully. Hagenaw, Regenſpurg, Schwinfurth, Colmaria, Semund, Roteburg and dyuers others, whan they were excluded from couſultation, and that the princes wolde not geue them the copie of the aunſwere, they complayne herof to themperoure, as they had don ofte before, requeſtinge him, that they myght not be hindered in theyr ryght, and many of them were content, that the articles agreed vpon ſhoulde be receyued. Whan themperoure had hearde all mens opinions, he maketh a new propoſitiō, and recytyng euery thyng in order becauſe the whole matter cannot be determined, and they moſt certenly ſtande in great daunger of the Turke, and the time is farre ſpente, he ſayeth, he will referre the matter to the couuſel, wherof both the Biſſhops legat hath put him into an vndoubted hope, and he himſelfe alſo will be in hande with the Biſſhop: for he promiſeth alſo to retourne ſhortly into Germany, and deſyreth the Proteſtantes that they wyll in the meane

tyme attempt nothyng els beſydes thoſe thinges wherin the diuines are accorded: Than warneth he the Biſhpops, than they deuyſe the The biſhops are inioyned to reforme their church meanes wherby euery one of thē, maye reforme their owne churches to the intent ther be a way prepared for a cōmon redreſſe. This mind of Themperoure for the moſte parte al men commended, and thinke inete that the Biſſhops Legate, ſhould geue alſo an erneſt & ſtreighte charge to the Biſhops, that they redreſſe and pourge theyr churches. And the Proteſtantes concernyng the conciliation of doctryne, and all other thynges, promiſe to do according to theyr dewtie, & require that it may be lawful for all other Princes ther, to propounde in their churches, the articles nowe accorded. You haue hearde how Eckius The preſumtuouſnes of Eckius. abhorred bothe the booke exhibited of themperoure, and alſo the Collocutours. Wherefore after the conference had whan the booke was agayne reſtored to themperoure, & the matter debated in the counſel of the Princes, he lying ſick of a feuer, ſendeth an epiſtle to the princes, of this effecte, that he neuer lyked that foolyſhe booke, wherin he fyndeth ſo many errours: and therfore ought not to be admitted: for the cuſtome of the olde fathers and the church layde a ſyde, the ſtepes and phraſis of Melanchthon are in it well perceyued: moreouer he ſayeth, he ſawe not the booke whiche his fellowes corrected, and after reſtored to themperoure, but as he laye ſycke, there wer red vnto hym only certen opinions of the Lutheranes: Moche leſſe did he allow that wrytyng, that was preſented to themperoure with the boke for he neuer ſaw it. This thing knowne, Iulius Pfiugius, and Iohn Gropper, whiche thought how the ſame concerned their eſtimation, deſyre the Preſidentes and hearers of the conference, as witneſſes of the whole matter that they would defend theyr honeſtie againſte the ſclaunders of Eckius. They informe themperoure of all the matter, who after in a publicke writing, gaue vnto them bothe a goodly, and an honorable report, affirming that they haue donne herein, as becō
               meth honeſt men. It is before mentioned, that the cauſe of religyon was referred to a generall or prouinciall counſell of Germany: After that Contarene vnderſtoode it, the .xxvi. day of Iuly he wrote to the ſtates and Princes, requiryng that the laſt might be croſſed and cancelled: for the controuerſies of religion, ought not to be determined by ſuche maner of counſelles, but the ſame to belonge to the vniuerſall churche: and what ſomeuer is determined in ſuche caſes of any one nation, to be of none effect wherfore they ſhall ſhew a greate pleaſure to the Biſſhop, who is the head of the churche and of counſelles, yf in dede they omitte the ſame: vnto whom agayne it woulde bee diſpleaſaunte, in caſe they ſhould not do it, for the ſame would ſtyre vp great ſtryfe and offence not onlye in Germany, but alſo in other countries. This he doeth admoniſſhe them of, bothe by the commaundement of

the Byſſhoppe and alſo of hys owne dewtye. The ſame day the Princes make hym aunſwere, howe the Byſſhop maye auoyde all offenſion, in caſe he will call a counſell, whyche hathe been ſo longe promyſed. Yf not the ſtate of Germany to bee ſuche, as they muſte of neceſſitie fynd ſome other waye to ſalue the ſore: And therfore require him earneſtly that he wold of hys wyſdome and gentlenes ſo further the cauſe to the Byſhoppe that a remedie might be founde. Moreouer the diuines of the Proteſtantes doe confute thoſe letters and reaſons of The proteſtantes confute his letters and reaſons. Contarene, by a longe wrytyng, and proue manifeſtly, how it apperteyneth vnto all prouinces, to eſtabliſhe gods trewe ſeruice and Religion. This done, themperour cauſeth a decree to be made and red the xxviii. of Iuly, he referreth the conference of the learned men, and the whole treatie, vnto the counſell, to the Synode of all Germany, or of the ſtates imperial: in hys Iorney into Italy, he promiſeth to intreat diligently the Biſſhop of Roome for a counſell: And yf neyther generall nor prouinciall counſell can be obtayned, than wyll he call a convocation of thempyre within .xviii. monethes for to quiet the cauſe of Religion, and will deuyſe, that the Bifſhop ſhall alſo ſende hys legate thither: he chargeth the Proteſtātes, that they attempt no new thing beſydes the articles alreadye accorded, and the Biſſhoppes, that they ſhould clenſe their churches of theyr faultes and enormities. In that decree were certen articles, that Religious houſes ſhoulde not be defaced, that the churche goodes ſhoulde not bee put to prophane vſes, that no man ſhould be allured to a contrary Religion, of the iuriſdiction, and Iudges of the chamber: Whiche thinges whan the Proteſtants dyd miſlyke, themperour in a certen priuate wryting, declareth The Emperours priuat wrytiug for the Proteſtantes. ſeuerally, what his opinion is herin. In the doctrine not as yet conciliated, he doth preſcribe vnto them no meaſure: Monkes houſes wold not in dede bee pulled downe, but yet mete to bee reuoked to a godly reformation: the lyke is to bee thought of the churche reuenewes: no man that is of an other iuriſdiction oughte to be intyſed to theyr Religion, and ſo bee mayneteyned, but yet ſhall it bee lawefull for them to receyue any that will come vnto them vncalled: furthermore the decree of Auſpurge, concernynge relygion and doubtfull cauſes of the ſame, for a common quyet, he ſuſpendeth tyll the cauſe be determined eyther in a counſell, or other aſſemblie, and commaundeth that no mā ſhalbe reiected of the Chamber for a contrarye relygion, but that the lawe ſhalbe miniſtred vprightly, vnto all men. What tyme they had theſe thynges confyrmed vnder themperours ſeale, they promiſe hym ayde agaynſte the Turke, of whoſe commynge it was bruted daylye more and more. And the Ambaſſadours of Hongary and Auſtryche were commen thither which with greate intreaty required ayde. So was there a ſodayn ayde of Almaignes ſent into Hongary, by the cō
               duict of Friderick countie Furſteinberg.
            
               
In thys aſſemblie, Themperoure, the thirde day of Iuly before al the ſtates, had a greuous complaynt of wyllyam Duke of Cleaue for the The Emperours complaynte of the Duke of Cleaue. poſſeſſion of Gelderland. He exhibiteth alſo a booke vnto them, wherin he declareth hys ryght & tytle to the ſame, and ſayeth how he willed hym to haue ben there, but he tooke a contrary waye, ſignifyinge couertly, Fraunce, as before is ſayd. There were preſent the ambaſſadours of Cleaue, which excuſed theyr prince, and when they proceded to declare his title, themperour xiſeth vp and departeth. The .xxi. day of Iuly the Princes and ſtates all go to themperoure, & intreate him The princes make interceſſion, for the Duke of Cleaue for the Duke of Cleaue, and requeſt hym that he wold receyue him in to the tuition of thempire, & permit that the caſe may be decided frēdly, and promiſe to take paynes in the thynge, and in caſe they cannot make an ende in it, they beſeche hym, to make clayme to it, and to recouer his right by the law. Wherunto themperoure maketh aunſwer by Iohn Nauie. Foraſmoche as this aſſemblie is called for the common welthes ſake to thentent that all diſſention and diſcorde taken a waye Germany myght be reſtored to quyetnes, and herin hath moch tyme ben conſumed, and yet nothyng concluded, by reaſon of contention and diuerſitie of myndes vnto his greate griefe, and hinderance of hys owne affaires: he ſayeth, he marueleth greatly, that in this on cauſe, which is properly hys, they can ſo wel agree. Thus he ſendeth them awaye, not withoute diſpleaſure. The next day, Raymunde, the Frenche kinges ambaſſadour in a longe oration written, reciteth the The oratiō of the Frēch Ambaſſador cauſe of expulſing Charles Duke of Sanoye, who a few daies before had accuſed the kinge to the Emperoure and al the ſtates. Durynge this aſſemblie, the Frenche kynge, ſendeth Ceſar Fregoſe an Italyan of Genes, and Anthony Rincon a Spaniarde, exiled, Ambaſſadours to themperour of Turkes: who ſayling on the Riuer of Po, towards The Frēche ambaſſadors, intercepted by thimperiall. Ueniſe wer taken and flayne abont the kalendes of Iuly. That time was William Bellaye the kynges lyeutenaunt in Piedmount, who beynge ſertifyed of the thynge, as he was maruelous circumſpecte, and induſtrious, immediatly aduertiſeth the kyng, and alſo the fyfte day of Iuly, wryteth from Turryn, to Alphonſus Daualus marques of Piſcare, than gouernoure of Millan and all Lumbardie, that he woulde ſee, that the kynges Ambaſſadours which wer taken, might be reſtored, whom he knewe for certentie that hys menne had apprehended: or els for the ſame cauſe ſhoulde the trewes be broken, which was made thre yeares paſt, by thinterceſſion of the Biſſhop of Rome. And he required, they might be reſtored, eyther for becauſe at the firſt he knewe not, els diſſembling that he knewe not, what had hapned to them. The Marques maketh it very ſtraunge, as though he knew nothing of the matter, and to pourge himſelfe, ſendeth Counte Fraū
               ces Ladron Ambaſſadour to the kynge. Langeus in a certen epiſtle,

whych he wrote to the Marques the eleuenth of Iuly, I would not doubte, ſayeth he, in the counſell of the whole worlde, to ſpeake of diuine Langens letters to Alphonſe. matters, and that as aptely, as euer did your kinſman and aunceſtre Thomas of Aquyne, yf I were as experte in diuinitie, as ſoom of youre familiars are perfit and priuie to this murther. For Alphonſus hys graundfather called Indicus, the ſonne of Rodorick a Spaniard, maryed a great inheriter of the houſe of Aquinas. And this Alphonſus was coſyn germane to Fernando, Dauall of Piſcare, a moſt worthye captayne. The. xx day of Iuly the king anſwereth Alphonce by letters, from Liner a Towne of Burges, admoniſſhing hym to regarde hys honour and eſtimation, and ſheweth hym that vnles they be reſtored, he can not neglect the iniury done to hys men. Many wer the letters that were ſent to and fro betwene Bellaye and the Marques for this matter, but nothyng els was done, whan Daualus after moche ſearche, ſayd he could not fynd nothing, and herin perſeuered The king moreouer by his ambaſſadour complayned to themperour at Regenſpurge. And whan he receyued not ſuche aunſwer as be wolde, he declared manifeſtly enough that warre wold inſue therof. It chaunced at the ſame time, that George of Auſtriche, Maximilian his baſtarde ſon, Archebiſhop of Ualencene, came out of Spain, George of Auſtriche apprehended at Lyons. to retourne into Flaunders: Who at Lyons was apprehended & caſt in priſon, to reueng Rincon & Fregoſe. Aboute the ſame tyme, Fraū
               ces ſon to Anthony Duke of Lorayne, maryeth Chriſtine the daughter of Chriſtierne Kynge of Denmarke, Dowager of Millan. The Frenche kynge tooke thys diſpleaſauntly, and ſo moche the more, for that the yere before, the daughter of Lorayne, was maryed to Renat Prince of Orenge, whiche depended wholy of themperoure. Whattyme Themperour helde the counſell at Regenſpurg, king Fernando beſegeth Offen or Buda and layeth to it battery, wherein was than Ferdinando beſegeth Buda. the wydowe of Iohn Uaynode, with her yong ſonne Stephen. The infantes tutours, and nobles of the realme had deſyred the Turkes ayde: Wherfore the Turke ſendeth thither his liuetenant with an armie, whyche came to Offen in Iuly: And not longe after commeth he with an other power: ſo wer Fernando his men repulſed, Almaignes Bohemers, Morauians leuing the ſiege, not withoute a greate ouerthrowe, His armie diſcomfited and loſſe alſo of Peſtum a Towne ouer agaynſte Offen, the reſidew wer glad to ſaue themſelues by runnyng away. About thend of Auguſt, the Turke ſendeth preſentes to the infante Stephen, cloth of golde, and goodly horſes, and letteth ſhew hys mother, howe he is deſyrous to ſee the childe, requyring her to ſende hym vnto hym into hys Tente. The woman ſore affrayd, whan ſhe might not otherwiſe doe, by thaduiſe of her counſel, ſendeth hym, and hys Norice with him accopanyed with a greate nomber of the nobilitie. He receyueth hym,

right gently, and after ſendeth word to the quenes counſellours, that he woulde haue Buda deliuered vnto him: for he ſayeth, they are not able to kepe it agaynſte the enemie: and he ſhoulde be driuen to come oftē hither with an armie: which, would be both very painful & charg able: therfore it ſhould be better that he had it in his cuſtodi. They being affraid of their owne daunger, haue not a word to ſay. Forthwith was the captain of the Ianizarens, appoynted to enter the Towne, neither could the quene receiue her ſome again, before the thing was accompliſſhed. Whan they had poſſeſſiō of the Towne, & vnarmed all the citezens, they require alſo to haue ye caſtell deliuered vp in to their handes, wherin the quene was than, whom the Turke by meſſagers ſent betwene, comforteth, and permitteth her & her ſon to enioie Trā
               ſiluania. Whan ſhe therfore had ſodēly packed vp her ſtuffe, & was departed, being conducted with captaines & ſoldiors of ye Turkes, Thē
               perour of Turkes & his two ſonnes came into Offen the ſecond daye of Septembre, And entring into the churche newly hallowed, and geuing thankes to his god, for that lucky ſucceſſe, he retourneth agayne to his campe, & leauing his garriſons at Offen & at Peſte, he leadeth home the reſt of his armie, and by the way deliuereth Laſcus, whom he leaft priſoner at Belgrade, when he went to Offen, for the takyng of Fregoſe & Rincon. For the Frenche kyng being ſore offended with that acte, had by his ambaſſadour Poline, ſignifyed the whole matter vnto Solyman. When the ſeſſians were dou at Regenſpurge, themperour goth ſtreight into Italy, end talketh with the biſhop of Rome at Lukes, whileſt his armie toke ſhipping, which he had gathered before of Almaignes, Italians, and Spaniardes. And becauſe winter was now at hand, the biſhop did what he could to put him in feare of ſayling, but he, although he had heard of the ouerthrow geuen in Hō
               gary, to thend he might vex the Turkes in an other quarter, was fully reſolued to go foreward, and wayinge his Ankers, he hoyſed ſayle The Emperours torney into Barbarie. in porte Uenery, and keping his courſe by Corſicke and the Ilandes of Baleare, the .xxiii. day of October, he arriued at Argier, a Citie of Barbarie by the Sea coaſte. The nombre of his footemen was .xxii. thouſande, hys horſemen were littell aboue a thouſande. The vantewarde of the Spaniardes led Farnando Gonzago, Uiceroye of Sicilie: the Battel, which was of Germanes, the Emperour: The reerewarde of Italians and Knyghtes of the Rhodes, Camillus Columnas. The ſame daye that Themperoure arriued, and the nexte daye after, the wether was fayre, and the Sea calme: But the thyrdde A great tempeſt diſtroyed hys ſhips daye there arroſe ſo greate a tempeſte, and ſo contynuall a rayne, that it letted all warlyke enterpriſes, in ſo muche that the Emperoure loſynge verye manye Shyppes, hys munition and all hys other fournyture, beeſydes two or three thouſande of hys menne,

was enforced to departe without his pourpos, and at length retourned into Spayn in the moneth of Nouember. Sir Henry kneuet being ther at the ſame tyme ambaſſadour for king Henry the eyght, loſt Syr Henry Kneuet. all that he had, and eſcaped drowning verye narrowely: for when his owne Ship was ready to ſynke, he lept out and was receyued vppō an oare, into an other ſhippe, by Thomas Kneuet a kinſman of hys, who had recouered that ſhyppe before. Thus had our affaires both by Sea and by lande, as well in Affrica, as in Europe, a doulfull ende. This yeare was alſo noyſome to Germany by reaſon of contageous ſicknes, eſpecially aboute the Rhine: amonges others at Straſburge The plage in Germani by the Rhine died Capito, at Baſyll, Symon Grineus, both men of excellent learnyng, thone of them a great diuine, thother a philoſopher, and a great fauourer of the Scripture. Themperour at his departure out of Germany, tooke order with Fridericke Palatine, that he ſhoulde through the Princes Electours, treate with the Duke of Cleaue for reſtoring vnto hym Gelderlande. They ſende theyr Ambaſſadours, and admoniſhe hym boothe of hys owne priuate perill and alſo of the publicke diſturbaunce: he ſayeth, how he is bothe ryght heyre, & tooke the poſſeſſion lawfully and is alſo content the matter be tryed in the law, beſeching them, that they wolde ſuffer hym to ſuſteyne no wronge, but perſwade themperours mynde vnto equitie. And whan themperour imbarked hym ſelfe in Italy, he leaſte Granuellan to ſollicite the Biſſhop for a counſel, and to ſet order in the comon weale of Senes, ſore tormoyled with ſedition. When newes came into Fraunce in December, of themperours loſſe at Argiers, ther was many merye harte, for Ioye in Fraunce at temperours loſſe. many men ſtamped for the murther of Rincon and Fregoſe, and now they ſayde how the tyme was comen to reuenge them. King Fernando, after this euill lucke & loſſe of Peſte and Offen, calleth an Aſſēblie of hys ſtates at Prage the chief citie of Boheme. There at the laſte amonge other thynges, the nobilitie of Auſtriche, the .xiii. day of Decē
               ber putteth vp a ſupplicatiō to the kyng. wherin firſt to haue his good The nobilitie of Auſtrich, put vp a ſupplication for the Goſpell. will and fauoure, they offer all that they haue, to maynteine hys proſperous eſtate and dignitie. After they lament the vnfortunate ſtate of the comune weale, and theyr owne condition, whiche haue ſo nere vnto them the Turke, a moſt cruell enemie, and alſo of late a conquerour: wherfore they ſaye, howe they muſte looke for remedies, & chiefly that the wrath of God may be appeaſed, who offended with mens ſynfullnes, ſendeth this great calamitie: For in the whole body of the common welth, is no parte cleane nor ſounde: al honeſte diſcipline is caſt a ſyde, aſwell priuate as common: which is the welſprynge of all enilles, but yet is the contempte of gods worde the chiefe cauſe, why God doeth ſo ſcourg and plage vs. For it is to be ſeene, they ſaye, and proue
                  •
                
               
                  •
               othe by ſacred and prophane hiſtories, that God hathe often

times greuouſly plaged great and moſt floriſſhing kingdoms, not for theſe lighter ſinnes that be graffed in vs naturally, but for idolatrie & contempt of hys word. The people of Iewes wer led awaye captiue Kingdoms diſtroyed for 
                     •
                  dolatry. into Aſſiria and Babilon, for contemnyng the prophetes, & for a newe Religion and worſſhipping, which they themſelues had deuyſed: and at the length was vtterly diſtroyed, & Hieruſalem quite ouerthrowne for crucifying the ſonne of God. The moſt triumphante Empires of the world in time paſt, of Babilon, Perſia, and Grece, being now ſubdewed by the Turkes, haue ſo cleane loſt theyr religion, lawes, comō
               welth and all theyr dignitie, for the ſelfe ſame cauſes, that there is at this day in maner no tokē of chriſtianitie there remayning: and wher partly they forſoke, and partlilothed gods benefites, they fel into horrible darknes, and moſt filthy bondage. Whether was this any ſodē alteration: for the Turkes maintened warre ſixe hondreth yeres and aboue, beefore they conquered Grece. Whiche happened than at the lengthe, what tyme they beyng ſo ofte prouoked and warned, wolde neuer amend, but heaped vp ſinne vpon ſynne. Now yf a man ſhould compare thoſe kingdomes, that wer of ſuch power & dignitie, wherein floriſſhed ſo many excellente wittes, with this very rude and beaſtly common welth of the Turkes, he ſhall fynde that ſyns Noes floud there neuer chaunced a greater calamitie. And yf they ſo ſtronge and mightye nations were not able to reſiſte ſo weake a people, as the Turkes wer, at the beginnyng, god thus auengyng the ſynnes of the people, what maye we looke for, which in dede are gyltye of the ſame fault, but in ſo much the worſe caſe, for that we be matched with anenemie that is ſtrong out of meaſure? we ſee how God doeth plage vs, chiefly in theſe parties wyth warre famyne, and peſtilence: The moſt The plages that god ſēt to Auſtriche and Germany. cruell enemie hathe taken of late Offen the chiefe citie of the Realme? he hathe brent & ſpoyled the land of Bohema: And what miſerie haue we not ſuffered theſe ſixtene yeres? howe moche blod hathe bene ſpilte & how many thouſand peopele led a waye in to moſt miſerable captyuitie? for certenly now is the Turkes power ſo increaſed that he is far exalted aboue all other kinges. And for by cauſe he obteyneth at oure handes in a maner contynuall victories he perceyueth him ſelf to bee The Turke is the ſcurge of God. the ſcourge of God and that no man is able to eſcape his vengeaunce Seing therfore that our ſynnes be ſo great and many, what haue we to truſte vnto, or howe ſhall we defende our ſelues agaynſte him? Aſſuredly there is but one only remedy. All thinges are in the handes of god: it is god that geueth and taketh awaye empires, whiche woundeth God offereth his word before he plageth. and healeth, who prouoketh vs to repētaunce, by offering vs the knowledg of his word, which thing in dede he doth euer before he plageth. So ſent he Ionas the prophet to the Niniuites, and forgaue thē for that they repēted: So loked he mercyfully vpon Nabuchodonoſor

the kyng of Aſſirians, followyng the counſell of Daniel. And certenly moſte myghty kyng, we knowe none other meane or remedye, than that Gods worde may be purely taught, and the people exhorted to amendement of life, to the entent that being ful of confidence, they may boldely withſtande the Turkiſhe violence, for herein conſiſteth oure ſaluation that we ſerue God ryghtly. Wherfore ſeing that manye errours are crept into the churche, whiche in this our tyme are diſcloſed, and that lately in the counſel of the Empyre, diverſe opiniōs wer agreed vpon, and for a certen tyme peace graunted for Religion, and the Byſhop commaunded to refonrme their churches: We beſeche your hyghnes to geue commaundement that the Goſpell be preached The chiefe article of doctrine is iuſtification. ſincerely, eſpecially that article of iuſtification, whiche teacheth that our ſynnes are forgeuen through Chriſt only. Agayne that men be excited vnto loue and charitable workes, whiche are the true fruictes & tokens of fayth. Moreouer let them be made afrayd to ſynne, and accuſtome them ſelues to geue God thākes, that of his mere mercy we are delyuered through Chriſt from ſynne, death, and hell, and made inheritours of the heauēly kingdome: that ſuch as deſyre, may receiue the Lordes ſupper after the maner of the primatiue church, And that alſo the Byſhoppes be cōmaunded according to the decree of the Empyre newly made, to redreſſe that is amiſſe in the churche, that they appoincte mete miniſters to inſtructe the people, and reiecte not the true preachers as they haue euer done heretofore. And let not your grace thinke that we make this ſute vnto you, for that we either ſeke for any more libertie, or intende at any tyme to diſobey: for we cōfeſſe that our whole ſaluation conſiſteth in Chriſte only, and that the knoweledge of the Goſpell, muſt be adourned with godly liuing, & acknowledge it our bounden dutie to ſhewe vnto you all obedience, as farre forth as our goodes and lyfe wyll extende. And ſeing it is ſo, we doe humbly beſeche you to ſuffer vs to enioye the benefite of this laſt decree, and that ſuche as ſhall followe the fourme of Religion of vs before rehearſed, be not indaungered therfore. For ſo ſhal you haue faith full miniſters of your churches, whiche are nowe many vacant and boyde of any, and men ſhall with more hardines warre againſt that moſte terrible ennemy, vnto whome for our ingratitude and wickednes, God hath geuen ſo many victories and conqueſtes hitherto.
            The nobles and ſtates of Auſtriche that put vp this ſupplication, were foure and twēty men of honour, and ten cities, wherof Uienne was one, and their next neighbours the Stirians & Carnites. Ferdinando Ferdinando deſfateth the requeſt of his uobles. hetherto aunſwered that for calamities by them mentioned, he is ryght hartely ſory, and doubteth not but theſe are plages ſent for the ſynnes of the people, and, therfore hath oftener than once admoniſhed the miniſters of the churche, that they ſhould exhorte the people

to amendement of lyfe. Moreouer ſayeth howe he was neuer againſt that Gods worde ſhould be ryghtly taught, according to the traditiō and ſettyng forth of the Apoſtles, and ſuch other interpretours as the churche hath receiued and allowed: neuertheleſſe he chargeth them, that in Religion they do alter nothing tyll ſuche tyme as the matter be fully determined by a generall or a prouinciall counſell of Germany, or els by ſome conuocation of the Empyre. And not to thynke that the decree of Regenſpurge concerned them any thynge at all, wherof the meaning is, that the catholickes ſhould remayne in the olde, and the Proteſtauntes in the ſame Religion whiche they followed at the tyme of this reconcilement, tyll ſome one of theſe counſelles were appointed within eightene monethes: and ſeing it is ſo, he may not permitte his ſubiectes, to do any thyng to the contrary. They deſyre him againe at fewe wordes that the true Religion of Chriſte maye be auaunced, The nobles reſterut their 
                     ••
                  te. and that the good preachers be not brought in daunger: for otherwyſe let hym neuer loke to haue any victory or lucky ſucceſſe as the Turkes hande.
            A litle after this dyed the Byſſhop of Numburge, in whoſe ſteade Strife about the biſſhop. ricke of Nū. burge. the College choſe Iulius Pffugius before mentioned, but the Prince Electonr of Saxon, contended that they myght not doe it withoute his conſente, and reiectyng the Flugins, ſubſtituted in his roume Nicolas Amſtorfe of a noble houſe, a doctour of diuinitie of Wittemberg whome Luther ſtalled in the moneth of Ianuary, and after ſet forthe 1542. a booke of the ſame in dutche, wherin he declareth howe the flocke of Chriſte ought not to be cōmitted to Pffugius, as ennemie to the pure doctrine. Pffugius being thus repulſed, complayneth to the ſtates of the Empyre howe wrongfully he is put from his ryght. The Prynce agayne aunſwereth howe the gyfte belongeth properlye to the houſe of Saxon, and reciting many olde preſidentes of great antiquitie, alledgeth amonges other cauſes, wherfore he can not ſuffer him to bee Byſhop, this alſo for one that he is openlye againſte the confeſſion of Auſpurge. After the ouerthrowe in Hongary as is ſaid before, the Emperour calleth an aſſemblie of the ſtates at Spiers by his brother Ferdinando, to begynne in the moneth of Ianuary, and appointeth ioyneth An aſſemble at Spires. to him for aſſiſtaunce Hughe Monforte, and Iohn Nauie. The Princes that were there preſente, were the Marques of Brandenburge Electour, Fredericke the Palſgraue, Albert Duke of Megelburge, Erneſt Marques of Baden, the Byſhoppes of Mentz, Wormes, Spier, Conſtance, & Hildeſſem, the reſidue ſent Ambaſſadours. What tyme they were aſſembled the nynth daye of February, kynge Ferdinando in the Emperours abſence propoundeth as the maner is, the cauſe of that aſſemblie whiche was in brief to conſulte howe the Turke myght be kept out of Hungary, & for ayde touchyng the ſame,

After the aſſemblie of Regenſpurge, whan Iohn Gropper, ambaſſadour to the Archebyſhop of Collon, was retourned home, he cōmended Gropper cō
                  mended Bucer. Bucer exceadingly, and ſayde he was meteſt of all others, to take in hande the reformation of Religion, for he was bothe well learned, a louer of peace, and of a pure lyfe. The Byſhop therfore whiche knewe Bucer well enough before, and thought to vſe his helpe, ſendeth for hym in February to come to hym to Bonna, where he was verey gentlye receyued, namely of Gropper, who intreated hym to goe with hym to Collon. And ſo for that tyme was lycenced of the Biſhop to departe, and to come agayn whan he ſhould be ſent for, as I wyll declare hereafter.
            Moreouer about this time alſo was beheaded Catharine Haward in Englād, and for that, where the king had maried her for a mayde, he founde that ſhe had troden her ſhowe a wrye. He that had defloured her was gone into Irelande, and had an office there, but beynge called home againe by her whan ſhe was Quene, and taken into her ſeruice, he was beheaded after her, as were alſo certein others, partly for concealement, partly for lyke offence. After her deathe the kynge The king of Englād maried the ſyxte wyfe. marieth the ſyxte wyfe Catherine Parre, that had bene wyfe to the Lorde Latimer, and ſyſter to the Marques of Northhamton. To the aſſemblye at Spiers, the Frenche kyng ſent an Ambaſſade the chiefe wherof was Fraunces Oliuer Chauncelour of Alenſon. Who in the preſence of all the ſtates whan they conſulted of the Turkyſhe warre, Theioration of the frēche ambeſſrdour the fourtene daye of Februarye made a longe Oration, in the begynnyng whereof he ſekynge to wynne theyr fauour reciteth howe the yeare before the kynge vnderſtandynge that the Turke woulde inuade Hongarye, for the loue he bare vnto Germanye, ſent Ambaſſadours immediatly to him to perſwade him, if he myght to the cōtrary but the Emperours men toke them in Italy, & as yet it is not certeinlye knowen whether theibe dead oraliue: wherby not only the truces is broken, but alſo the lawe of armes. And where as certein do encourage the Germaines to warre againſt the Turke in the defence of Hō
               gary and al Chriſtientie, alledgyng that albeit he be of great power, Perſwaſiōs to warre againſt the Turke. yet maye he ryght well be vanquyſhed, by the example of Iohn Hunniades, Matthie kyng of Hongary, Scanderbeg lorde of Epirus, and Tamberlane Emperour of the Srythiās, al the whiche haue wonne honour at his haude, as alſo they themſelues did at Uienne a fewe yeares paſt, and vſe diuerſe other perſwaſions to pricke thē forward, he contrary wyſe affirmeth that thoſe whiche geue this counſell, doe not well conſyder the ſtate of Germany, howe full it is of diſſention, nor the daunger that of this warre myght enſue. For a myghtyer or crueller ennemye is not in the whole worlde, nor one that is better furnyſhed of all thynges belongynge to the warres.
            
               
Neither can this warre be finyſhed with one battell or two, but euer requyreth newe and freſhe men continuall, and marneylous greate charges. The force & power of Germany is in dede exceading great, but yet is the Turkes ten tymes greater, whiche paſſeth litle of the loſſe of two or thre hondreth thouſand men, where if they ſhould loſe but one battell, in what daunger ſhould the whole countrey be in, before they ſhould leuie an other in this grudge & diſſention of mindes? therfore his aduiſe is that they attēpte not warre againſt the Turke, neyther ſeke to recouer that he hath already gotten in Hongarye for feare of a further miſchief. But in caſe he ſhould at any tyme inuade Germany, that it ſhould ſtande vpon their honours to bende all their force againſt him, & ſtoutely to giue him the repulſe, otherwyſe not to medle vntill ſuche time as they ſhalbe fully & throughly accorded in matters of religiō, in like caſe as they be partly already, namely in the chiefeſt articles of iuſtificatiō, of faith & workes, for certenly without a perfit cōcorde the ſtate of Thempire can not long endure, eſpecially the Turke ſtil inuading. The Romains became lordes of al the world not ſo much by power & force of armes, as by a certē craft & policie, for The policie of the Romaines in eſtabliſhing their empire loke what natiō thei purpoſed to ſubdue vnto their empire, thei wold euer practiſe to weaken by ciuile diſcorde, & for a time wold maintein thone parte of the faction, till at laſt thei had vanquiſhed thē both. By this meane were the people of Carthage & of all Aſia, the French men and the Grekes ſupplāted: thus alſo were the Germains deluded by Tiberius, what time they moued war in Italy, only Britaine which now is Englande eſcaped this yoke, for that they vnderſtode their ſubtill fetches, & always in cōmon perill powred out all their ciuile hatred vpon their ennemy. And by the ſame meanes at the length were The concord of England. the Romains thē ſelues ſubdewed. Philip alſo king of ye Macedoniās by this craft conquered Grece, ſetting together be theares the men of Athens, Corinthe & Theſſalie. Ottoman the firſte Emperour of this Turkiſhe nation, toke Bythinia through the diſſentiō that was there among Chriſten Princes, & at laſt by the ſame occaſion the Turke inuaded Europe, cōquered Thrace, al Grece & Morea, yea the Turkes haue theſe thre hondreth yeres wonne ſtil through our diſcorde & treaſon. Howe the Turkes acheued their empyre. What time the citie of Conſtantinople was taken all Italy was ful of ſedition, whileſt one ſorte wold be called Gwelphiās, & an other Gibellines, whiche were names of themperial, and popyſhe faction: what chaunced lately at Rhodes, & what in Hongary, & by what occaſion it is no nede to recite. But thus indede the Turkes a poore vile & Gwelphiās. Wibellines. barbarous nation, creping out of ye corners of Scithia, haue increaſed through our diſſention, & atteyned to ſo great an Empire, whyleſt eyther the light Grekes opened thē a gate into Europe, or yt faithles mē of Genes haue tranſported thē by the ſea of Heleſpōte, or the Prynces

of Peloponeſus brethren, falling at variaunce, ſent for them the one to deſtroye the other, whileſt they of Epyrus did ayde thē, or the Myſians conſpyred with them or the Hongarians of their owne accorde dyd moue them to come. Therfore to mainteine their common lybertie, they muſt fall to an vnitie and concorde, and may not thynke that whyleſt they them ſelues ſytte ſtyll and doe neglecte it, beynge denyded into ſectes and factions, that foreyne nations wyll take this cars in hande for them. This he ſayeth is the kynges aduyſe and counſell, whiche he deſyred them to accepte in good parte, and of hym to loke for all amitie and frendſhyp. The Byſhop ſente thether his Legate Iohn Morone, Byſhop of Mutma, who beyng demaunded of kyng Ferdinando and by the Emperours deputies of the byſhop of Romes The opinion of the Popes Ambaſſad. mynde, the .xxiij. day of Marche, ſpeaketh on this wyſe. The laſt yere whan the Emperour went into Africa, paſſing through Italy, he cō
               ferred with the hyghe byſhop concerninge the turkyſhe warre, and a generall counſell, but ſythe the matter was very weighty, & the Emperour made great haſte, nothynge was determined, and Granuellan remayned in Italy, with whome the caſe was further debated afterwarde. Than he declareth howe the Byſhoppes mynde is, and euer hath bene, to warre vpon the Turkes, and that he wil ſende ayde of fyue thouſande fotemen, in caſe the Emperour come to the fielde hym ſelfe, if not, halfe that nombre. And lykewyſe is cōtent that there ſhalbe a counſell, but that the ſame ſhould be holden in Germany, neyther his age can beare, who both wyll and ought to be preſent, nor alſo The Pope ſuſpecteth Germany. the farre iourney and alteration of the ayre wyll permitte: therfore he lyketh better Mantua or Farrare, Bolognia la gras, or Placence whiche are all ample cities, and fyt for ſuche a purpoſe: howe beit if none of theſe wyll pleaſe them, he wyll not refuſe to kepe it at Trent, whiche is a towne nere vnto the frontiers of Germany, and woulde haue had it begonne at a Whytſontyde, but for ſhortenes of tyme, hath differred it to the Ides of Auguſte, praying them that al diſpleaſure ſet aparte, they woulde wholy applie them ſelues hereunto. King Ferdinando with the Emperours deputies, and all the Catholyque Prynces, geue hym thankes, and if a meter place maye not be had in Germanye, as Regenſpurge or Collon, they ſaye howe they are contente with Trente. But the Proteſtanntes doe neyther allowe the Byſſhoppes counſell nor the place, nor that there was anye mention made thereof in the decree, and openly pronounce to the contrary. Whan the Frenche kynges Ambaſſadours coulde not preuayle, and the ſtates were inclyned to the Turkyſhe warre, and ſawe that the Emperours men both lothed and ſuſpected their preſence, before the ende of the aſſemblye, they departe halfe in diſpleaſure.
            Trent is in the Alpes, by the Riuer of Atheſe, a towne in Farnādo

hys dominion, thre dayes Iorney on this ſyde Ueniſe, and not two from Uerona. After the chauncelour of the Dutchie of Alenſon was retourned home, the kyng begā ſtreight wayes to prepare for the war And albeit he had already in effecte reſtored the Admiral, & vſed hym frendly: Yet leſt it ſhould be herafter preiudicial to him or his childrē. he cauſeth the whole matter to be compriſed in writing, and reſtoreth him to his poſſeſſions, dignitie and fame, and proteſteth that hee had committed neyther treaſon nor yet extortion, & releaſeth and geueth hym the condemnation of ſeuen hondrethe thouſande crownes, commaunding that theſe letters ſhould be enrolled at Paris, and in other places, to remayne as matter of recorde. this was the twelfte daye of March. Whan the French kynge was at the ſame tyme beſydes Paris in caſtell Uincenne, word came to him in ye night, of a ſodē tumult A ſoden fear in the Frēch courte. as though the enemies, out of themperours contrie ſhoulde make an incurſion in to the contrie of Uermandoeis in Picardie: whereuppon the princes that chaunced that time to bee there, were ſent thither in al haſt, the Dukes of Uandome, Guiſe, Aumall, Niuerne, and diuerſe others, with a great nomber of gentlemen. Whan they came there, al was huſhte, neyther ſaw they nor heard of any man. Many men ſayd how thys brute was reyſed, that the people might be perſwaded that themperour ſought warre, wherof the kinge him ſelf wold not be accōpted the author, whan he had already vtterly determined the ſame, as ſhalbe declared herafter. Foraſmuch as the ſtate of Germany was ſuch as before I haue ſhewed you, great ayde was decreed on, & commaunded An Army agaynſte the Turke. that an armie ſhould be leuied, which ioyned with the power of Fernando, might reſiſt the Turkiſhe force, and recouer that was loſt. The leading and ordering wherof, was both by common aſſent, and alſo by themperours pleaſure, committed in charge to Ioachim, Marques of Brandenburge, Prince electour, who in continently departing from Spier, prepareth him ſelfe for the Iorney. For this war was gathered, polle money through out all Germany and graunted, that the magiſtrates might for this cauſe impoſe a taxe: They agreed moreouer to demaund ayd of the Suiſes, and other princes, eſpecially of the king of Denmarke and of the Italians: furthermore it was decreed, that all mē ſhould obſerue the peace, and reiſe no tumult within the limites of thempire, & the .xi. day of April the aſſemblie was diſſolued. And in maner at the ſame time, in Saxonie, ther grew a greate Contention betwixte the elector of ſaxon & Duke Moris. hatred betwene the Prince Electour, & Duke Moris, who than ſucceded Henry his father lately departed. The contention was for the lymites, & a certen Towne: And Maurice did manifeſtly mayneteyne the cauſe of Pflugius, through the ſuite of hys frēdes, the matter was vtterly lyke to brede ciuile warre: For eyther of them had their mē vp in armure: but through yt mediation of ye Lautzgraue it was appeaſed

This was the beginning of the diſpleaſure betwyxt them, whiche after increaſed in tyme, wrought a deadlye wounde to Germanye, as ſhalbe recited in place. And certenly many men marueiled at Maurice, that he would be ſo earneſt and bitter agaynſt him that brought hym vp, and whome both he and his father may thanke for all theyr good fortune. But certen of the coūſellers that were with Duke George, were thought to haue ſet forwarde this matter, whiche neyther loued Religion, nor yet the Prince Electour. Whan the decree was Luthers oretion for the field. made, and all men prepared thē ſelues to the warre, Luther ſet for the a booke in the vulgare tongue, an exhortation to the warre, whiche he dedicated vnto Philip the Lantgraue. And after hathe declared the cauſe why he wrote of the contrary argument in his yong days, ye to warre againſt the Turkes were nothing elles but to reſiſte God, whiche vſeth hym for a ſcourge to afflicte vs, whiche ſentence Leo the tenth had amonges other thynges condempned, for the Byſhop of Rome ſo ofte as he mynded to procure a maſſe of monie out of Germany, vſed euer this collour, to gather it for the Turkiſhe warre, and had ſhewed all the reaſons that moued hym than, and amonges others that a Chriſten man ought not to reuenge nor reſiſte euil, but to ſuffer all thynges according to that ſaying of Chriſte, of leauinge thy rote, and agayne that the Emperour is not to be excited vnto warre as the head of Chriſtendome, Protectour of the churche, and defendour of the faithe: For the tytles are falſe and vayne glorious and iniurious to Chriſte, who allone can defende his churche: and the iniurie is the more for that certen kynges and Prynces are moſte bytter ennemies to his true doctrine, and therfore concludeth that the Turke is not to be warred vpon or reſiſted, for the diuerſitie of his religion, but becauſe he robbeth and ſpoyleth, and maketh vniuſt warr, The Pope 
                     ••
                  
                  pared with yt Turke. and bringeth in with him moſt ſhameful examples of lyfe. By a cōpariſon made he proueth, yt the byſhop of Rome is nothing better thā the Turke, for as he by his Alcorane, ſo hath the Byſhop by his decreetales quenched the doctrine of the Goſpell. That whiche he doeth by force, the ſame doth the byſhop by his curſe: but thei both worke reproche vnto matrimony, & abide puniſhment for the contempte of Gods lawe, which ordeined holy matrimony, what time god geueth thē ouer to their filthy luſtes, & that they burne in moſt deteſtable deſires, & worke moſt wickedly againſt the order of nature. Finally ſpeakig of the turkiſh power, he admoniſheth thē not to be careleſſe in warfare, but to knowe how thei haue to do with a moſte fierſe ennemy. Theſe and diuerſe other, ſuche lyke thinges he treateth of in that firſt boke, but now what time the ſtate of thēpire, had at the requeſt of thempe. & king Ferdinādo decreed war, he cōpiled an other worke as I ſaid, a warlike exhortation or ſermon, to thentēt that ſuch miniſters of the

churche as followed the warres, myght haue ſome forme and order, howe to teache and exhorte. Firſt therfore ſayth he, that men may vnderſtande what is to be thought of the Turke, the Scripture ſpeaketh of two houge and cruell Tyrantes which ſhall deſtroy Chriſtendome, Two mighty Tyrantes before the laſte daye of iudgement, one through falſe doctrine, of whome prophecied Daniel, and after him Paule: this is verely the Byſhop of Rome. And an other by power and force of armes, that is to ſaye the Turke, of whome Daniel in the ſeuenth chapter ſpeaketh. Any pleaſant lyfe is not to be loked for. Thoſe therfore that wylbe chriſtians, let them plucke vp their hartes and loke for no peace and quietnes; nor pleaſaūter life frō henceforth. For that miſerable tyme which he prophecied of before, is now come, but let vs comforte our ſelues with the comming of Chriſte, and with our finall deliueraunce, whiche immediatly after thoſe afflictiōs ſhal appeare, and let vs knowe for certentie that al the woodnes and malice of the deuyll is powred wholy vpon vs by the Turke, for neuer did Tyrante practyſe ſuche crueltie, as he doeth. After he expoundeth the ſeuenth chapter of Daniel, whiche is of the foure beaſtes cōming out of the Sea, declaring that the Turkiſhe Empire is there deſcribed. For this is that ſame litle horne whiche ſprang vp betwene thoſe ten hornes of the fourth beaſt. And albeit it is wonderfully increaſed, yet can it not be that it ſhould be in power like to the Romaine Empyre, for the Prophet doeth there deſcribe foure Empyres only, which The Turke ſhal not be of ſuch force as were the Romaines. ſhould ſucceade in order, and the laſt to be the Empyre of Rome: therfore ſhall there be none other that may be cōpared in greatnes to the Romayne. And for aſmuche as Daniel did attribute vnto him three hornes only, whiche he ſhould plucke of from thoſe ten, his violence from henceforth ſhall not proceade muche further, for thoſe three are plucked of long ſynce, Aſia, Grece, and Egipt, whiche beinge three of the greateſt prouinces in the Empire, the Turke now poſſeſſeth, with in the whiche limites the Prophet hath included him, wherfore there is good hope that from henceforth he ſhall poſſeſſe no prouince of the Empyre: And where he is nowe ſo buſy in Hongary, and alſo readye to inuade Germany, this is the laſt acte of the tragedy, for it may bee The laſt act of yt Turke. that he ſhall inuade thoſe countries, but he can not thynke that euer he ſhall haue them in quiet poſſeſſion, as he hathe Aſia, Grece and Egipt, for the prophecie is playne and manifeſt. After this he treateth of all the other partes, prouokyng them chiefly to repentaunce, and exhorteth them all to be ready and wylling to obeye the Magiſtrate commaunding vnto this warre, and not only to employe their goodes herein, but alſo to ſerue wt their bodies. The priſoners alſo whiche A couſolatiō of the pryſoners with the Turkes eyther be nowe in the Turkes handes, or hereafter ſhal come into the ſame captiuitie, he comforteth with many perſwaſions, and admoniſheth them to be well ware of that fayned and pretenſed Religion of

the Turkes, for he heareth ſaye howe many that haue profeſſed Chriſt doe of their owne accorde falle into their Religion, for that it hath a certen ſhewe of vertue and holines, and that they ſuffer this bondage patiently, and ſerue their maiſters faithfully, though thei be prophane and wicked, neyther that they runne away from them, or fordo them ſelues for vnpatientnes and lothſomenes of that eſtate, but to beare alwayes in memory that ſame which Peter and Paule wryte of the dutie of bounde ſeruauntes, but what tyme they ſhal attempte warre againſt the chriſtians, to haſarde their lyues rather than to ſerue vnder thē, for they be murtherers and make warre againſt the ſainctes, as Daniell ſayeth, and ſhead innocent bloude: therefore muſte they chiefly beware that they be not partakers of ſo great a miſchiefe and wickednes. Unto this Oration he annexeth a maner of praying againſt the Turkyſh fury, and about the ende, diſcourſing the vice that reigneth in this our tyme in all ſortes of men he ſheweth howe Germany whiche is ſo corrupted, and wholy infected, can not longe continewe in proſperitie. And this fourme of prayer he preſcribeth.
            Oeuerlaſting father, we haue verely deſerued to be ſore afflicted, The prayer of Luther. but punnyſhe vs thyne owne ſelfe Lorde, not in thy wrath and diſpleaſure, but according to thy great mercy, for it is muche better for vs to falle in thyne, than into the handes of men and our ennemies, for thy merci is vnſpeakeable and infinite: we haue certenly offended the, and tranſgreſſed thy commaundementes, but thou knoweſt O heauenly father, howe the deuill, the Byſhop, and the Turke, haue no rightnor cauſe to punyſhe vs, for we haue treſpaſſed nothyng againſt them, but thou vſeſt them as a ſcourge to whippe vs, which haue mo ways than one, al our life time ſtyred the vp againſt vs. They I ſaie, haue no quarell againſt vs, but would rather that we ſhould euer after their example offende the moſte greuouſly, that through idolatry, falſe doctrine, lyes, diſceiptfull and craftye iugglynge, with murther, thefte and extortion, fornication, adultery, and ſorcerie, we myght offende the maieſtie of thy name. This is the thing that thei moſt wiſhe for, and becauſe we confeſſe and honour the God the father, and thy ſonne Ieſus Chriſte our Lord and the holy ſpirite, one and euerliuing God, that ſame is our offence and wickednes, for the whiche they ſo greuouſly hate and perſecute vs. If we ſhould forſake this fayth, and fal vnto their lore, thā ſhould we loke for no diſpleaſure at their hāds. Uoucheſaufe therfore to loke vpon vs, O God the father, and to ſend a remedy, for they be more thyne aduerſaries than ours, whan they doe tormente vs, they tormente the, for the doctrine that we profeſſe, is not ours but thyne. And Sathan can not abyde it but wylbe worſhipped in thy place, and thy worde ſet aſyde, goeth about to feede vs with lies: And the Turke alſo, in the ſteade of thy ſonne Ieſu Chriſt,

wold place his Mahomet. Nowe, yf thys be ſynne, that we profeſſe thee, the father, and thy ſonne, and the holy ghoſt to be the trewe and only God, certenly than arte thou a ſynner, whiche ſo teacheſt vs, and requyreſt this dewty of vs, and whā they for this cauſe perſecute vs, they do hate and afflicte thee alſo. Awake therfore my God, and take in hande thy ſelfe to aueuge thy ſacred and holy name, which they defyle and deface, neyther ſuffer thou this iniurie at their hande, which punniſhe not our ſynnes and vices, but ſeke to quenche thy worde in vs, and doe what they can, that thou ſhouldeſt not reigne at all, neyther ſhouldeſt haue any people, whiche might ſerue and honour thee. Nowe touching the ofſpringe & encreaſe of the Turkes, becauſe many haue written, it nedeth not to note any thing therof in this place: of a Of the originall of the Turkes. ſmal beginnyng they haue had a maruelous encreaſe: Their firſt Emperour is accompted Othomanne, aboute the yere of our lord a thouſand and thre hōdreth: whom, after ſuccedeth Orchanes, Amurathes, who fyrſt tranſported his armye ouer the ſea of Helleſponte into Europe, and inuaded Thrace. Than Baiazethes, Cyriſcelebes, Moſes, Mahoniethes, Amurathes, Mahomethes, Baiazethes, Selime, Solyman. About this ſame tyme, Alphonſe Marques of Piſcare before mentioned, ſendyng a booke to the princes of Germany, accuſeth, and The Markes of Piſcare accuſeth the Frēch king. blameth the frenche kinge, whiche in ſo troubleſome a tyme of the comon welth, goeth about to ſtyre vp ſtryfe, to thentente he might hinder the moſt noble enterpriſes of themperoure and al the ſtates, & pretendeth a lyght and a forged matter, for Anthony Rincon & Ce. Fregoſe that ſhould be intercepted, vnto whom, what thing hath chauuced, he could not, after long and diligent ſearche fynd out. The Frēch Kinge, whan he knew thereof, declareth that he had an exceadinge great iuiurie done him, to haue his Ambaſſadours ſo cruelly deſtroyed: The kinges purgation. of this thinge hathe he ofte complayned ſore to the Biſſhop and to themperoure, and hath requyred that he might be ſatiſfyſed herin, but it was in vayne: And ſeing it is ſo vnworthie an act, he can not without the greate ſhame and diſhonoure of his name, neglecte it. After, the ſecond of Maye, addreſſing hys letters to the Senate of Paris, to thende ſayeth he, that god maye illumine our heartes, and graunt vs the conſtancie of fayth, and bring again thoſe that ere into the way of ſaluation, and ſende vs peace throughe recompence, for the iniuries that we haue ſuſteyned, by the vſurping of our right, and the outrage donne to oure meſſagers and ambaſſadours, or if in diſpayre to haue peace, we muſt nedes haue warre, that he would graunt vs victorye: our requeſt is, that the people go a proſeſſion and pray in all churches And that by ſome fyt preacher the cauſe therof be recyted to the cōgregation. Moreouer in caſe any ther be that thinketh not rightly of oure fayth and religion, neither will promiſe amendement, we, commaund

that he ſuffer openlye for his offence. Not longe after he ſendeth the Duke of Longuill to the prince of Cleaue, who leauing ther a power in the ſomer ſeaſon by the conduicte of Martyn van Roſſen looked for an occaſion to doe ſome exploicte. In the meane ſeaſon, at the kalendes of Iune, the biſſhop appoynted a connſell at Trente agaynſte the fyrſt of Nouember, at the which time he commaundeth to repayre A counſell called at Trente. thither Patriarches, biſſhoppes, abbottes and ſuche other lyke which eyther by right or priuiledg haue intereſt to be preſēt at counſels, and are permitted there to ſpeake their minde. He exhorteth alſo themperoure and the French kyng, that eyther they wolde come them ſelues, or ſend theyr proctours, & to commaunde their biſſhoppes to be there: but the biſſhops of Germany he inuiteth aboue all others, for that, for theyr cauſe chiefly, and at theyr requeſte, is all this payne and trauaile taken. In the moneth of Iuly the Frenche kinge, with moſte hatefull woordes proclaymeth warre againſt themperoure, and in a wryting The Frēche king proclaimeth warre. publyſſhed, geueth his ſubiectes libertie to ſpoyle and diſtroy his contries by ſea and lande, by what meanes ſo euer they might A littel before the Duke of Longeuill and Martyu Roſſen had made an inuaſton into Brabant, and were a wonderful terrour to men vnprouided and commyng vpon the ſodayne, had lyke to haue taken Andwerpe The Duke of Languile and Martin van Roſſen invade Brabant. & Louayne, but wantyng thinges neceſſarie for munition, they could make no battery, and marching forewarde, whiche way ſo euer they wente, they diftroyed al before them, with fyer and ſword, and extorted many. And thus making theyr waie by force, in Auguſt they ioyne themſelues with the kinges ſonne, Charles Duke of Orleans, which warred that tyme, in the land of Luke. In this force were foure hondreth horſemen ſent by the kynge of Denmarke. Beſydes Danuillier, Uirton, and Iuey, was taken alſo Lucemburge the chiefe citie. The kinge hym ſelfe maketh warre on an other ſyde, and marchinge foreward Perpiguſan beſeged. with a ſtrong Armie, beſegeth Parpignan a Towne of Ruſcinon in the mountaynes of Pyrene. Moreouer he moueth warre in Piedmount by the conduicte of William Langey, and alſo in the borders of Flaunders, by the gouernment of the Duke of Uandome. So that he aſſayled his enemies in fyue ſondry places wherby the iudgement of many it had ben better for him to haue ſet vpon ſome one prouince with his whole power, as thende alſo declared, for both he attempted Parpignan in vayne, and alſo whan the Duke of Orleans was retourned home, the Imperialles recouered all agayne except it were Iuey. By this occaſion they began to fortifie Andwarpe, where before it was eaſy to bee wonne. When the kinge pourpoſed to haue warres, he ſente agayne Poline to the Turke, to entreate hym, that he wolde ſende him a uanie into Fraunce: but where it was longe or Poline came there, Solyman differred the thyng vntil the next yere.

Duryng this warre the king ſetteth forth proclamations againſt the Lutherians: Moreouer the parlament of Paris chargeth the Printers vnder a great penaltie, that they ſhoulde neyther prynte nor ſell any bookes condempned or ſuſpected, namely the booke of Caluine whiche is intituled the Inſtitution of Chriſtiane Religion. Further more at the requeſt of the Inquilitour as they terme hym, the ſeuenth daye of Iuly he maketh a decree, that the preachers ſhall admonyſhe the people to doe their duty to the churche, and if they know any Lutheriane or one that thinketh amiſſe in Religion to preſent hym: for this is a worke to God moſte acceptable. And the Miniſters of the churche had an order preſcribed, whiche they ſhould followe in that inquirie. For they were cōmaunded to inquyre of the promoters, whether The maner to ſ
                     •
                  rche out yt Lutherin̄s. they knewe any man that would ſaye how there was no purgatory: whan a man is dead to be eyther ſaued or dampned, or that a mā is not iuſtified by obſeruing of Gods commaundementes, that God only muſt be called vpon & not Sainctes: yt the worſhipping of images, is idolatry, yt ſainctes worke not miracles, that the ceremonies of the churche profite nothing, that the lawes of the churche doe bynde no man: that the knowledge of the Goſpell is neceſſarye for all men without exception, or that it is a fonde parte of the common people to pray to God in Latin: how the prieſt cā not forgeue ſinnes through the Sacrament of penauuce, but to be only a miniſter, to pronounce the benefite of God whiche forgeueth our ſynnes: that the church can bynde no man to mortall ſynne, or that it is lawfull to eate fleſhe at al tymes. This fourme of inquiſition was geuen priuately to prieſtes, but openly was ſet forth a proclamation, wherin they were cōmaunded to be preſented and accuſed, whiche doe neglecte the Rites and lawes of the churche, or ſuche as haue bookes contrary to the chriſtiā fayth, and eyther geue them others to reade, or purpoſely let them fall in the wayes as they goe, that thei may be founde, thoſe that aſſemble in priuate houſes and gardens, and forge diuiſes againſt the lawes of the chruche, and they that receyue ſuche kynde of men into their houſes or gardens. They that are priuie to any ſuche thyng, are commaū
               ded to preſente them within ſyxe dayes, to the doctours of Diuinitie, choſen by the Inquiſitour, or els to ſtande accurſed. The Stacioners were alſo charged that if they had any thyng eyther prynted or wrytten, that were in any point ſuſpected, or that ſwarued frō the cuſtome of the churche that within ſyxe dayes they ſhould bryng it before thē, after, none excuſe to be taken. The ſame daye that this acte was proclaymed, they had a generall proceſſion for the preſeruation of the realme S. Genefeua and of Religion: And ſaynt Genefeua their truſty Goddes was borne about with ſuche ſolemnitie as I haue before declared in the nynth booke. And in theſe dayes were certen brent in place Moberte

for Religion. At the ſame tyme Fraunces Landr
                  •
               e, Uicar of S. Crois in Paris, taught the people ſyncerely, and ſayde no Maſſe for that he branke no wyne: whether he did it of nature or of purpoſe, I knowe not. Againſt whome the Diuines had conceaued a great hatred. And after thei had noted certe in thinges in his preaching, they propounde vnto hym theſe articles. The ſacrifice of the Maſſe to be inſtituted of Chriſte, and is vayleable for the quicke and dead: that we muſt praye to ſainctes, that they maye be mediatours and aduocates for vs vnto Chriſte, howe the ſubſtaunce of bread and wyne, is chaunged in the The articles of the Sorbe niſtes. conſecration, that only preaſtes may conſecrate bread and wyne, and that the whole ſupper of the Lorde apperteineth to them only: Monaſticall vowes muſt be kept, that by the Sacramentes of confirmation and vnction, is receiued the holy ghoſt. by prayer, faſting & good workes ſoules are delyuered out of purgatory, that the lawes of the churche concerning faſtyng and choyſe of meates doe bynde the conſcience, that there is one hygh Prelate and Byſhop of the Churche, whome al are bounde to obeye by the lawe of God, how many thinges muſt be beleued, and of neceſſitie receyued, that are not expreſſed in the ſcriptures, that the Byſhop of Romes pardons doe releaſe the paynes of purgatory, that prieſtes beyng neuer ſo ſynfull and vicious doe conſecrate the Lordes body, that all deadly ſynne muſt be confeſſed to the prieſt, and than to receyue of hym the ſacramentall abſolution, howe man hath free wyll, wherby he may doe good or euyll, and ryſe from ſynne through repentaunce, howe not by fayth only, but by charitie and true penaunce is obteyned the remiſſion of ſynnes, how the churche and counſell beyng lawfully aſſembled, can not erre, and therfore muſt be obeyed, howe the iudgement and interpretation of Scripture apperteyneth to the churche, if any thyng be in controuerſye. Theſe thynges would they haue him to ſubſcribe to, and confirme with his Seale. He a fewe dayes after aunſwereth generally, that it is good and Godly, what ſo euer the holy & catholyque churche hathe taught in theſe matters, but they not content with this aunſwere, attempted greater thinges againſt him as afterwarde you ſhall heare.
            In this tyme alſo one or two Freers of ſaint Dominickes order, preached the Goſpell at Metz. But whan the prieſtes ſhewed them Two friers preache the Goſpell at Metz. ſelues ſore offended, diuerſe citezens made petition to the Senate, that they would not forbidde thē, promyſing al dewe obedience. The ther came alſo William Farell, who taught firſt priuatly in the citie, and afterwardes in a certein Caſtell without. But what tyme the Emperours letters were brought, wherin he commaunded that they Williā Farell. ſhould alter nothyng in Religion, but punyſhe the offendours, the people were forbodē to heare any more ſermons, vnles the preacher werlicenced by the Byſhop and the Senate.

This ſommer an infinite nombre of graſſehoppers came flieng into Germany, and the hither parte of Italy. They were of a wonderfull graſhoppers in Germany and Italy. bignes, and where ſoeuer they lyghted, they eate vp bothe graſſe and corne. Concerning the Duke of Brunſwicke, of his moſte bitter inuectyues againſt the Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue, and of the burnyng of certen places in Saxony, I haue ſpoken oftener than once: And nowe where he vexed with continuall inuaſions and robberies, Goſlarie and Brunſwicke, cities of the Empire inlincked with the Proteſtantes, and would not obeye the decrees of the Emperour and kynge Ferdinando, who at their requeſt, had commaunded him, to ceaſe from all violence, the Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue, in the name of al their confederates, make warre againſt him, and with The Duke of Saxon & the Lantgraue mouewar againſte the duke of Brū
                  ſwicke who flieth. in a ſhort ſpace, brynge all his countrie into their ſubiection, and his ſtrong caſtell of Wolſebutell, ſtanding not farre frō the citie of Brunſwycke, wherein he put all his truſte, they wanne by compoſition, he taried not long hymſelfe, but whan they began to inuade, he fled with his eldeſt ſonne Charles Uictor to the Duke of Bauier. In that forſayde caſtell were founde ſondrie letters, wherby it was evident to ſee, what thinge he and the Duke of Bauier, the Byſhop of Mentz, Heldus, and diuerſe others went about, but that ſhalbe after repeted in place conuenient. The Proteſtauntes in a wrytyng ſet forth, declare a Large the cauſes of this their doinge, and ſhewe howe they dyd not begynne this warre, but of neceſſitie defended their fellowes. In the fourmer aſſemblie at Spier they had intreated kyng Ferdinando that in the Emperours name and his own he would cōmaunde him to ſuffer the Goſlarians to lyue in reſt by hym, Ferdinando followed their myndes, who at the ſame tyme had nede of their ayde agaynſte the Turke, and ſendyng his Ambaſſadours, warned hym ſharpely to ſurceaſe, but he aunſwered contemptuouſly and proudlye, and would not leaue, whereupon enſued this deſenſion before reherſed, for they had ſhewed kyng Ferdinādo at Spier, that vnleſſe he obeyed his decree, they would not ſuffer their fellowes to ſuſteyne this wrong. At the Ides of Iuly was an other aſſemblie of the Empyre at Norynberg, for ſo it was decreed at Spier, becauſe of the warre in Hōgary. An aſſembly at Noriberg. Kyng Ferdinando was preſent, and the Emperours deputies were, Fridericke the Palſgraue, the Biſhop of Auſpurge, Fridericke counte Furſtemberge, Hugh Monforte, Iohn Nauie. Ferdinando propoundeth howe the Emperour toke it in very good parte, that they ſente an army into Hongary, who had purpoſed to haue bene at the ſame warre him ſelfe with all his power, and therfore had called an aſſemblie of the ſtates in Spaine: but in this cōfutation he fell into a great ſickenes, and ſo was conſtrayned of neceſſitie to differ it tyll an other tyme: And whan he was nowe fully reſolued of the matter, and how

to haue ſent his force out of Italy and Burgundye before, than brake foorthe thenterpriſes of hys enemyes, in ſo much that he hath cauſe to feare ſome perill not only in I
                  •
               aly, but alſo in Flaunders and Artoys. Wherof notwithſtanding he hath geuen none occaſion, who chieflye loueth the comon tranquillitie: but as they knowe well enough, how thenemies haue euer ſins the aſſemblie at Spier endeuoured to leuie men in Suyſerlande, & in Germany, to begin the warres: thus is the Emperour againſt his mind impeached and letted, ſo that he can neyther come hym ſelfe, nor ſend his force, which he hathe nede of: for his owne defence, neuertheleſſe he is fully mynded, before the nexte yeare goe aboute, to retourne into Germany, and accompliſhe the warre in hys mynde ſo long intended. And that he will haue on the Sea alſo a nauie well prepared & furniſſhed, that the Turke beyng aſſayled with double warre, maie not bende hys whole power agaynſte Hongary. Moreouer whan he cometh into Germany, he wil leaue nothyng vnattempted, that maye make for the godly and tollerable reconcilemēt of Relygyon: And after complayning that almen did not obey the decree of the laſt aſſemblie: for ſome ſent no ſoldiours, others ſente: but not the full nombre, ſom were ſent foorth without money, there wanted alſo of the munitiō & furniture that was promyſed, which thinges for becauſe the captaynes made complaynte of, he vewed himſelf and ſawe it was ſo. And for that the whole iorney was letted herby to the detriment & daunger of the empire, he is commen vnto this aſſemblie not without his loſſe & hinderaunce, to require thē that in ſo nedefull a time, they would not faile the cōmon wealth. Before Fernādo toke his iorney from Uienna, to come to the aſſemblye at Norinberge, beeing aduertiſed of the war of Brunſwick, he ſent a meſſager to exhorte thē to ſurceaſe. And now that he was comen to Norinberge, by cōmō aduiſe were ſent Ambaſſadours the ſōme of whoſe oration was this, Ambaſſadors to the Duke of Saxon & the Lantzgraue. that they ſhould not try the matter by force of armes, eſpecially at this time, for in caſe they did, it were to be feared leſt ye Turkiſh war ſhould behindered, & ciuil warreſtered vp in Germany. Unto this the Duke and the Lantzgraue made aunſwere the .xi. of Auguſte, oute of theyr campe before the Caſtell of Wulfebuttel, & recyting the cauſes of this enterpriſed defence, declare that the thyng might not otherwiſe haue ben doon. And that albeit they were dryuen of neceſſitie to take thys warre in hande, to theyr greate charges, yet haue they neuertheleſſe ſent ayde to the Turkiſhe warre, fully as moche as they wer boundē, neyther wolde they fayle alſo to dooe the lyke hereafter. And yf all other men wold doe the ſame, ther ſhould be no nede to feare the diſſolution of the armie: But the lacke that is in many men, is reported by the mouthes and letters of diuers: which ſeing it is ſo, and foraſmoche as the Duke of Brunſwick coulde by non other meane be quieted,

contemning both the Emperours and kyng Ferdinando his cōmaundement, and alſo the decrees of the Empire, they deſire them not to miſconſtre this their doyng, for they ſeeke no man by this warre, but him only, neyther doe they refuſe whan thinges be appeaſed to ſende al their force to the aide of Hōgary, as much as they are able to make. This aſſemblie ended the ſixe and twenty daye of Auguſt, a penaltie was ſet for ſuche as obeyed not the decree of Spier, and certein other thinges for the warre requiſite were enacted. There were no Prynces there, ſauinge Walter the Maſter of Pruſſia, and the Biſhops of Bamberge, Eiſtet, and Trente, and themperours deputes before named. You haue harde before of Cardinall Contarene. He for hys ambaſſade, had no greate thanke of the Biſhoppes and Cardinalles, and Contarene in diſpleſure with yt pope & cardinalles was charged that he was not vehemente enoughe in reſyſtynge the Lutheranes, and that he had almoſte brought the common welth of Roome in daunger. Where as many blamed hym ſore in hys abſence, Cardinall Fregoſe only ſtode in hys defence. Retournyng out of Germany into Italy, he came to Lukes, where the Biſſhop Paule attended for the Emperours comming, to goe into Barbarye. Than going with the Biſſhop to Roome, he was ſhortly after created Legate of Hys death. Bononie, where at the laſt he departed thys yere in thend of Auguſt not without the ſuſpicion of poiſon. Whan his frende Cardinall Fregoſe was alſo dead a little before they that knowe him well, ſay that he beleued ryghtly touching mans iuſtification, he was a man excellently learned and wrote a boke of the Magiſtrates & comon welthe of the Uenetians. In this ſame moneth the Chaunceloure of Fraūce, The Chaū
                  celour of Fraunceput in priſon. williā Poret by the kings cōmaundement (who went thā to Perpignan) was taken in the night, as he laye in his bed, & carried to priſon. What time the brute therof came to Paris, al men reioiſed exceadingly. For in thoſe foure yeres that he had ben in that office, he had offended all ſortes of men, and from ſome lady of the kynges courte, came this miſfortune to him. The condēnation alſo of the Admiral augmē
               ted the hatred, as before is ſaid. He was in a great, & in maner an aſſured hope to bee made a Cardinall, & therfore two or three monethes before, he wold nedes take holy orders, which thing notwithſtāding ſom mē ſaied he did, that foraſmuch as he was in the hatred of mani, he might the better beare it, & eſcape the daunger of his life in caſe that heat ſhould at any tyme breake out & boyle ouer. This was the third mockeri of fortune that chaunced in Fraūce, with in a few monethes together. For where theſe three before mentioned, the Conſtable, Admirall and Chauncelour, were in the higheſt degre of dignitye. They burned in mutuall mallice & declared by theyr enſample, the diſceiptefullnes, vncertentye, and ſlyppernes of woordly thynges.
            At this tyme Otto, Henry the Palſegraue embraced the doctryne of

the Goſpell The ſame dyd they of Heildeſſem.
            I tolde you before of the counſell, the Byſhop ſent immediatly letters The Palſgraue receyueth the Goſpell. and Bulles therof to the Emperoure into Spayne. Wherunto Ceſar aunſwereth the fyue and twenty daye of Auguſte. Fyrſt he cō
               mendeth his endeuour and zeale towardes the common wealth, but it greueth hym that the Frenche kyng ſhould be compared vnto him, for he is that prodigall chylde, but for hym ſelfe which neuer ſwarued The Empe. aunſwered the Popo. from his dutie, he ſayeth he ought more derely to be imbraced, for he hath refuſed no paynes, peryll, nor coſte, that a counſel myght once be had, that the whole common wealth beyng pacified, they myght ſette vpon the Turke on all handes. Contrary wyſe he mynded euer an other waye, wherfore he fyndeth ſome lacke in his letters. The other was wonte to make his boaſte that he had the Cardinalles at hys becke. Wherfore he doubteth whether the thynge be trewe or countreſeared. But howe ſoeuer it be, he reſteth vpon a good conſcience, & both their doinges are openly knowen. He hym ſelfe hath bene ouergentle to hym and fauoured hym a great deale to muche. For all the labour he hath taken theſe many yeares is in vayne: he hath ofte bene warned of his dutye, ſondrye great iniuries haue bene remitted, leagues with hym haue often tymes bene remoued, but with all theſe thynges he is waxed worſe, and vtterly doeth abuſe his lenitie and patience. Who brake the league and gaue the occaſion of warre, he hathe declared at Rome. What hathe happened ſince, he wyll vtter now alſo. For how frendly & deſirous of peace he hath bene, hereby may eaſely appeare, that after the truce taken at Nice, he came into talke with him at Aegnes mortes, & cōmitted him ſelf vnto him, & the yeare followyng, he paſſed through Fraunce to the great admiration, and not without the reprehenſion of many. For ſeing he hath oftener than once broken his fayth and is fickell & vnconſtant in all his counſelles, it was ſure a great daunger, to hazarde his perſone vpō his fidelitie & promeſſe. Moreouer he knoweth for certeintie that thei deliberated to deteine him at the ſame time. And where as many ſay that for the rebellion of Gaunt, he muſt nedes paſſe that waie, that was nocauſe at all. For that rebellion was ſtired vp of a very fewe, & that of the baſeſt ſorte of men, & al the coūtrey remayned in their allegeaunce and fidelitie, & the quene his ſiſter could haue remedied thoſe matters. How beit where he was prefixed to retourne into Germany through Italy, he was moued by his intreaty to chaunge his purpoſe, & went through Fraūce, which thing he is able to proue by his own letters, & by the letters of his ſōnes & nobles. For he requeſted this thing of him ſo erneſtly, yt he rekened he ſhould be diſhonoured, in caſe he toke any other way than through Fraunce. And what tyme he was wt hym in Fraunce, he affirmed many times, yt he wold obſerue the truces made

But after he began to complayne, that Millan was not redred vnto him according to the promeſſe, where not withſtandinge vnto ye ſame promeſſe was added thys condicyon, that he ſhould reſtore hys vncle the Duke of Sauoie and doe ſerten other thinges: And yet ſyns that tyme hathe he practiſed agaynſte hym in ſondry places, in Germanie, in Italy, with the Turke, with Iohn Uaiuod, and his wyfe the widdow, and with certen noble men of Hongatye, by whoſe meanes the Turke had the citie of Offen: And yet in the meane ſeaſon he coulde full well cloake hys mallice, & promiſe hym greate frendſhyp, through a ſubtill fetche and polycie, that he myght tracte the tyme, and ſet vppon hym vnware. And than tooke he firſt occaſyon, what tyme hys miniſters Fregoſe and Rincon, were intercepted: In the which thing The enterpriſes of Fregoſe & Rincon. how he wolde in dede haue ſatiſfyed hym, he hymſelfe can tell, whiche was choſen vmpere in the arbitrement betwene them. This therfore dyd he pretende to bee the cauſe of a newe trouble and diſturbaunce of the weale publicke whan he had prefyxed it long before: But what Fregoſe and Rincon attempted by hys commaundemente, in Italye and Turkie, and what ſeruyce they had oftetymes donne hym, was knowen well enoughe. For they wente aboute throughe treaſon to haue broughte the Chriſten common welth into great daunger: therfore coulde not they inioye the benefyte of the peace Nicene, whyche had them ſelues infrynged the publycke peace. Agayne they wente by ſtealthe, and priuelye throughe Lumbardie, with a companye of oute lawes, whyche is deathe, by the cuſtome of the countrye. He blameth ſore the Marques of Piſcare, but he offered, to abide iudgment: And whye he ſhoulde refuſe it, and alſo forſake other ſatyſfactions, it is not vnknowne, he certenly thinking he had been ſatiſfyed, paſſed ouer into Barbarie, and ſendynge, hys Ambaſſadoure commended vnto hym the publycke peace and queyet. And albeit hee made fayre promiſes, yet did he attempte diuerſe thinges agaynſte hym, in Germany, Denmarke & other places: he intēded alſo to inuade Nauarre. Agayne in the aſſemblie at Spier, he did what he coulde, to nurryſhe ſtryfe in religion, whileſt he promyſed ſeuerally to eyther partye hys amytie and fauour: he indeuoured moreouer to diſwade the ſtates of the empire from the Turkiſſhe warre, he ſollycited the Turke, he ſent a power into Italye, and mooued warre agaynſte hym, in Brabant, by Martyn Roſſenn, and in the lande of Luke, by the Duke of Orleans, beefore the ſame was proclaymed. The reſte of hys force hee bent wholy agaynſt the Frontiers of Spaine: And thys is the fruict that he gathereth of hys dylygence whyche hath geuē hym ſo moch of his wil, & exhorted him ſo oft vnto peace: Furthermore where he hath ſuffered him, to deteine the arche biſſhop of Ualencene, priſoner, and

certen noble men of Spayne to be outrageouſly iniuried by Frēche men at Auignion, hath in dede bene ouermuche ſufferaunce. Nowe therfore is he compelled of neceſſitie to make reſiſtaunce, what tyme he had lefte feare of hym, by reaſon of his moſte large and ample promyſes, and alſo what tyme he had prepared hym ſelfe for the Turkyſhe warre, and therfore was reſolued to retourne into Germanye. The iniurie ſure is great, and the dammage not ſmalle, that he hathe done vpon his Frontiers, but yet is he not moued ſo muche with all theſe thynges, as for the calamitie of the common wealth. For concernyng his owne affayres, for as muche as he doeth ſo ofte breake conuenauntes, it is muche better for hym to haue open warre, than to truſte to any truce or condicions whiche at the fyrſt light occaſion, he wyl abholyſhe and make fruſtrate, for peace is oftentimes diſceiptful, Peace is diſceiptful. for in the meane ſeaſon doeth he practyſe newe deuyſes, hurtfull to the common wealthe, mayteyne factions and is wholy occupied, that when he is wery hym ſelfe of loſſe and charges, he maye dryue hym than to reſiſte the Turke. And beyng of this diſpoſition hym ſelf, he bryngeth vp his chyldren in the ſame diſciplyne. Nowe is his ambition and vnmeaſurable couetouſnes ſo increaſed, that it can not be The Frēche king is accuſed of ambition. hydde. His Aunceſtours dyd vſurpe the Frenche prouince, whyche was of the dominion of the Empyre. So nowe doeth he poſſeſſe Sauoye and a parte of Piedmont, and ſo fortifieth the ſame, that it is verye apparente, he entendeth not to reſtore them. And his pourpoſe was, not only to inuade Lumbardy, but alſo Parma, and Placence, and than Luke and Seine, after that alſo the dominion of the church of Rome, to the entent he myght thus haue the waye open to Naples and Sicilie. It is no doubt, but this is his entente, and it maye be eaſely perceyued by ſuche thynges as he attempteth and practiſeth in Italye. To be brief his couetous deſyre is conteyned within no certeyn limites, but is great and infinite, neyther is it to be thought that euer he wyll obſerue conuenauntes ſo longe as any thyng remayneth that he may take a way frō others & to conuert to his owne vſe. For with this diſeaſe & vice of mind is he caried about, as with a Raging tempeſte, that forgettyng all vertue and Religion, he hathe lyncked hym ſelfe in league with the Turke, and doeth participate not onlye his counſelles, but alſo his goodes and fortune with the ennemye of our common wealth and nowe alſo maketh his boaſte full ſtoutelye, that Barbaroſſa ſhall come into our Seas with a nauie. Whether theſe thynges doe make for the reformation of the common wealth, & begynning of a counſell, he ought of his wyſdome to cōſyder, his ſtudy hath bene euer, that there ſhoulde bee no counſell had, for that he iudged it to bee moſte profitable ſo for his owne priuate commoditie.

Therfore did he this thing wayed and cōſidered, deuiſe an other way to reconcile and appeaſe the controuerſie of Religion in Germanye, & herein had only a reſpecte vnto Gods glorye, and the dignitie of the churche, therfore let it be imputed to the kynge that there is no counſell, who hath euer impeched the ſame, and not to hym, whiche hathe taken in this behalfe ſo much trauayle and payne: Wherfore if his holynes be nowe diſpoſed, to helpe the common wealth thus afflicted, he ought of dutie to profeſſe him ſelfe his ennemie, who is the authour of all trouble and calamitie, who moueth and allureth the Turke to inuade the Chriſten cōmon wealth, who leaueth no waye vnaſſayed to accomplyſhe his ambition and mynde moſte deſyrous to reuenge. For ſythe the chief care of Chriſtianitie apperteyneth vnto hym by reaſon of his office paſtorall, the thynge it ſelfe doeth ſurely requyre, that he ſhould no longer ſuffer hym to cauſe this vexation and trouble, but declare hym ſelfe to be his vtter ennemye. Whiche thyng if he would doe accordyngly, it ſhould both be moſte accepted of al good men, and and alſo be very profitable to reteyne other kynges in their dutie. For to haue a counſell to recouer peace, and eſtablyſhe the common wealth, this is the only remedy, wherin if he wyll doe his owne dutie vnfaynedly, he wyll not bee behynde with his parte.
         
         
            
            
               ✚ The fiftene Booke of Sleidanes Commentaries concerning the ſtate of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne of the Empyre of Charles the fyfte.
            
               
                  ❧ The argument of the fyftene Booke
               THe Pope could not accorde the Emperour and the kyng. Warre waxed hote betwyxt Englande and Scotlande. The Frenche kyng appeaſeth the rebellion of Rochelle. In the aſſemblie of Norinberge, Granuellane demaūded for the Emperour ayde againſt the frēch kyng, who in a certen anſwere obiecteth to the Emperour many thinges. Fraunces Landry is examined. Bucer is ſent for to Collon to make a reformatiō. The Pope would buye Millan, he incenſeth the Clergie of Collon agaynſt the Archebyſhop. Launderſey is taken, and Dure is ſacked, An aſſemblie is holden at Spyers, and greuouſe complayntes made againſte the Frenche kyng, in ſo muche that his Herauld was ſent backe with threatninges. There the Proteſtantes accuſed the Duke of Brunſwycke, and recite an Acte of his doyng with a young damſell. The Duke of Sauoye accuſeth the kyng. The Frenche Ambaſſadours ſet forth there an Oration, whiche they ſhould haue made, in caſe they had bene admitted to ſpeake in the counſell. At this aſſemblie an accorde was made betwyxt the kyng of Romains and the Duke of Saxon. The The Prynces graunt ayde againſt the Frenche kyng. After the Emperour beſiegeth ſaynt Deſier. The kyng of Englande with great force taketh Boloigne. The Emperour concludeth a peace with the Frenche kynge contrary to mens expectation.
            
            
               WHan the warre waxed hote on euerye ſyde, the Cardinalles ſent to maks a peace. Byſhop at the xxvi. daye of Auguſte, ſent Ambaſſadours two Cardinalles to treate of peace Michaell Uiſenſe a Portugall, to the Emperour, Iames Sadolete, to the king of Fraūce, praying them, to remitte their priuate miuries for the commō wealthes ſake, and frame them ſelues vnto peace. He ſendeth alſo three Cardinalles as Legates to the Synode at Trente, Paris, Poole, and Morone. The Emperour both anſwereth the Legate The Preſydentes of the counſell at Trente. Uiſenſe, and alſo wryteth to the Byſhop, almoſte the ſame in effecte, that he dyd in his former letters. How it is vayne to make peace with hym, that wyll kepe no conuenauntes: Therfore he aduertyſeth hym agayne, that he would profeſſe hym ſelfe to be his ennemye: For he hath often ſayd that he would before auenged on him, that ſhould breake the tcuce, or make league with the Turke. This is nowe only the ſureſt and fitteſt meane to eſtablyſh the cōmon wealth. With theſe letters he ſent away the Ambaſſadour about the eyghtene daye of October. For aſmuche as the Duke of Longeuille and Martyn Roſſen, had leuied their armye in the dominions of the Duke of Cleaue,

the emperialles, by the conduiet of the Prince of Orenge, inuade Gulicke, and diſtroye the countrie with fyre farre and wyde, and take by compoſition, Dure the chiefeſt Towne in thoſe parties. For Gulicke Dure is taken. & Mounten came to the Duke of Cleaue by his mother. At this time alſo the Emperiall armie in Hongary, no exploite done, when they had attempted in vayne to wynne the Towne of Peſta, retourneth home, and through infection dyed many thouſandes. Duke Maurice of Saxonye ſerued in thys warre voluntarily, a yonge prince aboute xxi yeares of age, who on a certen daye ryding out of the campe, and but one mā with him, meting by chaunce with certē Turkes, foughte with them, and hauing his horſe ſlayne vnder him, was ſmitten to the ground. Than his ſernaunt being a gentel man borne, lay downe vpon hys lorde and with his body couered the Duke, and defended him and bare of the ſtripes ſo longe vntill certen horſemen came and reſcewed the Prince. And ſo he ſaued hys lyfe, but his man hauing receiued many woundes was caried into the Camp, and dyed ſhortly after. Thus ended the warre in Hongarye. The biſſhop had ſente ayde of thre thouſand footemen, whiche wer led by Alexander Uitellius. At thys tyme alſo began hote warre betwene England & Scotland, the occaſion wherof was miniſtred a yere before, for that the Scottiſh Warre betwixte England & Scotlande. king, when he had promiſed to mete hys vncle, the king of Englande at Yorke, to make an accorde touching theyr limites, being diſwaded by hys mother and certē of his nobles, came not. And it fortuned that the Scottes had this yere in the beginning of december a great ouerthrowe at a place called Solymoſſe. In the whiche battell were taken the moſt part of all the lordes in Scotelande: For the which loſſe The Scotes taken at Solymoſſe. the kynge toke ſuche thought, that retournyng home, he dyed within a fewe dayes after, which was the day before the Ides of December when the eight day before, the quene had brought him forth a daughter, Mary: whiche thinge alſo did greatly augmente his ſorrowe, for Theyr king dieth. that he wanted an heyremale: For in the yere before he had loſte two ſonnes, in ſondri places, within the ſpace of foure and twenty houres: And he had to wyfe Marye, daughter to the Duke of Guyſe, of the houſe of Lorayne. When the Scottes werre in thys calamitie, the Frenche kynge ſent them monye and munition. After the kynge was dead the gouernement was committed to Iames Hamelton Erle of Arrayne, whiche was the kinges greate coſyn. The next place vnto hym had the Cardiuall of. S. Andrewes, moſt addickte to the kynge of Fraunce. I ſhewed before how Henry the Prince of Saxonie had for him ſelfe and his ſonne Maurice, entred into league with the Proteſtantes: But after his death, Duke Maurice being moued herein, ſayed how hys father coulde not bynde hym, neyther wolde he be tyed to the bondes of his father. Whē Henry Duke of Brunſwicke was

expulſed, as before is ſayd, he accuſed the Duke of Saxon, the Lantzgraue and theyr conſortes to the imperial chamber. Who being afterwarde The Duke of Sarō and the Lantzgraue refuſe the iudgmēt of the chaumber. cited, in the moneth of December, do refuſe theyr iudgemente in all thinges, and ſendinge ambaſſadours thither, declare this vnto them, and alſo do proteſt, that they doe not refuſe a lawfull and ordynarye Iuriſdiction, but take exceptions to the Iudges themſelues, which are all of a contrary relygion, which prayſe the decree made at Auſpurge twelue yeres paſt, and haue confirmed the ſame by an othe which for the ſame cauſe diſſent from them exceadingly, and beare thē greate mallice: whiche take them for heretikes, and thinke them vnworthy to haue any iuſtice miniſtred: which by ſōdry preiudices haue oft tymes vttered and bewreyed this theyr hatred. In the conuentiō at Regenſpurg it was decreed, that the chamber would this yeare in the moneth of Ianuary, be refourmed. This did the Proteſtantes allow, ſo that men alſo of theyr rellgion might be admitted to be of that nombre, which thing Themperour graunted them, and king Fernando renewed after in the aſſemblie at Spier, and appoynted the moneth of Iune for the ſame reformation, and by this meane obteined of them ayde for the Turkiſhe warre. For yf it had ben otherwyſe, they tolde him that tyme plainely, that they wolde not only beare no charges frō henceforth touching the iudges of the chamber, but alſo wold refuſe hereafter to obey theyr decrees. When therefore nothinge was donne hitherto, they as before is ſayde, ſending Ambaſſadours, doe refuſe theire iudgment. And agayne the iudges after in a wrytyng ſet forth, dooe reiect that ſame refuſall. They agreed in theyr laſt metinge at Norrinberge, there to aſſemble agayne about the Turkiſh warre, the xiiii. daye of Nouember, but the matter was differred: And in the The Duke of Cleauerecouereth Dure. moſt ſharpe time of winter, the Duke of Cleaue beſegeth and recouereth Dure. What tyme the Frenche kynge beſeged Perpignan, there arroſe a rebellion at Rochel an hauē towenin Pantois verey famous and ſituated in a place right commodious. It was ones poſſeſſed of Englyſh men, but it was rendred Frenche, in the tyme of Charles the A rebellion at Rochelle. firſt ſonne and heire to his father Iohn, The cauſe of that commotyon was for a gariſon placed there by the king, vnder the gouernemēt of Iarnacke the Admirall his kinſinā: And in other places alſo there aboutes, they were vp for a tribute of Saltepittes, and droue awaye with reproche the kinges officers and treaſurers that came thither. So ſoone as the kinge vnderſtode it, he ſente thither a new garriſon of horſemen and footemen: Iarnake alſo taketh from them, all theyre munition and armure, and kepte the gates with watche and warde. The laſte day of December followyng, the kyng hym ſelfe came thyther, 1543. and the next daye, ſettyng in place of iudgement, whan both the Townes men, & theyr neyghbours aboute them, laye proſtrate before

hym, and beſought hym of mercy. Albeit, ſayeth he, what tyme I and my thildren, were occupied in moſte weightie affayres, for the defence The kynges oratiō to thē of Rochell. of oure whole Realme and of you al, you forgetting your dewtie, that you owe vnto vs, haue made a rebellion and an vprore, in ſuche wyſe, as we haue iuſte cauſe to punniſhe you, and for the eſtate of oure perſon, and enormitie of your offence, myght dryue you to fyne: Yet for that we accompt it, no leſſe honorable and prayſe worthye for a prince The clemēcy of king Fraū
                  ces. to extend mercy to his people, than it is honeſt for hys ſubiectes to remain in their duty, & againe becauſe we ſet more by this your ſubmiſſion and wyllyng myndes, than by the rigour of the lawe, we doe intende to forget the iniurie that you haue done vnto vs, and to haue a conſideration not ſo much of your errour and treſpaſſe, as of our own accuſtomed gentlenes, vpon this trnſte and confidence, that you wyl committe no ſuche lyke facte hereafter. For els in a ſteade of a gentle and mercifull Prince, you ſhall haue a ſeuere executour of iuſtice, and that through your owne faulte, whiche doubtles ought to be accoūpted no leſſe, than that for the which in theſe laſte yeares paſt the Gantois were handled extremely, whan they were not only executed and puniſhed, but alſo loſt their liberties for euer. Whiche example in dede though we myght followe without reprehenſion, becauſe we haue neyther ſuſteyned leſſe iniurie, neyther are inferiour vnto hym in any thynge, whiche hath thus reuenged his griefe. Yet for as much as we loke to encreaſe rather through the loue, fidelitie & beneuolence of our ſubiectes, thā to be enriched by their goodes & ſubſtaūce, we do clerely forgeue you this act, & reſtore you to your former eſtate. Notwithſtanding ſuche thinges as you haue frely and lyberally geuen vs, we doe accepte and reteyne. What ſo euer alſo hath bene taken from you in this tumulte, we wyll that it be reſtored you agayne. Whan after this Oration of the kyng there enſued a reioyſing & a confuſed noyſe of the audience, by and by was heard a moſte ſwete and pleſaunt melodie in the ſteple of the head churche of ſaynct Bartholomewe, teſtifying the publique ioye and gladnes. After that the Senate made the kyng a moſte coſtly ſupper. The next daye, the kyng beyng ready to departe, ſayde to the chief of the people, we goe nowe into an other parte of our Realme, to defende the ſame from the ennemy, defende you this, as we truſte aſſuredly you wyll doe. Moreouer if there be any thyng that apperteineth to the bettering of the cōmoditie of your citie, we wyll not denye your requeſte. The ſeuentene day of Ianuary kyng Ferdinando and his two ſonnes came to Nurrenberge to The aſſemblie of Nurrenberge. the aſſemblie. And the eyght daye after came thether alſo Granuellan out of Spayne, who comming by Trente with his ſonne the byſhop of Arras, had exhorted there the byſhoppes legates. In this conuention the Emperour had ſubſtituted for his deputies, Fridericke

Palatine, the Biſhop of Auſpurge, Iohn Nauie. The ſeconde kalend of February, king Fernando maketh hys propoſition. And foraſmuch as in certen aſſemblies before, continual ayde agaynſt the Turk hath been decreed, he admoniſſheth and requireth them, that they wyll all condeſcend vpon this nowe, that nothing nedefull be wantyng: for it is reported of all men, that he wyll retourne thys yere into Hongarye with an exceadynge greate power, and that he is prouoked ſo to doe, by certen chriſtian Princes. And albeit his countries be ſore impoueriſhed with almoſte continuall warres, yet will he not faile them for his part. And how great a matter it is, to defend Hongary, Auſtrich, Morauia and other countries adioining to the ſame, there is no man in maner, but knoweth. And for the better perſwaſion were red diuerſe letters, ſente vnto king Fernando & others, from ſondry places, all the which in a maner pourported thys, that the Turke prepared a new armie, and a Nauie, to warre bothe by ſea and land. There wer alſo the Ambaſſadours of quene Marie, who gouerned the lowe coū
               trye for themperour, Wiricke Criechinge, and Uiglie, Zwichem a Lawyer. They in a longe oration accuſed ſore the Duke of Cleaue, that through hys ayde and counſell, the French kyng, by the conduict The treatye of Norinberge of Martyn Roſſenn, had made warre in thoſe parties, wherfore they requeſted them to reduce and frame him to his dewtie that he myght leaue the poſſeſſion of Gelderland, & recompence the dommage don. After the fifte daye of Februarie, Granuellan ſhewed his commiſſion. And what the good will of themperour was towardes the publicke weale, he ſayd it was no nede to recite: but he reioyſed not a lyttle, the laſt yere, whan it was ſhe wed hym, how they made oute theyr powers together ioyntely agaynſt the Turke, and wolde in dede haue ben therepreſent hym ſelfe, and had prepared all thynges for the ſame iorney, but then did the French king and the Duke of Cleaue moue war agaynſt hym vnloked for: which thing certēly diſapoynted his former pourpos, for the force which he had intended to haue ſent agaynſt the perpetuall enemie of Chriſtianitie, he was conſtrayned to reteyne aboute him, for his owne defence: eſpecially ſeynge his enemyes bragged alſo verey moche of the Turkiſſhe Nauie, wherin they ſayd came great ſoccour for them. But all thys notwithſtandyng he perſeuereth ſtyll in the ſame mynd, that he hath euer ben of, and alſo declared, and is determined to ſpende not only hys Treaſure, but alſo hys lyfe and bloude in the Turkiſſhe warre, ſo that they will agayne ayde hym agaynſt the French king and the Duke of Cleaue. Wherunto both his will and zeale towardes the common welth, and alſo the ſtate of this dangerous tyme onght to perſwade thē: How the French king hath expulſed his vncle the Duke of Sauoie oute of his inheritaunce, it is not vnknowen: the ſame he intendeth to doe alſo vnto others, astune

and occaſyon will ſerue. And for becauſe themperoure dooeth let his violent enterpriſes, therfore doeth he beare hym all thys hatred and mallice. They heard ryght nowe, by the letters that wer redde, what he worketh with the Turke, and what he practiſeth in Germany, and how he ſeketh to hynder the Turkiſſhe warre. And foraſmuch as the Duke of Cleaue is ioyned in league with hym, and alſo diſtourbeth themperours moſte worthye exploictes, and is a let to the ſaufgarde of Germany, it is requiſite that ayde be decried agaynſte them bothe, that theyr inſolente Raſſhenes may be repreſſed. In the meane tyme A ſupplication of the proteſtantes. the Proteſtantes deliuer a ſupplycation to king Fernando and themperours deputies: wherin they make a longe reherſal, what hath ben don in Religion theſe many yeres, how the peace was geuen at Norinberge, and how the iudges of the chamber haue infringed it, howe themperour made them a prouiſo two yeres paſt at Regenſpurg, and declared playnely hys mynde, and howe a decree was made there for the reformation of the chamber, and vpryght miniſtration of Iuſtice: what they alſo did proteſt than openly vnleſſe the decree were obſerued. And ſeing there is nothing redreſſed hitherto: And that the iudges of the chamber do ſtil moleſt them after theyr wonted maner, firſt: for theyr defence agaynſte the Duke of Brunſwicke, ſecondly for not paying the ſtipendes of the chamber, therfore haue they refuſed their whole iuriſdiction: which thing in dede they proteſted longe before in the open aſſemblie that they wolde doe. Now therfore, yf the matter be otherwiſe reported vnto them, they deſyre them, to geue no credit: for they were conſtrayned of neceſſitie thus to doe, and vſed lawefull remedy, whych both the law and equitie it ſelfe doeth permitte. For if they ſhould on this wyſe procede, and vſurpe the authoritie of iudgement, and pronounce publycations & other penalties, the ſame wolde not be to them only, but alſo to the publicke weale hurtfull. For what time, throughe mallice and hatred kindled amonges the ſtates, theire whole treaſure ſhalbe conſumed in ciuile warre, how fyt and profitable the ſame wilbe for the Turkes, there is no man but knoweth wel enough. For howe harde a thing it is, after that althynges be exaſperated, to quyet the matter, it maye by dyuers examples be ſhewed. The Turks increaſe by the loſſe of chriſtians. They verely doe wiſhe for nothyng more, than that a fyrme peace, vpright iuſtice, and publicke quiet might be ſtabliſhed in Germany, certenly of the diſſention that is in religion arriſeth al this grudg & diffidence: And that diſſention ſpringeth of that ſame wel, for that the doctryne of the goſpel, and Gods trewe relygyon are prohibited, for that errours and open crimes are not only not taken awaye or a mended, but alſo for ambition and lucre ſake, are defended and maynteyned. Therfore god beyng offended & prouoked to wrath for thys vnthankfulnes, doeth plage vs with greate calamities, and will not ceaſe hys

hand, ſo longe as we perſeuer in the ſame: They praye them therfore, that they wolde applye theyr ſtudye hereunto, and at the leſtewyſe ſo trauell in this matter, that for relygion ſake, there bee no trouble moued, and that iuſtice maye bee miniſtred to all men indifferentlye: but for ſomoche as that can not be, as the ſtate of the chamber is at thys preſent, they requyre, that accordyng to the olde lawes of the empire, and Themprours declaratiō, that iudgemente may be reformed, and other iudges appoynted, and actions to remayne in the ſame ſtate as they were in before the refuſall made, and the iudges to bee charged, that they obſerue exactely, the fourme of the reformation that ſhalbe, and attempt nothynge agaynſt the peace makinges of former yeres: For vnleſſe the thyng maye thus bee ordered, and that they may haue a ſufficiente warraunte to haue peace, they cannot conſulte of the Turkiſhe warre althoughe they deſyre to doe anye thynge they maye for the common welth. The matter beyng longe and mothe debated, whan bothe kynge Fernando, and Themperours attourneis, ſayed, howe the counſell was alreadye appoynted ar Trente, and Themperoure alſo would come thyther: And that the Iudges of the chamber coulde not be remoued without theyr cauſe were hearde, and that the redreſſe, is already decreed, and ſhortely ſhall take effecte. And howe they coulde not denye the Duke of Brunſwicke, by them expulſed, makyng claime to hys owne, to haue the lawe, neyther that they had Aucthorytye to make any further graunte. The Proteſtauntes ſhew them agayne, that they neyther allowe that Counſell, neyther wyll they come there, neyther are they ſatiſfyed in other thynges, nor ſufficiently aſſured, neyther can they take any further delyberation. Notwithſtandinge Fernando and the other ſtates make a decree for the The decre of Norinberg. fortyfying of the places nere to the Turkes dominion, and for contribution monye for the ſame, and appoynte the thirde daye of Iuly, for reformation of the Chamber, ordeynynge that it ſhoulde be redreſſed after the fourme preſcribed eleuen yeares paſte at Regenſpurge, appointing a penaltie for thoſe that ſhall refuſe to contribute their ayde accordyngly. But the Proteſtantes agayne do proteſte, that they doe not aſſente vnto this decree, becauſe it was made withoute theyr aduiſe, becauſe there is no certen thing eſtabliſſhed touching the peace, & law, and becauſe there is great pertialitie cōcerning the contribution. When for Themperours cominge, the matter was lyke to tende to a mortal warre betwene him, & the Duke of Cleaue. The Princes electours and other ſtates by theyr Ambaſſadours doe intreat, & hardely at the laſt obteyne a trewes of Granuellan, not certē and determinat, but ſuche, as ſhoulde ſtande at Themperours pleaſure, ſo ſoone as he ſhoulde ſette foote into Germanye, whether he wyll approue,

or refuſe it, and in the meane ſeaſon, Sittarde a verey ſtronge towne in the frontier of Gulicke, ſhoulde haue been in the Emperours poſſeſſion, vntyll he had declared what hys mynde were. The interceſſours promyſed thys alſo, that they wold ſend Ambaſſadours to mete with the Emperoure, to in treate him in the matter: And Granuellan put them in greate hope, that theye ſhoulde receyue of hym a gentle aunſwer. Thys treatye thambaſſadours of Cleaue, the chiefe whereof was Iohn Ulatten, a noble man of birthe and well learned, dyd well allowe, and gaue thankes to the interceſſours, for theyr paynes taken: but in the meane whyle was a battell foughten at the Towne of Sittarde, the .xxiiii. daye of Marche. And where as the Duke of Cleaue wanne the feelde, partely by reaſon of this victorye, and partly The Duke of Cleaue refuſeth truce. throughe the perſwaſion of the Frenche Kynge, that fed hym with money, he waxed obſtinate, forſakynge the treuce, whan hys ambaſſadours were retourned home. The newes of this proſperous battel, brought ſpedely into Fraunce, cauſed great reioyſynge, and at Paris by the Kynges commaundemente, they ſange Te deum. The Dukes of Banier bretherne by theyr Ambaſſadours, make interceſſion to the Proteſtantes in thys conuentyon, and amonges other condicions they propounde thys alſo, that all the Duke of Brunſewickes landes, myght be committed to the cuſtody of Themperoure, or certen princes of Germany, tyll the matter be further examined: but herein could be nothynge determyned. In this aſſemblye Chriſtopher Byſſhop of Auſpurge dyed of a ſoden paulſey, when he had appoynted to make The death of the biſhop of Auſpurg. a feaſte on the nexte daye. He was of the houſe of Stadious, a man learned and peaceable, whom Otto Truckeſſe ſuceded. Here was a decree made, but not entered of recorde as was accuſtomed, neyther was it of authorytye. It was longe or the Frenche Kynge receyued Themperours Letters wrytten to the Biſſhop of Roome, therefore nowe at the laſte he aunſwereth them at the full. Where Themperoure wolde be preferred before hym, as though he had well deſerued The French kinges aunſwer to the Emperours letters. of the church of Roome, it is a mockerie and a vayne thyng. For neyther are Themperours aunceſters to bee compared with hys, nor he hymſelfe alſo with hym in thys behalfe: certenly he is a good ſonne, and moche prayſe worthye, whoſe Armie dyd beſiege, vexe, and take priſoner, the father and good man of the houſe, Clemente the .vii. and ſacked the chiefe citie of the whole world, and polluted the Churches and Temples of God immortall by ſondry wayes, and lefte there vndonne no kynde of miſchiefe, fylthy luſte, and crueltye, who vnto this ſo greate an outerage, gaue alſo hym ſelfe a prettye mocke, what tyme he made vowes and ſupplycatyons in Spayne for the delyueraunce of hys father, whom he moſte ſtreyghtely deteyned at home

captiue: But hys Progenitours kinges of Fraunce, euer ſyns Charles, Martell Pipine and Lewis, haue ſtudyed alwayes to auaunce Kinges of Fraunce moſt addicteth the pope. and enryche the Byſſhoppes of Roome. He prayſeth moche his owne dilligence and zeale to the common welthe, but the thynge is farre otherwyſe: yf it bee indged a ryghte: for throughe hys order and conduite haue many thouſandes of Chriſtians ben ſlayne of the Turkes, within a ſhorte ſpace, in Hongary ones or twyſe, in the Goulfe of Ueniſe at Caſtelneufe, after that in Barbarfa, at Argiers. Whither at the ſame tyme he ſayed he muſte nedes gooe, whan in deede he fled, and leafte Germany for appraye to the enemie than approchynge throughe hys faulte, the yong infante of Iohn Uayuode, and his owne brother Fernando, and all the Realme of Hongary are fallen into thys calamitie: he telleth with a brauerye, as thoughe he came to Aegneſmortes to confirme the peace: but yf there be any prayſe in thys thynge, it ought rather to bee aſcribed vnto hym, whiche wente fyrſte in to the Shyppe to hym, and after alſo ſente hys chyldrene thyther, wherein ſurely there was great daunger, bothe of hym ſelfe, that can truſte no man, and alſo of Androwe de Anxie, hys Admirall, a man of a ſubtyll and craftie witte. After he tooke hys Iorney through Fraunce, at his requeſte in dede, but when he had fyrſte by hys Ambaſſadour, letters: and Meſſagers, craued thys of hym, and offered hym Millan: he alledgeth nonne other cauſes, but he was conſtrayned of neceſſitie for the Rebellion of Gaunte to paſſe that waye: where he ſayeth, howe conſultation was had, to haue ſtayed hym, it is faulſe, & neuer came into hys thought: He did the Duke of Sauoye no wronge, but when he denyed him bothe hys mothers dowarye, and in herytaunce, and woulde not permitte hym to redeme Nice, and beſydes dyd euyll intreate The Dukes of Sauoye frend to thē
                  peroure. hys Lieutenauntes and ſoldiours, he recouered by foorce of Armes, that he coulde not gette by lawe and equitie eſpecyallye, ſyns he wrought all thinges in a maner at the Emperours pleaſure, whoſe vſe and propertye is, to perſwade other Kynges, ſubiectes to reuolte, & after to bryng them to miſerye: As for example the Dukes of Bourbon, Sauoye, the Prynce of Salarne. And Duke Henry of Brunſewicke: He is alſo chargeable and hurtful to his kinſe folkes and alies, to Chriſtierne king of Denmarke, to Fernando his brother, & to hym chieflye whiche hathe maried his eldeſte ſyſter: For that the Turke hathe of late inuaded Hongarye, and taken the chyefe Cytye, it ought not to be aſcribed vnto hym, but to hymſelfe and hys brother, whiche layed wayte, for the yonge Heyre, Uayuodes ſonne, and made warre agaynſte hym. And ſo aunſwereth to euerye poynte of the Emperoures Letters, concernynge the Turke, and hys Ambaſſadoures ſente vnto hym touchynge the Germanes Relygyon and

counſell, that he will ſeme to bee in no faulte, but to deſerue well the Title of the mooſte Chriſtian Kynge, geuen longe ſyns to hys noble progenitours. And in fyne deſyreth the Biſſhop to geue no credyte to the ſclaunderous reporte of hys aduerſary, but to thynke howe there is nothynge, that he wyll not bee glad to doe for the common welthes ſake and hys, and for the Churche of Roome. A little before this time dyed Willyam Bellaye of Langeis, of whom wee haue oftetymes mentioned, a man of moche honoure and vertue, and an eſpecyall ornamente The death & praiſe of W. Bellay. of the Frenche Nobilytye, by reaſon of hys notable learnynge, Eloquence, Experyence, and ſyngular aptnes in all affayres, farre vnlyke vnto the moſte parte that followe the lawe, which ſeeke onlye to auaunce and augemente theyre ryches: but he was of ſo noble a courage, that he had thys reſpect onely, howe he myght through more vertue, wynne trewe renowne, and ſerue hys Prynce trewelye thoughe it were to hys owne hynderaunce. I tolde you beefore of Fraunces Lander, a preacher of Paris. Whan he had made a doubtfull Frances Lā
                  der cōmmitted to priſon aunſwer to the articles propounded, and perſeuered ſtyll in hys Preachynge, two or three dayes before Eaſter he was commytted to warde. Thys was doone by the procuremente of the Diuines, which had accuſed hym to the lieutenaunte Criminell. Within a fewe daies after the Kynge came to Sangermane whyche is a little Towne and Caſtell by the Ryuer of Seine, fyue myles benethe Paris, and His weknes before the kynge. beyng infourmed of the whole matter, calleth the Preacher beefore hym. He whan he came thither, beynge put in feare by ſome mennes woordes, whyche ſayed howe the kynge was ſore offended, declared not that conſtancye, whyche many men looked for at hys hande: And beynge caryed agayne vnto Parys the .xxix. daye of Aprill he was enforced to recant ſuche thynges as he had taught before. For on that day in the Cathedral Church did aſſemble the Senatours and iudges of the Parlamente, moreouer all the Magiſtrates and officers of Parys, and a great nomber of Diuines. After the Church dores wer made faſte, and men ſet in Armure to dryue a waye the people. Whan all were placed hys opinions were recyted, and beynge demaunded of euery one, what he beleued therein, he aunſwered as pleaſed them, confeſſynge howe he had erred, and promyſeth all obedyence from hencefoorthe, and acknoweledgeth thoſe Articles of doctryne, which fryſte the Diuines, and after the Kynges counſell propounded vnto His recantation. hym, to bee trewe and godlye. After the ſame ſorte alſo they handled an other Preacher, Depenſius, thoughe not with ſo greate a ſolemnitie: for whan he had at the fyrſte made hys retractatyon nothynge Depenſius driuen to recante. playnlye, he was compelled an other daye in hys ſermon beefore the people, to declare eche thynge diſtinctelye and apertelye, tyll the Divines there preſent, were fully ſatiſfyed. In Fraunce liued Clemente

Marotte, who in the vulgare tounge ſurmounted far al Poetes that eyther wee before hys dayes, or that liued alſo in his tyme. He had no The prayſe of Clements Marot. greate knowledge in the latyn tongue, but yet through the company of learned menne he profyted verye moche: Neyther was there any thynge almoſt in the bookes of Poetes, but he kneweit, ſo that out of theyr woorkes he tooke moche and applyed it to hys pourpoſe. Thus did he tranſlate certē thinges couertly, out of Tibullus, Propertius, and Ouide into hys owne elegies. And our of Ga
                  ••
               llus, he tooke the Marriage of Hercules, Duke of Farrare, and Senate Armoricke Daughter to Lewes the .xij. Kynge of Fraunce. He tranſlated alſo moſte excellently the fyrſt booke of Ouides, Metamorphoſys. And in his later dayes he bente all his writynges, to holy ſcripture, and was prefixed to haue expreſſed Dauid his Pſalter in Frenche metre, but Pſalmes tranſlated by Marot. taken away through ſickenes, he finiſhed only fyfty Pſalmes, which now remaine, and are red not without thadmiration of hys excellent wit: for nothinge is more pleaſaunte than hys ſtyle, nothynge purer than his ſpeache, nothyng apter or more pleaſaunt than hys Rythme, And he ſet them foorthe thys yeare at Geneua, whither he repaired, what tyme hee myghte not ſafelye make longer a bode in Fraunce, for ſuſpycyon of Lutheraniſme, he had prynted .xxx. Pſalmes two yeares before in Parys, but with moche diffycultye: for thys myghte he not doo, beefore the Doctours of Sorbone had pronounced, that there was nothynge conteyned in that booke, contrary to the Chryſtyane fayth. Thys peraduenture maketh not moche to our pourpos, but I thought good to commend the name, of ſo excellent an Artificer alſo, to other nations, for in Fraunce hys memoryal ſhal endure to the laſt poſterytie, and moſt men be of thys opinion, that it ſhall be ryght harde for anye man to matche hym in thys kynde of vertue, and as Tullye reporteth of Ceſar: he maketh all wyſe menne a frayde to wryte. Some others haue taken in hande the ſame Argumente, and in deede better learned than he, but they doo not attayne to that fynes of perfectyon. In the tenth booke is mentioned of the Archebiſſhop of Collon, how he coueted to refourme hys churche, and allowed The Archebiſſhop of Collon calleth a convocation. not that Synode of hys prouynce, notwithſtandynge that the booke went foorthe in hys name. And after that, in the conuention at Regē
               ſpurge, Biſſhops were enioyned, bothe by kinge Fernando, and alſo by the Biſſhop of Roomes Legate, that euery man in hys owne dyoceſſe ſhoulde ſee a godly reformation to bee had, he calleth a conuocatyon of hys ſtates, whych are the clergye of the cathedrall churche, the Erles, the Nobilitie, and Ambaſſadours of cities. The matter beyng debated, they agreed all, that ſo godly and holſome a worke ſhoulde be taken in hand. Therefore he appoynteth certen to conceaue in writyng a draughte of the reformation that ſhalbe, and to eſpye out good

men to bee myniſters of the churche. Thys wryting he ſendeth to the Diuines of Collon, and wylleth them to iudge thereof by the Scriptures, and to ſhew theyr opinion, but where hys requeſte was not ſaſatiſfyed, and hauing not conuenyent miniſters to inſtructe the people, he ſent for Martyn Bucer at Straſburg, whō both Iohn Gropper had alwayes commended vnto hym highly, and he hymſelfe alſo knewe ryght wel, by familyar comunication. Who commyng thither the laſte yere in Decembre, in the begynnyng of thys yere, at the commaundemente of the prince, beganne to preache at Bomia, a Towne vpon the Rhine fyue miles aboue Collō. After at the Ides of March, the Biſſhop calleth a newe aſſemblie of ſtates, at Bomia, and requireth Bucer preacheth at Bomia. that they wolde conſulte vpon a godly reformation: But where the clergie had aſſigned no man for this pourpos, the reſt of the ſtates deſyre the Archebiſhop, that according to hys owne iudgemente, hee wolde chouſe mete men for the thynge. Wherfore he committeth thys charge vnto Bucer, that he ſhoulde penne oute the articles of the chriſtian doctrine, and to thentent all thynges might the better be donne, The biſſhops boke of reformatiō. he intreateth the Prince Electour of Saxonye, that he wolde Ioyne vnto hym Melancthon. When he was commen and Iohn Piſtor frō the Lantzgraue, and that the woorke was fyniſhed, the Archebiſhop ſent it to the clergie of the head church in Collon, whych are all of noble Melancthon and Piſtor come to Collon. houſes, and requireth them, that they wolde ponder dyligently the doctryne of that booke. After at the .xxii. daye of Iuly, he calleth an other Synode and exhibited vnto them the booke of reformation, requiring them that euery ſtate wold choſe certen, whyche myght pervſe that booke ouer, and conferre with hys, to thentent ſome tollerable and godly accorde myghte in fyne bee had. But the clergie before ſayed, vrged this obſtiuately that Bucet eſpecially, and certen others appoynted of late to inſtructe the people, myghte bee dyſplaced. After they require a further tyme of delyberation, touching the booke, and refuſe to conferre with the reſt. He, albeit he knewe well enoughe for what pourpoſe they made thys delaye, yet to thende they ſhould fynd no lacke, graunteth them tyme to conſulte in. And where they ſpake of remouing of Bucer, and hys companions, he did not refuſe, in caſe any man were able to conuicte them, eyther of falſe doctryne, or of euyll lyfe: And at ſondrye tymes offered them lybertie to trye it, beyng ready to exhibite them before any lawefull or indifferent Iudg. Whā the matter therfore ſtayed here, they prepare a contrary booke, and in A booke called Antidagma. title it Antididagma. In the preface of the ſame booke, after a wonderfull raylynge agaynſt the Lutheranes, they affirme with expreſſe wordes, that they had rather lyue vnder the dominion of the Turkes than vnder a Magiſtrate, that wolde followe and defend that reformation. The author and diuiſor of this booke, as they ſay, was Gropper.

For he, albeit he was very familiar with Bucer two yeres before at Regenſpurge: Albeit that comyng home from thence, he cōmended Gropper forſaketh the Goſpell. hym maruelouſly, not only to the Archebiſſhop, but alſo euerye where to all others, albeit he had written him many, and that moſt frendely letters, yet whan the matter was brought vnto this poynt, he forſoke his frendeſhip altogether, and leauynge hys prince, by whom he had all hys preferment, he reuolted into the tentes of his aduerſaries. The ſame did Barnarde Hagie his Chauncelour: which had bothe of them many fatte benefyces. The diuines of Collon affailed Bucerfore, and rattled hym vp with manye opprobrious wordes. But he requyred, that the matter might come to diſputatiō, and proteſted that he wold defende this doctrine agaynſte them in all aſſemblies. In hys defence alſo Melanethon ſet forthe a booke at the ſame tyme, and exhortinge them vnto modeſtie, ſheweth them, what ſhamefull errours they defende. Duke Moris of Saxonye maketh certen lawes at this tyme, Duke Moris maketh lawes for ye miniſters of the churche. to be obſerued within hys dominiō. And fyrſt in dede he exhorteth the preachers and miniſters of the church to execute theyr office diligently, to preache the Goſpel ſincerely, and to ſhyne before theyr ſtock with honeſt examples of lyfe, that they exhorte men to prayer, and mutuall loue, that they rebuke vice ſharpelye, and ſequeſter deſperate perſons from the communion of the church, by the conſent of the Magiſtrat, vntyll they amende. And ſuche as will not thus be refourmed, to preſent vnto the Magiſtrate. Secondly, foraſmoch as youthe is the ſtore of the Churche and the publicke weale, he founded three Grammer He foundeth three ſcooles. Scooles, at Miſene, Merſeburge, and Porte. And in euerye place, he fyndeth a certen nombre of Scolars, bothe theyr apparell and commons: And payeth alſo yerely ſtipendes to theyr Scolemaſters. And to thys vſe doeth he applye the reuenewes of the relygious houſes wherin Monkes had dwelt, and ſuche others. He graunteth that the youthe ſhal remaine there, for the ſpace of ſixe yeres: of the ſame lands He is beneficiall to the Uniuerſitie of Lipſia. alſo he geueth in Augementation to the Uniuerſitie of Lipſia, two thouſand crownes yerely, and certen Raſers of wheat. Moreouer he forbiddeth beggynge, and appoynteth an yerelye ſomme of monye in certen places to releue poore houſeholders. After this for ſuche, as defloure Lawes agaynſt deflowerers of Uirgins, & adulterers. maydes, and mary them not, he appoynteth thys puniſhement, that albeit they ſett them foorthe afterwardes, and marye them to others, yet ſhall they be committed to pryſon. And commaundeth that aduouterers ſhall dye by the ſworde. And noble men that marie ſuche wyues as they haue accompanied with beefore, he punniſhethe thus, that he taketh awaye from theyr children, that were borne before the Marriage, the poſſeſſion and profites of ſuche landes as they holde of him in fee. In the meane time themperoure cōming oute of Spaine, arriueth with his Nauie at Genes. And the .xxvi. day of May addreſſyng

his letters from thence to the Duke of Saron, the Lantzgraue and theyr conſortes. For as moche as they are alreadye ſufficientlye warranted by hys proclamations for publyke peace, and that alſo the reformation of the chamber ſhal now be ſhortely, he exhorteth them, they would not refuſe to contribute theyr ayde agaynſt the Turk, of whoſe not only preparation that is exceading greate, but alſo of hys commyng, he is credebly certifyed both by letters & meſſaugers: He was infourmed of all that was dooue in the conuention by Nauius, that wente vnto hym. At the ſame tyme alſo he calleth a counſell of thempire at Spier, agaynſt the laſte daye of Nouembre. Departyng than frō Genes, he ſpake with the Biſſhop of Rome at Buſſet, which An aſſemble at Spier. is a Towne by the Riuer of Tare, betwixte Placence and Cremone. There agayne in lyke caſe as he did before by letters, he required him to proclayme hymſelf enemie to the French Kynge: but he ſayde howe that was not expedient for the common welth, and herin perſeuered. The Biſſhop had geuen to hys ſonne Peter Aloiſe, Parma and Placence, whiche he had obteyned latelye of the College of Cardinalles, by an exchaunge made, and becauſe theſe Cities were ſometyme the Dukes of Millan, he required, that the Emperour by hys authorytie would for a pece of monye, confirme hys ſonne in the poſſeſſion of thē, The Pope woulde bye Millan. and create hym Duke of the ſame. But that did themperoure (which helde Millan, and wolde deminiſhe no part of hys ryght) refuſe. They ſaye moreouer howe the Byſſhōppes intente was, to haue perſwaded themperour, for a ſomme vfmony, to haue made his Nephew, Octauian, Duke of Millan. The Emperour breaking of this talke, that he might be no longer letted, whan he had deliuered vnto Coſmus Medices, Duke of Florence, the Caſteles of Florence and Liburne, which he had vntill that time in his owne cuſtodye, receyuing of hym therfore, two hondreth thouſand ducates, he procedeth on hys iorney. Before he came out of Spayne, he had created hys ſonne Philip kynge, and gaue vnto hym in marriage, the Ladye Marye, Daughter vnto Philip created kynge of Spayne. Iohn kynge of Portugall. This yere alſo did Sigiſmunde, the ſonne of Sigiſmund kyng of Polle, mary the Lady Elyzabeth the daughter of Fernando kyng of Romanes. Henry the Duke of Brunſewicke going to mete Themperour in Italy, heynouſlye accuſeth the Proteſtantes at Cremoiſe. Whan Themperour was now comming out of Italy with hys armie, the Proteſtantes, whiche had lately receyued hys letters dated at Gene, mete together at ſinalcalde the .xxiiii. daye of Iune, to conſulte of ſending to hym Ambaſſadours, of matters apperteyning to the defence and kepyng of the Dutchie of Brunſwicke, and to theyr league, to ſollicite Duke Maurice, of the king of Swecia, of Otto Henry Palatine, Wuolfange Prince of Bipounte, of the Biſſhop of Munſter whiche than deſyred all to be receyued into their

league. This aſſemblie ended the .xxi. of Iuly. And moche aboute thys ſame tyme, the Emperoure and the Kyng of England make a league A league of themp. & the king of England againſt the Frenche kyng. agaynſte the Frenche Kynge, whiche ayded the Scottes, as before is ſayde. But this confederacie the Biſſhop of Rome toke in maruelous euill part, and therfore thoughte the French frendeſhip to be nedefull for hym. Whan themperour was commen to Spier about thende of Iuly, the Proteſtantes ſende thither Ambaſſadours, Fraunces Burcart, George Bemelberg, Chriſtopher Ueninger, and Iames Sturmius. The proteſt. ambaſſad, to themperor. Being admitted the ſecond of Auguſte, they ſpeake in a maner the ſame in effecte that they did before to king Fernando, the concluſion of theyr tale was, that in caſe they might be ſufficiently warraū
               ted to haue peace, yf the Iudgement of the chamber myght be refourmed, as it was lately decreed at Regenſpurg, yf the inequalitie of cō
               tributyng may be takē away, they wil not fayle to beare theyr partes in publicke neceſſities: As touchinge the Duke of Brunſwicke, theyre deſyre is, that the matter maye come to hearyng, and they ſaye howe they will proue manifeſtly, that he: whiche firſte had done open iniurye to the cities of Goſlarie and Brunſwicke, to haue benryghtlye expulſed and dryuen oute of hys countrey. Hereunto Themperoure, by Nauius, in the preſence of Granuellane, two dayes after: that there was no more to bee required: For they were well enouge aſſured of peace by the fourmer decrees: the iudges of the chamber can not bee remoued before theyr cauſe be heard. In the moneth now of October, inquiſitiō ſhalbe made of them, and if any fault may be found in them, they ſhall not eſcape vnpunniſhed: the moderation of contributinge, can not be made, without the comon aſſent of all ſtates: let them conſider the preſent ſtate of the publicke weale, and becauſe it is a matter of moſte daunger, vnleſſe it be holpen in time, let them geue theyr ayd agaynſte the Turke, lyke as other ſtates doe. He muſte hym ſelfe goe now with hys whole force agaynſt the Frenche Kyng and the Duke of Cleaue, to thentente he maye defende hys ſubiectes from Iniurye. The Duke of Brunſwick vrgeth ſore to be reſtored: therfore let them ſaye theyr fantaſye in that matter. They deſire to haue this aunſwere deliuered them in wryting, that they may the better conſyder it, Thē
               perour was content, and the nexte day he went frō Spier to Mentz, ſo farre the ambaſſadours followed hym, and whan they had receyued the wryting, they ſhewe Granuellan and Nauius, wherfore they are not ſatiſfyed touchinge the peace, and becauſe theyr deſyre is, that the cauſe of Brunſwick, might be hearde, they haue no further comiſſion in that matter. The archebiſſhop of Collon came to themperoure at Spiers to intreate for the Duke of Cleaue, but that was in vaine: Themp. viage againſte the Duke of Cleaue. For excepthe wolde fyrſt departe from the poſeſſion of Gelderlande, Themperour wold heare no mention of peace. And where the ambaſſadoure

of Saxonye, by hys Princes commaundemente, made ſuite for the Duke of Cleaue, to Granuellan, at Mentz, and to perſwade, dyd ſaye howe a priuate iniurye muſte bee forgeuen for the common welthes ſake, eſpecially now that the Turk inuadeth. The other maketh aunſwer, that Themperour wil not goe frō hys pourpos, what inuaſyon ſoeuer the Turkes ſhall make. I tolde you before how they of Heldeſſeme had forſaken the popiſſhe Religion, & entred into league with the Proteſtantes: Whom Ualentyne the Biſſhop of that Cytye They of Hildiſſeme are accuſed to the emperour. had accuſed heynouſely before to the chamber, and to kynge Fernando, and nowe alſo to Themperoure, that they had chaunged the religion and Ceremonyes of the churche howe they had appoynted new preachers to teache the people, put downe the Maſſe, punniſſhed the followers of the olde relygyon, howe they haue broken and beaten downe not only aultars and fontſtones but alſo the churches, howe they haue taken into theyr handes & cuſtody all the mouables, goods and Iuelles of the clergie, and that of late alſo they haue ſetfoorthe gameplayes to mocke and deryde openly the Uirgin Marye, and other ſainctes, that they pourpoſynge to forſake hys Iuriſdiction, had lynked themſelues in confederacie with the Proteſtantes, and conſtreyned Monkes and ſuch others to obſerue theyr religyon through violence, and thoſe that wold not obey them, haue put to open ſhame, and alſo banniſhed. When Themperour had heard thys complaynte, the ſyxte daye of Auguſt, he wryteth vnto them From Wormes, and with a terrible threatenyng commaundeth them, to reſtore relygyon, and all other thinges into theyr fourmer ſtate vntyll ſome publicke decree be eſtabliſſhed in ſuch matters. Thre dayes after, he addreſſeth his letters to the Senate of Collon, how he heareth that certen preachers Themperours letters to them of Collon. labour ſore to remoue them from the aunciente religion, whom they notwithſtandyng haue ſtoutly reſyſted hytherto: whych he was ryght ioyefull to heare of, admoniſſhing them to perſeuer in the ſame, and kepe the citezens in theyr dewty. This ſhalbe to him moſt acceptable, whiche he will alſo declare in dede, in tyme to come. At the kalendes of Iune, the Biſhop of Roome wryteth to the ſame effecte vnto the prebendaries of the cathedrall churche at Collon. In the care & The Popes letters to the clergie of Colion. ſorrow of mynd, which he hath of the Archebiſſhopppes folye conceaued, he is greatly cōforted with theyr ſtoutenes, and conſtancy which is not only to themſelues, but alſo to all theyr neyghbours righte holſome: For nexte to the immortall God, they deſerue the thankes, that bothe that moſte noble Citie and alſo the whole prouince, is in ſayfegarde. Therfore he geueth them ryght harty thankes, for ſtandyng ſo ſtyffe in the cauſe, and whyleſt he lyueth, will neuer forget the ſame. For albeit they did but theyr dewtie, yet for the thing it ſelf, and for the example he muſt nedes confeſſe, that he is moche bounden vnto them.

Notwithſtandyng they had nede to bee conſtant, for thys cauſe chiefly left if they ſhould faynte, and that the Archebyſhop ſhoulde happely gette the vpper hande, he wolde wreake hys tene on them extremly. Therfore let them be ſtronge and ſtoute in the defence of Goddes name and the catholicke relygyon, and of theyr owne lybertye & ſaluation, whyche that wicked Archeheretike goeth aboute to ſubuerte and deſtroye. They haue no nede of a counſelloure, yet wolde he alſo thruſte as it were thys ſpurre vnto them runnyng, and deſyreth them erneſtlye, to take good hede, that he whiche is vn woorthye the name of an Archebiſhop, doe not infect that moſt noble Cytie with his contagion: neyther that they take hym for theyr Paſtoure, but for an enemie: and he wyl not fayle to aſſiſt them bothe with hys counſell and otherwyſe. Theſe letters dyd Iohn Poggius, the Biſſhops Ambaſſadour to Themperour ſent vnto them the. xxv of Auguſt. A little before thys tyme, the French Kyng goyng with an army into Uermandois taketh a little Towne of Themperours called Landerſey, & maketh The French king fortifyeth Landerſey. it ſtronge with fortifications, and gariſons, aboute the ſame tyme alſo, Barbarouſſe the Turkes Lieutenaunt, by the conduit of Poline a Frenche man, arriued with a greate Nauie at Tolloye, whiche is an hauen towne in the prouince of Fraunce betwene Marſelles & Nice. The turkes Nauie arriueth in the prouince. Whan the Kyng knewe of hys comyng, he ſendeth the Duke of Uendome, Angiane, with a force & with Galleis to aſſiſte hym. After they goe bothe to Nyce, and whan they had taken the Towne and the havon, the .xx. day of Auguſt, they layeſege to the caſtell. An other armie The Caſtell of Nice beſeged. of Turkes made incurſyon into Hongarye, whyche tooke the towne Quinqueccleſe, and the citie and Caſtell of Strigone, and Wanne, Stulweyſenburge by aſſaulte. The Biſhop of Roome had ſente ayd, wherof Baptiſta Sabella & Iulye Urſine were Captianes: but they came ſō what to late, Whan the diuines of Paris had thus triumphed ouer Lander and Depenſius, as beefore is ſayde, they publyſhe thoſe articles of Doctrine, propounded to the Preacher Lander, whiche in nombre were xxv. The matter was ſolēnely donne at Paris the firſt daye of Auguſte & the people beyng called together, as the maner is, by a trompet, thoſe articles were recited, and after alſo, by the kynges commaundemente, wer put in prynte, and proclamation made, vnder a great penaltie, that no man ſhould worke nor teache agaynſt them, and a decree alſo added for the ſearching oute of Lutheranes. The diuines moreouer charge theyr ſtudentes, that are called bacchelaures Batchelaurs. and others that ſtudie diuinitie, to follow this fourme, or els to be expulſed their colledge. Agaynſte this theyr doctryne, Caluine wrote a booke, whych he calleth Antidotum, and paynteth them forth in their Abooke of Caluine againſte the Sorboniſtes. collours, and moch aboute the ſame tyme ſetteth forth an other booke in Frenche, of the relyques of Saynctes, to thintente that bothe thys

age, and alſo the tyme to come may ſee, in to what a caſe relygiō was fallē: but he recyteth theſe thinges only, which vnto him were knowē 
               A booke of the relieques of Sainctes. and wiſſheth that the ſame were done lykewyſe in other countries. And of this nombre are the Cribbe, Swadling clothes and bearing clothe, the foreſkinne and blud of Chriſt, partely pure, partely delayed with water, the ſixe waterpottes that were at the mariage in the Citie of Cane in Galilee, the wyne that Chriſte made than of water, the ſtuffe and furniture of hys Maundie and laſt ſupper, that he had with hys Apoſtels, the Manna of the people of Iſraell: the Croſſe the cane Nayles, Sponge launce, Crowne of thorne, Cote, Shoes, Handkerchef, and teares of Chryſt: The Milke, Smocke, Heare, Girdel, Slipper, Combe, and Ring of the Uirgin Marie. The ſworde and bucklar of Michel tharchangell: The Scull, Iawebonne, braynes, and fingar of Iohn the Baptiſte: The Chaire, Honlette, Maſſinge garmentes & brayne of. S. Peter: And then the bodies of Sainctes, and that the ſame in diuerſe and ſondry places. And he ſheweth with what veneration, the people worſhipped theſe thynges, whan the Priſtes not without monye let them haue a ſyght therof, and ſhewe them a farre of, verey tryfles, and thinges of nought, which yf they be well conſidered, haue nothing but craft & colloure diuiſed of the Priſtes for lucre. But in vaſe Dutchelande, ther be two famous Cities in thys behalfe, Treuers and Achon, for hither they ſaye, men were wonte to come to Two Cities full of relicies. ſee reliques, oute of Hongary and Slauonye. What tyme thoſe marchauntes ſet forth theyr wares, but euery ſeuenth yere, that thauthorytie and wonder mighte bee the greater. Themperoure came from Mentz to Bomia by water: Ther taught Bucer at the ſame tyme, & Caſper Hedio alſo, ſent for thither newly frō Straſburg by the Archbiſſhop a man of a verey milde nature, and verey mete to inſtruct the people. They were bothe in great daūger, eſpecially the Spaniardes beyng thete, Themperour alſo doth wyll the Archebiſſhop by his ambaſſadours, to ſend them a waye: Melancthon was departed thence before: They alſo not long after obteynyng lycence to departe, hauing taken order with the miniſters in the churches, retourn home again. After this Themperour wente to Dure: And what tyme he came before the Towne the .xx. of Auguſte, the nexte daye he ſent an Herauld to ſommon the Towne, willyng them to render it vnto hym, or els he wil attempte it by force. The ſoldiours within aunſwer hym contēptuouſly, ſayinge, that they are not affrayde of hym, who was a good whyle ſence made bayte for fyſſhes: For the brute went howe Themperour, Afalſereport of the Emperours deathe. in hys retourne out of Barbarie, after the ouerthrowe at Argiers, ſuffered Shipwreake, & was drowned. And this opinion was ſo ſetrled in the myndes of the Cleauois, that they would neyther credite them whiche ſayed they had ſene hym, nor ſcarſely thoſe that had

ſpoken with hym. The Prynce hym ſelfe alſo was lykewyſe perſwaded, by acerten fatall credulitie. The Frenche men were thought to be authors and forgers of this vanitie, leſt the Cleauois ſhould relēt, and for feare of Themperours power, fall to ſome cōpoſition. Themperour receyuing this aunſwer, whan he had fortyfyed his camp and furniſhed it with all thinges, the .xxiiii. day of Auguſt, before the ſōne ryſyng he beginneth to make his battery, and after geueth thaſſault, eſpecyally by the Spanyardes, whyche were exceadyng preſte and wyllyng. They beyng often repulſed, and hauyng loſte many of their men, neuer ceaſed, before they had taken it by force. The fortune of the Townes men was ſuche, as is wonte to bee, whan the waye and entrie is made by the ſword. Howbeit here was wont to be ſhewed the head of Saint Anne our Ladyes mother, and thither came yearelye a greate multitude of people, at the. xxvi daie of Iuly whyche is dedicated to that ſainct. But the Spaniardes being victours, caried that head incloſed in golde with a greate pompe deuoutely into the graie Freres Churche, leſt it ſhoulde bee loſt in that Ruine and burnyng of the Churche. After the Towne was ſpoyled and diſtroyed by fyre, Themperour Marchinge forewarde, had rendred vnto hym Gulick, and than Ruremunde a ſtronge Towne of Gelderlande, ſituated where the Ryuer of Rure, and the Maſe mete. For the ſodein diſtructyon of Dure, broughte all men into a wonderfull feare and perplexitie. From Ruremunde he goeth to Uenlon. Thither at the laſte came the Duke of Cleaue to hym into his Campe, accompanyed with Henry The Duke of Cleaue craueth pardon of themperoure. Duke of Brunſewicke and the Ambaſſadours of the Archebiſhop of Collon. And what time he humbly beſought Themperoure to perdon hym, the Duke of Brunſwicke alſo and the Ambaſſadours, erneſtly intreated for hym, Themperoure at the laſt ryſeth vp, and appoynteth the Prynce of Orenge, and Granuellane, to preſcribe lawes vnto hym. Therefore vpon theſe conditions, he was receyued againe into fauoure, the ſeuenth daye of September. He ſhall not departe Condiciōns to him impoſed. from the relygyon of the Catholycke Churche: yf he haue altered any thynge, let it be reſtored: that he promyſe hys fydelytie & allegeaunce to themperour, to king Fernando & to thempire: that he doe renounce the league of Fraunce and of Denmarke: He ſhall make no confederacie, wherin he ſhall not excepte Themperoure, Fernando, and their heires: He ſhall leaue the poſſeſſion of all Gelderlande, and releaſe the people of theyre othe. And in caſe any place or places ſhall refuſe to render, that he ſhall than ayde the Emperoure to recouer the ſame. The Emperoure agayne reſtoreth vnto hym the Lande of Gulycke, latelye Conquered, excepte two Townes, Henſeberge and Syttarde, whyche hee wyll kepe for a tyme, tyll he haue ſomme

experience of hys fydelytie and Loyaltye. Whyleſt the Emperoure wente agaynſte the Duke of Cleaue, the Frenche Kynge Marcheth throughe Champagne towardes the lande of Luke: And ſendeth for the Lady Iane hys Syſters Daughter, whyche was deſpouſed and ſolemnelye Maryed two yeares before to the Duke of Cleaue, to carye her to her Huſbande. She wente full ſore agaynſte her wyll, as I ſhewed you beefore. Howbeit ſhe obeyed the Kynge her Uncle. The daughter of Nauaris ſent to the Duke of Cleaue. The Kynge appoynted vnto her, Cardynall Bellaye, Byſſhop of Parys, as a man mooſte meete to perſwade with her, and kepe her companye all that Iorneye. When ſhe was commen nowe to the Soyſſons, to goe from thence to the Kynge, woorde was broughte that the Duke of Cleaue was ſubdewed. Wherwith beeyng greatlye reioyced, ſhe ſawe then, that ſhee nede to feare the thinge no longer, and knewe what wolde bee the ende thereof. Neyther was ſhe deceaued at all: For the Kynge at theſe newes was ſore aſtonyed. And ſo ſhe retourneth home, but he neuertheleſſe procedynge, taketh the Cytyo of Lucemburge aboute thende of September, and after delyberatyon had, fortyfyeth it. Aboute thys tyme alſo, Henry the eyghte Kynge of Englande confederated latelye with the Emperoure, ſendeth hym a power of men, by the conducts of Syr Iohn wallop, Capytayne of Launderſey, beſeged. Guiſnes, whyche Ioynynge with Themperoures Armye, beeſege the Towne of Landerſey. In the Moneth of October, Charles Roſſet a Lawyer was ſente by the Emperoure to Mentz, who there The preachers of the goſpel thruſt oute of metz. tooke order with the Senate, Monkes, and Clergie for the obſeruing of the olde relygion, bannyſſhynge the Preachers and others that were inclyned to the Proteſtantes, vnles they ſhoulde reconcile them ſelues within a certeine tyme. Whan Barbarouſſe had beeſeaged the Caſtell of Nice in vayne, and that Themperoures power out of Lū
               bardye The ſege is leuied at Nice. alſo approched, whyche was led by the Marques of Piſcare, he leuyed the ſege, and ſomewhat ſooner, than the tyme of the yeare requyred, he leadeth backe hys Armie to wynter at Tollon: for that Towne had the Kynge aſſigned hym, commaundyng all the Citezēs and inhabiters to auoyde thence. This yeare was moche diſſention Diſſencion in Scotland. and trouble in Scotlande, the mindes of the nobles beyng deuyded: For thoſe Lordes, whyche we ſayed were priſoners in Englande, being lib
                  ••
               ally diſmiſſed of the kynge, furthered hys cauſe as moche as they myght. But the Cardinall of Scotlande, who had great yerely reuenewes by benefyces in Fraunce, and the Quene beynge Daughter to the Duke of Guyſe, tooke the Frenche Kynges parte. After the The yonge Quene of Scottes affiaunced to Kynge Edwarde. death of the Scottiſh king. Henry the eyght, was wholy in this, that the yonge Quene of Scottes might be affianced to Prince Edward his ſō. In the which thing, thoſe nobles that I ſpake of, did him good ſeruyce. And when they had perſwaded Hameltō the gouernour, they

toke the Cardinall, and beſege the Quene in a certen caſtell, and makyng the wrytynges, confyrme the marriage. But where the French kynge diſturbed this deuyſe: And the Nobilitie alſo pitied moche the Quenes chaunce, and the gouernoure reuolted to thother ſyde, they brake theyr conuenauntes. And the warres beganne agayne afreſihe betwixt them and England, as ſhalbe declared herafter. The kyng of Denmarke had alſo warre with Themperialles of the low countrye, The king of Denmarke, warreth vpō thē perialles. for Kyng Chriſtierne that was captiue. And he axed ayde of the Proteſtantes, but they ſaye how thys quarel concerneth not theyr league: for it was prouyded, that in caſe he ſhoulde haue warre for hys religion, that then he ſhoulde by their cōmon ayde be defended. When the Duke of Cleaue had made hys peace with Thēperour, he ſendeth his Ambaſſadoure to the Kynge of Fraunce and renounceth hys league, The duke of Cleaue renounceth the Frenche Leage. and requyreth that his wyfe maye bee ſente hym, for whoſe paſſage, he hathe obteyned a ſaufe conduite of Themperoure. The kynge aunſwereth the Ambaſſadour, howe there hath ben no let in hym, that he hath not bothe had his wyfe delyuered, and an Armye alſo ſente, but that it hath ben hys owne faulte, which certifyed, that ther was neyther open way for them to paſſe in thoſe parties, nor vitaile to be had: What ſoeuer he hath promiſed, he hath lyberally perfourmed, and ſō
               what more alſo, than he was bounden: But he hath not donne well, who forgettyng his noble lynage, and eſtate, hathe brought hym ſelfe into ſuche bondage. As concernynge hys Nece, he maie knowe what her mynde and her parentes is: he is in nothyng further bounden to hym. Whan Themperoure had eſtablyſſhed thynges in Gelderlande in the moneth of October he came to Landreſey, with an exceadynge greate armye. Thyther came alſo the French kynge, with hys whole force, and the thynge was none other lyke but to haue commen to a battell. But when the Frenche men had vytayled the Towne, they The departure of the Frenchmen from Lāderſey. went awaye by nyght ſo pryuely, that the enemy perceiued it not, before it was day light. Than at the length purſuing after them they ouer tooke the rerewarde, & ſlew many. And becauſe winter came on, Themperour thinking good to attempt no further, whan he had ſēt a certen power to the ſege of Lucēburg, he diſchargeth the reſt of hys army. Duke Maurice ſerued themperour at Landreſey of hys owne Duke moris voluntarye mynde, wherby he gote moche good wyll, and made the way to obteyne hys frendſhip. In the winter ſeaſon the Duke of Lorayne and certen others intreate for peace, but that was in vayne. Themperoure retournynge home from Landerſey, ſent Fardinando County willyam forſaketh the Frenchking Gonzage, Uiceroy of Sicilie, to the Kyng of England, that he might incenſe hym more agaynſte the Frenche kynge. I haue oftentymes mentioned of William Countie Furſtēberge: he beyng made a ſtraū
               ger with the Frenche kinge, made ſuite by Granuellan to come in to

Themperours fauour: And to declare hys fydelytie, he leuyed a certen power of foote men, in hys owne Iuriſdictyon, and wente in the myddes of wynter to Lucemburge, and ioyned hym ſelfe with Thē
               perours Armie. But when the Frenche men, by the conduite of the Duke of Longouile, had vitayled them within, he departeth without any thynge doon, after that many were dead for colde and honger. I ſhewed you before, howe the counſell of thempyre was appoynted at the laſt of Nouember: Wherfore the Proteſtantes aſſemble together at Franckfourd, to conſulte before, what thynges they ſhoulde treate of in the whole aſſemblye. And where the matter was delayd by reaſon of the Frenche warres, the Duke of Saxon and the Lantzgraue in the moneth of Nouember addreſſyng their letters to themperoure, do aduertiſe hym, howe they wyll come to the counſell, yf he hymſelfe wyll bee there, and graunte them ſaufecounduite, for them, and theyr league frēdes. Wherunto Themperour aunſwered, frō Bruſſeles, the x. day of Decembre, that he would come doubtles, and that in the moneth of Ianuarye, and ſendeth withall a ſaufconduite. Howebeithe excludeth ſuche as are addicte to hys enemyes, by promeſſe, faythe or conuenaunte, ſignifyinge the priuie eſpialles of the Frenche kynge. Than in the begynnyng of Ianuary, takyng hys iorney he commeth to Spire. The .xxiiii. day of thys moneth, was a great Eclipſe of the Sonne, in the daye tyme, ſo that all men beheld it, not without great 1544. wonder: This yeare alſo were thre ful eclipſes of the Moone: A matter in dede to bee wondred at, and the whyche, as the aſtronomiers Thre eclipſes of the moone. ſaye, hathe not chaunced ſynce the tyme of great Charles. Alexander Farneſe Cardinall, paſſyng throughe Fraunce, ſpoke with Themperoure goynge towardes thaſſemblye, and tooke hys leaue of hym at Wormes. The cauſe of his ambaſſade was thought to be, a treaty of peace. This aſſemblie of Spier was exceading great: For booth king A great Aſſemble at Spiere. Farnando, and all the Prynces Electours, which is ſeldome ſeene, & in maner all other Princes were there, and amonges them alſo the Duke of Cleaue. As the Duke of Saxony was comyng, whych was the .xviii. day of February, the Lantzgraue, the Archebiſſhop of Colō. Friderick the Paulſgraue, and the Uiceroye of Sicilye, went foorth and met hym. Two dayes after the counſel began. And Themperour propoundeth, for what cauſes leauynge Spayne, he is nowe retourned into Germany, and hath called this conuention, he hath ſufficiētly declared by hys letters dated at Gene: neyther is it nede to recyte, howe moche he hathe euermore loued the Publyke weale, that all thynges put in order at home, he myghte warre agaynſt the common enemye of Chriſtendome: but howe he hath ben impeached hytherto, and by whom, it is not vnknowen. For thys laſt yere, by the procurement of the French kyng, the Turkiſſhe nauie is comen into the Sea

of Ligurie, and hath inuaded the countrey of the Duke of Sauoye, a Prince of Thempire, taken the Citie and hauen of Nice, and with greate force beſeged the Caſtell, and vattered it ryght ſore. And albeit they were conſtrayned, throughe hys Armye approchynge to leuye theyr ſiege, yet haue they ſyns attempted other places of Thempyre, and of Spayne alſo, and are nowe wholy aboute to diſtroie all together. Therfore is the matter nowe brought into an extreme daunger, and vnleſſe they ioyne theyr mindes and powers to helpe it, it is to be feared, leſt Germanye ſhall acknoweledge and bewayle hys miſerye al to late. He hath often wiſſhed to redreſſe theſe euilles, but the Frēch Kynge mouing warre agaynſt hym inſondry places, he could neither retourne into Germanye, nor Ioyne his power with theyres. And that the Turke doeth ſo boldly inuade Germany, & that the warres The cauſes of the turkes proſperitie. alſo attempted agaynſte hym, haue had ſo euell ſucceſſe hytherto, the cauſe hathe ben, fyrſt, that he hath ben aduertyſed from tyme to tyme, by the Frenche kyng, of the diſſention in relygion, of the publycke and priuate dyſpleaſure of al degrees, of the ſtate of Thempyre, and what thynges are donne therein. Secondlye, for that he ſeeth, howe at the Frenche Kynges hand he fyndeth fauour, and ſocour ready, as it hath not been only declared by witneſſe and letters, but nowe alſo proued in dede. For aſmoche therfore as he ſtyreth vp and armeth the comon and moſte cruell enemye of all others agaynſte the Chriſten publyke weale, he ſuppoſeth, that they ſhoulde eſteme thys warre, whyche he is conſtreyned to maynteyne agayſte hym, non otherwyſe, than if it were attempted agaynſte the Turke: truſtynge moreouer that they wyll not onlye condemne hys practyſe and enterpryſes, but alſo wyll The French king compared to the Turke. aſſiſte hym, to thentente that beyng delyuered from the domeſtycall enemye, he maye dyſplaye hys whole force agaynſte the Turke. After thys expoſtulatyng, that the ayd decreed for the Turkiſh warre, was not ſente accordyngly, for the wante wherof, the Turke hathe agayne thys laſte yere, preuayled, and taken certen Townes and Caſtels in Hongarye, he requyreth them, that ſeeyng the Turke goeth about to wynne Hongarye, that he maye after inuade Germanye, they wolde conſyder depelye ſo weyghtye a matter, that they may haue ayde not oulye to defend, but to inuade alſo, to thende thys moſte noyſō plage may ones be driuen away from theyr wyues, children, and natif contrie: declaring moreouer how willing he is, ye thinges amiſſe ſhoulde be refourmed, and emongs other the iudgement of the chamber. The ſame day king Fernādo, by hys ambaſſadours, ſpeakīg many thinges The Proteſtantes oration to themperoure. of the Roades & invaſions of the Turkes, craueth aide. After this immediatly, the Duke of Saxon & the Lantzgraue with their confederates addreſſing their oratiō to thēperour, you know ſaye they, moſte victorious Emperoure, howe we haue offered oure ſelues euer ſyns

the beginnynge, to declare before this moſte honorable Senate, the cauſe of our defence taken agaynſt Henry of Brunſwicke: And be yet alſo of the ſame will and mynde: doubtyng not, but when the matter ſhalbe hearde, there ſhall appeare vnto you weyghty and iuſt cauſes, wherfore we were dryuen to it of neceſſitie, and that it is not lawfull for hym to be preſent here in the counſell of Princes. Howbeit becauſe we ſee hym put hymſelfe in preaſe, to occupie a place in thys moſt noble conſiſtorye, moche agaynſte oure willes, in as moche as we can or maye, we doe proteſt, that wee neyther take hym nor acknoweledge hym for a Prynce of Thempire, neyther will that any right of oures, ſhoulde through hys preſence, be diminiſhed. Wherunto the Duke of Brunſwicke aunſwereth ſtreyghte waye, by hys Chauncelour. The The Duke of Brunſewicke accuſeth the Proteſtauntes. Duke of Saxō, ſayeth he, the Lantzgraue and theyr fellowes breakyng both gods law and mans law, infringing the ſtatutes of thempire, and the faythe publicke, by violence and open wronge, haue ſpoiled me of my countrey: For the which cauſe I haue accuſed thē to the Iudges of the chāber. And ſeeyng it is ſo, they ought to haue no place in the Senate of Thempire, and yf they had any, they haue nowe loſt the ſame, by committing that acte, and are worthye, whoſe companye all men ſhoulde eſchewe: But if it ſo be, that I muſte nedes ſyt by thē, in comon counſelles, I proteſt, that I do neyther attribute this place vnto them, nor will therfore that the ſame ſhould be preiudicial to my caſe. The Proteſtantes were verye deſyrous euen than to haue recited the cauſe of theyr enterpryſe, and the whole matter in wrytynge, leſte hys complaynte ſhoulde appere to be trewe, or ſettle in mennes heartes. But Thēperour, by Fridericke Palatyne, and by Nauius, required them, foraſmoch as the day was farre ſpent that they wold differre it, affirming alſo that he wolde aſſigne thē a day for the pourpos and ſo they followed hys mynde. And becauſe as the Princes ſat in counſell, it fortuned that the Lantzgraue ſate next to the Duke of Brunſwicke, the Prince of Palatine, Iohn Suner, for the auoyding of ſtryfe, arryſeth out of hys place, and ſytteth downe in the myddes betwixte them bothe, proteſtyng before, that the ſame ſhoulde bee no preiudice to hym or to his familye. Yt was thought he did it, at Thē
               perours requeſt. The day before the Duke of Saxon and the Lantzgraue had intreated Fridericke the Paulſegraue and Iohn Nauie, that they wold ſo deuiſe with Themperour, that the Duke of Brunſwicke might not come in the comon aſſemblie: but it could not be obtayned, Themperour alledging that he might not be excluded, vnleſſe the cauſes were fyrſt declared. The Frenche kyng knowing for certē
               tie The French ambaſſade to the aſſemble at Spier. that Themperour wold make a greuous complaynte on hym to the Prynces: determineth a moſt honorable Ambaſſad, Iohn Bellaie Cardinal, Fraunces Oliuer, chauncelour of Alenſō, Affricane, Malley

preſydent of Diuion: whan theſe wer commen to Nance a Towne in Lorayne, they remayne there lookyng for Themperours ſaufcondict: For the king, had ſent before to Spier an Heraulte, for the ſame cauſe with letters to Themperour, and ſeuerall letters alſo to the Princes Electours, wherin he required ſaufe conduite for hys Ambaſſadours. And when he came to Spier about the ende of Februarye, in hys rich cote of armes, as is accuſtomed, he was ſtayed by Granuellan, vnto whom he delyuereth the kyng his maiſters letters written to Themperoure, whan he myghte not otherwyſe doe, and declareth the cauſe of hys comyng, requyring that Thambaſſadours which are not farre of maye accordyng to the law of Armes haue ſaufconduite, beyng cō
               maunded to tary within and dilligētly watched, that no man ſhould The French Herault euil receyued at Spier. come to ſpeake with hym, the fourth day after, he was diſmiſſed with moſt ſharpe wordes, that he had played a fond part, and was in daū
               ger to haue loſt hys head, whych durſte preſume to come thyther. For the kynge, beyng enemy to Germany hathe not to doe with in the lymites of Thempyre, neyther is he worthy to enioye the law of Nations: let hym retourne home therfore, and tell the kynge thus: Howe ther is no cauſe, that herafter either he or any other may comefor him. And nowe in dede this fault is forgiuen and perdoned, more of themperours clemencie, than of his deſert, but let him take hede from hēceforthe: or els he wil not eſcape vnpunniſſhed: For he hath don againſt the law of armies, neyther was it laweful for hym to haue comen into Themperours habitation, without his leaue and permiſſiō. And touchyng the letters whyche he ſayeth, he hath, the kyng hath ſo well deſerued of the Chriſten publicke weale, and chefely of Germanye, that in thys preſent ſtate of thynges, Themperour neyther wyll, nor ought to receyue them, leſt by hys accuſtomed maner of writing and promiſes, eyther he, or alſo others myghte be diſceaued. This aunſwer was delyuered vnto hym wrytten in Frenche. And thus was he ſent back with the kynges letters wrytten to Themperour and Prynces, and certen horſemen were ſente with hym to conduite him to Nance. To this were not the Princes made priuie: And many thoughte it was done agaynſt the cuſtome of thempyre. Thys thyng knowen, the Ambaſſadours were in a pecke of troubles, and toke great thought, how to retourne home without daunger, and vſing the counſell of Authony Duke of Lorayne, they went a waye ſecretly in the nyght ſeaſon, and ſo retourned into Fraūce. Whyleſt they yet remayned at Nance, The ambaſſadors retorne by nighte. Chriſtine, the Dukes daughter in lawe was ſente to Spier, that the thing which neither he could, nor certen others, that might ſhe, which was Themperours Nece, by his ſiſter, through her intreaty & teares, and by a certen commendation of her kind obtayne, but yet was this in vayne. For Themperour was wholy bent to haue warre: And hys

counſellours ſayde he muſte ſo doe, to mayntaine hys eſtimation and dignytie. The Duke of Lorayne, albeit he was addicte to neyther, & had long ſyns couenaunted with them both, that he myght be a newter, yet for aſmoche as the warre was to be kepte vpon, hys frontiers, and ſawe, howe that coulde not be done, without hys greate loſſe & domage, was verye carefull for peace. The .ix. daye of Februarye certen Priuces, through Themperours motion, wryt letters frō Spire, The princes letters to the Pope. to the Biſſhop of Roome, partely commendyng hym, for that the laſte yere, he adioyned hys force with Themperours, to reſcue the Caſtell of Nice, partly requiring him, that for as moch as the enemye is now reparyng his nauie at Tollone, to repare agayne to Nice and to win that Caſtell, which ſhoulde be a greate ſhame and a ſore anoyeaunce vnto Italy, the Churche of Roome & all the common welth, he which is the father of the comon welthe, and hygh Biſſhop, wolde ayde the Duke of Sanoye with hys helpe & counſell, and of hys ſyngular wiſdome wolde deuyſe ſome meanes howe that cruell enemye myght be expulſed not only from Nice, but alſo frō thoſe places, where he hathe hauens and holdes for hys refuge: for thys ſhoulde be a thynge, bothe to God moſt acceptable, and to the whole common wealth alſo moſte holſome and profitable, with diuerſe other perſwations touching the ſame matter. To this the Biſhop aunſwereth the .xxvi. day of February: Theffect of his aunſwer is thys, that the caſtell of Nice may bee The Popes aunſwer. defended, he wyll be no leſſe carefull hereafter, than he hathe ben hytherto, truſtyng, that as they are carefull for it, ſo wyll they be no leſſe mydnfull, to take paynes for the whole common welthe, for this ſhall beſt become them. And after a longe rehearſal of the ayde of men and captaynes, which he hath ſent into Hongary and Affrica agaynſt the Turkes, how he hath waſted his treaſure in ſuche affayres, how ofte he hath ſent Ambaſſadours, how oft traueled him ſelf aboute the publyke weale, he ſayeth in fyne, that lyke as they commende vnto hym Nice, ſo doeth he commende vnto them, the ſtate of the comon welth, whiche is ſore afflicted and decayed. And the chiefe and only waye to helpe thys matter, is, that the myndes of Kynges may be reconciled, The meane to heale the comon welth for out of thys welſprynge procedeth all the diſcommoditie, that is in the comon welth. And if diſſention betaken awaie, the fourmer beautie will come agayne: For before this grudge and diſpleaſure, there were neyther hereſies in Germany, nor Turkee in Hongarye, But ſo ſoone as the waye was made throughe ciuile diſcorde, immediatelye ſprange vp hereſyes, factions, and hatred bothe publyke and pryuate. And hitherto hath alſo the counſel ben letted and hyndered. Therfore muſte we ſeeke to recouer the peace, that was before: And after thexample of phiſitions, take away the fyrſt cauſe of ye diſeaſe: For through peace, warre and the Turk are put to flyght. And by a counſel which

in peace may be kepte, all hereſyes and what ſo euer is amiſſe, may be refourmed: Otherwiſe, let them not thinke that eyther Nyce can bee defended from the enemye or any part of Chriſtendome kept fre from daunger, but that all men ſhalbe wrapped in the ſame calamitie and diſtructiō. In the moneth of March the Paulſegraue Lewis prince Electour departed out of this lyfe, and his brother Fridericke did ſuccede him. The Princes electours and thother ſtates, through Themperours aduiſe, the ſecond day of Aprill ſende letters to the Swyſes, The princes letters to the Swiſſes. to diſwade them from aydyng the French kyng, who to the vtter decay and ruine of Chriſten relygyon, hathe lincked hym ſelfe with the Turkes, and thys laſt yere, hath conducted theyr Nauie, into the ſea of Lygurie: where they haue warred vpon the Duke of Sauoye, and taken Nice. And yet remayne ſtill in Fraunce, intendiuge to worke more miſchiefe, to Themperour and all hys countries. Wherfore they require them from hencefoorthe to ſuffer non of theyr men to ſerue the Frenche kynge, who for thys wicked league with the people of Mahomet, ought to be deteſted of all men, and taken for a comon enemie. And yf any be gon to hym already, to call them home agayne, and ſo to vſe them ſelues, that it maye appere, they doe not neglecte the publycke preſeruation. Whileſt they conſulted of matters propounded by Themperoure, The Duke, the Lantzgraue and theyr confederates, the fyrſt daye of Aprill, before Themperoure, Kyng Fernando, and al The proteſtantes accuſe the Duke of Brunſwicks the ſtates of thempyre, accuſe Henry the Duke of Brunſwick, of moſt heynous offences, and alſo recite in order by wrytinge, what harmes and iniuries he had done to the cytyes of Brunſwicke and Goſlarye, theyr conſortes, in whoſe defence they wer cōſtrayned, to repulſe that vniuſt violence. After they reherſe howe theſe many yeres, hys whole endeuour hath ben, to ſeeke occaſyon to moue warre agaynſt them: & proue the ſame by the teſtimonye of letters, which were founde, as I tolde you before, whan he was expulſed, in hys princypall Caſtell. In thoſe letters, whych he had wrytten for the moſt parte all to the archbiſſhop of Mentz, to the duke of Bauier and to Heldus before he was The tenure of his letters dryuē oute, he wiſſheth oft for Themperours comyng out of Spaine. And when there was any hope therof, than he braggeth and threateneth: And what tyme Themperour was comē, and ſlacked the matter, he complayneth of hys lyngering and delaye, and be wayleth, that he and hys fellowes are not ſatiſfyed, & that the league made at Norinberge was neglected, and layeth all the blame therof in Granuellan, which is corrupted with mony by the Proteſtantes, he raileth on hym, and wiſſheth hym a ſhamfull death for his demerites, and ſaieth how themperour is a ſlepe and can not be awaked. And that he vſeth hys name ſometime, only for a clooke and a terrour, as Faukners are wonte many tymes to ſhewe foorthe a dead hauke, to feare the fowle

withall. Theſe and many other letters of ſuche lyke ſorte, wherin he vttereth hys mynde and affections, were red openlye. And moche to the ſame effecte had the Duke of Bauier and Heldus wrytten to him agayne. And for becauſe Henry brother to Duke George of Saxonie, was in league with the Proteſtantes, and had altered the religion, as before is ſaide, the Duke of Brunſwicke had with letters & meſſagers ſollicited Themperour, to take awaye hys landes, truſtyng, that he ſhould be ſet to kepe the poſſeſſion of the contrie: herof wer the letters alſo recyted. Furthermore they declare hym to be a wycked mā, The Duke of Brunſewicke contē
                  neth hys owne religion. and that he doeth contemne & delude the Biſſhoppes relygion, which he wyll ſeme to maynteyne, and proue it by a moſte euydent teſtimonie. Thys Duke of Brunſwick had maryed the Lady Mary, ſyſter to Ulriche Duke of Wirtemberge, who had a gentlewoman waytyng vpon her, of an excellente beautye, called Eue Trottine, vpon whom her huſbande doted in loue, and when he had perſwaded the mayde, he had by her diuers children. After to thentent the matter ſhould not A ſtraunge tale of the ſaide Duke. bee perceyued, and that he myght vſe her company the longer, he geueth her counſel, to faine, as though ſhe wold go home to her parētes. And he fourniſſheth her of horſes, charyote, and althynges neceſſarye for her Iorney. She departeth, and where ſhe was thought to haue gone home, ſhe was conueyed into a Caſtell of hys. And the captayne was made priuie to it before, what thyng ſhould be done. And a woman or two appoynted to wayte vpon her, whom he moſte truſted. This Eue within a few daies after ſhe came thither, kepeth her bed, and fayneth her ſelf ſycke. He had before cauſed to be made an Image of wood, whiche dyd repreſente the head, necke and Boulke of a dead body, the other partes were made & ſet out with lynen clothes, which the wemen had ſtuffed and filled with earth and aſſhes, that it might ſeme proportionate, and ſo ſet the Image of wood and the clothe together: for the cloth was ſo ſhapē, that it couered alſo the otherpartes which were of wood. The body therfore being thus ordered and lapped in the wynding ſhete, is layed foorth on the floure, ſtreyght waies cometh one of the womē to the parlour dore where the Captain was, and declareth how Eue is dead. He by and by commaundeth a coffin to be made, to lay her body in: And to make men affrayde, that no body ſhould come nere hir, they fayne that ſhe dyed of the plage, and perfume the houſe with the graines of Iuniper, & other ſauoury thinges: After, is the corps brought foorth, and with a ſolemne pompe caryed to the graye Freres Churche. And there was honorably buried, with An Image buryed in the ſle
                     •
                  e of Eue. meſſe and dirige. And the Freres pray for her al the yere long, and deſyre the people in theyr ſermons to doe the ſame. Moreouer by the Dukes commaundemente, there was a funerall made for her in the Chapell of the Caſtell, where it was ſayde, ſhe dyed, and lykewyſe in

hys head Caſtell of woulſebutell, whiche is not farre from the Citie of Brunſwicke: for thither came alſo the reporte of her death. And at this Obite or exequie was his wyfe the Dutches, with her women & trayne of maydens, all in mournynge apparell: thithere came manye Priſtes that were ſente for oute of the contrye, whyche had a dyner made them, and monye geuen in rewarde to euery man ſomewhat, after the olde accuſtomed maner amonges the papiſtes. In the meane tyme Eue, whoſe deathe ſo many bewayled, liueth and fareth well in the Caſtell of Stanſſeburge, where oftentymes the Duke viſiteth her, and ſyus that tyme hath had by her ſeuen children: he perſwadeth hys wyfe alſo to ſygnyfye to her parentes and frendes, that Eue is dead. But when it was bruted abrode that ſhe was alyue, and kepte in the Caſtell of Stanſſeburge, hys wyfe which had alſo an Inkling therof, conceaueth a vehement ſuſpicion, & inquyreth of the ſeruaūtes, howe the matter ſtoode, but he forbad that any man ſhoulde come at her, of thoſe that knewe any thyng: but thys ſuſpicion ſticked faſte in her mynde, ſo longe as ſhe lyued, and wryting ofte vnto hym, bewayled her miſerye. Thys fact of hys was recyted emonges others in the ſame preſence, to thentent all men might vnderſtande, what opinion he had of hys owne relygion. The concluſion of theyr accuſation was this, to proue for howe iuſte & neceſſarye cauſes, they attempted war agaynſt hym, who contemnyng the Proclamations of Themperour, and of kinge Fernando, had diſturbed the Publicke peace, and had wrought all kynde of Iniurye to theyr fellowes and confederates. The Duke of Brunſwicke was not preſent at thys action, Themperoure ſo willing it: For the Proteſtantes deſyred that he myght haue ben preſente, and herein had moued Themperour. On Eaſter Monday, which than was the .xiiij. day of Aprill, Themperours ſoldiours, led by the Marques of Piſcare, foughte a battell in Piedmont, with the Frenchemen at the Towne of Carignane, and loſt the felde, and The French victory at Carignane. many thouſandes of them were ſlayne. The generall of the Frenche armie was Angian Duke of Uandoſme, before mentioned. Whanreport came of that ouerthrow, many men ſuppoſed that Themperoure wolde not haue refuſed the treatye of peace, but he was erneſtly bent to haue warre, & made preparation accordyngly. The Duke of Brūſwicke aunſwereth to the accuſation of the Proteſtantes, the .xxiij. day of Aprill. And powryng out a greate heape of reproches, obiecteth vnto thē conſpiracie, rebellion, treaſō, extortiō, ſocietie wirth the Turkes and Frenche men, and touching the letters founde in his caſtel, he excuſeth as well as he maye, and yf theyr cloſettes were ſearched, he ſaieth there might a great deale worſe ſtuffe befounde. But the matter, concernyng Eue hys darlyng, he toucheth but a little, to this reproche the Proteſtantes make aunſwere agayne. And whan Themperoure

wolde ſuffer the matter to be pleaded no more openly, they exhibite a wryting, the ſame afterwardes doth the Duke of Brunſwicke. The xxvij. day of Aprill Charles the Duke of Sauoye, agayne by hys ambaſſadoures The Duke of Sauoye accuſeth the Frēch king. accuſeth the French kyng, and beſydes the violence and iniuryes of the foormer yeres, he ſayeth, how he hathe ſtyred vp the Turkes lieutenante, Barbarouſſe, who beyng ayded by the Frenche men hath taken by compoſition hys Citie of Nice, and agaynſt his fidelitie and promeſſe, ſpoyled it, and leadyng many awaye into captiuitie, hath ſette it on fyre: he requireth therfore, that they would help hym in thys hys extreme miſerye eſpeciallye, ſeeyng the enemies are fully prefixed to retourne to the ſege of the caſtel. He hath craued ayde of the Biſhop of Roome, and he hath graunted hym only that trybut, whiche the clergie are wonte to paye hym yerely: But that is a verye ſmal reliefe in thys hys pouertie, where he ſcarſely poſſeſſeth the tenth parte of hys dominion. And that he came not hym ſelfe to the counſel, he excuſeth hym by hys age, the longe Iorney, and the iminent daunger of hys enemye: And ſaieth moreouer how he is not hable to beare the charges, whiche hath ſcant ſomuche as wyll fynde hym, hys ſōne, & hys familie. Aboute thende of Aprill the Swiſes aſſemble at Badē, The ſwyſſes aunſwer the Princes letters. make aunſwer to the letters of the ſtates of thempyre. Howe theyre captaynes beyng demaunded the queſtion, affirme, that they ſaw no band of Turkes in the Frenche campe, nor hearde any thynge therof: For than woulde not they haue ſerued. And that the Frenche kynge, beyng of them moued herin, doeth complayne, that when he ſent Ambaſſadours the laſt winter, they coulde not be admitted which if they myght haue ben hearde ſpeake, coulde eaſely haue confuted thys ſlaū
               der: And that if Themperoure refuſe not peace, he promiſeth both the Bohemers, that wrote to hym in Februarie, and alſo the Germanes. hys ayde agaynſt the Turke. Nowe as touching themſelues, ſomme of them in dede are bounden to ſerue the French kyng in his warres, by compoſition, ſome agayne are only in league of amit
                  〈…〉
                with hym, & haue ben theſe many yeres, out of whoſe dominions, if an
                  •
                runne into Fraunce, it is done contrary to theyr will and knowledge as the lyke may alſo happen in ſome places in Germany. But they rekon it beſte, that the kynges Ambaſſadours ſhoulde be hearde, and peace eſtablyſhed: Wherin if they may do any good, they wil with al their heartes. This tyme did the kyng of England ſend a great Nauie into Scotlande. Who chauncynge of a good wynde, whan they were arriued, Thengliſhe Nauie inuadeth ſcotlād. take fyrſte Lythe, a notable hauon, after Eddenborough, the head cytie of Scotlad. And when the Caſtell was kept agaynſt them which for the ſituation was vnprenuable, they burnt it, in the begynnyng of the moneth of May. In thys Aſſemblie Themperoure with a ſolemn ceremonie created woolfang, Maſter of Pruſſe, openly and gaue him

the armes aperteynynge to that office, whyche Alberte of Brandenburge, the brother of George and Caſimire, had enioyed many yeres, & marieng a wyfe vſurped the ſame to hym ſelfe, & was therfore oute lawed by the chāber, twelue yeres before as is declared. And Sygiſmunde Kynge of Poole, defended hym as hys Cliente. And nowe, what tyme an other was inueſted, as I haue ſayed the kynges Ambaſſadoure prote
                  •
               ted openlye, that thys creation was vnlawfull, neyther that it oughte to bee any derogation to the Kynge hys Maſter, vnder whoſe defence and protection is the Lande of Pruſſe. Whan the Ambaſſadours of Hongary had recited theyr miſfortune and loſſe of the yeare paſte, they requyred ayde of Thempyre: For nowe is the matter broughte to the verey extremitie, and yf they bee nowe leafte deſtitute, they muſt nedes doe, as men are wont in matters deſperat, and for the which no man can blame thē: they wil accept right harde conditions, yea bōdage it ſelfe rather, that whileſt other men ſit ſtill & loke on, they ſhould fal into preſent deſtructiō. How the Frēch kings Heraulte was ſent away from Spier with his letters, it is before declared, whan the ambaſſadours therfore wer retourned home, ye oratiō, The oration of the Frēch Ambaſſadours. which they ſhould haue had before the ſtates of germany, they ſet forth in print. In the beginning, to get good will, they ſay how bothe nations haue one & the ſame originall, neither can any thing chaunce vnto germany which apperteineth not as wel vnto Fraunce. Thā do they cōfute the reportes of their aduerſaries, as though the king with an other warre ſhould diſturbe the cōmon welth, & haue made league with the Turke, vſing a certē preface to appeace themperour. And affirme how the former warre was begon, for that the king could not obteine of the duke of Sauoie his mothers inheritaūce. And this later, for ye kinges ambaſſadours, which wer ſlain againſt the law of all nations: And yt the king hathe no league nor ſocietie with the Turke, but for marchandiſe & cōmon quiet, ſuch as the Uenetians, Poloniās & others haue. And albeit ther wer any league betwixt thē, it wer not to be reprehended, for aſmoch as in times paſt both Abrahā, Dauid & Salomō, Phineas, the children of Tobie, & captaines of the Machabeis Holy men haue had leagues with men of a contrarye relygyon. haue done the like. After alſo themperours, Honorius, Cōſtātine, Theodoſtus ye yonger, Iuſtinian the ſecōd, Palaologus, Leo, Frederick the firſt & ſecond, haue vſed the aide & ſuccour of nations of a contrary religiō. And doubtles Fredericke the ſecond was euen vpon the ſhoulders of the ſaracens caried again into Italy frō whence the biſſhopes of Rome had expulſed him. They know, how great powers & aide the king hath oftener than once promiſed to the Turkiſh warre: Hereof alſo the Biſhop and Senate of Cardinalles, are good wytneſſes. The cauſe whye the Turke inuaded Hongarye, was for the contentyon aboute the gouernemente: And after was moore provoked

by the war in Affricke for the taking of Townes: And where of late the Turkiſſhe nauie came into the Ligurian Sea, it is not to be imputed to the kynge: neyther maketh it to the pourpoſe, that Poline the kinges ſeruaunt was in the ſame: For thintēt of Barbarouſſe was to ſearche and take Androwe de Aurie his enemie. And when he could not fynde hym, he beſeged the caſtell of Nice, and that of hys owne determination. The kyng in dede hath taken trewes with the Turke, lyke as he hath at other tymes ſhewed them, which is honeſt & hurtfull to no man: for the which he ought not to be blamed, conſydering that the greateſt men that be, haue alſo lately muche deſyred the ſame. The ſtate of the publyke weale is ſore afflicted, and for that is the kynge right ſory: And by this meane maie peace be recouered, if Themperoure will reſtore to the Kinge that thinge that is his owne ryghte and in heritaunce: Yf they can brynge thys to paſſe, the kinge wyll ſpare neyther trauell, coſt, nor perill to defende Germanye from all foreine violence. In the fourmer bookes you haue hearde how the Duke of Saxon wolde not acknoweledge Fernando to be kynge of Romanes: but in thys conuention, that matter wente through in the The duke of Saxon is ſet throughe with kynge Ferdinando moneth of Maye, and the Duke promiſed to honour hym accordingly. Themperour agayne, ratifyeth the Marriage conuenauntes betwixte hym and the houſe of Cleaue, whiche euer before he refuſed, & permitteth, that in caſe the Duke of Cleaue fortune to dye withoute heyres malles, that the Duke of Saxon whiche had maryed hys ſyſter, and his heires males ſhould ſuccede him yet vpon thys condiciō, if before that chaunce, they ſhal agree vpō religion. And for a further bande of amitye, Fernando, by Themperours conſente, promiſeth to geue his daughter Elenore in marriage to the Duke of Saxōs eldeſt ſonne, yf a reconcilemente in religion may be had, before ſhe be marying able. This latter thyng was kepte verey ſecret, and cloſely couered on eyther ſyde, ſo that neyther the Lantzgraue and hys fellowes knewe anye thynge thereof. For the matter was done by a fewe counſellours, and Themperoure vſed Granuellane, Feruando Hoffeman, the Duke of Saxon, Pontane and Burcarte. The King of Dē
               marke alſo, ſendynge hys Ambaſſadours, fell to a compoſytion with Themperoure, where before he had kepte hys power all the wynter longe for the chaunce that myghte haue happened, he ſemed to forſake the Frenche Kynges frendeſhyp for the Turkyſhe confederacye: for The French king hate
                     •
                   of all men for the turks ſocietie. ſomuch the Ambaſſadours dyd ſygnyfye, in famylyar talke with their fellowes. Nowe wyll we retourne to the demaundes of Themperoure and Kynge Fernando. The matter beyng longe and muche debated, the tenth daye of Iune the conuention ended. The States of Thempyre, albeit they thoughte it muche to bee charged with double ayde, yet ſuppoſynge that they ſhoulde the better warre agaynſte

the Turke, yf the domeſticall enemie were fyrſte broughte vnto hys bewtye, graunted to Themperoure monye to fynde foure thouſande Horſemen, and .xxiiii. thouſande footemen for halfe a yere agaynſt the The ſtates of thempire, decree an aide againſt the Frenche Kynge. Frenche kynge. And with parte of that monye Themperouce departeth to hys brother Fernando, to thentente he ſhoulde fortifye ſuche places as are nere the Turkes: And for the Turkiſhe warre to come, they agreed that moneye ſhouldbe gathered of euerye man throughe oute Germany, & all men to be ſeaſed after theyr landes and goodes, and no man to bee exempted, and enacted that no man ſhoulde ſerue any foreine Prynces, eſpecyally the Frenche Kynge, and the Magiſtrate permitted to execut thoſe that were taken with the maner. Becauſe the controuerſy of relygyon could not in theſe warlycke affaires A decree for relygion. bee treated on, it is differred tyll the nexte aſſemblye to bee holden in the moneth of December: In the meane ſeaſon wyll Themperoure appoynte certen good and well learned men to compile ſome godlye fourme of reformation, and alſo exhorteth the Princes to do the lyke, to the ende that throughe a Conference made in the next aſſemblye, ſomethyng by common aſſent may be eſtablyſſhed, to be obſerued vntyll a generall counſel to be holden in Germany, or a prouincial Sinode of the ſame. In the meane tyme let all men be quyet, and ſtyre vp no trouble for the dyuerſitie of Relygion, and that the Churches alſo, of what relygion ſo euer they bee, maye inioye theyr commodytyes on eyther partie, and parte of thoſe goodes to be imployed to the fynding of the myniſters of the Churche, of free Schooles, and the poore: the Of the chā
                  ber. iudges of the Chamber ſhall kepe theyr place, vntyll the tyme prefixed: whan the ſame ſhalbe expired, than ſhall all be receyued into that nomber indifferently without reſpecte of relygion. The decre of Auſpurge, and all actions commenced agaynſt the Proteſtantes for doctryne ſake, the caſe alſo of Goſlarie and Minden, to hang in ſuſpence, vntill the nexte treaty: The Anabaptiſtes to ſuffer puniſhement, long ſynce for them determined: Yet ſhall the magiſtrates aſſigne learned and godlye men to ſhewe them theyr errour, and call them agayne to amendemente. The Catholickes miſlyked thys decree, and reſiſted it withal theyr force: But when the byſhopes of Collon & Munſter held with the Proteſtantes, & alſo the duke of Cleaue and the Marques of Baden referred althinges to thēperours pleaſure, which after lōg diſceptation, had deuiſed thys way, as a meane & tollerable for both parties, They being wel ſhortned of their nūbre, ſay, that certēly they wil not aſſent to it, howbeit they will not preſcribe themperour, nor reſyſt hys authorytie, but are cōtent to ſuffer it. Friderick the Paulſgraue, & the Marques of Brandenburge, Princes electours had intreated yt it might be thus decreed. The proteſtātes deſired alſo yt the duke of Brū
               ſwickes caſe might haue ben cōpriſed in ye ſame decree, but it could not

be obtayned, & themperour vrged thē, that eyther they ſhould reſtore him, or els permit vnto him the prouince, by ſequeſtration, til the matter be tryed. And therof he treated with the Duke & the Lantzgraue, when they were preſent, and after theyr departure, moche more with theyr deputies. The Cities at the fyrſt refuſed the ayde of the French warre, by reaſon of theyr intercourſe and trade of Marchandiſe: But what tyme the Prynces had aſſented, and the Frenche kynges cauſe was full of hatred, they ſubſcribed alſo, thoughe ſore agaynſte theyre willes, eſpecyally, that were nere vnto Fraunce. The Ambaſſadours of the Dukes of Luneburge and wirtemberge refuſed alſo, but they were admonyſſhed priuately, and chaſtened in woordes, that they alone ſhoulde not lette the good will of the reſidewe. Whan the Lātzgraue was ready to goe home, and came to take hys leaue of Themperoure, Themperoures gentlenes to the Lantzgraue he had moſt gentle intertaynement. And Themperoure ſaid howe he wolde not trouble hym at thys tyme to ſerue agaynſte the Frenche Kynge, for thys cauſe only, that he wolde not bringe hym into hatred: but whan thys warre is doone, he wyll goe ſtreight waye agaynſte the Turke, and than wyll he make hym hys lyeutenaunte, and generall of all the warre. And whan he with a certen modeſtie excuſed, and abaſed hymſelfe: as vnmete for ſuche a charge you haue done righte well or euer nowe, ſayeth Themperoure, bothe for youre ſelfe and for the others. And we doubte not, but that you can doe vs alſo ryght good ſeruice, & with theſe wordes taketh hys leaue of hym moſte Frendely. He beyng full of good hope, and ioyefull that he had Themperoure ſo moche hys good Lorde, whan he had declared the ſame to certen of hys Frendes, retourneth home. Touching the ſequeſtration, after longe and moche pleadinge, they agreed that all the landes of the Dutchie of Brunſwicke ſhould be committed to Themperoure, as to the hyghe Magiſtrate, tyll the caſe were heard and determined, The duchye of Brunſewicke committed to thēperoure. eyther frendely, or by ryghte and lawe. And that Themperour ſhoulde committe the gouernement of the Contrye eyther to the Paulſgraue, or to the Electoure of Brandenburg, moreouer to Duke Maurice or the Duke of Cleaue. They that ſhall not abyde thys ordre, to ſuffer the penaltye of breakynge the Publycke Peace: That Themperoure doe aduertyſe the Duke of Brunſwicke to obeye the ſame, yf not, to puniſh him according to the lawes of thempire. Theſe condicions at the laſt Themperour propounded, & herin perſeuered, Thā did the proteſtantes ratifie the ſame, as ſhalbe declared herafter. The aſſēblie being ous finſſhed, thēperour goeth frō Spier to Mētz. Themperoures Iornoy into Fraunce. Nowe was all his armie aſſembled in Lorayne vpon the borders of Fraunce. And about thēd of May, he had recouered the citie of Lucē
               burg by cōpoſition. In this warre ther ſerued thēperour duke Maurice of Saxonie, the Marques Albert with ether of them a thouſand

Horſemen, moreouer Counte william of Furſtemburge, Captayne of the footemen, and Sebaſtian. Sherteline all of the Proteſtantes relygion. Whyleſt Themperour was at Mentz, there was takē in Lorayne, Huberte Erle Richlynge, a Germane, that ſerued the Frenche kynge: beyng brought to Mentz, he is condēned to ſuffer. The Coū
               teſſe hys wyfe, whan ſhe was comen thither, and fel downe proſtrate at Themperours feete coulde fynde no fauoure. And nowe were all thynges prepared for the executiō. At the length was procured Maximylyan the ſonne of kyng Fernando, whom Themperour had lately receyued: he in thende obtayned hys pardon, and ſaued hys life. In the meane tyme Barbarouſſe; eyther for that hys bufynes requyred ſo, orheyng perſwaded by the kynge, or els fearyng, leſte the Frenche barbaroſſue retourneth, Kyng ſhould conclude a peace with Themperoure, retourneth home, and what ſo euer places by the Sea ſyde apperteyned to Themperoure or thempire, he inuadeth and ſpoyleth: But from the Biſſhop of Romes landes he refraineth, as it is moſt lyke, by the French kinges perſwaſion. Themperours armye marchynge forewarde, taketh the Towne and Caſtell of Lyney, three myles from Barrey. And from thence goeth to Sandeſyre, a Frenche Towne ſtandyng vpon the riuer of Marne, which was kept with a ſtronge garriſon, ouer whom Mounſer Landren was Captayne, who ſo valeauntely the yere beefore had defended the Towne of Landerſey from Themperour and from Thengliſhemen. Whileſt theſe thynges are thus a woorkynge, The death
                     •
                   of the Duke of Lorayns. Anthony the Duke of Lorayne departeth out of this lyfe, not ſo moch for age, as for thoughte and care he tooke for thys nere and almoſte domeſticall warre, whom Fraunces hys ſonne ſucceded, whiche had maryed Themperours Nece, Chriſtine, as before is ſayde. In thys meane whyle the Kyng of England ſendeth ouer the Sea to Caleis, the Duke of Northfolke with one Armye, who marchynge throughe Bollonois, went and beſeged Mouſtrell, & here Maximilyan Countiede Bure, by Themperours accorde, ſerued the Kynge of England. And immedyately after ſente an other ſtronge Armye with the Duke of Suffolke, who layed ſege to Bollogne, and thyther came the king The kyngs beſegeth Bollogns. in perſon. The Frenche Kynge had appoynted Gouernoure there, Mounſer Ueruyne a man of honoure. Whan Themperour had enuironed Sādeſyre, with his army, he maketh the Batteri, & the Bretch onſe made, geueth thaſſault at yt Ides of Iuly, but where the townes men ſtode to theyr owne defence moſte valeauntelye, Themperialles were repulſed, and fyue hondreth Soldiours ſlaine. Fynally in the ſeconde moneth, what tyme Landrey the gouernoure was ſlayne with the fall of an Houſe, and the Gunners wanted pouder, the Towne was rendred. Durynge thys ſeege, Renate, Prynce of Orenge beeynge ſtryken with a greate Peece, the nexte daye after, whan he had

made his Coſyn the Erle of Naſſow hys ſonne, his heire, he ended his lyfe not without a great grief to Themperoure. That tyme were the The deathe of the Prince of Drenge. Proteſtantes Ambaſſadours in Lorayne, that they myght confyrme the couenauntes of Sequeſtration, latelye propounded by Themperour. And fyrſt they reſted at Metz, and after at Tullie, and ſendynge dyuerſe letters to Themperour and to Granuellan, they declared the rauſe of theyr commyng: But Themperoure at the laſt excuſyng hym ſelfe by hys warlyke affayres bad them go home agayne, and differreth the whole matter to the next conuention of thempyre, or to ſome other tyme more conuenient. Whan Sandeſyre was taken, themperour, the .xxv. day of Auguſt, marcheth on ſtyll, and leauing Catalāne, a Towne of Champagnie, pitcheth his Tentes by the Riuer of Marne, on the other ſyde wherof laye certen bandes of Frenche horſemen in an Ambuſſhe. There Counte Willyam of Furſtemberge, whyche Counte willyam taken priſoner. knewe the ſytuation of Fraunce, and euery paſſage, goeth foorthe in the nighte and but one man with him, to ſearche in what place of the ryuer they myght wade ouer at a foorde and paſſe with theyr Armie. And hauing a peſaunt of the Contrie to bee hys guyde, whan he had founde a forde, and was gone ouer on the other ſyde, he was intercepted by Frenche horſemen, and caryed in to theyr Campe in greate deryſyon, and not withoute reproches, for that he ſeruinge there before, had caryed a greate deale of Golde oute of Fraunce, and from thence was ſente to Parys. This thyng chaunced to Themperonre contrary to hys expectation, and helde hym long in ſuſpence. The French king, becauſe the Swyſſes were not commen, eſchewed the battell. And Themperoure procedynge foorth by the Ryuer ſyde, dayly auaunced hys campe. In thoſe: partyes is the Towne of Eperney: There was moche ſtore of victualles, Munition, and other warlycke furniture: whiche thynges, leſte they ſhoulde come into the enemyes handes, were conueyed in greate haſte downe the Riuer: All that coulde not bee caryed awaye, was conſumed with fyre, the Frenche men themſelues Eperney brunte. ſettyng the Towne a fyre. Wherfore Themperoure, withoute reſiſtance, marched to Caſtell Theodoricke a Towne by the ſame Ryuer, not two dayes Iorneye from Paris. And albeit the Frenche kynges Ambaſſadours, ſente to entreate for peace, were in Themperours Campe, yet marched he forewarde neuer the leſſe, and whan he was commen thus farre, there aroſe a wonderfull feare amonges them at Parys. All men that were of any welthe fled thence, neyther coulde they be kepte backe by the kynges proclamation, forbiddynge The feare & flyghte of the Pariſians. that any man ſhould flee, and the vileſt ſorte remayned ſtyll. And therfore was there ſome daunger, leſte the greateſt Citie in all Europe, and exceadyng ryche alſo, ſhoulde euen through thoſe ſame haue been ſpoyled. In the ſame Uninerſitie is a wonderfull nombre of Studentes,

out of al countries in chriſtendom: they fled alſo, and the king had in dede proclamed that all alienes ſhoulde departe immediatlye, vnder payne of deathe thys was in the begynnynge of September. A fewe dayes after the kynge of Englande hauynge ſore ſhaken and battered Bollen. with hys myghtye ordenaunce; had it rendred vnto hym, whiche neyther hys father, nor the kynges of former tyme could Bollon rendred. euer wynne. For he dyd not batter the walles only with canon ſhot, and ſhake a ſondre the Caſtell and Bulwarkes with, vndermynyng, whyche in wynnynge of ſtronge places, is the common practiſe of other Princes, but alſo had greate and heuge Morter peces, whyche were ſhotte of ſuche a compaſſe, that they fell ryght downe, and looke where they lyghted, brake downe all beefore them to the grounde, ſo that many wer oppreſſed with the ruine that they made, and the reſt that loued theyr lyues were driuen to kepe in caues and ſellars vnder the earth. At the laſt the .xxiiij. day of September, Thēperour maketh peace A peace concluded betwixte themperour and Fraunce. with the Frenche kynge, whan he was commen to Caſtell Theodoricke, a towne of the Soiſſons: the peace makers, of Themperours parte were Gonzage the Uiceroye of Sicilie, and Granuellan. And for the Frenche kynge was Claudie Annebalde the Admirall, Charles Nulley, and Gilbart Baiarde. And the condicions wer theſe. What ſoeuer hathe ben taken on eyther ſyde ſyns the trewes of The condicions of the peace. Nice, is reſtored agayne. The French kyng ſhall render to the Duke of Lorayne, the Towne of Aſteney, for becauſe it is vnder the protection of Lucemburg. They ſhall aydeone an other, and Ioyne al their forces together that the olde relygion & concorde of the churche maie be reſtored. The Frenche king promiſeth to ayde Themperour in the Turkiſſh warre, with ſixe hondreth men of Armes, and ten thouſand footemen. He renounceth the title and clayme of Arragonie, Naples, Flaunders, Artois, and Gelderlande. Themperour agayne renounceth hys ryght to the Countie of Bollonois, Perone & other townes, ſtandyng vpon the water of Some: Moreouer, to lowe Burgundye, and the contrie of Macon: Than promiſeth he to geue in Maryage to the kynges ſonne, the Duke of Orieans, the Lady Mary hys eldeſt doughter, or els the daughter of hys brother Fernando, & whether of them he wyll geue, he ſhall declare with in foure moneches: yf he geue his daughter, he promiſeth for her dowary, Brabant, Gelderlande, Lucemburge, Limburge, Flaunders, Holland, Henaulte, Artois, Namures, Friſeland, Utrecht, and all hys dominions there, and alſo hyghe Burgundie, that after hys deathe they maye inioye & poſſeſſe the ſame. Yf he thus doe, than the kyng for hymſelfe & hys Chyldren, renounceth hys ryght to Millan: And if it fortune themperours daughter to dye, hauinge no Children, than the Duke of Orleans departeth from all that poſſeſſion, and the ryghte in Millan remayneth

wholy to the Frenche kynge, and to Themperoure the ryghte of the Houſe of Burgundie: Yf he geue the daughter of Fernando, he graū
               teth for her dowarie the Dukedome of Millan, howe ſo euer the mariage be, it ſhalbe accompliſſhed within a yeres ſpace. And the Kynge ſhall wholy reſtore the Duke of Sauoie. The Kynge alſo is permytted to kepe Heſdin: Themperour promiſeth his whole endeuour, that peace maye bee made alſo betwixte Fraunce and Englande: As concernynge the Duke of Cleaue, beecauſe the kynge and Quene of Nauarre did affirme that theyr Daughter neuer conſented to that Marriage, but alſo witneſſed the contrarye, after the ſolemne and accuſtomed maner, the Frenche Kynge ſhall ſende that proteſtation to Thē
               peroure within ſyxe weekes that ſome thynge maye bee determyned. In thys peace are compriſed the Biſſhop of Roome, Kynge Fernando, Portugall Polle, Denmarke, the Uenetians, Swyſes, the dukes of Sauoye, Lorayne, Florence, Farrane, Mantua, Urbine, the Cytyes of Gene, Luke, Senes, the Prynces Electours, and al the ſtates of Thempyre, that are obedyente to Themperoure. Thys peace concluded, Themperoure dyſchargynge hys Armye, retourneth home to Bruſſelles. All men woondred at thys peace makynge, For euen thoſe whyche were Themperours frendes, and famylyare with hym, loked moſt certenly for a Conqueſt before they went in to the Fielde, and made theyr boaſt, that with in a fewe monethes, Fraunce ſhoulde bee theyres, or Three moſte myghty enemyes of Fraunce. the kynge ſhoulde be at commaundemente, who had three moſte myghty enemyes, Themperoure, the Germannes, and the Kyng of Englande.
         
         
            
            
               ✚ The ſixtenth Booke of Sleidanes Commentaries concerning the ſtate of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne of the Empyre of Charles the fyſte.
            
               
                  ❧ The argument of the ſixtenth Booke
               ¶ The Pope by letters admoniſheth, taunteth, threateneth Themperoure hys ſonne: and maketh new Cardinalles. The clergie of Colon reſiſteth the Archebiſhop: Maſter Peter Bruly for preachynge at Tournay, was brent quicke. Whileſt the aſſemble was at Woormes, they of Merindolle and Cabriere, named Uandois be ſacked and burnt. The Pope notwithſtandyng the counſell by hym called, burned with deſyre to make warre agaynſt the Proteſtātes. Luther wryteth againſt hym, and paynteth hym in hys collours. Grignian is ſente to the Proteſtantes, to cauſe them to approue the counſell. The Archbiſſhop of Colon is cited to Roome. Open warre betwixte the Duke of Brunſwicke and the Lantzgraue: wherin the Lantzgraue had the victory, the Palſgraue prince Electour, receyueth the Goſpell. Bruites of warre are ſowen agaynſt the Proteſtantes, a Colloquie was ordeyned at Regenſpurge, to diſpute of Relygion: which broken the Counſell of Trente is publyſſhed, and the ſeſſions beginne in the meane tyme Luther departeth oute of this preſente lyfe.
            
            
               WHan the warres were hoteſt, the Byſſhop of The Popes letters to the Emperoure. Roome, at the eyghte kalendes of Septembre, wryteth hys letters to Themperoure, wherin he rebuketh hym ſharpelye, for vſurpinge, as he ſayeth, hys authorytie, and intermedlinge with the reformation of Relygion, whiche neuertheleſſe he dooeth not aſcribe to hys owne nature, but to the malycyous perſwations of ſuch euell men as he hathe lately made league and frendſhip with, he threateneth him with thexamples of Dathan, Abiron, and Core, whiche wolde haue taken vpon them the authorytye of Moyſes & Aaron: And alſo of Kyng Ozias, whom God ſtrake with Leproſie, for that he wolde attempte to burne incēſe vpon the Aultar: he telleth hym playnely that he hath nothing to doe with the reformation of Churches but the ſame to be longe vnto hys office chyefly, whom God hath geuen authorytie to bynde and looſe: Than proueth he by enſamples, that ſuche Emperours as haue aided the See of Roome and the Biſſhoppes therof, God hath euer rewarded with great gyftes and benefytes, as greate Conſtantyne, Theodoſe, and Charlemaygne: Agayne ſuch as haue reſiſted them, to haue The enemies of the romiſh church ben punnyſhed with greate miſfortunes, as Morys, Conſtans, Phylyp, Leo, Henry the fourthe and Fridericke the ſeconde whyche came vnto ſhamefull endes, and were ſome taken, ſome alſo ſlayne of their

owne chyldren: And that for ſuche diſobedience, not only kynges and Emperours, but alſo whole nations haue ben plaged, as namelye the Iewes and Grekes, the one for crucifying of Chryſt the ſonne of God, the others for contemnyng of hys vicar: Moreouer he wylleth him to imitate the example of greate Conſtantyne, who refuſed to be iudg in the Biſſhops cauſes, Notwithſtandynge he coulde be contente to vſe hym as a coadiutour, in matters of relygion, but herin to be head and gouernour, he can not abyde hym. Fynally he warneth him frō hence The Pope can abide no ſuperiour. foorthe to treate no more of relygion in the aſſemblies of Thempyre, but referre that vnto hys indgement, and that he diſanulle and abrogate all ſuche thynges as he hath, through ouer moche fufferaunce already graunted, to thoſe rebelles and aduerſaryes of the Churche of Rome, or els muſt he be conſtrained to deale more roughly with him, than either hys cuſtome, nature or will alſo can beare: Yet wil he not neglect hys dewtie: for the example of gods plage vpon Helithe preſt is euer before his eyes: Hitherto he hath vſed the clementie of a father, Themperoure is the Popes eldeſt ſonne. but if thys will not ſerue, he muſt feele another waye: therfore let him conſider, whether it ſhalbe more for hys honour, to aſſiſt his olde age, in recouerynge the tranqullytie of the Churche, or els to fauour thoſe, that ſeke the deſolation of the ſame. It is thought, that the Frēch king ſet hym on to wryte thus extremely, who made the matter odious by reaſon of the Englyſh league, to incenſe the byſſhop the more, for herof cometh it, that he wryteth of the Societie of euel mē. For they both are wont to ſwe and craue hys frendſhip right buſyly bothe by letters Great princes ſwe for the Popes fauoure. and ambaſſadours, eſpecyallye in tyme of warre, and eche laboureth for hym ſelfe, that they may bee to hym moſt acceptable. Aboute thys tyme, Stephen Biſſhop of Wincheſter ſet foorth a boke agaynſt Bucer, verey opprobrious and bitter. Wherin emonges other thinges he defendeth the ſengle lyfe. This yere the Biſſhop created Cardinalles, Chriſtopher Madruce, of the Trente, and Otto Truckeſſe Biſhop of The creatyon of Cardinalies. Auſpurge, Germanes: George Arminiack, Iames Anuebald, Frēchmen. Fraunces Mendoza, Bartholomewe Cueua, Spaniardes, to gratifye the Emperoure, Fernando, and the Frenche Kynge. At the ſame tyme alſo he calleth a counſell whyche had ben hindered heretofore by reaſon of the warres, agaynſt the Ides of Marche in the yere A counſel is called. following. And becauſe Themperour and the French king wer now at peace, he vttereth greate gladnes, and the writte, wherewith he reneweth the connſel beginneth of that place of Scripture Letare Ieruſalem-In theſe dayes alſo cometh foorthe a booke of Luthers, touchyng the Lordes ſupper, wherin he reneweth the olde controuerſie, Luthers booke of the Lordes ſupper. and ſpeaketh many thynges agaynſte Zwinglius and the fellowes of the ſame doctryne. Which was aunſwered by them of Zuricke, & that ryght ſharpelye. I tolde you before of Clergie and Uniuerſitie of

Collon, howe they with theyr whole force reſiſteth the Archebiſſhop in the reformation of religion: But where as he procedeth, they ſendyng The clergie of Collon to the Arche Biſſhop. agayne Ambaſſadours & letters, requyre hym to leaue, and attende the decree of the counſell, yf not they muſt cōplayne to the higher magiſtrate, and fynde remedy, to quyet theyr conſcyence, and pacifye Gods wrath. They are lothe to take that waye, but yf he goo forewarde, they muſte nedes do it. Whan they coulde not thus preuayle, the .ix. daye of October they aſſemble in the head Churche of Collon, and there recyte by wrytyng amonges other thynges what hath ben done at Wormes .xxiij. yeres paſt, what Luther by the common aſſēt of all Princes was condemned of Themperoure, what was decreed at Auſpurge, what at Regenſpurge, and what latelye at Spyer. All theſe thynges neglected, they ſaye, how theyr Archebyſſhop Herman, hathe gon a new waye to worke, and hath ſent for Bucer an Apoſtata and twyſe polluted with inceſtuous mariage, a ſacramentary, and a defendour of that opinion, and to hym hath committed theccleſiaſticall function, and hath appointed euery where new preachers, lewde and euill perſons: by them alſo was a fourme of a refourmation diuiſed, & ſet forth by the princes commaundement. All the which thinges they haue euer to theyr powers reſiſted, and ofte deſired the Archebiſſhop, that he woulde ſtaye vntyll the counſell, or at the leſte vntill the conuention of thempire, but all was in vayne. And nowe foraſmuche as the ſtate of the prouince is lamentable, & tendeth to greate vnquyetnes, & he will not be perſwaded, they of neceſſitie doe flee to the laſte remedye, and doe appeale to the Biſſhop of Roome, and to Themperoure, the hyghe protectour and aduocate of Gods churche and committe They appeale to the Pope and Emperour. all theyr thoughtes vnto theyr tuition. The chief of this aſſemblye was George of Brunſwicke, Duke Henry hys brother, Prouoſt of the ſame College. This thynge knowne, the Archebiſhop ſettynge forthe a wrytyng, ſayeth, there is no cauſe of Appellation: For he had done nothynge contrary to hys dewty: therfore he reiecteth theyr appellation, and truſteth, that they wil leaue theyr enterpryſes: but if not he wil procede not withſtanding in thoſe thinges that concerne gods glorye, and amendemente of Churches. And agayne in an other wrytynge, he confuteth theyr ſclaunderous reporte of Luther and Bucer, and affirmeth that he was neither priuie to the condemnation of Luther, before he ſawe it in print, nor conſented to the decre of Auſpurge. Luther was in dede condemned at Rome, but his cauſe not hearde, violently and tyrannically. But in the decree of Regenſpurge, he and all other Biſſhops were enioyned to reforme theyr Churches. And he ſente for Bucer throughe the meanes of Gropper, who ſo ofte and ſo hyghly commended hym, in whom he alſo could fynd nothing blameworthye, And it is a greate tooken that he ſhoulde bee an honeſt man,

for that Themperoure amonges many, choſe him to be one of the colloqutours as a man godly learned, & a louer of peace, the ſame iudgement hath he alſo of the reſt of the miniſters of the churche by him appoynted. After the peace concluded, Themperour ſent the Byſſhop of Arras, Granuellans ſon, and the Frenche kyng, Cardinall Bellaye, ioynctely to the kynge of Englande, to treate a peace, but it was in vayne, the king refuſyng to reſtore Boloingue. In theſe daies alſo, the An Ambaſſade to the Kynge of Englande. Duke of Orleans and the Cardinall of Turnon, and Ladyes of the Frenche courte came to Themperoure at Bruſſelles, for a mutual reioyſyng of the peace. Themperour had appoynted the captaynes and bandes of Spaniardes to wynter in Lorayne, & in the contrie there aboute. In Themperours prouinces annexed to the houſe of Burgū
               dye, many were euery where deſyrous to know the goſpel, but ſecretly, for feare of Themperours proclamations & punniſhment. In thoſe parties is a Towne called Tournoye, the chiefeſt amonge the Neruians. Thither came a Frenche preacher from Straſburge, beyng of Peter brulie them ſente for, one Peter Brulye, of whom mention is made, in the twelfth booke. Whan he was commen thither in the moneth of September, beyng gently receyued, of them that ſent for him, he began to inſtructe them priuately. And after, for the ſame cauſe, went to Lyſle, a Towne of Flaunders, and retourneth aboute thend of Octobre agayne to Tournay: but nowe was the matter brought to lyghte, and ſearche made for hym throughout al the cytye & the gates kept ſhutte. Being therefore in preſent daunger, and coulde be no longer hyd, the ſecond day of Nouember, in the night ſeaſon he was by ſerten of hys frendes let downe ouer the walles by acorde: whan he touched the earthe and ſatte downe on the grounde, one of them, laining ouer the walle, as ſoftly as he coulde, bad him a dew, and whyleſt he thus leyned, he fortuned to thruſte of a ſtone, that cleaued not faſt to the morter, whiche fallynge vpon hym as he ſate, brake hys legge: who vexed partely with the ake of his legge, partely for colde, when he could not ſtyrre thence, ſatte ſtyll and bewayled hys chaunce and miſerie. That That hearde the watchemen, and ſuſpecting, as it was in dede, came vnto hym take hym and carye hym to pryſon. When the brute hereof came into Germanye, the Senate of Straſburge, ſendynge theyr letters did intreate for him, the ſame did alſo afterwardes the Ambaſſadours of the prote ſtantes, which wer that tyme at Wormes, but that was ſomwhat to late. And before theſe letters came, whiche were ſēt in the name of the Duke of Saxon and the Lantzgraue, he was dyſpatched out of the waye. This was on the .xix. day of Februarye. The 1545. Brulie burnte at Tourney. maner of hys executiō was extreme. For he was brent in a ſmall fire, that hys torment might be ſo mutch the greaeer. He confeſſed his doctryne conſtantlye euen to the laſte breathe: And as he laye in priſon,

comfortyng hys diſcyples by letters, which were fettred in chaynes, he exhorteth thē to be conſtāt. The ſentence was pronounced againſt him, that he ſhould ſuffer for tranſgreſſing themperours commaundement. For many yeres paſt themperoure had ſet forth moſt ſtreit proclamations, in all hys dominyons there awaye, agaynſt the Lutheranes. And they be red euery yere twyſe, leſt any mā ſhould pleade ignoraunce. Whē he was ſent for out of priſon to be examined, ye Freers that wer diuines, axe him, before the magiſtrate, what his opinion of Hys examination. the ſacrament of the altare, as they calle it, of the meſſe, of conſecratiō, of adoration of the hoſt, of purgatorye, of the worſhipping of ſainctes, of ſteewil, of good workes, of Iuſtification, of Images, of Baptiſme, of vowes, of confeſſion of ſynnes, of the Uirginitie of our lady. Wherunto he aunſwered: that the verey body & blud of Chriſt is there receiued, not with the mouthe, but in ſpirit through fayth, and neyther the ſubſtannce of breade nor wyne is chaunged: But whan the ſupper is diſtributed to the congregation after Chryſtes inſtitution in the vulgare tongue, than are they verely conſecrated, euen by the wordes of Chryſt. For that ſtill and ſecret mutteryng wherwith the prieſtes doe treate, & ſpeake to the breade and wyne, belongeth rather to inchaunters and charmers, than vnto Chriſtianes. The popiſſh maſſe to haue nothyng cōmon with the Lordes ſupper, but to be a ſeruice inuented by men, to the reproche & iniurye of Chryſt: the adoration of the bread conſecrated to be Idolatry: For there is worſhipped a creature in the place of the Creatour, that he knoweth not, nor can fynde non other purgatory, ſauing the bloud of chryſt which forgeueth vs, not the treſpas only, but alſo the payne dew for our ſynnes. Therfore the maſſe & other praiers, which are applied vnto the dead, are not only of non effect, but alſo wicked, for aſmoche as they are inſtituted beſydes gods woorde: Sainctes can not be better worſhipped, than yf we followe theyr faythe and vertues: What ſoeuer cometh beſydes, is euyll, and they, whyleſt they lyued, wolde permit no worſhyp to be donne vnto them. Therfore ought they not to be called on as mediatours, for that the ſame honour apperteyneth only to Chryſt: through Adames ſinne mans nature was wholy corrupted, and the wyll weakened, ſo that withoute Goddes grace, it can doe nothyng that good is: Howbeit a man regenerate, dooeth through Gods motion, as a good tree bryng forth good fruictes: How it is faith that bryngeth vnto vs ſaluation, yt is, when we truſt vnto gods promeſſes, & beleue ſtedfaſtlye, that for Chryſt his ſonne ſake, our ſinnes are forgeuen vs. Traditions, whervnto the mindes of men are bounden, ar not to be receyued: To haue Images in ye churches, is a thing full of daunger, for Idolatrie: Baptiſme is a ſigne of the league, that god hath made with vs, wherby he teſtifieth yt he forgeueth our ſīnes. It is a ſigne alſo of cōtinuall mortifying,

and of a new lyfe, which ought to folow Baptiſme. That thys Sacrament ought to be receiued of al men, and not ſomuche as little chyldren to be kept frō the ſame, which are alſo partakers of the godly promiſſion. There ought no vow to be made, that is eyther beſides Goddes worde, or els cannot bee perfourmed by man: Howe euerye man ought daily to confeſſe hys ſinnes vnto God, and craue his mercy: moreouer, yf any ſcrupuloſitie trouble hys conſcience, to axe counſell of the miniſter of the church, for hys comfort and conſolation. But that Auricular confeſſinge of Synnes, hathe neyther teſtimonye of Scripture, nor yet can bee perfourmed, but is a tormentynge of the mynde ryghte peryllous: Of the perpetuall virgynitye of our Ladie, he nothynge doubteth. Concernynge all theſe thynges, a fewe dayes before he ſtode foorthe, he wrote vnto hys wyfe, and to others of hys frendes, that requyred thys of him, vſing the ſeruyce of hys ſyſter. And whan he was condemned to dye, he aduertiſeth hys wyfe in an other letter, with what kynd of punniſhmenthe ſhould end his life the next daye, and alſo comforteth her, ſhewyng her, that the condicyō of a diſciple, ought not to be better than hys maſters, and geueth her certen inſtructions & preceptes of lyuing. The diuines of Paris had made decrees of relygion two yeares paſt as before is recyted. And now by A conuentiō of diuines at mellon. the kinges cōmaundement, they mete at Mellon, which is a Towne in an Iland of Seine, ten myles aboue Paris. The kyng was therby in the Caſtell of Fountayne blewe, and had commaunded them to aſſemble, that foraſmoche as peace was concluded, and the counſell ſhoulde ſhortely enſewe, they myghte after conſultatyon had, reſolue vpon ſuche artycles, for the Churche expediente as myght be thought mete to bee defended, in the counſel, and publycke Showe place of al Chryſtendome. The ende of whyche conſultatyon was thys, that allbeit the altercation amonges them was greate, yet wolde they alter no iote of thoſe thynges, whyche they had before ſetfoorth at Parys. After the example of the Pariſiās, the Diuines of Louaine alſo draw out articles, and after, by Themperoures permiſſion, ſet them foorth, The Articles of Lovayne. to the nomber of .xxxii. of the ſame ſecte for all the worlde, as bee the Paryſyans before rehearſed. Thoſe doeth ye Emperour by hys proclamatyon confyrme and ratyfye, publyſhynge hys letters therof the day beefore the Ides of Marche. The Diuines wrytte, howe they tooke thys payne the more wyllyngly, for that they knewe the ſame ſhoulde be well accepted of Themperour, who had hertofore requyred of thē a moche lyke thynge. In the compoſytion of the peaſe, it was agreed, that Themperour and the Frenche Kynge, ſhoulde to the vttermoſte of theyr power, reſtore the olde Relygyon, as they terme it: And thoſe thynges that wee haue nowe recyted, ſeme to tende to the ſame ende. And the Cardinall of Tournon, which went with the Duke of

Orleans into Flaūders, is thought to haue furthered much that matter. But Luther aunſwereth them of Louain with cōtrary theames, Luther aunſwereth thē of Louayne. and calleth them heretickes, and bludſuckers, who teaching wicked thynges, that can neyther be defended by reaſon nor ſcripture, doe ad to vyolence, and perſecute with fyre and ſworde: For bothe they and alſo the Paryſians propounde onlye bare propoſitions, and preſcribe what they wyll haue followed, but alledge no place of Scripture to proue it, and incenſe the magiſtrate to perſecution. The aſſemblie of Thempire was than at Woormes. Themperoure beynge diſeaſed of An Aſſēble at wormes. the goute, was longe or euer he came: He had theyre hys deputes, the Cardinall of Auſpurge, and Fridericke Countē of Furſtemberg. The xxiiii. day of Marche, kyng Fernando, in Themperours abſence, propoundeth. Wherfore thys conuention is called, verely for the eſtablyſhyng of relygion, the lawe, and peace, and for the Turkiſſhe warre. He ſheweth howe Themperoure wyſſhed to haue ben here in perſon, but hathe ben letted hitherto by reaſon of ſyckenes, and yet intendeth to come, ſo ſoone as he hathe recouered healthe. And becauſe he wyll not longer hynder the common conſultation, therfore hathe he requyred hym to commence the thynge, chieflye concernynge the Turkiſhe warre, for the which cauſe Themperoure made peace with the Frēch kynge, to thentente that all thynges beyng pacyfyed, relygyon maye be quyeted and refourmed, and after, all force and power bee prepared agaynſte the Turke. And after he hathe declared what trauell Themperour hathe euer taken to procure a counſell, fyrſte wyth Clement the .vii. at Bononie, after with Paule the. iii, at Roome, Genes Nice Luke, and now lately at Buſſet. And becauſe it is now brought to paſſe, and already in hande at Trente, Themperours aduiſe is, not to treate of Relygyon in thys Conuention, but to attende vpon the procedynge of the counſell, or yf there ſhalbe none, than before thende of thys aſſemblye, to appoynt an other conuocatyon of Thempyre for the ſame pourpos. But now requyreth them eſpecially to cōſult of the Turkiſhe warre: For he is aduertyſed by ſondry letters & meſſengers that the Turke is comming into Hongary with a greater power thā euer he did, to thentente he may after inuade Germany. Let them cō
               ſulte therfore, whether they thynke it mete to mooue warre agaynſte hym or defende onlye, and what they ſhall determyne, to ſignifye the ſame to themperoure, who hath perſwaded the biſſhop of Rome & the French king to the Societie of this war, & truſteth alſo ye others will The Proteſtātes make aunſwer. not be behynd. Wherunto the proteſtantes, & with them alſo the archbiſhop of Collon & the Palſgraue electour, the third day of April make this aunſwer. How this cōuentiō was appoynted chiefly for religiō: and how yt in fourmer conuētions an entrie & acceſſe hath bē made to

come vnto an agrement. And therfore is there more hope now yt they ſhould wholy accord. Wherfore they wolde right gladly begin firſt wt that matter & the ſtate of Germany doeth require, it ſhould be ſo, who yf the feare of God be before theyr eies, they doubte not to haue good ſucceſſe. Howbeit, if either the weightines of the thing, or the ſhortnes of tyme, or els the preſēt daunger of the Turke, wil not permit it: yet ſhall it be nedefull that the decree concerning peace be further declared: For peace is in dede graunted to religion vntill the counſell, but they do not acknowledg this counſell of Trent for a lawful counſell, The counſel of Trēt vnlawefull. ſuch as hath ben promiſed in the coūſelles of thempire: And why they doe not accept it, they haue oft times heretofore declared. Therefore haue they nede of peace, who doe not depende of the popiſhe counſell, which may take place, til ye matter be godly & chriſtiāly, determined. And becauſe a firme peace can not bee had, except the execution of the law were miniſtred indifferentli: and how that ſhould be don, it was in the laſt conuention at Spier decreed. They for theyr partes are redy to accompliſſh the ſame: Therfore if theſe two partes may be decided they wil not refuſe to conſulte of the Turkiſſhe warre. The reſte of the prynces and ſtates, amonges whom were the archebiſſhopes of The deuiſe of the popiſh Princes. Mentz and Treuers, do determine, that the caſe of religion ſhalbe referred to the counſell already ſommoned, and the chamber to be eſtabliſſhed according to the auncient lawes of thempyre, and iudgement to be geuen after the law written: and that certē ſhould be choſen out of the whole nomber to conferre of the Turkiſh warre. To that of the Proteſtantes, kyng Fernando & the Emperours deputes make aunſwer, howe the decree made at Spier touchinge peace, pleaſed them well enough than without exception, where as the counſel was that tyme called, and ſhould beginne ſhortly after: In to the Senate of the Chamber alſo, ſhoulde mete men be receyued, accordyng to the decree made at Spier. And ſeyng it is thus, reaſon wolde that they ſhoulde requyre no more, but conferre with the reſte of the Turkyſhe warre. They againe ſaye, how it was inacted at Spier, firſt that ther ſhould bee no troubled moue for Relygion, ſecondlye, that thys diſſention ſhould be accorded, through a godly and frendly diſputation. For vppon thys foundation reſteth the peace of Germanye, neyther wolde they haue founde any lacke at all, yf the matter myghte thus haue remayned. But nowe, inaſmoche as the Byſſhop hathe called a counſell, to let and diſturbe this reconcilement, wherin he alone with hys adherentes, hathe power to determyne, by whoſe decree alſo, moſte men affirme, that the foormer pacification ſhoulde bee finiſhed, they haue nede of a further aſſurance: howe they haue euermore refuſed, & that by ſolemne proteſtation, the Biſſhoppes counſell, and haue many yeres ſynce ſet foorth bookes declaryng the cauſes of the ſame. Nowe

albeit there were non exception made of thys thyng at Spier, yet in caſe they ſhould haue warre with the Turke, it is requiſyte, that firſt all thynges be quyet at home? For the people muſt pay monye to thys warre. But by what equitie, or by what countenaunce can a man exact mony of his cōmons, vnleſſe he put them in a ſure hope, that they with there wiues & children ſhal liue ſafely at home in their Religion. For euen for this cauſe doe they warre agaynſt the Turke, that euery mans goodes, the cōmon welth, and trew religion may be cōſerued: But to warre with the Turke, & in the meane ſeaſō to be in daunger at home what great differente is betwixte theſe two. Therfore haue they iuſt cauſe to demaund a further ſuerty: Cōcerning the chamber, they are contēted, as they haue ſayed, that it be eſtabliſhed accordinge to the decree of Spier: And touchīg the charges of the ſame, they wil conſult with the reſt. They contended about theſe thinges frō the begynning of Aprill, til it was the .vii. day of Maye. And than, hearing, that Themperour had taken his iorney, king Fernando differred thē tyll his cōming, and alſo requyred them in the meane tyme to conſult with the reſidew, of the turkiſh matters. The princes were not there preſent, neyther Proteſtantes nor catholyckes ſaue only the Cardinal of Auſpurge. The French kyng ſent thither his ambaſſadour, Grinian, Grinian the French ambaſſadour. the gouernour of the prouince in Fraunce. In whoſe abſence, arroſe great perſecutiō in thoſe parties. Ther be in the French prouince a people called Ualdois. They of an aunciente cuſtome, doe not acknowledg the biſhop of Rome, & haue had alwayes ſomwhat a more The Ualdois. pure doctrine, & after that Luther floriſhed, gotte vnto thē gredely a more ample knowledge. For this cauſe were they ofte cōplayned vpon to the king, as though they contēned the magiſtrate, & wold make a rebellion. For this kinde of accuſation many vſe nowe a daies, more odious than trewe. There is of them certen Townes & Uillages, amonges the which Merindolum is one. Sentence was geuē againſt thē fiue yeres paſte at Aignes, which is the high iudgmēt place of the The cruell ſentence at Aygnes. prouince, that all ſhould bee deſtroyed without reſpect, that the houſe ſhould be pulled downe & the village made euē plain with the groūd, the trees alſo ſhould bee cut downe & the place made altogether a deſert. Howbeit though it were thus pronounced, yet was it not thā put in execution, by the meanes of certē men that perſwaded, the king to the contrary, & amonges thē, William Bellaye, who was at the ſame tyme the kinges Lieutenaunt in Piedemount: But at ye laſt, this yere the .xii. day of April, Iohn Miners, preſidēt of the counſel at Aygnes, Iohn Myners. calling the ſenate, readeth the kinges letters, cōmaunding thē to execute yt ſentēce geuen. Which letters, this Miners had obteined by the meanes of cardinal Tournō, through a fyt ſollicitour, Philip Cortin. The Cardinal of tournon. Therfore where he receiued thē in ye moneth of Januarie, he ſhewed

them not by and by, but kept them for a tyme cōuenient to worke the feate. When the letters were red, certen of the Senate wer choſen to execute the matter: when the Preſidente Miners promiſed to aſſiſt, Miners preſidente of Aygwes. for that in the abſence of Grmian the gouernoure of the Prouince, he ruled the common welth. Now had he euery where by the kinges cō
               maundemēt muſtered men before, for Thengliſh warres, but he vſed them for this his pourpos: Moreouer at Marſelles, Aygnes, Arles, & other great Townes, he toke vp all that were able to weare armure. He leuieth a power agaynſte the Ualdois. Then had he ayde ſente hym oute of Auingnon and the places there aboutes of the Biſſhop of Roomes dominion. Wherfore the fyrſt impreſſion was made, not vpon the Merindolanes, but on the countrye aboute the Towne of Peruſe. And at the Ides of April Miners, garded with a company of nobles, and captaynes, commeth to Cadenet: but in the meane ſeaſon, certen Centurious ſet vpon a village or two by the Riuer of Druence, and there diſtroying al with ſlaughter, ſpoilyng and fyrynge, dryue awaye a greate nomber of Cattell. The lyke alſo did others in ſondrye places at the ſame time. The Merindolāes ſeyng all burne rounde aboute them, leaue theyr houſes and flee in to The merindolans flee into the woodes. the wooddes, and with a wonderful feare reſte alnight at the vilage of Sanfaleſe. And than were the inhabiters there readye to flye alſo. For the Byſſhop of Cauallon, deputie to the Biſhops Legate, had appoynted certen captaynes to go and ſlaie them. The nexte daye, theygo a little further, and hide them ſelues in the woodes: For there was daunger on euery ſyde, and Miners had commaunded vnder payne of deathe, that no man ſhoulde ayde them with any thynge, but that they ſhoulde bee ſlayne withoute redemption, wherſoeuer they were founde. The ſame proclamation was of force alſo, in the Biſſhop of Roomes dominions therby, and it is ſayde, how the Biſſhops of that Countrie did fynde a great part of that armie. Wherfore they wente a werye and a paynefull Jorney, carying theyr children vpon theyre ſhoulders, and in theyr Armes, and in theyr ſwaddling clothes, & that did many women great with childe. And when they were commē to the place appoynted, thither was alreadye reſorted a greate nomber whiche had loſt theyr goodes, & ſaued themſelues by flyght. Not long after it was ſhewed them, howe Miners came with all his power to geue the charge vpon them. This was in the euenynge. And becauſe they muſt goe thorow rough and combrous places, they take counſel to leaue ther behinde the women, and children, and a fewe others to kepe with them, and amonges them the miniſters of the churche: the reſidew were appoynted to go to the Towne of Muſſie. And this did they vpon hope, that the enemye wolde ſhewe mercye, to the multytude A lamentable departynge. of women & children, beyng deſtitute of all ſuccour. What ſighes ther were fetched, what imbracynges, and what lamentation, euerye

man maye eaſely perceyue. Whan they had gonne al nyght long, and paſſed ouer the great hyll of Leberon, they might ſee many Uillages and Fermes ſet on ſyre. After this Minerius diuidyng hys armye into two partes Marcheth him ſelfe with thone towardes the Towne of Merindolum: And hauing knowledge by eſpiall, which waye the Meriudolans were fled, ſendeth thother parte of hys armye to hunte them oute. Before they came into the wood, one of the ſoldiours moued with pitie, runneth before, and from the toppe of an hygh Rocke, where he iudged that the Merindolanes ſatte vndernethe, he caſteth A ſoldioure, geueth them warnynge. downe two ſtones, & afterwarde calleth vnto them, though he could not ſee them, that they ſhould immediatly flee from thence. And at the ſelfe ſame time, came two of thoſe that went to Muſſie, to ſhew them that theyr enemyes approched, and ſo cauſe the miniſter, and the reſydew of them that were leaft with the women, to Runne their waies, ſhewing them a narrow way through the wood, wherby they might eſcape all daunger. Theſe were not ſo ſoone gone, but the Soldiours came ſtreight waies in a great Rage, & drawing oute theyr ſwordes, with a greate outcrye, bad kyll theſe Heretickes. Neuertheleſſe they ſeyng no men amonges them, abſteyned from ſlaughter at that time. But whan they had done greate outrage, and ſpoyled them of theyre money and vittayle, they leade them awaye. Theyr pourpos was to haue handled them more ſhamefully, but beyng letted by a Captayne A Captayne defendeth the women. of horſemen, which comming in the meane tyme, threatened thē with puniſſhment, and cōmaunded them to goe ſtreight waye to Miners, they forſake that filthye enterpriſe, and leauinge the women, dryue a waye theyr botye & cattell. The women were in nomber aboute fiue hondreth. In the meane ſeaſon Miners came to Merindolum, & fyndyng it without dwellers, ſpoyleth and ſetteth it on fyre, ſhewyng before A cruell fact of Miners. that one very cruell example. For fyndyng there one yonge man, he commaunded that he ſhoulde bee tyed to an Oliue tree and ſhot in with dagges. After he goeth to the towne of Cabrier, and battereth Cabrier yelded. it with hys ordenaunce, and vſynge the ſeruice of Capitayne Polyne, that brought in the Turkes nauie, he perſwadeth the Townes men, to open theyr gates, promiſyng that they ſhoulde haue no harme. But a whyle after whan the ſoldiours were lette in, they were all ſlayne, without reſpect had, eyther of age or of womankynde. Many fled into the Churche, and ſome to other places, dyuers in to the wyne ſellar of the Caſtell. But beyng brought foorthe into a meddowe and ſtripped naked, they were ſlayne eche one, not men onlye but alſo women greate with chylde. Miners alſo ſhutteth a fourtye women in a barne A terryble example of crueltye. full of ſtraw and hey, after ſetteth it a fyre and burneth it: And where the ſely women put of theyr clothes therewith to haue quenched the fyre, and when they coulde not, ranne to the great windowe, whereat

the hey is wont to be caſt into the Barne to haue lopen out: but there being kept backe with pickes and Iauelyns they were burnt all together: this was the .xx. daye of Aprill. This done, Miners ſent parte of his armie to winne the towne of Coſte: whā they were marching on theyr way, they were found oute, who I tolde you a lyttell before, were fled into the wyne ſellar of the Caſtell. Whervpon was Reyſed an outcry, and as though there had ben, treaſon the ſoldiours are called backe, and diſtroy them all. The nombre of them that were ſlaine within the Towne and withoute, were aboute eyght hondreth. The infantes that eſcaped theyr furye, were baptiſed agayne of theyr enemies. Whan all thynges were diſpatched at Cabrier, there was ſente a power to Coſta: The lord of that Towne had denyſed with the Citezens before, that they ſhould carie all theyr armure into the Caſtell, and caſte downe theyr walles in foure ſondry places: Yf they wolde doe this, he promiſeth them to obteine of Miners and that eaſelye, that there ſhalbe no diſpleaſure wroughte there. They beeinge perſwaded, folow his aduiſe, after he departeth, as it were to intreat for them, & going not farre, he meteth with the ſoldiours: They marche one notwithſtanding, and the firſte daie they were yet repulſed: The next day they aſſault it with a great violence, and hauyng burned all the ſuburbes aboute it, take it eaſely for that the night before many eſcaped ouer the walles by cordes. After the ſlaughter committed, they ranne into an orchard by the Caſtell, & there the women and maides that were fled thither for feare, they rauiſſh euery one, and when they had kept them ther incloſed a daye and a nyght, they handled them ſo beaſtely, that thoſe that had greate belyes, and the yonger maydens, dyed ſhortely after. In the meane ſeaſon the Merindolanes, & diuerſe others, that wandered in the woddes and mountaynes, being intercepted, were eyther ſente to the Galeis, or ſlayne, many alſo dyed for honger: Moreouer, not farre from the Towne of Muſſie before named, certen went and hid themſelues in a caue vnder a rocke, to the nomber of. xxv, but being bewraied, they were ſmothered with ſmoke and burnt all: ſo that no kinde of crueltie was omitted. Neuertheleſſe diuerſe, which had eſcaped this bouchery, came vnto Geneua, and other places nere. Therfore whan report herof was bruted in Germany, it offended the myndes of many: And in dede the Swyſes, which The Swiſſes intreate for the Ualdois. were not of the popiſſhe relygion, intreated the kynge, that he wolde ſhew mercye to ſuch as wer fled: but the Kyng ſayeth, how ther was iuſt cauſe for hym to doe as he did, neither ought they to be more carefull what he doeth within his dominions, or how he puniſheth offendours, than he is aboute theyr affayres. In the yeare before theſe men A ſharpe aunſwer of the kynge. had ſent to the kyng a confeſſion of theyr doctryne compryſed in writing. Wherof yt articles were of god the father, creatour of al thinges,

of the ſonne mediatour and aduocate of mankynd, of the Holy ſpirite, the comforter & inſtructour of all treweth, of the church, whych they The confeſſion of the Ualdois doctryne. ſaye is the fellowſhip of all gods electe, wherof Ieſus Chryſt is head: of the miniſters of the churche, whom they wolde ſhould be remoued, vnleſſe they doe theyr dewty: of the magiſtrate, whom they graunte, to be ordeyned of God, to defende the good, and to punnyſh the tranſgreſſours. And how they owe hym not loue only but alſo tribute, and cuſtome, & no man herein to be excepted, euen by the example of chriſt who payed tribute hym ſelfe: of baptiſme, which they ſaye is a viſible and an outward ſygne, that repreſēteth vnto vs the renewyng of the ſpirite, and the mortifycation of the members: of the Lordes ſupper, whych they ſaye, is a thankes geuing, and a memory all of the benefit receyued throughe Chryſte: of matrimony, which beyng holy and inſtituted of god, ough to be inhibited to no mā, of good workes, which they ſaye, we muſt obſerue and exerciſe, as holy ſcripture teacheth: of falſe doctryne, whiche, becauſe it leadeth vs a waye from trewe worſhippyng, they ſaye, it ought to be eſchewed: to be brief, the order and rule of theyr faythe, they affirme to be the olde and new Teſtamente, and doe proteſt that they beleue all thoſe thynges, that are conteyned in the crede of the Apoſtles. Finally, they deſyre the kyng to geue credyt to thys declaration: for incaſe he be otherwyſe informed, it is not trew, and that they ſay they wyll proue, yf they maye be heard. That tyme was the king occupyed with affaires of warre, and therfore the matter ſlept: but whē peace was made, it was renewed, and through the prouocatiō of many, brought to thys wonderful crueltie. I ſhewed before of the Spaniardes, whom Themperour had placed in Lorayne for the wynter ſeaſon. They, after they had wrought moche euyll in thoſe parties, by Themperours cōmaundement depart thence in the moneth of Aprill, and trauelyng by Straſburge, whē they had there paſſed ouer the Rhm, they goe through Sweuia into Auſtriche, about three thouſande footemen. At thys tyme ended hys lyfe, Lewis the Duke of Bauier, the brother of Wyllyam, hauynge no chyldren. For ſo it was accorded, that he ſhould not marie, for the kepyng together The deathe of Lewes Duke of Bauier. of thinheritaunce. The Duke of Brunſwicke and he were exceadyng great frendes: For they were the chiefe captaynes of the league that was deuiſed againſt the proteſtātes: And whan Henry of Brūſwicke was dryuen oute of hys countrey, he fled fyrſt vnto hym. After thys, the .xvi. daye of Maye came Themperour to Wormes. And the next daye after, Cardinal Farneſius: What was the cauſe of his commyng, Cardinall Farneſius his cōming to wormes. I am not able to ſaye, but it was thought for certentie, that he came to ſtyre vp warre agaynſt the Lutheranes: He did nothinge openly, and comynge from Roome, he paſſed not throughe the lande of Wirtemberge, but whan he had ſtayed a tyme at Dilling, a Towne

of the Cardinalles of Auſpurge vpon the Riuer of Danubius, he torned an other way. Kyng Fernando had written to the Duke of Wirtemberge, that for his ſake he wold let hym paſſe ſaſſye, and ſhewe all the fauour that myghte bee: he made aunſwer that he had rather, he wolde take ſome other waye, neuertheleſſe, to doe hym pleaſure, yf he were diſpoſed to paſſe that waye, he wolde not let hym. But he, as I ſayd, tooke an other waye, and came to Wormes, one daye after thē
               perour. Themperoure, ſo ſoone as peace was made with the French kyng, ſollicited other prynces alſo to further and helpe forewarde the Counſell. And for thys cauſe only ſente ambaſſadours to the kynge of Themperours Ambaſſadour to the kyng of Poole. Polle requyring hym to ſende hys deputes to the counſell of Trente: who amonges other thinges ſayed, that for aſmoche as Themperour ſuppoſed, howe the Proteſtantes, whyche had ben euen ſtubburne, wold not forſake the cōfeſſion of theyr doctryne, exibited at Auſpurge nor alſo obey the publycke decrees of the counſell, the thinge it ſelfe requyred, that kynges and princes ſhould take the matter in hande, and yf they doe not obey, to bee auenged on them, as the diſturbers of the publycke weale: and all godlye relygion. And where as he, amonges others, hath the comendation of a godly and a chriſtian kyng, Themperoure prayeth hym, to thynke vpon the Turkiſſhe warre, ſubcribe to the counſell of Trente, and yf the Proteſtantes will not beframed to amendement, to aſſiſte hym with hys ayde and counſell, as alſo other kynges haue promiſed. The king of Polle agayne made aūſwer, how he deſyred that he myghte ſee that day, whan chryſtian kynges & The kinges aunſwer to themperour Prynces, all ciuille warre and diſcorde layde a parte, ſhoulde bende theyr whole power at ones agaynſte the Turke: For then wold he be none of the laſt. And as concernyng the counſell and the Proteſtātes, he wil doe all thynges that maye profite the publycke weale and trā
               quillitie of the churche, neyther yf nede repuyre, wyll in greate daunger fayle Themperoure hys Frende and alie. The ſame tyme it was The pope moſt deſyrous of war. wrytten from Rome, how the Biſſhop, notwithſtandyng that he had called a Counſell, and ſente hys Legates thyther, was ſo deſyrous of warre agaynſt the Lutheranes, that hereunto he promiſed aide of. xii thouſande footemen, and fyue hondreth horſemen. And that priuelye, alſo he hyred Centurions and Captaynes. And whan it was ſhewed hym agayne, howe the time was farre ſpent, and no great good could be donne that yere, and how they muſt tary for ſome better occaſyon, he declared the ſame immediately to hys captaynes, and put them in hope of the next yere following. On the morrow after the feaſt of Pē
               tecoſt, A frere obſeruaunte, ſtireth Thē
                  peroure to warre. a Frere obſeruaunt, an Italian, made a ſermon before Themperour, kyng Fernando, Cardinal Farneſius, the Biſſhop of Auſpurg and Granuellan, and in hys ſermon makinge a digreſſion to the Lutherans when he had inueyhed moche and ſpoken diſpitefully againſt

thē, it is tyme no we, ſayeth he, moſt victorious Emperour, that at the laſte you doe your offyce: certenly it hathe ben delayed ouer longe: for the thyng ſhoulde haue ben don long ſince. God hath bleſſed you with many great gyftes, and ordeyned you defendour of his church. Wherfore extende youre power and diſpatche out of the waye that peſtiferous ſorte of men: For it is not lawefull for them any longer to behold the ſonne, whiche doe thus pollute and confounde althynge: Neyther ſay that you will doe it: For it ſhoulde haue ben done already, already I ſaye, and long ſyns: therfore may ther be no longer delay. For how many thouſand people do you thinke to be in daunger of euerlaſting ſaluation, through theyr madnes? All the whych God ſhall requyre at your handes, vnleſſe you fynd the remedye. It is ſayde how Granuellan was moche offended with thys Trompete, eyther for that he fayned ſo, or els for that he ſawe, howe it was a warnynge to the Proteſtantes. Not many daies after this ſermō, Farneſius departeth ſecretly by nyght, and retourneth to Rome with great expedition. In theſe dayes Luther ſetforth a boke in the vulgare toungue intitled againſt Luthers boke againſt the Pope. the Biſſhoprycke of Roome ordeyned by Sathan, in the which booke he aunſwereth fyrſt to the Byſſhoppes letters, wherby with ſo vehement wordes, he diſwadeth Themperoure from the reformatiō of relygion, lyke as you haue hearde before. After thoſe places of ſcripture, which the Biſſhop doeth vſurpe to eſtablyſhe hys ſupremacie, he confuteth moſte aboundantly, and applyeth them to make agaynſt hym. Before the booke he ſet a picture, whych by and by declareth the ſōme of the argumente. The Byſſhop ſytteth in an hyghe chayre, with hys handes ioyned and ſtretched out in ſolemne apparel, but he hathe aſſe eares: And aboute hym are many deuelles, of diuers ſhapes, wherof ſome ſet a triple crowne vpon hys head, with a tourde in the toppe of it: others let hym downe by cordes into hell vnder neth hym, hortyble to be holde, ſome bryng wood and colle: others as ryght ſeruyceable, ſtaye his feete that he may deſcend rightly and ſoftely. Not longe after came foorthe certene theames of hys, whyche he had heretofore diſputed of the three gouermentes, Eccleſiaſticall, politycke and Oeconomike. Luthers themes of thre gouernmentes. Whiche he ſayeth God hathe ordeyned agaynſte the furye of the Deuill: but he vtterlye excludeth the Byſſhop from all theſe, for that he condemneth and oppreſſeth the Goſpell, for that he bryngeth, vnder hys ſubiection all lawes, and euen the ciuile lawe: And in aſmoche as he forbiddeth matrymony to whom it pleaſeth hym. Therfore he calleth him the beaſt, which is named in Germany of the beare The wylde beaſte. and the wolfe together. There is nothynge, ſayeth he, more fierce and cruell then ſhe. Wherfore when a token is geuen, and that ſhe is once hearde of, ſtreyghte wayes all men get them to theyr weapons to the intent they maye kyll her: And yf hapely ſhe ſhould take a caue or anye

incloſure, and gouernour or Iudges of the ſoyle, wolde exempte her; or alſo defende her, ſhe ſhoulde be perſecuted notwithſtanding, and he that ſhould let or diſturbe the hunters myght be ſlayne lawefully. After the ſelfe ſame ſorte, muſt the Biſſhop be reſyſted, if he doe attempte and moue warre, lyke a wyld and a rauenyng beaſt, with what aide ſomeuer he is mayneteyned. For they that wil ſerue or helpe a theefe, ought to looke for the rewarde of the thynge which they deſerue. Thā did he alſo ſende foorth an other picture, very fonde in dede, but yet as it were a propheſye of the thyng to come. The Biſſhop in hys prelates apparell ſitteth vpon a greate ſowe with manye dugges, whyche he Luthers picture againſt the Pope. diggeth in with his ſpurres: hauyng two fyngers of hys ryght hand nexte hys thume ſtretched ryghte vp as the maner is, he bleſſeth ſuche he chaunceth to mete with: In hys lefte hande he holdeth a new ſmokinge tourde, at the ſmell wherof the ſowe lyfteth vp her ſnowte, and with her wyde mouthe and noſe thirlles catcheth after her praye: but he in deryſion, blamyng the beaſt full bytterly, I ſhall ryde thee, ſaieth he, with my ſpurres, whether thou wylt or noe. Thou haſte troubled me longe aboute a counſell, that thowe myghteſt rayle on me at thy pleaſure, and accuſe me franckelye. Beholde nowe, thys ſame is that counſell, that thou ſo greatlye deſyreſt: by the ſowe he ſygnifyeth Germany. Theſe tryfles of hys, many mentaunted, as vnſemely for hym, and not verey modeſt: But he had hys reaſons whye he did ſo, & was thought to haue had a greater foreſyghte in thynges. And certenly in hys bookes are diuerſe and ſondry prophecyes, wherof the ende prooved ſome trewe, the reſidew as yet are in the hande of God. In the meane ſeaſon Themperoure taketh order with Granuellan and Nauius to be in hand with the proteſtantes touching the counſel and the Luther a prophet. Turkiſh warre: but after longe deciſion nothyng could be concluded. Grinian the french Ambaſſadour, for becauſe he vnderſtode not the latyn tounge, conpryſed hys matter in wrytyng, and vttered it by an The ignorāce of Grinian. interpretour, the .xx. daye of Iune: the ſomme of thys oration was to exhort them al to the counſell. This Grinian was a nere frende to the Cardinall of Tournon who is thought to haue ben the occaſyoner of thys Ambaſſade, for he had ben with Themperoure at Bruſſelles, as I ſayde before, and had treated of matters concernynge the counſell. And than was it thus agreed, that the kinge ſhould ſende an Ambaſſadour, to exhorte them to the counſell, whych Themperoure and he had already approued: for thys was thought to bee a meane to make the Proteſtantes affraid. At this tyme dyeth Fraunces Duke of Lorayne, leauing behynde hym a yonge ſonne: Charles, a chylde of two The deathe of Fraunces Duke of Lorayne. yeres olde. The Duke had a brother called Niclas Biſſhop of Mentz betwene him and the childes mother Chriſtien, Themperours Nece, arroſe a contention aboute the wardeſhyp: Al the Nobilitie fauoured

hym more, and lothed the womans gouernement, but through Thē
               perours mediation, they were bothe appointed gardins, yet ſo, as the mothers authorytie was chiefeſt. In thoſe dayes alſo departeth the Daughter of Ferdinādo, which was maried two yeres before to the ſon of Sigiſmunde king of Polle. But out of Spayne was brought The birth of Charlesſōns to kyng Philyp. glad tydinges, of the birth of Charles Themperoures Nephewe, the ſonne of kynge Philip, for the whyche cauſe the Spaniardes made greate Ioye at wormes: But a few dayes after came worde that the mother of the childe was dead. To Themperoure being at Wormes came the Marques of Piſcare, and broughte with hym certen of the chiefe inhabiters of Millan. It was thought, how Themperour was than determined to marye the Daughter of Kynge Fernando to the Duke of Orleans, and therfore had ſent for theſe men to vnderſtande the ſtate of Lumbardie, whiche he had promiſed to geue hym for her dowarye. Whyleſt Themperoure helde this aſſemblie, the Duke of Brunſewicke goeth to the Frenche kinge. That time did Fridericke Rifeberge leuie a certen power of footemen, in the Borders of Saxonie for the king of England: Henry of Brunſwicke eſpying that occaſion, promyſeth and perſwadeth the frenche kyng, that incaſe he wyll geue him monie, he ſhall eaſely fynde the meanes to ſcatter thē again. And ſo getteth of hym certen thouſandes of Crownes: but he neyther The Duke of Brunſewicke getteth monye of the Frēch kynge. letted Rifeberge, and cōuerted the monye receyued, to warre againſt the Proteſtantes, as ſhalbe declared herafter. Unto this conuentyon came no Princes as I ſayde before, but after Thēperoure was there, the Paulſgraue Electoure came alſo, and at the requeſt of the Proteſtantes, maketh interceſſion. But whan Themperour ſaw, how they wold graunt nothyng to the Turkiſſhe warre, vnleſſe they obteyned theyr requeſte concerning the counſell and the chamber, he ſendeth an Ambaſſadoure to the Turke for trewes, Gerarde Ueltuniche, a man Themperoure taketh truce with the Turke. verye well learned, and experte in toungues. Duryng thys conuention, the Senate of Mentz maketh inquirye after ſuche as by the olde cuſtome, had not receyued at Eaſter, and baniſſhed them the Towne, that were founde herein culpable. I ſhewed you before howe the clergie and Uniuerſitie of Collon had appealed to Themperoure and biſſhop, The clergie and vniuerſitie of Collō againſt their Archebiſhop that they myght hereby hynder thenterpriſes of theyr Archebiſſhop: but where he ſtil proceded, and wolde not diſplace the preachers and miniſters of the church whyche thyng they chiefly requyred, they renewe theyr ſute to Themperoure, making of hym a greuous complainte. Therfore aboute thende of this conuention, Themperoure by hys letters publiſhed at Wormes, receyueth them into hys tuitiō, and chargeth al men vnder the paine of outlawyng, that no man diſturbe Temperourciteth the archebiſhop. thē in their religiō, right or poſſeſſion. Againe in other letters he citeth the archebiſſhop, that within .xxx. dayes he come hym ſelfe or ſend his

proctour to aunſwer to the accuſations. And in the meane time commaundeth, that he intermeddle not, nor alter any thynge, & yf he haue chaunged ought, to reſtore it to hys olde place. The ſame commaundemente alſo geueth he to the Towneſemen of Andernake, Bonna, Lyntz and Campene: for in theſe places chyefly had the Archebiſſhop appoynted Preachers to inſtructe the people. Agayne the .xviij. daye of Iulye, Paule the .iii. citeth hym after the ſame maner, that The Pope citeth the archebiſhop of Colon. within two monethes he appere before hym at Roome: he cyteth alſo Henrye Stolberge Dean of the Cathedrall Churche in Collon, and hys Colleges, whyche were all of noble houſes, Iames Ringraue, Fryderycke Weden, Chryſtopher Oldenburge, Rychard Rauier and Phylyp Oberſten: For theſe bothe loued the Archebiſhop, and allowed not the ſuite of the reſt. The Byſſhop of Roome had dyuerſe yeres paſte miſlyked muche the Archebiſſhop, whyche was chiefly longe of Uergeryus Byſſhop of Inſtinople, who beyng Ambaſſadour in Germany and comming on a time to Collon, whan he heard that he was aboute the reformation of hys churche, he rebuked hym ſore bothe by wordes and letters, and accuſed hym whan he came at home. After longe diſceptation concernyng peace, the Chamber, and the Turkiſh warre, Themperoure, the fourthe daye of Auguſt maketh an ende of pleadynge. And becauſe manye thynges coulde not be here determyned, vnleſſe the Prynces had been preſente themſelues, he prorogeth the whole treaty vntill the moneth of Ianuarye next followyng, and than commaundeth all the Prynces to come to Regenſpurge, vnleſſe they be letted by ſyckenes: and ſayeth he wyll be there hym ſelfe: And forſomuche as he deſyreth, that the controuerſye in relygion myghte once bee accorded, he appoynteth an other conference of learned men, and foure collocutours on eyther ſide, and two auditours, commaundynge them to bee at Regenſpurge at the kalendes of December and to begynne the matter before the aſſemblye of Prynces ſhall repayre thyther. Then he recyteth the decrees of peace of the fourmer yeres, and confirmeth them, commaunding that no man attempt any thing The decre of Auſpurg. to the contrarye: After he taketh order howe the money graunted in the yeare before to the Turkyſſhe warre, ſhoulde be leuyed and reſerued, the reformation of the Chamber he differreth tyll the nexte conuention. That parte concernynge the conference of Learned men the Catholyckes refuſe, neyther wold they aſſent to Themperoure herein: the reſte they doe not refuſe. But the Proteſtantes doe repete the fourmer treatye, and ſaye that the faulte is not in them, that they had not treated of Relygyon, and that they had ſayed beefore touchynge the refuſall of the Counſell, and the Chamber they inferre agayue, and vrge the decree of Spyer made the laſte yere, and where

as this decree of Themperoures diſſenteth from that, they proteſte that they doe not admit the ſame. How the ambaſſadours of the proteſtantes followed themperoures campe the yeare paſt, & how themperour differred it tyll an other tyme, I ſhewed you before. Wherſore in this aſſemblie the matter was throughly determyned vpon condicions before mentioned. And whē the duchie of Brunſwicke was by ſequeſtration permitted to themperour, he by & by cōmaundeth Henry ye duke to trye the matter by the law, & abſtaine frō force of armes: but he wyll not aſſente thereunto, & hereof maketh proteſtation: And what tyme themperoure againe chargeth hym extremelye vnder the The frowardenes of the Duke of Brunſwick. paine of outlawing, that he ſhold obey thorder taken, he not only diſobeyed it, but alſo wrote agayne bitterly, & raileth vppon his counſellours, eſpecyally Granuellan, and Nauius, and not content herewith ſecretly began to gather men, that he myght recouer that he had loſt, as a lyttell after you ſhall heare. Themperoure goeth downe the Ryuer of Rhine from Wormes to Collon: And from thence retourneth to Bruſſelles. The Byſſhop of Collon beynge cyted to appere before Themperoure, where ſoeuer he were, or to ſende hys Proctour within .xxx. dayes, Albeit that for the olde cuſtome of Germany, and by the priuelege of the Princes Electours, he was not bounden to ſeke thē
               peroure withoute the limites of thempire, yet ſent he thither his proctour, which ſhould defende hym. That time was the warre hote betwirte Fraunce and England: And was mayneteyned aſwell by ſea as by lande. And the Frenche king with moche a doe builded a forte, The warr
                     •
                   of Fraunce & England. nere vnto Bologne, vpon the Sea coaſt, intending to cut of theyr vitayle: And was driueu to fynde an Armye there, tyll the woorke was finiſſhed, which neuertheleſſe was at the fyrſt diſcōſited with a great deale leſſe power of the Engliſſh men through the cōduite of the Erle of Herforde, and loſt theyr tentes & caryage. And it greued the proteſtātes to ſee theſe two kynges at ſuch mortal warre together, which ſo many yeres before had been at peace. Wherefore knowynge that it The Proteſtantes ſend Ambaſſadours into Fraūce and Englande. ſhoulde not be diſpleaſaunte to neyther partye: They ſende Ambaſſadours, into Fraūce, Chriſtopher Ueninger, Iohn Bruno of Nidepōt, & Iohn Sturmius: Into Englād, Lewis Bambache, & Iohn Sleidan. Who coming to Amiens the tenth day of Septēber, heare there of the death of ye Duke of Orleans which was departed ye day before. He ſhould haue ben eyther ſon inlaw or allied to thēperour, as before is declared, & as it wer a moſt ſure bonde of perpetuall frendſhip. But The deathe of the duke of Orleaūce. what tyme the maryage was in maner appointed to be kept, he died of a ſhort ſickenes being a yong man of .xxiii. yeres of age. At the ſelfe ſame tyme Duke Henrye of Brunſwicke beinge furniſſhed with the The armye of the Duke of brūſwick. French golde, as before is ſayde, hyreth bandes of ſoldiours as ſecretly as he can. Which after they were aſſēbled beſides Uerded, aboute

a thouſande and fyue hundreth horſemen, and eyght thouſande footemen. He goeth to Rotburge, a Towne belōging to the citie of Breme that he myghte ioyne the munition of hys brother Archebiſſhop of Breme, & hys owne to gether, but that labour was loſt: For the Senate of Breme had ſente thyther before, men to defende the place. Marchynge therfore through the countrey of Luneburge, where he did moche hurte by the waye, he commeth into hys owne prouince & taketh the Caſtel Stēbrucke by compoſition, after he worketh moche miſchief in the coūtrie, ſpoylyng and fyreyng the houſes: And ſendeth worde to the Cities nexte hym as Brunſwicke, Hanobrye, Minden, Breme, & Hamburge, that they ſhoulde recompence hym for the iniutyes done, and forſake the conſpiracie of Smallcald, for ſo it was his pleaſure to cal it, or els he threateneth thē with vtter diſtruction. And other force of his aboute eyght hundreth horſemen, and thre thouſand fotmen, whau they had ſpoyled & burned the coūtrie of Countie Deckelburge, a fellow of the Proteſtātes, & done moch harme, they paſſed ouer the riuer of Uiſurge, and ioyne themſelues vnto him. Wherfore he goeth, & beſegeth Warolbuttell the chiefe caſtel of his dominion, & conſtrayneth the people in all places to geue hym theyr ſaythe by an othe. In the meanetyme, the Lantzgraue, at the commaundement of The Lantzgraue goeth againſt him his fellowes, gathereth in hys owne countrey, to the nombre of ſeuen thouſande men, & thre enſeignes of foote men, and aboute a thouſand and ſixe hundreth horſemen. With thys power, and with .xxiii. pieces of ordenaūce, he marcheth to Northeme, thither came vnto him duke Erneſt of Brunſwicke, the ſonne of Philip, ſent by the Duke of Saxon, with a thouſande horſemen, and thre thouſande footemen, & ſyxe thouſande of them that were leuyed in hys owe dominyon, and with xii. felde peces. When the Duke of Brunſwicke vnderſtode this, leavynge the ſyege of the Caſtell, whyche the garriſon within defended manfullye, he tourned an other waye, and ſcrapynge together all the monye he myghte gette, payeth the ſoldiours, whyche were readye to ſlyppe aſyde, and after marchynge forwarde, encampeth hymſelfe at Calfelde, whyche Uillage was a myle from the Lantzgraues campe. In thys troubleſome ſtate Duke Ericus of Brunſwicke and his mother a wydowe, Iohn Marques of Brandenburge, ſonne inlawe to Duke Henry, with certen others intreate for peace. But the Lantzgraue and the Saxons ſaye, howe they can doe nothynge herein but by the cōſent of theyr fellowes. Therfore doe they make ſuite to duke Moris praying hym to perſwade the Lantzgraue hys father inlaw. He followeth theyr requeſte, and whan he came into the Campe, the Duke Moris intreateth a peace. xvi. daye of October, he propoundeth the whole matter, and deſyreth that he myghte bee permytted to treate the peace. But the Lantzgraue excuſeth the matter as he dyd beefore. The nexte daye certen

bandes of Horſemen of the Duke of Brunſewyckes came nere vnto Northeme, and ſkermyſhed with the Lantzgraues Horſemen, but beynge repulſed with ſhotte, they retourne into theyre Campe. The ſame daye at nyghte. Duke Mauryce ſollyciteth agayne, the Lantzgraue. And for becauſe he hathe promyſed Duke Henrye and hys frendes to take paynes in the thynge, he deſyreth to haue ſome condycyons propounded, whych yf Duke Henry ſhall refuſe, he maye honeſtly leaue the matter. The Lantzgraue than propoundeth ſuche condicyons, as there was no doubte but they wolde be refuſed. Duke Morys ſendeth Chryſtopher Ebleb and Comerſtrate, a Ciuilyan to make hym the offer. In the meane while came worde, how the Duke of Brunſwycke was commyng with all hys power, to gette the hille that was nere vnto the Lantzgraues Campe. But the Lantzgraue came fyrſte thyther, and leauynge three bandes of Horſemen and certen enſeygnes of Footemen to defende the Campe, he remoueth hys whole Armye vnto the ſame Hylle: Not longe after they beganne to ſkyrmiſhe on bothe partyes. Whyleſt theſe thynges were a working, the Ambaſſadours of Duke Mauryce retourne, they ſhew hym how A ſkirmiſhe betwirte the Duke & the Lantzgraue Duke Henrye aunſwered franckly, and committeth hym ſelfe wholy to Duke Moris, and wil no more impugne relygion from henſeforth, the matter beynge debates to and froe, whan Duke Moris was verey erneſt, the Lantzgraue ſheweth hym howe thys is the onlye way to haue peace, that he put in ſufficyente warrantyſe for Relygion, that he yelde hymſelfe into the cuſtodye of Duke Morys, and delyuer hys whole prouince vnto hym, and looke what Duke Morys ſhal iudge hym to paye for the charges of that warre, for the harmes donne, and of the controuerſye betwixte hym and the Cytie of Goſlarye, the ſame to be ratifyed, theſe condycyons dooeth the Lātzgraue permitte that Duke Morys, as interceſſoure ſhall propounde, whiche yf he wyll receyue, after conference had herin with the Duke of Saxon and the Cyties that bee nere, he ſayeth ſhalbe concluded. With thys commiſſyon Duke Morys ſendeth agayne hys Ambaſſadours: who, whattyme they retourned, bryng word that there is good hope, but in this hurly burly and conflictr together, ther can nothing be ryghtly dōne, and therfore had nede of a trewes durynge the treatye. Than was it almoſte nyghte, and by the Lantzgraues permiſſion, trewes was taken from that tyme tyll the nexte daye at nyghte. In the meane ſeaſon goeth Duke Morys, and talketh with the Duke of Brunſwicke, that he myght perſwade hym: But he cleane refuſeth all thoſe condicyons, and propoundeth others farre vnlyke them, and in communication The vanitie of the Duke of Brunſwick. with ſome of Duke Mauryee counſellours, within theſe three houres, ſayeth hee, it ſhall appere, whether the Lantzgraue, or I bee Lorde of the Worlde, as Haunyball ſayde to Scipio. He alſo

brake the truſe made, geuyng the charge vpon the Lantzgraues forragers. Wherfore, the Lantzgraue hearyng, what condicyons Duke Henrye had propounded, he breaketh of all the treatye, and thanked Duke Moris for his paines, the .xx. day of October the Duke of Brū
               ſwicke by hys counſellours, proueth, againe Duke Moris, and requireth that they maye mete agayne in a conuenyent place betwixt both campes: but the Lantzgraue wolde not. Than Duke Moris proclameth warre alſo agaynſt the Duke of Brunſewycke, which thyng he tolde hym before, that he woulde doe, vnleſſe he agreed of the peace, ſendynge to hym hys letters from Mulluſe. After thys whan it was farre in the nyght, the Lantzgraue ſent before Conrade Hauſtē, with eyght guydons of horſemen, and aboute twelue thouſande footemen, with the ordenaunce: he hym ſelfe with the reſt of his force followeth after, accompanyed with the two Dukes, Moris, and Erneſt. Whan the day began to appeare, the forewarde came to a certen ſtrayte vppon the toppe of an hill not far from the Duke of Brunſwickes camp, after alſo the Lantzgraue with the reſydew of hys armye. Here was a ſore conflict, and by reaſon of the ſtraytnes of the place, whych could not be paſſed but one way only, the fyght was a good whyle doubtefull: But in that ſame inſtant the Lantzgraue ſhotynge of hys Ordenaunce, A conflicte betwixte the Duke & the Lātzgraue. repulſed the enemye. After takynge delyberation, whan they had found other places alſo wher they might paſſe through, the Lātzgraue auaunced ſome parte of hys armye, and ſhotte amonges his enemyes, with hys greate pieces. There the Duke of Brunſwicke ſendeth a trompet to Duke Moris, and deſyreth a comunication: but the Lantzgraue makynge no aunſwer; fyrſt bringeth through all his armye, than ſetteth them in order of battel, and diſchargeth hys peces at them. Than agayne come other two meſſagers from Duke Henrye, making the lyke requeſt: vnto whom the Lantzgraue made aunſwer that other condicion of peace was there none, but that the Duke and hys eldeſt ſonne muſte come and yelde themſelues vnto hym: If they ſo doe, well and good, yf not I wyll proue, ſayeth he, what I can doe: thys ſhew hym, and conclude briefly. Here goeth Duke Moris in hād agayne with his father inlawe, all the armye ſayeth he, is conueyhed through: Now what hope is therof peace? I wil, ſaieth the other, that Henry and his ſonne ſhall ſubmitte themſelues vnto me: If they ſhall refuſe, I wyll trye it by battell. Whan he had thys aunſwer, Duke Moris goeth agayne and ſpeaketh with Brunſwicke. But the Lātzgraue neuertheleſſe prepareth for the battell, and ſtyll ſhoutyng of his ordenaunce, approcheth nere hys enemye, and ſtayeth aboute fyue hō
               dreth paſſes from hym, and ſendeth woorde to Duke Morys by Cō
               rade Hauſtē, how he cānot be in quiet, for that he feareth, leſt through occaſyon of talke, Duke Henry ſhoulde eſcape awaye, Duke Moris

ſayeth, how he muſt nedes tary till he haue ſpoken with him, and praieth hym ſo longe to abſteyne. A little whyle after he retourneth, and ſheweth how Duke Henry with plentifull teares, be wayleth his myſerye, and wyll render hym ſelfe and hys ſonne, and deſyreth hym, that he wolde vſe no cruell wordes towardes hym. When the Duke was commen and hys ſonne Charles Uictor, the Lantzgraue ſayde vnto hym: If I were in thy power, as thou art nowe in myne, thou woldeſt Duke Hēry and hys ſon yelde themſelues. not ſuffer me to lyue longe. But I wyll vſe thee a greate deale better, then by thy deſertes: what came into thy mynde, that thou wouldeſt not obey the Emperoure, refuſyng the ſequeſtration? for certenlye by thys meane, thouhadſt wel prouyded for thee and thyne, ſpeakyng on thys wyſe, he appoynteth thē both vnto kepers. But in thys meane whyle, the Lantzgraues armye, had lyke to haue bickered with the enemye, and had not the Lantzgraue and Duke Moris with greate expedition runnen betwixte them, there had ben a wonderful ſlaughter. The Duke of Brunſwickes armye, pourpoſed to depart wholy to gether in one companye, but becauſe there was daunger, leſte by occaſyon they ſhoulde attempte ſome newe enterpryſe, the Lantzgraue followeth them, and ouertakyng them vpon a playne, compelleth thē that they ſhould teare in pieces their enſeignes, & promiſeth hym vpō theyr fydelytie, that they ſhoulde not ſerue agaynſte hym nor hys fellowes, within theſe ſixe monethes. Than taketh he a waie from thē, all theyr munition, to the nomber of. xviii, pieces with all that therunto belongeth, and marching foreward, recouereth the Caſtel of Stē
               brucke, and ſweareth the people to be trewe to hym, and commaundeth to geue God thankes for the victorye. Then he punniſheth Iohn Schamburge, & Otto Ritberg, Erles, for aydyng hys enemie, and ſo diſcharging hys army, retourneth home. In thys tyme dyeth Albert The deathe of the Cardinall of Mentz. Cardinall of Mentz, and Sebaſtian Huſeſtene ſuccedeth hym. And the Biſhopricke of Maydenburge had Iohn Alberte, hys coſen germayne, whyche was hys ſuffragan therebe fore. A reporte was afterwarde bruted by Duke Maurice, as though with diſceiptefull & captious woordes, he ſhoulde haue brought the Duke of Brunſwicke into bondage: that knowen, he ſetteth foorthe a wrytynge, and ſheweth for what cauſe, beyng requyred of the Duke of Saxō and the Lantzgraue, he coulde not denye them, and recyting the whole matter in order, declareth that he ſuſtayneth iniury: And yet neuertheleſſe intreateth that he maye be deliuered: But Luther in a booke ſet foorthe, exhorteth the Prynces, that they wolde not let goe theyr pryſoner: For thys victorye without bludſhed, was geuen them of God. And in maner aboute thys tyme, Countie William of Furſtemberge, whan he Coūte willyam deliuered. had ben priſoner at Paris, vntil now, paying .xxx. thouſand crownes for hys raunſome, was delyuered, and paſſyng through Flaunders,

whan he had declared hys myſfortune to Themperoure, retourneth home. Themperoure wylleth hym to eſpye out ſome meane, whereby thys dammage may be recompenſed: And herin promiſeth him his fauour & good will. Whan Henrye the Duke of Brunſwicke & his ſōne were takē, the Duke of Saxon & the Lantzſſaue immediatly ſignifye to themperour by letters the whole matter: & inaſmoch as he, contēninge all his proclamations, had diſquieted Germany with a newe warre, they require, that both he & his fellowes, for breaking the publycke peace, may be outlawed, after the fourme and condicions of the Sequeſtratiō before conuenaunted. After thys, the laſt of October, ye 
               The Lantzgraues letters to thē
                  peroure. Lantzgraue accuſing countie Ritberge to themperour, & making mē
               tion of the former letters, whan he had made the ſame requeſt, he ſayeth, how after the Duke of Brunſwicke was taken, he found ſondrye letters of great importaunce, & of ſecret deuyſes in hys tentes, which ſhew well enough, that he went about ſome great miſchief, eyther agaynſte him, or kinge Ferdinando: For amonges others, ther is an epiſtle, whiche a prince electour wryteth agayne to hym, how he maye not vpon ſuch condicions come into that league & cōfederacy, but that it is rather his dewty, to vtter ſuch maner of counſel: which doubtles he wolde haue done, had he not promiſed him vpon his fydelytie to haue kept it cloſe. Wherfore let hym moue hym nomore in the matter from henforth, for yf he doe, it ſhalbe no counſell: theſe and ſuche other lyke thinges hath he to ſhew. If now he ſhall thynke, that anythynge concerneth hys perſon, he maye ſende ſome truſty man of hys, & he ſhal ſhew him the letters, & let him haue a copie of the ſame. Themperour beyng that tyme at Bruges a Towne in Flaunders, the ſyxte daye of Nouember ſendeth to the Lantzgraue Nicolaus Conricius with this Themperoure to the Lātzgraue. meſſage. He heareth, in what ſorte the Duke of Brunſwicke and hys ſonne came into hys hādes: And albeit he wold haue wiſſhed, that he had accepted the condiciō of ſequeſtration, yet ſeing the matter is cō
               men to this poynt, he ſuppoſeth it not nedefull, to puniſhe hym moreouer for breakinge the publyke peace: hys truſte is alſo, that he wyll ſo moderately vſe thys victory, that no man ſhall nede to feare hys vyolence: he admonyſſheth hym moreouer, that accordyng to the auncyente cuſtome of Prynces, he doe intreate hys priſoners quyetlye and honeſtyle, neyther that he enforce them to any vnreaſonable condicyon or vnworthye for them, but permytte, that the matter maye bee frendelye and indifferentlye hearde. Wherin verelye he, for hys offyce and place wyll omytte nothynge: And becauſe neyther he nor hys confortes neede nowe to feare anye further daunger hee requyreth hym to dyſcharge hys Armye and obſerue peace: And yf he haue oughte to ſaye to any man, for the Socyetye of warre or ayde minyſtred, he wolde trye it by the Lawe, and he wyll doe herein that ſhall

be reaſonable. When Conricfus had thus declared the .xviii. daye of Nouember, the Lantzgraue the ſame day aūſwered him at Caſſels. For aſmuch as the Duke of Brunſwicke and hys fellowes haue moe wayes than one broken the imperial decrees, he truſteth that Themperoure wyll playnly declare in how euill parte he taketh thys theyr doyng: one of the chiefeſt of hys adherentes, is Otto Erle of Ritberge his client, whō he hath punyſſhed therfore: therbe alſo diuerſe others, of whom he myght iuſtely be auenged: but to thentent Themperour and all men ſhoulde clearly ſee, howe littell he and hys fellowes loue trouble, he hathe done nothyng to them, and hath diſcharged hys ſoldiours. And ſeeyng it is thus, and that he tooke in hand a nedeful defencion, he deſyreth erneſtyle, that Themperoure wolde banniſhe the Duke & hys fellowes: for though he be taken, yet are hys adherentes to bee punyſhed notwithſtandyng whych alſo wyll ſhew themſelues ſtyll lyke enemyes: Hys priſoners are intreated metely lyberally: touchyng the reſt he will conferre with the Duke of Saxon and hys fellowes. The Ambaſſadours whyche I tolde you before, were ſente by the Proteſtantes into Fraunce and Englande, doe as they had in cō
               miſſion, but at the ſame tyme alſo Thēperoure ſought to make a peace A treatie of peate beetwirt fraūce & England. & appoynted a daye at Bruges, for the Ambaſſadours of both kinges to mete. And the Frenche kynge ſente Mounſer Annebalde the Amirall, and the kyng of England, Stephen, Biſſhop of Wincheſter: But they could not accorde. In the meane ſeaſon the Ambaſſadours of the Proteſtantes wrought ſo moch, that bothe the kynges were content to haue a further treaty. Therfore they ſend ambaſſadours, the Frēch kyng to Arde, the kyng of Englād to Cales and Guyſnes. They mete in the mydde waye betwixt Arde and Guyſnes the .xxvi. daye of Nouember, in tentes pitched in the playne felde: And whan the Ambaſſadors of the Proteſtants had propounded certen cōdicions of peace, the matter was longe, and moche debated betwyxt them. The Frēch mē wolde haue Bologne reſtored, & eſpecially vrged that the Scotes myght be compriſed in the peace. But both theſe did the Engliſhmen vtterlye refuſe. Than was the matter reported by letters and meſſagers to eyther kynge, but after moche intreaty ther was nothyng fyniſſhed. Wherfore the ſyxte day of Ianuary the Amboſſadours of the 1546. kynges and Proteſtantes depart, and retourne home. The next daye after the Frenchemen vitayled theyr forte, that the kyng had builded nere vnto Bologne. When the Engliſſhemen would haue letted that they fought together and many were ſlayne on bothe parties, and after The king of Englande warneth the Proteſtants of the daunger. was the fort vitailed. What tyme theſe āmbaſſadours of the Proteſtantes were in Englande, the kynge by waye of communication tolde them, howe they were lyke to haue a fore and a mortall warre: therof was he moſte certen: He warned thē alſo, to wryte of the ſame

to theyr confederates. And after one of hys counſellours whych was than in hygh fauour, declared as moche to one of the Ambaſſadours, naming alſo certē practicioners & meſſagers, by whoſe meanes chiefly the thing was wrought. Moreouer the king ſemed to take in maruelous euill parte, that Themperour had the yere before made peace with the French king, and was ſo moch the more offēded, for that as he ſayd he made warre with the Frenche king throughe his procurement, by reaſon of the Turkiſſhe league. In the moneth of Ianuarye the Proteſtantes conuented at Frankeforthe, there they conſulted of the counſell of Trente, of augementyng theyr league, for the charges of the warre of Brunſwicke, howe they will not forfake the Archebiſſhop of Collon, howe to ſolicite Themperour, in the aſſemblie of thē
               pire, that he wyll graunte peace for relygion, and refourme the iudgment of the chāber. In thys cōuention the Ambaſſadours of the archbiſſhop of Collon complayne of the iniuryes of the Clergye, and of the commaundementes and citations bothe of Themperour and alſo of the Biſſhop of Roome. In the meane ſeaſon the Paulſegraue prynce electour, ordeyned euery where miniſters of the church and preachers The Palſegraue ordeineth miniſters in hys Churches. of the Goſpell, he permitteth alſo the whole ſupper of the Lorde, and the Mariage of priſtes: And the tenth daye of Ianuary in ſtead of the Popiſſſhe Maſſe, was ſeruice ſayde in the head church of Nedelberg, in the Duche tongue. Wherfore the Proteſtantes, ſending an Ambaſſade, reioyſe therat, and geuinge him thankes, that he aunſwered the Archebiſſhop of Collon his Ambaſſadours ſo frankelye: they exhorte hym alſo to procede, & to profeſſe the doctryne confeſſed at Anſpurge, and to doe hys endeuour that in the nexte aſſemblye at Regenſpurge, the peace and lawe maye be eſtablyſſhed. Wherunto he aunſwereth, that he hath bē euer deſyrous of peace, and wilbe, ſo long as he liueth: for the Archebiſſhop of Collō he is right ſory, that he is thus moleſted, eſpecyally in hys olde dayes. Therfore what tyme they ſhal ſend their Ambaſſadours to Themperoure, and to the Clergie and Senate of Collon to intreate for hym, he wyll alſo ſende hys with them: he had truſted theſe many yeres to haue had ſome agrement in religion: but in as moch as he ſeeth how the matter is daungerouſly differred, neither is theire any greate hope, he coulde no longer delaye the wiſſhe & expectation of hys ſubiectes. Therfore hathe he begonne a reformatyon of relygion, whych he pourpoſeth to anaunce furthermore, and to profeſſe it openly. At the ſeuententh daye of Ianuarye, at Weſell mete the Ambaſſadours of the Prynces electours, which are named of the Rhine, thoſe be Mentz, Collon, Treuers, & the Paulſegraue or Coū
               te Palatyne: for the dominions of all theſe ſtretche vnto the Rhine. The Paulſegraue vrged the Archebiſhopes of Mentz and Treuers, that they wolde ſende theyr Ambaſſadoures with hys and with the

Marques of Brandenburges, to intreate for the Archebiſſhop of Collon: but they fearynge to get diſpleaſure, refuſed it. At thys tyme a rumour A brute of war againſt the Proteſtantes. was noyſed abrode, that Themperour ſhoulde ſecretly mynde warre. Wherfore the Lantzgraue wrytyng hys letters to Granuellā the .xxiiij. of Ianuarie, ſayeth howe it is reported not onlie in Germany, but alſo ſygnyfyed oute of Italye, and otherplaces, that Themperoure, and the Biſſhop of Roome make preparation to warre vpon the Lutheranes, and wyll maynteyne the counſell, and beegynne the warres in the ſprynge of the yere, and howe they intende to ſet vpon the Archebyſſhop of Collon with the force of the lowe contrie of Germany, vpon the Saxons, out of Boheme, & to inuade high Almaigne with the power of Italie: How Themperour wil alſo haue ten thouſande foote men and certen trouppes of horſemen, to garde hym, and conduicte him to Regenſpurge. This brute is not only ſpread abrode commonlye, but is alſo reported of head Captaynes and Centurions, wherof ſome make theyr boaſt that they haue receyued money of thē
               peroure already: And ſeyng Themperoure hathe peace with Fraūce, and hath alſo taken trewes with the Turke, as ſome do affyrme, many men doe maruell to what vſe and pourpoſe, he ſhoulde wage men to warre: Neyther he nor hys conſortes, whyleſt they conſyder the peace makyng of Norinberge, confyrmed after at Regenſpurge Spier, and other places, can be eaſelye perſwaded, to beleue it ſhoulde bee trew, eſpecially ſynce they haue done ryght good ſeruice bothe to thē
               perour and to kynge Ferdinando agaynſt the Turke, and other enemyes alſo: Howbeit he thought good to declare theſe thynges frendly vnto hym, whych are ſygnyfyed to hym and hys fellowes, by many letters and meſſagers: For it maye be, that the like thinges are reported to Themperoure by malycious perſons, of hym and hys confederatours, whyche maye rayſe a ſuſpicion, cauſe trouble, and put them bothe to charges: he doubteth not, but that he wyll make hym an aū
               wer. And in aſmuche as he hathe ben euer hitherto a counſelloure of peace, he deſyreth him, that from henceforthe alſo he wolde perſwade Themperoure to the ſame. Granuellan wrote an aunſwer to thys the Granuellan his aunſwer to the Lantzgraue. ſeuenth day of February: How Themperoure hathe neyther made any compacte with the Biſſhop, leuyed ſoldiours nor geuen money to any Capitayne. Albeit that yf he ſhoulde haue ſome force aboute hym, no man ought to maruel there at, in thys daungerous tyme, & doubtfull ſtate of thynges, whan the kynges and Prynces nere aboute him doe mouſtre theyr men: for who ſhoulde reprehende this in hym, yf he fore ſee that hys countries ſuſteyne non iniurye: but he ſayeth, the report is vntrew, as is alſo the reſt of the ten thouſand men, that ſhould garde hym to Regenſpurge: For Themperoure is now ready to take hys iorney, and that with a ſmall treyne. And after he hathe declared

howe deſyrous euer Themperoure hathe ben of the peace and tranquilitie of Germanye, and to be yet of the ſame mynde ſtyll, he ſheweth alſo howe frendely and gentlye he hathe vſed the Archebiſſhop of Collon, & fynally wiſſheth to the vniuerſal common welth, but namely of Germany, all thinges ſafe and fortunate. Aboute the end of Ianuary, the Lantzgraue, & Fridericke the Paulſgraue, prince electour, mete at Frankeforte. They of Auſpurge receyuing intelligence oute of diuerſe places, of the warlicke preparation of themperour & biſſhop of Roome, had ſent Sebaſtian Scherteline a man of warre, to them Sebaſtian Scherteline. addicted, vnto the Paulſegraue & Lantzgraue, who ſhoulde inſtruct them priuely of al ſuch matters. After therfore he had ſpoken with eyther of thē ſeuerally, he brought to paſſe, that they bothe came thither to conſulte, and the Paulſegraue was alſo accompanyed with Otto Henry hys coſyn germane. A fewe dayes after came thyther alſo the Proteſtantes Ambaſſadours out of Fraunce and Englande, & report their ambaſſade to ye Lātzgraue & his fellowes. The next day, which was the fourth day of February, the Lantzgraue departeth thence, & goeth to the Archebiſſhop of Mentz, newly created, whiche was but one Germane mile of, and amonges other thynges, intreateth him, yt in the nexte aſſemblie of Regenſpurge he wold geue his aduiſe & coū
               ſell for the tranquillitie of Germany. And ſhortly after was diſſolued the conuention of Franckefort, and by a decree made the Proteſtātes ſendyng theyr ambaſſadours to Themperour & clergie of Collon, intreate for ye archebiſſhop. Duke Moris of Saxonie was not in league with the Proteſtantes, yet had he an ambaſſadour there, Chriſtopher Carlebice, a gentelmā verey well learned, who immediately after the conuention ended, went to Themperoure: the ſame time was Themperoure in Gelderlande, who before had ben aduertyſed, that the proteſtantes, had conſpyred agaynſt hym at Franckeforte: neyther wanted The Proteſtantes accuſed of conſpiracie. the matter ſetters foreward, which, as the cōmon ſaying is, powred oyle vpon the fyre, and wolde ſaye, how theſe aſſemblies of ſtates and Prynces, were kept to hys contempte. Nauius was ſent by thē
               peroure to the Archebiſſhop of Collon: And came from thence to the Archebiſſhop of Mentz, and to the Paulſgraue, and by the waye fortuned to talke with Renarde Counte of Solmen, a man of warre and of ſtoute courage, touching the preſent ſtate of thynges, and how Themperoure is aduertiſed. And where the Erle tolde hym agayne what thinges were bruted of Themperoure throughout Germanye, he vtterly denyed it, and ſayde it neuer came in themperours mynde: for ſo much he loueth peace, that al his owne affaires ſet apart, he will now to the counſel of thempire: neyther doubteth he, but if the Lātzgraue woulde come vnto hym, he ſhould be frendly vſed, and hys aduyſe is that he do ſo in any wyſe: for ſo maye he, bothe pourge hymſelfe

and hys fellowes, & becauſe happely he wyll not goe to Regenſpurg, know Themperours mynde, preſently, and conferre with hym, of the comon welth: by this meanes alſo maye all ſuſpicion and diſtruſt bee taken awaye, which is reyſed by miſreportes on eyther ſide: And if he deſyre to come to Thēperours ſpeache, he ſhal dee well to come with a ſmall company that he maye declare therby, what fayth and conſydence he hathe in Themperoure. When the Lantzgraue was aduertyſed hereof by Counte Solmenſe, the .xx. daye of Februarye he writeth to Nauius and to auoyd ſuſpicion, he ſheweth him partely, what was donne at Franckefurte, after he declareth, how a report went of Themperoure, that he ſhould prepare to haue warre: And amonges other Captaynes, had appointed Marques Albert, to leuie a thouſād The Lantzgraues letters to Nauius. horſementhowebeit the Erle of Solmen, vpon hys report, affirmeth it to be vntrewe. And becauſe Granuellan alſo wryteth the ſame, he will rather credite them, than ſuch flyeng tales, as are talked a brode: For he and hys fellowes hope well, that Themperour wil not ſhrink from the conuenauntes and decree of Spier eſpecially, ſeyng there is no cauſe geuen, whie he ſhould ſo doe: And to come ſpeake with Thē
               peroure, he will not refuſe, but fyrſt he muſt conferre with hys leagefrendes, of whom ſom he wold haue preſent at the talke, and not many. I ſhewed you before howe Themperoure had appoynted a talke The coll
                     〈…〉
                   quie of the learned mē at Regēſpurg. of learned men at Regenſpurge, and had commaunded them to bee there all at the begynnyng of December. After he proroged this daye to the Ides of December. Thither came (ſent by Themperoure) Peter Maluenda, a Spaniarde, Eberard Billicke a white Frere, Iohn Hoimeſter an Auſten frere, Iohn Cochleus, Diuines, & as many hearers. From the Proteſtantes came Bucer, Brentius, George Maior, and Erard, Schuepſius diuines, and with them alſo other ſoure auditours. At the kalendes of Ianuary, came the preſidentes of the diſputation, Moris Biſſhop of Eiſtet, & Fridericke Counte of Furſtemberge. And at the length beganne the conference, the .xvii. daye of Ianuary: And the preſidentes ſpeaking of theyr charge, & thynges cōcerning themſelues, require the diuines, that in ſo graue & holy a buſines they wolde not followe their affections, but treate ſyncerely, hauynge the feare of god before theyr eyes, and a reſpecte to concord. And herin promiſe theyr paines fidelitie & vprightnes. After they recite howe Thēperours cōmaundement is, that the doctryne of the Proteſtātes exibited in tymes paſt at Auſpurge, ſhoulde in this communication be treated of, omittynge thoſe thre firſt articles, of the Trmitie, of the incarnation of the word, and of originall ſinne. For the two firſt are out of controuerſie; and thys laſte hathe ben ſufficientlye debated alreadye: But that all the reſidewe bee treated vpon in order, of iuſtyfycation,

of forgeuenes of ſinnes, of fulfylling of the law, of faythe, of good woorkes, of deſerte, of the Sacramentes, of purgatory, of praying for the dead, of the veneration, and inuocation of ſainctes, of reliques, of Images, of monaſticall vowes, of the mariage of prieſtes, of choiſe of meates, of holy dayes, of theccleſiaſticall traditions of the churche, of the power of the keyes, of the ſacred order, of the authorytie of the biſſhop of Roome, of biſſhops, of generall counſelles. Theſe thynges once declared, the Proteſtantes conſideryng with what aduerſaryes they were matched, requeſt that all theyr talke and treaty myght be written oute by notaryes, to thentent Themperour and princes may vnderſtande the whole matter, and the argumentes, and probations of eyther partie. Contrarywyſe the preſidentes ſaye how that ſhould be to longe a woorke, and that it ſhoulde ſuffice, yf the chiefeſt poyntes were noted only: Agayne they ſaye howe nothynge of that whiche is done, maye be vttered, and aſſigne the forenoone for the diſputation. After muche debatyng, it was agreed, that two on eytherſyde ſhould commit al the talke to wrytyng, and that the ſame ſhould be laied vp into a cheſte faſt locked, and ſhewed to no man, except the reſt be preſent, and yet to be kepte in ſilence. Theſe thynges doethe preſidentes agree to, ſo that Thēperoure be content, of whō they ſayed they haue no cōmaundement in this behalfe. The proteſtantes alſo accept it vpon condicion to ſignifye the ſame to theyr Princes, whom it concerneth to knowe, and haue willed them to wryte to them hereof. Whā thys order was takē, Peter Maluāda, a doctour of Paris beginneth, Maluenda treateth of iuſtification. the fyrſte daye of Februarie, and in hys preface ſpeaking muche in the commendation of Themperoure, he diſcourſeth at large the article of Iuſtifycation after the ſcoole maner. But Bucer interruptinge hym, ſayde how that was agaynſt the lawe of the conference, & order preſcribed by Themperoure: the confeſſion of theyr doctryne lyeth before hym: he maye take the chapter of iuſtifycation, and yf he haue oughte to ſaye agaynſte it, let hym confute it in order, or obiecte, and he ſhalbe aunſwered. He neuertheleſſe procedeth, and ſo concludeth, that he attributeth muche to freewyll, and ſayde that a man is not iuſtifyed by faythe onlye, but alſo by hope and charytie. The nexte daye Bucer declareth, howe the article of iuſtifycation was accorded in the talke Bucers aunſwer. at Regenſpurge a yeare ſynce, and ſheweth what Themperoure and the reſydewe of Prynces and ſtates decreed touchyng the ſame, and deſyreth that the ſame bee enrouled amonges the Recordes.
            Then followyng the order preſcrybed by Themperoure, he repeteth the ſame Artycle, and deuideth it into foure partes: that a man is not iuſtyfyed before God, through hys owne woorkes or merytes, but to be freelye iuſtyfyed by Chryſte, throughe faythe, what tyme he beleueth bothe that he is receyued vnto grace, and that alſo hys ſinnes

for Chryſte are forgeuen: howe Chriſte with hys deathe hathe made ſatyſfactiō for our ſynnes: that God doeth impute fayth, for righteouſnes. Theſe thynges he doeth confyrme and declare by the teſtimonies of the ſcripture, & ſheweth in what thinges he agreeth with Maluē
               da and what not, and confuteth hys argumentes. After Maluenda, the Carmelite Billicus taketh place, and confuteth amonges other thinges ſpoken of Bucer, that alſo of iuſtification, and denyeth that euer it was accorded. The .xiii. daye of Februarye, Maluenda aunſwereth Bucer, and concludeth theſe three thinges, that workes doe diſpoſe and prepare vnto iuſtification: that charytie is the fyrme iuſtifying: that the workes of men iuſtifyed doe accompliſſhe iuſtificatition, and deſerue eternall lyfe. Whyleſt they were treatynge aboute theſe matters, the .xv. daye of Februarie came Themperours letters, cōmaundyg them to receyue Iulius Pflugies Biſſhop of Numburg, Pflugius amonges the Preſidentes amonges the preſidentes, that the nomber of Collocutours and additours be not augmented with extraordinarye men, and that there be none other ſcrybes appoynted, but ſuche as the preſydentes had choſen, that all promyſe to kepe ſylence by an other, and to vtter no parte of the conference to any man liuing, before it be reported to Themperoure, and ſtates of Thempire, that to the thynges accorded eyther parte ſhall ſubſcribe, and ſuche as remayne in controuerſie, to bee noted with fewe wordes. When the letters were thus recyted, the proteſtantes aunſwer amonges other thynges, that they can not obſerue that poynte of ſo ſtrayte kepynge of ſylence, for becauſe they are commaunded to aduertyſe theyr Prynces from tyme to tyme, of the ſtate of the dyſputation. Whereaboute was moche contention, whileſt the preſydentes ſayde, they muſt followe Themperours cōmaundement: And the Proteſtantes agayne alleaged that they myght not ſwarue from the commaundementes of theyr Prynces. Wherefore the preſydentes at the laſt, wryte vnto Themperoure what theyr requeſt was But in the meane ſeaſon the Duke of Saxon who lyked not the condicions of the diſputation, after he had hearde thereof, ſendeth for hys men home agayne, to vnderſtande the whole matter. And when they were gonne, Bucer the .xx. daie of Marche departeth alſo, to declare, The colloquie diſſolued. what was doone, to the Lantzgraue. Whiche thing the preſidentes tooke verye vnpatientely: And where they had before geuen warenynge to ſuche as were preſente, to remayne ſtyll, nowe, that diuerſe were ſlypped awaye, they exhorte and charge the reſte in any wyſe to attende Themperours aunſwer: But they ſaye, that ſeynge theyr chefeſte fellowes are gonne, it is but inuayne, for them to tarye: And yf the diſputatyon ſhall contynewe, they promyſe not to bee abſente.
            The Papyſtes afterwarde in theyr Bookes ſetfoorthe, rayle vppon them betterlye for the ſame cauſe: But thoſe Bucer aunſwereth

at the full, and what ſoeuer is to be ſayde of the iuſtifycation of man, he treateth moſte largelye. Wyth the Ambaſſadours of the Proteſtantes, ſente to Themperoure to intreate for the archebiſſhop of Collon, Ambaſſadours to thē
                  peroure, for the archebiſſhop of Collon. were ioyned the Ambaſſadours of the Paulſgraue and the Marques of Brandenburge, electours. Theffect of theyr requeſt was this, that Themperoure wolde referre hys caſe, to the reſydewe of matters of Relygion, and ſtaye the proceſſe commenced by hys Clergye: For yf any violence or wronge ſhalbe offered hym, they ſygnifye, that they can not neglecte hym. Whan the Emperoure had hearde them at Utreyght the .xxvi. daye of Februarye, the ſeconde daye of March, he gaue them an aunſwer by Nauius, declarynge what good wyl he had borne hym hytherto and howe frendely he had aduertyſed hym what he ſhoulde and oughte to doe, whyche he hathe contemptuouſly deſpyſed, truſtynge to a vayne appellation whyche can take no place: Neuertheleſſe takynge theyre Ambaſſade in good parte, for that he ſuppoſeth it to procede of a zeale of peace and reconcylement of Relygion, he is contente, the rather at theyre requeſte, to vſe in thys matter, the aduyſe and Counſell of Prynces in the next aſſemblye at Regenſpurge: Whyther he is nowe ready to goe, and deſyreth that theyr Prynces wolde come thyther themſelues in lyke caſe: for albeit he is troubled with ſyckenes, yet to thentente an ende of controuerſyes myghte once be had, he wyll refuſe no trauell and payne.
            Aboute this tyme dyed Alphouſus Daualus the Marques of Piſcare, gouernoure of Millane, and in hys place ſucceded Ferdinando Gonzaga, that before was Uiceroye of Sicilie, I ſhewed you before Gonzage go uernour of Millane. how the Counſell was differred, at Trent vntill the Ides of March. Thither ſent the Biſſhop thre Legates Iohn Marimoūtayne, Marcelle Ceruine, and Reinalde Poole, Cardinalles, thither came alſo frō Themperoure, but not at the daye appoynted, Iames Mendoza, a The Popes Legates in the counſell of Trente. Spaniarde, who after he had ſpoken moche in the commendation of Themperoure, and of hys greate good will and zeale towardes the Counſel, and the Churche of Roome, he excuſeth hys abſence and promyſeth hys endenoure and furtheraunce in hys name, and where as the Biſſhoppes be not yet commen oute of Spayne whyche Themperoure called, he ſayeth it muſte be aſcrybed to the farre and payneful iorney, thys: was during the aſſemblye of Wormes. The Cardinalles hereunto make aunſwer, albeit they neuer doubted of Themperours zeale towardes Religion, yet was thys oration of hys to them right acceptable. And in as much as the Biſſhop, the trew vycare of Chriſt, and ſucceſſoure of Peter, Prynce of the Apoſtelles, after conference had with Themperoure, hathe appoynted thys Counſell for the refourmatyon of the Publicke weale, namelye of Germanye theyr truſte is that the Emperoure wyll ſee there bee nothynge decreed

at Wormes concernynge relygion, but that al thynges be referred to the counſel: If it ſhoulde be otherwiſe, not only the auncient cuſtome of the churche, but alſo the lawe bothe of God and man ſhould be infrynged. Moreouer it ſhoulde be an euyll preſident, and wold deface the whole dignytye of the Counſell: As touchyng hym ſelfe, hys preſence and perſone is to them ryghte acceptable. Where therefore many were long or they came, nothing was done that yere, but that certen Freres made ſermons to the Biſſhoppes, in the tyme of Aduente. Preachinge Freers. A bul of perdonnes. The Byſſhop alſo ſendynge foorthe a bull of indulgences at the Ides of December, ſayeth that the miſerye of thys tyme is ſuche, by reaſon of the ouerflowyng of hereſyes, that albeit he take neuer ſo muche laboure, trauell, and payne for the common welthe, yet can he ſcarſelye ſatyſſye hym ſelfe: therfore hath he called a counſel, that the woundes of the Churche myghte bee healed, whyche are made by wicked heretyckes: And becauſe the ſaluatyon of all men conſyſteth therin, and agayne, that the fathers of the counſell beynge holpen by the prayers of others, maye to God be the more commended, he exhorteth al men in generall, that immediately they frame themſelues to repentaunce, confeſſe theyr ſynnes to the prieſt, and that thre daies in the weke they tame theyr body with faſtynge, and the ſame dayes to be preſente at the diuine ſeruice, or in caſe they be ſicke, & can not, than to geue ſome thing to the poore, and let the poorer ſorte oftymes ſaye ouer theyr Pater noſter, and after receyue the Sacrament. Unto al that obeye this, he graunteth pardon and remiſſion of theyr ſynnes, and cōmaundeth all Byſſhops, to declare theſe thynges to the people. After the ſeuenth daye of Ianuarye, whan the number of Byſſhoppes was wel increaſed, The begynnyng of the counſell. they beganne the Counſell: And whan all were commen into the Cathedrall Churche, and maſſe donne, the foreſayde Cardinalles, the Byſſhop of Roomes Legates had an oration to the fathers wrytten, wherin they declare howe the counſell is called for three cauſes chiefly, The oratiō of the popes Legates. that hereſyes maye be weded vp by the rootes, that the dyſciplyne of the Churche maye be reſtored, and that peace maye be recouered. And ſaye howe the whole blame of all thys preſente calamytie, is to be imputed to the Clergie: for what hereſies, warre or diſorder ſoeuer there is, they haue geuen the occaſyon of all theſe euylles throughe theyr auaryce, ambition, and naughtie lyuynge: therfore is it the iuſte iudgment of God, that they are nowe thus contemned, troubled and afflicted, yet not accordynge to theyr demerytes: for there is not one of them that dooeth his dutye, therefore they admoniſſhe euerye man to acknowledge hys faulte, and ſtudie to appeaſe Goddes wrathe, Thē was
                  
                     〈…〉
                  g of Eſedras and Nehemias. through the repentaunce and amendemente of lyfe, vſyng herein the example of Eſdras, Nehemias and other Capytaynes, who at theyr

retourne, admoniſſhed earneſtly the people of Iſrael, that confeſſinge theirs and their fathers offences, they ſhoulde call to God for mercye. Then come they to declare theyr owne duty, whiche are Iudges in thys caſe, howe they oughte to be free and voyde from anger, hatred, frendeſhyp, and geue nothyng to affections, but to aſcribe all honour vnto god only, who with his aungels beholdeth thys congregation, neyther can any mans thought be hidde from him; therfore muſt they worke ſyncerely, and exhorte the ambaſſadours of kynges and prynces to do the ſame. After this oration, was red the decree of the ſinod, by Iohn Fonſſeca biſſhop of Caſtremarine, a Spaniarde. In thys al chriſtians are warned, to amende theyr lyfe, feare God, many tymes A decree of the Sinode redde. confeſſe theyr ſynnes, go ofte to churche and praie to God for publicke peace: And that all Biſſhops and other priſtes be addicte to prayer, & alſo euerye ſeuenth daye at the leſte, whiche is called Sondaye, ſaye maſſe and make interceſſion for the hygh biſſhop, for Themperoure, & for the whole comō wealth, that they faſt moreouer, & geue aulmouſe to the poore: That in the head churche there be maſſe ſonge weekelye vpon the thurſedaie in the honour of the holy ghoſt, that in maſſe time almen be attentife vnto the prieſte, and refrayne talkynge: Moreouer that the biſſhoppes leade a ſober life and not fare ſumptuouſly at their tables, and that they do eſchew all light and Idle talke, and vſe their familie to do lykewyſe, that in ſpeakyng, in apparel, and al behauiour they maye ſhewe an honeſtie. And in as much as the Synnode hath thys reſpect chiefly, how the darknes of errours & hereſyes, that haue ſo many yeres ouerwhelmed the earth, being dryuen awaie, the light of the treuth maie ſhyne foorth, al ther be warned, chiefly the learned ſorte, that they conſyder diligentlye with them ſelues, by what waye thys maye beſt be brought to paſſe: And that in geuyng theyr voyces, they follow the decree of the coūſell Toletane, that they do it modeſtlye, not clamourouſelye, that they be not contentious, nor obſtinate, but pronounce all thynges temperately and quietly: there was an other ſitting the fourth daie of February. Wherin was nothyng done, The ſeconde ſeſſion of the Synode. ſauing that they confeſſed the articles of the fayth, and a daie appointed for the third metynge, the eyght of Aprill. For they hearde of moe that were cōmyng, and therfore thought good to tarye for them, that the Authoritie of theyr decrees myght be ſomuche the more. Whyleſt thys was donne at Trent, Luther was ſent for, to go to the Erles of Manſfelde, to ſet an agremente betwixt them, which wer at controuerſie Luther choſen arbiter. for a piece of lande: he had nouer accuſtomed to treate of ſuche affayres, and had onlye applyed hys ſtudye all the dayes of hys lyfe: But becauſe he was borne at Iſſebie, which is a Towne of ye Erles of Manſfelde, he coulde not but take ſo muche payne for them and for hys countrye. Before he came to Iſſebie, whych was in the later end

of Ianuarye, he felte hym ſelfe ſkant well at eaſe: Yet did he accomplyſſhe the thyng he came for, and ſometyme preached in the churche, and receyued alſo the communion. But the .xvii. daie of Februarie, he waxed ſore ſicke in hys ſtomake: he had with him three ſonnes, Iohn, Luther is ſicke. Martin, Paulle, and certen others of his frendes, emonges them alſo, Iuſtus Ionas, the miniſter of the churche at Halles: And thoughe he was weake, yet did he bothe dyne & ſuppe with the reſte. Whyleſt they ſate at ſupper, ſpeaking of ſōdry thinges, he moued alſo this queſtiō among others, whether that in the life euerlaſting, we ſhal know one an other. And what time they were all deſyrous to learne that of hym: what, ſayeth he, chaunced to Adam? He had neuer ſeene Eue, but Whether we ſhall knowe eche other in the lyfe to come. what tyme God ſhaped her, he was caſte into a maruelous depe and ſounde ſlepe: But awakyng out of the ſame, whan he ſawe her, he axeth not, what ſhe is, or whence ſhe came, but ſayeth, ſhe is fleſhe of his fleſſhe, and bone of his bones. But howe knew he that. Uerely beyng full of the holy ghoſt, & repleniſſhed with the trew knowledge of god, he ſpake thus. In lyke maner ſhall we alſo in another lyfe be renewed by Chryſt, and ſhall know more perfitly our parentes, wyues, children, & what ſo euer is beſydes: than Adam that tyme knewe Eue. After ſupper whan he went a ſide to praie (as he was accuſtomed) the payne of his ſtomake began to increaſe. There by the aduiſe of certen he dranke of an Unicornes horne in wine: After, he ſlept quietly in the trindle bed of the ſtowfe by the ſpace of an houre or two. Than awakyng, he goeth to hys chamber, and laieth hym downe againe to reſt, and biddyng hys frendes good nyghte, that were with hym, he wylled them to praye to god, that he wold graunt vs to kepe ſtill the doctryne of the goſpell: For the Biſſhop, and the counſell at Trente are a workynge ſome great miſchief: Whan he had thus ſayed, and al was huſhte, he ſlepeth a good whyle, but the force of hys diſeaſe increaſing vpon hym, at after midnight he complayneth of the ſtraytenes of hys ſtomake, and perceyuing that thende of his lyfe drewe nere, he calleth to God with theſe wordes. O god my heauenly father, and the father of oure Lord Ieſus Chryſt, God of al conſolatiō, I geue the thankes, Luthers laſt prayer. that thou haſt reuealed vnto me thy ſonne Ieſus Chryſt, whō I haue beleued, whom I haue profeſſed, whom I haue loued, whom I haue ſet foorthe, & honored, whom the Biſſhop of Roome and al that wicked rabel doe perſecute, and diſhonour: I beſeche thee my Lord Ieſus Chryſt, receyue my ſoule: my heauēly father, although I be taken out of thys lyfe, albeit I muſt now leaue thys body, yet know I aſſuredly, that I ſhall remayne with thee for euer, and that noman can take me out of thy handes. Not long after thys prayer ſayde, whan he had The quiet departure of Luther. ones or twyſe cōmended hys ſoule into the handes of God, as though he had fallen a ſlepe, by little and littel he departeth oute of this lyfe,

withoute any paine of hys body that could be perceyued. And thus he dyed in hys owne natyfe countrey, whyche he had not ſeene of manie yeres, the .xviii. daye of Februarye, to the greate lamentation of many. The Erles of Manſfelde were deſirous, that he myght haue ben buried in theyr countrey, becauſe he was borne there, but at the commaundemēt of the Prince electour, he was honorably caried to Wittemberge, and buryed the fyft daye after: of yeres he was aboute. lxiii for he was borne the yeare of oure Lorde a thouſande .iiii. hondreth Luthers birthe. foureſcore and three, the tenthe daye of Nouember, of ryght honeſt & good parentes, Iohn and Margarite: he learned hys fyrſt prynciples at home, from thence beynge ſente to Maydēburge, and then to Iſenacke, he farre excelled all hys fellowes. After he came to Erford, and gaue hym ſelfe wholie to the ſtudye of logicke, and Philoſophye: And whan he had ben there a whyle, makyng neyther parētes nor frēdes priuie to it, he profeſſed hym ſelfe into the College of Auſten Freres, & applyed all hys ſtudye to the ſcripture, forſakyng the lawe, whyche he ſtudied before. That time was an Uniuerſitie newly erected at Wittemberge: wherefore Stupicious, of whom mention is made in the fyrſte booke, hauynge the charge hereof, bryngeth Luther thyther to reade diuinitie. Than was Luther ſent to Roome by the conuente of Luther ſent to Rome. hys order, aboute a ſuite that hanged there in the lawe. Thys was in the yere of our lord .M.D.x. Whan he was retourned home, through the motion of hys frendes he commenced Doctour, at the charges of Duke Fridericke. What force and plētie of eloquence was in him, his Luthers eloquence in the Dutche tongue. workes doe ſufficiently declare, certenly the Dutch toungue he beautifyed and enryched exceadingly, and hathe the chiefe commendation therin, and hathe tranſlated out of the latin toungue, ſuch thynges as were thought vnpoſſible, and expreſſeth the matter with moſt apte & proper termes, and many tymes by one worde he ſetteth before youre eyes the whole matter. He wryteth in a certeine place of the Biſſhop, howe he hathe polluted the Lordes ſupper, and hathe alſo applied the maſſe to them that be dead: he ſayeth he hathe pearſed with hys maſſe not only in to all corners of Chriſtendome, but alſo into Purgatorye it ſelfe: but he vſeth the Dutche word, whyche repreſenteth that noiſe, as is wont to be made, whan a man doeth rattle or ſhake together a nomber of dead mens bones, or caſt aboute amonges them, he was of courage inuincible. What tyme he beganne fyrſte to preache agaynſt pardons, he knewe not what the matter mente, as he hym ſelfe confeſſeth, The inuincible conſtā
                  cie of Luther and did that thing only, and therfore wrote than verey lowly, bothe to the Biſſhop & others: but whan he had profited in the knowledge of ſcripture dayly more and more, and perceyued that his doctryne was agreable to Gods worde, he withſtode the violence of hys enemies, & the malice of the whole world with a moſt ſtoute courage,

and lyke awalle of Braſſe remayned ſtyll vnmouable, deſpyſynge all daunger. Whan Themperoure helde a counſell of the ſtates imperyall at Auſpurge, immediately after he was crowned at Bononie, by Clement the ſeuenth, a terrible tempeſt was lyke to enſwe, as in the ſeuenth booke is ſpecifyed. Than did he couinfort bothe hys Frendes priuately, & all others openly, and applying to thys pourpoſe the .xlvi. Pſalme. God (ſayeth he) is oure ſure caſtell and Bulwarke: that olde enemye of mankynde, taketh the matter in hande now with all hys force and power, he layeth to all hys munition: And indede our powers is but ſmall, neyther can we longe ſuſteyne ſo greate a violence: Howbeit that noble champion, whom God hym ſelfe hath choſen vnto hym, he hathe put on Armure, and fyghteth for vs: If you are, who that is? knowe forcertentie that he is that Ieſus Chryſt, who muſte nedes haue the victory and conqueſt: And albeit the whole compaſſe of thys worlde be full of Deuilles, yet are we not affrayde, but with a moſt aſſured confidence doe looke for a ioyefull ſucceſſe: For although Sathangnaſſhe hys teethe, and rage neuer ſo fierſely, yet ſhall he nothyng preuayle agaynſte vs: For he is iudged already, and throughe the worde only, falleth downe all hys armure. Thys worde ſhall not The victory and conqueſt of the word. the aduerſaryes take from vs but will they nyll they, ſhall leaue it behynde them: For he is in our tentes and armye, who with his ſpirite and gyftes defendeth vs: yf they take awaie lyfe, goodes, wife, & chilchildren, take it patiently: For they winne nothyng therby, and for vs is prepared a kyngdome euerlaſtynge. This Pſalme, whiche at that tyme he applyed to relyeue ſorrowe and heuynes, whan he had tranſlated it into the vulgare toungue, ſomethynge wraſtynge the ſence, he made it alſo in metre, and ſet a note to it verye conſonant to the argument, and a mete tune to ſtyre vp the minde. And ſo euer ſynce that tyme thys Pſalme hathe alſo been muche ſonge amonges all others. And that there was ſuche a decree made at Auſpurge, he aſcribeth all the blame therof, in a booke ſetfoorthe afterwarde, to Clement the ſeuenth, and hys Legate Campegious: but ſpeaketh all honoure and good of Themperoure, whoſe name and authorytie they vſed for a clooke, and reporteth hym to bee blameles,
         
         
            
            
               ✚ The ſeuententh Booke of Sleidanes Commentaryes, concerning the ſtate of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne of the Empyre of Charles the fyfte
            
               
                  ❧ The argument of the ſeuententh Booke.
               IOhn Diaze beyng ſent Ioinetly with Bucer, to the colloquie of Regenſpurge, is murthered of hys owne brother Alphonſe. The Lantzgraue commyng to Themperours ſpeche declareth vnto hym the conditions of the counſell, whyche the Proteſtantes requyre: and afterward makyng his excuſe that he cannot come to the aſſemblee, taketh hys leaue frendly of Themperour. Sentence of excommunication thondereth at Roome againſt the Archebiſſhop of Collon. Thē
                  peroute, couertly maketh preparation to warre in Germany. Thoſe of the Counſel of Trent make theyr decrees, and Peter Danes is Ambaſſadour there for the Frenche kynge. Themperoure, ſoliciteth certen cities of Germany and alſo the Swyſſes, through polycye to do them to vnderſtand. The Proteſtantes hauinge intelligente hereof, take them to theyr weapons. The Tenure of the league betwixt the Pope and Themperour, is recyted. Themperour is ſo vrged by the Pope, that he letteth alone the Turke, and falleth vpon the Proteſtantes. The Caſtell of Erenberge and Tonauert ſurpryſed. Themperoure by hys letters Patentes banniſſheth the Duke of Saxon and the Lantzgraue. The Popes armye commeth to ayde Themperoure.
            
            
               A Lyttle before was mention made of the conference Iohn Diaze a Spaniard. at Regenſpurge. Iohn Diazius a Spaniarde wente thyther with Bucer. He had ben many yeres a ſtudent at Paris, in the diuinitie of the Sarbonites: but when he had red the bookes of Luther and others and dilligentlye ſtudied the ſcriptures, that doctryne began to waxe vyle to him euery day more & more: And at the laſt to thentent he might profit ſo much the more, leauing Paris, he went to Geneua, where Caluine was miniſter of the churche. And whan he had there remained a while, went to Straſburge: and becauſe Bucer perceiued in him much learnyng, and an erneſt zeale, a few monethes after, whan he ſhould go to the diſputation at Regenſpurge, he moued the ſenate, to appoint him to be his companion and felow that iorney. Commyng therfore to Regenſpurge in the moneth of December, he goeth to this Peter Maluenda, whom he knewe at Diaze goeth to Maluenda Paris. He as one amaſed, bewayleth & lamenteth to ſee him in theſe parties, and that in the company of the Proteſtantes, whiche wil trihumphe more of one Spaniard allured vnto their opinion, than of a Fewe Spaniardes loue the Goſpell. great meany thouſandes of Germanes. And therfore begā to admoniſh him, that he wold haue a reſpect to his name & not ſo ſhamefullye ſtaine and ſpot his countrey and honeſt familie. Diazius aunſwereth hym modeſtly commendyng the Proteſtantes doctrine, and ſo departeth for that tyme.
            
               
And whā he came againe a fewe daies after, as was accorded, Maluenda planteth al his ordenaunce, that he myght, to put hym in feare: And ſpeaking many thinges of the authoritie of the biſſhop of Roome he rekeneth vp at large, how daungerous a thing his curſe is. Again, becauſe Themperoure ſhould come thyther ſhortely, he aduiſeth him, not to tary hys commyng, which perchaunce will be daungerous for him, but counſelleth hym to goe mete him by the waye, and fallinge downe at the feete of Themperours confeſſour, craue perdon for hys offence, and promiſeth to be a furtherance to hym herein. Wherunto Diazius aunſwereth ſtoutely and throughlye: And ſayeth howe the doctryne of the Proteſtantes is conſonant to the doctrine of the Apoſtels and Prophetes, and lamenteth the miſerye of Spayne his nat if countrey, which is in ſo great darkeneſſe: he rebuketh Maluenda and his fellowes which impugne the manifeſt veritie, and geue Themperoure euill counſell, and erneſtly warneth him to leaue, he refuſeth his counſell, and ſheweth hym how he wyl, through Gods helpe profeſſe thys holſome doctryne, and wyll refuſe no daunger of hys lyfe therefore. Whan Maluenda ſawe hym ſo ſtrongelye confyrmed, thy commyng hither (ſayeth he) is in vayne: For here ſhalbe nothing determined. And yf you liſte to doe any good openly, as you ſeme to boaſt, you ſhoulde haue gone to Trente. After this metinge, Diazius came nomore in hys company. But Maluenda, wryting his letters to Themperours cofeſſour repeteth the whole matter, and exhorteth him moſt erneſtly, to helpe the diſeaſe in tyme. When theſe letters were delyuered, there was a Spaniard by, Marquina, whiche came lately from Roome. Who vnderſtandyng the accuſation, beganne to excuſe Diazius, Marquins excuſeth Diaze. whom he knew verye wel. And after a few dayes he retourneth home agayne, and declarech the matter to Diazius brother, Alphonſus, a Lawyer at Roome, what he had hearde of Themperours confeſſour. In the meane ſeaſon Diazius went from Regēſpurge to Nuburge a Towne of Otto Henry the Paulſgraue, ſtandyng by the Riuer of Thonawe twelue myles aboue Regenſpurge: the cauſe of hys goynge thyther, was to ouerſee the correction of a booke that Bucer ſent thyther to be prynted. Hys brother Alphonſus kyndled with the tale of Marquina, & haply alſo with the letters of ſom others beſides, His brother Alphonſe coeth into Germany. immediately prepareth him ſelfe to take his iorney, and in greate haſt cometh firſt to Auſpurge, and from thence to Regenſpurge. And whā he vnderſtode, where Diazius was, he haſteth thyther. And to hym that marueled not a lyttell at his ſodan comming declareth the cauſe. After he vſeth in a maner the ſelfe ſame argumentes & reaſons, as did Maluenda at Regenſpurge. Whan he had aſſayed that in vayne he The traytorous mind of Alphonſe. promiſeth hym a greate yerely penſion out of hys benefyces, ſo that he wil goe with him to Roome: When that wolde take no place nother:

After certen dayes, he confeſſeth himſelfe to be vanquiſſhed, and fayneth as though he loued the doctrine of the goſpel, and exhorteth him, that leauing Germany, which hath aboundance of learned men, and nedeth not hys trauell he wolde goe with him into Italye where he maye profit many. Firſt they ſhall come to Trent, there be many men of ſingular learnynge and iudgement, which wilbe right glad of hys company: After they will goe to Roome and Naples, & ſo ſhall it come to paſſe, that when many ſhalbe ryghtly inſtructed of hym in ſondrye places in Italye, by this occaſyon the ſame doctryne maye be ſet forth alſo in Spayne: therfore he prayeth and beſecheth hym, to follow his aduiſe herein: he promiſeth to beare all hys charges, and what ſo euer is nedefull beſydes. Diazius ſtriken with great ioye and gladnes, reioyſeth bothe for hys owne cauſe, and alſo for hys brothers: And ſendyng his letters to Regenſpurge, vnto Bucer and the reſt requyreth to haue theyr counſell. They write agayne, and admoniſſhe hym, that he goe not with hym. Wherfore Alphōſus put quite beſyde that hope, deſyreth hym at the leſte wiſe to goe with hym as farre as Auſpurge. Whyleſt this gere was a brewyng, Bucer commeth to Nuburge, intendynge to goe home, as before is ſayde, and counſelleth hym not to ſturre one foote thence. And he himſelfe departeth not before Alphonſus was gon, whiche was the .xxv. daye of Marche. But the daye before that Alphonſus went thēce, he talked with his brother moſt curtoiſely, he exhorteth hym vnto conſtancie, & thynketh hym ſelfe a happye man, which hath profited ſo muche in a fewe dayes, throughe hys talke, in the trewe knowledge of God: he prayeth hym, that he wolde wryte vnto hym ofte: and promiſeth all good wyll, and cauſeth hym to take .xiiij. Duckates, whether he wolde or noe, and thus with ſheding of teares on eyther ſyde, he departeth, riding in a wagon to Auſpurge, ſixe myles from Nuburge. The next daye tarying and lettinge Alphonſe retourneth to Nuburge to kill his brother. the wagoner, by flattering woordes and rewardes, that he myght be before hym, taketh the ſame waye that he came, and bying an hatchet by the waye of a Carpenter, the .xxvii. daye of Marche in the dawenyng of the daye, he commeth agayne to Nuburge, and leauynge hys horſes without the gate, with the poſte of Auſpurge, whō he brought with hym, he goeth into the Towne, accompanyed with his man a murtherer, and commeth to hys brothers lodging. His ſeruant, leſt he ſhould be ſtreyght waies knowen, had put on the apparell of a meſſē
               ger, that poſteth with letters, and going before knocketh at the dore, and axeth for Diazius, vnto whom he hath letters: And being let in, goeth vp to hys chamber, but Alphonſus taryed benethe at the ſtayre foote, watching, that no man ſhoulde let theyr enterpriſe. Diazius awakyng, and hearyng ſaye that a meſſenger was commen from hys brother, leapeth out of his bed, and hauynge nothyng vpon hym, but

hys clooke caſte aboute hym, and hys nyghte gere, goeth foorthe into a dynyng Chamber next where he laye. By and by commeth he with the letters, and delyuereth them: it was ſkarce lyght daye. The effect of the letters was this. Howe he was verye carefull for the daunger he was in: let hym be well ware of Maluenda, & ſuche other enemies of the Goſpell. Whyleſt Diazius was readynge this, the Murtherer ſtandyng behynd his backe, letteth dryue at him with an hatchet that he had hyd vnder hys clooke, with all hys myght, & ſtrake him in on The murtherer killeth Diaze. the ryght ſyde of hys head vp to the healue, ſo that he hauing ſodainly hys braynes thus clouen a ſonder, neuer ſpake worde. The murtherer leaueth the Axe ſtickyng ſtyll in the wounde, and getting hym quickly downe the ſtayres, immediatlye with the principall his maſter haſteth out of the Towne. There leaping vpon theyr horſes, that were ready before the gate, when they were cōmen with exceadyng great ſpede to Bothmey, which is a bayting Towne in the mid waye beetwixt Nuburge and Auſpurge, takyng freſhe horſes, whiche they had leaſte there pourpoſely, they come to Auſpurge. In the ſame chamber with Diazius ded ly, one Claudius Cenarcleus, a yonge gentleman Cladius Senaclyus. of Sauoye. But the murther was ſo ſecretly done that he in the nexte chamber perceiued nothing, vntil ſuche time as he hearde the ſpurres ſtrike on the ſtayres whan the murtherer ranne haſtely downe. Thā he aryſyng, came forthe, and ſawe that miſerable and heuy ſight: the brute of his miſcheuous dede, and facte moſte horrible, was immediately ſpred abroade throughout Nuburge, and diuerſe of the princes ſeruauntes, that loued Diazius, tooke their horſes and purſued after them: whan they were cōmen to Auſpurge and coulde not fynde thē, being cleane out of hope, they determine to retourne backe agayne: But one of them, whiche was elder and ſtouter than the reſte called Michell herffer, rideth forthe, with wonderfull ſpede, and as they were at reſt in a village, for werines of their iorney, he getteth before them, & came ſonner than they to Inſprucke, & declareth the whole matter to the Maieſtrate: And whan they came alſo not longe after he cauſed them to be apprehended, and accuſeth them of murther, and writing to his Prince Otto Henry counte Palatine, aduertiſeth hym where and howe they were taken. Whervpon the Prince ſent two of his counſellours frō Nuburge to Inſprncke to playde the caſe. They taking poſte horſes, came thither at the kalendes of Aprill, and to put the matter out of doubt, they bring with them the night cappe of Diazius the bluddy hatchet that ſlewe him, and his brothers letters. But to fore they came there Alphōſus had gotē leaue to write to his frēdes in what caſe he ſtoode. The ſecond day of Aprill, whan the Ambaſſadours of Nuburge were cōmen before the magiſtrate & had informed

hym of the whole matter, they requyred that they myghte bee put to executyon, or yf they wyll ſtande in the denyall of the facte, that they might be racked. The magiſtrates referred the matter to other iudges. When they came before them, the murtherers were permitted to take aduocates to pleade for them: by thoſe was the matter differred from day to daie: At the laſt were the plaintines commaunded, to exhibite theire accuſation in Latin and in Spaniſſhe: After thys came Themperours letters, as he went to Regenſpurge, wherin they were Themperours letters for a paracide. commaunded to ſurceaſe and let the proceſſe alone: for he and his brother will haue the hearyng of the matter at Regenſpurge. Whē they coulde obteyne none other aunſwer, Otto Henry and the electour of Palatine intreate the Senate of Inſprinke, vpon a ſufficient pledge to ſend the defendauntes to Nuburge where the murther was committed: but they make their excuſe by Thēperous letters. What time thys murther was donne, Themperoure came to Spyer, goynge to Regenſpurge, and by the waye, as he was at Bipounte, whyche is a Towne of Prynce Wuolfangus the Paulſgraue, his wife, the Lātzgraues Thēperoure viſiteth the Lantzgraue hys daughter. Daughter, laye in Chylde bed: whom Themperour went to viſyte, and geuyng her moſte gentle and comfortable woordes, dealeth great rewardes amonges her women: but hauyng no woorthye gyfte readye at hande to geue the Ladye her ſelfe, he ſendeth it backe from Spier, whyther he came at the ende of Marche. The Lantzgraue was admoniſſhed by Nauius (as before is ſayde) to mete with Themperoure by the waye goyng to Regenſpurge: the ſame woord was ſent hym by Granuellan, in the moneth of Februarye, whan thē
               peroure was at Utrecht vpon the Maſe. Wherfore receiuing ſaufecō
               duite of Thēperoure, he came to Spier. Thither came alſo the Paulſgraue The Lantzgraue commeth to thē
                  peroure. Electour, and wyllyam Manſbach, ambaſſadour to the Duke of Wyrtemberge, this was the .xxviii. daye of Marche. Than goeth the Lantzgraue to Themperoure, and talkynge with hym priuately, by his Chauncelour, whan he had tolde him the cauſe, and occaſion of hys comming: It is not in one place, nor in Germany only, but alſo in foreine Nations reported, moſte myghty Emperoure, that throughe the Byſſhop of Roomes procurement, you ſhulde mynd great diſpleaſure to the Proteſtantes: There goeth abrut alſo that at the concluſyon of the peace, you ſhuld haue perſwaded the French kyng to ayde you in punniſſhyng the ſame: Moreouer, that you ſollicite the Turke for a trewes, that you may ſo muche the eaſelyer, brynge youre pourpos to paſſe, and therefore (they ſaye) the Biſſhop hathe called and cōmaunded a counſell, that vpon the decrees made in haſte, the matter myght be put in execution: & it maketh vs the rather to think this report to be trewe, to ſee howe erneſtly and buſyly the ſuite procedeth

againſte the Archebiſſhop of Collon. And certenly, foraſmuche as we haue ayded you chargeablye againſt the French kyng and the Turk, and offered to doe more, as was declared at Spier, becauſe we haue donne more alſo then euer our aunceters were accuſtomed, moreouer inaſmuche as you haue graunted vs large warrauntes concerninge the peace and the law, bothe at Regenſpurg & at Spier, theſe thinges chaunce to vs now beyonde all expectation. Yet we truſt, that before you departe out of Germany, you wyll cauſe that relygion be eſtabliſhed, after the preſcripte of Goddes woorde, by a prouinciall counſell of Germany, and in caſe the diſſention can not be throughly accorded, yet that the peace whiche was promiſed vs at Spier, you wold commaunde to be wholy obſerued, in ſuche wyſe, as it bee neyther chaunged nor taken awaye by the decree of any counſell.
            Hereunto Themperoure aunſwereth by Nauius: Howe ſondrie reportes haue commen to hys eares of them alſo, that they ſhould attempte ſome enterpryſe, yet wolde he not credite the ſame, eſpeciallye after he had hearde hys letters, written to Nauius, and nowe alſo beleueth it muche leſſe: As concernynge that whyche he ſpake of the Frenche kynge, there is no man able to proue it: he hathe peaſe with him only, and nothynge els: It is the guiſe of Fraunce to braue and bragge of matters that bee vayne: he moued the Turke of a trewes, chiefly for the loue of Germany: for ſeyng that in ſondrie aſſemblyes of Thempire, they complayned of the greate charges, and the pouertye of the people, he thought this the beſt waye to relyeue them, that duryng the tyme of the trewes, they myght conſulte, how to make war agaynſte him, and to ſet an order in Religion: but herein as yet, is nothyng determyned, for hereof muſt he conferre with hys brother Fernando: the Counſell, which they haue ſo many yeres requyred of him, is nowe, throughe hys greate ſuite and labour, aſſembled: And what ſo euer he hathe done therin, he hathe donne it of a good affectyon to the publicke weale: And where ſome perchaunce taketh it otherwiſe, it is not well donne of them: he hathe vſed the Archebiſſhop of Collon frendlye, but he coulde abyde no delaye at all: What is hys preparatyon to warre, he ſeeth preſētly: there is no man with him, but his houſholde ſeruauntes, neyther doeth he gather any power: And the cauſe whie he ſent for him, is for that he ſuppoſeth him to be a man that deſireth peace: And therfore requireth him, to declare his fantaſye, howe Relygion may be appeaſed, or what he thinketh maye be obteyned of his fellowes. And if he liſt not now, he wil appoint of his coūſel, to cō
               ferre with him in ye matter. Thē the Lantzgraue ſpeaking himſelfe, yf it laye in me, noble Emperoure, to doe anye thynge for the welthe of The Lantzgraue to theperoure. Germanye, and maynteynge of Amytye beetwene you and the

ſtates of Thempire, certenly I wold ſpare no paines, & for this cauſe chiefly came I hither: I wiſſhed ſurelye to haue had ſome moe of my fellowes here, but that could not be for ſhortnes of tyme. The Duke of Saxō is to farre of, and Iames Sturmius is troubled with ſicknes: I beleue ryghte well that you haue hearde ſondrye reportes, but doubteles the trewthe is ſo as I wrote to Nauius, for there was no conſultation had agaynſt you at Frankefurte, but we treated onlie, howe we myght bothe perſeuer in oure relygion, and alſo repulſe vniuſte violence. Of the French king it was ſhewed vs, that for the affinitie of the Duke of Orleans, the king had promiſed you ayde againſt vs: Many wiſe mē marueled, that you ſued to the Turke for trewes, and ſuppoſed that no lyght cauſe moued you ſo to doe, eſpeciallye hauyng peace with the Frenche kyng: but now foraſmuche as you ſaye it is done for the common welthes ſake, I haue nothyng to obiecte againſt it: For Germany had nede longe ſynce to haue ben vnburthened of ſuche charges: we deſyred a counſell, the treweth is ſo, but the ſame to be free, godly, and holded in Germany: And why we doe not What counſell the Proteſtantes deſyred. eſteme thys of Trent to be ſuche, we did ſufficientlye declare it vnto you at Woormes: For to ſhewe any waye howe to accorde relygion, I maye not, withoute the aduiſe of manye fellowes, and I perceyue well I ſhould haue but ſmall thanke of neyther partie: yet will I not refuſe to conferre with your counſell herein, ſo it be not preiudiciall. I haue in dede no hope in the counſel, where all others ſecluded, the biſſhoppes onlye, and ſuch others as be the Biſſhop of Roomes ſworne men ſhall determyne all thynges, but I ſuppoſe a ſynode of Germany ſhulde not be vnprofitable: for as yet other nations differ muche from vs in opinions and doctrine. And the thyng is ſo farre entred in Germany, that it can not be altered: Therfore were there nothyng better than yf you woulde permit relygion there to be free, yet ſo, as all men ſhulde obſerue the peace. I ſuppoſe, you ordeyned the colloquie at Regenſpurge of a verye good intent, but I heare by ſom that were preſent, Freers be diſturbers of peace. howe there be certen bitter Freers, which call agayne in queſtyon, the articles already accorded, and be of ſo naughtye a lyfe withal, that there is no good to be looked for at theyr handes. The Archebiſſhop of Collon is doubteles a goodman: And what ſo euer he dooeth in thys matter, he ſuppoſeth it to bee hys dewtye, eſpecyallye, ſyth the decree of Regenſpurge inioyned hym to refourme his Churche: And that reformatiō, he cauſed to be made as temperately as might be, taking awaye no more thā was nedeful, & in the church goodes he altered The boke of reformation at Collon. verie littel. And his boke is agreable to the holy ſcripture, & cōfirmed with the teſtimonies of the auncient Doctours Tertuliā, Auſtē, Ambroſe & others which wer nerer the time of the apoſtles: wherfore

if any violence ſhould be offered hym for thys matter, the ſame might be awarnynge to others, that had altered a great deale more. (Than ſayeth Themperoure) I leaue the treaty of Franckfurte, for I neither beleued the tales that wer tolde me, neyther haue I geuen anie occaſyon that it ſhoulde ſo be. And I haue not procured the counſell for other intent, then to profite the common welth, not mynding, that yf any thyng be there decreed, there ſhuld any wrong be donne to the proteſtantes therfore: for euen for this cauſe was appointed the conferēce at Regenſpurge, the beginnyng wherof was very well, in caſe it had proceded. The Archebyſſhop of Collon, albeit he had promiſed to ſurceaſe and differ the matter, procedeth neuertheleſſe, and that by rigor, and compulſion, he putteth out the ordinary curates, and putteth in others at hys pleaſure, he handeleth the Clergye extremely, he ſtayeth and witholdeth the reuenewes and cuſtomes of the Chanons, and is to preciſe in all thynges, ſo that I am conſtrayned, to aſſiſt the Clergie complaynynge vnto me of theyr iniuryes: that the talke betwene you and my counſellours ſhoulde not be preiudiciall therwith am I well contented. Hereunto againe the Lantzgraue, that you beare ſo good an affection towardes Germany, and my league frendes, moſt victoryous Emperoure, I am ryght glad and ioyful, and beſeche God that you maye perſeuer herein: And ſurely yf accordyng to youre excellent wyſedome, you doe well conſyder, and waye with your ſelfe, what a commoditye Germanye is to youre magnificence, to youre Realmes and prouinces, you ſhall fynde, that there is nothyng more to be wiſhed for, then that all ſtates ſhoulde bee glad of you theyr ſupreme Magiſtrate: And that you agayne maye haue them ſtyll louyng and obedient, For certenly yf it fortune, that Germany ſhoulde be weakened, the ſame wylbe chiefly to youre diſcommoditie: And as touchyng my Lorde of Collon, the matter ſtandeth euen ſo as I ſayde before: Inaſmuche as he is a Sheparde, he wolde fayne haue hys flocke fedde with good and holſome foode: And thynketh hys dutye to be no leſſe. Therefore hathe he cauſed a fourme thereof to be ſet foorthe: And they that are nowe hys aduerſaryes, were at the begynnynge moſte gredye of this reformatyon: and now it is commen to paſſe, they refuſe it, and drawe backewarde. Here themperoure interruptynge, ah (ſayeth The Archebiſſhop of Collō is accoumpted vnlearned. he) what ſhulde that good man refourme? he ſcarſelye vnderſtandeth any Latyn: And in al hys lyfe he neuer ſayde but three maſſes, wherof I heard two my ſelfe: he is not learned. But he readeth ouer diligētly the Germane bookes, (ſayeth yt Lātzgraue) & as I am wel aſſured, he vnderſtādeth religiō. Againe thēperoure: to refourme is not to bring in a new faith & religion. Neyther doeth he (ſayeth the Lantzgraue) graunt, that he hath receyued a new Relygion, but he hathe renewed

that olde, that was leafte of Chryſt and hys Apoſtles: And where he hath diſplaced certen Curates of the churche, and placed others, the ſame aperteyneth to hys charge & office. For yf the perſon be a naughty lyuer, or vnlearned, it is ſurely the Biſſhops parte to ſubſtitute an other in hys ſteade, that is fyt for it: For within the iuriſdictions of diuers Biſſhoppes many churches lye Uacant, as I am able to ſaye, beyng deſtitute of Curates, where the people are fedde with no kind of doctryne, nor gouerned by no diſcipline, but lyke brute beaſtes lyue a barbarous and diſſolute lyfe: where he hathe taken ſomwhat of his The ignorance of the people for lacke of teachyng. Clergye, he hath thys reaſon for hym, that he imployed a greate ſome of golde on the Turkiſſhe and Frenche warres. And it is the maner of Thempire, that the Prince ſhal for this cauſe, commaunde his ſubiectes to paye: therefore thys thynge deſerueth no blame at all: And where it is commonlye bruted, that he did this for relygion, that had hys aduerſaryes inuented to brynge hym in hatred. The nexte daye at the Paulſegraues lodging, mete the Lantzgraue, Granuellā, Nauius, and Maſbacke. There Nauius began the talke, & repeteth ſome A communication of the Lātzegraue and others. parte of Thēperours cōmunication the daye before, declareth wherfore they are nowe mette, and ſheweth howe deſyrous Themperoure is of peace, and where for the ſame cauſe he appoynted a conference at Regenſpurge he ſayeth the diuines wēt a waie. Then aunſwered the Lantzgraue that of theyr departure from thence, as yet he knoweth nothyng, but the Duke of Saxon and he were aduertiſed by letters, what vnreaſonable condicions were offered them at the begynning, whan they might neyther haue theyr ſcrybes to wryte, nor ſee the copye of the treaty, nor yet be permitted to write any thyng home: they hearde alſo howe vntemperately the Freers that were collocutours Freers vile in lyfe and learnyng. handled the matter, which both wolde ouer throwe the articles, that were there before reconciled, and tooke awaye all hope of concorde, and with the diſhoneſt examples of life, where offenſe to many: Whether theire diuines departed therfore, being in diſpayre of the matter, as yet he knoweth not, but certenly they were not called thence. Thē talked Granuellan, and fyrſt ſpeakyng much of Themperoures good nature, and loue of peace, he partely excuſed that of the condicions of the diſputation: And where they were prohibited to ſygnifye oughte home, he ſayeth that was done without Themperours commaundement. There the Lantzgraue exhorting, that theſe thynges ſet a ſide, they wolde come to the preſent matter, commendeth the decree made at Spier in the yere paſte concernyng peace, and order of lawe, and declareth that a prouinciall counſell of Germany, were moſte expedient to accorde and quyet Religion, and in aſmuch as Italyans, Spaniardes, Frenchemen, diſſent ſo farre from the Germanes doctryne, in hys opynion a generall counſel ſhuld be to little porpos. Not withſtandyng

how ſoeuer the matter fall, and though none agrement can be made, yet ſheweth he how they ought to obſerue the peace, & that the decree of Spier mighte not be aboliſſhed: For now was the ſtate of relygion ſuche in Germany, that whoſo wolde aſſaye to extinguiſh it, muſte diſtroye innumerable thouſandes. Whyche ſhoulde be bothe an exceading great loſſe to Themperoure, whom the force of Germany hathe auaunced, & alſo to other nations, that loue them not, chiefly the Turkes, a greate reioyſing and commoditie. The decree of Spier, ſayeth Granuellā, was made but for a time, neyther was the fault in Themperoure, that it was of no more force: but whom it was lōg on, it is knowen well enough: In priuate counſelles of ſeuerall natyons, ther hath ben redreſſe made only of vices & maners, but of faithe and religion, no mention made. And now are all thinges full of diſſē
               tion and ſectes, where touching the faythe, all are not of one opiniō: Wherfore this diſceptation concerneth not only the Germanes, but al other chryſten people in lyke caſe: The moſte parte of the Diuines are frowarde men, ſtubburne, and obſtinate, with whom the caſe can not Diuines ſtubburne & obſtinate. be dipatched: Therfore muſte prynces and noble men be at the ſkannyng therof, and & certen meane waie in relygion founde oute: for you your ſelues do not permitte religion to be free: For ſuche as are of a contrary opinion to you, are puniſſhed with impriſonment and by the purſe. And ſeeyng Themperoure deſyreth chiefly a concorde, he maye in no wyſe graunte that thyng, which is vngodly: For yf all thynges were permitted to the common people, Than ſhoulde not the Magiſtrate liue in ſaftie. I doe vnwiſely (ſayeth the Lantzgraue) to reaſon of ſo weightie matters, my fellowes beyng abſent: notwithſtanding, by cauſe the matter is not handled to any preiudice I wyll procede: I ſuppoſe that Themperoure made the decree of Spier for a good intēt, and where the aduerſaries of the ſame, were then content to ſuffer it, and ſo promiſed, they maye not nowe go backe with theyr wordes: Agayne, inaſmuch as we gaue Themperoure ſtronge ayde agaynſt the Frenche kinge, we truſte ſurely, that the thyng, that was then agreed vpon, and confirmed with ſeales, ſhal not be broken. Moreouer, there is nothyng that ought to let a prouinciall counſel: For we profeſſe the ſame faythe that the Apoſtles, the counſell of Nice, & Athanaſius did, and oure diuines are agreed vppon the chiefe and principall articles: ther was in dede a controuerſie amonges them cōcernyng the lordes ſupper, but the ſame is nowe appeaſed: for there is none but confeſſeth that the body and blud of Chriſt is there truly receyued: There be anabaptiſtes, Dauidians, and I know not who beſydes, whom in dede we doe punniſh. Therfore is it not nedeful that foreine nations ſhulde be preſent when theſe thinges ſhalbe determined neuertheleſſe, if they gaue themſelues to the knowledge of the trueth, it were chieflye to be

wiſhed for: That certen meane opinions ſhuld be eſtablyſhed, & that by men of honour. I doe not greatly reſiſt, but I thinke that cā hardly be donne with out diuines: but if the ſincere preaching of the goſpel and the whole ſupper of the Lord, and the marriage of prieſtes might be permitted, as in tyme paſte Paphuntius perſwaded in the counſel Nicene, I ſuppoſe a concorde might be eſtabliſſhed: I know no place, where men be conſtrayned to come to oure religion: we do not ſuffer a contrary and a ſondry doctryne in the ſelfe ſame place, but we compell no man, kyll no man, nor ſpoyle hym of hys goodes: And in caſe men of our relygion myght remayne harmeles in your dominiōs, and might haue theyr Churches ſeuerally, aſſuredly I coulde be contente for myne owne parte, to ſuffer youres to haue theyr Churches in lyke caſe, with in my rule and dominion: but for aſmuche as you wyll not graunt to the ſame, we deſyre alſo to haue oure doctryne equiualente: Therefore looke what I ſayde before of the decree of Spier, and the prouincyall Counſel of Germanie, the ſame doe I take to be beſt now alſo. If there bee any man, ſayeth Granuellan, in all the worlde, that loueth peace, aſſuredly it is Themperoure, who indede for the Biſhop of Roomes pleaſure, wyll not ſwarue one heare breadthe from equytye: He hath kept alſo the decree of Spier, not without the greate offence of the other partye, and alſo of the Biſſhop. 
                  •
               ea, Nauius and I doe ſuſtayne no ſmal diſpleaſure for the ſame cauſe: In a Counſell prouinciall, I cannot ſee who ſhuld be Iudge: For al men doe not vnderſtand the ſcripture after one ſorte. And becauſe that in the Conference of learned men, there appereth ſmal hope, doubtles ſom other meanes muſte bee founde: Some Articles are indede accorded, but agayne there be moe yet in cōtrouerſie. Moreouer thoſe that be accorded, Bucer doth interpret more largely than the thyng it ſelfe permitteth: and yf they ſhoulde nowe reſte here, it were eaſy to iudge, what wolde be the ſtate of Thempyre at the lengthe. I lyke it righte well (ſayeth the Themperoure ought to compell the Pope to do his dutie. Lantzgraue,) that you ſaye howe Themperoure hangeth not of the Biſſhop his ſleue: And wolde God he myghte brynge the Biſſhop to hys dutye: In tymes paſte, Biſſhoppes of Roome did honour Themperour as theyr ſupreme Magiſtrate, And now Emperours ar bounden to them by an othe: In all controuerſies Gods woorde oughte to be chyfe iudge, whyche is not obſcure, ſo that che minde of men wolde frame themſelues accordynglye. For it ſheweth vnto vs ſynne, prouoketh vs to repentaunce and amendemente of lyfe, and preacheth vnto vs Chryſte, who hathe taken a waye the ſynnes of the worlde, in whoſe name alſo God the Father is to be called vpon, that he woolde graunte vs hys holye ſpiryte: Uerelye thys faythe and Doctryne hathe euer been, and ſtyll remayned in the Churche, as the Lordes Prayer, the Crede of the Apoſtles: And dyuerſe Songes beeſydes

accuſtomed in churches doe inſtructe vs of the benefite of Chryſt: neither muſt we here conſyder, what the greateſt multitude weneth but The ende of Scripture. what the trewthe is. For at Ieruſalem alſo, what time diuerſe of the Apoſtles and diſciples wolde haue had the heathen people that had receiued the Goſpel, circumciſed, Peter and Paule, Iames and Barnabas, were of a contrary opinion, & the errour of the reſidew ſhewed, did abrogate that yoke of the lawe. At the whyche tyme, the greateſt The beſte thinges pleaſe ſeweſt. parte of that congregation, gaue place and obeied the iudgement of a few, that were in the right. We verely doe not preſcribe other nations, but couet only, that the Germanes might agree within themſelues: to treate of meane waies, I could be cōtent, ſo that they ſwarued not from the decre of Spier concernyng the eſtabliſſhment of the peace and lawe: and in other thynges it is to be ſene, what may be eſtablyſſhed by Gods woorde, and what maye not. But I wold haue alſo my coſen and frend here, the Paulſe graue, who hathe ben at many aſſemblies, and knoweth muche of matters paſt, to ſpeake hys opinion herin. Then he, ſpeaking of Themperours good will and diſpoſition, The mynde of the Paulſ graue. ſayeth howe the conference had at Regenſpurge, was well and to muche purpoſe begonne: And if it were renewed, and the articles already accorded, no more decided, he thinketh they myght come to ſome tollerable agrement in the reſt. Themperoure (ſayeth Granuellan) deſyreth acōcorde verie muche, as hath ben ofte repeted: And excepte that be eſtablyſſhed, it will ſurely redounde to the dammage of the publycke weale: And albeit Themperour hath not thus muche profyt by thempyre, albeit he hath not hys health alſo, yet for the loue of Germany, hathe he taken his iorney. He hath taken no ſecret counſell, eyther with the French king or with others, neyther commeth he to craue ayde, but to prouyde generally for all men. Bothe Fraunce & Englande leuie great force of men, whiche is greatly to be ſuſpected: Moreouer Thēperour hath to doe in Spayne, by reaſon of the death of hys Daughter inlawe: Yet all theſe thynges ſet a part, he goeth to the aſſemblie. But yf no Princes come thither, what ſhall he doe there alone? There is much calling and crying on hyn to refourme thinges, and yet wyll they not come to the place appoynted for conſultation: Therfore it ſhould doe well my Lordes (ſpeaking to the Paulſgraue and the Lantzgraue) if you, whiche are two of the chiefeſt, wolde goe thyther. Albeit ſayeth the Lantzgraue, that Themperoure hathe no greate reuenewes out of Thempire, yet, in aſmuche as he hathe ayde alwayes thence agaynſte the Turke, agaynſt the Frenche kynge and others: And for that the dignitie of Thempire, getteth hym great authorytie What profit hath thē
                  peroure out of Germany amonges other kinges, and that he may leuye there alwaies force and power at hys pleaſure, and maye aſſemble greate armyes in Germany, where others maye not doe the lyke, how muche is thys to

be eſtemed? Our aduerſaryes are more clamorous than we, yet wyll they not follow good coūſell. For we bothe allowed ye decree of Spierand the articles accorded fyue yeres ſynce at Regenſpurge, we deſired to haue enrolled for matter of recorde, and admitted alſo, al reaſonable condicions of the laſte conference: contrary wyſe they, did none of al theſe, neyther wolde they be brought to any cōformitie: but with open proteſtation, at Wormes, refuſed the communication. Now can not I go to Regenſpurge, the charge will be ſo greate. There is alſo a matter in controuerſye betwene the Electour of Saxonye & Duke The Lantzgraue is arbiter beetwirte the Dukes of Saxon. Moris, which becauſe theyr counſellours can not determyne, it is put to my arbitrement: Neuertheleſſe I wyll ſende Ambaſſadours to the aſſemblye with large commiſſion. Thus departing, a fewe houres after, commeth Nauius agayne to the Lantzgraue, he telleth him how this daies talke hath pleaſed Themperour, and ſolliciteth him again, to come hymſelfe to Regenſpurge, alſo he enquireth of hym, whether he wolde talke agayne with Themperoure the ſame daye in the euenyng? he refuſeth not, and whan he came, Themperoure geueth hym thankes by Nauius, fyrſte, that he came thyther, ſecondely, for that he Thēperoure thanketh the Lantzgraue ſeeth that the Paulſegraue and he are bothe deſyrous of a concorde: Howebeit, he ſuppoſeth the Collocutours wil retourne againe to Regenſpurge: yf they doe not, he wyll ſende for them agayne: but in the meane tyme, he requireth him, that he wolde come hym ſelfe to the aſſemblie, though not at the begynnyng, yet towardes the later ende. He hym ſelfe hath verely, all other affaires layde a parte, taryed theſe three yeres in Germany, to thentent he myght quyet the ſame. Wherunto the Lantzgraue aunſwered, that of the departure of the Colloquitours, he hearde not before thys daye, he hath alſo recyted the cauſes, wherfore he thinketh it was done: But yf it be his deſyre, and that his fellowes be content, that the ſame Diuines of the contrary parte doe retourne agayne, hys alſo ſhall not tary from thence: But for him ſelfe, he may not goo thyther, for that he hath ben at great charges in the warre of Brunſwicke, and hath lately maryed a daughter, and is choſen vmpere betwene the Dukes of Saxon and for that he can not goe thyther with out a great company, and becauſe that through hys abſence, hys countrey might be in daunger by the confederates of the Duke of Brunſwicke his priſoner. Than ſayeth Thēperour, that hys intent is not to burthen hym with vnneceſſarye charges, but he deſireth hym erneſtlye to come, for that he ſuppoſeth, howe hys preſence wolde further the whole conſultation, and that the Saxons and others myght be ſo in couraged: And there is no cauſe that he ſhoulde be any thing affraide of Duke Heuries fellowes: For neyther is their power ſo greate, and thoughe they ſhoulde attempte any thynge, yet wolde he let it, and not ſuffer that any man ſhal diſturbe the publycke

quyetnes. The Lantzgraue agayne recytyng the cauſes, ſaieth he can promiſe nothyng, neuertheleſſe he wyll ſende Ambaſſadours, whiche ſhall trauell for peace: whych yf they can not in all thynges obeye and gratifye hym, he deſyreth hym not to take it diſpleaſauntelye, neyther thynke it to be don of any obſtinacie or mallice, but for feare of godes diſpleaſure: For thys lyfe tyme is verey ſhorte and vncerten, therefore muſt they thinke of an euerlaſtingnes. Themperour againe ſpeaking of hys owne paines taken (ſayeth) the matter of Saxon maye be differred: therfore let hym come, and ſet all lettes a parte: for he hym ſelfe beyng preſent, myght bothe counſell and cauſe hys league frendes to ſhewe themſelues tractable, and be a meane, that the beginning of the treaty maye be reaſonable. After this the Lantzgraue complayninge of dyuers, that had ayded the Duke of Brunſwicke, maketh a briefe reherſall of the whole matter, and howe he was taken, (and ſayeth) how Duke Morys & he, doe ſuſteyne by them great iniurye: For they are light perſons, and borne to ſtyre vp trouble: amonges whom Friderick Spedius tolde him yeſterdaye, that yf he wolde heare hym, he Spedius a blabbe. wold open certen ſecret, and priuie deuiſes that are nowe a working: but in aſmuche as he truſted not to the man, he refuſed to talke with hym, and wylled hym, to ſygnyfye vnto hym by wryting ſuch thinges as he wold haue tolde hym preſētly. Whan the Lantzgraue had this declared, Thēperour was maruelous angrie with Spedius: wherfore after thys communication had amonges them, the Lantzgraue The Lantzgraue taketh hys leaue of the Emperoure takyng hys leaue of Themperoure, was bad farewel ryght frendely: And went from thence to Hedelberge, and after home. And Themperoure went ſtreyght to Regenſpurge. And the ſelfe ſame time, that is to ſaye, at the kalendes of Aprill, the Ambaſſadours of the Proteſtantes, aſſemble at wormes, to conſult of the whole matter. But becauſe Themperoure ſent awaye the Lantzgraue ſo gently, they receiuing letters from hym of the ſame, who in the meane tyme had reported the matter to the Duke of Saxon, the .xxiii. daye of Aprill depart, that they myght conſulte of the ſame matters at Regenſpurge, whyther they muſt go to the imperiall aſſemblie. In thys conuention they of Rauēſpurge entred into league with the Proteſtantes. The eight daye of Aprill was the thirde ſytting of the fathers in the Counſell at The thyrde ſeſſion in the Syneode at Trente. Trent. There are recited the bokes of the olde and new Teſtament, and are cōmaunded to be taken for ſacred and holy, no parte nor iote of them omitted: And the olde and common tranſlation of the Bibell is only commaunded to be vſed in churches and Scooles: It is alſo decreed, that no man interpret the holy ſcripture after his owne ſēce & vnderſtanding, but that al mē follow herin the cōſent of the church, and of the aunciente fathers. Moreouer Printers are commaunded, that they prynte or ſet foorth nothing, but by conſent of their ordinary

Byſſhop: Furthermore it is forbidden ye any man ſhal vſe the termes or teſtimonyes of ſcripture to triflyng thynges or vayne fables, about ſuperſtition inchauntmente or witchecrafte, or alſo in ralyng & ſlaunderous libelles, and a daye was appointed for the next ſyttyng, at the ſeuententhe daye of June. Themperours Ambaſſadour there at the The oration of the Emperours ambaſſadour. ſame tyme was Fraunces Toletane: and when he had ſpoken much in Themperours prayſe, and had declared moreouer, howe ioyefull that daye was to Themperoure, wherin the biſhop of Rome cōmenced the counſel, he ſheweth, that he is ioyned in commiſſion with Didaco Mendoza, who hauing caught an ague, is retourned to Ueniſe to his olde Ambaſſade, and promyſing hys ſeruice he ſayeth, we muſt praye to God that he wold long continew this conſent of myndes in the Biſſhop and Themperoure, that is ſo godlye and holſome for the publycke weale, to the intent that vices refourmed, and euill weedes plucked vp by the rootes, the Lordes felde maye receiue the auncient tillage. In the eleuenth daye of Aprill the Biſſhop addreſſeth hys letters by Hierome Franch, whom he ſent than backe to the Swyſſes, vnto the Biſſhoppes of Sedune and Chur, and to certen Abbottes in thoſe partyes. Howe he hathe called all the prelates of Chriſtendome to a generall counſell at Trent: And it is reaſon, that they which, repreſente The Popes letters to the Biſſhops of Sedune and Chur. the Churche of the Swiſſes, ſhoulde come thyther chieflye: For the people of that nation are vnto hym more derely beloued than the reſt, for that they be as it were the peculiar children of the See Apoſtolicke and defendours of the Eccleſiaſtical liberties: and to Trēt are commen alreadye, verey manye Biſſhopes oute of Italy Fraūce, and Spayne, and the nomber encreaſeth daylye: Wherefore it is not ſemely, that thoſe which dwell ſo farre of, ſhoulde preuente them that are nere hande: A greate parte of theyr people are infected with Hereſyes, and had ſo muche the more nede of a Counſell: Wherefore let them nowe with dilygence, recompence thys ſlackenes, and get them thyther immedyatelye, all delaye ſet a parte, vnleſſe they wyll incurre the penaltye, by the Lawes preſcribed, and the cryme of neglectynge theyr dewtie, and playne dyſobedyence. The reſte ſhall hys Ambaſſadour tell them, vnto whom he prayeth them to geue credyt. The clergie and Uniuerſitie of Collon, followed theyr ſuite at Roome againſt theyr Archebyſſhop verey erneſtlye. Wherfore the Biſſhop of Roome the .xvi. daye of Aprill, for aſmuche as forgettyng hys owne ſaluatyō, he hath offended diuerſeſly, agaynſt the eccleſiaſtical rules & doctrine, agaynſt the traditions of the Apoſtles, rites & ceremonyes of the chriſtiane religion, in the church accuſtomed, cōtrary to the cenſure of Leo The Archebiſſhop of Collon excō
                  municated by the Pope the tenth, ſetfoorth againſt Luther and his fellowes, he doeth excommunicate him out of the communion of the church, & depriueth him of his Archebiſhopricke & al others his benefices, priueleges, & dignities,

and commaundeth the people of hys iuryſdiction, in generall, that frō henceforch they obey hym not, he releaſeth them alſo of theyr othe by the whyche they are bounden to hym, and commaundeth hym to ſylence, and awardeth hym to pay to the contrary parte coſtes and dō
               mage. With them of Collon ioyned the Byſhops of Liege, and of Utreiche, and the Uniuerſitie of Louain, this ſentēce was after imprinted at Roome, in the moneth of Auguſt. When Themperour came to Regenſpurge, and was infourmed of the whole matter by the preſydentes Thēperoure commeth to Regenſpurg of the conference, he toke the going awaye of the Diuines in moſt euill parte, and diſpatching hys letters throughe out Germany, complayneth greatly therof, and exhorteth the princes moſte erneſtly to come themſelues. From the Proteſtantes came Ambaſſadours only: but thyther came Duke Moris Ericke Duke of Brūſwicke, Iohn & Albert of Brandenburge, the Biſhoppes, of Trent, Auſpurge Bamberge, Wirciburge, Paſſawe, & Hildeſſeme. Aboute thende of Maye came alſo kyng Ferdinando. The ſecond daye of Iune, ye Proteſtāts goe to Themperoure and complayne of the murtheryng of Diazius, and deſyre that the murtherer may ſuffer accordyngly: Themperour, The murther of Diaze vnpuniſhed. (ſayeth he) wyll conſulte wyth hys brother: Ferdinando moued alſo, maketh the lyke aunſwer. With the Proteſtantes then were the Ambaſſadours of the Paulſgraue, of the Archebyſſhop of Collon, of Mū
               ſter, Norinberge, Regenſpurge, and Norling. The thirde daye after, Themperoure calleth before him al the ſtates, and declareth the cauſe of callynge thys conuention, and after he hath complayned muche of the abſence of the Prynces, he fyndeth hym ſelfe no leſſe greued that the Collocutours were ſo ſodaynely broken of and departed: wherefore inaſmuche as he coueteth greatlye, that Relygion myght be ſet at ſome ſtaye in Germany, he deſyreth theyr aduiſe and counſell, what is further to be don herein: moreouer how the iudgment of the chamber maye be refourmed, & he vnburthened of the charges therof. Fynally, he ſheweth them howe for the relyfe and quyet of Germany, he hathe throughe the meanes of the Frenche Kynge, taken trewes with the Turke for one yere, but ſeeyng the trewes commeth oute at October nexte, & as his brother king Ferdinando telleth him, is broken alſo already, and he knoweth not what wylbe the ende therof, he ſuppoſeth, that they ſhalbe fayne whan tyme requyreth to geue hym that ayde, whych heretofore they promyſed, and he wyll, for the defence of thempyre, myniſter all the helpe and counſell he is able.
            The Princes Electours were wonte to conſulte and conferre together: But at thys tyme the Ambaſſadours of Mentz and Treuerſe, forſake the Ambaſſadours of Collon, Palatyne, Saxon & Brandenburge, Adiuiſion amonges the electours. & reuolt to the Catholickes, and after conference had with thē,

they approue the counſell of Trente, and exhorte Themperoure, that he wolde maynteyne the ſame, and perſwade the Proteſtantes, that bothe they wolde goe thither, and alſo ſubmytte them ſelues, vnto the decrees and iudgement of the Synode: But the Proteſtantes deſyre Themperoure, that he wolde eſtablyſhe a fyrme peace, and vpryghte iuſtyce, that he wolde referre the cauſe of Religion to a laweful counſell of Germany, or aſſemblie of thempyre, or to the conference of learned men to be had vpon certen condycions, and ſhew how the counſell of Trente is not the ſame, that hathe ben promyſed by the decrees of Thempyre. Whyleſt they conſulted aboute theſe matters, behold it The brute of warre againſt the Proteſtantes. was bruted a brode that Themperoure, Kynge Ferdinando and the Byſſhoppe of Roome made greate preparatyon for warres. For inſomuche as Themperoure had peace with Fraunce, and trewes with the Turke for thys yere, the oportunytye of tyme ſemed fytte, to work theyre feate in. Certen Byſſhoppes, and Themperours Confeſſoure, with whom the Byſſhop of Roome had practyſed, were thought amonges others to haue been a greate occaſyon hereof. Wherefore, whan Themperoure was fullye reſolued to haue warre, the .ix. daye of Iune, he ſendeth the Cardynall of Trente in greate poſte haſte to Roome, in meſſage to the Biſſhop, to procure the ayde promyſed: two dayes after, he diſpatcheth awaye Captaynes and chieftaynes with money, to goe leuie men incontinentlye. He had before commaunded Marimilian the Erle of Bure, to bring him out of the low countries, al the force he could get, bothe of horſemen and fotemen: he commaū
               deth alſo Marques Albert, and Marques Iohn of Brandenburge, The falſehod of Marques Albert and Iohn of Brandenburge. & Wulfangus, the maſter of the order in Germany, to gether bandes of horſemen. And thoſe two, though they were of the Proteſtantes religion, and Marques Iohn alſo in league with them, yet for aſmuche as themperoure ſayde, howe he attempted that warre, not for religion, but agaynſt certen rebelles, they promyſed hym their ſeruice: And Marques Iohn had maried the Duke of Brūſwickes daughter, that was priſoner with the Lantzgraue, The Ambaſſadours of the Proteſtātes, being troubled to heare of theſe matters, and taking care for the cōmon daunger of Germany, deſyre the other ſtates of thempire, that they wold goe with thē to themperoure, to intreate, that he wold haue no warre: but that was in vaine: eſpecially the ambaſſadours of Mentz & Treuers vtterly refuſed them. The Lantzgraue, who had The Lantzgraue is circumſpecte. good eſpialles euery where, ſēdyng oft his letters to Regēſpurge, aduertiſed them, what intelligence he had out of ſondry places, & admoniſhed them, that the bandes of horſemen, whiche for the ſuſpicion of warre they had hyred before, ſhuld be ſtyl reteyned, & newe taken vp and prouyded: but they, for aſmuch as thēperours demaundes pretē
               ded no likelynes of warre, but Lenitie and deſire of peace, thoughte

verely there ſhuld haue ben no warre that yeare: But what tyme the thing it ſelf declared, that the brute was not vayne, whan nowe not only in Germany, but alſo in Italy powers were leuied, and moreouer the force of Spaniardes did approche, the .xvi. daye of Iune they goe to Themperoure, and for becauſe all places are full of warlycke motions, they inquyre of hym, whether theſe thynges be don through hys commaundemente: For in aſmuche as the reporte goeth, that he myndeth no warre agaynſt the Turke nor other foreine Prince, they maruell to what ende all thys preparatyon tendeth. And with them were the Ambaſſadours of Collō and Palatine: hereunto had themperoure appoynted Nauius to make them aunſwer. With what loue he hath imbraced Germany, euer ſynce he fyrſt, was Emperoure, it is no nede to recyte: And is nowe of the ſame wyll alſo, neyther hath he any other pourpos, but that peace and iuſtice maye be obſerued in thē
               pyre, and that all ſtates may be reconcyled: herein ſuch as ſhall obeye hym, he commaunded them to looke for all good wil of hym, & againſt thoſe that ſhall doe otherwyſe, he ſayeth howe he muſt procede accordyng to hys ryght and authorytie. The nexte daye addreſſyng his letters Thēperours letters to the Cities of the Proteſtātes. to dyuerſe Cities that were in league with the Proteſtantes, eſpecyally to Straſburge, Norinberge, Auſpurge and Ulmes. I doubt not (ſayeth he) but you know well enough, howe derely beloued Germany, the common countrie of vs al, hathe ben to me alwayes, what trauell and paynes, I haue taken, and what charges I haue been at, not with out the great dammage of my realmes and kyngdomes, to thintent that weightie & daungerous diſſention of religion, might be appeaſed. Wherin doubtles I haue not ſought myne owne priuat cō
               moditie, but alwayes don my indeuoure, that offences taken a waie, Germany might be in quiet: For this the decrees doe teſtifye, ſo oft by me renewed, albeit that certen doe enterprete theſe thynges otherwyſe, and doe falſely aſcribe vnto me the contrary. Moreouer in thys my gouernemente of the common welth, I haue had euermore an eſpecyall care for the preſeruation of the free Cities, that they ſhulde not be oppreſſed by certen, whyche yf they myghte fynde an occaſyon, to brynge theyr pourpoſe to paſſe, wolde not fayle to do it. Which thing I ſuppoſe, you, as you be wyſe mē, haue marked, by former actes don: Nowe, though certen men haue oftentymes attēpted diuerſe thinges to the hynderaunce boothe of you, and of other ſtates, and of me alſo, Thēperours crafte. yet, in aſmuche as I could not without a greate ſturre redreſſe them, I haue ſuffered hytherto, in good hope ſurelye, that I ſhoulde at the lengthe reape the fruyte of thys my pacyence and lenitye, to the profyt of the publycke weale: whiche doubtles had ſo commen to paſſe, had not ſome men by ſecrete and wonderfull polycyes letted thys agremente, certes not for thys cauſe, that eyther they loue Relyon, or

reſpect gods glory, but that vnder a certen pretence of holynes, wherwith they myghte cloke theyr wickednes, they myght oppreſſe other ſtates, and bryng theyr goodes and landes into theyr owne handes: For the reuenewes of ſome they haue vſurped already, and violently deteyne the ſame, to the greate iniurye of many. And nowe that they haue brought the matter to thys paſſe, that iuſtyce ſet aſyde they now feare nothyng, they ſhoute now at my office, by moe wayes than one, and raſeſhely demyniſſhe the ſame, for thys intente certenly, that they maye ſubdewe the ſtates of Thempyre, and eſpecyallye the Cytyes, partely by force, and partely by craftie meanes. Whoſe talke maketh me to beleue the thynge to be certenly trewe, whan they bragge, as I am credebly infourmed, and threatē alſo, that they wil attempt force and warre agaynſte me. The ſame thyng is wytneſſed by ſo many of theyr forged ſedytions, and famous lybelles and pictures, which they ſetforthe, to reyſe ſedition, and inflame the people againſte me. Therfore can I haue no hope, that euer they ſhulde, through my lenitie and pacience waxe the better, & amend, or leaue theſe inſolent facciōs. For certenly hitherto I haue ſo littell profyted by this meane, theſe many yeres now that they are not only become nothing at al the better, but alſo worſe then themſelues, more obſtinate, more rebelles, and deſperate. Whiche thing certenly tendeth to the diſtruction of the publycke weale, and vnleſſe a remedy be found, it wyll come to paſſe, that Germany ſhall fall from hys auncyent lybertye, into a moſte greuous bō
               dage and tyranny: but that maye I neyther beare nor ſuffer anye longer, neither cā it by any meane be excuſed, though I wold. Wherfore, to thintent my dygnytie may be preſerued, that peace and iuſtice maie conſiſt in their vertu and ſtrength, & that the iminent daunger may be repulſed, from the Empyre, and from youre heades, I haue prefixed to bring thoſe diſturbers of the common welth to theyr dutye, and to reſtore Germany, to her olde beautie and lybertie. Which intēt of myne I thought good to ſygnifye vnto you, that you ſhuld geue no credite vnto ſuch, as haply ſhal brute a broade, that my pourpoſe is otherwiſe For I doe aſſure you vpō my honour, that I doe it for none other reſpect, thē for the ſame that I haue now declared. Therfore I truſt alſo that you will not faile me herein, that bothe their boldnes may be repreſſed, & that youre dignitie may alſo be recouered. If you ſhall thus doe, I bed you looke for all goodwill at my handes, which I wil further declare, incaſe you ſend me an Ambaſſadoure touching the ſame: the like thing in effect, he wrote alſo to the Duke of Wirtēberge. The ſame daye, wherein theſe letters were in dited, Granuellan, and Nauius calle vnto them, the ambaſſadours of the cities beforeſaide, and ſpeaking to euerie of them ſeuerally in maner after one ſort (ſaye) how this warre is not ment nor prepared againſt the Cyties but againſte

certen rebelles, that haue committed treaſon, and infringed themperours authoritye, which haue taken the poſſeſſions of certen Princes and biſhops, whiche in dede by occaſyon, wil not ſpare the cities neyther: Wherfore looke they ſhewe theyr fayth and allegeaunce to Thē
               peroure, and ayde not his enemies, that Themperoure haue no cauſe of diſpleaſure agaynſte them, vnto whom he wiſſheth well
                  •
                let them wryte thys whome with ſpede, and exhorte theyr cyties to remayne in theyr de wtye: Themperoure will alſo wryte vnto them, & like wiſe ſende ambaſſadours. The ſame daye at Trent, it is ordeyned, that in A ſtatute of Trente. the Abbeies of Monkes & Chanons, there be ſome learned man appointed to reade a lecture of diuinitie, & herunto ſome benefyce aſſigened out in ſteade of a penſion: And that no man be admitted to the office of reading, but of whoſe learning, maners, and lyfe the Biſhop or Abbot be certayne of: And becauſe the preachyng of the Goſpel is nothyng leſſe neceſſarye, than the readyng it ſelfe, the Biſſhops and al other prelates of the churche, are commaunded to inſtructe the people, or yf they haue any lawful impedimēt, to ſubſtitute others that ſhall: Moreouer the headpriſtes & paſtoures of the people are charged, at ye leſt euery ſondaye, to declare vnto men thoſe thinges that are neceſſary for ſaluation, and that they exhort them vnto vertu, and feare them from vice and ſyn: And a penaltie appoynted for ſuch as neglect their dutye. The Biſſhops alſo are admoniſhed to note dilligentlye, what thinges are taught, and incaſe hereſies or abſurde opinions be ſowen abrode, to vſe the remedie by the lawes preſcribed. After are decrees made of originall ſynne, and ſaye that the whole ſpot thereof is taken A decree of oryginal ſin. awaye through baptiſme: And that there remayueth in dede in them that be baptiſed a motion to ſynne, or concupiſcence: And albeit Paul ſometyme calleth it ſynne, yet is it not done becauſe it is ſynne in dede and properly ſo, but becauſe it inclineth to ſinne: But the Uirgin Marye is not compryſed in thys decree, and that is to be obſerued, which in tyme paſte was ordeyned by Byſſhop Sirtus the fourthe of that name, Than is the nexte daie limited to ſit in, the .xxix. of Iune, Now did this Sixtus the fourth make a decre, wherin he did excommunicate them as heretickes, whyche teache that the Uirgyn Mary was conceaued in oryginall ſynne, and that the daye conſecrated by the churche of Roome, in the memoryall of her conceptyon, oughte not to be kept holy. Thys decre is written in that part of the Byſhops law, that is called extrauagātes. In this foreſayd counſell & ſitting, Peter Daneſe, ambaſſadour to the French king, made an oration, and ſpeakynge The oration of the Frēch ambaſſadour. Daneſe. many thynges of the deſertes and godly zeale of the kinges of Fraunce towardes the Churche of Roome, begynnynge from kynge Clodowey declareth, howe kinge Fraunces deſcendinge of the ſame

progenitours, is in no kynde of dewtye inferyour to them, who was lynked with Leo the tenth in a continuall bonde of amytie, and likewyſe with Adrian, Clement, and now with Paull the third, whyche in all this tempeſtuous ſtorme of Religion, hathe ben well ware, that no alteration hath ben within hys dominions, for that he wold haue the whole iudgement of the matter to be referred to the church, for albeit he be of hys owne nature moſte mercifull; yet hathe he put them to moſt greuous tormentes, which by a certen priuate raſhenes, haue aſſayed to diminyſhe the ſtate of the church, through the which dillygence and ſeueritie, he hath this obteined, that he deliuereth now vnto them all Fraunce in peaſable wyſe: For in it, is no new, nor ſtraūge doctryne, which is not of auncient cuſtome and olde diſcipline confyrmed. And where he hathe alwayes thought it profytable for the publycke weale, that in the church, there ſhuld be one, namely the biſſhop of Roome, as the ſucceſſour of Peter, vnto whom all others, as to the head, myght referre all theyr doynges, he hath ben euermore carefull, that thys magiſtrate myghte ſtyll kepe the ſupremacye: and albeit he hath often times with large offers ben moued to the contrary and to He vnderſtandith this of the kynge of England. followe thexample that an other hathe ſhewed before hys eyes, yet coulde he neuer bee remoued from hys pourpos, and of late whan the counſell was called, & that he hearde howe certen fathers were there aſſembled, forthewhich he commaunded certen of hys cheife Biſſhops to repayre thyther, & whan after a few decrees were made & brought into Fraunce, he appointed hym and his fellowes to come and declare hys lykyng opinion touchyng the ſame: Therfore his fyrſt requeſt is, that they wold ones eſtabliſhe in generall, what thyng in relygion is The Frēche kynges 
                     ••
                  
                  qu
                     •
                  ſte. to be followed and beleued: And agayne that for theccleſiaſticall perſons, they wolde preſcribe a moſte ſharpe diſciplyne of lyfe & maners: What ſo euer they ſhal decree, let thē put no doubte, but that through hys commaundement it ſhall be obſerued in all Fraunce. Moreouer, for as muche as the kynges of Fraunce haue done very muche for the churche of Roome, that they wolde not ſuffer, any thyng to be dimiſſhed or altered, the poſſeſſion wherof the kynges of Fraunce haue had euer ſynce Lewis ſurnamed Pius, the ſonne of great Charles: Finally, that of all the Frenche Churches, whereof he hathe the patronage left hym of hys elders, they wolde confyrme all ryghtes, priueleges, and lybertyes. With the letters before mentioned, and with further credite alſo, came Lazarus Schuendius to Straſburge, ye .xxiiii. daie of Iune, when he had by the waye ſpoken with the reſt of the cytyes. An aunſwer of them of Straſborough to thē
                  peroure. But the Senate, ſendyng hym awaye, not long after wrote vnto thē
               peroure, and for that they made no directe aunſwer to Lazarus, they ſaye it was for the ſtraungenes and difficultie of the thing, which did not concerne thē only, but others in lyke caſe. Nowe where he ſaieth,

that he beareth ſuch a loue to Germany, they geue hym great thākes, and beſecheth hym to perſeuer in the ſame, and ſuffer not hym ſelfe to be ſtyrred vp to ciuyll warre: where he complayneth moreouer of certen, that doe not theyr de wtie, neither ſhew theyr dew obedience, they were ſory to heare it, yet they truſt, that there be none of theyr Religion culpable in ſo greate a crime: For the fault hath not ben in vs (ſaye they) that relygion hath not ben accorded. For you knowe ryght wel, noble Emperoure, howe willinge and confyrmable we haue been, to haue a recontilemente, bothe fyue yeres paſte at Regenſpurge, and alſo ſynce and before at all tymes, where certen others, through thaduiſe and perſwaſion of the Biſhop, haue refuſed the ſame, and referred althinges to Roome: But the Biſſhop intendeth through violēce and power to reteyne ſtyll thoſe greate errours for the whyche arroſe all The Pope & Tyrante. thys diſſentiō in the church & doeth ſo handle the matter in al thinges, that we maye not cōmit the cauſe vnto his iudgment: wherby it may wel be perceyued, that we ſuſteyne wrong, yf any man ſhulde lay the blame in vs, that thys controuerſye is not appeaſed. And where it is obiected vnto them, that they ſhulde ſeke to plucke the church goodes in to theyr owne handes, vnder the pretence of relygion, it is vnfrendly ſayde: For you haue heard and knowen, Ceſar, why oure fellowes coulde ſuffer no longer that monkiſhe lyfe in theyr dominions, which was growen ſo farre out of order, and howe they haue conuerted the The clergie abuſed the churche goodes. ſame to better vſes, as fyndyng of Scooles and releuing of the poore. Where agayne it is well knowne, howe men of the contrary relygiō heape vp the churche goodes, and abuſe them to all voluptuouſnes, & yet nothyng ſpokē of: furthermore, you your ſelfe haue made decrees, bothe at Regenſpurg, and lately at Spier, how, for a common quiet, thoſe goodes oughte to be vſed: Nowe incaſe there be any man, that hathe not obſerued a meaſure herein, we doubte not, but yf the ſame were called forthe, and heard ſpeake, he wolde abyde iudgement, and geue none occaſyon, that Germanye ſhulde therefore be layde waſte through warre. They obiect to our men, that they haue ſubuerted the miniſtration of iuſtice: but you are not ignorant, moſte mightye Emperoure, wherfore they haue cōplayned of the iudges of the chamber, and howe erneſtly they haue deſyred a redreſſe, whiche albeit, it hath ben ofte promiſed, yet neuer came it to effecte. Therfore for the preſeruation of peace, you did diſplace them lately at Spier, takynge order howe the Chamber ſhoulde hereafter be eſtabliſhed: Which order we were alwayes cōtent to obeye, and ſo declared at Wormes: but oure aduerſaryes did vtterlye refuſe it (and ſayde) they had rather haue no iudgement at all: therfore is all the blame of this matter to be imputed vnto them: Finally we could neuer perceiue that euer any of oure league frēdes did aſpire or couet your office, or wēt aboute to oppreſſe

others, or els boaſted or threatened to woorke any kynde of violence. And certenly we beleued that theſe thynges be beatē in to your head by the Byſhop of Roome and his miniſters for the hatred, which they beare to relygion: Howbeit we doe ſuppoſe, that you haue perceyued our good wil towardes you, by the warres which you haue had with foreine nations: And wold god he that incenſeth you nowe agaynſte vs, had borne you euer the ſame good will, that we doe: for then had The goodwyll of the Proteſtātes toward thē
                  peroure. ſome warres either not ben attempted at al, or els much ſoner ended. Nowe in thoſe ſeditions and warres, that haue chaunced in Germany, ſynce you were Emperoure how they haue demeaned themſelues towardes you, and howe frankly oure men haue geuen theyr ayde agaynſt the Turke, it is openly knowen, and chiefely for the defence of youre countries of Auſtriche. Foraſmuche therfore as we doubt not, but thoſe ſtates are free, and giltles in thoſe crimes, whych are reported vnto you, and yf they might be heard, were able to declare theyre innocency, before you and all others, we moſte erneſtlye requyre you moſt merciful Emperoure, and father of the countrie, and for the loue of God, and for the preſeruation of Germany beſeche you, to laie aſide thys ſo great preparation, and to call them before you in iudgemente, that are ſo heynouſly complayned vpon to your hyghnes, accordynge to the auncient maner to your predeceſſours accuſtomed, whiche we truſt that you will not omitte, And yf you thus doe, we put no doubt, but that you ſhall ſoone perceyue how they haue ſuffered iniurye, and beare there greate good wylles towardes you. And in thys conſultation, beholde, we beſeche you, the miſerable ſtate of Germany, both by reaſon of the continuall dearth of thynges, and alſo for that terrible & cruell enemye the Turke: conſyder what fydelytie bothe theyr elders haue ſhewed to your auncetours, and they alſo vnto you and to kyng Ferdinando your brother, whan bothe agaynſte the Turke, & againſt youre other enemies they haue ſent you more aide thā any other haue donne, whyche they doe not refuſe to doe nowe alſo: Ponder & weye with your ſelfe, what a mortall warre thys wylbe, what calamitie & euilles ſhall redounde therby to the innocente people, as chyldren, infantes, women and ſuche other lyke: And doe not, through theyr perſwaſion, whyche for mainteyning theyr rule and power, doe malygne An heape of euylles of ciuill warre. our men, brynge the matter to that paſſe, that the noble countrey of Germany, or any parte therof, vnto you doubtles moſte addicted beynge waſted through her owne force, and ſore afflicted, be not able any longer to reſyſte, and withſtande the Turkiſhe violence. Wherfore we ryght humbly beſeche youre excellencye, that you wolde compliſh oure requeſt: we ſhall take the ſame in ſteade of a great benefyte, and yf there ſhalbe any man, which after the matter hearde, will refuſe to obey you contrarye to lawe and equitie, we will not only not allowe

his doynges, but wil aſmuch as lieth in vs, ayde you, our high prince, and Magiſtrate, geuen vs of God, and euermore ſhowe all dew obedience. Duke Moris which came to Regēſpurg the .xxv. daie of May, Thēperoure had ſecrete talke with Duke Moris after he had long and much talked with themperoure priuely, departeth the .xx. daye of Iune. But what theffect of theyr communication was, the thinge itſelfe ſhal after declare. Whan the Ambaſſadours of the Proteſtantes ſaw that all thinges tended to warre and violence, neyther that they could with out daunger, eyther conſult of thynges nedefull, or wryte home to theyr ſtates, they cōueyhed themſelues one after another, and retourned home. At the Ides of Iune, Themperoure ſent hys Ambaſſadour, Iohn Muſchet, treaſurer of hygh Burgundie to the Swyſſes, and in the preface ſpeakynge of hys loue and Themperours anbaſſadour to the Swyſſes. zeale towardes the common wealth, namely of Germanie, and deſire of peace: he ſayeth therbe certē princes of Germanie, which vnder the pretence of the Goſpell, doe many thynges ſeditiouſely, and ſubuert al lawes, that when there is no iudgement, they nede not to feare what they doe: Whoſe boldenes now hath ſo far proceded, that they attēpte thynges agaynſt his office and dygnytie, and threaten him with war and violence, and are non otherwyſe lyke, but that in hys abſēce, they intende to inuade and oppreſſe the common countrey: for the whyche conſiderations, he is conſtrained to moue warre, that for the dignitie of hys place and office, he maye repulſe the daunger from the commō welth, and reſtrayne them from doing ſuch outerage, neyther diſtruſteth he, but that God will further his enterpryſe: And ſuppoſeth alſo, that other ſtates whoſe welth conſyſteth herein will aſſiſte him with their ayde ad counſel: wherfore he requireth them, that they wold not be otherwyſe perſwaded by hys aduerſaryes, which hatefully & ſpitefully deuyſe many thinges agaynſt him, neither that they atempt any matters through theyr perſwaſion, or permit ought to be done with in theyr limites, wherby this his enterpriſe might be impeched or hindered, For this warre is taken in hande for the welth of al Germany, and for non other cauſe: Let them remayne therfore in the olde amytie and league, which is betwixt them: For he will doe nothing to the contrary, nor ſuffer that any of hys ſhall, and whan occaſion ſhal ſerue he wyll ſhew them all loue and fauoure, as in dede he hathe done hytherto: whiche thinge may be diuerſely perceyued, but chiefly in thys, that he neuer made league, with other kynges & ſtates, but they were compriſed in the ſame. The Cities of hygh Germanye, and the Duke of Wirtemberge, hearing of Themperours aunſwer that was geuen The Cyties of Wirtemberge puton armure. by Nauius, as before is ſpecifyed, immediatly ſendyng their letters to the Duke of Saxon & the Lantzgraue, the captaynes of their league ſhew what is nedefull to be donne, and promiſeth al theyr aide & fidelitie, doe leuie as many bandes of fotmen, as they were able to make:

and were in the felde the fyrſte of al men. And theyr armie was deuided in two partes: the one company was the Dukes of Wertemberg conteining .xxiiij. enſeignes of foote men, and amonges thē wer many noble gentle men: The other was hyred of the Cities. When all theſe were aſſembled at Ulmes, the .xxi. day of Iune they marche to Gunſperge, and the nexte daye whan they were muſtred, encamped in ſeuerall places. Theyr Captaines were Iohn Hedecke, Scherteline, Balthazar Gutling, Sebaſtian, Beſſerer, Mathew Langemantell, Iohn Harder, and Ioyce Roſeberge. They doe fyrſt bynde the powers of the Cities, by an othe, as the maner is, charging them to follow and obey Scherteline, vntill the Princes them ſelues come, that be Captaynes of the confederacie. Than going to the Dukesmen, when they had done lykewyſe, they appointe Hedecke their captayne, after the ſame ſorte. That done, Balthazar Gutling a noble mā borne and The oraiion of Balthazar to the ſoldiours. counſellour to the Duke of Wirtemberge, by the conſente of the reſte, ſpeaking to hys princes ſoldiours: My derely beloued fellowes (ſaieth he) Sathans Uicar the Biſhop of Roome intendeth againe to kindle ſuch a fyre, as ſhall inflame & burne all Germany, the natyle countrey of vs all, and vtterly diſtroye the ſame: For bothe the wonderfull hatred that he beareth to trew relygiō, and alſo the deſyre of vengeaūce, for the calamytie receyued in the fourmer yeres by the Almaignes, when Rome was taken and ſacked, doe moue him herunto. Therfore hathe he ſtyred vp Charles the moſt puiſſaunte Emperoure, to attēpt warre againſt our princes & ſtates, that ar lincked in a godly league, truſting, that through violence & great crueltie, they ſhall cōpell them to the ſeruice and obſeruaunce of theyr wicked and deueliſh religion. For it is reported for certentie, howe that proude and deteſtable bōdſlaue of the Deuil, hath leuied already no ſmall force bothe of horſemē & foormen, which he wil ſend to Thēperoure: We heare for a treweth alſo of yt approching of Spaniardes: But what euilles will enſwe to our cōmon countrey, by foreine ſoldiours, what diſtructiō, & miſchief, euery man of vnderſtanding may eaſely perceiue: Therfore our princes, & ſtates, foraſmuch as they knew it to be their dewtie, not only to repulſe al violence & iniurie frō the people of theyre dominiōs, but alſo to trauel & forſee, that they be not deſceaued with falſe religiō, & run in daunger of euerlaſting dānatiō, are wholy prefixed, through gods help, to defend this war, which is moued againſt thē, not only beyōde al expectatiō, but alſo contrary to conenauntes & promeſſe. And therfore haue hyred you & others moe with al the ſpede that might be: but in aſmuch as the chieftanes of the leage are yet abſent, & wilbe heare within theſe few dayes, the moſt noble prince of Wirtemberge, Duke Ulriche, to thentent that in the meane time, the whole matter may be gouerned by an order, neyther that yt enemie may eſpie any occaſiō to

hurt vs, hath appoynted to be your Captayne, Iohn Hedecke a man of a noble houſe and parentage. Wherfore hym you ſhall obeye, and ſo demeane your ſelues in all thinges, that the ſame worthye and notable fame, whiche oure elders in tymes paſt haue goten in ſondry battels, foughtē with foreine nations, not without much māhod & bludſhed, may be alſo bequethed to oure ofſpryng and poſterytie: Al otherthynges we ſhal committe to almyghtie god, who doubtles in this ſo iuſte a cauſe, and godly defencion, will prepare ſuche meanes for vs, as vnto his diuine maieſtie, ſhal ſeme good and expedient. I told you before howe the Proteſtantes ambaſſadours departed from Regenſpurge whan there was no longer place of conſultation there: But now that their armie was leuyed, as we haue here ſhewed they aſſē
               bled at Ulmes, to conſult what is to be donne. Wherfore the .xxi. day The Proteſtātes letters to the Uenetians. of Iune, they adreſſe theyr letters to the Duke and ſtate of Uenyſe & complayning of the iniurie of the Biſhop of Roome, deſyre them that they wold not ſuffer hys force to paſſe through theyr dominion, and if the Biſhoppes power ſhulde be augmented, they ſhew by the examples of fourmer tyme, what they, and other people in Italie may loke for. They diſpatche theyr letters alſo to the moſte of the noble men in Germany, and admoniſhe them, that they doe not ſtop the ſoldiours, that repare vnto them. Agayne, becauſe they of Rhatia and Tirall, were ſore vexed, for the commyng of foreine ſoldiours, the laſte day of Iune they exhort them by their letters, not to ſuffer them to paſſe, and hereunto promiſe them ayde. They are alſo aſſiſtaunce of the Cytie of Norimberge (but they ſaye) they cannot, for that they haue ſkante mē ſufficient to defend theyr owne frontiers. Moreouer they commaund Scherteline the ſecond daye of Iuly, to inuade the enemies that wer in muſtering vnderneth the Alpes. And finally ſend Ambaſſadours to the Swiſſes. I ſhewed you before of the Cardinall of Trente, whō Themperoure ſent ſo haſtely inpoſt to Roome. Wherfore through his A leage beetwyxte the Pope & the Emperoure ſolliciting, the league, whiche before was conceaued and penned, the xxvi. daye of Iune is decreed vpon theſe couenauntes. Foraſmuch as Germany hathe nowe theſe many yeres perſeuered in great errours, in ſomuch that a great daūger is to be feared therby, for theſchewing wherof the counſel was called at Trent and commenced the laſt yere paſt in the moneth of December: and the Proteſtantes doe reiect the ſame, and ſaie it concerneth them nothyng, therfore hathe the Biſhop and Themperoure, for gods glory, and for the preſeruatiō of the publycke weale, but chiefly of Germany, concluded betwene them ſelues vpon certen cōdicions. And fyrſt in dede that Themperoure ſhall prepare an armye and althynge nedefull for the warre, in the moneth of Iune next enſwyng, and that he be furniſhed with all thynges, and that ſuch as refuſe that counſell, & maynteyne thoſe errours, he reduce

by forte of armes to the olde relygion, and obedience of the holy See: but yet that he do endeuour and proue al meanes, yf he can bring it to paſſe without warre: That he make no peace nor compoſition with them, that ſhalbe preiudiciall or hurtefull to the churche or relygion: The Biſſhop, beſydes thoſe hundreth thouſande Dukates, whyche he hathe alreadye defrayde, ſhall laye downe as muche more at Ueniſe, whych after hys Lieuetenauntes ſhall imploye vpon the warres and to no other vſe: And that yf no warres be, he ſhall receyue hys money agayne: Moreouer he ſhall furnyſhe Themperour in this warre with twelue thouſand fotemen of Italians and fyue hondreth lyght horſmen at hys owne charges for a halfe yeres ſpace, ouer which power, he ſhal place a Lieutenaunt Captaines and Centurions: And if it fortune the warre to be finiſhed, before the end of ſyxe monethes, to take the commoditie therof: It ſhalbe lawfull for Themperoure this yere, by the Byſhop of Romes permiſſiō, to take the one halfe of the church goodes in Spayne, moreouer it ſhalbe lawful for hym to ſell as much Abbey landes in Spayne, as ſhal amounte to the ſumme of fyue hundreth The church goodes in Spayne to be imployde herein. thouſande Dukates, and all thys only for the mayntenaunce of this warre, but yet vpon condicion, that he laie to thē againe in mortgage ſo mutch of hys owne landes: And becauſe the thing is ſtraūge, he ſhal make them ſufficient warrantiſe, at the arbitrement of the biſſhop: If any man wyll impeche or let thys theyr enterpriſe, hym ſhall they ioyntly reſyſt with bothe theyr forces, and the one help theother, and they bothe to be bounden thus to doe, ſo longe as the warre ſhall indure, & ſyxe monethes beſydes, after that the warre ſhalbe finiſhed: it ſhall be free for euery man to ioyne hym ſelfe vnto thys league, and to be both partaker of the charges & the gaine: This compoſition alſo ſhall the Senate of Cardinalles confyrme, and that which is ſpoken of Iune, to be vnderſtande of the moneth of Iune thys preſent yere, wherin they bothe haue ſubſcribed now to the leage before cōceaued. The copie of thys confederacie the Biſhoppes legate, Hierome Frāch ſhewed after to the Swiſſes, as ſhalbe declared in his place. Aboute thys tyme was a peace concluded betwene Fraunce and Englande, Peace betwixt fraūce and Englād. and the French king permitteth the kyng of Englande to enioye Bologne vntill ſuche tyme as he hath payed hym hys money dewe. And where at the ſame tyme Hēry the Dolphin had a daughter borne called after Iſabell, for the better confyrmation of that frendeſhyp, the kyng of England was deſyred to be godfather at the fountſtone who ſent hys deputie into Fraunce. Sir Thomas Cheynie knight, Lorde Warden of Cinke portes. Then alſo was the Cardinal of Saint Andrewes The Cardinall of Scotland ſlaine. in Scotlande in hys owne Caſtell aboute diner tyme, ſlayne by a certen gentleman, whoſe brother he had euyll intreated for Lutheraniſme. And he that did the murther fled into Englād. The third

daie of Iuly the byſhop of Rome ſendeth his letters to the Swiſſes, & threatning vpō them kindnes, for the frenſhip that had ben betwene The Popes letters to the Swiſſes. thē & his predeceſſours, he bewayleth, that ſom of thē, are through the diſceipt of the deuil, & law breakers, plucked from the apoſtolicall relygion & frō him, as the moſt deare children out of the boſom & armes The teares of the Crocodile. of a moſt louing father: Notwithſtanding it is the great gift of God, that many of them haue perſeuered cōſtant in the faith towards god & the church, to thintēt verely that others, which through the talke of wicked men, haue ben diſceaued, ſhould haue an exāple ſet before their eyes, & at the length conuert vnto the religion of their forefathers: for it is a great token of gods goodnes, that in this diſcention of religiō, they be at peace with in themſelues, wherin other places, for this occaſion hath ben great ſedition & tumultes: The whiche to appeaſe, he hath euer ſince he was firſt biſhop, vſed al ye gentle remedies he could deuiſe, and now alſo is fled to the laſt refuge, calling a generall counſel at Trent, a Towne of Germany, within the limites wherof, this euil ſede of heretikes hath chiefly increaſed: vnto the whiche Towne they might ſafly com, and there defend their matters, yf they wold: for he truſted, that inſo ſacred a ſenate, to the which alwaies all chriſten kinges and nations, haue attributed very much, & in the aſſemble of ſo many biſhoppes, which through the inſtinctiō of the holy ghoſt, ſhuld treate of religiō, no man wold be ſo wicked, that he wold not ſubmit him ſelfe to ſo great an authoritie, and which ſhuld not incontinently caſting awaie his wicked opinions, imbrace the iudgement of the catholicke church: And that he hath now alſo the ſame opinion of them, and by reaſon of theyr concord at home, hath good hope that ſo many of them as haue continewed faithful and conſtant, will obey the coū
               ſell, and that the reſt, which of no ſet purpos, but through a certen credulytie, haue ben broughte into errour, will not diſpyſe the authoritye of the counſel: which thing that they wold doe, & come vnto the counſell, as vnto a certen heauenly Senate, ouer the which God himſelfe is preſydent, he exhorteth them moſte erneſtly, as he hathe donne alſo before: And ſayeth howe it hathe ben a greate grief to hym, that dyuerſe in Germany, yea, of the ſame number, that are called Prynces, whyche not only doe proudely and inſolently contemne the counſell, but alſo bayte it with curſed and raylyng wordes, and ſaye how they wil not obey the decrees therof. But he was chiefly ſory for this cauſe that through the contumacie & diſobedience of theſe obſtinate perſōs, he is dryuen to attempt the matter by warre: For he coulde no longer The Pope attempteth the matter by force of armes. ſuffer ye loſſe of ſo many ſoules, whych through theyr hereſies, periſhed dayly, nor yet the oppreſſion of chriſtians, wherof that other belōgeth to his office paſtorall, and this to the dignitie of the degre wherin he is placed: And whyleſte he was thynkynge vppon a remedye, and

prayed God, to ſhew hym the waye, it chaunced luckely, that Themperour, a prynce of moſt godly zeale, offended with the like faultes in a maner, that he was, thought good to auenge the cauſe of religiō, againſt thoſe wicked heretikes, by force of armes: For where as by his interceſſion and meanes, a counſell was graunted vnto Germany, it ſemed vnto him, that ſuch as refuſed and contemned that, diſpiſed alſo his doing & authoritye: wherfore this occaſion offered euen of god, he tooke holde of it right gladly, & prefixed him ſelf to further this noble myde of Themperoure, as wel with his owne treaſure, as alſo of the church of Rome: for if he ſhuld otherwiſe do, & handel ye thing negligently & ſlackly, ther is no doubt, but god wold require at his hādes, as of their father, the ſoules of ſomany children, as wer loſt throughe the falſehead of heretickes: and for this cauſe doeth he open his mind & counſell vnto them, that they maye ſee, with what carefulnes he is vered, and may ioyne theyr prayers with his, that is, with God & religion: They haue don verely many godly actes, but neuer non more noble then this, if they wil kepe the olde amitie with god as their elders haue don, if they ſhew to the churche of Rome, which hathe euer don for them, their olde loue & fidelitie, yf in this now ſo godly a cauſe they wil geue theyr ayde & aſſiſtaunce: Which thing he deſireth them: grealy, they wold doe: The ambaſſadours of the Proteſtantes in the vpper part of Germany come from Ulme to Baden to the conuentiō 
               The Proteſtantes Ambaſſadours to the Swiſſes. of the Swiſſes, & declaring their meſſage, were delaied to ye moneth of Auguſt. Their requeſtes were, that they wold ſuffer no foreine ſoldiours to paſſe through their countrey, & that they wold permit their men to ſerue them in their war, if the thing ſo required. At this time alſo, they of Brunſwicke, Goſlarie, Hildeſſem & Hanobrie, at the commaundement of the Duke of Saxon & the Lantzgraue, Raſe Wuolbutel, the chief caſtel of the Dukes of Brunſwicke, which they had hitherto kept with a garniſō. The Paulſegraue, prince electour, in this The Paulſgraue axeth the cauſe of the warre. hurly burly maketh ſuite to themperoure at Regenſpurge, by his ambaſſadour, Sir Wuolſie Affeſten, knight, to knowe what is the cauſe of this war & againſt whom the preparation is made: he deſyreth him alſo to leaue warre, & beſech him to geue him licence to be an interceſſour in the cauſe. A few daies after, themperour maketh him aunſwer by Granuellan and Nauius, that it is not hard for him, to know both what is the cauſe, & whom the war concerneth. After, he reciteth the ſame thinges in effecte that he did before in his letters to the Cities, A pretence of mouing war that they obey him not, that they haue practiſed thinges againſt him in Germani, and in forein nations, vnder the pretence of religiō, how they wilbe bounden to no lawes, take other mens goodes and poſſeſons bothe ſacred and prophane, ſtyre vp other ſtates to Rebellion, reiecte the Decrees of Thempire, and woorke altogether by crueltye and a kynde of Tyrranye: Therefore he purpoſeth in thys Warre

to appeaſe not only relygion, but all other diſpleaſures in lyke caſe, & reſtore peace & libertie vnto Germany, and ſuch as ſhal do their dewtie to defend through his protection, and thoſe that be diſturbers of ye cōmon quiet, & be oppreſſours of libertye to punniſh ſore and extremly according to theyr demerites. This aunſwer of Themperoure, the The Palſegraue ſeketh to reconſile the proteſtāt to Themperoure, Paulſgraue, the tenth day of Iuly, when it was brought him the day before, ſendeth to the Duke of Saxō, the Lantzgraue, & the Duke of Wirtemberge, & declaryng the common daunger, that hanged ouer Germany, eſpecially by the ſtraunge ſoldiour, if the war ſhould waxe mortal, he beſecheth them, to condeſcend & graunt to as much as they maye: For albeit the likelynes of thinges is ſharpe & ſorrowfull to be holde, yet he ſuppoſeth, that in caſe they wold make their ſubmiſſiō to Thēperoure, & follow his mynd in certen thinges, it wolde be agreat furtheraunce to bryng the matter to a concord. And theſe be thinges, wherby he perceiueth Themperoure wilbe appeaſed, fyrſt if they wil craue perdon for theyr offence, ſecondly, if any mā hath don any thing vniuſtly, that it be amēded: fynally, yf they poſſeſſe ought of any other mans, that they wold permit that to Themperoure, or to ſome other as they ſhall thynke mete: Wherin if he maye doe any good, he promiſeth hys fayth & trauaile. In the meane time the Duke of Saxon and the Lantzgraue, to whom this ſoden tumult chaunced much vnloked Duke of Saxon and the Lentzgraue prepareth to war. for, eſpecially, for that themperour lately departed ſo frendly frō Spier, being aduertiſed of the whole matter, with great diligence gather theyr forces alſo, and warne their fellowes to do the lyke, & not to ſuffer thēſelues to be diſwaded, through the craftie counſel of certē. And whan they were aſſembled to take counſell, the fourthe daye of Iuly ſendyng their letters to themperoure, we haue heard (they ſaye) moſt mercyful Emperoure, by our Ambaſſadours ſent at your cōmaundement to Regenſpurg, how what time they had heard of preparation Their letters to Thē
                  peroure. for warre, the fellowes of our league & religion did ſollicite you dillygently, that you wold force, that Germany ſuſteined no dōmage: And albeit you aunſwered ſo at that tyme, that we myght wel ſuſpect ſomthing, yet wer we in a good hope, yt the ſame war had not ben moued againſt vs, or any ſtate of thempire, for ſo much as being called of you to that aſſēblie, we ſent our ambaſſadours thither with ful authoritie who alſo conſulted vpon your demaundes, & ſhewed, what their aduiſe was, in ſo much as we could ſuſpect no diſpleaſure: moreouer that aunſwer of youres, doeth cōcerne thynges paſt, but yet to come, whileſt you ſaye that you will eſtabliſhe the common welth, & accordyng to youre authoritie, punniſhe thoſe that ſhalbe diſobedient: Wherfore we could not thinke, that before you had publiſhed your demaundes, and before we had made any aunſwer, you wold haue prepared war: But at lengthe, whan by manye coniectures, and chyefely by youre

letters, adreſſed to certen prynces and Cities, and alſo by the wordes of Granuellan, and talke of Nauius, we perceyued that youre purpoſe was to punyſhe certen Prynces that were diſobedyent, and the brute was euerye where, that the warre was bente agaynſte vs we tooke it in dede heuely, and greuouſely as becommeth vs no leſſe, and thought good to ſende thys epiſtle to you, to pourge oure ſelues. And fyrſte, we are truly able to affirme, that we & oure leagefrendes haue alwayes dorne the common charges impoſed vpon vs more than others, whan ſome alſo haue gonne free: Moreouer, the ayde, that you deſyred in the laſt aſſemblie at Spier, we found the meanes that you had them graunted, and perfourmed the ſame oure ſelues: And now that after all theſe ſeruices donne, we ſhulde be charged with diſobedience, it doeth not only greue vs, but is alſo muche diſpleaſaunt and bytter: We wolde haue wiſhed ſurely, and it had ben alſo reaſou, that we ſhulde fyrſt haue ben accuſed and hearde, before it had commen to hande ſtrypes and that oure accuſation had ben thus blaſed abrode: For ſo ſhulde we bothe eaſely haue proued our owne innocencye, and cōfuted theyr ſklaunder, that of vs to you haue thus cōplayned: How louingly you dealt with vs, bothe lately at Spier, and alſo fiue yeres ſynce at Regenſpurge, it is openly knowen, ſo that to vs can be obiected no rebellyon, or dede vnworthy: we will omytte that, at youre requeſt, we put the poſſeſſion of the Dukedome of Brunſwicke, to arbiterment one yere paſte, and were in daunger therby to haue loſt oure lyues and goodes: Furthermore you are not ignorant, what time you wer created Emperoure at Frankefurt, in what ſort you bound your ſelfe to Thempyre, what you promiſed by a moſte ſacred othe, howe Thēperoure periured. your doynges ſhulde be accordyng to the lawes of the Empyre, whā any ſuch crime, as you now obiect vnto vs, ſhuld be layd to any mans charge: And where you intende to worke violence agaynſt vs before oure matter be hearde or knowen, we will committe that vnto god, and when we ſhall heare, of what matters you doe accuſe vs, we ſhal ſo make aunſwer, that all men ſhall vnderſtand, that we bothe ſuffer iniurye, and that you alſo, through the inſtigation of the Roomiſh antichriſt, and the wicked counſell of Trent, do attempt this war, to the intent both the doctrine of the goſpell, & alſo the libertie of Germanye The authors of this war. may be oppreſſed, and wil proue that there is none other cauſe: the cō
               dicion & ſtate of our thinges requyreth, that we ſhuld thus muche declare vnto you: you ſhall take it therfore in that part. For it had ben a a great deale more pleaſaunt for vs, to haue gratifyed you, and approued our fauour and dilligence. Themperoure, the ſeuēth of Iuly, writing Thēperours letters to the Archebiſhop of Collon. letters to the Archebiſhop of Collon, for the welth of Germany, (ſayeth he) that is to ſaye, that common quiet, right, & equitie, the dignitie of this our office & libertie of Thempire may be recouered, which

thynges in dede, certen ſeditious perſons, haue almoſte expulſed out of the cōmon welth and vnleſſe they ſhould be reſtrayned, wold take them cleane a waye, I am conſtrayned to attempte war, that I may reduce them to theyr dewtie: And for as muche as I heare ſaye, how they goe aboute all that euer they can, to allure you, & others to their fellowſhip, I commaund you, fyrſt, that throughout your whole prouince you let proclame, and doe foreſee that no man ſerue in this war, vnleſſe he ſerue me and my captaynes ſuche as ſhall haue commiſſion to ſhewe, ſecondly, yf any be gonne foorthe already to ſerue, that you call them againe immediately, and commaund them to tary at home, and attende vpon our commaundement: And ſuche as will not obey, that you punniſh them extremelye, & ſo demeane youre ſelfes, that I maye perceyue, that you loue the quyet of Germany: except you thus doe, know for certentie, that it ſhalbe to your great daunger, & loſſe of all that you haue. Theſe letters, whan the Archebiſhop had receiued, he publiſhed in all places, and commaunded they ſhuld be obeied: Beſydes he gaue commaundement that they ſhulde praye in Churches, that God of hys mercy wolde tourne awaye the greate daunger that nowe hanged ouer Germany. At the ſame tyme the Proteſtantes ſēd their ambaſſadours, to the kinges of Fraunce and England, newely reconciled, making ſuite to them for ayde. After the Duke & the Lātzgraue had wrytten thus to Themperoure priuately, as before is ſayd, at yt Ides of Iuly, they ſet forth a publicke writing alſo, wherin they Thēperours polycie. declare, howe thys warre is made againſte Religion, and this to bee Themperours intent, that vnder a ſerten pretence of rebellyō, and as though he wolde punnyſh but a fewe, he myght plucke awaye the fellowes of the league, one from an other, and ſo muche the more eaſelie at the length ſubuert them all. And hereof they bryng manye proues, and reporte what kynge Fernando, what Granuellan, what Nauius and others ſpake priuately at Regenſpurge, verelye that the contempt of the counſell was cauſe of thys warre. Moreouer (they ſaye) howe Themperoure ſent commaundement to them of Rauenſburge, whyche had lately receyued the doctryne of the Goſpell, that within a few dayes they ſhuld for ſake theyr enterpryſe, or els wolde he geue theyr Citie and Landes to be deuyded amonges the Soldiours: but the Meſſager was called backe with the letters by the waye, leſte it ſhuld come forthe a brode that the war were agaynſt relygion: Foraſmuch alſo as the byſhop of Rome hath geuē ſentēce againſt I ye Archbiſhop of Collon, for the reformatyō of doctrine & hath depriued him of The Cardinall of Auſpurge the firebrand of thys warre. hys dignitie, & for that Thēperoure in a maner doeth & threatneth the ſame, doeth not yt ſufficiētly declare the cauſe of the war? For it is a cō
               mon brure, how theyr drift is, yt the Cardinal of Auſpurg, who hath ſet this matter a fyre, ſhall throughe violence be ſubſtituted in hys place:

It is reported moreouer, that when they bee vanquiſhed, bandes of Soldiours ſhalbe placed in all partes of Germany, whych in Themperours name, ſhall ſee the decrees of the counſell concernyng relygion maynteyned and put in execution: Furthermore, it is wrytten by dyuers men, howe the Archebyſſhop of Toledo chiefly, and ſuch other prelates in Spayne, do geue a great ſumme of monye to thys warre which they wold not haue donne, if it had not ben for religion: It is wel knowen alſo, what maner of decree was made at Auſpurge .xvi. yeres ſynce, what tyme Themperoure proteſted, that he could not abyde thys ſecte and doctryne of Luther, but that to diſtroye the ſame vtterly, he wold beſtowe all hys force, treaſure, lyfe and blud alſo: For yf they were once oppreſſed, as God forbid, than ſhuld it quickely appere, whether they wolde ſpare thys religion, and wolde not rather ſlaye the miniſtere of the churche, inforce theyr wyues and their children, and reſtore Monkes and Freers and all that relygious rabbell: But Themperoure may not lawfully worke force agaynſt any ſtate, nor banniſh any man, before his cauſe behearde, nor bryng foreyn ſoldiours within the bondes of Germany, or chaleng to hym ſelf any inherytance or ſucceſſion belonginge to thempire: For he is bounden to theſe condicions, and hath confyrmed them by an othe: For yf it were lawful for him to doe otherwiſe, the ſtate of the publycke weale could not long endure: And what cauſe of diſpleaſure ſhulde haue agaynſte them, they cannot in the worlde perceiue: For touching me (ſaieth the Duke of Saxon) what ſo euer diſſention was betwene him, his brother Fernando, and me it was wholy quenched, two yeares paſte, at Spier, and for a nerer frendſhip, the lady Elenore daughter to kynge Ferdinando, was promiſed freely to my eldeſt ſonne, ſo that we could agree in religion. The ſame did Themperoure than cōfyrme, & what tyme I ſhoulde retourne home from that aſſemblie, he ſent to me into my owne lodging Granuellan & Nauius, & with moſte large wordes offered all good wil and frendſhip to me, and my children & my whole countrey. And what great cryme haue I commytted ſynce that time, that he ſhould intēd this crueltie againſt me? But doubteles the matter is euē ſo, as we haue ſhewed you before: becauſe we refuſe the biſſhoppes counſell, we incurred diſpleaſure: But reaſon wolde, that he ſhulde not imagine theſe thinges againſte the houſe of Saxon: For he knoweth, how, after the death of Maximilian, mine vncle Duke Fridericke, hauing the crowne imperiall offered hym, through hys voyce Duke Fridericke choſen Emperoure. and meanes gaue it vnto hym, to omitte in the meane tyme many other benefites which the houſe of Saxon hathe imploied on the houſe of Auſtriche. And in caſe he were offended for putting Iulius Pūugius from the Biſhopricke of Nunburge, I haue in bookes ſetfoorthe declared my ryght and tytle of Patronage, and if Themperour wold

appoynte indifferent iudges, offered to abyde theyr iudgment. Nowe concerning my owne parte (ſayeth the Lantzgraue) I was throughly reconciled to hym fyue yeres ſynce at Regenſpurge. And for that I intended a fewe yeares paſt to haue warred on certen Biſſhops, and for that afterwardes I did helpe my coſyn the Duke of Wirtemberg, to recouer hys owne, all thys and what ſo euer I had haply don beſydes agaynſte the lawe wrytten or decrees of Thempire, eyther priuely or apartely, it was for geuen me, and wrytinges made therof, cō
               firmed with handes and ſeales: Therfore can not I deuiſe or imagin what ſhould be the cauſe of thys grudge: Againe whan I ſpake with him nowe lately at Spyre, he ſhewed hym ſelfe ſo frendelye bothe in wordes and countenaunce, that I could perceyue no ſparke of diſplaſure. And it was couenaunted fyue yere ſynce at Regenſpurge, that if he ſhuld attēpt any thyng herafter agaynſt the Duke of Cleaue, that I ſhuld not meddle in the matter: After, he moued war agaynſt him, and I kept touche and promiſe: And than what time he receyued the ſame Duke agayne to hys fauoure, whiche was before Uerlone, he perdoned all yt had ſerued or aſſiſted hym with ayde. But yf he ſhould take in euill parte our abſence, that we came not our ſelues to Regē
               ſpurge: we haue bothe made oure excuſe, the Duke by hys Ambaſſa, dours, and I by preſente talke with hym at Spier. But what is then the lybertye of Germany, or ſtate of ye publicke weale, yf we muſt haue warre therfore, whan bothe in others heretofore, and alſo in this conuention nowe at Regenſpurge, many other Prynces are abſent: And as for the warre of Brunſwicke, we are not to bee blamed: For it is lawfull for all men, to ſaue them ſelues from violence. We haue often It is lawſul to repulſe a violence. tymes deſyred in ſondry aſſemblies, that hys vyolence myghte be reſtreyned: but more than wordes & letters we could obteyne nothing: And yet in thoſe letters, whych Fernando at our requeſt wrote herof to Duke Henry openly, wer other letters incloſed, wherby he myghte eaſely perceyue, that he neded not to obeye the others. Theſe Letters were founde in the caſtel of Wuolſbuttell, ſubſcribed with the kinges owne hande, and are foorth commynge, and nede be: But in caſe the lyke ſeueritie had ben extended to the Duke of Brunſwicke, as themperoure ſheweth nowe vnto vs, albeit we haue not deſerued it, there had ben no warre at all: But in aſmuche as he impugned vs, who for the profeſſion of the Goſpell doe ſuſteyne greate hatred, they coulde winke at hys myſcheuous actes. And Thēperoure knoweth, how we commytted the prouince taken, to gardience, and for the defence takē in hande we offered our ſelues to abyde the order of the lawe, and arbitrement by hym appoynted: yf he would haue taken the ſame way, and had not, forſaking the Arbiterment and contemnyng Themperours order, attēpted a new warre, but wolde haue tryed the matter

with vs by the lawe, the way had ben eaſy enoughe. For if we, being conuict in iudgement, had not obeyed, than ſhulde Themperour haue had iuſte cauſe to put the lawe in execution: but nowe, that he ſhulde thus doe, he hath not at al. Finally, from the time that this Duke and his ſon were taken, themperoure did neuer demaunde thing of vs for the ſame: therfore there is no cauſe, wherfore we ſhould be accuſed for negletynge oure dewtie. And in caſe it ſhoulde bee aſcribed to vs, as though we ſhuld impeache the law, then haue we to muche wronge. For in aſmuche as of many yeres now, thoſe only were receiued to be iudges of the chamber, whych hated our religiō moſt bitterly, for that The iudges of the Chā
                  ber be Papiſtes. the ſame iudges, all cōpoſitions ſet a part, gaue ſentence againſt vs & our fellowes in matters of religion, & alſo in ciuill cauſes wolde let vs haue no iuſtice, we did, as we myght doe euen by order of lawe, neceſſarely and lawfully refuſe them, as ſuſpected & our aduerſaries, proteſtyng that we wold declare more at large the cauſes of the refuſal, before choſen iudges. Therfore can there nothing be imputed vnto vs in this be halfe: Moreouer two yeres paſt it was decried at Spier, that the chamber ſhuld be eſtablyſhed vprightly, & why it was not ſo don, it cānot be aſcribed to vs nor our fellowes: And it is not vnknowē to themperoure, how the laſt yere in the aſſēblie at Wormes ther did no man reſiſt this decree of his more, than they themſelues, whiche wyll ſeme to be loyall & obedient princes, for this intent verely, that where as they be oure aduerſaries, they myght be oure iudges alſo. We doe heare moreouer that this is layed to our charge as much blame worthy, that we ſeke to allure vnto vs certē of the Nobilitie: But maruell it is, that we ſhould be reproued for this matter: For it is to be founde & proued, that this hath ben alwaies the maner in the dayes of oure forefathers, that they ſhould ioyne vnto thē not only the gentelmen of their owne coūtries but the biſhops alſo: And though there werſom fault therin, it is therfore lawful to moue warre againſt vs, our cauſe The leage betwixte the thre houſes. not heard, and albeit, that in the league of in heritaunce, which is betwene the houſes of Saxon, Brandenburg & Heſſe, themperour is excepted, yet ought this to be ſo taken, if he do not abuſe his authoritie. Wherfore, let Albert & Iohn of Brandenburge, coſins, who haue promiſed to ſerue Themperour againſt vs, conſider with thēſelues dilligently, what they doe, & remēber their othe, wherwith they ar boūdē: we wold they ſhuld haue this knowledg and warninge, as they alſo, which being our clientes, take wages vnder thē in this war. Neither are they excuſed, if haply they wil ſay, how thēperour is pourpoſed to punniſh certen princes for diſobedience: For they knewe themſelues, howe there can be no ſuch thing imputed to vs iuſtly: But if Themperoure had accuſed vs of any crime, as reaſon wold haue requyred, & that we could not haue confuted the ſame, he ſhulde not haue neded

to vſe all theſe polycies, and ſollicite our fellowes to withdraw themſelues from vs. For yf he coulde haue ſhewed our offence, they wolde haue forſaken vs, of theyr owne accorde, and in a cauſe that had not ben good, few wold haue a biden the commō daunger. Furthermore, what tyme we with the reſt gaue hym ayde two yeres ſynce, againſt the Frence king, he promiſed than, that when that warre ſhulde be finiſhed, he wolde goe into Hongary hymſelfe agaynſt the Turke. And nowe doe the Turkes inuade Hongary, and the places ther aboutes with great force & power, as in dede it is reported of many, & doubteles therbe in thoſe parties both at Offen and Peſt great garniſons of Turkes: But the poore mens liues of yt countrie are neglected, which are now caſt vnto theyr enemyes, as a praye, and in the meane while they ſeke howe to make ſlaughter in Germanye, and that all thynge maye ſwymme full of theyr blud, that profeſſe Chryſt. And ſeing it is ſo, we truſt ſurely, that moſte men will pitie and lament our caſe, and wil not aſſiſt our aduerſaryes, whiche ſeke only to extinguiſh the doctrine of the Goſpell, as they haue donne in all others places of theyre dominions, and bring vs into extreme bondoge, but wilbe content for reaſonable wages rather to followe oure campe, than theirs, wherin is the Romiſh Antichriſte, and his adherentes, whoſe chyfe endeuour Thintent of the Papiſtes is thys, that euen with the ſlaughter of all Germany, they maye eſtabliſh agayne, and confirme theyr wicked and deueliſhe doctryne. And in aſmuche as after muche intreatinge for peace beyng of no crime as yet cōuicted, we are enforced to warre, to defend our ſelues from violence, we truſt that God will aſſiſt the treweth agaynſt lyes and in thys hys cauſe, wilbe our hygh Emperour & enſeigne bearer againſte the wicked deuiſes of the biſhop. Unto him verely doe we commit the whole matter, and beſeche hym, to confounde the cruell counſelles of blud thirſters, and euer more and more to auaunce the maieſtie & glory of hys name. The ſame daye they wryte to Iohn Marques of Brā
               denburge: And becauſe he is bothe in the league of the Proteſtantes, The Proteſtātes letters to Iohn marques of brā
                  denburge. as by his owne letters can be proued, and agayne in priuate confederacie with them of olde tyme, they admoniſhe hym, that he weare no armure agaynſte them, but doe accordynge to the conuenauntes and bonde of league: for otherwiſe they will vtter the whole matter, & declare openly, how farre agaynſt hys dewtie, are hys doynges, Whervnto he aunſwereth, how he ſerueth Themperoure, he doeth not denye, foraſmuce as he hath put him oute of doubte, that he warreth not againſt religion: he is indede of the Proteſtantes league, but only by meane of the confeſſion of Auſpurge: As touchyng the pryuate league, therin is Themperoure excepted by expreſſed wordes: And ſeeyng it is ſo, there is no cauſe, why they ſhuld be offended with hys ſeruics, or to ſaye that he doeth ought agaynſte hys faythe and promyſe.

When that aunſwer was geuen, they ſet foorthe a publycke writing, and amonges other thinges, they confute that, which he ſayed of the confeſſion of Auſpurg, and proue by hys owne letters, that he is boū
               den to helpe them and theyr leagefrendes, yf the matter ſhuld come to ſuche a paſſe, albeit that any man did pretende & fayne an other cauſe of war agaynſt thē, as thēperoure now doeth. Wherfore they admoniſh dilligently almē, but chiefly captaines & ſoldiours, yt they ſerue not vnder him, which hath broken his faith. At ye Ides of Iuly the biſhop publiſhing a wryting, & ſpeaking much of his care & zeale towardes ye 
               The Popes bull againſt the Proteſtantes. common wealthe, & mens ſaluatiō, of the counſel begonne alreadie of the obſtinacie of heretickes, which contemne and refuſe the ſame, and haue moued warre agaynſt all godly men, he exhorteth all men in generall, to faſt & praye vnto God, confeſſe theyr ſynnes, and euery man choſe him a ghoſtely father where he lyſte, and than receyue the ſacrament, to the intent that god intreated, may proſper this warre, which Themperoure and he haue nedefullye attempted, to roote out Hereſies, and reſtore the peace of the Churche. And albeit Themperoures intent was, that leuying powers in euery place as ſecretly as might The diligēce of the Proteſtantes in leuying theire armye. be, he might ſet vpon the Proteſtantes, before they wer prouyded, yet was theyr dilligence ſo greate, and the courage of men ſo cherefull to defend this warre, that at the .xvi. daye of Iuly the Lantzgraue was in the felde with hys men, not withſtanding that in the lowe Duchland, Coūte de Bure had in maner hys whole armie in readines, neither was it certenly knowen, whom he wold firſt inuade. Before the Lantzgraue marched out of hys owne countrey, he ſent William his eldeſt ſonne of .xvi. yeres of age, to Straſburge, an exceading ſtronge The Lantzgraue ſent hys ſonne to Strauſburg Citie. At his departure from home, the Duke of Brunſwicke his pryſoner, ſent him word, that if he wold geue hym the hearyng, he wolde open vnto hym, what tyme it was deuyſed, and what thentente and pourpos of thys warre is: But the Lantzgraue, who ſuppoſed he ſaid it but for a craft, eyther to leſſon his owne offence, or to get hym libertie, refuſed to talke with hym: And he wolde vtter it to no man but to hym ſelfe alone, The fyrſt explocte that the Proteſtantes did in highe The fyrſt enterpriſe of the Proteſtantes. Germay, was agaynſt the enemie vnder the Alpes. For where it was reported by ſondry meſſagers, yt the biſhop his power hauing already almoſt paſſed ye Alpes, approched nere Germany, they thought good to preuent them. And thus ſtandeth the caſe. They that come oute of Italy, do paſſe by Trent, to Iuſprincke, a Towne of king Ferdinando. Frō thence is there two wayes to goe into Bauier, eyther downe the Riuer of Oeno, by Copſteyne, or els on ye left hād ouer the middes of the Alpes Kynge Fernando hathe almoſt at the going oute of the Alpes, the Caſtell of Erenberge ſituated vppon an exceadyng hyghe The Caſtell of Erēberg. mountayne, & the nature of the place is ſuch, by reaſon of the ſtraitnes

and holownes of the waye, and the headlong and pitchehill ſtepenes to looke dowewardes, that who ſo hath this paſſage, maye prohibit, beit neuer ſo great an armie for paſſing that way. Wherfore in the moneth of Iuly thither wēt Sebaſtiā Scherteline with a meane power at the commaundement of the Proteſtantes Ambaſſadours, aſſē
               bled at Ulmes, as I ſayde before, and by the waye takinge Fieſſa, a Towne of the Cardinalles of Auſpurge, which ſtandeth on the riuer of Leyche, the tenth daye of Iuly, taketh alſo that foreſayde paſſage & Caſtel, by compoſition made, with the ſoldiours of the garriſō within. His intent was, to haue marched on through the Alpes, & to haue taken alſo Inſprucke, and fortyfyed it with a ſtrong garryſon: For ſo ſhulde he haue kept both waies, wherby they come out of Italye into Germany, and ſo ſhulde he haue ſhut vp Themperour from hauynge eyter ſoldiours or vitalles out of that partyes: But in thys greate tumulte, when by the commaundement of king Fernando all men wer called to armure in the countie of Tirol, there came a great power to Inſprinke, vnder the leadyng of Fraunces Caſtelalte, gouernour of Trent, who leauing a gariſō to defend the Towne, kept thoſe waies Sherteline retireth. and paſſages. Wherfore Scherteline placing ſoldiours in the Caſtell of Erenberge, & Towne of Fieſſa, retireth, & with hys force repareth to the armye aſſembled in high Germany aboute the Riuer of Danubius called in duche Thonaw. The armie which Counte Hedeck led, taketh Dilling, a Towne and Caſtell of the Biſhops of Auſpurge, by compoſityon, and ſweareth them to be trewe to hym the .xxiii. day of Iuly. Aboute the ſame tyme, Maurice Biſhop of Eiſtet, ſendeth Ambaſſadours to the Chieftaynes of the warre, praying them, that they wold ſpare him & his: he promiſeth alſo to geue them paſſage through hys prouince, & vitaile by couenaunte. Beneth Dilling is the Towne of Donauerde, whiche being ſommoned to render, had refufed. But Donauerde taken. what time the armie came before it, and the ordenaunce was plāted, they yelded vnto the proteſtantes. In the meane ſeaſon the Duke of Saxon and the Lantzgraue marche forward with theyr armie, and paſſing through Frankome, whan the Biſhop of Wirciburge, had put them in ſufficient ſuertie, not to ſtoppe theyr vitaile, they wente & ioyned with theyr fellowes. At the ſame tyme in theyr Campe were the Ambaſſadours of the Marques of Brandenburge prince Electour, & of Duke Moris, ſent about the permiſſion of an in treatie: but where they referred the matter to theyr fellowes, there was nothing donne. Certen ryche men, that dwelt at Auſpurge, had packed vp theyr ſhort endes, and were gonne out of the Citie: And becauſe the brute wente, that they lent Themperoure monie, the ambaſſadours that were thā at Ulmes, ſending theyr letters & Meſſagers to the Senate of Auſpurge, ſhewe howe vnworthye a dede this is, and admoniſh them erneſtly,

that they wold ſorſee, that the like ben not don hereafter. The Senate maketh aunſwer, howe they had long before, geuen out their monie for intereſt, as their maner is, becauſe it ſhuld not be vnoccupied, knowing not of the warres: But now they ſuppoſe there is no mā, that geueth out hys monye to lone, nor none ſhalbe ſuffered to doe it vnpunniſhed, if they maye know it. Al this time was themperoure at Regenſpurg, & beſides thre thouſand Spaniardes, & about fiue thouſand Themperours power fotemen of Almaignes, and ſeuen hundreth horſemen, he had no more power commen to him at that time. He had ſent for the Spaniardes out of Hongary: And it were the ſame, whyche after the peace concluded with the French kyng, wintered in Lorayne, & after went through Germany into Hongary as I ſhewed you in the laſte booke. The peace lately made betwene Fraunce & England, chaūced luckely for the Proteſtantes, for that the Almaignes which had ſerued the French king, came vnto thē, through the cōduite of Counte Bichling, & George recrode, which was client to the Lanzgraue. Thēperour, yt xx. day of Iuly, by his letters patens doeth outlaw ye Duke of Saxō 
               The duke of Saxon and the Lantzgraue ar out lawed by Thēperour. and the Lantzgraue. In the beginning he accompteth at large, what paynes he hath taken hytherto, yt Germany myght throughly be quyeted, what decrees he hath made for the ſame, that no force ſhulde be don to any man, for any kynde of matter, but that al thinges might be don by law and cuſtom: Agayne, he ſheweth, how the ſtates of thempyre be bounden to him, and what fidelitie they ought to perfourme. But all theſe thinges (ſaieth he) neglected, Iohn Fridericke Electour of Saxonie, and Philip, Lanzgraue of Heſſe, by a certen raſh boldenes, haue at all tymes, as muche as in them laye, hindred all oure trauaile and paynes taken for the publicke weale, neyther haue they ben obedient, and haue not only them ſelues reſiſted vs, but haue alſo intiſed other ſtates to doe the lyke, and with them to make vnlawful cō
               ſpiracies. And the Lantzgraue certen yeares paſt, pretending a cauſe I knew not what, attempted war againſt ſom of the chiefeſt ſtates of thempire, and inuading their dominions, did extort agreat ſomme of monie. And after, they both together, ſet vpō an other prince of thempyre, the cauſe not knowen, and droue him out of his prouince, & kepte it to them ſelues. They haue alſo gotten into theyr owne. gouernmēt, ſondry Biſhoprickes and offices as well Eccleſiaſticall as Ciuile, the Lordes wherof are of an auncyente cuſtome vnder the iuriſdiction of Thempyre, & haue theyr place in the conſiſtory amonges other ſtates, and as yet alſo, thoughe they haue ofte complayned and ſued to vs in all aſſemblies, they deteine them ſtyll in that ſeruitude. They haue alſo ſpoyled many of theyr goodes and yerely reuenewes, and receyued into theyr tuition the clientes and ſubiectes of others.

And nowe lately alſo, throughe a certen ſinguler boldnes, haue ſollicited diuers ſtates, that they ſhould not come at thys conuention, to thintent they myght let our procedynges and brynge vs in contempt. And all theſe thinges doe they ſo much the more boldely, for that they contemne iudgementes, and neyther acknowledge nor feare the magiſtrate: For throughe theyr fault the hyghe iudiciall place of Thempyre is taken awaye: the lawes kepe ſilence, and of a long tyme now there hathe ben no iuſtice miniſtred, to the great loſſe and domage of many, and after a ſtraunge example, ſuche as hathe not ben hearde of before. And that which is worſte of all, they worke all theſe thynges, The Proteſtantes accuſed of treaſon. vnder that goodly and pleaſaunt name of Religion, peace, and lybertie: For theſe vſe they, as clokes, to couer theyr doinges, where they deſyre nothyng leſſe, than eyther the agrement of relygion, or of Germany the peace and libertie: certes they can proue by neuer a place of ſcripture, that it is lawfull for them obſtinately to reſiſte theyr hyghe Magiſtrate in any caſe: but the contrary is moſt manifeſt, aſwell by holy ſcripture, as alſo by autenticke hiſtoryes, that thoſe auncient profeſſours of the chriſten doctryne, which confirmed their faithe, not in wordes only, but alſo by theyr dedes and death, did obey heathē princes. Wherfore doubtles they ought much leſſe to denie vs theyr dewtie, vnder the pretence of religion. And when they denie that, they declare euidently, that theyr intente is, to take frō vs the crowne imperiall, ſcepter, and all oure authoritie, and vſurpe the ſame to thēſelues, and when they haue confounded all thinges, to oppreſſe religiō, law, peace, and lybertye: And thus auaunced hyghly, with new honours and poſſeſſions, to bring all men vnder theyr tyrany. For this do their wordes teſtifye, ful of malicious threatninges, and alſo their famous libelles and pictures diſperſed into all places, to the great mockerye & contempt of our name Moreouer, they haue not only made leagues againſte vs, in thoſe their conuenticles, but haue alſo ſtyred vp forein kinges againſt vs, & ſecretly aided the ſame with theyr helpe & coūſel. Ther be ſomme olſo that cantel what they haue attempted, to induce yt Turke into Germany. Which thing is the rather to be credited, for that the ſame ſhuld be verey fitte and commodious for their pourpos. Wherfore by theſe theyr doinges, they breake theyr allegeaunce, that they owe vnto vs, and infringe the dignitie of oure office, they reiecte all decrees, which they neuer eſtemed otherwyſe, than yf they had bē made for thys intent, that others myght not repulſe violence frō them ſelues, but that it were permitted to thē only, to doe iniurie to all mē. Therefore they haue fallen into that moſte heynous crime of treaſon, and into the condygne puniſhement for ſuche an offence by the lawes preſcribed. And becauſe theyr doinges beknowen, there is no nede to declare thē. And albeit yt through the authoritie, yt we haue, we might

haue punniſhed them long ſynce, according vnto their demerites, yet for the loue of peace, and to auoyde trouble, we haue fauoured them verye muche, graunted to them ofte in many thynges, more alſo than became vs, and herin haue oftener than once hurte our owne conſcience, and miniſhed oure authoritie, and not well prouyded for others. Thus did we fyue yeres ſynce at Regenſpurge, deale moſte gentlye with the Lantzgraue, & two yeres paſt at Spier with the Duke of Saxon, of thys hope verely, that they beyng vanquiſhed through our great lenitie, pacience and clemencie, ſhulde at the length leaue theyr vngodly deuiſes, and ſhuld nede of no extreme remedy. But where in dede I perceyued, that this did no good at all, & that they abuſed our gentlenes, inaſmuche as contemning the decrees of thempire, & breaking conuenauntes, they procede obſtinately, & throughe a licencious luſt to rule, take other mens landes & poſſeſſions, and wilbe bounden to no lawes: But ſeke, to ſubuert the whole ſtate of ye publicke weale. And certenly, vnleſſe they be firſt put to ſilence, neyther can Relygion be accorded, nor the other partes of the cōmon weale eſtabliſhed and refourmed, we are conſtrayned to vſe agaynſt thē, the authoritie, that god hath geuen vs. And becauſe theyr rebellion is manifeſt, inſomuch as they themſelues cannot denye, agayne, for that they woorke by violence, and will abyde no iudgment. Therfore doe we outlaw them, as falſe rebelles, ſeditious (of treaſon giltie) and diſturbers of the cō
               mon quiet, and we are prefixed to punniſhe them, as they haue deſerued, to thintente we maye haue libertie by them afterwarde, to eſtabliſh the common wealth, and doe ſuche thynges, as properly concern our office: therfore we ſtraytly charge and commaunde, that no man ayde thē in any caſe, neither take theyr parte: they that ſhall doe other wyſe, ſhall in curre the daunger both of lyfe and goodes: And let ſuch as are happely gon already to ſerue them, retourne as ſoone as they poſſible can. But let all men geue theyr ayde vnto vs, and fynde no let or cauillation throughe any league, or priuate conuenauntes. For we make all theſe thinges fruſtrate. Moreour we releaſe all the Nobilitie and commons of theyr dominions, of theyr allegeaunce & othe, wherby they are bounden to them, and aſſure them to be in ſaftye, yf they doe obeye: But ſuche as ſhall refuſe, to be punnyſhed, in lyke ſort as they. The .xxii. daye of Iuly, Gerarde Uelduuiche is ſente agayne from Regenſpurg to Cōſtantinople, frō whence he was but lately retourned. Thēperour, whan nothing could here be determined, prorogeth the conuentiō of thēpire vntil ye kalends of February in the next yere following: of the biſhop of Romes letters, ſent to the Heluetiās, The Popes letters to the Swyſſes. I haue ſhewed you before: whiche after the Biſhops legate, Hierome Franch had receiued, he ſent them from Lucers, and writeth to them,

alſo hym ſelfe the .xxv. daye of Iuly. That thre dayes ſynce were deliuered vnto hym the letters of the Biſhop & Senate of Cardinalles. And albeit they are in a maner of the ſame effecte, as wer hys former letters, yet, for that they conteyne ſomewhat more, he ſendeth them nowe a copie of the ſame with ſpede, and at the nexte conuention, he will ſhew them the principal. And foraſmuche as in the ſame league, whyche lately nowe at the ende of Iune the Biſhop and Themperoure made, there is leafte alſo aſpace for others, that will come into the ſame confederacye, moreouer, becauſe it was couuenaunted, that Themperoure ſhoulde trye, whether that hys aduerſaryes, and enemyes to the Churche of Roome, myghte haply with out warre be reduced to theyr dewetye and amendement, the Biſhop doeth erneſtlye require of them, that they wolde pronounce with expreſſe wordes, whether they wilbe of thys league, and whether they wyll obey the decrees of the Counſell of Trente: And where they haue appoynted hym a daye, at the nexte aſſemblie at Baden wherein they will make hym an aunſwer to hys former demaundes therefore he hathe nowe wrytten to them alſo, to the entente they maye conſulte in the meane ſeaſon. Therefore he dooeth beſeche them, in the blud of our ſauioure Chryſte, that they wolde dilygently conſyder with themſelues, what a noble and famous acte thys wylbe, and howe profytable for them and theyr ofſprynge, yf they wolde bothe helpe to quenche this fyre in Germany, and approue alſo the decrees of the Generall counſell. Where the biſhop vttered the cauſe of the league, ſumme men ſuppoſe The Pope bringeth the Emperouro into hatred. it to bee donne of hym for a craftie polycie that he myghte by thys meanes put Themperoure to his narrowe ſhyftes. For it is moſt certen, that he tooke it verey diſpleaſauntely, that Themperoure pretended an other cauſe of warre, as ſhalbe declared herafter. At thys time Alberte, ſonne to the Duke of Bauer, maryeth the Ladie Anne, the daughter of Kyng Fernando, and the Duke of Cleaue the lady Marye and other of hys Daughters. For when the Duke of Cleaue had Mariages in the broyle of warres. longe looked for the Daughter of Nauaire out of Fraunce, in vayne, as before is ſayde, the Byſhop of Roome graunted hym a lycence to marye an other. Wherefore he maryeth theſe ſame, and bothe mariages were ſolemniſed at Regenſpurge in the myddes of the vprores & tumultes of warre: eyther Maryage did concerne a newe bonde of amitie. A daye of ſyttyng was appoynted for the fathers at Trent, as before you haue hearde at the end of Iuly, but the matter was defferred till the begynnynge of the nexte yere, as in hys place ſhalbe declared. There were at Trent beſides the Cardinalles, the Biſſhoppes legate and the Cardinalles of Trent and Pacher a Spaniard, foure The number of the fathers at trēt. Archebiſhops .xxxiii. biſhops, & of them two Frenche, fyue Spaniſhe,

and one Slauoniſhe, the reſidew were all Italyans. Doctours of diuinitie, relygious .xxxv. of others yt had not profeſſed religion, twelue, for the moſt parte all Spaniardes. But amonges thoſe foure Archebiſhops, two of thē bare but the name only, Olans Magnus of Upſalya, and Robert Uenaut, a Scotte. And that chaunced thus. Whā 
               The king of Swecia receyueth the Goſpell. Guſtaue kynge of Swecia, nere vnto Denmarke, altered relygion, which was in the yere of our lord about a .M.D.xxxvii. Iohn Magnus, Archebiſhop of Upſalya, who miſlyked that alteration, forſaking the countrey fled vnto Roome, and came thyther with a meane company. Afterward going to Uenyſe, he became Suffragan to the Patriarche of that Citie: But in fyne waxing werye of that ſtate, he retourneth to Roome, and beyng broughte to an exigente, and a verey lowe ebbe, what tyme he had ſolde hys horſes, and in a maner putte awaye all hys ſeruauntes, the Biſhop of Roome placed hym, in the Hoſpytall of the holy ghoſte, wherin he ended hys lyfe full poorelye: there was with hym hys brother Olans. Unto whom the Byſſhop gaue that Archebiſhopricke of Gothlande, thoughe it were out of the precincte of the Church of Roome, and commaunded hym to be at the counſell, and geueth hym .xv. crownes a moneth to paye for hys bord, the other, a Scotte, whan he had infourmed the Biſhop of the Archbiſhopricke of Armacane in Irelande, he obtayned of hym the name and title therof. This Scotte was blynde, and yet did not only ſaye maſſe, but alſo wold ryde in Poſt. Wherfore the Biſhop wolde haue theſe two in the counſel, for oſtentation only, as though thoſe two nations ſo farre of, the Gothes and Iryſhemen, did acknowledge hys Authorytie, where they in verey dede, had nothyng but the Shadow and bare name of the thing. It is mentioned before how Duke Moris, after priuate talke had with Themperour, departed from Regē
               ſpurge: whan he was cōmen home, king Fernando followyng ſhortly after, he goeth vnto hym to Prage. After, the fyrſt daye of Auguſte, Thēperours letters to Duke Moris. Themperour ſendeth to Duke of Moris From Regenſpurge, a copie of the proſcription before rehearſed, and writing his letters commen to him & to his people, he reporteth in a maner the ſame thynges, that are compriſed in the table of on Lawerie. And becauſe he is allied vnto the outlawes by kinred & affinitie, ſo nere, that he may haply claime ſom ryght in theyr landes & poſſeſſions, he chargeth him moſt erneſtly, that he aſſiſt hym with all his force, to wynne theyr countries, yea, & that he get all him ſelf ſo ſoone as he can, and holde it for his owneryght, for els wil it come to paſſe, that all ſhalbe his that can catche it, who ſo euer he be, neyther ſhall the ryght of conſinage or compactes profet hym any thynge. And agayne, for contemnynge hys Emperours commaundemente, he ſhall incurre the ſame penaltie, that the others doe, he commaundeth alſo the Gentelmen and the people,

to obeye hys proclmatiō, and to ſerue theyr Prynce faithfully, vpon the like penaltie. The letters written to Duke Moris were commen alſo to his brother Auguſtus. Now was the whole armie of the The Proteſtantes letters to the Duke of Bauer, Proteſtantes commē to the Riuer of Danubius. There the Duke of Saxon and the Lanzgraue & counſellours of the warre, wryte theyr letters to Willyam Duke of Bauer. the .iii. daye of Auguſt: to ſpeake much of Thēperours preparation to war, it is no nede: For he knoweth the whole matter. And albeit they haue omitted no kynd of dewtye towardes Themperour, & ſuppoſed there had ben no cauſe of diſpleaſure, yet haue they hearde longe ſynce, bothe by his aunſwer, and alſo by the talke of others, that he intendeth to war on thē, as though they ſhould be diſobedient, where as yet they are neither conuict of any crime, nor haue done wrong to any mā: And beit ſo, that the offēce were moſt trew, that he imputeth to them, yet were it not lawful for him, before the caſe be examined, to attempte the matter by force of armes: but this enterpriſe of his, is agaynſte the ryght and lawes of Thēpire, againſt couenaunt & cuſtome of former time: For if Thēperours had any matters againſt any ſtate, the ſame hath bē euer accuſtomed to be examined opēly: Now, he knoweth, how of many yeres there hathe ben meanes deuyſed, that Germany myght loſe her libertie. And without all doubt, thys warre alſo tendeth to ſuche an ende: And albeit they haue alwayes hitherto perceyued in him a deſyre to mainteyne common lybertie, and although he lately promyſed manye thinges touching his good will to wardes them, and ſent them word that he wold not ſuffer the foreine ſoldiour to paſſe through his countrey, yet is it reported vnto them, that he hath geuē them waye already, and alſo vitayle and munition: whiche thinge greueth them not a lyttel, and ſuppoſe, that he is perſwaded, ſo to do, through falſe ſclaunders. But where as by theyr writinges lately ſetfoorth is declared aboundantly, how iniuriouſly the Emperoure dealeth, and howe many couenauntes, aſwel publicke as priuate, are in thys one thing broken, they truſt yet, that in the defēce of lybertye, he will aſſiſt thē with hys ayde and counſell, eſpeciallye, ſeynge he put them in hope of the ſamethynge nowe lately by hys meſſager. Therfore he ſhall doe well to cōmaunde Themperours ſoldiours to depart out of his Townes of Roene and Ingolſtad, or els to permit them to place as manye of theyr men there alſo. And that he geueth them free and ſafe recourſe throughe hys countrey, and relieue them with victualles, and aſſure them hereof by wryttynge. And albeit they thynke he wyll not ſaye them naye, yet they deſyre an aunſwer within ſyue dayes: For yf he ſhulde otherwiſe doe, than muſte they doe as theyr counſell ſhall ſerue them. At the ſeuenthe daye of Auguſte, in Machlin (a veraye fayre Towne of Thēperours in Brabant) gunpowder that lay in a Tower

vppon the walles, catching fyre through lyghtning, firſt ouerthrewe the ſame Towne from the foundacion, & thē lighted vpon the houſes Lightenyng cauſed of ſtruction at Machlin. within the Citie and without, aboue fyue hondreth paſes in circuite, wherof ſome were brente, ſome ouerthrowen, many ſhaken in pieces and tourned vpſydedowne, and of the ſame houſes many heuge and exceading great ſtones flewe threſcore paſes of through the violence of the powder, which ſo tearyng a ſonder the houſes, and ſhakynge & breaking the glaſſe windowes in euery ſtrete, defaced in a maner the whole citie, it ſinged trees and turned them vp by the rootes. In that calamitye periſhed two hondreth perſons, or there aboutes, partly cō
               ſumed with fyre, partly by the ruine and fall of houſes, ſtones & tyles ouerwelmed, beſydes thoſe that were ſore wounded, and yet eſcaped death, wherof the nomber was great. Many of them two dayes, and three, ſomme foure dayes after were found and drawen out of the ſellars and caues vnderneth the grounde, wherunto they were fled, diuerſe of them dead, whiche periſhed, eyther for honger, or for lacke of breathe ſome a lyue, which fynding theyr vitayles layde vp, ſuſteyned theyr life. Moreouer a great nomber of horſes, and other beaſtes wer burnt vp ſtables and all. And the wal itſelfe, where the Toure ſtode, was throwen downe flat with the grounde, aboue two hondreth paſes in length. At the .ix. daye of Auguſt, the Swiſſes mete agayne at Baden, and the fourth day after, maketh aunſwer to the proteſtants The Swyſes aunſwer to the Proteſtantes, Ambaſſadours, whom they appoynted to be there at the ſame tyme, as before is mentioned, not all the Swiſſes, but ſuche only as wer of the popiſhe religyon. Who ſayde they were very ſory, that this warre was moued betwene Themperoure and them, neyther was there anything that they had rather, or wiſhed for more, then peace. Therefore they wolde not intermeddle in this warre to nor fro, nor incline themſelues to either partie, howbeit, they wolde kepe out foreine ſoldiours, and not ſuffer them to paſſe thorow theyr dominion, and ſtaie their owne men at home, as muche as in them lyeth: And for the ſame cauſe haue geuen ſtrayte commaundement already, that no man goe foorth to ſerue in the warres, but attend vpon the Magiſtrates pleaſure, and looke to the defence of theyr countrey: yet this notwithſtandyng, many are gonne a warfare, whom they haue takē into wages: which thing is a great grief to them: therfore they deſyre them, to diſcharge the ſame, and ſuffer them to retourne home agayne: Beſydes the former demaundes, the proteſtantes requyred of them this moreouer, that they wold not enter into that confederacie of Themperour and Biſhop of Roome, nor ayde thē with any men, wherunto the biſſhop eſpecially moued thē, but that they wold aſſiſt them, whych wer conſtrained to defend vniuſt warre, and repulſe from them violence. And reporting many thinges of the Biſhops iniquitie, who wyll both

rule the counſell, and be iudge alſo, and holdeth the ſame in a place ſet for iniurye, vpon occaſyon ſpeake of the death of Iohn Diazius, and The deathe of Diazius is vnpuniſhed. ſhew how that deſtable murther is not only to this daie vnpuniſhed, but is ſo much commended of many alſo, as though it were worthy a great rewarde: which thing is a warning to them, how daungerous and vnmete it is for them to come in ſuche places, where theyr aduerſaties haue al the gouernement, & amonges them, the biſhop of Trēt, lately made Cardinal, depely bounden to the Biſſhop by moe wayes than one. For aſmuche as the Proteſtantes with all theyr force were at the water of Thonawe, Themperoue whiche as yet was not fully fourniſhed, in the begynnyng of Auguſt, leauing Regenſpurg with a garniſon, went to Landſhut, a Towne of the Duke of Bauers, by the Riuer of Iſara, and pitcheth his tentes without the walles. The Duke of Saxon the Lantzgraue and theyr felowes, ſendyng theyre The Proteſtantes proclayme war. agaynſt thē
                  peroue. letters from Donauerd, the eleuenth daye of Auguſt, declare of what mynde they are towardes hym, after the maner and lawe of Armes, and the laſt moneth (ſaye they) we made our purgation to you by letters, Emperour Charles, of ſuche thynges as we are accuſed of: And albeit reaſon wold, that eyther you ſhuld haue layde a ſide your warlike furniture, or at the leaſt haue declared the cauſe of the warre, and hearing vs ſpeake lykewiſe ſhuld haue don accordyng to the cuſtome of Thempyre, and your fayth promiſed by an othe, yet foraſmuche as you doe neuertheleſſe procede, we are alſo compelled to put on armure to beare of thys vniuſt violence muche vnworthy your perſonne: For that you nowe ſeke to extinguiſhe the doctryne of the Goſpel, and lybertie of thempyre, by ſondry of your actes it may be proued. For you knowe youre ſelfe, what maner of conſultations, you haue had nowe many yeres, with that Roomiſh Antichryſt, and foreyne kynges, that you myght eyther ioyne them with you, or incenſe them agaynſt vs. And agayne, without the aduiſe of the Princes and ſtates of Thempyre, you haue taken trewes with the Turke, contrary quite to youre promeſſe. For what tyme Germany gaue you ayde, two yeres paſte, agaynſt the Frenche kyng, you affirmed, that the ſame warre beynge finiſhed, you wold goe your ſelfe with an armye agaynſt the Turke: But nowe haue you made a compoſition with hym, verely, to thintēt you myght the better accompliſh the thyng which you haue intended agaynſt vs. And nowe in thys conuention at Regenſpurge, you haue ſet a newe collour & face of the matter, ſpeakyng much of youre owne induſtrie and zeale to the cōmon wealthe and countrey of Germanie, and of the contumacie of certen others. Whice doubtles was done of you for this intent, that you might ſeuer vs one from another, that ar confederated for relygion. For you are not able to charge vs with any faulte of neglectyng our dewtie, & diſtruſting your cauſe, you haue

not ſommoned vs to appere, and come to our aunſwer before the Senate of thempire, yea, you did not ſomuche as once name the parties: The crafti
                  
                     〈…〉
                  s of themperoure. and yet in the meane ſeaſon, wryting your letters to dyuers Princes and Cities, you diſſembled ful craftely, as though you attempted not warre againſt religion, but to punniſhe certen rebelles. But it is manifeſt enough that you ſhoote at relygion, and appereth herof ſufficyently, in that you ſollicited the Biſhop for a counſell, wherin, beſydes his clientes and adherentes, no man maye haue place, nor libertye to ſpeake, There were a very fewe, that were ſomwhat franke in ſpeakyng, Lybertie is exiled out of the counſell. but a meane was founde that they were called awaye, & worſe placed in theyr ſteade. What maner of decrees alſo, ye fathers at Trēt haue made now, it is knowen to al men: wherfore this is not the coū
               ſell, that hath ben ſo often promiſed in the aſſemblies of Thempyre, as we ſhewed you the laſte yere at Wormes. And the ſame thinges we ſayde than, we will, ſhuld be nowe repeted: Moreouer that it is your pourpos, to cōpell vs, to approue the counſell, it is to be proued by the Biſhops letters lately ſent to the Heluetians, wherin he complaineth ſore of diuerſe in Germany, which reiect the authoritie of this counſel, and ſayeth how this is the cauſe, for the which he attempteth warre: And becauſe you were alſo prefixed to warre for the ſame matter (he ſayeth) howe it chaunced to hym luckely, and therefore wold imploye therupon, all the force and treaſure of the churche of Roome and hys owne alſo. Wherefore ſeeing the Biſhop hathe vttered that pretenſed pourpoſe of youres, which you wold haue cloked by an other coloure, who can doubt any longer, but that you pricke at relygion? Certenly we knowe oure ſelues faulty in nothyng, which eyther we wold not ſhuld be heard openly, or that we can wel aunſwer: but it had concerned your office, after the example of your predeceſſours, to haue called vs before the Senate of Prynces, and lykewyſe, to haue hearde oure reaſons. Neyther did it become you thus to vſe vs, to call vs to the aſſemblie, to propound of the common wealth, to axe our aduiſe & counſell, and in the meane whyle to prepare warre agaynſte vs. For what kynde of thing is thys, to leaue the Turke, and to bend all the furye & rage of warre againſte vs, as thoughe we were a greate deale worſe than he? But we truſte aſſuredly that God will impeche and hynder thys ſo vnworthy a facte: For if there were any grudge or diſpleaſure betwene you, youre brother Fernando and vs, the ſame was wholye forgeuen at Cadame, Uienna, Regēſpurg and Spier: Therfore you maye paynte and ſet out the matter as muche as you lyſte, yet knowe we for certentie, that there is no other cauſe, but that trewe relygyon ſhuld be oppreſſed, and Germany loſe her lybertye. You wryte in dede to diuerſe, and go aboute to perſwade, as though you deſiered greatly, that the doctryne of the Goſpell myght be auaunced, but the opinions

of the vniuerſitie of Louayne, confyrmed by your iudgement, agayne the execution of Godly men within your Realmes, and dominions. The articles of the Uniuerſitie of Louayne. And this confideracie made with that Romiſh Antichriſt, declare and ſhew well enoughe what your intente is, verely euen this, that you myght recouer and eſtablyſh agayne all kynde of Papiſtrie, quenching the trew doctryne, that we profeſſed at Auſpurge. And ſeing the caſe is thus, and that we made our league for this pourpos, that we myght perſeuer in thys Relygion, and defende it ioyntely together, although any man els ſhuld pretēd ſome other cauſe of diſpleſure, agaynſt any of vs, we were dryuen of neceſſitie to ſtande to oure owne defence, whyche bothe Gods lawe and alſo the lawe of nature doeth permitte and graunt vs. And albeit, that by reaſon of this your enterpriſe, we are in nothing bounden to you, and therfore neded not to declare vnto you any part of our mynd, yet for a further aſſurance, we renounce the allegeaunce and dewetye, wherby we were boundē to you, not that we wold deminiſhe the ryght and commoditie of thē
               pyre, but rather preſerue and mainteyne the ſame. This therefore we proteſt openly, and that in ſolemuwyſe that we are of this mynd, that we purpoſe to repulſe from vs, thys warre of you, and your fellowes. For in ſo godly and honeſt a cauſe, we ought to refuſe no perill. They ſent theſe letters by a yong gentelman and a Trumpeter, as the maner Thēperoure woulde not receyue the Proteſtants letters. is, to themperoure in hys campe before Landſhut: Whiche he did not only refuſe to receyue, but alſo cummaunded in paine of theyr life, to cary it agayne where they had it: And added this moreouer, that if any man from hencefoorth came vnto hym from them, he ſhoulde inſteade of a chayne of golde, be rewarded with an haulter. Then deliuereth he vnto them the Table of preſcription before ſaied, and geueth The table of preſcription. them a moſt ſtreight charge to delyuer the ſame to theyr princes. Before they ſent thys epiſtel, it was debated, howe themperoure ſhulde be termed or ſpoken to. And the Duke of Saxon wolde not haue geuen hym the name of Themperoure, for otherwyſe it is not lawfull to warre with hym: but the Lantzgraue was of a contrary minde. And eyther of them had ſoothers, and vpholders of their ſaing. And at the length thys meane waye was diuiſed, that they ſhulde call hym, as it were he, that vſed the place of Themperoure. After they conſult, whither to goe: ſome ſayde, to Landſhut, where Themperoure was: but when they that were experte in the knowledge of the countrey, had ſhewed them howe they muſt goe through fennes, where the wayes were ſo narrowe, that oftentymes, by the ſpace of a myle, there coulde goe but one horſeman at once, alteryng theyr purpoſe, they determine to goe to Regenſpurg, where Themperoure had leaft a garniſon and munition: For there was bothe a place commodious to incampe in, and if themperoure wolde come to reſcowe them that were beſeged,

they myght trye the matter with hym in the playne felde. Wherefore remouing theyr Campe, they march foreward, howebeit verey flowly. And in maner aboute the ſame tyme, whyche was at the Ides of The Popes armie commeth to thē
                  peroure. Auguſt, arriued at Landſhut the Italians or Biſhoppes force, which were ryght welcome to Themperoure, who beyng aduertiſed by eſpiall, of the progreſſe of hys enemyes, ſente diuers and ſondrye meſſagers, exhortynge them to make haſte. The footemen were teen thouſande, and fyue hundreth demilaunces. Ouer al theſe had the Biſhop made hys nephewe, by hys ſonne, Octauius Farneſius, general. Under hym ſerued many noble Captaynes, Alexander Uitellius, Iohn The Captaynes of the ſaid armie. Baptiſte Sabello, Sſortia Palauicino, Fridericke Sabello, Paullus Uitellio, Iuly Urſine Alexius Laſcaris, Hierome of Piſe, Iohn Mary of Padowaye, Niclas Plumbine, Niclas Petilian. With this power alſo Coſmus Medices, Duke of Florence, ſente two hundreth horſemē at the conduite of Rafe Balion, and Hercules Duke of Farrare, a hundreth, by Alphōſo his baſtard brother. The biſhop had ioyned with Octauius, the Cardinall hys brother, Alexander Farneſius, as it were to eſpie what Themperours doinges were, & alſo to be aſpurre vnto hym to prycke hym forewarde, yf nede required. Whan Farneſius departed out of Italy, he ſhulde ſaye as it is reported, that he wolde make ſuche a ſlaughter in Germany, that hys horſe myghte ſwymme in the bludde of the Lutheranes. Not longe after came alſo the Spaniardes, whom themperoure had called out from Naples & Millan, aboute ſyxe thouſande, olde and expert ſoldiours all. Theyrechieftaynes were Philip Lauoye, Prince of Sulmone, Aluar Sandey, Alfonſe Uiues, Iames Arzie. Themperours lieutenaunte was The Capitaines of thē
                  peroures armie. Fernando Toletane, Duke of Alba: ye next place after hym had Iohn Baptiſte Caſtalde. The Cardinall of Auſpurge was head commiſſioner for vitayle. There ſerued Themperour alſo, Maximilian of Auſtriche, Emanuell Philiberte, ſonne to the Duke of Sauoye, Ericus Duke of Brunſwicke, and Philip the ſonne of Duke Henry priſoner, George Duke of Megelburg, George Duke of Brunſwicke, brother to Henry, a man of the Church, Friderick Furſtemberg, and Renard Solmen, Erles, with diuerſe others. In the tētes of the Proteſtātes, were Iohn Erneſt Duke of Saxon, brother to the Prynce Electour, The princes of the Proteſtantes cāpe. and Iohn Fridericke the electour hys ſonne, Philip Duke of Brunſewicke with hys foure ſonnes, Erneſt, Albert, Iohn, and Wuolfange, Fraunces Duke of Luneburge, Wuolfang Prynce of Anhalde: Chriſtopher Henneberge, George Wirtemberge Albert Manſfelde with hys two ſonnes Iohn and Uolrate, Lewis Oetingen with his ſonne of the ſame name, William Furſtemberge, Chriſtopher Oldenburge, Hubert Bichling, and Iohn Hedecke, Erles all. Moreouer Recorde, and Rifeberge, and eyght Enſeignes of Swiſſes. Wherfore whan all

theſe forces were commen together, beſydes that power which Coſite de Bure brought oute of the lowe countrie, the Emperoure remouyng hys Campe, marcheth towardes Regenſpurge. That knowen, many beganne to ſuſpect, that he wolde into Meyſſen and Saronie. Wherfore they made Bridges and tranſported theyr armye ouer the Ryuer of Thonnawe. And when they had marched a little waye towardes Norgouia, they had intellyngence that Themperoure wente frō Regenſpurge to Ingolſtad. Then tournynge againe ouer Rough an vneuen wayes they repare to Dannbius, leſte Themperour ſhuld take Nuburg, which is thre miles aboue Ingolſtad, and Donauerd, and ſo ſhoulde haue the waye open into the lande of Wirtemberge. Whan they were comen to Naſielſe, the nexte daye the Lantzgraue wente foorthe with no greate company of Horſemen, to take the vieu of Ingolſtad, knowyng not that Themperours armye was there. For he had hearde only of a fewe Spauiardes, that laye therin garriſon, The Lantzgraue rioeth foorth to eſpye. and them wold he haue prouoked to eſcarmouche: But whyleſt he marcheth, there appere certen horſemen of the Prynces of Sulmone. The charge beyng geuen, dyuerſe were ſlayne on both partes, but yet moe hurte and taken. It was knowen by them that were taken, that Themperoure wolde encampe the ſame daye at Ingolſtad. Thys facte of the Lantzgraue, the Electour of Saxon toke diſpleaſauntly and greuouſely, and yf he doe the lyke hereafter, without makinge hym priuie to it, he proteſteth, that he wyll departe. After marchynge foorthe a little waye with theyr whole armye in ſuche order, as yf they ſhulde haue foughte a battell, they retyred with theyr ſoldiours, to theyr campe. The ſame nyght followyng, when men were in theyr fyrſt ſlepe, the Spaniardes enter the campe where Counte Hedecke laye, who was appoynted vnder the Duke of Saxon, and kyll The Spaniardes inuade the Proteſtantes cāp. to the number of an hundreth of hys fotemen, and loſt dyuerſe of their owne men alſo. Wherfore there was a greate vprore throughoute all the campe, whych by reaſon of the darknes, was alſo more encreaſed. The nexte daye, whyche was the .xxix. of Auguſt, certen Centuryons and Captaynes were ſente oute to vieu the ſituation of theyr enemies Campe. Upon whom the horſemen of Italy breakyng out of an Ambuſhe, gaue the charge ſodaynely. And when many were ſlaine on cyther ſyde, they retourned agayne, without theyr pourpoſe. Wherfore the nexte Mornynge the Lantzgraue, accompanyed with a fewe others, choſen oute of the whole number, goeth foorthe to knowe ſome certentye, and fyndyng a foorde, where the Horſemen that were ſent oute before hym, ſayde there was nonue at all, he retourneth backe to the Duke of Saxon, and ſheweth hym, howe Horſemen maye paſſe the Riuer. The laſte daye therefore of Auguſte they were agreed to

ſetfoorthe in the mornynge as ſoone as daye appered, and to take the hygher grounde, where in tymes paſte ſtoode the watche Tower of Ingolſtad, and there to plant certen pieces of Ordenaunce to ſhoute into theyre enemyes Campe, to ſee yf they can perauenture prouoke Themperoure to battell. When it was far foorthe nyght, the Duke of Saxon aduertyſed the Lantzgraue twyſe, at ſondrye tymes, that Themperoure was departed, and how hys Campe ſmoked: But he, geuynge no credite to that reporte, ſente foorthe Whilliam Schacht with fyue bandes of hys owne Herſemen, to kepe the foorde, and to make Brydges for the Munition and footemen: ſhortly after followeth he with hys whole power, and Munition in greate haſte.
            When he was commen to the waterſyde Schachte ſhewed hym, howe Themperoure was not remoued oute of hys place. When he had ſente the Duke of Saxon intellygence hereof, he marcheth to the hylle beforeſayde, and there planteth part of hys Ordenaunce. He placeth hys menne alſo on the lefte hande and on the ryghte: The ſame did the Duke of Saxon, whan he was commen thyther with hys companye.
         
         
            
            
               ✚ The eightenth Booke of Sleidanes Commentaryes, concerning the ſtate of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne of the Empyre of Charles the fyfte
            
               
                  ❧ The argument of the eyghtenth Booke.
               THe Erle of Bure paſſeth the Rhyne, by meanes of the Archebyſhop of Mentz. The counſell of the Lantgraue is not allowed to ſet vpon the Emperour. The Switzers wyll not meddle in this warre: Wherfore the Duke and the Lantgraue ſollicite the Bohemers: & aunſwer fully to the accuſations and diſſemblinges of the Emperour. They remoue theyr Campe to cutte the waye from the Erle of Bure. Peter Stroſſe kepeth not promyſe, to lende them money. Touruert being rendred to the Emperour, Duke Maurice holdeth an aſſemblee of his ſtates againſt the Duke of Saxon, vnto whome the Lantgraue aunſwereth. The Duke of Saxons countrey is ſet on fyre and deſtroyed by the Hongarians, and Duke Moris ſurpriſeth certen of his townes. Fourtene Martyrs brent at Meanx. The Proteſtauntes hauyng leuied their campe, are purſued. The Duke of Wittēberg and certen cities make their peace with the Emperour. The father of Trent, eſtabliſh the Article of the inſtitution of man. After the death of kyng Henry the eight, the Goſpell had fre paſſage in Englande. Marques Albert is taken pryſoner by the Duke of Saxon.
            
            
               WHan Maximiliā the Erle of Bure, of whō is mētioned before, had aſſembled al the power The Erle of Bure leadeth an Army to themperour. he coulde, in the lowe coūtrey, which were foure thouſand horſemen, and ten thouſand fotemen, and emonges them certen bandes of Spanyardes and Italians, whiche had ſerued the kyng of England in his warres againſt Fraunce, marching forwarde with the ſame out of Brabāt in the moneth of Auguſt, paſſeth ouer the Rhine aboue and beneath Mentz, wherſoeuer he coulde get ſhipping, notwithſtandinge that the Proteſtauntes had layde a power on the other ſyde, at the leading of Chriſtopher Oldenburge, and Riſeberge, which ſhuld haue ſtopped their paſſage. The Archbiſhop of Mētz, was thought to haue holpen much in this matter. When the whole armie of the Proteſtauntes was come to the forſaid place, they ſhot of al their ordinaūce into themperours cāpe moſt terrible. Euen ther the Lantgraue, calling before the Duke of Saxō, ye counſellours & captains of y• war, if I had y• gouernmēt alone, The bould & profitable counſell of y• Lantgraue. ſaith he, as I had what time I reſtored y• Duke of Wirtēberg, I wold firſt vndertake to geue y• charge vpō thēnemy wt ii. legiōs, & bring ye piōners to caſt down their trēches, & that done, aſſaile thē wt the whole force & power, but herein whileſt thopiniōs of mē were diuers, & ſome diſwaded y• thing, as ful of moſt peril, & others miſliked not y• ſame, ſo yt ther wer no daūger to be feared of the townes men, which had great ſtore of ſhot & munition, &

that the horſemen were alſo at the firſt charge giuen: nothyng was attempted. Whiche thing doubtles is ſo much reproued of many, that this ſame errour is thought to be the cauſe and beginning The cauſe of the Proteſt. miſery. of their calamitie, and of the Emperours victory. For they farre excelled in horſemen, and than was the Emperours campe intrenched but with a lowe ditche only, ſo that it was but of ſmall force. But what time the Emperour had ſuſteined the ſhot and brunt of that day, the next night followyng he ſo well fortified his campe, that after he was of better confidēce, and might endure more eaſely all ſtormes that came. But they ſaye, how in this ſo great a daunger the Emperours harte and Feare in the Emperours Campe. courage was wonderfull good, and not only declared no token of feare him ſelfe, but alſo boldened others exceadingly, and offered to take ſuche part as they did. How the Emperour ſolicited the Switzers by his Treaſurer of Burgundy, I ſhewed in the laſt boke. Unto thoſe requeſtes was aunſwere made in the aſſemblie of Baden, holden in the moneth of Auguſt, as before is mentioned. How they wil not infringe the league that they The Swiſſes aunſwer to the Emperour. haue with the houſe of Auſtriche and Burgundy. Moreouer, they wyll call home agayne, ſuche as are gone forth a warfar, and vnleſſe they ſhall obeye, punyſhe them accordingly. Thus aunſwered thoſe nyne townes, that are of the popyſh Religiō: But they of Zurich, Bernes, and Baſill, and alſo the Schafuſians, for as muche as the Emperours and Byſhoppes letters did not importe one, and the ſame cauſe of this warre, againe, in as muche as the copy of the Emperours and Byſhoppes league, which was ſhewed them by the Byſhoppes Ambaſſadour, ſpake playnly, how this warre was attempted, to roote out the Religion of the Proteſtauntes, they tolde the Emperours Ambaſſadour, that they would take deliberation in makyng an aunſwere, and attende, vntyl ſuche tyme as the Emperour had aduertiſed them, whether he would permitte them to kepe ſtyll their Religion in ſafitie. Whan the Emperour harde of The Emperour to the Swiſſes is a Goſpeller. this, the ſeuen and twenty day of Auguſt, he addreſſeth to them his letters out of the Cāpe before Ingolſtad. Where they haue not made the ſame anſwer, that the reſt haue done, he can not perceiue the cauſe, & ſuppoſeth yt this is done through ye craft of his aduerſaries: For he heareth how in the former aſſembly of Badē, they went about to perſwade wt them, as though he had moued war, not to puniſh rebellious princes, but againſt certē cities, to thintēt yt through ye biſhops aid, ye doctrine of ye Goſpel & alſo ye libertie of Germany might be oppreſſed, he hereth moreouer, how thei haue ſollicited thē, not only for aid agaīſt him

but alſo concerning a league, wherof as he vnderſtandeth they haue put them in good hope, & that in the next aſſembly, they ſhal make thē a direct aunſwer: And as touching the cauſe of y• war, for as much as they haue vnderſtāden the ſame, aſ wel by his priuate letters writtē vnto thē, as ſuch alſo, as he hath publiſhed opēly, it nedeth not here to be repeted. For that he hath ether moleſted any man for Religion ſake, or giuen occaſion of rebellion, it can not be ſhewed nor proued: but yt ſtreight wayes frō the beginning of his preparatiō vnto war, he treated frēdly & gently with diuerſe more alſo, thā was decent for his perſon, to do to men of ſo meane eſtate & degre. Nether can this excuſe their rebelliō, for yt the byſhop of Rome doth aſſiſt him, for not only the Princes of Italy, but certen alſo of Germany, and diuerſe gentlemen of right noble houſes, & emonges thē ſom of the religion & league of the Proteſtauntes, do ayde him now, & wil venter their liues, & ſpend their blud in this war: Whiche doubtles thei wold not do, in caſe the matter ſtode as theſe ſeditiouſe The Profeſtaūtes one againſt another. perſons do falſly report. And yt they haue alwayes gone about, vnder the pretēce of religion, to reſiſte their hygh magiſtrate, to oppreſſe religiō & the libertie of Germany, & bryng al other ſtates into their ſubiectiō, it is by many of their doings ſo well knowen, that it nedeth no further declaration. For verely vnder the ſwete name of Religion, they haue allured into their cōfederacie ye chiefeſt cities of Germany, & through their Force ought not to be vſed in Religion. force, & furniture, haue gottē the landes & poſſeſſiōs of others. How they now alſo go to worke, & compelle other Princes ſubiects to take their partes, and diſturbe many in their religion, and inforce them to another kinde of lyfe, caſt alſo diuerſe in pryſon and fetters, and threaten them cruelly, and robbe and ſpoyle churches, the thyng it ſelfe declareth. For this is the very cauſe, why they couet to haue them in their league, that by this meane being made ſtronger, they might the more eaſely accomplyſhe their pretenſed purpoſe: he doubted not, but they alſo perceiue theſe thinges, and vnderſtande ryght well, what incommoditie, or diſcommoditie they may loke for, by their ſocietie. And ſeing the matter is thus, and inaſmuche as they ar not ignoraunt both of his good will & alſo of the cauſes of the warre, he truſteth that they wyl refuſe their league, and kepe their ſoldiours at home, and call home ſuche are gone to ſerue into the warre, vnder a ſet penaltie, and doe nothing contrary to the auncient leagues, and by the example of the reſidue, obſerue peace and amitie. For this ſhall both redounde to theyr owne prayſe, and ſhalbe to hym alſo ryght acceptable.

vnto the which letters they wryte again after the ſame ſort as they anſwered thambaſſadour before, and deſire him to accept in good part their delay in anſwering: And in aſmuch as he affirmeth, that this war is nether to oppreſſe Religion, nor yet ye libertie of the countrey, they ſay how they will do again none other wyſe thā ſhal become thē: For if any be gone out of their confynes a warfare, the ſame is done without their leaue and knowledge as oft times it chaunceth: And their maner is, not to call thē again that go forth without their licēce, but what time they retourne home, to puniſh them. And as they did moue the Swiſſes, ſo likewyſe the Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue ſollicited the Bohemers: but thei made ſuch aunſwer as The Proteſtauntes ſēd to the Bohemers. it appered wel, yt their myndes were alredy perſwaded through thaccuſation of king Ferdinando. Whan they perceiued this by their letters, about the end of Auguſt they wryte again, and ſhewe them manifeſtly, that this war is attempted againſt religion, and ſent vnto them the bokes whiche haue bene lately ſet forth concerning the ſame, and require thē to worke no diſpleaſure againſt them, and laſt to ſignifie vnto thē, what they intend to do. About the ſame time alſo thei publiſh a wryting, wherin they ſay how they are aduertiſed by them that are credit worthy, how the biſhop and Antichriſt of Rome, an inſtrument The Pope hireth men to poyſon other. of the deuil, & authour of this war, who in certen yeres paſt, by his hired miniſters, ſet many townes of fire in Saxon, hath now ſent forth impoyſoners, to infecte their welles, and ſtanding waters, to thintent that the ſame which war and yt ſword can not diſtroy, theſe may diſpatche with their poyſon. Wherfore they do admoniſh vniuerſally al mē, but chiefly their owne ſubiectes, to waite narrowly, that ſuch men be apprehē
               ded, and being put to torture, whan they ſhall haue tried their miſchief, that they ſuffer accordingly. And within a fewe days after, the Duke of Saxon his ſonne, Iohn William, in his letters publiſhed, geueth warning to his coūtrey, yt they take diligent hede to thē ſelues. For lately not far frō Weynmar a town of Turing, a certen Italian was taken of ſuſpiciō who cōfeſſed that he & diuerſe others had money giuē them at Rome in the byſhops name, yt they ſhuld, with fiering & poyſon, do as much hurt in Germany as they poſſible might. Cōcerning their outlawyng, & how themperour ſent a copy therof to ye Duke & to ye 
               The Proteſtauntes anſwer to the table of outlawery. Lantgraue, I haue ſhewed you before: Wherfore whā they had receiued it, in their cāpe at Ingolſtad, ye ſecōd day of Septēber, in ye defēce of their honor & eſtimatiō, they anſwer in a very lōg wryting. That he ſo highly cōmendeth his zeale & good wil tomany,

it is nothing but diſſimulatiō: for ſince the time he was firſt choſen Emperour, he hath always ſought meanes, how to bring it in bondage. For this was verely the cauſe, why he leauing Spaine and his other countreis, hath retourned ſo oft in to Germany, and bene at ſo importunate charges. Of like ſort is the ſame, which he ſpeaketh of religiō. For his purpoſe hath bene alwayes, ye hauing oportunitie he might oppreſſe the ſincere doctrine. For ſo oft (ſay they) as he graūted peace vnto vs & The Emperours crafte towarde the Proteſtants our religiō, he did it craftely, for a time only, vntil we had giuē money to ſerue the publique vſes & neceſſities of thempire. After he called the decrees made, in doubt & into queſtion, & helde the matter ſo long in ſuſpence, till he had made peace with the French king, & taken truce with the Turck, & that the biſhop & he eſpiyng a time conuenient, had appointed the counſell of Trent, & concluded vpon a league: but hereof wil we bring probations. Fiue yeares paſt at Regenſpurg, he made a decree of religion, and wher as in diuerſe pointes we miſliked the ſame, he declared his minde more at large, and gaue it vs in wryting ſufficiently: The ſame in other aſſemblies after, his deputies & king Ferdinando did cōfirme. And yet two yeres ſince, in the cō
               uention at Spier, whan mention was made therof, he ſayd, how he did remēber no ſuch declaratiō. The laſt yeare in the cō
               uention at Wormes, the Byſhop of Hildeſſeme, ſaid openly before al the Princes, how themperour promiſed the catholikes, yt the decree of Spier ſhuld take no place after the Frēch warres. A few monethes paſt, when he went to the conuention at Regenſpurg, Granuellan ſpake it to me, ſayth the Lantgraue, in the preſence of the Paulſgraue, of my counſellours, & the Ambaſſadour of the Duke of Wirtēberg, how that decree of Spier was applied vnto the time: And that now themperour can not longer mainteyn the ſame againſt the other ſtates. Sixe yeres paſt at Hagenaw, king Firdinando, whan he ſheweth his commiſſion The Emperors decrees made for fear to the catholiques, ſaid, that vnto vs ſhould no decrees be obſerued: For they were made for fear of the Turkiſh warre, what time he had nede of our ayde. What thinke you? Was not this a goodly cauſe and a fetch to ſupplant vs & our felowes. They confeſſe the craft thē ſelues, wherby they licked vs of our money. Therfore it is playn, that he intended alwayes the diſtructiō of religiō, as the late cōfederacie declareth & taried but only for a time to ſerue his purpos, & becauſe he wold appere to haue ye matter lawfully decided, he was euer in hād wt vs, yt we ſhuld ſubmit our ſelfs to ye biſhop of Romes coūſel, but why we might not ſo do, it is ſufficiētly declared ī our bokes ſet forth of

And his purpoſe was, to maintain & execute the decrees of the counſell, for the accompliſhement wherof he had longe before ſollicited certen forrein Princes: but fearing leſt by this mean he ſhould ſet in his top, all that cleaued to religion, he pretended an other cauſe and fained rebellion, that he might withdrawe our fellowes, and whan he had vanquiſhed the chiefeſt, myght after compell the reſidue to obey his commaundement. And albeit that he and his brother thought to kepe maruelous ſecret this their ſubtill and craftie counſell, yet through the ſingular goodnes of God, it commeth to lyght dayly more and more. For the Biſhop himſelfe, by his Ambaſſadours declared to the Switzers, the cauſe of the warre, and copie of the league. Wherby it is manifeſt that not, they alone, but al other that profeſſe the ſame doctrine, are in the lyke daunger, & that this is their indeuour, to reſtore papiſtrie in all places. Let all men iudge therfore how truly this matter was handled, when lately in the conuention at Regenſpurg, they went about to perſwade, and cōcluded alſo, that for the appeaſing of religiō, they would vſe lawfull and quiet remedies. He tolde me hym ſelfe ſayth the Lantgraue, lately at Spier, that he was in no The diſſimulation of the Emperour. league with the Byſhop: The ſame affirmed Granuellan. This is verely that ſame fatherly mynde and affection: This is that zeale and loue of peace, wherof they ſpeake ſo muche. Did euer man heare of the lyke thing, that he wold perſwade the Princes quite contrary, to that whiche he hath had ſo long prefixed in his minde? We know right well, what dutie the Princes owe vnto the Emperour, and againe, what he ought to perfourme vnto them: For as we are bounden to hym, ſo is he againe bounden alſo vnto vs: And wher as our cauſe not heard, he doth outlawe vs, and ſeketh to put vs beſides our lādes and poſſeſſions, in that he breaketh the bonde of the ciuile lawe, wherby the patrone is bounden againe to his cliente. Nowe where he chargeth vs with rebellion, it is nothing, and he him ſelfe knoweth, that he doth vs wrong. For euen for the ſame cauſe, ſaith the Lantgraue, he gaue me thākes lately at Spier for that I haue omitted no diligence to appeaſe religion. But where he ſayth, that I prepared warre, & punyſhed certen ſtates by the purſe, I denie it not, and there was iuſt cauſe ſo to do: Neuertheleſſe it is openly knowen, how through the mediation of Lewys the Paulſgraue, and Richard the Archbyſhop of Treuers, all this matter was quietly ended: he him ſelf alſo, writing his letters, all be it he had taken the matter diſpleaſauntly, yet for as muche as I had diſcharged mine armie,

ſignified that he required no more: Again, what time he ſpake to me of the ſame ſixtene yeares ſynce at Auſpurg, I made my purgation in ſuche ſorte before king Ferdinando, Friderick the Paulſgraue and certen others, that he was contēt and ſatiſfied. Wherfore he ought not to make that mattir any part of occaſion of this warre. And where as I reſtored Ulriche Duke of Wirtemberg, at the interceſſion of George Duke of Saxō, and The Archbiſhop of mentz, I was for that matter reconciled by compoſition, which he ratified. And after at Regenſpurg, vpō his faith and aſſuraunce, he toke away cleane and abolyſhed al diſpleaſure. Now he ſpeaketh alſo of ye warre with the Duke of Brunſwick: but the cauſe therof we haue expreſſed in wrytting, and after that, in a moſte frequent audience of the Empyre, he him ſelf being alſo preſent, we declared more at large two yeares paſte. The Duke that tyme made anſwere, but the Emperour refuſed to heare our confutation of the ſame. And why wold he not heare and examine dewly the whole matter, and by the aduyſe of the Princes, haue taken ſome ordre in the thing? Certenly becauſe he deſyred ayde for the Frenche & Turkyſhe warre, of a purpoſe he let it ſlepe, and wold haue it put to gardens, and herein we fulfilled his deſire at Wormes, & were content that Frederick the Paulſgraue and his Coſin Iohn Simmer, ſhould kepe and gouerne the prouince by vs taken, vntill ſuch tyme as the matter ſhould be lawfully decided and determined. That done, he aſſured vs, that the Duke of Brunſwick ſhould alſo aſſent to the ſame, and wryting his letters, charged hym earneſtly, that he ſhould obeye, but he cōtemning his commaundement, rayſed warre againſt vs, and was taken therin, as it appereth by a wryting ſet forth by me and Duke Maurice. Therfore did we nothing in this warre contrary to our dutie, nothing againſt the lawes, and herein we appeale to egall iudgement. But here by it is to be ſene, what fauour he beareth to Religion. For albeit that the Duke of Brunſwick contemned his commaundement moſt raſhely, although at what tyme he heard of the ſequeſtration, he ſpake of Themperour many lewde and opprobrious wordes, yet, becauſe he The Duke of Brūſwi
                     〈…〉
                   a bitter enemy to ye proteſtants. was a moſte bitter enemy of our Religion, he did althyngs vnpunyſhed. Where he ſayth, that we haue brought certen vnder our ſubiection, it is farre otherwyſe, and we haue ofte made aunſwere to the ſame. This in dede may be wel verified of him whiche hath brought vnder his iuriſdiction diuerſe prouinces of the Empire, and alſo Byſhoprikes, and againſt this preſent warre, hath aſſembled nobles and gentlemen, that he might al

lure them to him for our diſtruction. This verely we graunt, that we haue receiued diuers into our tuition & fidelitie, that if they ſhould be in daunger for the doctrine of the Goſpell, we ſhould defende them: And that we ſuppoſe to be our duty, for God commaundeth to ſuccour the afflicted. And none haue more nede theſe many yeares nowe of helpe and defence, than thoſe that are taken for Lutherians. But in other things that do not concerne Religion, we defend them not, no, we haue always exhorted them to geue the magiſtrate their right and honour due. He obiecteth to vs, that we ſhould haue exhorted ſom not to repare to the Aſſemblie: But that is both vayne and abſurde: For where as our Ambaſſadours wer lately aſſembled at Wormes, and he went to Regenſpurge, we commaunded thē, that (al other thinges ſet a part) they ſhould go alſo to that aſſemblie. Unto all other aſſemblies of thempyre, ether we haue comen our ſelues or always ſent our Ambaſſadours. Concerning that he ſayth of the chamber, and iudgement, it hath ben ofte confuted heretofore. Moreouer he maketh mention of an Heathen Magiſtrate, to declare that we might not reſiſt hym. But we haue not only done our duty, but alſo more than we ought to do, & haue geuen him more, than euer our aunceſters haue accuſtomed, to our great loſſe and hinderaunce: And that he hath no cauſe of complaint at all, it ſhall appere by that we ſhall here recite.
            A certen Ambaſſadour of the Frenche kyngs ſent vnto hym The french Ambaſſador diſſwadeth the Emperour from this warre. lately (by occaſion fell in talke of this warre) He ſaieth, it is a very great enterpriſe that he taketh in hand, and aduiſeth him to conſider with him ſelfe, how great is the force of Germany, and how muche daunger is in the thing: And if perchaūce one or two haue offended, there may a meane be founde, how to pacifie the matter without warre. Wherunto he made this aunſwere, there nedeth no pacifieng of the matter: For he wil conquer Germany, or hazard all that euer he hath in the worlde. The Emperour will cō
                  quer Germany. For the power therof is not ſo great, that he nedeth muche to feare it: For twenty yeares ſynce and more, hath he layde the foundation of this matter. Oftentymes they haue giuen hym ayde, in ſondry and many warres, lately alſo againſt the kyng him ſelf. They haue bene at great charges, in many aſſēblies of the Empyre. Moreouer in ſondry warres they haue loſt a great number of their mē, & ſo is their ſtrength decayed. And al theft thinges hath he done for this intent, that Germany might he diſtitute of power, & voyd of force and ſtrength: therfore is this tyme commodious to worke this feate in. He that heard this

talke of his by the mouth of the Ambaſſadour, an honeſt man and worthy of credit, reported the ſame vnto vs. Why ſhould he than impute the cauſe of the war to vs, ſeing he hath intended the ſame, of ſo long tyme before? Whan we were than priuate perſones, and drowned in the dregges of the Romiſh Religion? And if he had ſtande to his decrees and conuenauntes, than we wold haue done our duty: but in aſmuch as he hath brokē the ſame, and the chief obedience is dew vnto God, let him aſcribe the faulte vnto him ſelfe. For conſidering that he intēdeth deſtruction both to Religion and libertie: he geueth an occaſion, wherby we may reſiſt him with a good conſcience. For in this caſe is it lawful to reſiſt, as it is to be proued both by ſacred & prophane hiſtories. For God is not the authour of vniuſt violence, God is not the anctour of wrong. nether are we bounden to him otherwyſe, than if he fulfyll the conditions, for the whiche he was created Emperour. He graūteth that he hath agreed with vs priuatly, and that is to vs a great pleaſure to heare: Wherfor thē doth he moue war for thoſe matters, for the which once a faithful agrement was made? For it can not be proued that we haue committed any rebellion, ether before or after the ſame compoſitions. But thus the caſe ſtandeth. He made a decree at Wormes .xxv. yeares paſt, and ſet forth a proclamation, againſt Luther and ſuch as imbraced his doctrine, & appointed moſte extreme puniſhmēt. And that ſame acte now in this warre he intendeth to put in execution. His Crown and Scepter we neuer coueted: For we are content with our owne landes and reuenewes, and praye God, that in his feare, we may kepe and maynteine the ſame. If it be true that he ſayth, why haue we ſo oft geuen him ayd, and lately but two yeares ſynce, againſt the kyng of Fraunce? For the whiche deſert and benefit he ought in dede to forget al diſpleaſure, though no reconcilement had bene made. We neuer reported him euil, but for the opinion of his vertu, haue al ways commended hym highly. And as for famous libelles and pictures, nether haue our diuines nor yet any others ſet forth againſt hym: Yea our diuines and learned men haue euer more extolled him with great prayſes, & exhorted the people in their ſermons to do the ſame, and praye to God for his preſeruatiō. Perauenture they haue ſet forth ſomwhat againſt the byſhop of Rome: but there was no cauſe why we ſhould inhibie them ſo to do. But how vilaynouſly and ſlaūderouſly Cochleus, and Hadamar, the White frere of Collon, haue rayled againſt vs, our fellowes, and diuines, euen now at Regēſpurg, whan the The Rable of Papiſtes. aſſemblie was holden to appeaſe the controuerſie, it is manifeſtly

knowen. He obiecteth vnto vs conſpiracies, and conuenticles wherin he doth vs great iniury, as in all other thinges. For we are borne and bred in Germany, where men be far void of ſuche crafty deuiſes, as haue bene wrought againſt vs theſe many yeares paſt, and now firſt bewray them ſelues. Howbeit that we might defende our ſelues againſt vniuſt violence, we made a league, and denie it not, and did it only to defende our ſelues, and to iniury no mā, and wherfore we made it, we haue now in two ſeuerall writinges declared. And fiue yeares ſince ſaith the Lantgraue, when I went through with the Emperour at Regenſpurg, Granuellan ſayd then to me, and to my chauncelour, how the Emperour was nothing offended with our league, but could be content alſo, that we ſhould receiue in to the ſame as many as we would. After he ſpeaketh in darke wordes, as though we ſhould haue moued the Turke to inuade Germany: But this ſhall the thing it ſelfe confute. For we haue always giuen ayd againſt the Turke, yea more than euer our progenitours haue done, and that at ſuche tymes as we were not bounden, for that the couuenauntes were not kept, and whan diuerſe others, whiche had promyſed ayde perfourmed nothing. But you haue heard already how he and his brother haue deuiſed ſo with the Turke, that he might oppreſſe ſodainly vs only and our fellowes. He had ayde giuen him lately by a publique decree againſt Fraunce: Than he promyſed, that whan that warre ſhould be finiſhed, he would go ſtreight againſt the Turke. After he made peace with the enemy, without their knowledge, with whoſe money he had made warre, & behold now, he bēdeth al his force againſt vs. Is it not a goodly matter to ſe the munition brought out of Auſtriche to the warre in Germany, and in the meane ſeaſon to ſuffer Hongary to be ouer runne with the Turkes? The ſeditions, cōſpiracies, and treaſons, wherwith he chargeth vs, are none at all, nether is ther any other cauſe of war, than the ſame before rehearſed. He ſayth, he hath graunted vs ouer muche, and wynked at our doinges, to the grudge of his own conſcience: but this is fayned alſo. For his deſire was long ſince to haue made warre againſt The Emperour pretended this war long before. vs, and could not, being impeched hitherto, and was of neceſſitie conſtrained to differre it, till he had quieted the Duke of Cleaue, the king of Fraunce, and the Turke. For what hys mynde hath bene, thoſe extreme and moſte greuous executions of godly men in his coūtreis do declare. And that alſo he agreed with vs heretofore, we now firſt perceiue, that it was done for this intent, that being diſpatched of other affaires, he might

entent, that being diſpatched of other affaires, he might intēd this warre only. Wherof aſſuredly I coulde ſuſpecte nothyng, ſayth the Lantgraue, by reaſon of the great good wyll and humanitie that he ſhewed me lately at Spier. At the which time alſo Nauis wylled my Chauncelour, that in any caſe this talk might be kept ſecret. Finally the ende of his accuſation is, to pluck our fellowes from vs. And therfore aſcribeth vnto vs Tyranny, extortion and diſturbaunce of the clergie, but vndeſeruedly. For we punyſh extortions and murther in our dominiōs extremely, and therby haue purchaſed no ſmall hatred to our ſelues. But lately that innocent man, Iohn Diazius, was ſo cruelly and deteſtably murthered, as neuer man was, from the beginning of the worlde vntyll this day: That Fratricide his brother apprehēded and accuſed. Certen Princes made requeſt that ſo horrible a fact myght be punyſhed: but what inſued therof, the matter it ſelfe declareth. He imputeth the cauſe of all diſpleaſure and trouble vnto vs: But his decree of Wormes The decres of Wormes was the trō
                  pet of this warre. was cauſe of all together, wherunto our aduerſaries cleaued as to a moſte ſure foundation, eſpecially the Duke of Brunſwick, whiche made a confederacie with diuerſe, before the conuentiō of Auſpurg, where as, what maner of decree was made, it is openly knowen. Certenly thoſe cruell and fierce wordes ther pronounced, cauſed vs to make the league and cōfederacie that we are in at this daye. The Byſhops adherētes haue bene euermore buſy with vs, in al aſſemblies, and would haue compelled vs to the choiſe of meates, and holy dayes of their owne makyng. Moreouer we permitted the Emperour at Auſpurg, whan he promyſed vs faire and largely that he ſhould appoint preachers. But it is knowen wel enough, how wicked and how ignoraunt men he aſſigned to that office. It is an auncient cuſtome The cuſtom of thempire in aſſēblees. of thempire, that whā any Prince is minded to retourne home, from thaſſemblie he may do it by the Emperours leaue. How be it, my father (ſayth the Duke of Saxon) what tyme he was at Auſpurg, could not obtaine licence of him to departe, and heard it alſo reported, that in caſe he prepared to goe, he ſhould yet be ſtayed againſt his wyll. And albeit my vncle Friderick had done muche for hym, yet would he neuer, as long as my father liued confirme hym in his own Dukedome, only becauſe of the decree of Wormes and Religion. Seing therfore that the cauſe of this warre is manifeſtly knowen, we deſyre all men to geue no credit to the contrary, and defende with vs their common and natife countrey. As for our own ſubiectes and clientes, whom he hath releaſed of their allegeaūce which

they owe vnto vs, we doubt not but they wyl do their duty vnto vs as they are bunden. The proteſtaūtes letting ſlippe that occaſiō of fight at Ingolſtad, as before is ſayd, and remayning there thre dayes after, whan the Emperour in the meane ſeaſon had fortified his Campe ſtrongly, the fourth day of Septē
               ber, they remoued thence, that they might encountre with the The Proteſtauntes remoue their Campe. Erle of Bure, or ſtop his paſſage: Notwithſtanding that ſome were againſt it, and ſaid how they nede to go no further to ſeke the enemy, which was in ſight, and before their eies. They pitched the next tyme at Neuburg, which they had fortified with a garniſon before, two days after they marched to Donauerd. The tenth day of September they encāped beſydes Uending, a towne of the Erles of Oeting, ſending from thence eſpialles to bring them ſome intelligence of the Erle of Bure. That perceiuing the Emperour, ſent aduertiſement to the Erle, who turning out of his way, and marching from Norinberg to Regenſpurg, came to the Emperour at Ingolſtad in ſafitie. Wherfore the Proteſtauntes being fruſtrated of their hope, the third day after returne vnto Donauerde. Hether came vnto them Chriſtopher Counte Oldenburg, and Friderick Rifeberg with two legions, and the Erle of Bichling with fiue enſeignes of fotemē. In the meane tyme the Emperour remoued his campe to Nuburg: And whan no aide came, the ſouldiours of the garnyſon rendred the towne. The Emperour pardoned them al, taking ſtipulation of them, that they ſhoulde no more weare armure Nuburg rē
                  dred vnto ye Emperour. againſt him. Than the report went, how the Emperour would to Auſpurg. Wherfore the Germaines paſſe ouer Thonawe, to let him of his iourney: But whan he leauing a garniſon at Nuburg, marched toward Marxeme, they returne back into their former campe. I tolde you before how they had ſent Ambaſſadours for ayde both into Fraunce and Englande, but that was in vaine. And the king of Fraunce in dede excuſed the matter, for that hauing made peace with ye Emperour, he ſayd he could not. How beit, for that he would not haue the Emperours Fraunce de
                  
                     〈…〉
                  ed to ayde ther Proteſt. power increaſed, he deſyred Peter Stroſſe (a Florētine, a man of war and exceading riche) to lende them thre hondreth thouſand crownes, and to the intent he might the eaſelier doe it, he payeth a great ſomme of money, that he ought him. He was content, for aſmuche as they of Straſburg, Auſpurg, and Ulmes became ſuerties, & goeth forth with Iohn Sturmius, that was ſent Ambaſſadour into Fraunce, to the Princes in their campe at Donauerde. Whan he came thither, he was honorably receiued, and departed in ſuche ſorte, as he would aſſuredly

defray the money: but when the tyme came, that he ſhuld diſburſe it, he could no where be found in all Fraunce. Many men ſuppoſe that this was wrought by the policie of the Cardinall Peter ſtroſſe diſceaued ye Proteſtātes. of Tournon. Who for the hatred he bare to Religiō, wyſhed all aduerſitie to the proteſtauntes, and was than chief in authoritie with the king. About thende of September, the proteſtauntes write again to them of zurick, Bernes, Baſill, & to the Schafuſians, and ſhew them what themperour intēdeth, & The Prote. write to the Swiſſes goſpellers. what daunger they ſhal ſtand in alſo, in caſe he get the victory, and will them to conſider, whether it be not wiſdome for thē, to declare them ſelues ennemies to the Emperour and byſhop of Rome, & after to inuade the Emperours countrie next thē. If they wyll ſo doe, they promyſe them all ayde and fidelitie. Wherunto they make aunſwere. Howe not they only, but all the reſt of ye Swyſſes in lyke caſe, haue a league by inheritaūce with the houſe of Auſtriche and Burgundy: out of the whiche Their aunſwer to the Proteſtātes. countreis, they haue all their wyne and bread corne: Whiche league if they ſhould them ſelues infringe, the Swiſſes their fellowes, whiche be of a contrary Religion, ſhould haue iuſte cauſe to aſſiſte the Emperour and kyng Ferdinando, and to opē the ſtrayte paſſages in the Alpes, whiche they haue through their great labour ſhut vp and cloſed, and ſo ioyne with their ennemies. Moreouer, wynter is now at hande, ſo that albeit they would neuer ſo fayne, yet can they do no great thing this yeare, and if they ſhould leaue their owne countrey naked, it is to be feared, leſte others would take poſſeſſion in the meane ſeaſon. Therfore it is muche better that they tary ſtyl at home: For ſo ſhall not their fellowes ſtyre, as they haue already declared. It is not vnknowen, that they beare them ryght good wil, and wyſhe them to proſper, after their owne hartes deſyre, howebeit they thinke it not mete for thē, to enter into ſo great daunger. And therfore deſyre them to take it in good parte.
            The Emperour remoueth from Marxeme, to Donauerde: but fyndyng no place conuenient to encampe in, he tourneth on the left hand, and the thyrde daye of October, marcheth to Monheyme. It fortuned than to be a great myſte, and the eſcoutes that were ſent out to knowe whiche waye the Emperour went, brought contrary reportes: but in fine, whan Lewys the Erle of Oetinge, brought certen worde that he was paſſed with a great part of his Armie ouer the Ryuer of Wernize, they followed after immediatly about two of the clocke at after none, and towardes nyght, pytche their Tentes, not paſſing halfe a myle from the Emperour.
            
               
Hitherto came vnto them meſſengers from the city of Norling who ſeing themperour ſo nigh, required ayde, who were aunſwered The Emperours & the Proteſtātes campes nere together. frankely. The nex day again it was a myſte. The forewarde led the Duke of Saxon, the Lātgraue the middle ward, and George Malſpurg and Rifeberg the rerewarde. The Duke of Saxon marching forwarde with fiue legions & with many troppes of horſemen, approcheth nere vnto thennemy, & there was ryding & pricking & courſing vp & down on both partes. Whan it waxed clere, themperour perceiuing ye the vantwarde kept on ye way towardes Norling, & that the rereward was not come yet in ſight, he auaunceth al his horſemen, as though he would geue the battell. The Lantgraue therfore being in the mids, what time ye whole armie of his enemies made towards him, aſketh coūſel: ſome aduiſed him to folow ye Duke of Saxō, but becauſe the reward was yet far behind, which through his departure, he ſawe ſhuld be like to fal into the lapſe of their ennemies, he thought not good to depart, but ſending meſſēgers, both to haſte them forward, & to cal back the Duke of Saxō, he kept the hilles, that he was vpon, & ſtired not. In the midway betwixt both armies was ye Riuer of Egra, which was in dede but ſmal, yet hard to paſſe ouer, eſpecialy for themperour, if he wold haue foughten the battel. Unto this riuer was come the Erle of Bure with his power. And whan it was very like, that they ſhuld haue ioined in battel, themperour calleth him back, & cōmaundeth him ſtraitly to go no further. Thus they returned both into their campe, & the proteſtauntes pitched not far frō Norling. On the next daye certen troupes of themperours horſemen, ryde nere vnto their enemies, & gaue thē a very hote ſkirmyſche. In this conflict was hurt Albert Brunſwick, the ſonne of Duke Philip, going vnaduiſedly after he had wel tippled: Albert of Brunſwick hurt. he was caried to Norling, where he died not long after. The Emperour remayning there certen dayes, ſendeth in the meane tyme Octauius Farneſius with his owne force and with the Almaigne fotemen and munitiō to take Donauerd. Fortune fauoured the mans deuiſe: And ſettyng forwarde by night, whan he was come thither as ſone as day appered, and was auauncing his ladders to ſcale: the townes men yelded them ſelues. The ſouldiours of the Garnyſon were fayne to Donauerd rendred. ſaue thē ſelues by flyght. This done, themperour marcheth to Donauerd. The proteſtantes intent was, to haue aſſaulted the Emperour in his campe, but his departure altered yt purpoſe, & it is thought how themperour had ſome intelligence therof by eſpial. In thoſe days the Duke of Alba, ſent to demaūde of the Lantgraue, why he kept ſo much the hilles and mountaynes?

why cometh he not downe into the plaine fielde, and trye the matter in battell? The Lantgraue ſent him word again, howe The duke of Alba raūteth ye Lātgraue. he and his fellowes were fiue dayes together in the plain fieldes before Ingolſtad, and offered battell: why would he not fight? Why did he not bicker at Norlinge, where he taried for him the whole daye? Whyleſt this was done in Sweden, there fell a great alteration in Saxonie. How the Emperour had deuiſed Alteratiō in Sauonte. with Duke Maurice at Regenſpurg, and Ferdinando at Prage, again, how the Emperour commaunded him to inuade and enter in poſſeſſions of the Electours of Saxonie and the Lantgraues countreis, it is before ſpecified. Wherupon Duke Maurice in the firſt beginning of the warre, retourning home from Regenſpurg, calleth a conuention at Chemnice of al the ſtates within his dominion, and there cōſulteth what is nedefull to be done. They counſell him to know certenly of the Emperour, Duke Maurice conſulteth againſt the Proteſt. whether he wyll permitte them to kepe their Religion ſafely, ſecondly that he, and the Marques of Brandenburg Electour, ſhould make interceſſion. And in caſe they may be in aſſuraunce for Religion, and that interceſſion wil take no place, they exhorte him, that in as much as he is bounden in al other matters beſides Religion, to obey the Emperour, he would ſit quiet, & hire a power to defende his countrey. Unto the which thing they promiſe him ayde, & chouſe ſyx out of the whole nū
               ber, to aſſiſte him at all times with their aduiſe & counſel: But whan themperours cōmaundemēt before ſaid came, vnto hym, and king Ferdinando alſo muſtred men in Hongary, & leuied a power in Boheme, he holdeth another aſſembly of his ſtates at Fridberg the eight day of October. There he reciteth ye former treaty, & ſayth, how after their aduiſe, the Marques of Brandē
               burg & he haue ſolicited the Duke of Saxon & the Lantgraue, to permitte yt they might intreate the matter, & haue earneſtly admonyſhed them alſo, what perill is in the thing, & that they would ponder it diligently. How be it as yet in dede they haue receiued no conuenient aunſwer, and libelles are ſet out, & the matter come to hand ſtripes, & they haue bickered together, & haue had ſondry ſmal cōflictes: and albeit yt thei haue at diuers times required his ayd, yet foraſmuch as themperour hath giuen him ſufficiēt warraūtiſe for religiō, therfore hath he, following their coūſel, ſtired nothing, but hath kept ſoldiours for ye defence of his prouince, & conferred in matters of coūſell wt the ſix choſē. But now is the time ſo troubleſome & perillous, yt the thoſē ſay, how thei ar not able to beare ſo great a burthē: wherfore at their requeſt, is this aſſēbly called. For thēperours cōmaundementes

are brought vnto hym, which he will ſhewe them, that are ſore, and of moſte importance, and of ſuch ſorte, that in caſe they be neglected, the whole countrey therby is like to come in a wounderfull daunger. Moreouer, the Bohemers and theyr fellowes prepare warre, and are comen out of their countrie al ready, purpoſing to inuade the prouince of Duke Iohn Friderickes. And albeit that he hath firſt by letters, after, by his Ambaſſadours, laſt of al going him ſelfe alſo, intreated king Ferdinando to the contrary, yet could he obtayne nothing. And in aſmuche alſo as he ſuppoſeth that the ſame is done by Themperours commaundement, he neither may, neither lieth it in his power to reſiſt it, he would in dede right gladly, that the ciuile warre being once appeaſed, the Turkiſh violence might be repreſſed. How beit they knowe in what ſorte both coūtreis be lincked together in hope of ſucceſſion. And howe he hath ſiluer mines alſo comon with the Prince Electour. And to ſuffer all theſe thinges to be plucked away from the houſe of Saxonie & Siluer mynes cōmon to ye Dukes of Saxon. to come into a ſtraungers handes, it ſhould be a great grief to him. Moreouer, the whole coūtrey lieth ſo intermingled by per celles, that in caſe foreine ſoldiours ſhould inuade his Coſyns prouince, it were a daunger leſt his countrey ſhuld alſo ſuſtain great hurt therby. They ſe alſo, how it is not good, that forein nations ſhould remaine in theſe parties. And ſeing the matter is thus, he deſyreth them both in his own, and alſo in his brother Auguſtus name, that they would way the whole caſe diligently, & help him with their ayde & counſell. And he eftſones wyl omitte nothing, that ſhalbe his duty ta do agayne for thē. The matter being debated, they condeſcended, immediatly to aduertyſe the Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue, of the Emperours commaundement, of the preparation of kyng Ferdinando, and to deſyre them both, that for auoyding of deſtruction, they would permitte that Duke Moris myght enter into the poſſeſſions of their countrey. For ſo ſhuld they both eſchew The vnreaſonable requeſt of Duke Mauris counſell. forein warre, and kepe ſafe their Religion, & after, whan matters appeaſed, a great deale more eaſely obtayne the ſame agayne at his handes, thā of others. Therfore writing their letters to this effect the eleuenth day of October, thei deſire them to way with them ſelues the whole matter, & be cōformable to this counſell, which is doubtles the beſt, that may in this troubleſome tyme be geuē. They requyred alſo the Lātgraue in his letters, that he would perſwade the Prince Electour to take ye ſame way. Duke Moris wrote alſo his letters to ye Lantgraue his father in lawe, of much like inportaunce. And becauſe the

foreine ſoldiour was now at hande, he ſayeth, howe he muſt of neceſſite prouide, that Saxony be not ouerrunne. After that, he promyſeth hym muche good wyll and amitie, and ſheweth that he deſyreth nothyng that is his. He ſayeth moreouer, how the kyng of Polle wyl be a petitioner to the Emperour, which thyng he is glad to heare of, wherfore let hym ſo be content, and not be exaſperated with any wordes, and lykewyſe to perſwade the Electour, neyther that he refuſe to ſubmit him ſelf to the Emperour. For this is in maner the only waye to come to a reconcilement, and that he wil alſo helpe to make a peace. To the conuention at Fridberg, Iohn William the Electour, ſonne of Saxonie, whan he heard of the preparation of kyng Ferdinando, ſending Ambaſſadours, requyreth Duke Moris, that according to the league of inheritaūce, he wold ioyne his force with his, to ſaue the common countrey from daunger. Duke Moris ſayth again, how he hath ſpared no payne, that the matter might haue bene appeaſed. And ſeing he hath takē that labour in vaine, and that they be now in armure, he may do nothing againſt the ſupreme Magiſtrate, whome alſo that aunciēt league doth except. It was ſong or euer ye proteſtaūtes heard of the Emperours going to Donauerd. The nex day ther purpoſe to go to Lawging a towne vpō the Riuer of Thonaw thre miles aboue Donauerde, & that by night: but whan they were vncerten, whether the Emperour were gone forward, & if they ſhould leaue him at their back, many ſaid it was daunger leſt he ſhould take Norling, and after by the vale of Remſie, inuade the lande of Wirtemberg, altering their purpoſe, they remayned there one day. This toke Scherteline diſpleaſauntly, as likewiſe other thinges, & going to Auſpurg, from the which Scherteline departeth from the proteſt auntes. citie he was ſent forth into the warres, he leadeth away ye garniſon that was at Lawging, & returneth no more to the field. In the meane ſeaſon themperour marching forward frō Dona uerde, taketh by cōpoſition Dilling & Hochſtet, & ſhortly after, Lawging, & Gundelfing, by ye riuer of Brent. Wherfore hauing gotten the poſſeſſion of the water of Thonawe, he had great cō
               modities to ſerue his purpoſe, & leauing algarniſō at Lawging The Emperour winneth the Riuer of Thonawe. whan he had paſſed ouer Brent, he pitcheth his Tentes at the village at Sontheyn, in ye way to Ulmes, which was thre myles from ye ſame place. The .xiii. day of October, the proteſtātes at the length remouing their campe whan they heard that the Emperour kept on his iourney towardes Ulmes, the nex daye came to Sieng a town by the ſame Riuer a litle aboue Sontheim, ſo as the water was in the mids, betwixt both armies,

As they ſtaied here, and had not yet pitched their Tentes, they eſpie certen horſemen on the top of the next hyll. Amongs the whiche was thēperour him ſelf, who rode forth wt the Duke of Alba to eſcoute abroad, the ſame day the Duke of Saxon had ye forewarde, and haſteth ſpedely toward the enemy, and ſendeth alſo worde to the Lantgraue, to make haſte after hym: But what time the enemies fled, he ſlacketh the matter, and tarieth for the Lantgraue on the hyll. There as it is thought, was loſt The occaſiō of taking the Emperour loſte. agayne a moſte goodly oportunititie of well doing. For there was no foorde to ryde ouer the Ryuer, and but one brydge in al thoſe parties, and though the Emperour peraduenture had eſcaped by the ſame, yet had his chief Captaines bene in great diſtreſſe, as thei them ſelues afterward ar reported not to haue hid. The Emperour omitting his iourney to Ulme, leſt that leuing his enemies behinde his back, he ſhould loſe the vitall of Thonawe, he goeth another way to worke, and at the Ides of October, in the next wood he laieth an Ambuſche, of thre thouſand Arcubuſiers: And whan the Prince of Eulmone had offered A warlike pollicie of ye Emperour. them the ſkermyſche with his light horſemē, & the charge being geuen, infayning that he fled, had allured them to the wood ſide, thei by & by breake out of thēbuſchemēt & diſcharge at them. That ſeing the Lantgraue, came ſtreight wayes to reſcue his company that were in daūger, which were fowre bandes of horſemen. Wherfore there was a ſore conflicte all day till it was night, and the field pieces were brought to the bickering. This whyle the Duke of Saxon abode with the armie, that in caſe the Emperour ſhould in this tumulte haue aſſaulted their Campe, he might be ready to gyue him the repulſe. Whan this wold take no place, the Emperour attempteth the matter by a Camiſade in the night, and chouſeth out of the whole nombre the fotemen of Almaignes and Spanyardes, & An other pollicie. cōmaundeth them to put on whyte ſhirtes ouer their harneſſe, he appointeth them alſo horſemen, and the Duke of Alba to be their Captain, and ſendeth them forth at night as ſone as the watche was ſet, that they myght go ſtyll and cloſely to their enemies campe: And he him ſelfe immediatly after, followeth with the reſt of his power. Whan they came thither, they perceiued that the nomber of the watchemen were increaſed, and that they were vp in armure. Wherfore this enterpryſe was in vayne, for as muche as they vnderſtode the matter by eſpiall, a fewe howres before. For the wante of forage and vytayle, the Peſtilencein the Emper. Campe. tyme of the yeare, and continual rayne, they died ſore in themperours Campe, and about this tyme alſo Cardinall Farneſe

departeth out of the Campe homeward with certen bandes of Italian horſemen. The Emperour alſo for the ſame cauſe was compelled to chaunge his place, and retourne into his old cāpe beſides Laweging, the daye before the kalendes of Nouember. Unto the letters of the ſtates of Duke Moris dated at Fridberg the .xi. day of October before ſayd, the Lantgraue anſwereth the xx. day of ye ſame moneth. How he is hartely ſory that The Lantgraue aunwereth the ſtates of Duke Moris. warre ſhould be attempted again thoſe countreis, and muche more that in common daunger, they doe ioyne their forces together, after the example of their elders. And where they doe not conſider that this warre is againſt Religion, that ſemeth to hym great maruel, ſeing that both the Byſhops letters to ye Swiſſes, and the league made betwixt him and the Emperour and ſhewed vnto the Heluetians by the Byſhops commaundement, doe opēly teſtifie and plainly declare the ſame. For ſince that league was made, great forces haue commen to the Emperour out of Italy, and all the Italians that are taken do affirme this certenly, that they were purpoſely ſent, to warre againſt the Lutherians. Moreouer, their fellowes of the ſame Religion are in this war much more cruelly handled than any others with ſpoyling, firyng, & robberies: That the women & maydens are wickedly defloured, and yong chyldren & infātes, The crueltie wrought by the papiſtes. haue their handes and fete cut of, euen for the hatred of this doctrine. Where the Emperour hath warraunted them for Religion, it is but diſſimulation. For in caſe he were demaunded whether he would, that Luthers Religiō ſhould be ſubmitted to the authoritie and decrees of the Byſhops counſell, there is no doubte, but the craft would ſone appere. Wherfore let them not truſte to his promeſſe. And where they are affrayd of themperours ſentence of outlawyng them, he marueleth greatly, where they knowe, that the ſame is not lawfull for hym ſo to doe, vnleſſe the parties had firſt bene ſommoned, and conuicte in iudgement. But the greateſt grief of all is, that the noble houſe and people of Saxonie ſhuld be thus deuided: For if they were of one mynde, and would ioyne their forces together, the daunger that is ſo feared, might eaſely be repulſed. He hath verely talked with the Electour herein, but he is nothing agreable to that waye, whiche they do ſhewe. For if he ſhould, at the chaunge of fortune, require the lyke of Duke Moris, he doubteth not, but that both he would refuſe it, and they alſo would counſell him to the contrary. Wherfore he doth not lyke theyr coūſel, and the worſe, for that Duke Moris hath lately writtē to them both, how he was ſory to heare it bruted, that he ſhuld

couet to poſſeſſe his cōſyns prouince. For the reporte was vntrue and iniurious to him, and therfore praied them not to credit the ſame. Whan they had receiued theſe letters, they were contented with that excuſe, and thought no more of the matter: And if he ſhold now ſeaſe vpō his coūtrey, thei ſe, what men would iudge, he deſireth therfore, that they would impeche the thing, that it were not done: For otherwyſe not only forreyne warre, but ciuill alſo wil enſue vpon the ſame. For in caſe he ſuſteyne any iniury, by reaſon of the Emperours proſcription, neither he, nor his fellowes, which ſtande in the ſame caſe can not but helpe him. And than what wilbe the ende therof, it is not hard to iudge. Therfore let them indeuour, that the houſes of Saxō and Heſſe be not deuided, but that Duke Maurice doe aſſiſte him and his fellowes. For this ſhalbe chiefly for his honour and welthe alſo. He wrote the ſame day alſo, to Moris of like effect, and admoniſheth him, not to waye the Emperours proclamations, and outlawyng, but cal to his remembraunce, what the Electour and he haue done for him & his father. For where as Duke George his vncle had made his wil that themperour ſhould poſſeſſe his whole prouince vntil his brother did The Proie. benefites to Duke Moris forſake the Proteſtauntes Religion, he knoweth, what benefit than he receiued of them both. Moreouer, where Duke George gaue vnto his father a yearly penſion, and that ther was ſome feare, leaſt he woulde haue denied the ſame, for the hatred he bare to Religion, the Proteſtauntes than promyſed hym, that if it ſo came to paſſe, they would of their liberalitie gyue hym aſmuche yearly. Wherfore let hym ſurceaſe of his enterpryſe, & attempt nothing in the Duke of Saxons prouince without his loue and leaue. For otherwyſe, he ſhall not want his fellowes ayde. The Ambaſſadours of Pole were in dede in the Emperours Campe, and haue ſignified to the Duke of Saxon and him what they haue done: But the condicions are of ſuche ſort as they make nothing at all for peace. And of lyke importaūce, the councellours of the warre, wryte to Duke Moris and his ſtates, and proteſte, that if any force be done to yt Duke of Saxon, they wyll not neglecte his iniury. The Electour him ſelfe, made them none aunſwere at that tyme, as ſhall further be declared hereafter.
            The ſame day alſo the Lantgraue and the counſellers write The Proie. letters to the cities. to the cities of Maydenburg, Brunſwyck, Breme, Hamburge, Goſlary, Hildeſſeme, Goting, Hanobrie, Embeck, Minden, and to the Duke of Pomerane, Dukes of Luneburg, and to Prince Anhalde: They ſhew them what daunger is toward Saxonie,

but chiefly to the Electour, vnto whoſe frountiers the ennemies are comen already: The beginning cometh of kyng Ferdinando, who hath enforced the Bohemers vnto this warre, & Duke Maurice taketh his parte, and pretendeth a cauſe for that the Emperour hath outlawed him: howbeit, they haue ſende to Duke Moris, that he ſhould not medle, for than ſhall not the Duke of Saxon wante helpe. And in as muche as that whole countrie ſtandeth in preſent daunger, and the Duke aſketh helpe of them, they can not but ayde him. And were in mynde once to haue delyuered hym part of their Armie, which they haue together, but becauſe their ennemie is not far of, & are in good hope that the matter ſhall ſhortely be tried by a mayne battell: Wherin all their welthes do conſiſt, they thinck it not wyſdome at this preſent, to make them ſelues ſo muche weaker. For this is the fetche of their ennemie, that being moleſted with other warres, they ſhould not auaunce their whole force againſt him. And ſeing ye caſe ſtandeth thus, they require them, that in all their names they wold ſende him ayd of fotemen, ſo ſone as they can to Wittemberg and Weinmar, & that alſo the reſt of the money which is dew by the league, they pay vnto the Electours ſonne and counſellours, for the caſe is cō
               mon to them all, and whan their fellowes are ouerrunne, the lyke miſfortune wyll the ſoner chaunce vnto them. I haue ſpoken before of the Bohemers: They ſerued Fardinando in dede, howbeit full ſore againſt their willes, by reaſon of an aunciēt The Bohemers ſerued againſt the Duke of ſax on vnwillingly. league that they had with the houſe of Saxon. And agayn for that they ſaid how this war was not nedeful, & many thought that the Electour alſo had wrong. But Ferdinando brought them to it, & ſent for a power out of Hōgary & Sileſie, ſo that he might conſtraine them whether they wold or not. The horſmen of Hongary are commonly called Huſſares, an exceadyng Huſſares. rauenous and cruell kynde of men. Wherfore leuing their force alſo, whan they were now paſſing out of their owne limites, Sebaſtian Weittemulle, general of the armie, ſending his letters, the .xx. day of October, proclameth warre to the Duke of Sarons people. For that certen yeares paſt, their Prince ſeaſed Ferdinando his depute proclaimeth to Saxonie. into his handes the Abbeye of Dobrilug, and that he renoū
               ced lately his fidelitie to the Emperour and his confederates, breaking the league, that was betwene the Bohemers and the houſe of Saxon. And albeit the thing requireth no declaratiō, for as muche as he is outlawed by the Emperour, yet, leſt any thing might appeare to be omitted, he would for his diſcharge geue them this aduertiſement. About this tyme the Ambaſſadours

of the Proteſtauntes aſſemblie at Ulmes, for common cō
               ſultation to be had. And wher as out of Saxonie came diuerſe meſſages, of the ſtate of things there, the Electour ſending his letters the .xxvii. day of October, chargeth his Ambaſſadours that were at Ulme, to declare the whole matter to their Fellowes, and require them to conſider his caſe, for aſmuche as he The Duke of ſarons requeſt to hys fellowes. hath ſpared no peryll nor paine, that he might defende this higher part of Germany from diſtruction. The counſellours of the warre, a few daies paſt ſent worde to the cities of Saxony, that they ſhould helpe hym: But what they wil do, he is vncerten, and though they would, yet feareth he greatly, that they ſhall not be able to reſiſt ſo great a multitude of enemies, and that there is daunger, leſt or euer they be ready, the enemy wyl haue inuaded his countrey. Theſe thinges therfore let them require of their fellowes, firſt, in aſmuche as it ſhould be a great grief and diſcommoditie for him, in this extremitie, to leaue any longer deſtitute his wyfe, children, & people, that they wold geue him counſell herein. Moreouer, that they would graunte him more ayde, wherof the Lantgraue, and the counſellours of the warre haue put him in hope already. Finally that they do make no peace with the ennemy before he haue recouered yt he hath loſt. Hereunto the Ambaſſadours aunſwere franckly, & chiefly they intreate him that he would tary with the armie, tyll the Emperour ſhall haue broke vp his campe for this wynter, and ſhewe what daunger it ſhould be if he now departed. And if Ferdinando and Maurice doe him any wrong, they promyſe him ayde, and ſay, how ther is no doubt but his fellowes both Princes & ſtates, wyll according to their league, be faithfull and helpfull to hym, and wyll conclude no peace before he haue recouered his owne. And in caſe he thought good, they would alſo, in lyke maner, as the Lantgraue and counſellours of the warre haue done, ſignifie ſo much to Duke Maurice. They truſt alſo vndoubtedly that ſuche ſtates as be of their cō
               federacie in Saxony, wyll doe their dutie herein.
            The forſayd .xxvii. day of October, Duke Maurice wryteth Duke Maurice letters to the Electours. his letters from Dreſda to the Prince Electour, that what the Emperour hath commaunded hym to doe, and in what peryll the matter conſiſteth, he hath heard lately by the letters of the ſtates of his countrey. And now for ſo muche as the Emperour hath aſſured him and his people concerning Religion, therfore is he determined to the intent that both the Emperour may be ſatiſfied, and that his ryght alſo may remayne vnto hym whole, through the aduiſe of his counſel, to fynde the meanes,

that his lande and prouince doe not come into the handes of ſtraungers, and this doth he, both in his owne and alſo in his brother. Auguſtus name denounce to hym. And if in tyme to come, he ſhall be agayne reconciled to the Emperour and kyng Ferdinando, he wyll not refuſe if they wyll ſuffer it, that the ſtates of his iuriſdiction ſhall treate betwyxt them both for an order in the whole matter. The ſelfe ſame wordes he writeth alſo to Iohn William, the Electours ſonne, and warneth hym to ſee the letters adreſſed to his father, conueyed to him. In the meane whyle the Bohemers, and Nuſſars, make inuaſion into Uoetiande the next coſitrey of the Electours, ſleying, ſpoyling, The Electours countrey 
                     •
                  nuaded burning and rauiſhing out of meaſure. But the Bohemers taried not long, for becauſe as I ſayd before, they ſerued vnwyllyngly, and at the eleuenth day of Nouember, forſakyng their enſeignes, ſlyppe home euery man. But the Hongarians & ſuch The Bohemers ſlyp away. others as Ferdinando had hyred, ioyne them ſelues vnto Duke Maurice, who taketh by rendring, firſt Swiccauie, after Ecne berg, and Aldeburg, and for the moſte parte all the Electours townes, and ſweareth them vnto hym, ſauing Gothe, Iſenack and Wittemberg. The newes therof being brought into themperous campe, ſtyred vp great ioy and gladnes, which the Emperour declared by a great peale of ordenaunce, as is accuſtomed. In theſe dayes the Emperour chaungeth his Campe againe, for lyke cauſes as he did before and chouſeth a more commodious and drye ground, that he myght ſomwhat refreſh the poore ſouldiours, and releue them alſo with vitaile. All others for the moſte part counſelled him, that the ſouldiours might retire vnto places where they ſhould wynter. But he him ſelfe was of opinion, to continew the armie in the field, and maintaine warre. All men for the moſte part cried out vpon Duke Duke Maurice 
                     〈◊〉
                   of ali men. Maurice, whiche ſerued him ſo ſknekyſhely, whome he oughte to haue honoured as his father, who was in a maner ye only authour of all that he had, & he to requite him with ſuch vnthākfulnes: And ther came forth in his reproche and diſpraiſe, both libelles and verſes moſte bitter, whiche charged him with falſefying his fayth, with treaſon, and moſte ingratitude, and ſo muche the more, that he wold do nothing herein at the intreaty of neyther his wyfe nor his father in lawe.
            That thing knowen, he publiſheth a wryting, to purge him His excuſes. ſelfe, and ſheweth, what maner of Religion is in his countrey, what he hath promiſed the people, and how for the furtheraūce of Religion, he hath founded certen Scholes. After he ſaith, how the Emperour hath aſſured him and his people, and not

hym only, but other Princes alſo concerning Religiō, and preſeruation of the lybertie of Germany, neyther is he of wyll, that any thyng be done violently, but that the cauſe maye in lawfull wyſe be appeaſed, accordyng vnto many decrees of the Empyre already enacted. Wherfore he geueth credit to his promeſſe and letters, by the enſample of thoſe Princes, whiche do now ſerue hym, and doe not only at home, but in the campe alſo, and a warfare profeſſe this Religion. For ſuche as be familiar with hym, and are dayly in his ſight, may eaſely knowe his mynde, and in caſe they perceiued any ſuch thyng, without all doubt they would not tary with hym. And where as the biſhop aydeth him, that is done, for bicauſe the warre is attempted againſt thē that are the chiefeſt aduerſaries of his errours and authoritie: neither is it ſo muche to be conſidered, what moueth him, as what is the Emperours minde, which maketh the warre. Wherfore ſeing that Religion is aſſured, he ſeeth no cauſe, why he ſhould not obey themperour in al other thinges: For Chriſt commaundeth to geue both to God and alſo to the Emperour, that whiche is his. What trauell and payn he hath taken, that this matter might without ciuile warre haue ben pacified, it is not vnknowen to the Emperour, to kyng Ferdinando, and to diuerſe others. But where as no peace could be graunted, and the Emperour ſent out ſtreight cōmaundement to ſeaſe vpon the landes of Iohn Friderick, and that alſo kyng Ferdinando hauing leuied the forces of Hongary Boheme and Auſtriche, was ready to inuade, and would not be intreated, but ſent in his armie; and had taken already certen ſyluer mynes, whiche were common betwene his coſin and hym, he was dryuen of neceſſitie to prouide, that they got not the reſydue, or inuaded further. And what his purpoſe was, he firſt declared boeth to the Lantgraue, to the Duke his Coſyn, and alſo to his Sonne. And ſeing it is ſo, he deſyreth that no man miſtake his doyng, nor credit ſuche thynges as ſhall haply be reported Duke Maurice nothing coucious. by hym: For in mainteyning of Religion he wylbe conſtant, and hath none other reſpecte in this thinge than that the landes and dignities of the houſe of Saxon ſhuld not come into ſtraungers handes.
            About this tyme began again perſecutiō in Fraunce. There Perſecution in Fraunce. is a town in thoſe parties called Melda, ten miles from Paris the byſhop therof in former yeares was Williā Briſſonet: Who being deſirous of purer doctrine, appointed good preachers & inſtructours of the people, excluding al freers. And what tyme for the ſame cauſe the diuines of Sorbone procured him ſome

daunger, he ſhewed no conſtancie, but refuſed his enterpryſe. Notwithſtanding the remnaunt of that doctrine remayned in the mindes of many, and this yeare about thre ſcore townes men conſulting of the matter, chouſe them ſelues a preacher of the worde, and aſſembling in priuate houſes, whan the Sermon was ended, on certen dayes, they receiue the Lordes ſupper; after the order of the Goſpell, and Chriſtes inſtitution.
            This thing could not long be kepte ſecret, eſpecially, ſythe that dyuerſe alſo came to them out of the countrey. Wherfore, beyng taken whan they were all together, they are put in pryſon, and after their examination, caried to Paris in cartes. There receyuing ſentence of death, and caried home agayne, fourtene of them, bounden to ſeuerall ſtakes, were burnte quicke all at one tyme, the reſidewe were whypped and banniſhed. As they were retournyng home warde from Paris, one commeth runnyng to them out of the next village, and exhorteth them to perſeuer to the ende. Wherfore beyng apprehended, he ſuffered lyke punyſhement as the others did. Before ther were brent, they were put on the torture, to the intent they ſhould vtter the fellowes and followers of theyr doctrine, but they could extorte nothyng out of them.
            Many ſuppoſed this to be done of pourpoſe to breake the amitie, that was than in knitting betwene the kynge and the Proteſtauntes. Duke Maurice letters of defiaunce to the Duke of Saxon, were delyuered in the Campe the ſyxt daye of Nouember. In the fourmer booke I haue ſhewed you, howe the Byſhop, the .xvi. daye of Apryll, gyuing ſentence agaynſt Tharchebyſhop of Collon appealeth frō the Pope. the Archbyſhop of Collon, depriued hym of al his eccleſiaſticall offices. Nowe where he heard fyrſt therof for any certentie, the fourth daye of Nouember, as he hymſelfe mentioneth, a fewe dayes after ſettyng forthe a wryting, and declaryng the cauſes, why he can not acknowledge the Byſhop for hys iudge, who is accuſed already, both of hereſy and idolatrie, he appealeth from that ſentence, vnto a lawfull counſell of Germany, and whan the ſame ſhall begynne, he ſayeth he wyll perſecute his ſuite againſt the Byſhop.
            The Proteſtauntes Ambaſſadours, whiche I ſhewed you before, were aſſembled at Ulme aboute the ende of October, whan they could not agree in ſentences, in the moneth of Nouember they went to the Campe at Gienge, that the conſultation might be the eaſier. There is propounded, for ſo muche as ſome fellowes of their religiō geue no ayde, & of their cōfederates, they of Luneburg & Pomerane, & certen others, and again

the reſt of the States and cities in Saxonie helpe not muche, and nothyng is brought out of Fraunce, and by reaſon that the ſoldiours doe dayly ſlippe awaye for the tyme of the yeare, and other diſcommodities, the armie is deminiſhed, they muſt chouſe one of theſe thre thynges, eyther to geue the battell, or departe the field, retyring the ſoldiours into places where they may wynter, or els make peace and truce. The matter being debated, they condeſcended to make mention of peace, and they aſſigned Adam Trotte, who through the cauſe of the Electour of Brandenburg, had acceſſe to Marques Iohn his brother, to breake the matter. But where as the Emperour, whiche by eſpiall knewe throughly before all their caſe and diſcommoditie, and had lately receyued glad tydiuges out of Saxony, propounded verey harde conditions, it is determined, that all the reſte of their force beyng led into Saxonie, a thouſande horſemen, and eight thouſande fotemen, ſhould wynter there in certen places, at the coſte and charges of the Duke of Wirtemberge, and the cities of the vpper partes of Germany. After the thre and twenty day of Nouember, they retyre, makyng fyrſt a decree, that an other Ambaſſade ſhould be ſent into Fraunce and Englande. And at the two and twenty daye of Ianuarye, to mere agayne at Frankefurte. And thus was the warre gouerned nothyng luckely, of the whiche miſfortune this was The vnlucky ſucceſſe of the Proteſt. warre. thought to be the the principal cauſe, that the matter was not wrought by the order and wyll of one.
            For where the Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue were in authoritie egall, it chaunced that many goodly oportunities, through diſceptation, were omitted. The ſame whiche was Authoritie cānot beare equalitie. alſo decreed of placyng their Soldiours, came to none effecte. whan many refuſed to be contributaries any longer. After the Emperour had intelligence of theyr departure, he maketh forth horſemen immediatly to vnderſtande of their iourney. And ſhortly after commaundeth the Duke of Alba and the Erle of Bure to followe, and he him ſelfe alſo goeth forth with the Horſemen of Germany, leauing the fotemen, and cōmaunding them to remayne. The moſte part of the proteſtātes were already in their campe, where they ſhould reſte al nyght: But the Lantgraue, albeit he led the forwarde the ſame day, yet he taried with the Duke of Saxon, and either of thē had ten guidons of horſemen only, and about fiue hondreth gūners. With theſe they ſtayed vpon an hill, and plāted redy ſuch field pieces as they had with thē. And thus abiding their ennemies, whan it was almoſt darke night, the Emperour calleth his mē back,

and than went they alſo ſoftely forwarde tyll they came to their Campe be beſydes Heydenem, in the lande of Wirtemberg, eſcapyng moſte preſent daūger. For if the Emperour had The peril of the Proteſt. geuen the charge, they whiche were ſo fewe in nomber, in compariſon of their ennemies, had bene all either taken or ſlayne, and ſo they let not to ſaye them ſelues afterwarde. But themperour, who knewe not what force they were of, and ſuppoſed them to be many mo thā they were, was nothing haſty on thē. And the ſame night commaunded he the fotemen to marche forward and followe him, to the intent verely, that he might haue foughten with them the next day: But they as I ſaid, goyng ſecretly away by night, were nowe come to their Army. Wherfore the Emperour retourneth to his Campe, and there made his abode two daies, to refreſhe his ſoldiours. After, becauſe he ſuppoſed that they wold wynter in Franckonie, a fertile and a plentifull countrey, he thought to preuent them. After therfore that he had taken by rendring, Bophing, Norling, the coſitie of Oeting and Dingelſpulle: he haſteth with great expedition to Roteburg, a citie of the Empire ſtanding by 
                  •
               he Riuer of Duber. The Lantgraue going to the Duke of Wirtē
               berg, after he had deliuered his force to the Duke of Saxony, retourneth home. And at the kalendes of December came to Franckfurt. But the Duke of Saxon, although he wanted the Senewes of warre, yet marching forwarde with his army, he battred Gemund, a towne in Sweden, and hath it rendred to him, and cauſeth the Senate to geue him a ſomme of money, whiche was gathered of euery man. After, the twelfth daye of The Duke of Saxon 
                     ••
                  
                  acteth mony of the Papiſtes. December he came with his Army before Frankefurt, and getteth of thē nyne thouſand crownes: And impoſeth to the Archbyſhop of Mentz fourty thouſand. And proceding on ſtyll, he handleth the ryche Abbot of Fulden, and certen others of the Romiſhe Religion, after the ſame ſorte. The Lantgraue returning home, ſendeth his letters to Duke Maurice, his ſonne in lawe, ſignifiyng that he wyll come to him, ſo that he wyll aſſure him by ſaufe conduite: For he woulde intreate a peace betwixt him & the Duke of Saxon. Duke Maurice doeth aſſure him in dede, & ſendeth him letters of the ſame, but therin were ſo many conditions, that he thought not good to goe, but ſent Ambaſſadours, Herman Hundelſuſe, & Henry Lerſuer. And all be it they laboured the matter erneſtly, yet could nothing be cō
               cluded. Whileſt Maurice ſaid, he might not accorde, wtout Thē
               perours cōſent, & the Duke of Saxon, which had his army ready, wold haue no delay, but yt he wold attēpt war againſt him.

Therfore whan there was no hope of peace, the Lantgraues ſoldious retourne home. Howbeit Recrode, that brought fotemen of Almaines out of Fraunce (as before is ſayde) remayned ſtyll with the Duke. Whan the Emperour was at Rotburg, he ſendeth away the Erle of Bure, and gyueth hym in charge, to fynde ſome meane to get Franckefurte. After, about the Ides of December, wryting his letters from thence, to Ulrich Duke of Wirtemberg. Al beit, ſaith he, that for the war, which certen The Emperours letters to the Duke of Wirtemberg. yeares paſt, the Lantgraue and you attempted againſt my brother, kyng Ferdinando, and taking of the Dukedome of Wyrtemberg, reaſon would, that I ſhould haue punyſhed both him and you extremely, yet did I forgeue you al the iniurie and penaltie, and ſhewed you all fauour. And nowe of late, about the begynning of this warre, although your deſertes were farre otherwyſe, in as muche as you exerciſe Tyranny, not only vpon your owne people, but alſo ouer certen ſtates and cities of the Empyre, neither will obey any lawe or iudgement. I ſente to you an Ambaſſadour a man of honour, whiche ſhold declare vnto you the cauſe why this war is enterpriſed, and alſo requyre you to ſit quiet, and than ſhould you loke for all fauour at our handes. But al theſe thinges neglected, and not regarding the allegeaunce that you owe vnto vs, you haue aſſociated your ſelf with outlawes and their confederates, and haue incurred the lyke cryme of Rebellion, as they haue done, and firſt haſt taken certen townes of my brother Ferdinando, and of other ſtates, & than of myne alſo, and of the Empyre vpō the ſoden, with men of their owne faction. And not content with that, whan theſe thinges were a workyng, you denounced warre againſt vs, by a certen mallaparte boldenes, and with moſte opprobrious wordes, haue hurte our fame and eſtimation, goyng about to take from vs, this degree of hygheſt honour and dignitie, and deniyng vnto vs the fidelitie, ſtreyghtways with your conſpiratours, durſte leade forth an Armie againſt vs, doynge outtrage vnto many clientes of my brother Ferdinandos and myne. Wherby you haue fallen into the penaltie, whiche is dewe vnto periured outlawes, and conuictes of hygh treaſon. And ſeyng it is thus, and all be it we haue iuſte and lawefull cauſe to be auenged on you moſte extremelie, accordynge to your demerytes, yet for our accuſtomed clemencie, and that the myſerable people maye be ſpared. We ſtrayghtely charge and commaunde you, that immediatlye vppon the ſyghte hereof, you doe ſubmitte vnto vs your ſelfe, your countrey & all that you haue in the world, without condition or exception,

that we may ordre and vſe the ſame at our pleaſure: For vnles you ſhall obeye the ſame, we ſhal perſecute the and thine with ſworde and fyre. For thoſe letters whiche you ſent foure dayes ſynce, doe not content vs, neyther be they ſufficient to pourge or excuſe thyne offence. He ſendeth a copie of the ſame his letters vnto his ſubiectes alſo, and chargeth them to obeye hym no longer, but ſende Ambaſſadours vnto hym to know further of his pleaſure, he releaſeth alſo their allegeaunce and othe, wherby they are bounden to hym. This if they wyll doe, he wil prouide, he ſayth, that they ſhall lyue in a better ſtate hereafter: If not, he threatneth them with lyke puniſhement.
            What time the Emperour wrote this, the Duke of Alba was with his armie at the borders of the countrey of Wyrtemberg: But Duke Ulriche was goyng to his Caſtell of Tuel, ſtanding vpon an high hyll without the Region, and where the Emperours letters were delyuered vnto hym by the way, the .xx. day The Dukes letters of ſubmiſſiō to Themper. of December, he wryteth vnto hym moſte humbly and with great ſubmiſſion. For that he is brought thus into his hygh diſpleaſure, he is moſt hartely ſory, neither could there any thing haue chaunced vnto him more greuous. And where as diuerſe had intreated for him, and he him ſelfe alſo acknowledge his faulte, & craued pardon, he had good hope, that his diſpleaſure ſhould haue bene appeaſed. And the ſame hope he reteyneth ſtyll, for that he hath tried and experienced his clemēcy, which he is wonte to vſe, towardes all ſuppliauntes. For hereof armo examples than one, ſhewed not many yeares ſince vnto certen Princes, whiche happely gaue ſomwhat more occaſion of diſpleaſure, than he hath done. But in caſe he wold haue heard his Ambaſſadours, he doubteth not, but that he woulde haue wrytten muche more gently. Wherfore he craueth his mercy, and beſecheth him for Chriſtes ſake to forgeue hym, and not worke any extremitie againſt hym, beyng a myſerable Prince. nor yet againſt his poore ſubiectes.
            About this tyme came vnto the Emperour the men at Armes of Naples, to the numbre of fiue hundreth, at the leading of Iohn Baptiſte Spinello. After this, the Emperour goeth marching to Hale, a towne of Sweuia, vnto him lately reconciled. Thether came vnto hym Fridericke the Paulſgraue The Paulſgraue aſketh pardon of Themps. Prince Electour, he had ayded the Proteſtaūtes with foure hondreth horſemen, whiche came vnto them at Ingolſtad.
            Wherfore he goeth vnto the Emperour, and ſheweth hym that this was not done to reſiſt him, but to fulfyll a league wherby he was bounde to the Duke of Wyrtemberge.
            
               
Themperour taketh him vp ſharply, & accompting how much he had done for him, blameth him ſore. Neuertheleſſe he remitteth the offence, and warneth him, that hereafter, he do recompence this fault and errour, with a more truſty fidelitie. Alitle before the warres, whan the Paulſgraue intended to haue ſet an ordre in his churches, he had ſent for Paulus Fagius, a mā learned and eloquent, to come to him from Straſburg, to Hedelberg, Paulus Fagius. that he might be a guide in the doctrine of the Goſpel, and ſhew the way vnto others. But in this ſucceſſe of the Emperour, all that was there begonne, was quite daſſhed. A fewe daies after came to him Ambaſſadours from Ulme, who after Ulmes recō
                  ciled to the Emperour. they had made their ſubmiſſion and craued pardon, were reconciled. This citie was of chiefeſt force and authoritie in al Sueuia. Wherfore their breaking of, frō their felowes, was a great matter, but they writing their letters to their frēdes at thende of December, ſignifie how the cauſe why they ſo did, was that the Emperour was preſt to haue beſeged their city roūd about, and they were vtterly forſaken of their fellowes, and ſawe no mans helpe that was able to defende them againſt ſo great a power. Moreouer, for that certen of the chiefeſt of the confederates ſued vnto the Emperour priuatly to be reconciled. The Emperour condempneth thē in a hondreth thouſand crownes and twelue pieces of ordenaunce, and put into their citie ten enſeignes of fotemen. In this meane whyle the Erle of Bure, inuadeth the Lantgraues dominion, liyng aboue Franckfurt, and the towne and caſtell of Darmeſtat, he wynneth partly by force, partly by ſurendrie, he fireth the caſtell, and ſpareth the Darmſtat wonne. people: For none defended it but the inhabitauntes, and a company taken out of the coūtrey. After, he paſſeth by Franckfurt. And where as he was out of hope, to wynne the ſame by violence, eſpecially that tyme of the yeare, and his ſoldiours in ſo euyl plyght he ſendeth away parte of his army before to paſſe ouer the Rhyne, and willeth them to tary him at Mentz. And whan he thought nothing leſſe and was now returning home behold, they of Franckfurt, ſending Ambaſſadours, offer to render, Theſ of Frā
                  kefurte render to therle of Bure. and ſay they wilbe at commaundement. He without any tariyng, turneth backward with them, and entryng the town with his armie, bringeth them in ſubiectiō to the Emperour: And as he was a Gentleman of a plain nature, whan the Senate gaue him a ſupper, he ieſted with them, as it is reported, for rendryng ſo lightly and timourouſly, ſaiyng, howe they of Darmſtat are worthy to inhabite Franckfurt, and they to be remoued and dwell at Darmſtat. Which towne in compariſon

of Franckefurte is but a village. Howbeit the cauſe why they did ſo, amonges others, was for that they ſawe howe Ulme, and the Duke of Wirtemberg, ſhould be reconciled. And again fearing leſt the marte ſhould be taken from them, for all their welth ſtandeth by the ſame. Neither were thei ignoraunt, that they of Mentz and wormes, laboured for it to the Emperour, either citie for them ſelues, to haue it frō them. After, ſending Ambaſſadours, they are receiued againe into the Emperours fauour, paying him foure ſcore thouſand crownes. Whan the Duke of Saxon was come with his armie to his own frōtiers the .xxii. day of December, ſending his letters to the ſtates of Duke Maurice, where as I made no aunſwere, ſayeth he, to The Electours letters to the ſtates of Duke Maurice. your letters bearing date the .xi. daye of October. I did it purpoſely, and would tary to ſe the ende: but what hath ben done in the meane tyme, it is openly knowen. Howbeit, by reaſon of the Coſynage, league, and amitie that is amonges vs, and for my benefites toward your Prince, certenly I loked for no ſuche thing, either of him or yet of you: Nor I woulde neuer haue thought, that euer he would haue vſed me and my people in ſuche ſorte as hs hath done: Much leſſe, that you wold geue him ſuche counſell, as ſhoulde tende to the deſtruction of the whole countrey, and your owne dommage alſo. But I thinke this tyme ſemeth vnto you conuenient, wherin ſhould be vttered the craftie deuiſes and counſelles of certen of you, contriued many yeares ſince, but of God alwayes repreſſed. For conſider with your ſelues, what an acte of yours was this, whan you counſelled Duke George, to diſherite his brother and hys brothers chyldren, becauſe of their contrary Religion, and to make the Emperour & king Ferdinando his heires, vnles they would profeſſe and reſtore the byſhops Religion. And where as the wyl and legacie toke no place, but the whole inheritaunce was reduced to his brother Henry, and the doctrine of the Goſpell reteyned, that was chiefly wrought through the meanes and induſtrie of me and my league frendes. And albeit that he profeſſing our Religion, entred into our league alſo, and wrytynges made of the ſame, and ſygned, aſwell in his owne as alſo in his ſonnes name, yet did you, for as muche as your fyrſte hope was fruſtrate, moue him, as much as you might, to ſwarue from this his couenaunt. And whan he was departed, hys ſonnes alſo followed the ſteppes of their father, vndoubtedly through your counſell. And like as that inheritaunce, againſt your willes deſcended vnto Henry and his ſonnes, ſo did alſo the frendſhyp, that I had with Henry, not a litle greue, you &

full ofte haue aſſayed that the ſame might be vntwyned. Neyther was your enterpryſe altogether fruſtrate, and that which you could not bryng to paſſe whyleſt he liued, you haue now at the laſt obteined of his ſonnes, eſpecially of Maurice, of whom I had conceiued in my mynde moſte hope of vertue and frendſhyp. For fiue yeares ſynce, not long after he was made a Magiſtrate, you ſtyred him vp againſt me, whiche had not deſerued that at his handes, and that in ſuche wyſe, as the matter wanted not great daunger. And albeit that the tempeſt was blowē ouer, through the mediation of the Lantgraue, and a bonde made, that no ſuche thyng ſhould be attempted hereafter, but that the matter ſhould be ordered on both parties according to thaunciēt league, yet haue you, in my abſēce perſwaded hym & his brother Auguſtus, to ſeaſe vpō my prouince. Which thing aſſuredly greueth me ſo muche the more, for that he, both wryting and receiuing again ryght frendly letters, did ſignifie no ſuche thinge. Againe, that he would do nothyng herein at the requeſt of the Lantgraue and his fellowes. The calamitie of the innocent people and of my ſubiectes greueth me, and that The calamitie of Saxony. exceadingly, whome he bringing foreine, cruel, and barbarous ſoldiours, hath plaged with robberies, ſpoyling and murther. It greueth me alſo, that the miniſters of the churche and preachers, ar euery where driuen out and put to flight, yea virgins and matrones defiled: Which autragious crueltie, I doubt not but God wyll ones auenge. But muche more greueth & troubleth me, the handlyng of the thing ſo trayterouſly, ſpitefully, and vnloked for, attempted through your coūſell vndoubtedly, whiche after the example of the traytour Iudas, are hyred vnto it with bribes and rewardes. There is a cauſe pretēded, why he ſhould take poſſeſſion of my landes, for that Charles hath ſo commaunded, and Ferdinando vrgeth hym. But Coſinage and nere aliaunce, and the league and conuenauntes whiche are commen to both houſes, ought to be preferred far aboue theyr proclamations. For touching al thinges, that concerne not religion, Charles, Ferdinando and I were agreed long ſynce, and the crimes that are aſcribed to vs, are falſe, and we ar troubled for Religion only. If his commaundement doe moue you, why doth not the vnworthines of the thing it ſelfe moue you more? Why did you not conſider, whether your Prince might lawfully execute ſo wicked a commaundement, and grounded of no reaſon? But you brought to counſel with you a cankred mind, & long ſynce corrupt with affectiōs, & you & your Prince, liked my Dukedome better, than you did equitie it ſelfe, or true iudgement.

For otherwyſe reaſon would haue ſhewed you, in as muche as we are condempned, and came not to our aunſwer, that the ſame outlawing or preſcription is againſt the lawes, decrees and conuenauntes wherby he is bound to the Empire. Maurice alſo might eaſely haue ſene, that it had not ben lawfull for him, to obeye ſo wicked and wylfull a commaundemēt, and ſhuld haue regarded more the preſeruation of the coſitrey: But he had rather walke in the foteſteppes of wicked Doeg, & Duke Maurice followeth Doeg. with a fayned neceſſitie of dutie, cloke & couer his fact. Neither maketh it for the matter, where you ſaye that he woulde haue done no ſuche thyng, had not Ferdinando approched my lande with an Armie. For the matter is farre otherwyſe, and it hath bene reported to me by credible men, firſt, that you your ſelues and Maurice through craftie and ſubtill counſelles moued all theſe thynges to the Emperour and Ferdinando, at Regenſpurg, and alſo at Prage, as the tyme it ſelf hereafter wil bring to lyght. Moreouer, that the ſame was not done by the commō aſſent of all, but that this miſcheuous acte was contriued, by a fewe choſen out of the whole nomber. Nowe therfore, in as muche as through the goodnes of God, I am retourned home with my armie, I am fully determined to requite your Prince with lyke thankefulnes, and to attempte all thinges whiche are requiſite for my defence, and recouery of my prouince. In the whiche thing verely, I will ſo reuenge me vpon you, eſpecially whiche were authours of ſo miſcheuous a counſell, according to the wickednes hereof, that you ſhal wel vnderſtand, how cruell was the iniurie and wrong that I haue ſuſteyned. It greueth me ſuerly, that the matter is come to this paſſe, & I am ſory for the dommage of the common countrey. But ſythe the beginning commeth of you, and the thing it ſelfe requyreth that I ſhould defende myne owne from violent wrong, I proteſte, that what euyll ſo euer ſhall hereafter come therof, it is not to be imputed to me. If there be any of you alſo, fre from this miſdede, that wyll trie their innocencie before me, it ſhall be lawfull for them ſo to do: I wyll vſe them courteſely & gently. The king of Denmarke ayded not yt Proteſtātes. The king of Denmarke, albeit he was a cōfederate, yet gaue he no ayde to the proteſtauntes.
            The Emperour remouing from Hala to Hailbrune, and receiuing the townes men into fauour, ſendeth the Duke of Alba to inuade the lande of Wirtemberg, as is ſayd before. He taking 1547. Conditions impoſed to yt Du. of Wirtemberg. certen places by rendryng, doth verey muche harme. But through the ſute of the Paulſgraue, the Duke of Wirtemberg, the third day of Ianuary, is reconciled vpon theſe conditions.

For ſo muche as he is ſicke and can not, let him ſende Ambaſſadours, to make his ſubmiſſiō, and deſire the Emperour mercy: Theſame ſhall he doe in perſone within ſixe weakes he ſhal obſerue the Emperours decrees concerning the common wealth. He ſhal giue no ayde to the Duke of Saxon and the Lātgraue, but aſſiſt the Emperour, that the proclamatiō of outlawry ſet forth againſt them, may be put in execution. He ſhall permitte the Emperours ennemies to haue nothing to doe within the precinct of his dominion. He ſhal make no league at any time, wherin both the Emperour, kyng Ferdinando, and the houſe of Auſtriche, ſhal not be compriſed: If any of his ſubictes ſhall fortune to ſerue againſt thēperour, king Ferdinādo & the houſe of Auſtriche, he ſhall puniſhe them moſte extremely. Moreouer he ſhall bynde the nobilitie by an othe, that none of them ſerue againſt him. As oft as it ſhal pleaſe thēperour to paſſe through his countrey, he ſhall make him way for all thinges. The munition whiche his fellowes haue left within his prouince, he ſhall deliuer euery piece with the furniture: Towardes ye charges of the warre, he ſhal pay thre hondreth thouſand crownes, the one half out of hande, and the reſidue within .xxv. dayes: For aſſuraunce he ſhall deliuer, Aſperge, Kirchene, Schorendorffe, that the Emperour may place in them garriſons at his pleaſure. He ſhall compound with ſuche as he hath iniuried in this warre, if he can not, he ſhall ſtande to the Emperours arbitrement. Both he and his ſonne ſhall followe the cuſtome of the court of high Burgundie, whan they ſhall haue any matters in the lawe in thoſe parties. He ſhall not be auenged vpon his ſubiectes, whiche haue rendred vnto him. That the Title of kyng Ferdinando remayne vnto hym whole. That within ſyxe wekes his ſonne Chriſtopher, and his people doe confirme and ratifie the ſame. That his brother George ſhall not inioye the benefite of this peace. What time theſe thynges were drawen out in wryting the third day of Ianuary, as before is ſaid the Ambaſſadours of Duke Ulriche, Balthaſar Gultting, Lewis Frauenburg, and Iohn Feſler a Ciuilian, the fift daye after came to Hailbrune, and falling proſtrate at Themperours feete, ſaye, howe the Duke is letted by ſicknes, & can not come, and hath gyuen them in charge to make his excuſe. And howe he confeſſeth his fault openly, and is wonderfull ſory for the of fence committed, and deſireth for Gods loue, that he might be receiued to mercy, and that no extremitie be ſhewed to him, & his poore ſubiectes. For he doth both ratife the conditions of peace, and alſo, as ſone as he is able, will come him ſelfe to requyre

the ſame, and wyll neuer forget ſo great a benefit. Hereunto the Emperour maketh aunſwere by Nauius. Foraſmuch as he acknowledgeth his faulte, and aſketh pardon, he is ſatiſfied, and ſayth, howe he wyll of his mercy ſpare the people and pardon his offence, ſo that he obſerue conuenauntes, and from henceforth omitte not to do his dutie. After them came the Ambaſſadours of Memming, Bibrach, Rauenſburg, Kempten, & Iſnen, and making their humble ſupplication, deſyre pardon Thecities of Proteſtātes. ſend Ambaſſadours to yt Emperour. of their fault, and that they haue offended him, they ſaye it is to be imputed, partly to their owne errour, partly to the occaſion of others. And that they flie now vnto him for refuge, as vnto the welſpring of mercy, and beſeche him, that he woulde forgeue them, and reſtore them to their olde eſtate, and to deminiſhe nothing of their priuileges and fredome. The Emperour than byndeth them by an othe, that they be faithful vnto him from henceforth, that they obeye the ſame lawes, that other ſtates doe, that they forſake the league of the Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue, and ayde them with no kynde of thinge, nor make no league againſt him from henceforth. This done he taketh them to mercy, and condēpneth the citie of Meming, in fifty thouſand crownes. Before they came into the Emperours The Emperour wyll heare no mē
                  tion of Religion. preſence, they deſired to be aſſured not to haue their Religion chaſiged. But Nauius, whom the Emperour vſed chiefly for interpretour in ſuche matters, warned them in any wiſe to make no mention therof: For incaſe they did, the Emperour would ſurely aſcribe it, to a certen diſtruſte they had in hym. For at the beginning of the warre, he declared his mynde here in ſufficiently: Therfore let them holde them content, and requyre no further aſſuraunce. And this was thought to be done for this intent, leſt, if they ſhould haue had a nay, it might appere, that an other thing were intended, than the Emperour had publiſhed in his letters before. But and if it ſhold be graū
               ted them by expreſſe wordes, the ſame ſhold offende the Byſhop of Rome, whoſe purpoſe was, that by this warre, the doctrine of the Proteſtauntes might vtterly be extinguiſhed.
            In theſe daies aroſe a rebellion at Gene, againſt the houſe Rebellion aſ Genes agaiſt yt hous of Aurie. of Aurie, the Prince wherof at the ſame tyme was Androwe, the moſt expert man on the Sea that than liued, and through the Emperours auauncemēt, the chiefeſt of that cōmon welth. The chief captaine and ringleader of this vprore was Counte Fliſcane, and in the ſame, amonges others, was murthered the Coſin of Androwe Iohannine Aurie, a mā of a great courage. And if the Erle of Fliſca had not chaunced to ſlippe into the

Sea, and drowned, it is thought, that there would haue bene a blacke daye, and muche euyll done: But whan he was gone, the fellowes of that conſpiracie, ſhranke away immediatly, & ſtreightwayes after that Tempeſt followed a great Caulme. The Emperour affirmeth the Farneſians to be the authours of this enterpriſe, eſpecially, the Byſhops ſonne, Peter Aloiſſe, Duke of Placence, as ſhalbe declared in his place.
            The ſitting of the fathers at Trent, whiche ſhuld haue ben at the ende of Iuly, was adiourned vntill this tyme, and the xiii. day of Ianuary, what tyme the fathers were aſſembled in the Cathedrall churche, as their maner is, they make a decree, of the iuſtification of man, and there are they condēned, which affirme, that ſince the fall of Adam, man hath not had fre wyl, A decree of ye counſell at Trent of iuſtification. that man is iuſtified by fayth only, & in that Chriſte imputeth rightuouſnes, and ſay that iuſtification is nothing els but a confidence in Gods mercie, who forgiueth ſinnes for Chriſtes ſake, or ſaye it is neceſſary, that a man beleue aſſuredly, and doubte not, but his ſynnes are forgeuen, and that he is of the nombre of Gods elect, and ſuche agayne as ſaye, that a man is not able to kepe the commaundementes of God, no, though he be iuſtified, whiche ſaye that iuſtification receiued is not kept and increaſed thorowe good workes, whiche, after baptiſme, affirme that iuſtifications loſt, is recouered by fayth only, with out the ſacrament of penaunce, and ſaye that a penitent ſynner hath his offence wholy forgeuē, and that there remayneth no puniſhement for the ſame, neyther in this worlde, nor in the lyfe to come, through purgatory, finally whiche affirme that theſe decrees are a derogation to Gods glory, & to the merites of Chriſte. Whan the Duke of Saxō was coming with his Armie, Duke Maurice fortifieth Lipſia with a garniſon, & burneth the ſuburbes. The ſame tyme came the ther aboue a thouſand horſemen of the Hongarians. The .xiii. daye of Ianuary, began the ſiege, but the townes men defending them ſelues The Duke of Saxon be ſegeth Lipſia. moſte valiauntly, about the ende of the ſame moneth, the enemy departeth without his purpoſe. Howbeit the towne, with the nomber of ſhot that went of as thicke as hayle, was wonderfully rent and torne, & vtterly defaced. The Duke of Saxon departing from thēce, did not only recouer ſhortly after al that he had loſt in the countreys of Thuring and Meyſſen, but alſo wan all Duke Maurice townes, ſauing only Lipſia & Dreſda: He bringeth alſo into his poſſeſſion the Byſhoprike of Magdeburg Maurice loſeth his townes. and Halberſtat, making a compoſition with the Byſhop, Iohn Albert. The daye before he aſſayled Lipſia, kyng Ferdinando

commaunded the Bohemers, that they ſhoulde take armure and goe ayde Duke Maurice. They obeyed him in dede, but after they retourned home without cōmaundement: Wherfore the king at the ende of Ianuary cōmaundeth them again likewyſe. There did the commons of Prage, whiche citie is of moſte authoritie in thoſe parties, deſire the Senate, to ſue to ye king, that he wold ſtay that cōmaundement, which is both againſt The Bohemers refuſe to warre in Saxony. their libertie, & ſuche as they can not honeſtly obey. For there is no cauſe, why they ſhuld haue warre, with the Prince Electour of Saxon. And in moſte thinges, their religion is all one with his. Moreouer, he hath always ſhewed him ſelfe lyke a noble Prince, and aided them againſt the Turkes. Wherunto Ferdinando made aunſwer, amonges other thinges, howe the warre was attempted againſt him not for religion, but for rebellion. And where they ſay, howe he hath geuen great aide againſt the Turke, the matter is far otherwyſe: For he ſent meſſengers to ye Turke, a few monethes paſt, which might procure him to moue war, to Hongary and Boheme, and that he ſhuld take no longer truce, & that he ſhould infringe the ſame which he had graūted. And to the intēt the thing might haue the better ſucceſſe, he would not fayle, to inuade on the contrary ſyde. Whan themperour vnderſtode, how the matter went in Saxony, and was aduertiſed by ſondry letters of Duke Maurice, he ſendeth certen bandes of horſmen and fotemen to ayde him, at the leading of Marques Albert, & than cōmaundeth the forces of Spaniardes & Italiās to follow, wherof Sandey & Marignane wer captains. Marques Albert departeth frō Hailbrune with his cōpany, the .ix. day of Ianuary. Themperour alſo remoueth Marques Albert ſent to ayde Maur. frō thēce to Ulmes: by ye way they of Liudaue & Eſling were recōciled to him. Of the byſhop of Rome it is told before, how he gaue ſentēce & depriued tharchbiſhop of Collō of his eccleſiaſtical fūction. Whā he thus did, he gaue away al his right & authoritie at the ſelf ſame tyme vnto Adolphe Erle of Schauenburg, Adolphe ſubſtituted to Herman Archebyſhop of Collon. whome a fewe yeares before that: the Archbiſhop had amōges all others, choſen vnto him for his Coadiutour. Wherfore the Byſhop ſending his bulles, warneth all the ſtates of ye countrey to accept and acknowledge him for their Archbiſhop. Moreouer he vrgeth themperour, that he ſhuld execute his ſentence. And where as the Archbyſhop beyng at ſondry times admoniſhed, to leaue of his enterpriſe, ſayde euer, he could not do it with a ſafe conſcience. The Emperour hauing almoſt nowe gotten the victory, ſendeth to Collō Ambaſſadours, Philip Lalenge, gouernour of Gelderlād, & Uiglie Zwicheme a Lawyer.

By them he calleth an Aſſemblie of the States of the whole prouince, that cōmyng at a certen daye, they ſhuld forſake their Archebyſhop Herman, and goe to him that before was his Coadiutour, vnto whome they ſhould ſhewe al fidelitie and obſeruance as to their high prelate. The Clergie in dede was ready to graunt vnto it, for they were the very occaſion hereof. But the Nobilitie, and many of the Clergie alſo that were of noble houſes, and againe, the Ambaſſadours of cities, declare that it is not lawful for them, to forſake him, whom thei haue ſo long tyme obeyed, and ſo many yeares founde a good and a Godlye Prynce, vnto whome they owe their fayth, and allegeaunce by an othe. The matter ſtickyng at this harde poynte, the Duke of Cleaue his next neighbour, for the auoyding of further trouble, ſendeth his Coūſellours thither to make intreatie. Whiche after long and much deciſion, obteyne of the Clergie, that they wyll be quiet, tyll ſuche tyme as the other States may declare the whole matter to the Archebyſhop. Wherfore Theodoricke Manderſchitte, and William Nuenarie, Erles, the chiefeſt of all the nobilitie, were ſent vnto hym. Who through their ſingular wiſdome and eloquence, do perſwade hym, that for the compaſſion of the people, leſte the whole countrey ſhould be diſtroyed with warre, he would be content to geue place. What tyme therfore he had releaſed all men of their othe and allegeaunce: Herman leueth his byſhoprike. His forſayd Coadiutour, whome he had loued as his owne brother, doeth ſuccede hym. This was the .xxv. daye of Ianuary. The Archebyſhop had a brother, named Fridericke, who I tolde you in the tenth booke had bene Byſhop of Munſter, and was nowe prouoſte of Bonna. He was alſo depriued of his office, and that had Gropper, for his Share. The lyke chaunced to Counte Stolberge, Dean of Collon, who had defended the Archebyſhop ryght conſtantly. By and by through Gropper had the ſpoyle of Friderick. out the whole Prouince, by the commaundement of the newe Byſhop, the Religion agayne was altered, and what ſo euer Bucer had ſet forth, quite abolyſhed. Whan the Ambaſſadours of the Proteſtauntes, had bene with the Frenche kyng, they went into Englande that they myght bring the ſame to paſſe with them both. But nowe was king Henry ſore ſicke, and his diſeaſe increaſing, he departeth out of this life about thend of Ianuary in ye .xxxviii. yere of his reigne, whā he had by legacie The death of Henry the eight kyng of England made his ſon Edward of .ix. yeres his heire, & after him had ſubſtituted his daughter Mary, by his firſt wife, & Elizabeth by his ſecōd wife. Howbeit, before he died he condēneth Thomas ye duke of Norfolke, whoſe authoritie was always gret vnto per

And beheaded the Erle of Surrey his ſonne, for ſpeaking certē wordes, ouer muche ſuſpected of the king liyng ſicke. After his death inſued the alteration of Religion, as hereafter you ſhall heare. For albeit he had expulſed out of all his dominions, the Alteratiō of Religion. Biſhop of Romes authoritie, albeit it was death if any mā did acknowledge him, for the chief head of the churche, albeit, that in the cōmon prayers of ye churche, he deteſted him as a Tiraūt, Kyng Hēry baniſhed the Pope but not popery. & very Antichriſt, yet kept he ſtill the popiſh religion, as hereto fore hath ben declared. He had cauſed his ſonne to be well inſtructed from his childhode, and whan he ſhould depart, he appointed him counſeilours, to the nombre of .xvi. and amonges them, Edwarde Erle of Herford, the yong Princes vncle. Unto whome afterward, becauſe it was ſuppoſed, that he would be moſte faithfull to him, was cōmitted chefeſt part of his protection by the reſt of the counſailours, and an honorable ſtyle geuen him, that he ſhould be called the Protectour of the kyng & his Realme. He was alſo created Duke, whan the king had geuen The Duke of Somerſet him the Dutchie of Somerſet. He both loued the Goſpel, & did his indeuour alſo that the ſame might be receiued, & moued the king his nephew to imbrace it in like caſe, and herein had a companion and helper, Thomas Cranmer, Archebyſhop of Thomas Cranme primate of England. Canturbury, a man of notable learning, and primate of England. About this time alſo dieth the wyfe of king Ferdinando, Quene Anne, the mother of many children: For whom the Emperour maketh a funerall at Ulme. In the meane ſeaſon they of Auſpurg, moued by the example of their fellowes & by their They of Auſpurg make their peace with Themperour. owne daunger together, & hauing interceſſours fit for the purpoſe, & amongeſt others Anthony Fugger, are receiued into the Emperours fauour, being condemned in a hōdred & fifty thouſand crownes, xii. great pieces of ordenaunce furnyſhed, and to fynde a garryſon within theyr Cytie of ten enſeignes of footemen. In the Citie was Captaine Scherteline, and had ſerued them many yeares for their wages. Whome the Emperour and Sherteline moſte hated of Themp. kyng Ferdinando hated chiefly, for takyng the Caſtell of Erenberg vpon the Alpes. Wherfore, albeit the Senate intreated muche for him, yet, ſeing the Emperour did ſtifly refuſe, & other wyſe wold not accorde, he was conſtrayned to flie the countrey, & ſo went with his hole family to Conſtaunce, a citie in ye borders of Swiſſerlād. During the ſiege at Lipſia, the Electour of Brandenburg intreateth a peace, and ſending Ambaſſadours to thē both, requyreth thē, that he myght be permitted to take The Electour of Brā
                  denburg intreateth a peace. vp the matter. The Electour was content, but Duke Maurice blaming him ſore, ye he made ſo ſharp war, ye ſixt day at ye length

he anſwereth ſomwhat ſtraūgly, whan he ſaw that the towne was able to hold out thennemy. Wherfore the Marques immediatly doth ſignifie the ſame to the Lātgraue, praiyng hym to perſwade Duke Maurice. And for ſo muche as this ciuile war in Saxony can not well be appeaſed, vnles that publique war of themperour ſhuld ceaſe alſo, he deſireth him, that he would geue his minde here unto: and the rather perſwade him, he ſheweth him, in how great daunger he ſtandeth. How that all his fellowes for the moſt part are already recōciled to themperour. And how the Duke of Wirtemburg hath accorded vpon moſte ſtraite conditions. How thēperour prepareth a new army. And in as much as he alone is not able long to reſiſte ſo great a power, he admoniſheth him, yt he wold not refuſe to ſubmit him ſelf, and condeſcende vnto theſe conditions, which he him ſelfe hath cōceaued, and ſent him now by his Ambaſſadours. For in as much as for many cauſes themperours minde is ſore irritated, the thing it ſelfe requireth, that with a certen humble ſubmiſſion he do craue pardon. Wherfore let hym haue a reſpect to him ſelfe and his chyldren and to the common multitude, and dryue not the nayle to the head, neyther bryng the matter in to extreme daunger. He wryteth alſo the ſame in effecte to the Duke of Saxonie. The Emperour, a lytle before, that the Proteſtauntes departed in Nouember, had appointed certen, to leuie Thēperour leuieth a new army. ſtreight wayes a newe Armie, and to make warre in the next partes of Saxonie, leſte the States and Cities there, ſhould ayde the Duke and the Lantgraue. Ouer this Armie, whiche was to the nombre of .xxi. thouſande fotemen, and a thouſand and two hondreth horſemen, he made general, Ioyce Grunninge, Gouernour of Selande.
            They compell Conrade Erle of Deckelburg, in league with the Proteſtauntes, and the cities of Oſnabruge and Mynden, and the Erle of Lippen, with certen others, to obeye their cō
               maundement, and take the Caſtell of Ritberge, and marche from thence to Breme. This was in the moneth of February. Here ſerued the Emperour, Philippe Eberſten Erle, Chriſtopher Uriſberger, Frideriche Spedie. Whan the Electour of Saxonie hearde of the Emperours ſucceſſe, addreſſing his letters The Elect. of Saxons lettern to thē of ſtraſburg. to the Senate of Straſburge, the .xiii. daye of February, he ſignifieth vnto them howe he hath recouered his owne, and wonne almoſte all that Duke Maurice had in the countreis of Thuring and Meyſſen, & cauſed his Nobilitie to be ſworen vnto him, & hath allotted vnto him ye by ſhoprick of Maidēburg And where as the Duke of Wirtemberg, and the moſt part of yt
               
cities in vpper Germany, haue compounded with themperour vpon conditions moſte vnreaſonable, & omitting the mention of religion, haue promiſed themperour ayde againſt him & his fellowes, that hath chaunced vnto him beyond al expectation, and is altogether repugnaūt to the maner of ye league. How be it he heard ſay how they remained conſtant, & that was great pleaſure to him. Wherfore let them holde on, and fainte not, & doe as becometh confederates, and if the thing require ſo, let them defende & maintein thē ſelues with the ayde of the Swiſſes and the French king, his deſire is aſſuredly, to ſhew them alloue and fidelitie, but he is letted by domeſtical warre, wherin if God will make an ende, to his cōmoditie, they ſhal not want his helpe. The Ambaſſadours of the ſtates & cities of Saxony, be already aſſembled at Maydenburg, with whom he treateth of thoſe matters, for the which the conuention was appointed at Franckfurt, and his truſt is, that they will perfourme their dutie, eſpecially the cities, & wil not forſake the cōfederatie. At the Ides of February cometh to Straſburge an Ambaſſadour from the Frenche kyng, Mendoza, a Spaniard, an exile, & promiſeth Mendoza, Ambaſſa. from the frē
                  che kyng to Straſburge. largely: But the Senate had already decreed, to ſend to themperour an Ambaſſade for peace. And ſo he departed with out any thing done. The Ambaſſadours to thēperour were Iames Sturmius, Matthie Pharrer, & Marke Hagie. The cauſe of their Ambaſſade was, that going to Ulme, thei ſhould know for certentie, vpon what conditions themperour might be cō
               pounded with. Themperour had than of his counſel. Anthony, biſhop of Arras: For his father Granuellā, was gone to Beſanſon, & Nauius the ſame time had chaūged his life for death. In whoſe roume afterward ſucceded George Selde a Ciuilan, & to The death of Nauius. him were annexed, by reaſō of ſo much buſines as was in Germany, Iohn Marquard of Badē, & Harry Haſie, who had bene conſellour before to the Paulſgraue, & very lately to the prince of Bippount, right expert in matters of Germany. Kyng Ferdinando, to the intent he myght ſtyre vp the Bohemers, that Kyng Ferdinando moueth the Bohemers to warre. refuſed to ſerue, as I ſaide before, the ſixte daye of February, marcheth forth with Ferdinando his ſonne, and commeth to Letmerice, a Frontier towne of Boheme. What tyme he taried there a day or two, for the nobles and ſtates of the realme, he had a longe Oration. And for as muche as Duke Maurice, deſyreth his helpe, he exhorteth them to put on Armure, as wel for the auncient league betwene both the people, as alſo for that they are thēperours clic̄tes. And becauſe diuerſe ſay, that their libertie herby is infringed, he promiſeth thē aſſurāce, yt it

ſhalbe no hinderaūce to thē in time to come. The ſtates whiche than were preſent, ſay, how they can determine nothing, with out the conſent of the reſt. They require him therfore, ſo ſhortly as he can, to call them altogether. Certen others of them promiſe their ſeruice & duty. Thoſe were gouernours of townes, vnto whome the king gaue thākes, and to the others declared at large, how this was no time to ſtande in queſtion, when the thing it ſelfe requireth a preſent remedy againſt the ennemie: What time the warre ſhalbe finiſhed, he wyll not refuſe to call an aſſemblie, & will deminiſhe no part of their liberties, wherfore let them ſtande content, and follow him. At the length fearing his diſpleaſure, whan the king had taunted thē ſomwhat ſharply, thei gaue their aſſent alſo, and in caſe thei ſerue not in perſone, they promiſe to finde others. About ye Ides of February, the nobilitie, and men of Prage, writing their letters, pray the king, in ſo muche as he perſeuereth in his cōmaundemētes after a new and ſtraunge example, that againſt the .xx. daye of Marche he wold cōmaunde all the ſtates to be at Prage. Or if he can not, in caſe they do aſſemble than, and determine ſome thing, they deſire him not to take it diſpleaſauntly. He again, reciteth what was done at Letmerice, and promiſeth an aſſemblie againſt the .xviii. day of April, and warneth them in the meane time that they attempt nothing, neither aſſemble together in any wyſe. The fourth day after they had thus wrytten, The league of the Bohemers. thei make a league, to maintein their libertie. After that Marques Albert was come into Saxony, Duke Maurice aſſigned him to lie in the towne of Rochlice. The reuenues wherof had the Lantgraues ſyſter a wydowe, daughter in lawe to Duke George. That knowen, Iohn Fridericke Prince Electour, who was than at Aldenburge, three myles from the ſame, at the kalendes of Marche, ſendeth before Erneſt Duke of Luneburge, and Uolrate Erle of Manſdfelde with certen guydōs of horſmen, and after them Recrode with his legion of fotemē by night. He him ſelfe with the reſt of his armie followeth after. In the next morning before it was day lyght, a few horſemen, ſent before to eſcoute, did ſet vpon the watche, and ſome they toke, the reſt fled into the town. In the ſuburbes were foure enſeignes of fotemen. They accompanied with certen horſemen, The winig of Roclice. going forth as ſone as day appered, giue ye charge: But hauing the repulſe, they retourne back into the ſuburbes. But whan the Electour was come with the rereward, and ſhot of his ordenaunce into the town from the next hill by, the fotemē alſo entring perforce, fyred the ſuburbes. Thoſe forſaid enſeignes of fotemen flye awaye by the brydge, & the horſemen alſo through

the Riuer of Mulda. wherfore the fotemen, which already poſſeſſed the ſuburbes, go to the aſſault of the towne with a luſty courage wynne it, ſpoyle it, and taketh the ordenaunce from ye ennemy. Whyleſt theſe things were thus a working, Marques Marques Albert takē priſoner. Albert ſeketh whiche way he might eſcape, and taketh the Ryner, but he was intercepted by ye Duke of Luneburg, & brought to the prince Electour. The garriſon within the town was ſix enſeignes of fotemen. They putting them ſelues into a ringe, by ye helpe of the other horſmen, ſtand to their defence, but vanquiſhed with a multitude they were taken all and ſtriped out of their armure. And whā they had made promyſe not to ſerue againſt the Duke of Saxon and his fellowes, of ſix monethes after, they were ſo let go without raūſom. The horſemen pourſuing after thoſe .iiii. enſeignes of footemen that eſcaped ouer the bridge, did ſlea a great numbre of them: which were all for the moſt part, Italians and Spaniards. Marques Albert had, (what of Kyng Ferdinando, & what of the Emperour) as good as a thouſand and fiue hundred horſemē, ten enſeignes of foot men, and .xiiii. field pieces. Thei fought from the breake of the day tyll none. The Duke of Saxon loſt not many of his men, & amonges them, Wuolfie Theodorick, a man of a noble courage who beyng ſtryken with a gunne, lefte his lyfe a fewe dayes after. The nombre of them that were ſlaine within the town, was accompted a thouſand, without the town and in the Ryuer thre hondreth. After the conflict, the Electour with Albert his priſoner retourneth to Aldenburg, and after ſignifieth the whole matter into Boheme, & ſheweth that he wil do nothing againſt the league, and deſireth to haue thoſe puniſhed, which had attempted againſt his ſubiectes with ſword and fyre. The Duke of Wirtemberg had condicioned, ſo ſone as he might for his ſickenes, to come make his ſubmiſſion to the Emperour, he commeth therfore to Ulme, in the moneth of Marche, 
                  •
               han he The Duke of Wirtemtemberg craueth pardon of the Emp. was not yet recouered, and ſitting in his ſaddel, by the Emperours permiſſion, in aſmuche as he could not remoue nor bowe him ſelf, by his coūſellors kneling for him, he deſireth to be pardoned of his fault, promiſing from henceforth aldew obediēce. Whan themperour hereunto had made a gentle aunſwere, he departeth immediatly, & for the war of Saxō, he goeth to Norling. Whileſt the Duke of Wirtemberg on this wiſe made his ſubmiſſion, there was a great reſort and concourſe of people, which hauing therof knowledge before, came thither flocking thicke and threfolde. In thoſe thre forſaid places of the land of Wirtemberg, the Emperour had placed garriſons a good while before, for the moſt part all Spaniardes.
         
         
            
            
               ✚ The nyntenth Booke of Sleidanes Commentaryes, concerning the ſtate of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne of the Empyre of Charles the fyfte
            
               
                  ❧ The argument of the nyntenth Booke.
               THe fathers of Trent make their ſeuenth ſeſſions. The Emperour hauing accorded with them of Straſburg, marcheth forth with his armie. Fraunces the Frenche kyng dyeth ſhortly after the kyng of England. The counſell of Trent is diuided. The Duke of Saxō taken in battell, notwithſtanding his condemnation to death, remayneth conſtant in Religion. Wittemberge being rendred, the vniuerſitie is deſtroyed. Suite is made for the agrement of the Lantgraue, who coming to the Emperour is ſtayed pryſoner. Kyng Ferdinando appeaſeth them of Prage. A commotion at Naples by reaſon of the Spaniſh inquiſition. The coronation of the Frenche kyng is deſcribed. The citie of Maidenburg is outlawed. An aſſemblee is holden at Auſpurg. Peter Aloeſſe the Popes ſonne, is murthered. The Duke of Somerſet wynneth a great battell of the Scottes. Whan the Princes of the Proteſtauntes were vanquyſhed, the cities were made afrayd. Stryfe aryſeth for the impryſonyng of the Lantgraue. Requeſt is made that the Fathers ſhould retourne to Trent: but the Pope and ſuche as were gone to Boloigne le graſſe, ſtode ſtyf in their opinions. in ſo muche that there is great diſordre in the counſell of Trent.
            
            
               THe third day of Marche, was the ſeuenth The ſeuēth Seſſion at Trent, of ye Sacramēts. Seſſion of the fathers at Trent. In this are condēpned al ſuche as either ſay there are fewer Sacramentes of the church thā ſeuen, or that al were not of Chriſtes inſtitution, who deny that one is of more dignitie than an other, who ſay, they be only externall ſignes of grace, or that rightuouſnes is receiued through Chriſte & faith who deny that grace is geuen through the receiuinge of the ſame, who ſay that through Baptiſme, Confirmation, and orders, is not imprinted in the ſoule a ſpirituall token or marke that can neuer be ſcraped out, or ye al men haue lyke authoritie to miniſter the ſame, or that the accuſtomed ceremonies of the churche, in the adminiſtration of the ſame, may be omitted, or altered, whiche ſay that the doctrine of the churche of Rome, mother and maiſtres of al others, concerning Baptiſme, is not ſincere, whiche ſaye, that Uowes made after Baptiſme, are of no importaūce, and are rather a derogation of the faith which they haue profeſſed. And ſay that Confirmation is an Idle Ceremony, and was in tymes paſt nothing els but an inſtruction of youth, and deny that the vertue and inſtinction of the holye

Ghoſt, is not preſent at Confirmation, which aſcribe the cōfirmyng of children not to byſhops only, but take it to be the fūction of any other prieſt. After this, decrees are made of eccleſiaſticall benefices. That Byſhops & other Prelates of the church Of eccleſiaſticall benefices. be lawfully begotten, that they be of yeares, maners and learning ſufficient. That no man, of what eſtate or degree ſoeuer he be of, do enioy do Byſhoprickes than one, and they that poſſeſſe many, may kepe ſtyll whiche of them they liſte, and within one yeares ſpace ſhall put away the reſt. That ſuche as haue cure and charge of ſoules, be them ſelues reſident, neyther let them ſubſtitute others in their place, vnleſſe it be for a tyme, & ſo, as if they haue declared a cauſe of their abſence to the Byſhop, and he hath allowed the ſame, whoſe part it ſhalbe to forſee, that the people be not neglected, and that prieſtes offences be puniſhed, and ſuch vices as reigne amonges them, be ſtraitly corrected. After was the .xxi. day of Aprill aſſigned for the next aſſemblie. Whan king Ferdinando was come to Duke Maurice at Dreſda, the eight day of Marche, he writeth to the Bohemers, howe Iohn Friderick is prefixed to inuade them. Therfore let them take hede to their matters, and obeye Weittemulle, whome he hath appointed his deputie in his abſence. The Ambaſſadours of Straſburg, whiche as I ſayde, went to They of Straſburg compounde with themperour. Ulme, returning home, where the Senate did not miſlyke the conditions preſcribed of the Emperour, they are ſent agayn to cōclude throughly. As they were traueling, they fynde the Emperour at Norlyng, there liyng ſicke of the Gowte, and the .xxi. day of Marche, making their ſubmiſſion, thei were reconciled. The conditions were very tollerable. For neyther the Emperour charged them with any garriſon, and was content with xxx. thouſand crownes, and demaunded not aboue .xii. pieces of ordenaunce. The Prince Electour of Brandenburg, was an erneſt ſuter for the Lantgraue, and alſo preferred the matter to kyng Ferdinando. But the conditions were moſte vnreaſonable. Thoſe were, that he ſhould allowe without exception al Conditions offered to the Lantgraue. the decrees of the Empyre to be enacted hereafter, that he ſhuld geue one of his ſonnes for a pledge: That he ſhould releaſe the Duke of Brunſwicke Henry and his ſonne, and here in ſtande to the Emperours arbitrement. That he ſhould ayde hym againſt the Electour of Saxonie and his fellowes with certen centaynes of horſemen, and eight enſeignes of fotemen at his propre coſtes and charge, for the ſpace of ſyx monethes. That he do ſubmitte hym ſelfe to the Emperour, and cōfeſſe his faultes openly. But theſe conditions he refuſed, and vnleſſe they were

mitigated, in as muche as he can not with his honour aſſente vnto them, he ſignifieth in his letters to his frendes, that rather he wyll abyde what fortune ſoeuer happen. Themperour, the ſame daye that he accorded with them of Straſburg, departed from Norlinge, towardes Nurrinberg. And the next day after, adreſſing his letters to the States of Duke Maurice, for as much, ſaith he, as Iohn Friderick, that outlaw, retourning home by flight, hath not only recouered thoſe places, whiche Maurice Prince Electour toke from him by our commaundement, but ſutch alſo as my brother Ferdinando had ſeaſed in thoſe parties, for that they were vnder the tuition of Boheme. We are entred verely, vpon our iourney to repreſſe his boldnes and rebellion. Wherfore we will that you firſt, foreſee, that in ſuche places, wherby we ſhal paſſe with our armie, there want nothing that is neceſſary, and that the ſouldiours be wel vſed. Moreouer, that contemning all the others cōmaundementes, you perfourme vnto your Prince al loue and due obedience, as in dede you haue done hetherto. For euen for this intent haue we taken this warre in hande, that his fierſenes being oppreſſed, peace & quietnes may be for you recouered. The ſame daye alſo he wryteth to the counſellours and gouernours of Prage. How he is prefixed to be auenged vpon Iohn Fridericke according vnto his demerites: Let them prouide therfore, that his campe may be vitayled out of their countrey. The .xxiiii. of Marche, the nobles and cities of Boheme, whiche had lately made a league, whan they were aſſembled at Prage, as it was determined, they make warlike lawes, and ſuche as are requiſite for the warres if nede requyre, and committe the chief gouernment to Caſpar Phulgius. About this tyme king Ferdinando, Duke Maurice, and his brother Auguſtus came with Caſpar Phlugius Captaine of the Bohemers armie their forces to Priccie. Whiche the Bohemers toke in diſpleaſure, that thei were entred already vpon their Frontiers. Wherfore they requyre Ferdinando by their letters, that he woulde not ſuffer ſtraunge nations to inuade their countrey: For the example is ſtraunge and perillous. They wryte moreouer to Duke Maurice and his brother Auguſtus, that they departe immediatly out of their limites, without any hurt doyng. For otherwyſe wyll they doe, as their counſell ſhall ſerue them. Wherunto Ferdinando aunſwereth the .xxvi. daye of Marche, howe they ſhall not nede to feare: For they are come only into thoſe parties, to the intent they might ioyne them ſelues with the Emperour nowe approching. Againe, he wryteth to them of Prage, that they beſtowe no ſuperfluous coſte: For the Duke

of Saxon is retyred. The electour had ſent into the land of Boheme an Ambaſſadour, Nicolas Minquit, to renew the auncient league: But he falling ſicke by the way, whan he was not The Duke of Saxō ſendeth an Ambaſſadour in to Boheme. able to go to Prage, wryting his letters deſyred them to ſende ſome mē of credit to him, with whom he may treate & cōclude. Whan theſe letters were receiued, the Noble men of Boheme, wryte to the Duke of Saxon from Prage, the .xxviii. daye of Marche, ſignifieng what Minquit required, and howe deſyrous they be, to gratifie him herein, and graunt, that reaſon would, it ſhould ſo be. Howe beit they are impeched by reaſon of this troubleſome tyme, and preſent diſquietnes. For Duke Maurice and his brother are come with their force into Boheme, intending to doe ſome miſchief, and all through the procurement of kyng Ferdinando: praying him not to take this ſo, as though they would not that the league ſhould be renewed. For they wyll both kepe the ſame, and perſeuer in the olde amitie, as well as if it were already renewed. They wyll alſo doe their indeuour, that it ſhalbe confirmed again as ſone as may be. For therfore is this power lenied, & force prepared againſt them, for that they refuſe to breake the league, & to moue war againſt hym. They require him therfore, yt in caſe Duke Maurice do procede, he wyl vouchſaufe to ayde them. If he ſhal this do, there is no daunger ſo great, that they wyl refuſe to venter vpon for his preſeruation. They ſaye how Ferdinando is nowe at Priccie, and from thence wyll marche with his armie into the Uale of Ioachime, as it is reported. If he ſo do, they ar purpoſed a fewe daies after, to marche with their armie, and leade the ſame thether as nede ſhall require.
            The laſt day of Marche ſauing one, they wryte to ye Lordes of Morauie, exhorting thē, according to their mutuall league, The Bohemers letters to the Morsuians. that they would take armure and come to them with ſpede, to the intent their common countrey may be defended from that wicked and Sodomiticall kynde of men, the Spaniardes and Huſſars, buggerers, which the Emperour and kyng Ferdinādo bring with them.
            Fraunces the Frenche kyng, whan he had reigned .xxxii. yeares, he ended his lyfe the laſt daye of Marche at Rambolet, The death of the Frēch kyng. whiche is a dayes iourney from Paris. Whome his ſonne Henry ſucceded, a man about .xxviii. yeares of age. He immediatly ſendeth for the Cōſtable, Annas Momorancie, who had for the ſpace of ſixe yeares liued a priuate life out of fauour, and reſtored him to his former dignitie, and had him in great eſtimatiō. Againe, ſuch as were in chiefeſt authoritie before, partly grow

out of fauour, partly are diſplaced, and committed to priſon. Alteratiō in the court of Fraunce. Thoſe were the Cardinall of Tournon, Anebalde the Admiral, Grinian, the gouernour of the Frenche prouince, the Duke of Longeuale, Bayarde, Poline, & eſpecially ſhe, whiche had bene the kinges darling, Madame Deſtampes. The death of kinge Fraunces chaunced vnfortunately for ſtudentes & learned mē. King Fraū
                  ces the fauiour of learning. For he loued all liberal ſciences, no man better, or that ſhewed more liberalitie to auaunce the ſame. Through long vſe & cuſtome, he had gotten muche knowledge. For dining & ſupping his talke was commonly of learning, and that moſte earneſtly vſing many yeares for ye ſame purpoſe Iames Coline, a learned His knowledge. man, and in the vulgare tonge moſte eloquent. And after him Peter Caſtellan. Of theſe two had he learned, whatſoeuer was wrytten in the bokes of Poetes, Hiſtoriographers, & Coſmographers. Moreouer he knew perfitly, whatſoeuer Ariſtotel, Theophraſte, Plinie, and ſuche other like, haue wrytten of the nature of Plantes, Herbes, Beaſtes, Metalles & Precious ſtones, and by dayly vſe and hearing did remember them. He was wont alſo to deuiſe muche of the Mathematical ſciences, and to reaſon oft of the Scriptures. About his table ſtoode alwayes the notable men of eche degree. And in as muche as the talke was inferred of ſondry argumēts: it was harde, but that one or other would alwayes propounde ſome matter: And that might euery man do lawfully, in caſe he were any thing knowen. The example alſo, and this deſire of the kyng excited men vnto great diligēce, that they might in reaſoning before him, deſerue prayſe. In his owne tongue he was always accompted right eloquēt and graue. Throughout Grece and Italy he had The notable library of kyng Fraū
                  ces. that ſought and copied out for him the workes of olde writers. And he made a goodly librarie, whiche yelded certen notable bookes afterwardes. The keper wherof was Caſtellan. Alitle before his death, he had ſent to the Duke of Saxon, and the Lantgraue: for the mayntenaunce of the war, to eyther of thē an hondreth thouſand crownes, and what tyme he departed, ye mony was ſcarſely deliuered. About the ſame tyme alſo, the Ambaſſadours of the Proteſtauntes retourne out of England into Fraunce, that they myght finiſhe vp the reſt of their matters. And lyke as they found kyng Henry there whan they fyrſt arriued, ſo now, retourning from thence, they fynde king Fraū
               ces extremely ſicke. Wherfore this happened alſo to the reſte of the Emperours good fortune, that thoſe two moſte mightie kynges, which neither wanted oportunitie, nor (as many men than ſuppoſed) wyll alſo: to impeche and hynder his enterpryſes,

died both in a maner at one tyme. That force of the Emperours, whiche after they had oppreſſed certen noble men, and The death of two kinges was happy for the Emperour. taken the citie of Mynden (I ſayde) went marching to Breme, at the ende of this ſame moneth, had ſuch an ouerthrowe, that he loſt the chief captaine of the warre, Grunninge, gouernour of Selande. And whan the power of the Bremers was increaſed by the acceſſe of Hamborough men, Uriſberger, who after The ouerthrowe of the Emper. armie. the death of Grunning, had then the chief gouernment, remouing his campe, and fetching a long circuite about, for the fennes that lay in his way, began to beſeige the citie on the other ſyde. Thither came ſhortly after alſo Ericus Duke of Brunſwyck, whom the Emperour at the Ides of Marche, ſent away from him at Norlinge, to the intent he ſhould leuie a newe power of horſemen and fotemen, and leade them into thoſe parties. The Emperour remouing from Norling, to Norinberge, went from thence to Egre, a towne of king Ferdinādos in the borders of Boheme. The king had at ſondry times admoniſhed the citie of Prage, their weapons. The reſidue of the ſtates by them therof aduertiſed, the fourth day of Aprill, wryte againe. That the cauſe why they haue put on armure, & led forth their armie, is to defende their countrie from vniuſt violence, eſpecially in his abſēce. And pray him, to intreate themperour, that he war not againſt the Duke of Saxō, but ſuffer that his caſe may be frendly debated. They deſire alſo to haue a parlament, as the promiſe was. At the which time the Emperour cōming to Egre, and the. vi
                  •
               . day of April, whan Ferdinano & Maurice were come yt day before, he writeth to all the ſtates of Boheme, The Empe. letters to the ſtates of Boheme. and repeting briefly what he had writtē in the moneth before, ſheweth thē, that he ſeketh only the Duke of Saxon. Wherfore let them bring forth their vitayle, furniſhe them of corne, & retourne home. As concerning religiō, they nede not to feare, for in all this war, he hath moleſted no mā for religiō. At the ſame tyme the commiſſioners that were at Prage, diſpatching their letters into all partes, warne the ſtates moſte earneſtly, that they would put on armure, and come with all haſte poſſible, to deſend their countrey, for the matter is brought to an extreme daunger. Ferdinando the eleuenth of Aprill, aunſwereth their Ferdinando to the Bohemers. laſt letters from Egre, of lyke effecte in a maner as the Emperour did. Therfore let them leaue their enterpriſe, or els wil he fynde the meanes to repreſſe their raſhenes wel enough. Where they intreate for the Duke of Saxon, he can not a lyttle maruell: For he hath not deſerued ſo, neither of the Emperour, nor of him, nor yet of the lande of Boheme. Touching their requeſt

for a parliament, he wyll doe herein as ſhall become hym. In the meane tyme the Duke of Saxon taketh from Duke Maurice Fridberge and Miſen, a towne by the Ryuer of Albis.
            And about this tyme the Fathers that were at Trente, remoue Part of the counſell of Trent flitt to Banonie to Bolonia la grace, neither after that ſeſſion wherein they treated of the Sacramentes, made they any decrees at al. The cauſe of their departure (as it is ſayde) was, for that the ayre of this place was not greatly holſome, after the opinion of Hieroſme Fracaſtor, Phiſition to the Fathers of the counſell, who had of the Byſhop of Rome therfore, threſcore duckates a moneth. The Emperour toke this matter moſte diſpleaſauntly, and commaunded the Byſhoppes and Diuines of hys dominions, not to remoue from thence one fote. Wherupon, parte of the counſell was at Trente, and an other parte at Bononie. What tyme the Emperour marched from Norlinge to Norinberge, the Erle of Bure, whiche kept Frankefurte with twelue enſeignes of fotemen, and about foure hondreth horſemen, being ſent for, came thither. And whan he was come agayne to Franckefurt, the .xii. daye of Aprill, he putteth two to Two executed at Frankefurte. death, wherof the one Iohn Uerden, was of the ſame towne, the other William Gelluſe, was a ſubiect of the Lantgraues. The cauſe of their execution was, for that they were ſayde to be ſent by the Lantgraue, that they ſhould bye of a Smyth the keyes of one gate, that they ſhould ſet the town on fyre in foure ſondrye places, that they ſhould dryue in Iron nayles into the Canons and other great pieces, ſo that they might not be ſhot of. That whyleſt others were quenching the fyres, they with the helpe of their fellowes ſhould ſlaye the Erle of Bure and his familie, the Conſull and the Senate. That they ſhould infecte the welles of the town with poyſō, eſpecially that, which ſerued the Erles kitchin, and an other whiche is in the Court. After came forth a wrytting, pourporting howe they confeſſed in pryſon this cōſpiracie, and perſeuered in the ſame whā they were led to execution. But the Lantgraue pourgeth hym ſelfe, The Lantgraues purga
                     ••
                  on. and affirmeth that ſynce that tyme that Franckefurt came in to the Emperours handes, he hath attempted nothing, and cō
               futeth the crimes obiected with many weighty wordes: he had at ſondry times in dede cōmaunded Geluſe, to vnderſtād, which way themperour & the Counte of Bure marched with their armie, & but that thing only. But in caſe thei being vāquiſhed by the ſharpnes of the torture & extremitie of ye payn, haue ſpoken Unreaſonable torment isaperillous matter. yt is falſe, & haue not iniuried others only, but him alſo, he deſireth, that the ſame be not wraſted, to his diſdayne and hatred.

For all racking and torture, that exceadeth a meane, is vncerten and perillous. A probation wherof is, that ſuch as they before had nominated to be fellowes of their conſpiracie, after, whan they were had to the place of execution, declared them to be innocētes. The .xiii. day of April, the cōmiſſioners of Prage wryte againe to the ſtates of the Realme, and warne them erneſtly to cleaue vnto the league, that they haue with the houſe of Saxon. They complayne alſo that diuerſe haue infringed ye ſame already. Wherfore thei commaunde that from henceforth no man offende againſt it. The ſame daye they ſende letters to king Ferdinando, beſeching him, that neither he nor themperour, wold be offēded with this their warfare. Moreouer, that he war not againſt the Electour of Saxony, firſt, for the mutual league, ſecondly, for that he deſireth the matter might come to hearing. The ſelfe ſame day, Ferdinando ſendeth Iohn Byſhop of Olmuce, & certen other counſellours to the parliament Ferdinādos Ambaſſad. to the Bohemers. at Prage, whiche he had aſſigned at the .xviii. of Aprill. By thē he maketh his excuſe, why he can not come. Againe, he requireth them to aboliſhe their newe league, & laye a part their armure & weapons: for otherwyſe can not the counſell be holden free. If this were denied, thā had the Ambaſſadours in cōmaū
               dement, that they ſhuld treate no further. But if they did obey, than to procede as was preſcribed them, not to determine any thyng, but referre al to him. Themperour the ſame daye departeth from Egre with his whole armie, accompanied with his The Empe. iourney againſt the Duke of Saxon. brother Ferdinando, who had with him of men at armes ſyxe hondreth, of the Huſſares a thouſand, and ten enſeignes of fote men. There were alſo the two brethrē Maurice & Auguſt, with like forces. Whan he had marched continually ten dayes together, at the length the .xxii. day of April, he commeth nere vnto Miſen, where the Duke of Saxon was. Who hauing intelligence therof, forſaketh the towne. And whan he had fyred the bridge, he pitcheth his Tentes nere Mulberge, by the Riuer of Albis. But the Emperour fearing leſt he ſhould haue retired to Wittemberge, the ſtrongeſt and chiefeſt town of his Dukedom, ſawe he had nede to make haſte, commaunding therfore his armye to marche forewarde, whan they had repoſed them ſelues one daye, the .xxiiii. day of Apryl, they come to the water in the mornyng by tymes. The Duke of Saxon had placed certen on the contrary banke with field pieces, to let the Emperour, that he ſhould neither make a brydge nor finde a foorde to tranſport his armie. And alſo might defende that brydge whiche they them ſelues had there ready made of boates and ſmall veſſels.

But what time thei ſawe the Emperour come with his whole army, and a force of Spaniardes to the nomber of a thouſand, ruſhed into the water with a great violence vp to the chynne, and holding their armes aboue the water, and ſhot of fierſly their pieces. They caſte fyre into the bootes which were partly burnt therewith, and by litle and litle ſhrinke away from the banke towardes the myddle ſtreame. There certē Spaniardes, threwe them ſelues into ye Riuer naked, carieng their ſwordes ouerth warte in their mouthes, and thus ſwymming ouer all moſte to the other ſyde, lay holde on thoſe bootes, which (caried downe with the ſtreame) the Saxons had broken of, from the reſt of the bridge, and although they were ſhot at with many pieces, and wounded ſore, yet they bryng them away. Of thoſe veſſels, and ſuche others as themperour brought with hym by cariage, was made a bridge ouer the Riuer, ſo that the fotemen and cariage might paſſe. In this tourmoile of thinges, ye Duke of Saxon, who that time was hearing of a Sermon, ſendinge his cariage before, followeth him ſelf after, & marcheth toward Wittemberg. But themperour, which ſawe how ye whole matter reſted in ſpede, finding a foorde: firſt cōmaūded the Huſſars The Emperours celeritie in ouerta king yt Du. and all other light horſemen to paſſe ouer, after goeth he hym ſelfe alſo with the horſmen in complete armure, & tariyng nothing at al, neither for the carriage nor fotemē, haſteth on ſtil, And thre miles beyond yt Riuer of Albis, at ye wode of Lochan, he ouertaketh the Prince Electour. There, after he had encouraged his men through an exhortaciō vnto battel, he giueth yt charge: His army was deuided into two partes. In yt forwarde were the Duke of Alba, Lanoie, Anthony Toletane, Baptiſte Spinelle, & Duke Maurice. The rerewarde led themperour & king Ferdinando with his two ſonnes, & the Duke of Sauoye his ſonne. The Duke of Saxō might wel haue reſiſted all this force, & perchaunce haue diſcōfited the ſame, in caſe he had had The Empe. fighteth a battell with the Duke of Saxon. his whole armie together. For there was a great parte of hys force at Wittemberge, and ſtrong garriſons left in euery place. And William Thumſerne with his power was abſent, neither could al the reſt be put in ordre in ſo great expedition of themperour. Wherfore, being at the lēgth vanquiſhed wt the greater nomber & multitude, whan they had fought till it was night: He him ſelfe receiuing a wound in the left cheke, in defendyng him ſelf māfully, was taken, & brought firſt to ye Duke of Alba, The Duke taken fighting. & after preſented to thēperour. Into whoſe ſight whā he was come, I yelde my ſelf priſoner to you ſaith he, moſt merciful emperour, deſiring you that I may be kept & vſed lyke a Prince.

Am I now thy Emperour ſayeth he? I ſhall handle thee as thou haſt deſerued. But Ferdinando toke hym vp with ſharper wordes, and chargeth him that he ſought to diſpoſſeſſe hym & his chyldren of all that euer they had. With hym was taken alſo Erneſt of Brunſwick, Duke Philippe his ſonne: The Electours eldeſt ſonne, although he was ſore woūded, yet eſcaped & came to Wittemberge. Of pryſoners the nomber was great. They that eſcaped by flight, to the nomber of foure hondreth, recouered Wittenberg for their refuge, amonges whome was Counte Bichling, & Recrode. The horſmē following the chace make great ſpoyle, and take all the munition and cariage, that the Duke had ſent before. Than did the Duke of Alba cōmit ye Duke of Saxon and Duke Erneſt of Brunſwitck, to the cuſtody of Alphonſe Uines. What time the Emperour came nere vnto Miſen, which was the .xxii. of April, & agayne, the next daye and the ſame day that he paſſed the Riuer, and fought the battell, and certen daies after, the Sunne loked pale and dimme, & was inuironed as it were with a certen darkenes, ſo that the A perdigieof the Sunne. ſight was ſorrouful & greuous to beholde, in ſo muche as they whiche were a great way out of Saxonie, & knewe nothing of this matter, iudged that it did pourtende & ſignifie ſome great trouble. And this was not obſerued in Germany only, but alſo in Fraunce & England, & that this was ſo in dede, many thouſandes can teſtifie. Of Ferdinando his Ambaſſadours ſent to ye conuentiō at Prage, I haue ſpokē before. The Peres of the Realme, hearing their demaundes, make anſwer, that where they haue made a league, & put on armure, it is neither done amiſſe nor againſt ye cuſtome of Boheme. Again they determine to ſend an Ambaſſade to king Ferdinādo, which might declare yt ſame, and alſo require him, to intreate themperour for the Duke of Saxon. But tofore thambaſſadours were ſent, came newes frō king Ferdinādo, of themperours victory, & how the Duke was taken. Then chaunging their purpoſe, they promiſe corne & vitayle, and deſire the king, to make meanes to themperour, that al that armie may be led into Hongary againſt the Turcke, of whoſe comming report went daily. And that other kinges alſo might be moued vnto yt ſocietie of this war. Which thing if it may be brought to paſſe, thei wil not be behind wt their partes. Whan yt Duke of Saxon was taken, themperour marcheth to Wittēberg, & came thether with his armie the .iiii. day of May The Duke condempned to loſe his head. and thre daies after, he condemneth Iohn Friderick to loſe his head, as he ſaith for treaſon. But he, whan he heard therof ſhewed no ſigne nor token of a minde diſcouraged, but aunſwered

now he had thought the Emperour would not haue dealte ſo with him. Neuertheleſſe, if this be prefixed and determined, he deſireth, to haue certen knowledge, to the intent he maye take order in matters concerning his wyfe and his children. The Prince Electour of Brandenburg, after he had heard of the battell, taketh his iourney immediatly, and comming to the cāpe the ſixt day of May, doth mitigate the Emperours mynde, ſo that altering his ſentence, he ſaued the Dukes lyfe. Wherfore the Emperour propoundeth conditions, which after the Duke had confirmed the .xviii. daye of May, he redemed his life. Amonges others was wrytten this alſo, that what ſo euer the Conditions wherby the Duke redemed his life. counſell or the Emperour ſhould decree concerning Religion, he ſhould approue. But where he would in no wyſe aſſente to that, and perſeuered in the ſame, and herein reſpected no daunger, the Emperour commaunded that part to be croſſed & blotted out. And the reſt of the conditions were theſe. That he renounce the dignitie of Electourſhip, for him ſelfe, and for his chyldren, and permitte the Emperour to diſpoſe it at his pleaſure. He deliuereth vp to the Emperour Wittemberge and Gothe, the ſecond fortreſſe of his dominion, yet ſo as he may take a way all his ſtuffe and prouiſion, ſauing the munition, and the third part of the vytayle: The Emperour permitteth the ſoldiours of the garriſons to departe, yet without enſeignes. The Duke of Saxon frely releaſeth Marques Albert without raū
               ſome, and reſtoreth ſuch thinges as were taken from him. The Emperour againe ſetteth at libertie Duke Erneſt of Brunſwick, taking firſt a promeſſe of his fidelitie. The Duke of Saxon reſtoreth ſuche thinges as in this warre tyme haue bene taken away from the Erles of Māſfielde, the Marques of Pruſſe, and them of Solmen. He renoūceth his title of Maydenburg, Halberſtate and Halles. He promyſeth to obey the iudgement of the chamber imperiall, whan it ſhalbe eſtabliſhed by Themperour, and to geue towarde the charges therof. He aſſenteth that Duke Hēry of Brunſwick and his ſonne ſhalbe deliuered, neither wyll he commence any action againſt them. He forſaketh all leagues made againſt the Emperour and king Ferdinando, neither wyll he make any frō henceforth, wherin they, their prouinces and fellowes ſhal not be compriſed. The Emperour doth confiſcate all his landes, and geueth the ſame to his brother Ferdinando, and Duke Maurice, yet ſo, as Duke Maurice ſhall paye yearely to hym and his children fifty thouſande crownes. If the Emperour thinke good, the Duke of Saxō, by the promiſſion of Maurice, ſhal kepe ſtill the town and Caſtel,

of Gothe, with al the profite, howbeit he ſhal raſe the Caſtell, & not fortifie the towne: For ſo muche as the Duke of Saxon is greatly indebted, to the intent thoſe debtes may be payed, whiche were dew, before the league of Smalcalde, Duke Maurice ſhall geue to his children as a ſubſidie an hondreth thouſand crownes. Moreouer he ſhall paye ſuche other debtes, as depende vpon the landes confiſcated, and geuen to him by the Emperour, and and by this meane ſhall the ſuites and controuerſies betwixt them haue a finall ende. The Duke ſhall attempte nothing againſt them, that haue ſerued the Emperour in his warres, nor yet againſt the kyng of Denmarke. He ſhall obſerue the lawes and ſtatutes, that the Emperour and the ſtates of the Empyre ſhall decree. For as muche as he is releaſed of execution and bodely puniſhement, he ſhall remaine from henceforth in the cuſtody of themperour, or of his ſonne, prince of Spayne. The goodes before mentioned his children ſhall vſe and enioye, ſo that they and the people alſo do ratifie the conditions of peace. Out of this peace are exempted Albert Erle of Manſfield and his children, Counte Bichlinge, the Ringraue, Recrode & Thumſerne, who neuertheleſſe, if he ſhall diſcharge his armie within this moneth, ſhalbe therin comprehended. Before theſe thinges were conditioned, the Emperour out of his campe before Wittemberge the ſyxte daye of May, ſummoneth An aſſemble of thempyre at Ulmes. all the ſtates of the Empyre, to mete at Ulme at the Ides of Iune, to the intent to make a league. He ſendeth thether Ambaſſadours, the Cardinall of Auſpurg, Marques Iohn of Brandenburg, Lirane and Henry Haſie. The ſame doeth kyng Ferdinando. Unto that whiche the commiſſioners of Prage, Kyng Ferdinandos letters to the Bohemers. had lately ſayd, concerning the league made, as though it were no newe thyng, nor againſt the cuſtome of the countrey, Ferdinando aunſwereth from the campe before W
                  •••
               emberge at the Ides of May. That it is plainly a new and a ſtraunge enterpryſe, and whiche appertaineth vtterly to his iniury. Moreouer he declareth what they haue attempted in his abſence, and how many wayes they haue rebelled, and by ſondry reaſons goeth about to proue, that this ſame league was made againſt the Emperour and him. Wherfore he chargeth and commaundeth them, to abolyſhe & defeate the ſame, to reſtore vnto euery man his ſeale againe, and deliuer a copie of their league to his Ambaſſadours: Unleſſe they obeye this accordingly, he wyl doe as his counſell ſhall ſerue him. Albeit the Emperour had accorded with the Duke of Saxon, as before is ſaid, yet the garriſon that kept Wittemberge to the nombre of thre thouſand ſoldiours,

and the citezens alſo refuſed to rendre, except the Prince him ſelfe did ſo commaunde them. For the townes men feared chiefly the oultrage of the ſouldiours, whan they might ſee in a maner of the towne walles what hurte they did in the countrey, eſpecially the Spaniardes and Hongarians. The Duke of Saxon therfore the .xxi. day of May, whan his brother, hys ſonne and certen counſellours, came out of the towne to hym, doeth releaſe them of their othe for the warres, and commaundeth them to departe thence, before thre daies be ended. Whan this commaundement was geuen, the townes men make requeſt to the Emperour, that he would bryng in no foreine ſoldiours. Wittēberge rendred. He made them promeſſe, and kept it, and gaue them moreouer authoritie, to kepe out all ſuche as ſhuld preaſe to enter without his expreſſe commaundement. Whan they had ſurrendred, ye Ducheſſe of Saxon, Sibille of Cleaue, going forth with her ſonne, and her huſbandes brother, cometh into the campe, and making her ſupplication moſte humblie, beſecheth themperour with plentifull teares to be good to the Duke her huſbande. The Emperour enterteined her ryght curteouſly, & put her in good comfort. After he licenſeth the Duke to go into the citie there to remayne eight dayes with his wyfe and his children. The ſame daye that the ſouldiours iſſued out of Wittemberge, at the Duke of Saxons commaundement, whiche was the .xxiii. day of May, the Emperour ſent in Almaigne fotemē at the leading of Nicolas Madruce. Two dayes after king Ferdinando and his two ſonnes, came into the towne accōpanied with the Electour of Brandenburg, and Duke Maurice, to ſee it only, and making no long abode retourneth into the campe. At after none alſo the Emperour hym ſelfe entreth, and whan he was come into the Caſtel, he ſaluteth the Ducheſſe, & again comforting her, wylleth her to be of a good chere.
            I ſhewed you before of the death of Fraunces the Frenche The buriall of kyng Fraunces. kyng. Who the .xxiiii. day of May, was buried in the churche of ſaint Denis, conſecrated for the buriall of kynges and with him his two ſonnes, Fraunces and Charles, wherof the one departed .xi. yeares paſt, and the other two yeares ſince, as before is ſayd, and remayned vnburied hitherto. In the meane ſeaſon that the funerall was in preparing for kyng Fraunces, his picture for a certen ſpace appareled with riche array, with hys crowne, Scepter, and other ornamentes, was layde vpon his bed, wherunto at certen howres both dynner and ſupper was ſerued, with lyke ſolemnitie, as was accuſtomed being a lyue. After were theſe garmentes taken away, and mourning apparell

put on. There were continually preſent .xlviii. Monkes, ſuche as are commonly caled begging Freers. Thoſe ſange Maſſes and Diriges for hym, without ceaſing. About the dead corps were ſet .xiiii. great tapers, and ouer againſt, ſtoode two aultars, wherupon from the firſt day light, tyll it was noone, was ſayde Maſſe continually. There was alſo a chapel iuſt by, wherin were burning innumerable Tapers & lightes. About the chariot wherin the coarſe was caried, went .xxiiii. Freers with ſo many Tapers. And before them, went fiue hondreth poore men, in mourning apparell, with euery man a torche. Beſydes other nobles of Fraunce, there were preſent .xi. Cardinalles. The funerall Sermon made Peter Caſtellane, Byſhop of Macon, of whome is mentioned before. He, amonges other thynges declareth howe the king was prefixed to buylde a College, wherin all artes and tongues ſhould haue bene red and taught. And that ſixe hondreth ſhuld haue bene founde there to learning. And to the ſame vſe, had aſſigned out fiftie thouſand crownes yearely.
            I ſhewed you before how Duke Ericke of Brunſwick went to Breme: Howbeit at the .xxii. day of May, he departeth from the ſiege, to defend his owne coūtrey from ſpoyling. The ſame did Uriſberger, whiche led an other part of the armie, and they firſt agreed vpon a place, where they ſhould mete againe with their powers. This Duke chaunceth vpō his ennemies. Which Duke Erick diſcomfited. was the force of Hamburge, that came to ayde the Bremers. They fought ſore till it was within night, and in fine: Duke Erich being diſcomfited, and driuen backe with his horſemen into ye Riuer of Uiſurge, loſt many of his men. Neuertheleſſe, he him ſelfe eſcaped, but loſt all his munitiō, and after comming to the Emperour, layde all the faulte in Uriſberger, that came not to helpe him. With the Bremers and their fellowes, were Counte Albert of Manſfelde, Erle Hedecke, Thumſerne, Conrade Phenninge, and diuers others. But after the Duke of Saxon had cōdicioned with the Emperour, al theſe forces ſlipped away. Whileſt theſe thinges are a doing: the Electour of Brandenburg and Duke Maurice, intreate diligently for the Lantgraue. And to the intent the thing might the more conueniently Duke Maurice and the Electour of Brandenb. intreate for the Lantgraue. be accōpliſhed, they ſende for him to Lipſia: but where the Emperour would in any wyſe, that he ſhould ſubmit him ſelfe without condicion, and deliuer all his Caſtels and munition alſo, he retourneth home without concluding any thing, and the ſame day cometh to Weiſſefelſe, foure miles from Lipſia. The next day by the waye ryding, as he talked with Chriſtopher

Eblebe of the condicions that were propounded, and of his fortune and eſtate. If I knew, ſayth he, that the Emperour might be intreated, to ſuffer me to retourne home againe, and to let me haue one of my Caſtels furniſhed with ordenaunce, I could be content for a common quiet, to Raſe all the reſte, and deliuer all the munition accordingly. Than ſayeth Eblebe, I wyll reporte this tale vnto Duke Maurice, and within a fewe dayes, wyll eyther repare vnto you agayne, or aduertiſe you of the certētie hereof by letters, in the meane ſeaſon I deſire you to ſurceaſe from other deuiſes. Going therfore vnto Duke Maurice, not long after, he retourneth with letters to hym frō Duke Maurice and the Electour of Brandenburge, bearyng Duke Maurice letters to the Lantgraue. date the fourth day of Iune out of the campe before Wittemberge, whiche were of this importaunce. That ſo ſone as they vnderſtode more of his mynde by Eblebe, they became agayne peticioners to the Emperour, and what they haue obteyned, that doth the copie it ſelfe and conditions of peace, whiche Eblebe bryngeth him, declare. And in as muche as the conditions are tollerable, they doubte not, but he wyll admitte the ſame, eſpecially conſidering in how great daūger he ſtandeth. Their aduiſe is therfore that he refuſe them not, but ſubmitte hym ſelfe to the Emperour without condition: For he nedeth not to feare, leſt the Emperour ſhuld burthē him with great thinges, or deteine him pryſoner, for they wyll become ſuertie for that matter. And if any thing ſhould chaūce vnto him, beſydes that whiche is conteined in the copie of peace, that he ſhall now receiue by Eblebe, or if he ſhould be deteyned ſtyll in captiuitie, they wyll not refuſe, to abyde the ſame fortune, and being called vpon by his children, wyl offer them ſelues to make him recompēce. And for Religion he ſhall haue the ſame aſſuraunce, yt they, and Marques Iohn, haue already. And ſeing it is ſo, and in as muche as this compoſition ſhalbe not only for hym ſelfe, but alſo to the common wealth expedient, they hartely require hym that he would come withall expedition, and bryng with him the Duke of Brunſwick and his ſonne, and receiue the cō
               ditions, and followe their aſſuraunce and fidelitie herein. And let him not be afrayd, that his pryſoners ſhould be taken from him by the way. For they will beare him out of all that daunger, and whan he ſhall be entred on his way, he ſhall mete with horſemen of theirs, that ſhall conduite him in ſaufetie. The copie of the peace was this. That he do ſubmitte him ſelf and his prouince to the Emperour without condition, that he come to the Emperour him ſelfe, and humbly require to be pardoned.

that he behaue him ſelf to the Emperour from henceforth obediently, and according to his dutie. That he obſerue ſuche decrees as the Emperour ſhall make, for the preſeruation of the common wealth. That he ſende ayde againſt the Turke, at all ſuche tymes, as other Princes do. That he forſake all confederacies, but namely the league of Smalcalde, and deliuer to the Emperour all ſuche kynde of wrytinges. That he make no league at any tyme, wherin ſhall not be compryſed the Emperour and king Ferdinando. That he do forbid the Emperours ennemies to come within his dominion. If the Emperour lyke to puniſhe any man, he ſhall not take vppon hym to defende the ſame. He ſhall geue the Emperour leaue to paſſe through hys countrey, whan the thing ſhall ſo require. That ſuch ſubiectes of his, as ſhall ſerue in the warres againſte the Emperour, or kyng Ferdinando, he punyſhe extremely. And ſuche as do ſerue at this preſent, that he calle them home againe, ſo that with in theſe .xiiii. days they forſake their enſeignes, and vnles they obey, to make thē forfeate all their goodes, whiche ſhall than come to the Emperours vſe. For the charges of the warre, he ſhall pay to the Emperour within foure monethes an hōdreth and fifty thouſand crownes. That all ſuche Caſtelles and fortes as he hath, ſaue Zegenheme or Caſſell, he ſhall raſe them down to the grounde, and the gariſons and and Captaynes yt he ſhall place in the ſame, he ſhall ſweare to be true to themperour, That hereafter he fortifie no piece, but by the conſent of the Emperour. That he deliuer to the Emperour immediatly all his munition, the Gunnes with their whole furniture: Of the whiche the Emperour ſhall graunt him ſo many as ſhalbe ſufficient for the defence of that place, whiche he wyll permit him to kepe. That he obey the iudgemet of the chamber, which the Emmperour ſhall eſtablyſhe, and beare his part towades the charges of the ſame. That he ſet at libertie Hēry the Duke of Brunſwick, and his ſonne, and rēder vnto him his prouince, and releaſe his ſubiectes of their othe, & compounde with him for the harmes done. That he reſtore ſuche thinges as he hath takē from the Marques of Pruſe and frō others by force. That he attempte nothing againſt the king of Denmarke or any others, for that either they ayded him not, or that they toke the Emperours part. He ſhal deliuer all the pryſoners, that ſerued vnder the Emperour, without raunſome. He ſhall aunſwer all men, that wyll trie any matters with him in the lawe. Theſe conditions ſhall his ſonnes alſo confirme. The ſame ſhall his Nobilitie and ſubiectes do lykewyſe, and if he ſhall not obſerue

conuenauntes, they ſhall apprehende and delyuer him to the Emperour. For all theſe thinges the Electour of Brādenburg, Duke Maurice, & Woulfange, the Paulſgraue, his ſonnes in lawe, become ſuerties, and except he accompliſhe the premiſſes: The Lantgraues ſons in lawe. promeſſe to bende and ioyne all their forces againſt him. Whan he had receiued and peruſed theſe thinges, by the common aduiſe and conſent of all his ſtates, the Lantgraue admitteth the ſame: yet ſo, as he deſyred a further declaration in diuerſe pointes. The ſixte day of Iune, whan the Emperour ſhould remoue his campe, he calleth again his ſouldiours out of Wittēberge. And immediatly Duke Maurice putteth in his, and the ſame daye calling the Conſulles and Senate into the Caſtel, ſaith: that he will demiſhe no parte of their priuileges and liberties, and ſo cauſeth them all to be ſworne to him. For Wittemberge is the principall towne of the Electourſhip, whiche the Emperour had lately geuen to Maurice, confiſcating all Iohn Friderickes Wittēberge a town of electorſhip. landes, as before is ſaid. The towneſmen, and the Nobilitie after this: deſire Duke Maurice, that he would repare their Scoole, whiche was fallen in this tumulte of war. This promiſeth he to do, and commaundeth that the countrey men, The Scoole fallen there. whiche were fled, to be ſent for againe, & promiſeth them ſtuffe for the building, and Wheate for ſeede and bread corne, to the poore, frely, and to lende it vnto the reſt. Than putteth he Iulius Perflugius, in poſſeſſion of the byſhoprike of Numburge, and diſplaceth Nicholas Amſtorfe, inſtituted by Duke Iohn Fridericke, as is mentioned in the .xiiii. boke. Moreouer Lazarus Schendie was ſent with a force of men, both to raſe the caſtel of Gothe: And alſo to deliuer Marques Albert, that was there in captiuitie. The laſte wynter, the Archebyſhop of Maydenburge had made a compoſition with Duke Iohn Friderick and geuen place to him in his prouince. But at this chaunge of fortune (when both the Emperour and alſo the clergie toke it in euill parte) he had a Coadiutour aſſigned him, Fridericke, ſonne to the Prince Electour of Brandenburg. Kyng Ferdinando retourning from the Campe of Wittemberge into the lande of Boheme, ſtayed a whyle at Letmerice, a frontier town there. From thence at the beginning of Iune, he wrote his letters to al the ſtates of Boheme. Wherin he complaineth again of the league, ſaying that the ſame is made againſt him. Wherfore he commaſideth them to forſake the thing, and that euery man wryte vnto him ſeuerally, what his mynde is therin. For he knoweth that many haue fallē for lacke of experiēce, whom he is mynded to pardon, and to moleſte no man, but ſuche as

haue cōmitted high treaſon againſt his Princelyke Maieſtie. Whan the ſtates were come to Ulme, the Emperours Ambaſſadours before named, recite with a long circūſtaunce how greatly The treatis of Ulmes. the Emperour and king Ferdinando haue traueled for the peace of Germany, aſwel in publique as alſo in priuate affayr
                  •
               s. But ye Duke of Saxon & the Lātgraue, hauing no reſpect to the ſame, haue not only rebelled them ſelues: but alſo procured others to do the like, and breaking al lawe & equitie, haue tourmoiled al thinges in Germany. Therfore hath thēperour bene driuen, by reaſon of his office & dignitie, to attemp warre not without the great daūger of his life, & loſſe of goodes. And what harmes theſe rebelles & outlawes haue done to the lordſhips of Mentz, Maydenburg, Halberſtat, Eiſtet, Auſpurg, Fulden, Stolberg, Manſfeld, & the citie of Gemund, in this warre, it is to wel knowen. And in aſmuche as themperour ſeketh all meanes that Germany might haue quietnes, he thinketh it verye requiſite that ſome league were made, cōcerning the peace therof. Of the ſame mynde is alſo king Ferdinando, and will come both into this cōfederacie, to thintent that both this preſent tumulte, and if any other ſhall hereafter aryſe, it maye be lightly repreſſed. For euen for the commoditie of the cōmon coū
               trey, they will omitte no diligence. And loke againe that they ſhould do the lyke. This cōſultation of theirs, was interrupted by a vehement plage. Wherfore at the length, they remoue to Auſpurge, where as themperour was prefixed to holde a great aſſemblie, as ſhalbe declared hereafter. Whan themperour had taken order for thinges at Wittemberge, he remoueth to Hale in Saxony, a towne by the Riuer of Sale, to go from thence in to Heſſe, vnleſſe the Lantgraue did compound. Wherfore the Lantgraue ſtanding in this perplexitie, whan he ſawe no better remedy, truſting to the aſſuraūce of Duke Maurice and the Marques of Brandēburg, he taketh his iourney, and the. xviii daye of Iune, he cometh to Hale in the euening, ryding in the middes betwene Duke Maurice, and the Electour of Brandē
               burge, The Lantgraue commeth to the Emperour at Hale. whiche went to mete hym at Numburge. One houre after, came thether alſo Duke Henry of Brunſwick, that had ben pryſoner with his ſonne Charles Uictor, and his ſecond ſonne Philippe, and Duke Erricke of Brunſwick, who after that he was ouerthrowen in battell, came thether, as before is ſayde. The next day in the mornyng Chriſtopher Carlebice comming to the Lantgraue, exhibiteth the compoſition of peace, that he ſhould ſubſcribe to it. In the ſame was added, that the Emperour myght interprete euery article therof.

Wherfore the Lantgraue, in aſmuch as that was not in yt copy that thelectour of Brādenburg & Duke Maurice ſent, ſheweth the byſhop of Arras, that he might not ſubſcribe therunto. He ſaith how it was omitted through the negligence of the wryter, & again vrgeth theſame, ſo he folowed his mynd. Thā doth the biſhop of Arras require more of him, yt for aſmuch as he wil haue aſſuraūce for religion, as Duke Maurice & thelectour of Brādenburg, ar aſſured, he again to warraūt & promiſe thēperour, yt he wil obey ye decrees of yt coūſel of Trent. Contrariwyſe he ſaith, that neuer was this thing mentioned to him before, nor cōteined in yt cōpoſition of peace. How he had rather want themperours warraūt, that he alſo ſhuld nede to make no aſſuraūce. And whā they had lōg cōtended about it, & threatnings alſo geuē, how themperour was already ſet in the hal, & taried for him, and tooke this delay diſpleaſauntly. Therfore, let him make ſpede, leſt peraduenture he cōceaue ſome extreme diſpleaſur againſt him. At ye laſt the Lātgraue ſubſcribeth with theſe wordes. How he wold obey the decrees of a fre, godly, & general coūſel, wherin ſhuld aſwel be reformed yt head, as the reſt of the mēbers, in like caſe as Duke Maurice & the Marques of Brandenburg ſhuld do. For thei had promiſed him not to ſhrinke one whit frō the doctrine profeſſed at Auſpurg. This done, about. v of the clock at after none, whan themperour was ſet vnder his cloth of eſtate at home in his own lodging, the two Electours beforeſaid, bring the Lātgraue before him, who, whā he came nere vnto themperour, falleth down vpō his knees, & next him his chaūcelour Guntherode, which reciting by writing as followeth. The Lantgraue kneleth to the Emperour. For aſmuch, ſayth he, moſte mighty Emperour, as the Lantgraue in this fourmer war, hath ſore offended your highnes, ſo as you haue iuſt cauſe to be auenged on him, for this is he hartely ſory. And therfore, as he promiſed before, he ſubmitteth him ſelf to your wil & pleaſure, & alſo moſte humbly beſecheth your Ma. after your great clemēcy to pardō his fault, to redreſſe the outlawery dew for his offence, to reſtore him to his old place, & receiue al his thinges into your faithful protectiō. This wil he accept in ſtead of a gret benefitie, & wil declare vnto you frō henceforth al fidelitie, ſeruice, & dew obedience. Thē
               perour, after he had pauſed & taken deliberatiō, anſwereth her unto by George Selde. That albeit he hath deſerued moſte greuous punyſhement, as it is both openly knowen, and he The Emperours aunſwere. hym ſelfe alſo confeſſeth. Yet is he contente, both of his owne benignitie, and for aſmuche as certen Princes haue intreated for him, that he ſhall eſcape the outlawerie and the puniſhmēt

that he hath deſerued, and nether to ſuffer perpetual impriſonment, nor to be indaūgered furthermore than is in the compoſition of peace preſcribed. He pardoneth alſo his Nobilitie and ſubiects, ſo be it that they kepe conuenaūtes, and wil acknowledge from henceforth this his ſo great a benefite. There were preſent at his ſubmiſſion, Maximilian of Auſtriche, Philibert Prince of Piedmount. The Duke of Alba, the Marques of Pruſſe. The Byſhops of Arras, Numburge, and Hildeſſeme, the Dukes of Brunſwicke, Henry Ericke, Charles and Philippe, the Ambaſſadours of Rome, Boheme, Denmarke, Cleaue, and of certen hauon townes, beſydes many others of the nobilitie. The Lantgraue, whiche had thought all had bene ſaufe and well, geueth the Emperour thākes, and where he ſuffered hym The Lantgraue is driuen into the net vnwittingly. to knele very long, he arroſe vnbidden. A litle whyle after, the Marques of Brandenburg cometh to him, & ſheweth him that Duke Maurice and he muſt ſuppe with him, at the Duke of Alba his lodging. And yet could ye Lātgraue perceiue nothing. Whā thei came to the Duke of Alba, thei ſuppe, & after ſupper, Duke Maurice & the Marques fall to talke with the Duke of Alba, and the byſhop of Arras. In the meane while to paſſe away the time, the Lantgraue playeth at the cardes. Whan it was nowe far in the night, Duke Maurice & the Marques of Brandenburg call him vnto them aſide, & by the mouth of Euſtace Schlebie declare vnto him, how they haue al their life time, dealt faithfully as becometh Princes to doe, & if they haue promiſed any thing, haue perfourmed the ſame diligētly. And lobed alſo to haue founde the like fidelitie in others. But now do the Duke of Alba & the byſhop of Arras tel them, ye he muſte remayne there that night priſoner: Which is the greateſt grief The Lantgraues captiuitie. to them that euer chaunced. Howbeit they will ſpeake with ye Emperour him ſelfe, and truſte that he ſhall not be deteined. Than he ſayed, how he loked for any thing ſoner, thā that this ſhould haue happened, howe he came thether truſting vppon their aſſurance. And that they knowe wel enough, howe they are bounde to him and to his chyldren. Wherfore let them diſcharge their bonde and promeſſe. And whan he muſt nedes tary, Duke Maurice and diuerſe of the Marques coūſellours, abode with him al that night. The next day they go to themperour and make a greuous complaint, and ſhewe howe much it concerneth their eſtimation. For in caſe they had conceiued the leaſt ſuſpition in the world of this matter, neither would they haue counſelled him to haue gone thether, neither woulde he euer haue come there, where he ſhoulde haue loſt his libertie.

Wherfore they require him to haue ſome conſideration of thē that were interceſſours, and let hym goe at libertie, whiche thyng they haue promyſed hym vpon their fidelities, that he ſhould. The Emperour ſayeth, that in dede he made a promeſſe to reſtore him againe vnto libertie, but not immediatly. For his meaning was only herein that he ſhould not be kept in per petual priſon. From him they went to his counſellours, chiefly to the Byſhop of Arras. They after long and ſharpe contentiō, ſhewe the Lantgraue that he may departe: Ryght gladly ſaith he, ſo that I may be conducted home ſafely. Here do theſe two Princes intreate agayne for his ſaufe conduite, but al in vain. Two dayes after, it is ſhewed him, that he muſt wayte vpō the Emperour forth. That he vtterly refuſed to doe. And ſayeth he wyll not go one fote with him, vnleſſe he be drawen forth by violence. Than Duke Maurice & the Marques intreate him exceadingly, and beſeching him that he wold not refuſe to go. And to perſwade him the more, they take him by the righthād, and in the preſence of diuerſe noble men make him promeſſe, yt they wyl not departe from the Emperours courte, before he be deliuered. And ryding forth with him to Numburg, they go after to the Emperour, to make ſuite for him. Thre dayes after, whiche was the .xxv. of Iune. They ſende vnto him Carlebice. And where as they followe themperour no further they deſire him not to take it diſpleaſauntly: For he hath vtterly forbiddē thē yt thei ſhuld not. For if thei do: he wil ſend him into Spain. Neuertheleſſe if that .C. & fifty .M. crownes were payd, & that he make him aſſuraunce to performe the reſt of the cōuenaūtes thei perceiue ſo much, that he ſhuld be deliuered within a fourtenight after, & how thei wil ſhortly ryde to thaſſemblie at Auſpurg, & wil omit no erneſt paines, nor diligent ſuite for hym. He, which toke his chaunce moſt vnpatiētly, ſaith yt for the paiment of y• mony & raſing of his caſtels, he wil deuiſe & care for, & truſteth that loke what thei promiſe, ſhalbe performed. After warde paſſing out of the borders of Thuring wt the Spāiardes whā he came to Greuetalle, he ſheweth the Duke of Alba ye letters of ſaufecōduit, & aſſuraūce by obligatiō: he ſaith, how thē
               perour graūted nothing to ye interceſſours, but of perpetual impriſonmēt. Why thā ſaith ye Lantgraue, what meaſure or ende may this captiuitie haue, or wtin what time ſhal it be expired? Although ſaith he, he detein you priſoner .xiiii. yeres or lōger, yet ſhal thēperour do nothing againſt his promiſe. But he to ye intēt he might ſoner recouer his libertie, not lōg after, paieth al his monie, defaceth his caſtelles, & deliuereth his ordenaūce.

But the nomber of the battering pieces which the Emperour gate partely of him and of the Duke of Saxon, partely of the The nōber of great gun res takē frō the Protſt. Duke of Wirtemberge, and the cities in vpper Germany, was great. And as it is reported, to the nomber of fiue hondreth. Wherof he ſent afterwarde diuerſe to Millan, ſome to Naples, and ſome into Spaine, the reſidue he beſtowed in ſondry places of his lowe countreis belongyng to the houſe of Burgūdy, as monumentes and tokens of victory. The Lantgraues captiuitie, Ebleb a noble Gentlemā, that was meſſenger betwixt toke moſte heuely, and as many men iudge, for very thoughte Ebleb dieth for ſorowe. and ſorowe, died ſhortly after. The Emperour had intended to warre vpon the citie of Magdeburg on the Riuer of Albis two dayes iourney benethe Wittemberge. For they in maner only did not compounde nor agree with him. But at the ſame time Henry the Frenche kyng toke vp men in Germany, by Sebaſtian Uogelſberge, about ten enſeignes of fotemen. That matter did the Emperour ſuſpecte. Wherfore both for this cauſe, as it is thought, & alſo for that he ſuppoſed thei might be repreſſed by an other meane, departing from Hale, he toke his iourney into the hygher partes of Germany, and the .xxvii. day of Iune he ſēdeth the Marques of Marignaue to aide his brother Ferdinando with eight enſeignes of Almaigne fotemen. That tyme was Ferdinando at Letmerice, attending for the oportunitie of tyme to worke his purpoſe: And hearing of themperours ſucceſſe & taking of ye Lantgraue, at ye kalēdes of Iuly, wryting his letters to Prage, he cōmaundeth them to be before him in the caſtell of Prage the ſixt day of Iuly, there to make anſwer. After he came thither with his force, he declareth in open conſiſtory, Ferdinando cometh with his army to Prage. their whole doynges paſt, and howe many wayes they haue treſpaſſed againſt him, and ſaieth howe they haue cōmitted the offence of treaſon, and commaundeth them to anſwere vnto euery pointe. There do they in moſt humble wyſe ſubmit them ſelues to his will and pleaſure, and deſire him not to trie the matter with thē, neither by lawe nor otherwyſe. Wherupō the king, whan Ferdinādo his ſonne, Auguſt brother to Duke Maurice, and certen others were ſuters for them, the .x. daie of Iuly propoundeth theſe cōditions. At the next aſſemblie, they ſhal vtterly aboliſhe ye league made, & pluck from it euery mās ſeale. That they deliuer vnto him al their charters, & writings The Bohemers ſubdued by Ferd. of their Fredom & priuileges, to thintēt he may correct ſome, & ſuch as ſhal like him graunt vnto them again, & confirme thē. That they deliuer alſo al ye writinges cōcerning fraternities & fellowſhips, for yt diuerſe of thē haue miniſtred occaſiō of trou|

Moreouer that they deliuer vp their Caſtelles and fortreſſes with all their iuriſdictions and cuſtomes, and againe all the wrytinges of ye league that they haue both made with others, and alſo with Iohn Fridericke. That the ſame exciſe of Bere, that was promyſed for thre yeares, be payed from henceforth continually. That they bryng all their munition and warlike furniture into the Caſtell, & all their priuate armure into the towne houſe. If they ſhall thus doe, he ſayeth, he wil ſpare the multitude, except diuerſe, whiche he wyl reſerue vnto ſuch puniſhement as they haue deſerued, and deteyne them pryſoners, for the commoditie of the common wealth. Whan the matter was reported to the commons, after he had releaſed about fifty pryſoners, it was cōcluded. Certen of the Nobilitie beyng ſent for, where they did not appere at the daye preſcribed, ſentence was pronounced againſt them, to loſe both life and goodes. Certen other cities and Noble men, followyng the example of them of Prage: do ſubmitte them ſelues without condition. But Caſpar Pfluge, whome the confederates (as I ſaid before) had made their generall is condempned of treaſon, and proclamation made, that who ſo could bring him quick or dead, ſhuld haue fiue thouſand crownes in rewarde. After at the next conuention, whan they had diſanulled their league, & brokē their ſeales: he obteined of thē in a maner all that he had demaūded.
            Whileſt the Emperour triumpheth in Germany, ther aroſe Sedition at Naples for yt Spaniſh inquiſition. a ſore ſeditiō at Naples, the cauſe wherof was, that Peter Toletane, the Uiceroye, would after the Spaniſh maner, inquire of euery mans faith and Religion. The citezens toke this vnpaciently, whiche lothed the Spanyardes gouernmēt alſo before. And after muche ſlaughter on both partes within the cytie, the Spanyardes at the length preuailed, by reaſon that they kept the fortes and Caſtell. Wherfore ſome they put to death, the reſidue they banyſhed. This Spaniſhe inquiſition, whiche is ſo vniuerſall at this day, was firſt ordeined in thoſe parties, by king Ferdinando and quene Elizabeth, againſt the Iewes, whiche after Baptiſme kept ſtill their lawes, and ceremonies. But nowe ſince the name of Luther was publiſhed a broade, it is practiſed againſt all men in generall, which be neuer ſo little ſuſpected, and that both ſharply and ſodainly. In theſe ſelfe ſame dayes, ſeuen Cardinalles of Fraunce, by the The Cardinals of Fraū
                  ce ſene to Rome. kynges commaundement go to Rome, and there be commaunded to remain, till thei receiue further aduertiſemēt. The ſame was thought to be done for this intēt, that through their meanes the Byſhop might be wholy inclined to the kynges frendſhip,

and if he ſhould fortune to dye (for he was already foure ſcore yeare olde) an other myght be choſen, that fauoured the kyng of Fraunce. Howbeit ſome ſaide this was wrought thorowe the policie of the Coneſtable, to get them out of the way: that he might rule the king alone, for they all in a maner wold be at the kinges heles, whetherſoeuer he went. The Byſhop had a litle before ſent his legate into Fraunce, Hierome Romane with a moſte large commiſſion to graūt many thynges, whiche are forbidden alſo by the lawes and decrees of the counſell. He created alſo Cardinall at the ſame tyme, Charles of Guiſe, the ſonne of Duke Claudie, Archebyſhop of Rains, in whom he knew the kyng delighted much. Again ye Frēche king, to purchaſe further amitie offreth in mariage his baſtarde doughter, about .ix. yeres of age, to Orace Farneſe, the Biſhops granchilde by his ſonne. The Emperour remouing from Hale, cometh to Bamberge that being ſo nere, he might be a greater terrour to the Bohemers, and a ſtrengthe vnto his brother. Whileſt he was here, the third daye of Iuly, he calleth an aſſemblie of the Empire, and cōmaundeth that all mete at Auſpurg An aſſemble at Auſpurg. the firſt day of Septembre, the Princes them ſelues in perſone, the reſidues Ambaſſadours with full authoritie. And ſaieth he was letted by the warres, that he helde not a cōuention at the kalendes of February laſt paſt, as he had determined at Regenſpurge. But now that he hath the authours of trouble in his cuſtody, he would no longer differ, but that the corrupt members of the commō wealth may be healed. And the conſultaciō ſhalbe of ſuche matters, as ſhould haue bene treated vpon at Wormes, and a yeare ſynce at Regenſpurge. This conuention ſhould haue bene at Ulme, but for the infectiō of the plage, the place was chaunged, as before is alſo mentioned. After from Bamberge he goeth to Norinberge. As he there was he receiueth into fauour certen cities of Saxony, and the .xvi. daye of Iuly, he publiſheth a wryting, wherin he declareth what hath bene done with the Lantgraue, and vpon what conditions he hath pardoned him. And becauſe that he is carefull, leſte that many ſhould haply through ignoraunce worke violence to his landes and ſubiectes, therfore, at his requeſt, doth he ſtraightly charge and commaunde all men to abſteyne, and if they haue any matter againſt him, to trie it by ye lawe. In this ſelf ſame Duke Maurice intreateth liberally the Diuines of Wittemberge. tyme, Duke Maurice ſendeth for Melanchthon, Pomerane, Cruciger, diuines of Wittemberge, and receiueth them ryght gently at Lipſia, and ſpeaking muche of his zeale towardes religion, committeth vnto them the order both of the church and

Scoole alſo, requiring them to procede after their wonted maner, he appointeth them ſtipendes, & as they them ſelues wryte ſendeth thē away not without great rewardes. For Pomerane in a litle boke that he ſet forth after, commendeth highly his liberalitie and gentlenes.
            The Frenche kyng that ſucceded his father at the kalendys of Aprill, the .xxv. day of Iuly, cometh to Rains to be crowned. The coronation of the French king and the maner therof. And being receiued before the cathedral churche with thr
                  〈…〉
                Cardinalles, he is led to the hyghe aultar, and after he had kiſſed there the relickes of ſaintes encloſed in gold, & ſaid his prayers he goeth to ſupper. After ſupper retourning, and making his prayers againe, whan he had confeſſed his ſynnes to a prieſt, he departeth and goeth to bedde. The next day he ſendeth certe
                  •
                of the nobilitie to intreate the Abbot of ſaint Remige, that he would bring the boxe of holy oyle, whiche they ſay came down from heauen. After reſorte to the churche thoſe that are called the Douzeperes of Fraunce, which are twelue in nomber. The Byſhop of Rains, Landune, Langres, Beauuois, Noion and The twelue Peres of Fraunce. Challon. Than the kyng of Nauarre, the Dukes of Uandome, Guiſe, Niuerne, Mompenſer, and Anmalle. Theſe repreſented the Dukes of Burgundie, Normandie and Guienne, moreouer the Erles of Tolouſe, Flaunders and Champaine. Of the Byſhoppes were choſen two, Langres and Beauuois, alſo two Cardinalles, to go fetche the kyng to the churche. Whan they came into his chamber, after certen prayers ſayde, they lift vp the kyng liyng on his bedde, as the ceremony is, and accompanied with a multitude of prieſtes, leade him to the church, and the Coneſtable beareth before him the ſworde drawen. The king, what tyme he had prayed before ye aultar, was led by the Byſhoppes to his ſeate. And in the meane whyle, tyl that boxe cometh the Archebyſhop of Rains. After he had finiſhed the prayers conteyned in the boke of ceremonies, ſprinkleth with holy water the kyng and all the reſte. And whan worde was brought that the boxe was coming, whiche in the abſence of ye 
               An holy box ſent down from heauē you may be ſure. Abbot, the Prior of the monkes brought, ſitting vpon a white hambling palfrey, and accompanied with the Monkes of hys order, and the Noble mē that the king had ſent for it, as before is ſayd: the Archebyſhop with the other byſhops, goeth to mete him at the churche dore with the croſſe borne before him, & ther receiued of him the boxe, deliuering hym a gage to reſtore it againe. And whan he came agayn to the aultar, the king ryſing out of his ſeate, doeth him reuerence. After the Archebyſhop goeth into the reueſtrie, and there being ſolemnely decked in

his pontificalibus, cometh forth and taketh his othe and fidelitie of him, by the whiche after an auncient cuſtome, kynges are bounde to the churche. Than is the king led to the aultar by two Byſhops. There putting on other garmētes, he kneleth downe, and is girded with a ſworde, which he, as thei terme it, hath conſecrated with many prayers. After this, the Archebyſhop prepareth the oyle in a redines, & whyleſt the other prieſts ſynge their ſeruice, prayeth ſoftly with the kyng, lying both gruſſelyng on the groūd. Than he annointeth the kinges head, breſte, and both ſhoulders, and the elbowes of either arme, in ſaying that accuſtomed prayers. That done, the kyng hath put on him new garmentes, like a miniſter of the church, and is annointed in the palmes of his handes. After he layeth both his The king is appa
                     •
                  eled like a deach. handes on his breſte, and putteth on hallowed gloues, as they call them. But the Archebiſhop putteth a rynge vpon his fynger, and deliuereth him the Sceptre in his ryght hande. And in the ſelfe ſame moment the Chauncelour calleth forth the Douzeperes. In their preſence, the Archebyſhop taketh frō the aultar the crown of Charles the great, and whan the Peres haue touched it, ſetteth it on the kinges head, and bringeth the king into a roiall throne, whiche is made in an higher place, the whole company of Nobles followyng. And there hauing ended his prayers, kiſſeth him. Likewyſe do the Peres and Nobles, & making a great ſhoute and acclamation, pray all, God ſaue the kyng, and to reioyce mens hartes, the Trompettes blowe. After is gold and ſyluer throwen amonges the common people. Than goeth the Archebyſhop to Maſſe. And after that the Goſpell is done, the king carieth to ye aultar, certen pieces of gold, bread and wyne. And whā Maſſe is ended, receiueth the lordes ſupper after their maner. And than go al to dyner. For this vſe and purpoſe, to the intēt nothing ſhould diſquiet this coronation, the kyng would ſeme to haue hired the Almaigue fotemē, through the conduite of Uogelſberge, as afore is mentioned. In the meane tyme the Emperour demaundeth of the reſidue of the ſtates imperiall, money for the charges of the warres, whiche, he ſayeth, was chiefly attempted for their ſakes & the welth of Germany. Moreouer, all the Nobilitie and ſuche as ſerue with the Proteſtantes, are put to their fine throughout all Germany. And the ſomme of that money, which the Emperour The Empe▪ e
                     •
                  acieth money in Germany. leuied of the Princes and cities, aſwell of the Catholikes as Proteſtauntes, amounteth aboue .xvi. hondreth thouſande crownes, as appereth by accomptes made. And ſome alſo them perour refuſed as rebelles, and vtterly denied them his fauour.

And amonges others, Doctor George of Wittemberge, Albert Erle of Manſfelde, Iohn Hedecke Erle, Lewys Counte of Oeting, the father and the ſonne. For he puniſhed him in ſuch ſort as he gaue all his landes clerely to his other ſonnes, Friderick and Wuolfange, whome for their fidelitie & ſeruice done hym, he fauoured. So the Erle of Oeting exiled with his wyfe and the reſt of his children, and tourned out of all that euer he had: came to Straſburge, and after that, wandered vp and downe many yeares in ſondry places, vntil an alteratiō of time came, that the Emperour forgaue them, as ſhal be ſpoken hereafter. Furthermore, the Emperour by his letters publyſhed, outlaweth them of Maydenburg. And alſo king Ferdinando, for the They of Maydēburg outlawed. warre attempted againſt his countreis, doth exact money of ye Proteſtauntes, eſpecially the Cities, and fleſeth Auſpurg and Ulme, of a great ſome of money. After he commenceth proceſſe againſt the Duke of Wirtemberge for his whole Dukedom, as though he had broken fidelitie and conuenaūtes, made in four mer yeares. Neither did it auaile him any thing at all, that he had ſo lately redemed peace of the Emperour vpon moſt ſtrayte condicions. Lykewyſe the Cardinall of Auſpurg, doth extorte alſo of the citie a great quantitie of gold. Moreouer the Cardinall of Trent aſketh them money, ſaying, howe he ayded kinge Ferdinando with men, to recouer the paſſage in the Alpes, taken, as is ſayde, by Scherteline. Themperour alſo moueth the Swiſſes vnto a newe league: Yet doeth he exempte, Baſill, Zuricke, Schafuſe and certen others, for that he ſayd they apperteined The Emperour moueth the Swiſſes to a league. to the Emperour. They by one aſſent make aūſwere, how they haue a league alredy, with the houſe of Auſlrich and Burgundie: wherunto they cleaue ſurely, and other confederacie will they none make. The ſame do they loke for agayne of him alſo. About the end of Iuly, the Emperour cōmeth to Auſpurge, with the Duke of Saxon pryſoner. And the Lantgraue he left at Donauerde, garded with Spaniardes, whiche dyd many thynges dayly in his contempt and mockery. This was an armed aſſemblie. For there was a ga
                  〈…〉
               iſon in the citie before, An armed aſſemble. of .x. enſeignes of ſotemen. And in the countrey round about were forces of Sparnyardes and Italians. Of whome to be voyde and free, they of Meming payde thirty thouſand, and Kemptem, twenty thouſand crownes. Beſydes, there came out of nether Germany about ſyx hondreth horſemen, whome the Emperour beſtowed in the coūtrie nere vnto the citie. Twelue enſeignes of Spaniardes, whan they had wyntered a whyle at Bibrach, they were led into thoſe parties that border on the

lake Brigantine. At Wiſſeburg a town of Norgouie, wyntered ſeuen hondreth horſemen of Naples. Gerarde Uelthuiche, who went to the Turke, as I ſayd in the .xvii. boke, retourneth to the Emperour the .xii. daye of Auguſte, hauing made truce for fyue yeares. After the Emperour came to Auſpurg, he taketh the head churche and certen others to him ſelf, and leaueth the reſt for the Senate and people: But his chaplaines before they wold ſaye any ſeruice in their churches, pourged and hallowed The churches new halowed. them againe with many ceremonies, as ſuſpended and polluted with Lutheraniſme. The Emperour appointed preacher in the Cathedral churche, Michell Sidonie, Suffragan to the Archebyſhop of Mentz. He amongeſt other thinges, made diuerſe Michel Sidonie a great maſmonger ſermons of the ſacrifice of the Maſſe, whiche after he ſet forth in print. And where as in their churches came in maner none of the citezens, the catholikes, as it is reported, offered money to the porer ſorte to come & be preſent at their ſeruice. This aſſemblie was maruelous great. All the Princes Electours were there, and amongeſt them Adolphe Archebyſhop of Collon, and Duke Maurice. Thither came alſo kyng Ferdinā
               do, and the Cardinall of Trent, Henry the Duke of Brunſwick the Duke of Cleaue, the lady Mary the Emperours ſyſter, and his Niece, the Ducheſſe of Lorayne, wydowe. At the kalēdes of September they began to ſytte. There, whan Maximilian of Auſtriche, had in the Emperours name made a ſhort preface, the Emperours Secretary declared by wryting, what thinges ſhould be there decided, whiche were chiefly two, how Religion might be accorded, and the controuerſies about the ſame appeaſed. And again how the chamber ſhould be eſtabliſhed, & the lawe there miniſtred, wherin he requireth them to geue theyr faithful aduiſe and counſel. The tenth day of this moneth, Peter Aloiſe, the byſhop of Romes ſonne Paule the thirde, was ſlayne at Placence, at home in his own houſe, and ſhortly after Peter Alois the Popes ſonne ſlayne Ferdinando Gonzage, the Emperous lieftenaunt in Lumbardie, taketh the citie. The newes hereof within a fewe dayes came to Auſpurge. And as the matter was reported to the Emperour, the ſame ſtory as they ſayd, was communicated alſo to the Princes, and deliuered vnto them in wryting. The whole diſcourſe redoundeth to the infamie, and diſprayſe of Peter Aloiſe. And thus the caſe ſtandeth, as the ſame wrytyng ſpecifieth. Whan after the exchaunge made, Peter Aloiſe was created Duke of Placence and Parma, he did many thinges cōtrary to lawe and equitie, and through his rigour offended all ſortes of men. And amonges others, he depriued Hierome Palauicine Hierome Palauicine.
               
of all his landes and poſſeſſions. And where he to eſchewe the daunger, fled to Creme, a towne belonging to the State of Ueniſe, he caſte his wyfe and his chyldren in pryſon. Where as the ſame matter was like to growe to ſome great cō
               motion, the Cardinall of Trent, who bare good wyl to ye houſe of Farneſe, by his letters wrytten, intreateth the matter: but ye Duke aunſwered frowardly. His ſonne Octauius came after to Trent, retourning from the Emperours campe homeward. Unto whome the Cardinall declareth the whole matter, deſyring him to be a peticioner to his father in the ſame. He promiſeth ſo to do, and after letteth him vnderſtande, that Hierome may be receiued againe into fauour, ſo that he wyll come hym ſelfe, and humblie require pardon. And where it was to be feared, leſte contrary to faith and promyſe, ſome greater miſchief ſhould be wrought againſt him: the Cardinall, with a ſmall trayne goeth to Creme, & ſendeth for Hierome to come ſpeake with him. But he fearyng treaſon, came not before, he knewe aſſuredly that it was the Cardinall. Whan thei had talked and conferred together, and the Cardinall promyſed largely to trauell in his cauſe, they take their iourney both together. And the Cardinall ſent one or two of his company before, to aduertiſe the Duke of their comming. Than doth he cōtrary to that Octauius had ſignified ſende playne worde, howe he can not reſtore him. And albeit the meſſengers ſent, being men graue & witty, ſpake many things to mitigate his fury, yet perſeuered he ſtyl in the ſame. Wherfore ye Cardinal, whan he had brought Palauicine agayne to Creme, retourneth to Trent. Nowe had certen of the Nobilitie before this, whiche hated hym alſo, conſpired his death. They hiring certen deſperate murtherers, wayte an occaſion, and many tymes ſeuerally come abroade A conſpiracie againſt ye Popes ſon. with the ſame garde after them, and eche of them pretende to do it for their priuate enemies. And in the meane ſeaſon euery of them demaunde of their men priuely, whether thei wilfaith fully take their parte in reuenging a wrong done vnto them, as they ſayd, by the Dukes Stewarde. Who promyſe their ſeruice not only in that, but alſo to kyll the Lorde himſelf. About this ſame tyme, his father Paule the third, wryteth vnto him, that he ſhould take hede to him ſelfe the tenth daye of December: For the ſtarres do prognoſticate vnto hym ſome great miſfortune the ſame day. For the byſhop was much geuen not only to Aſtrologie, but alſo to Negromancie, as it is certenly affirmed. The Pope a Negromancier. Whan the Duke had receiued his fathers letters, he was in feare and carefulnes. And whan that day was come, he

goeth out of the caſtell, in his horſe litter, with a great company to view the fortification of the towne, that he had begone. The conſpiratours were there alſo: but whan they coulde not there accompliſhe the thing deſired, they ſtaye, and whan he retourned home, wayte vpon him, and as it had bene of duty, goe before him, to the nombre of .xxxvi. And whan he was come with his horſelitter into the caſtell, they plucke vp the drawe bridge immediatlye, that no mo ſhoulde followe after, there by and by they approche him with their ſwordes drawen, and calling him bitterly tyraunt, ſleye him within the horſelitter, and murther at the ſame tyme with him, his chaplayne, the maiſter of his horſe, and fiue Almaines of his garde. After they runne vp and downe the caſtell and ſpoyle altogether, finding great treaſure and ſommes of mony, whiche he had appointed for the fortificatiō of the citie. In the meane time was a great concourſe of people about the caſtel, inquiring what the matter ment, that they heard ſuche noyſe and crying within: They make aunſwer from aboue, that they haue kylled the tyraunt, and recouered the aunciēt libertie of the citie. But where they could hardly make them to beleue the thing, whan the citezens had warraunted their liues, and aſſured them of pardon, they hange out the dead body by a chaine ouer the walle, and after they had ſwynged it a whyle to and fro, they let it fall into the ditche. The people came running to it, iobbed it in with their The hatred of the citezens towardes Peter. daggers, & ſpurned it with their fete. So great and mortal hatred they bare him. After, cōſulting of y• matter, they aduertiſe Ferdinādo Gōzage by their letters ſent in poſt, what was chaū
               ced, geue thē ſelues wholy to thēperour tuitiō, & deſire to haue ayde ſent thē with al ſpede. Who ſending thither a garriſon in haſt, taketh the citie, & ſweareth thē to be true to themperour. After, he writeth of al things to themperour, deſiring to know his pleaſure herein. They of Parma wer alſo moued to ſubmit thēſelues vnto themperour. But they ſending letters to ye Byſhop of Rome, ſay they wyll ſtil remaine vnder his obeyſaunce, and refuſe not, the Father being ſlayne, to doe homage to his ſonne Octauius, and acknowledge him for their Prince. This is the ſomme of the newes, which were reported to be ſent vnto the Emperour, and wherof the ſtates were made partakers. But others declare y• matter to be far otherwyſe, & ſaye it was pourpoſly done, & that a fewe howres after, y• the murther was cōmitted, Gōzage was at ye gates of the citie wt a garriſon: but I can affirme nothing. How ſoeuer the matter was, al mē confeſſe, yt Peter Aloiſe was a very wicked & a miſcheuous fellow, &

there be bokes in Italiā which recite his vngracious & deteſtable luſtes, amonges the whiche, this is one of all others moſte notable, wherby he is ſaide to haue enforced & buggered with The monſtrous luſtes of hym. Coſmus Cherie, Byſhop of Fanen, by the ayde of his ſeruaūtes that helde him. Whiche filthie acte ſo inwardly greued that other caytif, that ſhortly after he died for ſorow and ſhame of the very thing. And ſome do ſuppoſe that he gaue him poiſon, that he ſhould not vtter that wretched dede to themperour. The Biſhop notwithſtanding, loued his ſonne derely, and applied his whole ſtudy to auaunce him in honour. And where oftentimes he heard of his lewde prankes, he toke it not very greuouſly, as it is reported, and wold ſay this only, that he learned not theſe vices of him. I ſhewed you before how the fathers of the counſell leauing Trent, remoued to Bononie. And the ſame did the Emperour take in high diſpleaſure. And cōming to Auſpurge, The coūſell of Trent of two partes. cauſed the Senate of Princes to wryte to the Byſhop herein. Wherfore the .xiiii. day of Ianuary, ſending him their letters, they declare the perillous ſtate of Germany, whiche they ſaye might haue bene eſchewed, if a remedy had bene founde for the diſeaſe in time, that is to wite, a general counſel, for the which themperour hath oftener than ones ben a ſuter, that he might haue procured ye ſame within the precincte of Germany: to the intent the byſhops of the ſame countrey whom it chiefly cōcerned, might there be preſent. For where their iuriſdictiō is gret, it is not expedient, yt they ſhuld, eſpecially at this tyme, be far from their own charge. At the lēgth through themperours induſtrie, whan no man wold come at Mantua, nor Uicēce, a coū
               ſell in dede was called and begonne at Trent without the borders of Germany, which rather belōgeth to Italy. For ye which cauſe alſo few Germanes came there. Neither could they eſpecially in time of war, whan al wayes & paſſages were ſtopped & cloſed vp. But now that this tempeſt is blowen ouer, and the ſhippe at the hauons mouth, & all men were brought into a very good hope, beſides al expectaciō, that the counſel ſhuld thus he remoued or rather diuided, wherin the preſeruatiō of the cō
               mon wealth conſiſteth it greueth them not a litle: becauſe of ye daūger that is like to enſue therby. For theſe .xxvii. yeres hath Germany ben tormoyled with newe & pernicious ſectes & opinions, & the byſhops in maner beare no authoritie. And in this diſſolute oultrage, and cōfuſion of things: innumerable thouſandes are in daunger of their ſaluation. Briefly, through this ſame peſtilent euill is infected & corrupted, whatſoeuer before was clere, & the ſtates of thempire plucked a ſonder, do obſerue no frendſhip amōges them ſelues. In theſe ſo many and great

euils their only refuge is to the Apoſtolicall churche. Wherfore they hartely pray him, euen for the wealth of Germany: that he would reſtore the counſell. Whiche if he would, there is nothing, but he myght loke for at their hādes. But if not, they cā
               not ſee from whence they ſhould ſeke remedy. For ſtormes and tempeſtes arriſe on euery ſyde, whiche all to repulſe, God hath ordained the holy churche of Rome as a certen bulwarke and rocke moſte ſtrong. Let him haue therfore a conſideration of their requeſtes, and thinke no leſſe but it may be, except he prouide for the contrary, that ſome other meanes and deuiſes may be founde, to diſpatche this matter. For the reſt, they pray him, to take theſe thinges in good parte: For their duty and ſtate of tyme compelleth them ſo to wryte.
            In theſe dayes alſo the Englyſhmen vanquiſh the Scottes in a maigne battell, and ſlewe of thē many thouſandes, at the Muſkelborough field. conduict of the Duke of Somerſet the kinges vncle. The cauſe of the warre was the ſame, that was before, during the lyfe of kyng Henry, that is to witte, for that the Scottes would not geue their Quene to wyfe vnto king Edward as their promiſe was. After this victory the Engliſhe nation wan a great part of Scotlande, and enlarged their limites farre. Concerninge the Emperours demaundes, all men were not of one opinion. For the Electours that were of the clergie do vrge the counſell of Trent without conditiō. But the Ambaſſadours of ye Paulſgraue, Duke Maurice and Marques of Brandenburg, refuſed not the ſame, ſobeit, it were fre and Godly, wherin the Byſhop ſhould not be iudge, and ſhould releaſe other Byſhops of their othe, and that their diuines alſo might haue licence to reaſon, and the decrees already made be retracted. But all other Princes and ſtates were deſirous that the counſell might be continued, that the Proteſtauntes going thether by ſaufeconduict, may be heard & conſtrained to obey the decrees of the counſell. Themperour hearing al their mindes, the .xviii. day of Octob. anſwereth, & deſireth them al to ſubmit them ſelues to the coū
               ſell, and treateth with the Paulſgraue and Duke Maurice ſeuerally, that they ſhuld geue their aſſent. And the Paulſgraue in dede was put in feare vnleſſe he conſented, by reaſon of the The Proteſtauntes intiſed or feared. late offence in the yeare before, where as that ſore was not throughly healed. Duke Maurice again, which both coueted yt the Lantgraue his father in lawe ſhuld be deliuered: And was alſo muche auaunced of late by ye Emperour, ſawe wel he muſt nedes do ſome thing. Wherfore whā themperour had by meſſengers ſēt betwixt promiſed largely of his good wil towards thē,

and deſired inſtauntly that they would committe the thing to his fidelitie, they at the laſt the .xxiiii. day of October conſente therto. The reſt were only cities, whiche ſawe what a daungerous matter it were to ſubmitte them ſelues to the decrees of the coūſell without exception. With them did Granuellan and Haſie intreate longe and muche. And the meane whyle it was bruted throughout the citie, howe they were franticke and out of their wyttes that refuſed the thyng whiche all the Princes had than approued. There were heard moreouer threatnynges that they ſhould be ſcourged worſe than they were of late. In fine a meane was founde, that both the Emperour was ſatiſfied, and they alſo aſſured. For being called before the Emperour. They ſaye it is not their parte to correcte the aunſwers of Princes and delyuer hym with all a wryting, wherin they teſtifie, vpon what conditions they doe admitte the counſell. The Emperour hearynge their tale, aunſwereth them by Seldie, howe he is verey glad and ioyfull, that after the example of others, they referre the matter vnto hym, and geue their cō
               ſent with the reſte. So did he attribute more vnto them, than they deſyred. For they did not aſſente to the reſide we, but to auoyde diſpleaſure, they woulde finde no faulte with the ſentence of the Princes. And yet leſte any thyng ſhould be preiudiciall to them hereafter, they declared by wryting, in what ſort they lyked the counſell, that in tyme to come myght remayne a teſtimony of their myndes. This was about the ende of October. And the ſame tyme came thyther Kyng Ferdinando, and after alſo the Electour of Brandenburge. The Emperour therfore immediatly in the beginnyng of Nouember, ſent the Cardinall of Trente to Rome in poſte, to moue the Byſhop to call agayne the Synode to Trente.
            In the moneth of Nouember, Chriſtine, wyfe to the Lantgraue, his ſonnes and certen choiſe counſellours in their letters Letters for ye Lantgraue to themper. wrytten to all the Princes and States of the Empyre, declare, by what meanes he was taken at Hale, commyng thyther vnder ſaufe conduite. And in as muche as all the condicions by ye Emperour preſcribed, that could or ought to be perfourmed, are accompliſhed, the monie payd, the Duke of Brunſwick & his ſon ſet at libertie, al the letters of the confederates exhibited, the oth of ye nobilitie, & aſſuraſice of ye ſuerties made. al his munition deliuered, & his fortes raſed. Moreouer, in as much as thei are ready, neither refuſe thei to be pledges thēſelues vntil ſuch time as ye reſt be fulfilled alſo, they can not wout the gret grief & vexatiō of mind ſe him in this miſerable caſe &

For before he went to Hale, he was in no ſuche caſe but that he might haue kept his caſtelles an honeſt tyme againſt the force of the ennemy. And that alſo can the Emperours commiſſioners, whiche ſawe the thinges afterwarde, teſtife. But for the compaſſion he had of the people, choſe peace before war. Wherfore they moſte hartely praye them, to intreate the Emperour in his behalfe, and fynde the meanes, that being ſhortly reſtored to libertie, he may retourne home. For in caſe he ſhould be longer d
                  •
               teined, it would be doubtles to the vtter decaye of his health. And to haue the better ſucceſſe in their ſute the Lantgraues wyfe came her ſelfe to Auſpurg. And both her ſelfe, and alſo by Duke Maurice and the Electour of Brandenburg, ſolliciteth the Princes to ſue for him. Whiche thing knowen, the Emperour, before interceſſion was made, the .xxv. day of Nouē
               ber, declareth to ye ſtates, that he heareth what report is made The Empe. aunſwer to the ſtates. vnto thē. And in as much as the talke of men is diuerſe, he wil declare vnto them the plain truthe of the matter, & ſo reciteth from the beginning, how ofte, and by whome the Lantgraue had bene ſued for. And howe he aunſwered thē al, that he ſhuld yelde and ſubmitte himſelf without condicion, raſe his caſtels, and deliuer his munition, and than he tolde Duke Maurice and the Marques of Brandenburg, that he ſhould neither ſuffer Toe conditions wherby the Lantgraue ſubmitted hymſelfe. bodyly puniſhement, nor be deteined in perpetual priſon, or further puniſhed in his goodes than was in the compoſition of peace preſcribed. This was the thing only, & in none other hope did he put them, as they can beare witneſſe. And after declareth howe he came to Hale
                  〈…〉
                and ſubmitted hym ſelfe vnto hym. And howe he hath bene ſynce intreated, nothyng againſt promeſſe. This tale of the Emperour the ſame daye, the ſtates do reporte to Duke Maurice and the Marques. The next daye they make ſuche aunſwer, as they neither blame themperour The anſwer of Du. Maurice and the Marques. greatly herein, neither wyll much contende whether the fault were in the counſellours or how the matter was miſtakē. But how ſomeuer the matter was, for a common quiet and peace of Germany, they did perſwade the Lātgraue, whan they ſuſpected nothing at all of impriſonment or captiuitie, to come vnto Hale, deſyre pardon, and not to refuſe the conditions of peace. and that he hath loſt his libertie, & is kepte priſoner hitherto, not without ye great peril of his health, how much yt is againſt their honour & eſtimatiō, euery mā ſeeth wel enough. Therfore they require thē, to be petitioners with thē, & intreate themperour, yt he would rather haue conſideration of thē, which haue done faithful ſeruice to the Empire, than of the Lantgraues

offence, and not to ſuffer them to runne in obloquie and ſclaunder, but reſtore him vnto libertie, eſpecially ſynce the conditiōs are all in a maner fulfylled, and the Emperour put in ryght good aſſuraunce for the reſt. Thus therfore with one voyce and aſſente they made interceſſion. The Lantgraues wyfe had intreated the Lady Regent the Emperours ſiſter to be a meane for him: But it auailed nothing. And becauſe Duke Maurice and the Marques of Brandenburg, ſayd how they were bound to the Lantgraues ſonnes by dede obligatorie, ſo longe as he was deteined, the Emperour ſendeth Iohn Lirane to the Lātgraue at Norling, whether as ye Spaniardes had caried him. And willeth him to deliuer all the wrytinges of aſſuraſice and dedes obligatory. He ſaieth, that they are not in his cuſtody, The Emperour requireth the w
                     •
                  itinges of the Lantgraue. but kept by his ſonnes and counſellours. Albeit he ſhuld write yet were it in vain. For thei told him when he came away, that they would not departe from them, vnleſſe he were firſt deliuered. Neuertheleſſe if he might knowe of the Emperour any certen tyme of his deliueraunce: he would do what he coulde, that they ſhould be deliuered. The Emperour not contented with this aunſwer, taketh from him all his ſeruauntes, except one or two at the moſte. About the ende of Nouember, Peter Martyr, a Florētine, leauing Straſburg, where he had taught fiue yeares, to his great commendation, hauing leaue of the Senate, Peter Martyr goeth in to England. goeth into Englande, being ſent for by the Archebyſhop of Canturbury, at the kinges commaundement, and is appointed to reade the diuinitie lectour in Oxforde. He had a compaignion of this iourney, Barnardine Ochine of Sene. Who beyng had in great eſtimation amonges the Italians for his eloquence & vertue, forſaking the monaſticall kinde of lyfe, gaue him ſelue to the doctrine of the Goſpell. And coming firſt to Geneua, and after to Auſpurge, ſet forth certen Sermons in print. And muche about the ſame tyme were the ſyxe articles, made in the life of king Henry, as is ſayd in the .xii. boke, diſanulled A reformation of Religion in Englande. by acte of parliament. And Images and pictures remoued out of the churches. This was the beginning of reformation there. The .ix. day of December the Cardinall of Trent in the preſence of the byſhop, and a great Senate of Cardinalles, propoundeth his matter, as he was commaunded, and with The oratiō of the Cardinall of Trēt many weighty wordes declareth, what perils and paynes the Emperour hath taken for the counſell, and now is the matter brought vnto that paſſe, as he ſayeth, through his induſtrie, & authoritie, that all ſtates wyll obeye the counſell. Wherfore he requireth for Goddes loue, in the name of the Emperour, kyng

Ferdinando and the whole Empire, that he will cōmaunde the fathers that are at Bononie to retourne to Trent, to finiſh vp their worli begon, ryght neceſſary for the cōmon wealth. More ouer that he ſend an Ambaſſadour or two into Germany, that by their aduiſe ſome meane howe to lyue well may be eſtablyſhed till the ende of the counſell, and that there may be a reformation of the olergie. Finally, let him conſider alſo and decree, that if the Byſhop chaunce to departe during the tyme of the counſell, whether the authoritie of Election ſhalbe in the Fathers of the counſell, or in the Cardinalles, leſte happely if the matter ſhall ſo come to paſſe, it may ſtyre vp newe commotiōs. The fift day after, that the Cardinall of Trent had thus playd the oratour: Iames Mendoza, by the Emperours commaūdement, in the ſame audience, ſpeaketh to lyke effect. And ſayeth, that if the Byſhop make any delay or excuſe, he hath in commaundement, that calling to hym the Ambaſſadours of other kynges and Prynces, he ſhuld openly proteſte, that the counſell is corrupted. The ſame daye being the .xiiii. daie of December, The Oratiō of the biſhop of Rains to the Pope. the Archbyſhop of Rains, that was made Cardinall the ſōmer before, ſent by the Frenche kyng to Rome, made a long and a flattering Oration to the Byſhop and the Cardinalles in the prayſe of kyng Fraunces and other kynges of Fraūce, but chiefly in the commendation of Henry the newe kyng, who, as he ſayeth nothing degenerating from his moſte noble progenitours, beareth ſuch a zelous affection to the churche of Rome, that he maketh not only his ſubmiſſion, and as a moſt louing, The Frēche king contendeth with ye Emperour for elderſhip and obedient childe, offereth hym ſelfe in to the boſome of the ſame: but alſo as the firſt begotten ſonne of the churche, & chief captaine of the Chriſtian nation, promiſeth in the defence and maintenaūce of the dignitie hereof, to imploye al the force and power of his Realme, his owne treaſure, and perſon Roialle, with many ſuche other thinges full of great aſſentation. The Frenche kyng vnderſtāding well what rancour and malice the Byſhop bare in mynde for the ſlaughter of Peter Aloiſe, & ſaw that through the remouing of the counſell from Trent, the diſpleaſure was increaſed, he iudged this a tyme cōuenient, wherin he might frame all thinges to his commoditie and purpoſe. Wherfore ſending oftentimes Ambaſſadours to the Byſhop, he promiſed him aſſiſtaūce, and incouraged and ſtrengthened his mynde. Whan the Byſhop had heard the requeſtes of the Cardinall of Trente, and of Mendoza, he ſayeth he wyl conſult with the fathers that be at Boloigne, and alſo make relation of the thing vnto other Chriſten Princes. Wherfore whan the Cardinall

of Trente could get none other aunſwere, he retourneth home, leauing there Mendoza, whome the Emperour had commaunded to finiſhe vp the reſt. And the .xvi. day of December, the Byſhop wryting to his chief Legate in the counſell, Iohn The Popes letters to his Legate. Mary Mountane, Cardinal, ſignifieth, both what the Cardinal of Trent, and alſo Iames Mendoza had demaunded in the Emperours name, and how he, after conference had with his Cardinalles, thought mete to conferre alſo with the fathers of the counſell, leſte any thyng ſhould be done raſhely. And to the intent that the decrees already made, aſwell that of remouing the counſell, as alſo the reſte myght wholy remayne. Therfore, ſayeth he, for ſo muche as I am both carefull for the welth of Germany, and for the Emperours ſake would haue no long delay, I commaunde you, that calling for the aſſiſtaunce of the holy Ghoſte you declare the whole matter to the fathers. And what anſwere ſhalbe made to the Emperour, you wryte hither with all ſpede. Cardinall Montane, as he was commaunded, bryngeth the matter in counſell, after wryteth agayne to the Byſhop. Albeit the counſell were lawfully remoued frō Trent to Bononie. Albeit that in the ſeſſion of the Fathers, the ſame daie, that the decree was made of remouing the Synode, al mē were openly warned, to repare to Boloigne. Although he, and the other Fathers, wryting their letters after to Trent admoniſhed thē louingly to take their iourney, yet do ſome remaine there vntyll this daye. Whiche thing verely aperteineth to the contemt of the counſell, and offendeth many. Therfore the Fathers do not ſee, howe they ſhould, ſauing the dignitie and eſtimation of the Synode, conſulte of their retourne, vnleſſe that ſuche as be at Trent, do firſt come to Bononie, ioyne thē ſelues with the reſidue, & acknowledge the authoritie of ye counſel. Againe, it is nedefull, that the Fathers be put in aſſuraūce, that Germany will ſubmitte it ſelfe to the counſell, and allowe the decrees therof, that either are made already, or heafter ſhalbe, in ſuch ſort, that they be retracted of no man. Moreouer, in as muche as the brute goeth, that it ſhalbe a counſell to the people agreable, the fathers deſyre alſo to haue aſſuraunce in that behalfe. For if that ſhould take place, all order and maner of counſelles ſynce the Apoſtles tyme vnto this day, ſhuld be chaū
               ged. They deſyre alſo to know, how they ſhalbe aſſured, yt they may all there ſafely and frely remayne, and whan they ſhall thinke good, departe thence, no man to let them. Finally this aſſuraunce is alſo requiſite, that whan for certen cauſes it ſemeth good to the moſte part, it may be lawfull for the Fathers

to go ſome where els, and remoue the counſell. Furthermore, whan it ſhall appeare, thoſe matters to be ſufficiently aunſwered, for the whiche the counſell was called, the fathers may be at libertie to ſurceaſe and make an ende. Theſe are the thinges whiche the fathers, after great deliberation, whan they had called for the grace of the holy ſpirite, haue anſwered vnto his requeſtes, praiyng his holines, to take them in good worth. Whan theſe letters were deliuered, the Byſhop, the .xxvii. daye of Decēber, at after Maſſe, ſendeth for the Emperours Ambaſſadour Mendoza, into the ſenate of Cardinalles, and ſheweth him, what the Synode of Boloigne hath anſwered, whoſe opinion The pope to Mendoza the Emperours Ambaſſad. he ſaieth, is not miſliked either of him, or of the Cardinalles, as conſonant to right and reaſon. For his part there is nothing that he would not wyſhe to do for Germany. And this can the Emperour witneſſe. For nothing that concerned the dutie of a good paſtour, and a moſte louing father, hath bene of him omitted. He perceiueth in dede what the Emperour, what king Ferdinādo and the States of the Empire require, but he ſuppoſeth howe they deſire it in ſuche wyſe, as it may ſtande with the peace and commoditie of other nations, and with the libertie of the churche. Whan Mendoza ſawe howe the Biſhop toke that company at Boloigne for the counſell, he was fully mynded to haue proteſted to the contrary immediatly. But through the interceſſion of certen Cardinalles and the Deane of the College, he was content to aduertiſe the Emperour of this aunſwere, and to awayte for his letters, and differre the proteſtation vntill the .xx. day after. Whan therfore Mendoza had ſignified the whole matter to the Emperour: The Byſhop alſo made aunſwere to the former letters of the Germane Byſhops, at the kalendes of Ianuary. Wherein he commendeth their vertue, and interlaſeth his owne prayſes amonges. He 1548. The Popes letters to the Byſhops of Germany. ſheweth how deſyrous he hath bene euer of a counſell, and firſt called the ſame at Mantua, after at Uicence, & laſt at Trente, whither came many Biſhoppes of other nations, but fewe or none out of Germany. Moreouer, what holſome decres were there made and how proftable for the commō wealth, and that they departed from thence without his knowledge, yet doeth he defende their doinges to be lawefull. Further more he defende their doinges to be lawfull. Furthermore he diſcourſeth The pope is ignoraunt of all thinges. at large what the Cardinall of Trent, and Mendoza demaunded in the Emperours name, whoſe requeſtes, in aſmuche as they were with theirs agreable, he would not anſwere, before he had aunſwered the Emperour. Finally, where they ſay, it is

to be feared, leſt if he be ſlacke, other meanes wyl be found, that can not moue him, for as muche as he hath omitted no part of his duty, whome God hath placed in this ſeate of dignitie, as it were in a hyge watche toure, to haue charge of the whole ſlocke, but eſpecially of thoſe that go aſtraye from the reſt. Againe it may be that newe deuiſes ſhalbe attempted againſt The pope is a watchman the authoritie of the Sea of Rome. For Chriſt him ſelfe the architectour therof, what tyme he layd the foūdation of ye church of Rome, did prognoſticate of great ſtormes, but that their enterpryſe ſhould haue any lucky ſucceſſe, he feareth not, for that Chriſte hath buylded the ſame vpon a moſte ſtrong Rocke. Diuers haue heretofore attempted the lyke thinge, whome God The conſtā
                  cie of the Romiſh church. hath made an example for all men to beholde. And if there be any at this day whiche are not affrayde of the plages and puniſhment of others, ſet before their eyes, he ſore lamēteth their caſe, for the deſtruction that will enſue. Howbeit he exhorteth them chiefly to remayne and perſeuer ſtill in that faith vertue and conſtancie, which they haue perfourmed hetherto. And ſuffer no counſelles to take place in their cōuentions againſt the dignitie of the churche. Whan therfore the Byſhop and Synod aſſembled at Boloigne, dwelt ſtil in their opinion. The Emperours The Emp. Ambaſſad. ſent to Boloigne le graſſe. Ambaſſadours for the ſame cauſe ſent to Bononie, Fraū
               ces Uargas, and Martin Uelaſcus, the .xvi. daye of Ianuary, whā they had deſyred a Senate, they come before the cōſiſtory. There was preſent Cardinall Mountane, and about .xliiii. biſhops and prelates of the churche. There Uargas reciteth his commiſſion wherin the Emperour had geuen him and his fellowe authoritie to pleade, whiche he had alſo exhibited lately before. And beginning to ſpeake, was interrupted by Cardinal Montane Preſident of the counſell. In this commiſſion and wrytyng, the Emperour calleth it not the counſell, but conuention of Bononie. Wherfore ſayeth Cardinal Mountane, albeit this aſſemble is not bounde to heare your Oration, foraſmuch The Popes Legate to ye Emperours Ambaſſad. as your commiſſion exhibited doth not concerne this holy Synode, yet, leſt any man ſhould haue any cauſe to complayne, we refuſe not to heare you, yet vpon condition, that this pleading do neither hinder vs, nor profite you, and that it ſhalbe free for vs neuertheleſſe, to continew, and procede in the counſell, and to appointe ſuche puniſhment againſt al diſobedient rebelles, as by holy lawes and conſtitutions is determined. After this, the Emperours Ambaſſadour Uargas, deſyreth to haue this recorded The Empe. Ambaſſad. to ye fathers. in the common recordes, that he was impeched and letted that he could not ſpeake firſt. Afterwarde in as much, ſaith

he, as you haue already ſene the Emperours letters of credit, now wyll I declare what our commiſſion is. We appeare here before you to treat of a matter moſt weighty, and not only we: but alſo the whole common wealth of Chriſtendome, with earneſt prayers do beſeche you, that you would ſhew equitie in the ſame. For all men iudge this certenly, that in caſe you wyll obſtinatly perſeuer in the opinion, whiche very vncircumſpectly you haue ones embraced: it wyll tourne to a maruelous calamitie of the common wealth. But if you will ſurcea
                  •
               e, and be ordered by themperour, all thinges ſhal luckely ſuccede. Which thing that all men the better may vnderſtande, we ſhall repete the whole matter more depely. For ſo ſhal it appeare, how fowly you ſhall erre, vnleſſe you alter your pourpoſe. And how gret good wil ye Emperour beareth to the commō wealth. And herein wil adde no word of our own, but wil treade in the foteſteps of the commaundement we haue receiued. There agayne Cardinall Mountane, I am here alſo (ſayeth he) preſident of this The malapertnes of ye Legate. ſacred counſell, and deputed Legate of Paule the third Biſhop of Rome, the ſucceſſour of Peter, and Uicar of Chriſt in earth. Here be alſo theſe moſt reuerende fathers, to procede in the coū
               ſell, lawfully remoued from Trent, vnto Gods glory, and ſaluation of mankynde. Wherfore we deſire the Emperour, to alter his ſentence, and aſſiſte vs in this matter, and commaunde the diſturbers of the counſell vnto ſilence: For he is not ignoraunt that who ſo euer they be that are any let or impediment to holy counſelles, do deſerue moſte greuouſe puniſhemēt, by the preſcript of the lawes. But how ſo euer the matter falleth, and what terrours ſo euer be threatened, yet wyll we cleaue faſt to the libertie and dignite both of the churche and counſel, and of our own alſo. After whan Uargas had openly recited the letters of their commiſſion, his fellowe Uelaſcus readeth the proteſtation. In the beginning is raccomted, how oftentymes the The letters of proteſtatiō from the counſell. Emperour hath deſired a counſell of Leo, Adriane, Clement, & laſt of Paule the third, what time the Germaines were erneſte ſuters to him for the ſame. Again how Paule the third firſt at Mantua, after at Uicence, finally whan it could not be kepte in thoſe places, appointed the ſame at Trent, by the aſſent of the Emperour and the other ſtates: for ſo muche as the ſame place was commodious for Italians and Spaniardes, French men, and Germaines, and wanted not thinges nedefull. Therfore what time this ſeate was choſen for the Synode: The Byſhop ſent thether Cardinals, Pariſe, Morone, and Poole. And in the Emperours name alſo came the Byſhop of Arras, & his

Father Granuellan and Iames Mendoza. But where as that tyme ſemed not to the Byſhop conuenient enough, the matter being differred, againe there came newe Legates from Rome, Mountane, Crucei, and Poole Cardinalles. And from the Emperour theſame Mendoza and Fraunces Toletane. The Ambaſſadours of other Princes came alſo, and others out of all partes repared to Trent in great nōber. And at the ſame time, the Emperour had warre in Germany, chiefly for the defence & maintenaunce of Religion, that ſuche as he could not rule by reaſon, he might compelle by force of armes. And what time he hauing lucky ſucceſſe in his warres, had in a maner vāquiſhed all, and had called into the way againe ſuch as contemned the counſell before tyme, beholde you, whiche vſurpe vnto you the name of the Legates of the See of Rome, ſodenly without making the Byſhop priuie, as you ſay your ſelues, faining a cauſe I can not tell what, do propounde of remouing the counſell, & geuing ſcarſely any tyme to conſulte in, departe from Trent in great haſte, where as many worthy and vertuous fathers did not aſſent, but ſayd how the cauſe of this flitting was not reaſonable, and proteſted that they would remaine at Trent. In the meane ſeaſon the Emperour going into Saxony, vanquiſheth the ennemy at Albis, and taketh both the Captaines of the warre in battell and by ſubmiſſion, and neuertheleſſe both before and after the warre was finiſhed, he deſired the Byſhop oft by letters and meſſengers ſent, that he woulde commaunde the Fathers to retourne from Boloigne to Trent. For otherwyſe would the matter be daungerous. After, he called a conuention at Auſpurge, wherin, at the Emperours requeſt, the Prynces and all ſtates with whole cōſent did approue the coū
               ſell of Trent, and promiſed that they wold obeie the ſame with out any condition. Whan he had this obtained, he ſent forth with the Cardinall of Trent to Rome, whiche might declare theſe thinges to the Byſhop and Senate of Cardinalles, and in the name of the whole Empyre myght require the continuaunce of the counſel at Trent. He commaunded the ſame thing alſo to Iames Mendoza his Ambaſſadour. But the Byſhop toke delay in aunſweryng, and thought mete firſt to conſulte with you, and receiued an anſwer from you ful craftie, ſubtile, and captious, and eftſones did aunſwer the Emperour vnſittingly, and by his ſtarting holes & backſteppes declareth well enough, how little he careth for the common wealth. For to proue the cauſe of remouing, ther had neded witneſſes worthy of credite. The Emperour, kyng Ferdinando and the Prynces,

ſending their letters and a moſte honorable Ambaſſadour, declared what the opinion of all States was cōcerning the coū
               ſell. But omitting their teſtimony, the Byſhop would rather geue credit to vile and abiecte perſones. Howe many tedious and painful iourneis hath the Emperour taken for this counſell: The Emp. carefulnes for the counſell. And what coſtes & charges hath he bene at? And ſhall all theſe thinges be loſt? Upon moſte weightie and neceſſarie cauſes, at the requeſt of ye Emperour, through the ſuite of the Germaines, and by the aſſent of other Chriſtian Princes, was the counſell both called & alſo cōmenced at Trent. Wherfore with out the publique authoritie of al ſtates cōſented therto, it may not be holden els where. For there was no cauſe of remouynge the ſame, but ſome thing was inuented for an excuſe. Uerely certe
                  •
                agues and infection of the ayre. And herein they followed the aduiſe of certen Phiſiciōs, but chiefly of their maydes The Authours of remouing the counſell. and cookes. But howe trifelyng and vaine a cauſe that was, the thinge it ſelfe, and ende declared. You ſaye that you departed not making the Byſhop priuie: But his letters wrytten vnto you, and aunſwer ſent to the Emperour do teſtifie farre another thing. Certenly you ought not to haue remoued or chaū
               ged the place, without the conſent of the Emperour, vnto whō is committed in charge the tuition of all counſelles. But you went ſo haſtely away, that you reiected ſuche as ſayd how you ought firſt to aſke aduiſe of the Emperour and Byſhop. And if you muſt nedes haue remoued, at the leſt you ſhould haue obſerued the decrees of holy counſelles, and haue remayned within the borders of Germany, to the intent the Germaines, whoſe cauſe was chiefly in hande, myght come to the counſell ſafely. But nowe haue ye choſen Bononie, a citie in the middes of Italy, and ſubiect to the churche of Rome, whether you are aſſured that the Germaines will not come. And therfore haue you choſen the ſame, that to the decaye and reproche of the vniuerſall weale the counſel myght either be doſſolued or handled and vſed at your pleaſure. The Emperour therfore requireth, & that moſte earneſtly, that you wold retourne to the ſame place, whiche before contented all men, eſpecially ſynce all thinges are ſafe and quiet, neither remaineth there any further cauſe of feare. Whiche thyng if you ſhall refuſe, I doe here in the name, and by the commaundemēt of the Emperour, proteſte this remouing of the counſell to be vayne, vnlawful, and the whole doyng to be voyde & of none effect. And do alſo teſtifie ye anſwer of yours, to be fond & full of lies, and ye the cōmodities yt hereafter ſhal inſue to the cōmon wealth, ar not to be aſcribed to thē
               but

vnto you, and affirme moreouer that you haue no authoritie to remoue the counſell. And in aſmuch as you haue neglected the publique health of men, the Emperour as Protectour of the churche, wyll take charge therof, ſo far forth as he may by the lawes and and decrees of holy fathers. Whan he had red theſe thinges, he deliuereth the copie of the Proteſtation written, and requireth that it maye be recorded for matter of recorde. There Cardinall Mountane, by the conſent of the Fathers, ſpeakyng grauely, declareth that they are not well vſed, Mountane ſtriken with a fury. and taketh God to witneſſe, and ſaieth howe they are ready to dye rather, than to ſuffer ſuche an example to be brought into the churche, that euer the ciuile Magiſtrate ſhould at his wyll and pleaſure comptrolle the counſell. The Emperour in dede is the eldeſt ſonne of the church, but neyther Lord nor Maiſter. But he and his colleges are Legates of the See Apoſtolicke, & refuſe not preſently to rēder an accompt both firſt vnto God, & after alſo to the Byſhop of their Ambaſſade. And that more within a fewe dayes their Proteſtation ſhalbe aunſwered. In maner to the ſame effect, and about the ſame tyme, Mendoza, whan letters were come from the Emperour, wherby he was commaū
               ded to procede, did proteſte at Rome before the Byſhop and Cardinalles, callyng therunto, as he was cemmaunded, the Ambaſſadours of foreine kynges and Princes.
         
         
            
            
               ✚ The twenty Booke of Sleidanes Commentaryes, concerning the ſtate of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne of the Empyre of Charles the fyfte
            
               
                  ❧ The argument of the twenty Booke.
               THe treaty is of a controuerſie, whether the lande of Pruſſe belong to the kyng of Poole, or to the Empyre. The Pope maketh an ample aunſwere to the proteſtation before made by Mendoza: Wherof the Emperour being aduertiſed, leauing all hope of a counſell, begynneth to ſet forth his Interim. The Protectour of Englande, wryting to the Scottes in ample wyſe, demaundeth their Quene. Uogelſberge is beheaded. The Emperour in his campe before Wittemberge gaue to Duke Maurice the ryght of Electourſhyp, and nowe createth him with all ſolemnities. Bucer refuſeth to ſubſcribe to the Interim. The Pope himſelfe cō
                  demneth the Interim. Lykewyſe do ſome of the Electours and Prynces: Certen alſo refuſe it, al though that the Emperour had cauſed it to be proclaimed. The Duke of Saxon pryſoner with great magnanimitie refuſeth it. The Lantgraue by letters ſet forth in his name, maketh ſemblant to conſent therunto, to be deliuered. Whileſt the Maſſeis aboliſhed in England, the cities and townes of Germany are ſollicited to accept the Interim, and aboue all others Straſborough, yea with threatchynges.
            
            
               IN the fourmer bokes is declared, howe Albert of the houſe of Brandenburge did homage to the kynge of Polle, howe he altered the ſtate of the cōmon welth in Pruſſe, and was therfore outlawed of the chāber. Againe, howe the kyng of Polle in commō aſſemblies of the Empyre, had oftentymes ſued to the Emperour and other States, that, in as muche as he was his Cliente, they would reuerſe his outlawerie. But where as nothynge was obtayned vnto this daye, and in this great victory of the Emperour it was to be feared leſt the matter ſhould haue come to further daunger, the kynge of Polle vnto this aſſemblie ſendeth an Ambaſſade, the chief wherof was Staniſlaus Laſcus. He, in the moneth of Ianuary, deliuereth to the Emperour and Senate of Princes, an Oration wrytten, the effect wherof was this. Howe the cauſe of Pruſſe had bene oftentymes debated. The oration of the Kyng of Pols ambaſſadour. But for as muche as it hath bene alwayes differred vntyll other aſſemblies, he is nowe cōmaunded, agayne to declare the ſame. And the kinges truſte is, yt inaſmuch as they haue at al times made him gētle anſwers, ye cauſe it ſelf being rightful

they will haue ſome conſideration, and mynde of hym, yet not not as Iudges, but as Prynces worthy all honour and reuerence. And firſt of all, ſayeth he, I wyll ſpeake diuerſe thynges, of the order of Pruſſe, to the intent the thyng may be manifeſt. In times pait the kynges of Polle gaue a great part of Pruſſeland to the order of knighthode in Dutche land, vpon cōdicion, The beginning of thorder of knight had in Duchland. that they might haue their ſeruice againſt the enemies of chriſtendome. But they very vnthankefull, breakyng conuenauntes, tourned their force againſt ther owne Lordes. So had they oftentymes warre, and oftentymes their conuenauntes were renewed: Which by reaſō of antiquitie, it is not requiſite to rehearſe. But that whiche in maner chaunced in our memory I ſhall recite.
            Kyng Caſimire, father vnto Sigiſmunde, ſubde wyng them in a great battell, brought them to conditions of peace. Than The victory of King Caſimire. amonges other thinges it was accorded, that from henceforth they ſhould acknowledge the kynges of Polle, for their Magiſtrate, geuyng thē their fidelitie by an othe. But afterwardes certen Maiſters of that order brake conuenauntes, geuynge them ſelues in to the tuition of others. Of the whiche Albert of Brandenburge was one, who being bounde by conuenaunt to doe homage vnto the kyng his Uncle, within the half yeare, wold not. Wherfore the kyng; albeit he loued peace, yet was of neceſſitie conſtrayned to attempte warre. And albeit they neuer ioyned in battell with their whole forces, yet by Roades made, fyryng, ſpoyling, and eſcharmouſhing, was much harme done, in ſo muche that Alberte being to weake, came vnto the kyng to take truce. But at the ſelfe ſame tyme came a force of Germaines to ayde hym. For the whiche cauſe he departed without concludyng the ſame, and began to renewe warre. But not long after, beyng of them forſaken, where he dyd but diſſemble before, than was he conſtrayned in ſadues to intreat for peace. Whiche being ones concluded by the mediation of certen, it was conditioned that he ſhould geue his fayth to the kyng by an othe, and doe all thynges as becommeth a faythful and truſty Cliente.
            It is certen therfore that the lande of Pruſſe, hath euer ſynce the memory of mā, and from the tyme, they fyrſt receiued Albert receyued into the tuitiō of the king of Pol. the Chriſten Religion, both by the lawe of armes and alſo by ſondry conuenauntes, aparteyned to the Realme of Polle. For if any others haue made any title or claime to it the ſame hath ben through the arrogancie & wrong of ye maiſters of thorder, who being through y• kinges permiſſiō, Germains borne, haue

about oftentimes to intitle others in the ryght of Pruſſe. Whiche thing aſſuredly hath bred muche diſtention betwixte the Germaines and Polonians, and cauſed alſo this ſame decree, wherin Duke Albert was outlawed. But what ryght haue they to outlaw an other mans cliente? For in yt he came not to iudgemēt when he was ſited not of his iudges, that ded he by the kynges commaundement, vnto whome all the faulte is to be imputed, in caſe there be any at all. But if he ſhould be outlawed for this cauſe, that he acknowlegeth the king for his Magiſtrat, that were very vnreaſonable, that any man ſhould ſuffer puniſhemēt for doing his duty. Wherfore moſt triumphāt Emperour, and ſtates moſt noble, the king doeth hartly requyre you that this vniuſt and vnlawfull decree of outlawery, preſcription may be repreſſed. Neither is there any cauſe why any man ſhould thynke, that ye kyng would for any ambition or deſyre to enlarge his kyngdome, bryng Pruſſe vnder his ſubiection. For he that hath refuſed moſt Goodly prouinces, that haue bene frely offred him, how ſhould he come then into the ſuſpicion of this matter? Certenly that coūtrey is not ſo much worth vnto hym, but that, if he myght with his honour, he coulde be content to forgoe it: But ſith it doth properly belong vnto his dominion, he can not other wyſe doe. For the cauſe, why oftentimes trouble & cōtētion hath riſē about it, was euer through Pruſſe belō
                  geth to Pole the faulte of the Maiſters of the order, as I ſhewed you before. And God in dede hath often plaged their bolde enterpryſes. And theſe thinges knew ryght well, moſt noble Emperour and king Ferdinādo, your grandfather Maximilian, who remembring the iniuries, which he and his father Friderick, receiued of them, made a faithfull promyſe to kyng Sigiſmunde, what tyme they met at Uienne, & promiſed as well in his owne as in your names alſo, that he woulde geue no maner of ayde vnto this order. And this dyd Maximilian, after no newe example, but followyng the trade of his aunceſtours. For both the Emperour Sigiſmunde, metyng wt kyng Ladiſlaus, grādfather to the king my Maiſter, did not this much only, but alſo promiſed aide againſt them. And ye Emperour Friderick, your great grādfather The war of Emperours and kynges of Pole againſt this order of knightes. ioyned his force and power with Caſimire, the father of king Sigiſmund, againſt Matthie, kyng of Hongary, and this foreſayd order, of one cōfederacie. And although that kyng Caſimire, being let & impeched with ye warres of this ordre, could ſende themperour Fridericke that time no ayde of men, yet did he ayde him wt monie, ſo much as his couenāt was. Wherby it is euident, how this order hath always ben enemies to ye hous

whiche hath euer bene linked to Polle with bondes of leagues and affinities. Wherof king Sigiſmūde requireth you to haue ſome conſideration. For in caſe there be any of the ſame order, that thinke them ſelues bounde, to fight for the chriſtian faith and Religion, there is nothing for them to do in Pruſſe. For all that be round about it, doe profeſſe the chriſtiane religiō. Therfore muſt they ſeke vnto other places, where they may exerciſe them ſelues. For now of many yeares, Hieruſalem is poſſeſſed of a barbarous ennemy, for the defence of the whiche place, it is ſaid how this order was in times paſt inſtituted. Conſtantinople alſo is kept of the ſame nation: Here lieth their worke & buſines. Or if this be thought ouer olde or to far of, there are many ſtrong cities of Chriſtendome wonne lately. Why do not theſe worthy knyghtes go thether, that thei might either recouer that is loſte, or defende the reſt frō the ennemy? But if they delight more in ciuile warre, than euery man may iudge, howe vnworthy they are of that name. But thus the caſe ſtandeth: this order hath bene alwayes without order. For the whiche A diſordred order of knightes. cauſe alſo they were expulſed not out of Pruſſie only, but out of Boheme lyke wyſe, well nexe an hondreth and fiftie yeares paſt. And yet hath no man hetherto deſyred the ſame places, out of the whiche they were expulſed, as common and vacant to be geuen them. But only Polle ſement fit to be moleſted herein, whiche ought moſte of all to be fauoured. For albeit that order hath offended many, yet hath it done moſte hurt of all to the Realme of Polle. For ſauing a few of the firſt, ſcarſly were there any maiſters of that order that did their duty, but contrariwyſe, for the moſte part, leauing the Barbarous ennemies, haue tourned their weapons againſt their Magiſtrate, kynges of Poolle. And not yt only, but haue brought into their confederacie alſo the Tartarians, a cruell kynde of people, and mortall ennemies to all Chriſtians, as is wrytten of Michell Cochmeſter. Wherfore if any man would make the rekening, & cōſider ye paines, perilles, charges, warres, tumultes, battails, ſlaughters & deſolations, wherof this order hath chiefly bene cauſe of, he ſhal find yt it is hardly ſo much worth. And ye kinges deſire is, that there myght ones be an ende of theſe euils. For if any man ſhould attempte warre againſt Albert Duke of Pruſſe, the kyng wyll not altogether ſit ſtyll and ſee hym take wrong, for as muche as he is both Uncle to hym and Patrone. There are threateninges and menaces brought to the kynges eares, whiche doubtles he is ſory to heare. For he loueth peace and quietnes, but chiefly the concorde of Chriſtendome. Howe

be it in caſe any man ſhall attempte violence, he wyll in dede vnwillyngly put on Armure, yet for all that wyll he doe it, to defende him and his. He deſyreth the frendſhyp of all Prynces, but chiefly yours moſte mighty Emperour and kyng Ferdinā
               do, and wyſheth the ſame to continue for euer. He hath often times heretofore intreated you by letters and meſſengers, that the preſcription decreed againſt Duke Albert, might be abolyſhed. But where the ſame is not done hetherto, he doeth not ſo muche impute it vnto you, as to the aduerſitie of tyme. But nowe that alwayes are made playne, and lettes taken awaye, he ſuppoſeth, you haue occaſion now to perfourme the thyng, whiche you haue right franckely promyſed, whan not by one lettre or two, you haue ſignified how that you were more ready in wyll than in power to gratifie hym. But in caſe this order wyll not ceaſe, but ſteare vp warre and trouble, he truſteth that after the example of your progenitours you will kepe aſſuredly the conuenauntes of Maximilian and Fridericke Empeperours. An other thing that I haue in commiſſion, apperteineth to the cities Danſke and Elunige. For theſe albeit they be vnder the dominion of Polle, yet are they called to the aſſemblies of the Empyre. Wherfore the kyng requireth that they be not ſo vſed hereafter, but ſynce that no man beſydes him hath to doe with them, they may from henceforth be ſuffered to vſe his owne lawes. Whan the Emperour had heard his demaundes, he made relation therof to the ſtates of the Empire, and geueth a copie of the Oration to Wuolfange Marques of Pruſſe. Who the .xxiii. daye of Ianuary maketh aunſwere in the vulgar tongue, and after a certen preface. In this, ſaith he, reſteth The Oratiō of the Marques of Pruſe. the whole controuerſie of the matter, whether Pruſſe be vnder the dominion of Polle, or of the Empire. If I ſhall proue the later to be true, the matter ſhalbe eaſy to determine. And thus ſtandeth the caſe, moſte triumphant Emperour, moſte mighty kyng, and moſte noble Princes and ſtates, as I ſhall declare. About foure hondreth yeares paſt, whan a publique war was attempted againſt the Barbarians, whiche vexed ſore the men of our religion throughout al Aſie & Affricke, this order, wherof we ſpeake, was inſtituted, whiche both Emperours haue liberally The Originall of this order of knighthode. auaūced, and the high Byſhops alſo confirmed. After the knyghtes of this ſame ordre for the ſpace of certen yeares, kept great warres in thoſe parties, for the vniuerſall Chriſten weale, but in fine hauing a great ouerthrowe, they were diſcomfited and diſperſed into ſondry places. At the ſame time it The Duke of Muſcouia fortuned that Conrade, Duke of Moſcouia, was greuouſly aſſayled

by the Pruſſians being than the ennemies of Chriſten Religion. And whan he was no longer hable to mainteine warres and defende him ſelfe againſt them, he ſued firſt to the Byſhop of Rome, that he, ſetting forth a celeſtiall and immortall rewarde, as the maner was, would incourage men to this warre. After he adioyned to him this order of ours, and gaue them all the countrey of Culmen borderyng vpon Pruſſe, and the rather to encourage them, gaue them al the land of Pruſſe, to holde for euer. This dede of gift the Emperour Friderick the ſecond confirmed, & permitted Herman Salcie, that than was Maiſter of the order, to moue warre againſt the Pruſſians, and if he did ſubdue them, to inioye their lande for euer. This was in the yeare of our Lorde, M .CC. xxvi. Thus verely did my order, through the ayde of the Emperour, Byſhoppes of Rome, & Princes of the Empyre continewing the warre by the ſpace of liii. yeares, at the laſt conquer the lande of Pruſſe, and bring it to the chriſtian Religion, beautified it with certen Colleges & Byſhoprikes, and builded therin alſo both Caſtels and Cities, that there might be in thoſe parties as a walle and fortreſſe of the Empire, and a refuge for the Nobilitie of Germany. And ſo hath parte of the ſame Region remained in our gouernement, vnto the yeare of ſaluation, M .CCCC. l. and an other parte therof tyll Albert of Brandenburg. After what tyme the Lituanes and Tartarians together, made warre againſt the Polonians and Moſcouites, our knightes remembring their profeſſion and order, toke armure and cleane diſconfited the Lituanians, inuading far within their limites. For the which cauſe we had long time peace and amitie with the Polonians vntill ſuche time as a certen Prince of Lituania was created king of Polle. Who to auenge the loſſe and ſhame of his nation, moued The Prince of Lituania, made king of Pole. warre againſt vs ſodenly, and ayded of the Barbarians, did very muche hurte. But being of our men repulſed, and put beſides, and a great part of his Realme, had no ioyfull ende of that warre, in ſo muche as he made his complaint to the counſel of Conſtance. After came forth a decree that ſuche part of Polle as our men helde by the lawe of armes ſhould be reſtored. Thus beyng againe reuiued, he forgot the benefit receiued, and renewed warre, and contended that certen prouinces of our order, belonged to the dominiō of Polle, And albeit that through the interceſſion of the two kynges of Hongary and Boheme, the matter was taken vp yet the ſore brake out agayne, and at laſt the caſe was referred to the Emperour Sigiſmunde, who approued the fourmer compoſition, that the kynges had made.

Howebeit the king of Polle could not reſte thus, but attempted warre agayne, whiche the .xxiiii. yeare after was accorded A compoſition of peace at Tournie, whan Ladiſtaus was king. In the whiche compoſition of peace, he forſaketh all ſuite and ſtrife, neither calleth he him ſelfe Lord or inheritour of Pruſſie, and byndeth all his ſucceſſours, that within one yeres ſpace after they come to the Crowne, they ſhall ſweare to accepte & ratifie the ſame peace, and compelle the byſhoppes and other ſtates of the Realme to take the ſame othe, and that euery tenth yeare this othe ſhould be renewed. This was alſo cōdicioned at the ſame tyme, if any king of Polle ſhall hereafter moue warre vpon the Maiſter of Pruſſie, that the people be not bounde to obeye or aſſiſte hym, but that peace be continually kept on either partie. And this compoſition was confirmed with two hondreth Seales, as it is to be ſhewed. Yet did not ye peace indure aboue .xiiii. yeares. For in the yeare of our Lorde .M.CCCC.I. the people, making The people rebell. a rebellion, conſpired againſt the maiſter. And albeit that the Byſhop of Rome and the Emperour Fridericke the thirde, did outlawe them. Albeit the maiſter deſired that ye matter might be heard, yet did they ſo litle regarde all this, that about .lxx. townes and caſtels revelled in one daye. Unto this conſpiracie of theirs ioyned him ſelfe the kyng of Polle, Caſinure, father to Sigiſmunde, and brought vs vnto ſuche a perplexitie, that Lewys Erlinſuſie who than was maiſter of the order, conſtrayned through feare of the preſent daunger, as a moſte conſtant man might doe in ſuch a caſe, to the intent he might both hepe ſtill his prouince, and alſo ſaue him ſelfe in the ſame, accorded with him vpon conditions moſte vnreaſonable, without the authoritie either of the Byſhop or the Emperour, or yet the ſtates of the Empyre. The cōditions of this peace amonges other thinges are theſe. That the Maiſters of Pruſſie frō hence forth ſhal within ſixe monethes after he be choſen Magiſtrate, come The conditions of peace betwixt ye king of polle and the knightes. vnto the king of Polle, and by an othe acknowledge hym for their Souraigne, and ſhall ayde hym againſt all men, they ſhal alſo receaue into the order aſwell Polonians as Germaines, & ſhall admitte them to beare office, and for ſuche landes as they ſhall wynne hereafter, to do homage to the kynges of Polle. Whiche conditions verely do not only cōcerne the priuate loſſe and rebuke of my order, but alſo the publique domage and reproche of the Empire & Nobilitie of Germany, Wherefore, ſince that time haue there bene maiſters. Which conſidering the vnreaſonablenes of the thing, haue made greuous complaintes hereof to the Byſhops of Rome and Emperours, yet haue they

bene conſtrained to ſweare. And certenly Pruſſie remained in the tuition of the Empyre, till Friderich of Saxon, and Albert of Brandenburg, were Maiſters of the order. For they would do no homage to the kynges of Polle, for that neither the Byſhop nor the Emperour had confirmed that cōpoſition of king Caſimire. And that in the yeare .M. CCCCC. the Emperout Maximilian in the aſſemble at Auſpurge made a decree, wherin he commaunded them to geue their fayth to the Empyre only. And where after to appeaſe the controuerſie, Maximilian had appointed a daye at Paſſawe, in the yeare a M .D. x. ſending thether Ambaſſadours, there could be nothing at all concluded. Wherupō enſued that laſt warre. Moreouer Albert him ſelfe .xxiiii. yeares paſt in the conuention at Norinberge as a Prince of the Empyre had his place amonges others, and ſigned the decree there made. Wherfore it is euident that the king of Polle hath no right to Pruſſe, and that it was not lawfull Pruſſe belōgeth to them yere. for Albert to withdrawe him ſelf vnto his tuition and protection. Nowe where the Ambaſſadour reproueth my ordre of vnthankefulnes and breakyng of conuenauntes, herein he doeth vs wrong, and it is to be proued by olde wrytinges, that ſcarſely haue any kinges of Polle kepte touche and promeſſe with vs. Was there euer wryting ſene confirmed with mo Seales, than ye ſame wherby we accorded with king Ladiſlaus? might there any more aſſuraunce be made? And yet breaking the ſeales and wryting, the warre was renewed againſt vs. This recompence had we of them for reſtoryng vnto them Sarmatie & a great part of Lituania. He named certen Emperours of fourmer tyme, and ſayeth how they were offended with our order. But the truthe is farre otherwyſe. For Sigiſmunde did not only ſequeſtre ſtrife and geue ſentence with vs, as before is mē
               tioned, but alſo gaue vs ayde againſt the enemie. Againe the Emperour Fridericke, what tyme the people rebelled, as I ſaid before, ſhewed vs all the fauour that might be, and banyſhed the cōſpiratours, and for the ſame cauſe helde an aſſemble of ye Empyre at Norinberge, in the which conuention a decree was made to ayde vs. The lyke good wyll and fauour did Maximilian ſhe we vs. For he neither would that we ſhould ſweare to the kyng of Polle, and therfore both in his owne name, and alſo of the whole Empyre he wrote ſondry letters to kyng Sigiſmunde, and made than a decree for vs right honorable. This oratour procedeth, and in the waye of mockery, demaundeth of vs why we do not recouer Hieruſalem and ſuch other like places? ſurely I am not ſo cleane without experience, but I could

taunte againe, neuertheleſſe by reaſon of this honorable audience I wyll refrayne, & wil aſke him but this queſtion only. Firſt why ye kyng of Polle doth not recouer thoſe places, which the Prince of Moſcouia hath taken frō him within theſe fewe yeares? Whiche are in compariſon as muche as all Pruſſie. Againe, why in ſo great fortune, he doeth not defende his owne limites from the dayly inuaſions of the Tartarians? Uerely theſe are plages for breaking his fidelitie. He ſayeth, our order in tymes paſt was expulſed out of all Boheme. Why he ſhould thus ſaye, I knowe not, vnleſſe that by this example he would ſhewe, that they myght alſo lawfully ſpoyle vs of our goodes, and tourne vs out of landes and poſſeſſions. For the diſtruction of ye tyme touched not only our order, but pearſed alſo through out all the lande of Boheme, and was extended vpon thē chiefly, The commotion in Boheme for the doctrine of John Huſſe. which followed the olde Religion, what tyme great tumultes were reyſed there for the doctrine of John Huſſe. Dur order hath warred with kinges of Polle, I confeſſe it, but that euer they gaue the occaſiō of warre, I denie vtterly. For they neuer attempted warre, but either to defende their right, or els to recouer their owne. He ſayeth, we haue made leagues with the Cartarians. This may well be verefied of them. For it is manifeſt, that they haue vſed their ayde, againſt men that profeſſe the Chriſten religion. Againe the ſituation of the countrey declareth eaſely, whether the Tartarians lie more commodious and nerer vs, or them. And that whiche he ſpake laſte of the cities Danſke and Eluinge, is grounded vpon no reaſon: For eyther citie is of our dominion & belongeth to the Germane Empyre neither hath the kyng of Polle any other title there: than that whiche he hath obtayned through the rebellion and treaſon of the citezens, as it may be proued by ſondry reaſons. And ſeyng theſe matters are thus, moſte redoubted Emperour, moſt mighty kyng, and States moſt honorable, I beſech you, that ye ſentēce already geuē, may be put in executiō. For this to obtein at your handes, ought both the equitie of the cauſe, and dignitie of the Empyre, and State of Religion, and the honour & all ſo cōmoditie of the Nobilitie of Germany. The Ambaſſadour of Polle, had prepared a contrary wryting, but did not exhibit the ſame. For whan the reaſons were heard on both partes, certen were choſen out of the whole nōbre to examine the matter, whoſe determination was, that the ſentence pronounced againſt Albert ſhould be maynteined. But yet conſideryng the great difficultie that would be in the execution of the ſame, they referre all to the Emperour. And ſhortly after kyng Sigil

munde departed, for pure age, whan he had reigned .xlii. yeres. He was ſonne vnto king Caſimire, as before is ſayde. He had The death of Sigiſmſid king of pole thre brethren. Wherof Ladiſlaus was kyng of Hōgary and Boheme, the father of kyng Lewys and Anne. Iohn Albert, and Alexander, whan they had reigned in order after their father Caſimire, leauing behinde them no children, paſſed ouer the gouernment to their yongeſt brother Sigiſmunde. Unto whome nowe ſucceded his ſonne of the ſame name, who had maried ye daughter of Ferdinando kyng of Romaynes.
            I ſhewed you of Mendoza in the fourmer boke, how he proteſted at Rome concerning the counſell. Wherunto, at the halendes of February followyng, the Byſhop, calling a Senate of Cardinalles, made this aunſwere. What tyme Mendoza, thou The Popes aunſwer to Mendoza. ſaideſt how the Emperour had commaunded thee, to make proteſtation againſt the counſell, thou madeſt vs right ſorowfull. But after we had more diligently wayed the letters of thy commiſſion, we were comforted agayne. And firſt I wyll ſpeake of the cauſe of our grief & heuines. For that maner of proteſting is after an euill example and chiefly vſed of ſuche, as are either reuolted wholy from dewe obedience, or haue begon to wauer therin. Therfore did it greue me exceadingly, whiche haue alwayes borne a fatherly loue to the Emperour, and as becommeth the paſtour of the church, haue euer deſyred concord. And it greued me and the Senate of Cardinalles ſo much the more, for as muche as at this time we loked for nothing leſſe. For the Emperour hath made warre with his aduerſaries and the ennemies of the churche, and hath done it through the ayde of myne armie. And albeit Mendoza thou ſemeſt to eſteme thys lyghtly, yet ought it to be accepted for a great benefite. For the The warre finiſhed by ye Popes army ayde was exceading great, that I ſente, in ſo muche that it far ſurmounted the abilitie and power of the holy treaſure, & came to him moſte in ſeaſon. What thing therfore could leſſe be loked for, than that after the victory obtained, and that ſo lately, the Emperour ſhould rendre vnto me ſuche fruicte of Godly zeale & beneuolence? Uerely, that the ende of the ſame warre, ſhould be the beginning of proteſting againſt me. Certes, it hath chaunced vnto me, that the Prophet complayneth of, that lokyng to gather grapes, I ſhould fynde wylde beries. I haue euer ſynce the tyme I was firſt called to this dignitie paſtorall, with earneſt ſtudy tilled, cheriſhed themperour, as a moſte noble plante, that I myght once haue a plentifull vintage. But this enterpryſe of his hath almoſte taken away frō me al hope of fruicte. Thou haſt heard the cauſe of our grief: heare alſo, how we were

relieued of the ſame. Thou, as though thou hadſt had authoritie geuen thee, to proteſte againſt me and this ſacret ſenate, haſt ſo vſed the ſame, as is neither vnto vs honorable nor mete or condigne for the Emperour. But in the letters of cōmiſſion, there is not one worde, that ſheweth it to be themperours wil, that thou ſhouldeſt thus procede. I ſay there is not one worde, to the intent thou mayeſt better vnderſtand it, that geueth the authoritie thus to do. The Emperour cōmaūdeth his deputies at Boloigne, that they ſhould proteſte thus before our Legates there whiche haue chaunged the place of the counſel. Which after thou didſt perceiue once done, thou woldeſt vſe the ſame maner of proteſting here alſo in our preſēce. But herein haſt thou paſſed the bondes of thy cōmiſſion. And if thou haſt not perceiued this before Mendoza, acknowledge now at the laſt hauing warning. For themperour cōmaūdeth yt to proteſt, not againſt vs, nor before this preſence, but againſt our legates, yt were autours of that remouing. Wherfore thēperour hath done herein the duty of a tēperate Prince, which hath ſtayed within thoſe bondes & limites, & wold not that ye proteſtation ſhuld be made before me, whom he knoweth to be the lawfull & only iudge of al ſuche cauſes. For if I had refuſed to haue heard the matter, than ſhuld be haue had iuſt cauſe of proteſtation. But thou Mē
               doza, not taking the way yt thou ſhuldeſt haue done, didſt not deſire me to examine the matter, but requireſt yt I ſhuld diſanul ye decree made of remouing the counſel, & cōmaunde the greateſt part of the fathers to geue place to a few, ye remained at Trēt. And what thing can more deminiſh thauthoritie of the whole coūſel than this? Had it not ben much more reaſonable yt thoſe few which are at Trent, if thei had any cauſe of cōplaint of the fathers which be at Boloigne, ſhuld haue made the ſame vnto me? Certenly, I wold neither haue refuſed their requeſtes thā, nor yet wold at this preſēt. Where therfore it is certen, yt themperours minde is not cōſonāt or agreable to your fact, we haue cauſe to giue God thankes, which ruleth his minde after thys ſort. We may reioyce to our ſelues, & thou thy ſelf mayſt be glad for thy Princes ſake. And albeit yt by this ſame, which is ſaide already the foūdatiō of your pleade is ſo fallen, yt I nede not to anſwere thy proteſtation, yet, leſt ye through ſilence I might appeare to acknowledge thine accuſatiōs, & by the ſame thing of ſend many, eſpecially ſuch as be ignoraūt I will cōfute thē all. And firſt what time yu haſt ſet this marke before rhine eies, yt thou mighteſt declare me to be negligent to draw backward, & ſeke delayes, yu the coūſel ſhuld not be holdē, but thēperour to be

carefull for the common wealth, Uigilaunt and induſtrious, and wholy addicte to the kepyng of the counſel, thou procedeſt in ſpeakyng thy pleaſure. Aſſuredly I doe not, nother ought I to enuie the Emperours prayſes. And if thou haddeſt ſtayed The Empe. prayſes ſet ye Pope a fyre. there, I had had nothinge to aunſwere. But in as muche as thou doeſt extolle hym, to depraue me, ſo laude and commende hym, that thou myghteſt bryng me in contempte, whyleſt thou ſayeſt, that he hath deſyred a counſell, not of me only, but alſo of my prodeceſſours, Byſhoppes of Rome. The thing it ſelfe requyreth, that I ſhould aunſwere thee to the ſame. For if thys were alwayes the Emperours mynde and deſyre, that a counſell myght be holden, of the ſame mynde haue I bene euer as well as he. Agayne, as I am his elder in yeares, ſo haue I deſired this thyng before him, as the moſte honorable Cardinalles can tell, whiche were of the ſame nomber at that tyme. And whan I was choſen Byſhop, I continued of the ſame mynde ſtyll. And hauing the leſte occaſion in the world, I called a coū
               ſell, firſt at Mantua, and after at Uicence. But thether came none at all, and hether but very fewe. And the Legates, which I ſent, taried there halfe a yeare, lokyng for the other Biſhops, whiche I had ſummoned, ſending a broad letters and meſſengers into all partes. Howbeit thou ſayſt, that theſe cities were not commodious for other nations to repare to, but that Trēt was fit for the pourpoſe. But al men knowe that Trent is not to be compared vnto theſe, neyther in quantitie, nor plentie of all thynges. Therfore the incommoditie of the place was not the let, but the warres of Prynces. Nowe conſyder with me, whether was more feruent in this behalfe: The Emperour, whiche letted the counſell with warlyke tumultes or the Byſhop, whiche was euer a peace maker, who neuer ayded any Prynce in warre, ſauing the Emperour only, and that in the ſame warre, whiche ſemed to open the way vnto the counſell? Whether the Emperour were conſtrayned to warre, & brought vnto it againſt his wyll, I diſpute not. But certen it is, that the counſell was let by the warres.
            I come vnwillingly vnto this compariſon, becauſe the contention is of the prayſe of vertu, which is al dewe vnto God alone, but thou Mendoza haſt geuen the occaſion. I will not be tedious, and will only warne thee to cōſider euery yeare of my byſhoprike, and marke wel what care and ſtudy I haue taken. For verely theſe two thinges haue bene euer before my eyes, to make peace amongeſt Princes, and to kepe a coūſel, and herein haue ſpared, neyther coſte nor payne, for all myne olde age.

But neyther doeſt thou reproue any thyng, before the counſel, and blameſt only my Legates, in that they remoued to Boloigne without my knowledge. Moreouer this doeth offende thee, that I call the congregation of the Fathers at Boloigne, a counſell, and thynkeſt that they ſuſteyne iniurie therby, that remayne at Trente. But what euill is in that? For thus all men ſpeake, howe the Counſell is remoued from Trent to Bononie. Wherfore if I ſhould doe the dutie of an vpryght iudge, I ought ſo to call it, tyll I knowe it to be otherwiſe by contrary probations, eſpecially ſythe the moſte parte of the Byſhops are gone with our Legates thether. For not the leſſe parte, as thou affirmeſt, but the greater, ought to preuayle in doubtfull matters. And it is euident, that the Counſell hath power to remoue els where. But whether it were lawfully remoued, wherin is al the cōtrouerſie, I reſerue vnto my ſelf the iudgement So I will, & ſo cōmaund. of that thyng, whiche is offered me. And in the meane tyme doe attribute vnto that congregation, the name of the Counſell. But thou affirmeſt thoſe, that were cauſers of the remouing, to be vnto me addicted. Thynkeſt thou this thynge worthy of reprehenſion? Than thou prayſeſt ſuche as remayned at Trente, for bycauſe they fauour me not. But conſider what daunger herein is. For of this thing are wonte to arryſe diſſentions, and ſciſmes, vnto the churche moſte perillouſe, what tyme the Byſhoppes withdrawe them ſelues from the obedience of their hygh Prelate. But if you vnderſtande by addicted, ſuche as be factiouſe, that wyll take my parte, whether it be right or wrong, verely I knowe none ſuche. For I haue none other partakyng, than that which is the part of a father towardes his children, or of the paſtour to ward his flocke. Neither hath there chaunced as yet any ſuche controuerſie in the Counſell, that I neded any ſuche addicted and vowed men. But this I requyre of the Byſhoppes chifly, that they prouide for the libertie of conſcience, and gaue an eſpeciall charge to my Legates, whan they went vnto the counſel, that thei ſhuld ſe in any wyſe, that the byſhops ſhuld haue no cauſe to cōplain of taking away from them their libertie in geuing of voices. You finde much fault alſo, that I can not be perſwaded by no requeſtes of thēperour, nor of king Ferdinādo, nor al ye ſtates of thēpyre, & gathereſt hereby, ye I take no care for Germany, eſpecially, whan thēperour hath through his great labour & pains brought to paſſe, that ſuche as were lately ſwarued from the church, do not now refuſe the decrees of ye coūſel, ſo it might be continued at Trent. Certes I neuer refuſed by determinate

wordes, but that they myght retourne to Trente, ſo that the ſame may be lawfully done, and without offence of other nations. But how deſirous I am of the health of Germany, hereof it is euident, that twyſe I haue called a counſel thither, twiſe A counſell called at Trent twiſe ſent my Legates, whiche after they had at the firſt tyme, by the ſpace of ſeuen monethes, loked chiefly for the commynge of the Germanes, Pariſe, Morone and Poole Cardinalles, thou knoweſt thy ſelfe, howe there came none at that tyme. Thither came in the Emperours name Granuellan, the Byſhop of Arras, and you your ſelfe Mendoza, and you can all witnes, how great was the patience of our men in abyding for the reſt. But what was the ende therof? Not ſo muche as you your ſelues would tary. And albeit my Legates intreated you, that at the laſt one of the thre myght remayne, for an example to others, yet alledging a certen excuſe, you departed not many dayes after. Agayne two yeares after, in a tyme more commodious, thei met there againe. And I ſent Legates thither, Mountane, Crucei and Poole Cardinalles. Thyther came you alſo, and Fraunces Toletane. And you remembre howe longe was the expectation, and how many monthes were conſumed in vaine tofore they could begynne. And after they were come to the matter, and many holſome decrees were made, you know how fewe of them came the ther, that chiefly neded that remedy. Of the Byſhoppes came none at al: A fewe of them ſent their proctours. Briefly there appeared no ſignes nor tokens that they would come to amendement.
            And whan many reſorted thether out of Spayne, Fraunce, Italy and further Prouinces, out of Germany, whiche was next of all others, hardely came there any one. But nowe you ſaye that the ſtate of Germany is otherwyſe, and that the Emperour, whoſe power and authoritie is nowe augmented, doth vndertake that in caſe they retourne to Trente, all the Germaines wyll followe the decres of the counſell. I beleue, Mendoza, if it be true thou ſayeſt. But if the Germaynes be of that mynde, why doe they not playnely ſubmitte them ſelues to the counſell, where ſo euer it be. And yet I woulde not that this ſhould be ſo taken, as though I paſſed greatly in what place the Synode be holden. But you ſo ſticke vnto Trente, that vnleſſe it be finiſhed there, where it firſte began, you wyll ſaye that Germany is vndonne. But take hede what you doe. For whyleſt you bynde vs to the walles of one Citie, you doe iniurie to the holy Ghoſte.
            
               
In olde tyme God ordeined Hieruſalem, as a peculiar place, wherin he wold be worſhipped, for it pleaſed him thā: but whā the ceremonies & ſhaddowes of the lawe were abolyſhed. After that our ſauiour Chriſt, the ſunne of rightuouſnes ſhone forth he would be ſerued in all places. Therfore you bryng in a newe bondage, whan you would compell vs to a place. But ſeyng that Germany ſhould be cured, it is nedefull that the counſell he kept there. why than, if the Danes, Gothians, or Britans be vexed with lyke diſeaſes, ſhould euery of them haue a generall counſell kept in their owne countreys? No not ſo: For in aſſembling of counſelles, there is not ſo much conſideration had of them, for whom the lawes are made, as of thoſe whiche doe make and preſcribe the ſame. They be Byſhoppes and other fathers, whoſe commodities are chiefly reſpected. For it is to be The fathers muſt be prouided forwel proued by ſondry examples, that counſels haue oftentymes bene holden, out of the countreis where the hereſies ſprange vp what, whether were not this an vnreaſonable thing, that 
                  〈◊〉
                Germaynes only ſhould take vpon them to appointe the place of the counſell, and the Election and libertie be taken away from all other nations? This is to declare, that this bitter proteſtation of yours neded not. But nowe to the reſt of the ſame, you ſaye howe the auſwere we made vnto the Emperour was vnſitting and full of lyes, and grounded neither vppon ryght nor reaſon. Theſe thynges are vnreuerently ſpoken, and herein thou doeſt vs wrong, but becauſe thou bryngeſt no reaſon, I can not aunſwere thee diſtinctely. Howe be it, I ſuppoſe it greueth you, that we deſyre the decrees may be ratified, and they well aſſured that ſhall repare to the counſel, that the ſame maner and order of pleading be ſtyll reteyned whiche hath remayned in the churche from the Apoſtles tyme vnto this daye, finally, that the ſaufe conduicte be ready. But in theſe demaū
               des is nothing ſtraunge or vnreaſonable, and are wont to be prouided for as wel by lawes of the Byſhops as alſo of Emperours. Nowe where you ſaye, that whatſoeuer incommoditie ſhall arryſe in tyme to come, the Emperour wyll aſcribe it vnto me. And alſo in this my negligence wyll take vpon hym the charge of the church. Uerely ſo far forth as God wyll geue me grace, I wyll ſo demeane my ſelfe, that I wyll geue no iuſt The Pope may be weake & negligēt cauſe, to be thought negligent in matters cōcerning the churche. Neuertheleſſe, if it ſo fortune, through the imbecillitie of mans nature, I ſhall not be offended, if my negligence, maye ſtyre vp and ſharpen the Emperours dilligence, to ſuccour the Churche, ſo that he ſtaye hym ſelfe within the precincte and

limittes preſcrybed, that is: If he followe herein the rule of ryght and lawes of the holy Fathers. Finally, as concerning the chiefe point of your Proteſtation, where you contende the remouing of the counſell to be vnlawfull, in as muche as the effecte of all the controuerſie theron dependeth, I take vnto my ſelf, the examination therof, by vertue of my power and authoritie, and committe the hearing of the ſame to the moſte worthy Cardinalles, Pariſe, Burges, Poole and Creſcent. And commaunde, that in the meane tyme whyleſt they do examine the thing, no man what ſo euer he be, attempte any thynge to the contrary. And alſo charge the fathers, aſwell that be at Bo nonie, as alſo at Trent, that if they haue any thing to ſaye or alledge in this matter, they do it within this moneth. And leſt I ſhould ſeme in any point to hinder the commoditie of Germany, I wyll not refuſe to ſende myne Ambaſſadours thether, ſuche as may cure the infirmitie of their people, if I ſhal vnder ſtande the ſame not to be vnthankeful to them and to the Emperour. Beſydes all this, whan the iudgement is ended, in caſe it ſhall appere, that they did not wel to remoue vnto Boloigne I will deuiſe by all meanes, that the Synode may be cōtinued at Trent. And at fewe wordes, will do what I can, that in fine the auncient Religion may agayne be reſtored to Germany.
            The Cardinall of Trent was before this retourned to Auſpurge, as I ſaid. Whan the Emperour than, hearing his talke, and alſo receiuing letters frō Mendoza dated at Rome, about the ende of December, ſawe but ſmall hope of the counſell, the xiiii. daye of Ianuary declareth the matter to ye ſtates, in what caſe it ſtandeth, and how he hath ſignified to his Ambaſſadour Mendoza, that he ſhould make proteſtation at Rome, concerning the remouing of the counſel. After the ſame ſhal be done, he wyll gette them the copie to wryte out. And albeit the hope of the counſell is not vtterly to be neglected, yet, by reaſon of ye long delay whiche is like to come betwixt, he thinketh it to be requiſite, and neceſſary, that in the meane tyme there be ſome meane founde, to conſerue the peace of Germany. They haue in dede committed vnto hym the charge of this matter: but he thinketh it expedient, that out of the whole nombre be choſen a fewe good and well learned men, to haue the doing hereof. And he wyll alſo appoint certen to conſult with them. Wherfore he requireth them to be wylling hereunto, and al affectiōs layde aſyde, to cōſider what commoditie it were for the cōmon wealth, and euery of thē alſo that a reconcilement were made. Let them call to remembraunce, howe before this diſſention,

Germany was the moſte floriſhyng Region of all others: and as a mirrour and a ſpectacle for al nations to beholde. Let thē conſider moreouer, that where he toke ſo muche trauel & pain, that the counſell might be continued at Trent, that he ded the ſame of his duty, and of a ſinguler zeale to the cōmon coūtrey. Therfore were dyuers choſen to treat of the matter: but when they coulde not agre, the whole matter was referred to themperour. Wherfore he appointed certen, to penne articles of doctrine, ceremonies, and reformation of the clergie. Thoſe were The Auctours of the Interim. Iuly Pflugie, Byſhop of Numburge, Michaell Sidonie, Iohn Iſlebie Agricola, who .xviii. yeares paſt had defended the doctrine of the Proteſtauntes with Melanchton and Brentius, as is wrytten in the ſeuenth booke. Theſe therfore, wryte a Ihon Iſleby a reuolte. boke of Articles, but very ſecretly, and whan they had bene lōg about it, and had printed it ſondry tymes, at length, exhibite the ſame to the Emperour, as I wyl ſhewe you hereafter. Ioachim the Electour of Brandenburg, whiche laboured ſore for a reconcilement, deuiſing firſt with Iames Sturmius, intreated the Senate of Straſburg by his letters, that for the cauſe of Religion they would ſende vnto him Bucer. For in aſmuche as the Byſhop had withdrawen the coūſell, the Emperour had taken an other way, and that there was great hope of a reformation. Whereupon Bucer is ſent, who taking his iurney priuely about the ende of Ianuary, whan he came almoſte to Auſpurg, Bucer is ſet for. ſtayed there, tyll the Prince ſent for hym. In the former boke is declared, how the Englyſhemen ouercame the Scottes in a mighty battell. But where the Scottes would not relent, nor chaunge their pourpoſe, and truſted to the Frenche kynges promeſſes, the Duke of Somerſet, Protectour of England, and the reſt of the counſell, the firſt day of February, wryte vnto thē a long exhortation vnto peace. Albeit, ſay they, it were requiſite, The coūcell of England wryte to the Scottes. that the beginning ſhould procede of you, whiche in the cauſe are inferiours, and goe by the worſe. And albeit we poſſeſſe a great part of your dominion, yet can we not but admoniſhe you of your wealth and preſeruatiō. The laſt yeare before the battel, we prouoked you to peace and amitie, and declared what our mynde was, but yt wryting was ſuppreſſed by your captaines and gouernour of your Realme, and not ſuffered to come to your handes. For ſo that they may do wel them ſelues, they care full litle what chaunceth vnto you. Wherfore, if they ſhall now alſo vſe the ſame diſceiptfulnes, & not ſuffer you to vnderſtande any part of our wyll and counſell, in this wryting we do openly proteſte, that we haue omitted no part of our dutie.

Englande hath oftentymes kepte warre with Scotlande, and that exceading great. And there is no doubt, but they that Ciuille war betwene Englande and Scotland. ſhall reade the hiſtories, or heare of the feates done, would maruell muche, that the people of one countrie and langage, ſhuld be at ſo great diſſention amonges themſelues, and woulde accompt it a thing chiefly to be wyſhed for, if the whoale Ilande might by ſome meane agree in one, & be ruled by one gouernement. But al men do confeſſe, that there is no redier waye here unto, than by mariage. And this way God hauing compaſſion vpon you, hath ſhewed you, and offered you a moſte goodly occaſion as it were into your boſome. Your kyng, whan he had broken his promeſſe, & had an ouerthrow in battell, died ſhortly after, whether it were for ſorowe, or for ſome other cauſe. He had thre children, two ſonnes & a daughter, and they indede might haue ben a let, ſo yt ther ſhuld not haue ben made an attonemēt betwixt vs. But God toke thē away both in a maner in one day whan thei were infantes, & left but one inheriter, a daughter, borne a litle before ye death of her father: And vnto vs hath geuē a king of great exſpectatiō, Edward, ſonne & heire vnto Hery ye eight. What do you not ſe a bond prepared of a perpetual & euer laſting amitie betwene vs? It hath bene oftētimes wiſhed for, but in theſe eight hondreth yeares paſt, chaūced neuer ſo good an opportunitie. And this can not they deny, which hinder the peace amongeſt you. But by this meane ſay they, we wold procure to our ſelues lordſhip, & to you bondage. But ye haue we in our letters ſent to you ye laſt yeare paſt, ſufficiently cōfuted, and now take God to witneſſe, that ye king is minded to ioyne with you in moſte aſſured frendſhyp. If you ſhal refuſe, & prouoke vs againe to warre through your frowardnes, vnto whome ſhall the faulte of common euilles be aſcribed? You haue promiſed the daughter & heyre of your Realm in mariage to our king, by common aſſent of parliamēt. Writinges were made of the ſame and confirmed with the common ſeale of the Realme. Many & The daughter of Scotlande aſſiaū
                  ced to yt king of England. great aſſuraunces were deuiſed, & you were cōtented to put in pledges, till they came both to lawfull age. Theſe wrytinges of yours are in our cuſtody, as a perpetuall witnes againſte you. At all the whiche thinges, Hamelton, Erle of Arraine, gouernour of your Realme was not only preſent, but Preſident alſo and chief doer. But the ſame, after the Cardinal of Saint Andrewes, and certē other prelates of the Clergie had put him The gouernour of Scotlanda leage breaker. in feare and terrour, and ſhewed hym agayne great hope an other waye, he broke his faith and conuenauntes. In whome aſſuredly, of what ſo euer euils is chaunceth in the meane

tyme the whole blame is to be imputed. In that you haue loſt ſo many fortes and Caſtelles, that after the battell foughten, you wanted ſo many thouſandes of your men, that we haue ſo farre inuaded your Realme, it is chiefly to be aſcrybed vnto hym. But what ende at the length doe you loke of this obſtinacy and vuloyaultie? Hauyng the victory, we offer you peace. We poſſeſſe a great part of your kyngdome, and yet make England common to you. The ſame that men vanquyſhed are wont to ſuffer as a great ignomie, that what tyme they are vnited with the people that haue the victorye, they ſhould forſake and loſe the name of their owne nation, that doe we frely graunte vnto you, and refuſe not to receiue yt auncient name of Britaines, common to both nations. What thing, for the loue of God, can of vs be more performed? Will not aſ men iudge this, that we haue iuſt cauſe to warre, whan they ſhall knowe that ſo liberall, ſo reaſonable and honeſt condicions could take no place with you? We ſet open for you always to come vnto our frendſhip, neither do we expulſe your Quene out of your Realme, but wil alſo eſtabliſh her and her daughter in England. Again, we intende not to abrogate your lawes: For both Englande, and Fraunce, and the Emperours countreyes alſo, do vſe ſondry lawes. They that ſeke to hinder the peace, doe put you in ſuche feare: But they prouide only for their owne commoditie and pleaſure, and care not for your wealth. But tourne you awaye your eyes and mynde from them, and conſider the ſtate of your common wealth. You haue a mayde, inheritour of your Realme, ſhe muſt doubtles mary at the length. Therfore ſhe ſhall eyther be maryed to one of your owne nation: or to ſome foreine Prince. If ſhe mary at home, our ryght and title remayneth yet neuertheleſſe vnto vs whole, and that thinge wyll ſtyre vp ciuile tumultes and diſſention. If ſhe take a ſtraunger, ye ſhal both haue vs your continual ennemies, and in a How miſerable is it for ye Quene to mary a ſtraunger. moſte miſerable bondage ſhall ye ſerue a foreine nation. You muſt ſeke for ayde that is farre from you. And the forces that ſhall be ſent, it can not be ſpoken, what hurt they wyll do you, and howe prowdely and arrogauntly they wyll deale with you. For thus wyl they be perſwaded, that in their ayde and defence conſiſteth your whole preſeruation. What? they wyll take from you, your Quene and Princes, and trāſport her whether they lyſte, and if they ſhall haue warre on any ſyde, as it may be they ſhall, they wyll be wholly addicte to defende them and theirs, and not care for you, but leaue you vnto vs for a pray. And if it fortune that they ſende no ſoldiours, but cap|

only. They ſhall preſcribe and commaunde you, and if any thynge ſhall be well done, wyll haue all the prayſe therof. But if any miſfortune chaūce, the whole ſtorme ſhall lyght in your neckes, that loſe your lyfe and bloud. What daunger alſo it is It is daūger to vſe forain aydes. to vſe foreyne aydes, a domeſticall example may teache you.
            The Brytaines, the people of this ſame Ilande ſente for the Saxons in tymes paſte to ayde thē, and after by the ſame were expulſed out of their countrie, and dryuen into the mountanes The Britanes expulſed by yt Saxons and fennes. Some tyme there dwelte betwyxt Englande and Scotlande, the Pictes, a fierſe and a warlyke people, whome the Scottes after they had a while defended from the ennemy, The Pictes, by yt Scots. at the length ſo oppreſſed, that their name remayneth not at this daye. Did not the ſame happen to the Frenche men by thē of Frankonie, to the Grekes not longe ſynce, and to the Hongarians in this our memory, whan they vſed the ayde of the Turkes. &c. Did not the Gothians in tyme paſte, by the ſame meane wynne all Italy, and the Lumbardes the whole countrie, that nowe is called Lumbardie? Longe not you, and ye wyſe be, to proue the inſolent pryde and arrogancie of the foreyne Soldiour, but compare that infinitie Rable of euylles, with mariage, infinitie, and an honourable peace. And herein ſet before your eyes. The maner and example of Nations nere Coūtryes vnited by maryage. vnto vs. The Emperour Charles the fyft, by this meane poſſeſſeth Spayne and Burgundy. The Frenche kynge by the ſame meane hath annexed litle Brytain vnto the crowne of Fraūce. The lyke alſo doe other nations. For there be but two wayes, whereby warres are finiſhed, that is either by force and victory, Two ways, to finiſh war or els by mariage. If you hate force, why doe you not admit the other, whiche is offered you, and whiche once you conuenaunted and graunted to? We are not ignoraunte, who they be, that diſwade you from holſome counſel. Uerely this do certen of the Clergie, and the gouernour of the Realme alſo. But take you hede, leſt they whiche ſo ofte haue broken their fidelitie, do loſe your whole libertie, leſte they beyng corrupte with brybes as with the hyre and rewarde of treaſon, delyuer vp your Caſtelles and Fortes to Straungers.
            Whiche thyng, whan they ſhall doe, they wyl fayne in wordes that they doe it, to the intent that they ſhall defende them from vs, but in very dede, that thei being aſſured through their ayde, may them ſelues brydle you as they lyſte. And than who ſeeth not in what caſe you and your Realme ſhall ſtande in? O miſerable and wretched frowardnes. We are incloſed on euery ſide with the Dccean Sea, as with walles & ditch moſt ſtrong.

If there were only the agrement of mindes amongeſt vs, there wanted nothynge to hyghe felicitie, and we myght than eſtablyſhe a moſte floriſhyng Monarchie. But if thys waye moue you nothynge, at the leſte wyſe let the calamitie lately receyued, and the myſery nowe hanging ouer your headdes perſwade you. Let the feare of Goddes vengeaunce alſo moue you. For God is the reuenger of faith and conuenauntes brokē, and deteſteth al deſire of warre, and plageth the ſame with greuous puniſhementes. We deſire your Quene as is conuenaunted, and the waye of peace, whiche God of his infinitie goodnes hath ſhewed the ſame we followe, and wyſhe that you alſo wold walke in the ſame ſteppes. And if we can obtain nothing we proteſt that of neceſſitie we muſt attempt warre, & through Gods conduite, whoſe worde and voice you contemne, we wyll proſecute our right with ſword & fire. Wherfore if there he any good men amōgſt you, which are ſory for the calamitie of their countrey, whiche thinke that faith and promyſe is to be kepte and obſerued, they may come vnto vs ſafely, whoſoeuer they be we ſhall ſhewe them all loue and fauour? That the trafficke alſo of marchaūdiſe may frely be vſed amongſt vs, the kyng hath lately prouided & ſet forth by proclamation, to the intent there might be a token of his beneuolence towardes you. And if he ſhall perceiue this benefite to be wel imployed, he intendeth to beſtowe vpon you greater, & hath cōmaunded all theſe thinges to be ſignified to you in his name. In ye former boke, I ſhewed you of Sebaſtian Uogelſberg, which brought the French kyng out of Germany ten enſeignes of fotemē: Who in Autumne retourned home, and diſcharged his bandes. For that he ſerued ye Frenche kyng, the Emperour toke it greuouſly & diſpleaſaūtly, and ſeking an occaſion, he commaunded Lazarus Schuendie to ſe if he could apprehende him. Who commyng to Wiſſeburg, where he had a hous, toke him and brought him to Auſburge. Uogelſberg apprehēded. Streight waies was he put vpon the Racke, and examined by torture of diuerſe others that were had in ſuſpicion before, as though they fauoured the Frenche partie. And although that through a valeaunt ſtoutnes both of body and mynde, he vttered nothing for all the tourment, yet, for that he was reported to haue bene in ſocietie with rebelles, to haue broken the Emperours proclamations, and deuiſed crafty counſelles, he was condemned to die, and two other Cēturions with him, Iames Mantel, & Wuolf Thomas. Wherfore ye ſeuēth day of February, he was brought forth into the marketh place, foure days after he came thether. There were certen enſeignes of fotemen in ar

mure, and great reſort of people. Whan he was come into the higher place of executiō, loking about him with a bold & ſtoute His conſtācy at his death. courage, for aſmuch as the noblemen of all degrees loked out of the wyndowes & houſes on euery ſide, he ſaluteth thē with great reuerence, and ſpeaking of the kinde of his life, declareth how he hath heretofore ſerued the Emperour in his warres, & ſayth the only cauſe of his death is, that yt laſt yere, he brought the Frenche king a force of men, what time he was crowned at Rains. Now was this Uogelſberg of a goodly & comely perſonage, and where he ſhewed no toke at al of any terrour or feare of death, he allured all men to beholde him. After him were heheaded the Cēturions before named. Two iudges gaue the ſentence, whiche followe the Emperours court & campe alwayes, the one Biruieſca, a Spaniarde, the other a Germane, Niclas Zinner, both lawyers. He had blamed Schuendie, as though he had bene circumuented by him. But thei ſetforth a wryting and declare wherfore he was executed, excuſe Schuendie, & affirme that he did nothing but the Emperours cōmaundement and proteſte that accuſation to be falſe. At this tyme through out Fraunce, but chiefly at Paris, was burning & perſecution Perſecution in Fraunce. renewed for Lutheraniſme, where contrariwyſe in Englande they conſulted vtterly to aboliſhe the Popiſh maſſe. Themperour as I ſayd before, had geuē to Duke Maurice the dignitie of Electourſhip & the greateſt part of the Duke of Saxons coū
               trie, in the campe before Wittemberge. But in this conuentiō by a publique & ſolemne ceremonie, he putteth him as it were inpoſſeſſion, and receiueth him into the tuition of him & of the Empire, which thing he had promiſed him thā. This was done the xxiiii. day of February, which was Thēperours birth day. And that cerimony was after this ſorte. In the market place was buylded a pauilion of bordes, of a great breadth, wherūto The ceremonie wherby Duke Maurice was created Elect. they went vp by ſteps. Thither came themperour about thre of the clock at after none, accōpanied with ye Princes Electours. After he goeth frō hence into an houſe by, and putteth on his ſolemne Robes, both he, & the Princes Electours. From thence he cometh forth again & ſitteth down vnder his cloth of eſtate. Likewiſe do they, euery man in his place, on the backſide ouer themperour vpon a ſtage were placed the Trompetters. Than cometh forth ye firſt band of Duke Maurice, & runne their horſes to themperours pauilion, as the maner is. In ye meane ſeaſon Duke Maurice wt an other band ſtaieth right ouer againſt them, accompanied with a nōber of Princes, & next before him were .xii. Trompetters. Immediatly iſſued out of y• ſame band,

Hēry ye duke of Brūſwick, Wuolfāge prince of Bipoūt, brother to ye elector of Palatine. And albert ye yōg duke of bauer, & whē thei had courſed their horſes to ye place before ſaid, they alight, & go vp to thē per
                  〈…〉
                hūbly require hi, yt he wold auāce duke moris for ye commō benefit of thempire, to ye digniti of electorſhip. Themperor cōſultīg wt thelectors, maketh anſwer by tharchbiſhop of 
                  〈…〉
               ētz yt he is cōtēt ſo to do, in caſe he wil cōe hī ſelf, & demād ye ſame, whē he had receiued yt anſwer, duke Moris cōmeth riding forth wt the hole troupe: before him wer born .x. enſeignes wt the armes of as many regiōs, wherin he deſired to be inueſted, whā he was come vp before themperor, he kneled down vpō his knees, & deſireth y• ſame, Hoier earl of Māſfeld was ſent of his brother auguſt, to make ye like requeſt. Wherfor themperor anſwereth by tharchbiſhop of mētz, chāceler of thempire. Foraſmuch as they both haue don hī faithful ſeruice, he wil geue vnto duke Moris & his heires males, or if none be, to his brother Auguſtus, & to the heirs of his body, thelectorſhip of ſaxonie, & al ye lāds of Ihō Friderick, ſo much excepted as is alredy grā
               ted to his childrē. Afterward, tharchbiſhop of Mētz readeth ye oth, wherwt thelectors are boūdē, and whā Duke Moris reciting it after him, had ſworn, themperor deliuereth vnto him the ſworde, & wt this ceremony putteth him as it wer into full poſſeſſion. He geueth thākes, & promiſeth al fidelity & obeiſāce. After, thoſe bāuērs of armes before mētioned, whē duke Moris had receiued thē of themperor, wer thrown down amōgs the people, as is accuſtomed, al theſe things might Duke Ihō Friderick, behold out of the houſe, where he lodged: & did ſo wtout fail: for it was in the ſame market place. Bucer, who was ſēt for to Auſpurge, came at the laſt to thelector of Brādēburge. And now was the boke finiſhed, which I ſhewed you before was cōpiled of religiō: which the marques deliuereth to Bucer, The Marques of Brā
                  denburge of fended wyth Bucer. & deſireth him to ſubſcribe. Whē he had red it ouer, for yt he ſaw the biſhop of Romes doctrine therein eſtabliſhed, he ſaid, he could not allow the ſame: Thelector toke this diſpleſātly, & was much of fēded wt him, & iudged the wryting moderat, for ſo had Iſlebie perſwaded hī. Granuellā alſo vrged Bucer by meſſēgers, & if he wold ſubſcribe, promiſed hī ample rewards: & whē he might not preuail Bucer is in daunger. by large promiſes, he begā to threatē him, ſo he returned home, not wtout dāger, ſor throughout al the lād of Wirtemberge were bāds of Spaniardes, as before is ſaid. In the month of Aprill tharchbiſhop of Collō, lately made prieſt, ſāg his firſt maſſe, as they term it. Wherat were themperor, king Ferdinādo, and of other Princes a great nōbre. After, he maketh them a moſte ſumpteous dinner. About this time alſo came to Auſpurge Muleaſſes, king of Tūnes, Muleaſſes Kinge of Tunnes. whome the Emperour .xiii. yeres paſte had reſtored to his kingedome, and expulſed barbarous, as I ſhewed you in the ninth boke.

Now had his eldeſt ſon put out both his eies, & vſurped the crown: wherfore like a miſerable exile he came hither to themperor out of Barbarie. And not lōg after came thither alſo his ſecōd ſōne. The boke cōpiled of religiō treateth firſt of ye ſtate of mā, before & after The cōtents of the Interim. his fal of our redēptiō by Chriſt, of charity & good works, of ye cōfidēce in ye remiſſi
                  •
                of ſinnes, of the church, of vowes, of authoriti, of ye miniſters of ye church, of ye high biſhop, of the ſacramēts, of the ſacrifice of the maſſe, of the memorial, inuocatiō & interceſſiō of ſaintes, of the memorial of ſuch as haue died godly, of the cōmunion to be annexed to the ſacrifice of ceremonies, & vſe of ſacraments. And theſe things amongs others are taught, yt thoſe workes, which beſides the cōmaūdemēt of god, are godly & honeſtly wrought, which are cōmōly called ye works of ſuperogatiō, are to be cōmēded: y• mā 
               Worckes of ſuperogatiō, cānot wtout diſtruſt of his imbecillity, beleue yt his ſins be forgeuē: how ye church hath autority to interprete ye ſcriptures, & oute of the ſame together & ſetforth doctrins, power to miniſter ye law, & to iudge of doutful matters by a general coūſel, & to make lawes: and yt ther is one high biſhop, which is aboue al y• reſidue, for the prerogatiue graūted to Peter: vnto whō the gouernment of the vniuerſall church was committed of Chriſt, yet ſo, as other biſhops alſo haue part of the cure euery mā in his own church, yt by cōfirmatiō & chriſme is receiued y• holy goſt, ſo yt they may reſiſt the deceits of ye deuil the fleſh & the world, & that the biſhop only is miniſter of this ſacramēt: how the ſins muſt be reherſed to the prieſt, ſuch as come to memory. That by ſatiſfactiō, which cōſiſteth in the frutes of repētāce, eſpecially through faſting, praying & almoſgeuing, are cut of ye cauſes of ſinnes, & temporal puniſhment, ether taken away, or mitigated: that holy vnctiō hath bene in the church ſince the time of the Apoſtles, yt ether it might help the body, or the mind it ſelf againſt the firy darts of the deuil: wherfor it muſt be vſed, what time the hour of death apeareth to draw nere: how mariage contracted wtout the cōſēt of the parēts ought to be ratified, but yet are the childrē to be admoniſhed in ſermons, yt they folow thaduiſe of their parēts: how chriſt at his laſt ſupper did inſtitute ye ſacramēt of his body & blud: firſt, that the ſame might be receiued of the faithful, as the holſom meat of the ſoul, ſecondli, yt it might be offred vp in memorial of his death: For ther be in al .ii. ſacrifices of chriſt, the one, blody vpō the croſſe, thother, wherin, vnder ye form of bread and wine, he him ſelf Two ſacrifices of Chriſt after theſe in terimiſtes. offred vp vnto his father, his body & blud, & after, deliuered y• ſame to his apoſtles & ſucceſſers to be don in ye memorial of him vnto the worlds end: by ye firſt was mākind reconciled to god the father, but through this ſame yt is not blody, Chriſt is repreſēted to his father not yt we ſhuld agaī deſerue yt remiſſiō of ſins. but yt we might apply vnto our ſelues y• recōcilemēt prepared by ye death of Chriſt, and yt
               
in this ſacrifice, wherin we celebrate ye death of Chriſt: ye morial of ſaints muſt be renued, yt they may make interceſſiō for vs to god the father, & help vs by their merits: we muſt alſo remēber the dead, & cōmend thē to almightye God. After this is preſcribed yt the old ceremonies accuſtomably vſed in baptiſme, be ſtil obſerued, the xorſiſme, renouncing, cōfeſſion of the faith & Chriſme. Moreouer, yt in the ceremonies of the maſſe, ther be nothing chaūged: that in al towns & great churches ther be ſaide daily .ii. Maſſes at the leaſt, & in the country & villages one, eſpecially on holy daies: and yt in the canō of the inaſſe, nothing at all be altered, and that al the reſt be obſerued, after thold vſage: yet if any thing be crept in, yt may geue occaſiō to ſuperſtitiō, let it be takē away: Let veſtments, ornaments, veſſels, croſſes, altars, cādels, & images be kept ſtil, as certein monumēts: let not thoſe ordinari praiers, & godly ſinging of Pſalmes be abrogated, & wher they be takē away, let thē be reſtored: let the obits for the dead be kept after the maner of thold church, & alſo ſainctes holy daies, yea, let thē be worſhipped alſo, vnto whō it is decreed yt ſupplicatiō ſhuld be made: The day before Eaſter & Witſontide, let the water in the fōtſtone be hallowed after a ſolēne maner: let riot be refrained, & to thintent to ſtir vp the mind to godly exerciſes, certen daie
                  •
                let mē faſt & abſtain frō fleſh: finally, though it wer to be wiſhed, yt ther be diuers & many miniſters of the church foūd, yt would liue chaſt, yet, for yt many haue wiues euery wher, whiche they will not forſake, nether can this now be altred without a great tumult, therfore muſt we tary herein for a decre of a generall counſel: likewiſe The Interi permitteth Prieſtes to kepe their wiues ſtil. are we cōtēted to bear with thē yt receiue the Lords ſupper vnder both kindes, yet ſo, as they ſhal not reproue others yt do the contrary. For vnder ether kind the body & bloud of Chriſt is conteined wholy. After this ſort was the boke ſetforth at the laſt, as after you ſhal heare, but not ſo pēned at the beginninge. For it was oft corrected, An euil cōpiled boke ofte corrected. & the copy yt Bucer ſaw was ſomwhat purer. Wherfore, after it had ben toſt lōg, & much among the ſtates of thempire, it was ſēt alſo to Rome. For albeit yt al papiſtry in a maner was therin eſtabliſhed, yet for aſmuch as certē things wer permitted to the contrary part, they thought it firſt expediēt to make the biſhop priuy. Who after openet
                  〈…〉
                themperor by cardinal Stoudrate theſe notes or any inaduerſiōs. That a prieſt which hath takē ordres ſhuld mary & execute Notes of the Interim bi ye Biſhoppe of Rome. ſtil y• holy miniſtry, was neuer hard of: yt the vſe of receiuing ye Lords ſupper vnder both kinds, is abrogated, nether hath any mā
               autority to permit yt liberty, ſauing ye biſhop of Rome, & the ſinode: yt the folowers of ye old religiō are not to be boūdē vnto theſe doctrins but if any Lutheranes wil forſake their opinions, thei are not to be refuſed: That of the .ii. maſſes ought only to be vnderſtād of ye Lutheranes: yt the ſinging of Pſalmes ought to be reſtored in al places:

yt on holy daies they muſt celebrate ye memoriall of the patrone of the church: that ſuche as are prieſtes already, or hereafter ſhalbe, muſte abſtayne frō Mariage: that a ſpedy reſtitution of the church goodes and iuriſdictiō muſt be made: For the Robbery is manifeſt, nether muſt they folow herein thordinary proces of the law, but determin of y• thing that is euidēt, & execute the matter by regal power. Whē this cēſure was inferred, tharchbiſhops of Mētz, Treuers & Collen, vnto whō it was deliuered, anſwer thēperor directly after the ſame ſort, & eſpecially vrge reſtitutiō, declaring the ſame to be right neceſſary, if chriſtē religiō ſhuld be maintained, & in places wher it is aboliſhed, ſhuld again be reſtored: Moreouer the cōmon peace cā not otherwiſe be eſtabliſhed: wherfore it is chiefli to be prouided yt religious houſes be wholy reſtored. And in as much as the ſpoil & extortiō is manifeſt, they muſt go ſpedeli to work, yt gods ſeruice may withal ſpede be recouered: Finally they deſire him to take theſe things in good part, & with his protectiō to defēd the mēbers of the church. The .iii. other electors, wer not of the ſame opiniō, eſpecially Thelectors dary opiniō. ye Paulſgraue & Duke Moris, yet ether of thē had cauſes, why they ſhuld not gainſai themperor. The reſt of the princes, whiche wer for the moſt part biſhops, anſwer in like maner as did the iii. Archbiſhops. As for the cities ther was no great accompt made of thē. Themperour therfore at the Ides of Maye, calleth all the States before him. And in the preface ſpeaking of his zeale towardes Germany ſaieth, we perceiue by manifeſt arguments, & by the thing it ſelf, ye neither the peace can be eſtabliſhed, nor law & iuſtice miniſtred, vnleſſe the cōtrouerſie of religiō the firſt appeaſed, which hath now many peares ſturred vp thempire muche grudge & dyſſention, hatred, diſcorde & ciuile warres. This hath bene verely the cauſe, why by many cōuētions & cōferēces we haue often ſought a remedy: But in the meane time not only in Germany, but alſo into other natiōs and people of Chriſtēdome hath this ſame cōtageous infection pearſed, in ſo much that ther appereth no more preſent remedy, than a general coūſel: which at the lēgth at your requeſt, we procured to be holdē at Trēt, and moued you alſo at ye beginning of this conuentiō, to ſubmit your ſelues to thauthoritie of y• ſame. And that y• charge might be cōmitted vnto vs in ye meane ſeaſō, to deuiſe ſome godly meanes, wherby they might liue quietly ye meane while in Germany, which cōtētatiō and cōfydēce of youres, was vnto vs both thā & now alſo right acceptable. What time therfore we gaue our ſelues wholy vnto this carefulnes, & demaūded your opinions, we than perceiued not without the great grief of our mynde, that the diſagrement in religion was thoccaſion of all the former euils. And vnleſſe it be foreſene, hereafter wylbe. Wherefore we thought it not good, to leaue the matter in that troubleſome ſtate, vntyll the decree of the counſell, but that it oughte to be broughte to

ſome moderation, eſpecially, ſith yt oftentimes new ſectes did ariſe. Whileſt we were pōdering theſe things, certain of high degre & nobility deſirous of peace, & louers of the cōmon weale, exhibite to vs in wryting theyr opiniō cōcerning religiō, & promiſe due obeiſāce. We than receiuing y• wryting, deliuered the ſame to certaine good & learned deuines, yt they ſhuld among thē ſelues conſider al things diligētly, which after they had peruſed it, made report, that y• ſame being wel vnderſtand, did not impugne the catholike religion and doctrine, nor ye lawes and cōſtitutions of the church, two opinions only excepted, wherof thone is of the mariage of prieſtes, thother of the Lordes ſupper: but ſaid it was wel deuiſed, to eſtabliſh the concord of Germany: which thing douſles vnto vs ſhuld be moſt of all acceptable: for what more ioyful thing could happē, thē to ſe al ſtates in mindes agreable, follow one & the ſame forme of Religion? And ſeing it is euē ſo, we require ſuch as haue obſerued hitherto ye lawes & cuſtome of ye catholike church to their great cōmendation, that they perſeuer in ye ſame, & alter nothing, as they haue promiſed vs heretofore: And thoſe alſo which haue chaūged their religiō, we deſire moſt earneſtly to paſſe wt thother ſtates, & profeſſe the ſame religion yt they do, or els to cōfyrme their doctrine after the order of this boke, & in euery poynt to follow the ſteps hereof, & beſides that to ordaine nothing: but to ſtay within theſe boundes & limites, and neither by wryting nor preaching to attempt any thing to the contrary, but obediētly to attēd the decre of a general coūcel: & that the ſame may be had as ſhortly as is poſſible, we wil indeuor wt al diligēce: & now ar occupied in this thing wholy, how to cōceaue a forme for the reformatiō of the clergie. Whā he had ſpokē thus by his ſecretary, as is accuſtomed, he cōmaūded the boke to be red. Ther tharch The craft of tharchbiſhop of Mentz in a prouing of y• Interim. biſhop of mētz, which occupieth ye chiefeſt place amōg thelectors, not ſeking what thopiniō of ſtats ſhold be, ariſeth vp, & as it wer in the name of al ye reſt geueth vnto thēperor for ſo much trauel, pain, care diligēce, & loue of y• coūtrey, imortal thāks: & in aſmuch as thei haue already cōmitted the thing to his fidelitie, & now paines hath bē takē therin, he ſaith it is reaſon, yt they ſhould wt moſt willing minds, acknowledg theſame, & obey the decre. This thāks geuing did thē
               peror take for a cōmon aſſent & cōfirmatiō, & after wold admit none excuſe, as I ſhall herafter declare, & cōmaundeth the boke to be ſet forth in print both in latin & duch alſo. The iiii. day after, he declareth to the ſtats wt how much labor & coſt he hath reſtored peace vn to Germany, & becauſe the thing it ſelf requireth yt it be alſo prouided for in time to come, he ſuppoſeth it veri mete & neceſſari, & ſome great treaſure of money beleuied, and in certeine places be kept the common treaſurie, that if it fortune at any time, anye commotion

to arriſe within the Empire, or without the ſame may be alwaies in a readineſſe. And when a fewe daies had paſſed betwene, kynge Ferdinando raccompteth, how he for waightie cauſes, whiche they King Fernā
                  do requireth monet of the ſtates. them ſelues vnderſtand wel inough, and nede not to be recited, ſendinge an Ambaſſade, made truſe with the Turke for fiue yeares, wherof one is paſt: And albeit he hath commaunded his men, to do nothing to the contrary, yet he requireth them neuertheleſſe to geue him that aid which they haue already promiſed, to the intent that if he breake couenauntes, he may be eaſely reſiſted: Again, inaſmuch as he doth fortifye his frontier Townes, with ſtronge garriſons, that he alſo be negligent in this behalf: Therfore is he purpoſed to fortifye in all places, and to kepe garriſons: but for the intollerable charges of the warres in theſe former yeares, he is not hable to ſuſtaine ſo greate a burthen: Wherfore he requireth them, that whileſt this truſe ſhal indure, they would pay the mony yerely to be imploid vnto theſe vſes: For this concerneth the quiet and preſeruation of them all. In the meane time Maximilian, the eldeſt ſonne of king Ferdinando, departinge from Auſpurge, goeth into Spaine, Maximilian marieth hys coſen. to take in Mariage, the Lady Mary, the Emperours eldeſt daughter, his coſin Germane. The Cardinall of Trent was ſente wyth him, and a fewe monethes before, the Duke of Alba. At the ende of Maye the horſmen of Nalpes, that before were in Norgouia, come into the contrie neare vnto Strauſburge, and there remaine by the ſpace of three Monethes, and hardly can it be expreſſed, how arrogantly they vſed them ſelues. Many times woulde they come into the Citie, neither wanted that thinge great ſuſpicion. Duke Moris not long after the Emperours decree was ſetforth, departeth thēce: But Marques Ihon of Brandenburge, the brother of Ioachim the electoure, goeth to the Emperour, and kinge Ferdinando ſtandinge Iohn Mark. of Brand. refuſeth the Interim. by, beſecheth him to fauor him in this matter, and ſpeakinge ſomewhat of his ſeruice towardes him, ſaieth, that he vppon this affiaunce chiefly ſerued him in this laſt warre, for that he had aſſured him touchinge Religion. The Emperoure ſheweth him howe this is the conſente of the ſtates imperiall, and ſaieth that no man oughte to ſwarue from the ſame: he replied againe, that all had not aſſented, and aunſwered him plainly that he could not with a good conſcience praiſe the ſame decree, and ſtill vrged his promeſſe and couenaunt. Whan the Emperour might not preuaile, he commaundeth him to departe, whiche men ſuppoſe to be done for this cauſe, leaſt he ſhould through his example and talke cōfirme the mindes of others. Wherfore the ſame day towardes euening, he taketh his iourney homewardes, and in all his dominion altered nothing. The Prince Electoure his brother, who indeuoured alwaies to

pleaſe themperoure, made no aſſiſtaunce: Nor yet the Paulſgraue hauing the Emperoure at the ſame time not his very good Lorde. The Ambaſſadoures of the Cities, ſuche as were of the confeſſion of Auſpurge, when they were vrged, did intreate, that they mighte firſte aduertiſe their Senates, to the intent they might anſwer according vnto their mindes: which thing was permitted them to do. The Emperoure commaunded Wuolfgange Prince of Bipount, of The cōſtāce of the Duke of Swebrig the houſe of Palatine, which had his Ambaſſadours there, to come him ſelfe: And whan he came, he doth inſtaunt him to confirme the decre. He ſaieth, he knoweth none other Religion ſaue that, in the which he was borne and brought vp in vnto this day: Wherfore, he requireth him, to haue ſome conſideration of him, and ſaieth he wil do herein whatſoeuer he maye with a ſafe conſcience. The Emperoure for that time letteth him ſo departe, but afterwarde he vrged him ſharply by letters and by meſſagers, as ſhall be rerited in his place. Whileſt the Senate of Auſpurge conſulted, the Emperoure placeth ſouldiours throughe out the Citie. There was a righte famous Miniſter of the Church Wuolfgange Muſculus: he, ſeinge Muſculus departeth to Bernes. Godlineſſe go to wracke, and the Senate tunorouſe, and could not approue the booke, departeth from thence, to Bernes in Swiſſerland. At Hale in Sweuia was Ihon Brentius. He was in greate daunger two yeres paſt, what time, as the proteſtantes retourned The labor & perill of Brē
                  tius. home, the Emperour came vnto Hale, and now was in much more daunger. For then a little before the Emperour came thither which was in the beginning of Decembre certain Spaniſh ſouldioures, comming into the Towne, went ſtraightwaies vnto his houſe, and require to be let in, or els threaten much cruelty. Which beinge receiued, did many thinges fierſelye and arrogantlye. Wherefore he biddeth his wife and his family, hauing none other place to repare to, to get them into the hoſpitall houſe of the City, and a little after followeth he him ſelfe, leauinge one at home to geue them vitailes and thinges neceſſary. But the next daye commeth a noble man of Spaine, which was of the Cleargy, and thruſting them oute at the dores, kepeth the whole houſe to him ſelf, and going into his ſtudie, ſearcheth all thinges. There, whan he had founde certaine letters wrytten to Brentius from his frendes concerninge the trouble of this time, he ſeketh to procure him much diſpleaſure, whan he had vttred the ſame to his Countrye men. Wherefore, he followinge the aduiſe of his frendes, in a cold and ſharpe winter nighte, conueieth him ſelf into the country, leaſt by his preſence he ſhould hinder his Citezens. But when the Emperoure was come thither, and ſhewed clemency, and ſemed to be nothing offended for anye kinde of Doctrine taught there, Brentius at the laſt retourned thither, and executed

his ſrunction vnto this time, that the Emperoure woulde haue all men to receiue the decree made concerning Religion. For beyng commaunded as many other learned men were thorowout Germany, to declare what he thought of that boke: Albeit he vnderſtode The pleannes and god lines of Brē
                  tius. his owne daunger, yet, to thintent he might perfourme hys duetie to the cōgregation, he pronoūceth the ſame to be contrary to the Scriptures, and ſo declareth it by writing. Which after yt it came into the Biſhops handes, Granuellan in themperours name, cōmā
               ded thambaſſadours of Hale, that they ſhould finde the meanes, that he might be brought bounden to Auſpurge. But beinge admoniſhed by his freindes, he ſteppeth a ſide into the countrey by: And not longe after commeth to Hale a bande of Spanierdes: the Captaine wherof goeth immediatly to the houſe of Brentius, and ſeketh euery where diligently, if he might find any pray to cary away: but the moſt part of his ſtuffe was conueied by his frendes & alies, vnto another place. Thus therfore he, whiche had taught there xxvi. yeares, was exiled: And his wife alſo, thoughe ſhe had a greuous ſicknes (whereof ſhe died ſhortly after) was baniſhed withall his family. Wherefore ſhe His wife and his childrē baniſhed. pore wretch wandred vp and downe with .vi. children, and knewe not where to become, or to haue any refuge, all men were ſo ſore afraid of the Spaniardes: And this thing augmented her diſeaſe & ſorow, that ſhe knewe not in the meane while, what was become of her huſband. But whan Ulrich, Duke of Wirtemberge hard of the miſery of Brentius, all be it he him ſelfe was in great daunger, yet gaue he relief ſecreatly to him and his family. Furthermore the Cities of Sweuia following all for the moſte parte the Emperoures authority, promiſed to accompliſh his commaundement. Wherfore the preachers euery where remoued out of diuers places, leaſt they ſhould commit any thing vnworthy their profeſſion. Andreas Oſiander Godlie preachers flee. for this cauſe leauinge Norinberge, wente into the lande of Pruſſe: Spire and Woormez had but ether of them one, which fled alſo to ſaue them ſelues. William the Earle of Naſſowe, ſuffred Eraſmus Sarcerius to depart for ye ſame cauſe: Moreouer the Duke The fearfulnes of yt duke of Wyrtemberge. of Wirtemberge, in whoſe country were garriſons of Spaniardes, euery where, as hath bene ſaied, whan the commaundement came from the Emperour, cauſed the Boke ſetforthe to be recited in the Pulpit, and commaundeth that no man do any thing to the contrary, and if any man wil ſay Maſſe, he geueth them liberty, and chargeth his ſubiectes, that they diſturbe no Prieſt, and putteth awaye thoſe Miniſters of the Church, which would not allow the boke. Amonges whome was Erardus Schueffius. The Emperoure by The conſtancy of the duke of Saxonie. Granuellane and the biſhop of Arras moued the Duke of Saxon captiue to obey the decree, and followe the doctrine of the Boke ſetforth.

And albeit they aſſaid him with fair promiſes, and ſhewed him ſome hope of deliueraunce, yet he perſeuered conſtante in his opinion. And the laſte yere, ſaithe he, amōges the condicions whiche the Emperoure propounded, this was wrytten alſo, that I ſhoulde approue the decrees that ſhoulde be made by him, and by the Counſell concerning Religion: but whan he perceiued that I coulde not be induced through the terroure or feare of any pearill, to aſſent, he releaſed the ſame condicion, and after that neuer moued any thing to me concerning religion. Whiche certenlye I toke than in ſteade of a great benefite, and being caſed hereof as of a moſt waighty burthē, al the other conditions, which the Emperoure at his pleaſure determined on my parſon and all my goodes. I ſuffered the more eaſelye, and with the better wil, truſting that from henceforth I ſhoulde be permitted to kepe my Religion free: but now, for ſo muche as he vrgeth me againe, and commaundeth me to ſubſcribe, I do heare proteſt yt I was ſo brought vp in my youth, and after by the reading of holye ſcripture ſo confyrmed, that I do beleue this doctrine to agree throughly with the wrytinges of the Prophetes and Apoſtles, neyther can it be conuicted of any erroure. For the whiche cauſe verelye bothe my father & I, and certaine other Princes, exhibited in times paſt a confeſſion of the ſame doctrine compriſed in wrytinge, and referred it to a lawful counſel, conſidering therfore that God hathe illuminated me with the knowledge of his word, it is not lawfull for me to forſake the truthe knowne, vnleſſe I woulde purchaſe to my ſelf euerlaſting dampnation. Wherfore if I ſhould nowe admit thys decree, foraſmuch as the ſame dothe in manye and moſte waightye He that doth agaiſt his coſcience, procureth to himſelf hell fyre. places diſſent from the holy ſcripture, I ſhould condempne the doctrine of Ieſu Chriſt, which I haue profeſſed hitherto. And in word and ſpeach ſhould allowe, that I know to be naughte and wicked. But what thinge els were this, than with painted and gloſynge wordes to delude the deuine Maieſty, and the Emperoure alſo? Than the which thing, what more wickednes can be committed? For this is that ſame ſinne againſt the holy ghoſt, wherof Chriſte Sinne agaiſt the holy goſt hath ſo diligently warned vs, which ſhall neuer at any time be forgeuen. And ſeinge it is ſo, and that my conſcience is tied with theſe bondes, I moſt earneſtly and for the mercy of God, which he gaue vnto mankinde through the oblation of his ſōne, pray and beſeche, that the Emperoure would not take in diſpleaſure this my refuſal. For where as I do reteine the doctrine profeſſed at Auſpurge, I do it for my ſoules health, and ſetting all other thinges a parte, do imagine howe after this miſerable life, I may be made partaker of the life and ioy euerlaſting. I heare ſay moreouer howe it is reported to the Emperour by diuers, as though I nothing regarded

religion, but ſought for a vaine glory, and what thing els I know not: I beſeche you what thing coulde happen to me in this worlde, more to be wiſhed for, eſpecially being thus groſe of bodye, then liberty, then to retourne to my wife and children, than quiet and reſt at home? And I take God to witnes, and than will alſo, what time he ſhall take an accompt of vs all for our doinges, that I reſpected The Dukes godly mind. nothinge els, than that, throughe the true worſhippinge of God I might enioy the inheritance of the heauenly kingdōe. Which thing I hartely deſire that the Emperour would certainly beleue and be fully perſwaded of me. In all other thinges my will hath bene alwaies ready to gratify him, and euer ſhalbe, and the infidelity and promeſſe which I haue made him, that will I kepe as becommeth a iuſte man, and borne of noble parentage. Furthermore I beſeche him to remit all diſpleaſure, and at the lengthe to deliuer me from this continuall captiuity. That I be not reported the firſt of all other Princes that ſhould lead his life with him priſoner. Where he perſeuered thus conſtant and immouable, they began to hādle him ſomwhat more hardly, and toke from him his bokes of Scripture Cruelty ſhewed to D. of Sax. Priſoner. and was commaunded on daies forbidden to abſtaine from fleſhe: The ſame preacher alſo, whome by the Emperours licence he kept vntil this time, whan he ſawe preſent daunger hanginge ouer his head, he chaunged his apparel, and conueied him ſelf awaye priuely. At the ſame time came abrode out of the Emperoures court letters which the Lantzgraue was ſaide to haue wrytten to the Emperoure. In thoſe he ſaieth, he hath commaunded his wife and coū
               ſelloures, that they ſhould fulfil all the reaſt of the conditions, and ſatiſfy ſuch as complaine for the warre paſt: Againe he ſaieth, how he hathe the boke wrytten of Religion: And albeit there be manye thinges which he doth not wel vnderſtand, and the which he cānot affirme by the ſcriptures, yet, for ſomuch as they ground their thinges of antiquitie, and authoritye of holy fathers, he will not make him ſelf wiſer then they, and doth both allow that wryting, and wil deuiſe alſo, that his ſubiectes ſhall obſerue the ſame. After this he offereth him his faith and ſeruice, whether he ſhall warre with the Turke, or with the Biſhop of Rome, or any forain kinges, or with the Swiſhes, or els wil vſe him in Germany: but he beſecheth him for the loue of Chriſt and all ſaintes, that he would lay awaye all diſpleafure, and ſet him at liberty: For now hath he bene deteyned priſoner a whole yeare, and ſuffred puniſhmente inoughe, and is brought to extreme miſery. Moreouer, for a further aſſuraunce he will geue his two ſonnes pledges, vntill he be fullye ſatiſfied. And whatſoeuer way he ſhall preſcribe, that will he be ready to accompliſhe. But he preuailed nothing for all theſe praiers, & was oftē
               times

by his kepers, which were Spaniardes, remoued frō place to place, firſt from Donauerde to Norling. Than to Hailbrune, after Whileſt the Maſſe is ſet vp in germanye, it is put down in englande. Thobſtinat mind of wincheſter. to Hale in Sweuia. Whileſt the Emperoure attempteth theſe thinges in Germany, the Maſſe is abrogated in Englande by acte of Parlaiment. And not longe after was apprehended Stephen, Biſhop of Wincheſter, who contended that the lawes whiche were made in the kinges noonage, were of none effect. He was commaū
               ded the yere before to kepe his own houſe, and not to come abrode: but being newlye enlarged, whan he was thoughte to haue thaimged his opinion, he made a Sermon before the king and his counſell, in the which whan he had declared his minde, he was committed to warde.
            The Emperoure the. xiiii day of Iune commaundeth to be red vnto the Cleargy the fourme of reformation, as they call it. In the The Eccleſiaſtical reformatiō of the Emperour. which were contained theſe Chapiters following, of ordeininge of the offices of the eccleſiaſticall ſtate, of Monaſteries, of ſcholes, of hoſpital houſes, of the miniſtration of Gods word, of the miniſtration of the Sacramentes, of the Ceremonies of the Maſſe, of the Ceremonies of the Churche, of the diſcipline of the Cleargye and laietie, of the Pluralitie of benefices, of viſitations, of Saintes, of excommunication. And amonges other thinges are theſe ſetfor the chiefly, that ſuch as come to take holy orders be diligentlye examined of their belief, of maners, and learning, but eſpeciallye of hereſies ſpread abrode chiefly in this time, and whether they beleue the ſame that the catholicke, apoſtolicke, and Church of Rome doth beleue: The inquiſition of manners is commaunded to be made, as ſ. Paule preſcribeth in the thirde chapter of the firſte Epiſtle to Timothe but that ſame, which Paule amonges other thinges admoniſheth, that the miniſter of the Church ſhoulde be the huſbande of one wife, which could well gouerne his houſe, and had obediēt and faithfull children, is cleane omitted: That no man be admitted to the office of a Biſhop, except he be firſt Prieſt, or promiſe to receiue the reaſt of the orders ſo ſhortly as is poſſible: That Biſhops take cure of their ſhepe, and fede them with doctrine and with the ſacramentes: That they alſo viſite ofte their Churches, and ouerſee that other Miniſters do theyr dutye, that the wolues do not wortye the flocke: That the monaſticall life be inſtituted againe, in places where it is left: That in ſcholes be nothing taughte, excepte it be agreable to the Catholike Church: That the Sacramentes and Ceremonies of the Churche be miniſtred in the Latin tounge, leaſt if the people vnderſtand them, they ſhould come in contempte: That the Canon of the Maſſe remaine whole, and be ſpoken ſoftlye, to the intente thoſe tremblable miſteries maye retaine theyr aunciēt

dignitye: That in accuſtomed Ceremonies nothinge be aultered: The trēblable miſteries of ye Maſſe. that Salte, Water, Hearbes, the Paſchall Lambe, newe frutes, alſo Temples, Churches, Chappels, Chalices, Aultares, Coopes, Ueſtmentes and Ueſſels belonginge to the Churche be hallowed throughe Prayer againſte the deceites of the Deuill, and inchantmentes: That Tapers ſhall burne in the Churche, and Incenſe be ſacrificed.
            Moreouer that ſupplications be made at the Churches dedicated to Sainctes: let the Cleargye liue temperatelye and ſobrely, and eſchue whoredome: let them put awaye their Concubines, or els be puniſhed: That the ciuile Magiſtrate ſhall aſſiſte the Byſhoppes, that a reformation be made of manners and Diſcipline. And that the Eccleſiaſticall liberties may be wholye mainteined, let the Saintes in euerye dioceſſe be put in vre againe, and kepte twiſe euerye yeare, wherein ſhall inquiſition be made of euerye mannes manners and vices, ſuche as may not otherwiſe be reformed Excōmunication. ſhall be excommunicated: let al men flee theyr ſpeach and companye, and not to be receiued againe into the Communion, before they humbly deſire forgeueneſſe, and promeſſe amendment. This reformation being red the day before ſaide, the Biſhoppes after a little deliberation, do confirme, and ſaye that ſhortlye after they be come home, they will kepe Saines: howe be it in diuers thinges, they deſire that the Biſhoppe of Rome maye be moued to geue his aſſente. This boke alſo was after put forthe in Printe. I ſhewed you before of the Ambaſſadoures of the Cities, howe they ſignified the matter home: but whereas they of Strauſburge, whiche were the chiefeſt of them, were longe or euer, they aunſwered. The Emperoure calleth vppon them by Granuellan: who the .xxviii. day of Iune ſendeth for the ambaſſadoures, whereof Iames Sturmie Menes made that Strauſburge ſhulde receiue thinterim. was the principall, and there by Henry Haſy, which was interpretoure, ſaieth: howe they knowe in what ſorte the ſtates requeſted the Emperoure, and put him in truſte to deuiſe ſome meane which mighte be obſerued till the Counſell: whiche thinge he hathe done accordinglye, and hathe cauſed learned men to compile a Booke, which al the Princes, a fewe excepted, and the chiefeſt Cities haue approued: And wheras they and certaine others intreated themperoure that they might aduertiſe theyr Senate at home, he graū
               ted them, and hathe loked euer ſence for an aunſwere. And that he hath heard nothinge hitherto, he is ſomewhat offended, and therefore hathe commaunded him to knowe what theyr meaning is. They, whan they had declared the cauſe of their longe ſcilence exhibite Theyr aunſweare. letters addreſſed to the Emperoure from the Senate. Howe they wiſhed for nothing more, than that they might gratify him in

all thinges: but they and theyr Citezens were perſwaded, that in caſe they ſhould throughly admit this decre they ſhuld bothe hurt their owne conſcience, & alſo oſfēd God moſt greuouſly: & ſeing he of his wiſedome can conſider, how terrible a thing that were, they deſire him for Chriſtes ſake, that in ſo waightye a matter, whiche concerneth not landes or goodes, but the ſaluation of their ſoules and life euerlaſting, he would haue ſome conſideration of thē, and as he hathe done to others of the contrary parte, ſo he woulde permit alſo that they mighte vſe the Religion confeſſed at Auſpurge, vntill the decree of the generall counſel as ofte times in aſſembles hathe bene determined, and not compell them to profeſſe otherwiſe with their mouth, than theyr heart thincketh: and they wil againe foreſee, that in their City be nothing done vnreuerently or againſt Religion, and that euill opinions take no place. And that no cauſe of complaint be geuen to their neighboures, Whan Granuellā had heard theſe letters, he ſaieth, how the Emperour hath had alwais a good opinion of their Citie: and for as muche as all for the moſte parte haue commended and ratified the decree made, let them not thincke to be exempted. For they are commaunded to admitte no ſuche kinde of aunſwer: therefore is this Supplication in vaiue: wherefore let them aunſwere plainely what the minde of the Senate is. Hereunto they ſaye: where the matter was committed to the Emperoure, that did they and the other ambaſſadours vnderſtand euermore of Politike matters, and not of Religion, for that they ſuppoſed, it to be alwaies referred to the counſell, that there both partes being heard, the determination might be made: but in this boke are determined in a manner all articles of religion: whithe if they ſhould now admit, without any due examination before had, or the learned men of their part heard ſpeake, than ſhould they be no longer in controuerſy, neither neade they the authority of the counſell: and wher diuers Princes and ſtates haue allowed the decree made, it is no maruel: for the ſame is for their commoditye: for thoſe haue al things permitted them ſafe and whole, but they haue Uyolence is not to be vſed in religion, but reaſō and truthe. a fourme of religion preſcribed them, and are commaunded to forſake thoſe opinions, which haue bene euer in controuerſy, the matter neuer heard: where notwithſtanding in all aſſemblies, yt whole cauſe hathe bene referred to a generall counſell: For certainlye to compel any man that he ſhould do any thing againſt his conſcience is a heauy matter, yea though he be in errour, before it be detected: They ſuppoſe that ther be many good men on both parties, which yet notwithſtanding may differ in opinion and iudgement: againſt whom no force is to be vſed, but the matter to be decided by reaſon, truthe, and argumentes: Wherefore conſideringe that in all other

thinges, whiche do not concerne Religion, they commit vnto the Emperoure whatſoeuer they haue, they deſire him: that he woulde preferre vnto him this one ſuite of the Senate: They know, howe greate the Emperoures power is, and what daunger they take vp on them in caſe he will attempt to try the matter by force: wherefore vnleſſe they were parſwaded, that God woulde be greuouſlye offended with the confirmation of this decree, it were ſtarke madnes, if they ſhould not obey him herein. There Granuellan, whan he had repeted their former ſayinges, affirmeth, how they, at what time they were reconciled to the Emperoure, promiſed to obſerue ſuch thinges as he ſhould enacte for the wealth of the Empire: of the which ſort is this decre made by the aduiſe of learned men, and by the moſte parte approued, therefore maye it not be refuſed, forſo muche as it agreeth and conſenteth with the Churche: and wyll they take ſo much vppon them, that they ſhould thincke to ſe more than the whole Church doeth? And ſhoulde make a departure from the reaſt? They ought not to haue altered Religion, but by the common conſent of the whole world: wherefore if they haue none other commiſſion, let them know of their Senate, whether they wil obey or no? Where they ſay, how they vnderſtode it only of Politike gouernement, whan the cauſe was committed to the Emperoure, it ſkilleth not how they vnderſtode it, but howe the moſte part of the ſtates toke the thing. Againe they ſaye, howe they and ſuche other like Ambaſſadours, were eſtranged and excluded in manner from all conſultation, neither were they called to counſell thā, what time this cauſe was referred to the Emperoure: wherefore they did not otherwiſe take it, than before is ſayed: yea and certain Princes alſo toke it after the ſame ſort: what time they made their peace wyth the Emperoure, they toke vpon them no obſeruaunce, for that they feared leaſt the ſame ſhould in fine be applied vnto religion: which thing is not vnknowen to his ſonne, the biſhop of Arras, who then alſo in the Emperoures name promiſed, that the whole cauſe of religion ſhoulde be referred to a lawfull Counſell: but wher he ſaieth how this decree muſt be receiued as a common act of the Empire, they do refuſe no burthen of the common wealth, but this preſente No mā ought to be cōpelled to his faith. cauſe do the concerne theyr ſoules health, and life euerlaſting: and againe, the whole burthen of the decre ſhould reaſt vpon the godly people for the other multitude, whiche contempne religion, careth nothing, what be ordeined: but no man oughte to be conſtrained to imbrace his faithe: they put no doubte in the Emperoure, but he loueth peace and concorde: yet neuertheleſſe, if this waye be taken, that men ſhall be compelled againſte their conſcience to ſpeake and do, it is muche to be feared, leaſte ſo ſodaine an aulteration do raiſe

vp greate commotions. That boke was in dede compiled of certen learned men, of whome ſome had the knowledge of the truthe: for the ſame dothe well appeare: but certaine others haue intermixed many thinges, which are not conſonante to the ſcriptures and doctrine of the fathers, as it is to be proued, if place were permitted to ſpeake it: They haue made no ſeparation from others, but in the chiefeſt articles do agree with the true Churche: wherfore they deſire him againe, that the letters mighte be deliuered to the Emperoure, to the intent they might ſo aduertiſe the Senate: For other thing haue not they in commiſſion to ſay. Than began he to ſpeake more angerly and vrged them with the decree, and made a digreſſion to other thinges, and ſaide howe the nobles in Fraunce made theyr boaſte, that they of Strauſburge would not admit the decre: which thinge was reported to the Emperoure, and raiſed ſome ſuſpicion the concluſion was, that he ſaid how the Emperoure required a plaine and direct aunſwere: and that no man is in dede to be inforced vnto any faith: but that is to be vnderſtand of ſuch as are no Chriſtians: for thoſe that do denye the faithe, whiche they once profeſſed, may be compelled to it by the fire. Wherevnto the ambaſſadoures aunſwere, what brute the Frenchmen haue raiſed they know not, but certaine they are, that the Senate hath as yet made no decree, nor anye thing els done, than this ſame which they now do ſollicite: ſeing therefore they refuſe to deliuer their letters to the Emperoure, they will no further intreat them, but make reporte to the Senate: by fire may a man be taken out of this life, but can not be compelled thereby to beleue otherwiſe: and thus ended theyr talke. They had treated with the Ambaſſadours of other cities ſeuerallye in ſort much like, and menaced them with threatninges, and aſſigned a day, by the which they ſhoulde make anſwere, and commaunded to tarye till they had aunſwere, broughte them from home, but no ſuch thinge was preſcribed to the Ambaſſadoures of Strauſburge. Touching the monye which the Emperoure required to be leuied for chaunces to come, the ſtates, thoughe muche againſte their willes, approued and promiſed alſo kinge Fernando euery yeare duringe the truſe, an hondreth thouſand crownes: but they deſire the Emperoure againe, that he woulde take awaye hys Garriſons, and diſcharge his Souldiours, which were placed ouer all Germanye, and did much hurt both in towne and country, and releue the pore that complained much thereof, eſpecially ſince all thing is now quiet and peaceable.
            The Emperoure ſaieth there be vrgent cauſes wherfore he can not at this time diſcharge his forces: and concerning the hurt done The Emperour wil not diſcharg hy
                     •
                   ſouldioures. there is none to his knowledge: for ſeing he doth paye them, it is aagainſte

reaſon, and his will alſo, that they ſhoulde do anye man wronge: ſuche lyke thinge hathe bene reported to him heretofore, but whan inquiſition was made, there coulde nothinge in a manner be founde: Neuertheleſſe he will do what he can to knowe the certaintye: For no man ſhall eſcape vnpuniſhed, that hathe oughte offended. At this time alſo the ſtates do graunte that the Emperor maye at his pleaſure conſtitute the iudgemente of the Chamber, and ioyne vnto them other iudges for aſſiſtaunce. And they them ſelues promiſe to beare the charges of the ſame. Of the treatye begonne concerninge a league before ſaide, the winedinge vp was this, that the Emperoures prouinces, whiche he hathe in Germanye and lowe Dutchlande, and all that belonge to the houſe of Burgundy, ſhould be vnder the tuition and defence of the Empire, and be contributaries vnto publicke affaires, yet ſo, as they maye vſe their owne lawes and iuriſdiction: And that Germanye ſhall againe looke for the like aide and defence of the Emperoures Prouinces.
         
         
            
            
               ✚ The .xxi. Booke of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the ſtate of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne of the Empyre of Charles the ſyfte.
            
               
                  ❧ The Argument of the .xxi. Booke.
               THe authoures of the Interim are rewarded, which neuertheleſſe many impugned, whereof the Duke of Saxon is accuſed. They of Conſtance were ſo vrged to admit the Interim that ambuſhes of fotemen were laied to ſurpriſe the Citie, whiche at the laſte receweth the Interim. They of Strauſboroughe make theyr purgation to the Emperoure. A commotion chaunſeth at Bourdeux. The diſpaire of Spiera is recited, and the conuerſion of Uergerius. The Scottiſhe Quene tranſported into Fraunce. Maydenbourge is ſetforth for a praye. The Admirall of Englande is beheaded, they at Strauſboroughe are at contention with their Byſhop. They of Wittemberge are accuſed to be Adiphoriſtes, to wit, indifferent or newters. A diſputation in Englande touchinge the Lordes Supper. Ueruine is beheaded in Fraunce. Purſute againſt them of Maidenburge, the death of Pope Paule, and the horrible actes of the ſame. The deſcription of the place of election at Rome, and the maner of chuſinge the Pope. Maſſe againe at Strauſborough, a proclamation in in Fraunce againſt Lutheranes. Pope Iulius and his little Cardinall.
            
            
               THe laſt day of Iune the conuention was diſſolued. In the. xix boke I ſhewed you howe the Emperor perſwaded all men, to ſubmit them ſelues to the Counſell, and that on his warrantiſe, who wold ſe that thaction ſhuld be lawfull: Nowe therefore a decre is made, that the counſel ſhuld be continued at Trēt, and the Emperour ſaith, he will deuiſe, that it be there recommēced ſo ſhortly as may be. Which thing whā it ſhalbe brought to paſſe, he requireth that they all, eſpecially of the clergy, & of the religion of Proteſtants, which come thither vnder his ſaufeconduit: for he wil take order, than the 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  promes 
                     〈…〉
                  ſawefull counſel repeted. whole matter ſhalbe godly and chriſtenly decided and determined, according to the holy ſcriptures and doctrine of the fathers, all affections laid apart, and that they thē ſelues alſo ſhalbe hard ſpeak ſo much as ſhalbe thoughte requiſite. After, are other decrees red, as is accuſtomed, eſpecially that of religion, & a ſtrait charge geuē, that al men obey the ſame, as was alſo before declared at the Ides of May, the .iii. authors of the boke are before named: of whō Ihō Iſlebie receiued for his paines taken a liberal reward bothe of the Iſlebi rewarded of themperoure. Emperour, and alſo of king Ferdinando: And Michel Sidonie afterward was made biſhop of Merſeburge in Saxony. Wherof aroſe a ieſt, how they defended the biſhop of Romes oyle & chreſme, as an holy thing, and neceſſary to ſaluation, to the intent they them ſelues might therby be the better greſed & auoynted. Not long after

the Emperour ſent his letters to the princes that were abſent, eſpecially vnto thoſe, where he thought moſt nede was, & commandeth them immediatly to obey this decre. And the tēth day of Iuly he wryteth to Eraſmus, biſhop of Strauſburge to ſee the thinge which he had brought to paſſe through his great trauel put in execution, & if he wanted conueniēt miniſters, to take them els wher. The report of this decree was incontinentlye ſpread abrode farre and wide. And the Uenetians make proclamation the .xix. daye of The decre of the Uenetians. Iuly, that whoſoeuer haue any bokes, wherin is any thing wrytten againſt the catholicke faith, they bringe them vnto certen men within .viii. daies: for after ſhall inquiſition be made, and ſuche as haue deſerued, ſhalbe puniſhed: & to the promotours they promiſe a reward and to kepe their counſel. The Biſhop of Rome hath his ambaſſadours there continually, as in kinges courtes alſo: They with the eies and eares of many do ſe and heare muche, and oftentimes are cauſes that ſuch decrees be made: but yet the Senate of Ueniſe vſeth this prouiſion, that they ſuffer not the Biſhops or inquiſitors The wiſdōe of the Uenetians in matters of religion. of Rome to geue ſentence of iudgemente, but ioyne with them alwaies their officers and lawyers which ſhall heare the examination and ſe that nothing be done malitiouſlye or cruellye againſt any man within their iuriſdiction. This law made they in the yere of our Lord .M.D.xxi. what time thoſe inquiſitours vſed great cruelty againſt pore men in the countrye aboute Brixia, as though they had bene inchauntors, and had medled with the deuil: and now ſence Luthers doctrine was depely roted & ſpred abrode, the ſame law is of force ſtil, though the biſhops gnaſhe their tethe at it, and wold neuer ſo fain haue it aboliſhed. About this time did the French King ſend aid into Scotland againſt the Engliſh men, and amonges others the Ringraue with a force of Germaines. But the Emperoure baniſheth the Earle of Bichlinge, Huberte, and Sebaſtiane Scherteline al in one wryting, and ſhortly after Who were out lawed by the emperor. the Ringraue, counte Hedecke, Recrode, and Riſeberge, and alſo deſireth all foreine Princes, that they would not maintaine them, but gratify him herein, and biddeth them whan occaſion ſhal ſerue, to loke for the like at his hand. The Ladye Iane, daughter to the King of Nauerre, which was affianced and Maried .vii. yeres before Daughter of Nauarre maried to the Duke of Uā
                  dome. to the Duke of Cleaue, as we haue ſpecified, is now ioyned in Mariage with the Duke of Uandome, a Prince of the bloud royal. Elenor the French Quene, ſiſter to the Emperor, leauing Fraūce, goeth into Flaunders. Duke de Ammalle ſonne to the Duke of Guyſe, whan he had bene a longe ſuter to the Emperoures Nece the Ducheſſe of Lorayne, he marieth the Daughter of Hercules, Duke of Farrare.
            
               
About this time, Lewes Auila, a Spaniard, ſetforth in print the hiſtory of the Germane warre, done by the Emperoure, wrytten The ſtory of Lewes Auila, of the germains war. in the vulgare tonge: where he ſpeaketh of the takyng of Marques Alberte at Rochlice, he ſayeth how he was ſo intangled with the wantouneſſe of women, that he coulde not proſper. The ſame booke came forthe afterwardes in Italian, Latin and Frenche. Althoughe the Emperoure had moſte ſtraightlye commaunded, that no man ſhould in any wiſe impugne the boke ſet forth concerning Who impugned the Interim. Religion, yet were diuers wrytinges publiſhed, whiche did condempne the whole Doctrine thereof, and warned meune to beware and eſchewe the ſame as a mooſte preſente Peſtilence. One of theſe was Caſpar Aquila, chiefe miniſter of the Church of Saluelde in Thuringie. Thoccaſion why he wrote, was Iſlebie, who retourning home from Auſpurge, gloried muche in the boke by the way, and ſaid there was now a golden world toward, and that Aquila had alſo aſſented: After he hearde of this, he anſwereth moſte vehementlye, and reproueth him for his liynge, and affirmeth the boke to be ful of erroneous opinions.
            And in Fraunce alſo Robert, biſhop of Abrincen wrote againſt Robert of Abrincē wrote againſt thiuterim. it, how be it after a contrary ſort, and chieflye diſpiſeth the boke, for ſo much as it permitteth Prieſtes to marrye, and the common people to receiue the whole Supper of the Lord, and ſo taketh occaſion to inuey againſt Bucer with moſt opprobrious words, for maryinge his ſeconde wife. Moreouer one Romeus generall of the Auſten Friers at Rome wrote againſte it for the ſame purpoſe. Thus doth the boke incurre reprehenſion on euerye ſide. Themperour ſent an ambaſſadour to them of Norinberge, and to certain others to perſwade them vnto this decre. Whan he came by the way The godly conſtancie of the Duke of Saxons children. to the duke of Saxons ſonnes, he moued them hereunto, but they conſtantly denied it: wherfore at his returne to themperour, he declareth the whole matter: wherupon themperour ſolliciteth againe the Duke theyr father priſoner, and complaineth of his ſōnes how they contemne the decre lately made, & ſuffer men to ſpeake againſt it both in theyr preachings & wrytinges: he requireth therfore that he would treat with them, to content him in ether thing. Wherunto he maketh anſwer, howe he lately declared the cauſe, whye he hym ſelf could not allow the doctrin of the boke ſetforthe to Granuellan and the biſhop of Arras: wherfore he can not perſwade hys ſonnes to do that thyng whych he hym ſelfe can not with a quiet conſcience: he beſecheth him to take it in good part, and defēd both him and his childrē. This cōſtancie of his, & magnanimiti in ſo great aduerſity The duke of Saxon beloloued of almen. got him great loue euery wher amōgs al men. Like as in Saxony

they of Breme and Maidenburge, ſo alſo in high Germanye onlye they of Conſtance, borderynge vppon the Swiſſes. were not yet reconciled to themperor: but at the laſt obtaining a ſaufcōduit they ſend ambaſſadors to Auſpurge to treat a peace. Themperor propoundeth They of Cō
                  ſtance wryte to the Emperoure. right hard conditions, and amōgs other things alſo, that they ſhuld admit the boke ſetforth, & after that to frame their religion. Thambaſſadors require to haue the cōditions mitigated: but that was in vain, and are commaunded to make anſwere by a certen day. That knowen the Senate wryting their humble letters ye xiii. day of Iuly, do beſeche him, yt they be not conſtrained to do any thing againſt their ſoules health, & their own conſcience: how they ſe theyr owne daunger, and are in a greate parplexitie: for vnleſſe they do obey, they ſtand in pearill to loſe both life and goods: but if they ſhuld follow his appetite, they muſt abide the vengaunce and iudgement of God. Wherfore let him ſpare them, and put not them pore wretches to ſo great an extremity, eſpecially ſeinge they haue no more offēded than others, and haue for thempire, & for the houſe of Auſtrich, ſuffred in time paſt exceding great miſery, & now do refuſe no charge that cā & ought of them to be performed: & although their treaſure is very ſmal, & their ſubſtance not great, yet wil they geue for amendes .viii. M. crownes, and .iiii. greate peces of ordenaunce: but they beſeche him, to permit the ſame Religion, whiche they haue kept now theſe .xx. yeres, vntil the decre of a lawful coū
               ſel, and unpoſe no heauier burthen to the Citye, than it is hable to beare. Their biſhop, Ihon Weſel, who was alſo called Archbiſhop of Londen, as is mentioned in the .xii. boke, had threatned thē ſore at Auſpurge, after the Emperors boke was ſetforthe: but within a few daies he died of the ſame diſeaſe, that he praied might fal vpō them, yt is of a ſodē palſy. Where they ſay, how they haue ſuſtained great domage for the loue of the houſe of Auſtrich, thus it ſtādeth. The Emperoure Maximilian, by the aid of the Sweuical league, wherof we haue ſpoken in the fourthe boke, made warre with the Maximilian warred againſte the Swiſſes. Swiſſes: wherfore the Citye of Conſtance, being than of the ſame league, and lieth nexte them receiued much diſpleſure. The Swiſſes were aided by them of Rhoetia, of Seon, and Sāmaurice whiche were lately made their felowes, and alſo by the Frenche Kynge Lewes the .xii. At the length by the interceſſion of Lewes Sfortia Duke of Millan, the matter was pacified aboute the yeare of oure Lord a thouſand and fiue hundreth. Maximilian had in Mariage Mary Blancke the ſiſter of Sfortia.
            Themperor, the third day of Auguſt, calleth before him the conſuls, and all the Senate of Auſpurge, and diuers others of ye chiefeſt Citezens, and by Seldus the Ciuilian, ſpeaking muche of the

good wil & zele that he and his progenitors haue borne to them, he ſaith their common welth hath now theſe many yeres bene euill & ſeditiouſly gouerned, the cauſe wherof hath bene, that men of none experiēce & crafts mē, for nothing les mete thē to haue gouernmēt, haue bene choſen ſenators: wherfore he, who beareth good will to their city, to thintent this euil may be remedied, diſplaceth them al not for any reproche vnto them, but for the common welthes ſake. After he cōmaundeth their names to be red, whō he hath apoynted The Emperour maketh newe Senatoures. ſenators, of the which nōbre were the Welſers, Relingers, Būtgarners, Fuggers, Pētingers: whō he bindeth after by an oth, & aſſigneth vnto euery of thē his office & function, & cōmandeth thē ſtraitly yt they loue the cōmon welth, obei the decre of religion, & be vnto him obedient. He doth alſo abrogate al fraternities, & cōmaundeth vnder pain of death, yt from henceforth ther be no conuēticles or aſſēbles He abrogateth fraternities. made. And cōmaundeth yt al wrytings of gildes & fraternities, of priuileges & fredō, be immediatly deliuered to the new Senate, & cōmaundeth this ſtate of publike weale to be proclaimed by an officer of armes, & geueth charge vnder pain of death, yt no man do impugne the ſame. The Senate geueth him thankes, & promiſeth al due obeiſāce. In the meane while yt theſe things were in doing, al the gates were ſhut, and the ſouldiours ſet to warde. There had bene a lōg ſute many yeres betwene the Lantzgraue, & William the Erle of Naſſow, for the lordſhip of Chats: which now at the length themperor in theſe daies decided, geuing ſentence againſte the Lantzgraue. The .v. day of this month, themperour anſwereth thambaſſadours of the City of Conſtance by the biſhop of Arras, and ſendeth them away withoute their purpoſe, and becauſe he ſeeth them ſo little careful for peace, he ſaith, how he wil deuiſe an other way. The ſame day the Spaniardes, which we ſaid went into Spanyardes go to cōſtāce. thoſe parties to the nombre of thre thouſand fotemen, go ſtraite to Conſtance. And departing from Uberlinge, parte of them paſſe through the woodes, to the intent at the ſpringe of the daye, what time they knewe the people were in the Churche at the Sermone: they might inuade the City, part againe remained in the woodes, lokinge for the oportunity of time. And it fortuned, that .iii. watchmen of the Towne, hearing an noyſe in the wode by, as they went further to ſee what the matter was, chaunced into theyr handes.
            Whome the Spaniardes toke, and manacing them with deathe, if they made anye ſigne or token, leade them awaye with them.
            After they couche them ſelues in a pece of grounde, by the lake ſide verye cloſelye: yet were they eſpied, and the watche men that then were in the Suburbes beyond the Rhine, geue knowledge to their Captaine, that there was ſome ambuſh laid. He immediatly ſignifieth

the ſame to the conſul: this was at .ii. a clocke after midnight. The conſul by and by calleth the Senate, & commaundeth al mē to arme them ſelues, though no man knew what the matter was. In the breake of the day, the Spaniards by little and little do appere, yet but fewe, to know what nombre of watchmen there were. Ther againe the captain of the watch ſignifieth to the conſul, that he prouide in time: for whē ther is dāger at hand. Wherfore yt matter was debated, about four of the clocke were ſent oute of the Citye aboute two hondreth Citezens into the Suburbes. After they were come forth, and found in manner nothing, they begin ſomewhat to ſlack: but beholde whan it was nowe daye lighte, the Spaniardes with theyr ordenaunce beate downe a timber walle, that deuided theyr ditche in the middes, and by the ſame ditch being than almoſt dry, aſſaulte thicke and fierſly the watchmen of the towne: ſtraightway alſo thoſe whiche we ſaied remained in the woodes, ſhewed them Conſtance aſſalted. ſelues in like caſe, and by great force and violence breake open one of the gates, but the Citezens fought moſt valeauntly, and ſhoting of theyr ordenaunce, ſlewe their Captaine, Alphōſe Uiues, by and by at the firſt incountre. But whan they were ſcarſely able to with ſtand the force of ſo great a multitude, by little and little they retire and on the bridge ouer the Rhine they foughte a longe time, and hardlye at the laſte were receiued againe into the City: and where the ennemies battered the gate ſore. They diſcharged at them the great pieces of the walles, and from ouer the gates, and ſlue many: whome they by and by tomble of the bridge into the Rhine and whan they ſawe how theyr laboure was in vaine, they recule back into the Suburbes, and ſet the Bridge ende on fire, to the ende the Townes men ſhoulde make no ſalt out. After, whan they had fulfilled theyr filthy luſte, they gather on a heape the dead carcaſes of their felowes, and burne them and the ſuburbes together, that no man ſhould vnderſtand how many were ſlaine, of the townes men were killed aboute an hondreth. Whan the alarme was geuen at Conſtance, as the manner is, the Swiſſes that were neare neighboures, came in theyr armure to healpe them, but the gouernour of theyr Country, who at that time was of Lucerna, called them back vnder a greate penaltye, for hatred he bare to Religion. Howe the Ambaſſadoures of Strauſburge reaſoned the matter with Granuellan, it is before declared: at their retourne home after thaſſēble, they report the whole matter to the Senate. After deliberation, the Senate wryting their letters to themperor in Frenche, for that he The Emperor delited in the Frenche tonge. moſt deliteth in that tong, our ambaſſadours, ſay they, retourning lately frō the cōuentiō, haue declared vnto vs what hath ben done. And had ſent vs the boke wrytten of religion lōg before. Their deſire

was, moſt puiſſant Emperor, before they departed from Auſpurge, to haue exhibited to your highnes a ſupplicatiō in wryting: but the ſame wold not Granuellan receiue: for the which cauſe we wryte vnto you at this preſent. And firſt certēly we deſire nothing The letters of ſtrauſburg to the Emperoure. in the world more, thē to gratify you in all things: but touching the decre of religion, thus it ſtādeth, calling vnto vs the deuines of our city, we haue peruſed it ouer, righte diligentlye: and albeit there be things in it, which do not vtterly diſſent frō the holy ſcriptures, yet in as much as they are ſo written, yt in many things a furcher declaratiō is required, it ſhuld be very hard for vs & troubleſome ſo to receiue thē. For we are moſt throughly perſwaded, that our doctrine & ceremonies are agreable vnto gods word, nether cā we without gods diſpleſure & hurt of our conſcience forſake or alter ye ſame, before it be duely examined, & our men alſo heard. For this hath bene the cuſtome ſince the beginning of the primitiue church, that ſuch doutful matters as are in cōtrouerſy, ſhuld alwaies be diſcuſſed by lawful coūſels. This way alſo ſemed euermore beſt in al conuentious of the Empire, that the whole matter ſhoulde be permitted to a Godlye Counſell. Wherefore we beſeche you of all loues, and for the bloude of Chriſte that was ſhedde for vs, that the decrees of thēpire may take place in this thinge, & that we may kepe this religion, vntil the thing be determined by thautority of a lawful counſel. For ther can no better way be foūd nor more profitable to eſtabliſh peace, or lōger to indure, but in caſe you ſhal refuſe this our requeſt, & require of vs obedience herein, we deſire you moſte earneſtly, yt our deuines may firſt be hard, to thintent they may declare in what places we do iudge ye ſame decre to ſwarue from the holy ſcripture, which if thei mai be permitted to do, we truſt aſſuredly yt both you ſhal vnderſtād thequity of our cauſe, & will mitigate ye ſame decre. Certenly we do nothing frowardly or obſtinatly, but yt feare of God & conſideration of our ſouls helth moueth vs thus to intreat you. For in al other thinges we ſhal ſo demene our ſelues, yt you may rightwel vnderſtand, in howe greate eſtimation we haue your moſt excellent maieſty. with theſe letters, & with further cōmiſſiō was Lewes Grempie a ciuilian ſent to themperour: But he maketh him ſuch like anſwer as he doth to others, & ſaith there can be none other thing determined: nether is now time to ſtād in queſtiō, & that in the coūſel they ſhalbe hard ſufficiētly. Wherfore he geueth cōmaundement, yt within a month, they ſhew plainly their mindes. After the way before mentioned toke no place, themperor in letters publiſhed, doth outlaw them of Conſtance. Ther began much buſines in the city: for the remembrance of the late daunger, and thexpectation of the miſery to come troubled thē excedingly, eſpecially

ſith ther appered no mans helpe nor ſuccour. Ther were diuers alſo of the citizens which with their leud talcke did heape on all theſe matters: the Senate therfore cōſtrained through their oportunity, intreateth certaine Princes, and alſo the Swiſſes by letters, to be meanes for them to the Emperoure. The Swiſſes therfore immediatlye call aſſembles, and agree to it: but thoſe that are of the Romiſh religion promiſe vnder this condicion, if they ſhall receiue the decree of the Empire lately made concerning Religion, and admit againe the Cleargy into the Citye. Wherefore whan the Citezens did ſore vrge it, the Senate doth publiſh the ſame decre: after they go to it by voyces, and they preuailed, which ſaid it was to be receiued, For they all cried oute they were vtterlye vndone, in caſe they ſhuld longer remain in that ſtate: and that themperors power was exceading great and almoſte infinite, which they were neuer hable to reſiſte. Whan this ordinaunce was made by the people, the Senate aduertiſeth the Swiſſes what was done. They ſende ambaſſadours to the Emperoure, to fele his minde, whether he coulde be conte to ſuffer an interceſſion: and alſo intreate him to vſe them with mercye. The Emperoure made them ſuche aunſwere as they mighte eaſelye perceiue, that he liked not their ſute. For he ſaide he maruailed greatly that they would do any thing for ſuche as were outlawed. Wherefore many within the City, that miſliked the alteration of Religion, got them vnto other places, amonges the whiche was Ambroſe Blaurer the chiefeſt miniſter of the church ther. The Lindauians whiche dwell ouer againſte Conſtance on the other Ambroſe Blaurer. ſide of the Lake, had aunſwered the Emperour before righte ſtoutly: but now being afraid, by the example of theyr neighbours, they receiue the decree alſo. Whan the Ambaſſadoure of Strauſburge was retourned home from Auſpurge, and had informed the Senate of themperors commaundement. Ther was called a great court, as they terme it, which is neuer wont to be done, but in matters of great difficulty and moſt waighty importaunce. They be in numbre. iii C .xx. of euery tribe. Whan they gaue their ſuffrages, yt moſt part thought mete to ſtand to it ſtoutly, and not to receiue the decre: after a few daies, they conſult again: there theyr voices were ſomewhat abated, and permitted to certen choſen Senatours that At Strauſburge they cōſult of the Interim. they ſhuld deuiſe the beſt way for the common welth. The horſmē of Naples, were not far from the City, as before is ſaid: And wher themperor at the ſame time departed frō Auſpurge, it was thought verely yt he wold haue come to Strauſburge, and that was a terror to many men yt chanced lately at Conſtance, wherefore very many both gentlemen, Marchauntes, and diuers others, fearinge to loſe their ſubſtance, and loth to diſpleaſe themperor, whē they had in ye
               
Senate houſe renoūced their fredome of the citie, wēt to dwell els where, not without the reprehenſion of many. The Emperour remouing from Auſpurge, and leauing there a garriſon, for the alteration of religion & ſtate of the cōmon wealth, marched with the reſt of his force to Ulme. Whan he was come thither, he diſplaceth the Senatours and ordeyneth new, and cō
               maundeth the miniſters of the churche to priſon, amongeſt the whiche was Martin Frecht, for that they refuſed the decree of Religion. The Senate being wholy addicted to Themperour, receiueth the decree. During the conuentiō at Auſpurg, at the requeſt of Granuellan, they had deſired Frecht to repare to Auſpurg, and helpe forwarde the cauſe of Religion, and to be either with Plugius, Sidonie, or with Iſlebie. Who, for that he ſuſpected ye matter, & that no mā of other cities was ther of his vocatiō, refuſed it. Being after cōmaūded to declare his minde what he thought of the decre made: he cōpriſed theſame in writing. And now whē themperour was come to Ulme, ye Senate calleth for him & thother miniſters of ye churche, & aſketh theyr opinion. They anſwer as before, & ſhewe what thing in the decree The conſtā
                  cie of the Miniſters. they like and what they miſlike. Being demaunded, where the preachers of Auſpurge haue receiued the ſame by an othe, and yet neuertheleſſe preache the Goſpell, why they can not do likewyſe? They ſaye, how they neither knowe what they haue done, neither is it their part to render an accompt of other mēs doinges. They verely at the firſt, what tyme they were admitted to this vocation did promyſe by their fidelitie, to preache the doctrine of the Goſpell purely and ſyncerely, without the traditions of men. If the Senate nowe do miſlyke that waye, they requyre them, to releaſe thē of their othe. Being commaū
               ded to go home, at after none they are called for againe. There certen choſen men of the Senate ſay vnto them, the Emperour this day doeth arreſte you priſoners, and you ſhal forthwith be caried to his pallace. God ſtrengthē you with his ſpirite. They for as muche as it pleaſeth God ſo, ſaye, they wyll refuſe no peryll, and pray for them agayne. Thus departing out of the Senate houſe, they were led by Sergeauntes to the courte, thynkyng that they ſhould haue come before the Emperour. After long expectation, and great reſort of people, thei were caried to a Senatours houſe called George Beſſer, where Granuellan and the Byſhop of Arras lodged. At the laſt, beyng let in, after long debate, whan Granuellan did inſtaunte them to obey ye Emperours decree: & they declared why they myght not ſo doe, thei were taken vp wt ſharp rebukes. After, the reſidue were cō
               maūded out, & to go a litle aſide, & thā thei aſſay Frecht wt gētle

But where he perſeuered ſtill in his opinion, they treate alſo with the reſt ſeuerally. Of the whiche foure remained conſtāt, two reuolted. With Granuellan & the byſhop of Arras, were alſo Paſius & Seldus. Immediatly thei were fettered in chaines and caried to the cōmon Geale with Spaniardes & Germaine ſoldiours, ouer whome Iohn the Erle of Naſſow was captain. And as they paſſed by Freights houſe, his brother George chaū
               ced to loke out at the wyndowe, & being deſired of him to loke Freight caried to pryſō with others well to his wife & his familie, he praieth God to ſtrengthē him & his fellowes, & biddeth them be of good cōforte, for the which ſaying he was alſo caried to priſon. This was the .xvi. daye of Auguſt. Thus being deteined four daies, the fift day, whā thē
               perour went thence, being faſt bonde in chaynes, they were caried in cartes to Kirchene, & garded wt .CC. Spaniardes. There whan they had remained by the ſpace of eight daies vnder Alteſtege Captaine of Germaines, they were cōmitted to ye cuſtody of Madronio a captayne of Spaniardes. From Ulme came thēperour to Spire, at thend of the moneth of Auguſt. Whileſt he was there, came one frō him to Straſburg, to fetche away yt xii. great pieces which they had promyſed to geue him yt yeare before. The day before the kalendes of Septēber, the byſhop of Rome, at the requeſt of thēperour, ſendeth into Germany thre byſhops, of Fane, Uerone, & Ferento. What their cōmiſſiō was, ſhalbe declared in their place. Themperour making no long abode at Spire, whan he came to Mentz, he went down the ryuer of Rhine into lowe ducheland, & leadeth away captiue the Duke of Saxon, & the Lātgraue, who was lately brought thither frō Hale in Sueuia, whā his wife had eftſones ben an hū
               ble The Duke of Saxon & the Lātgraue led away pryſoners. ſuter for hym, and put them in ſuerall boates. There is by the Ryuer of Rhine a towne of the Lantgraues, called Sanguner, and a Caſtell ſet vpon the toppe of a ſtepe hyl. Whan the Emperour came hither, he was benighted and rode at Ancker, and ſetting a lande the watchemen only, commaundeth al the reſte to remaine within borde. The Senathe of Straſburge was commaunded as is ſayd before to aunſwere within a moneth. Whan themperour therfore was come to Spire, Ambaſſadours were ſent vnto him the ſecond day of September. Iames Sturmius, Matthew Giger, & Lewys Grempe. Finding him not at Spire, followed after vnto Mentz. And what time thei had geuē knowledge to thēperour of their cōming, & ye Germain coūſellours were out of the way, which ſerued Thēpe. in thoſe affaires, thei were byd follow to Collō. In yt mean time yt biſhop of Straſburg, ſēding letters to yt clergie wtin the citie, yt
               
of September, willeth them to obey the decree of thempyre, & ordeyne the thyng after the fourme preſcribed. And with al ſendeth themperours letters touching the ſame matter, which I ſayde were writtē the tenth day of Iuly. Moreouer, he writeth to the Senate alſo, that they would not impeche them. Thambaſſadours of Straſburg after thei were come to Collon ye. viii day of September, exhibite to themperour, from the Senate, an other epiſtle wrytten in Frenche, of this importaunce. Al be Letters of Straſburgh to Themp. it, moſte triumphant Emperour, what time we were recōciled vnto you. We made no promiſe to obſerue ſuch things as ſhuld be decreed. Albeit we neuer aſſented that the cauſe of Religion ſhould be handled on this wyſe, yet, in al thinges yt we poſſible may, we are ready to gratifie your Maieſtie not only in ciuile, but alſo in diuine matters. We perceiue wel enough that your highnes & the reſt of the Princes will haue no conſideration of our doinges, & that it is reaſon, that we ſhuld folow your foteſteppes. Yet this notwithſtanding, we beſeche you eftſones to conſider, that for ſo muche as euery mā muſt render vnto God an accōpt of his own doing, we haue iuſt cauſe to be careful for our ſaluation, & to forſee, yt we do nothing at any tyme againſt our conſcience, for which cauſe alſo we were in very good hope that after you had heard our diuines, you would haue mitigated the decree. But conſidering that you referre vs to the counſel, & ſay how the matter ſhall there be debated according vnto holy ſcripture, we are thus contented. And leaſt we ſhuld ſeme contentious or obſtinate do not refuſe, but that the Byſhop of Straſburge recitueth yt Interim. our citie may ſet forth that order of yours in certen churches wt vs, by men of his facultie. And we ſhal deuiſe with hym for the churches, neither wil we diſturbe him in any thing, neither for bid the citezens to repare thither, but yt it may be fre for euery man to followe ſuche religion as he ſhal thinke good hym ſelf, yet vnder this condicion, yt we may haue again a few churches in ye which Gods worde may be purely taught, & the ſacramēts miniſtred, as it is decēt, & that in ye vulgare tongue. We wil prouide alſo yt the people ſhalbe kept in order, & that nothing be otherwiſe done than is ſemely. Againe we ſhal cōmaund yt holy daies, & faſting daies be kept, & wil ſuffer nothing to be done, either in ſermōs or other places yt may be any offēce vnto others. And for ſo much as this doctrine hath now theſe many yeares ben ſo depely roted in mens mindes, that it can not without yt hurt of cōſcience, be taken away ſo ſodenly. And againe, for ſo much as by this meane, which we haue ſhewed you, your highnes decre may take place amōgſt vs, we beſech you in ye hartieſt

maner yt we can, to graunt our requeſtes, & to ſuffer vs in this religiō vntil the tyme of the counſel. Which ſhalbe both a moſt thākeful duty vnto God, & make chiefly for yt peace of our citie and whole Prouince. After themperour had heard this letters And beſides ſuch thinges as Iames Sturmius with his great eloquence declared at large, he made anſwer by Seldie, & ſpeaking many thinges of his zeale towards Germany, after long debating, at yt length he ſendeth thē away after this ſorte, that they ſhould go through with their biſhop, yet vpon this condition, that if they can not agre, they ſhould ſtande to his arbitrement. Whan themperour was come into Brabant, it was his pleaſure to haue the Duke of Saxon with him, but the Lantgraue he ſent to Audenarde, a towne in Flaūders. On the borders of Brabāt, he diſchargeth all thoſe forces that he brought with him from Auſpurg. I haue ſpoken before of the iudgemēt of the chāber imperial, how the ſtates permitted themperour yt he ſhuld eſtabliſh the ſame. The firſt day therfore of October, as The reformatiō of the Chamber. before was enacted, it is renewed, & thre Aduocates are diſplaced for ſuſpicion of Lutheraniſme, & al the reſt amongeſt other thinges were cōmaūded, that they ſhuld perſeuer in ye doctrine of ye catholike church, or els to be remoued frō that place. There began Henry the Duke of Brūſwicke to cōmence ſuite againſt the Proteſtātes, for ye former war what time he was expulſed. He had in dede conditioned, whā he was deliuered out of priſon and that by an othe alſo, yt he would attempt nothing. But he went from that conuenaunt, & not he only, but alſo tharchbyſhop of Mentz, the maiſter of Pruſſia, the Erle of Naſſow, & Reuart counte of Solmen, with others, moued ſuit againſt yt Lātgraue. The mē of Cōſtānce, lately outlawed, wher as they were in great perplexitie, & ſawe no way how to ſaue thē ſelues, flee They of Cō
                  ſtance, geue thēſelues to the howſe of Auſtrich. vnto yt laſt refuge, and geue thē ſelues to the houſe of Auſtriche for euer. Wherupon kyng Ferdinando receiueth them into his tuition, & ſendeth thither immediatly a noble man to be their gouernour. Who about the middes of October propoūdeth vnto them theſe conditions. That they ſhall acknowledge Ferdinando and his children and heyres for their Lordes from hence forth, and ſhewe vnto them al faith and dew obedience, & ſhall not reuolte from them at any tyme, neyther make any league or confederacie. Suche lawes and ſtatutes as Ferdinando and his deputes ſhall make, concerning Religion and other matters, they ſhal throwly obeye. In warre and other affaires, thei ſhall be ready at all tymes to ayde and ſerue kyng Ferdinando, his children and heyres obediently, as the reſt of his ſubiectes.

The ſame conditions afterwarde they receiue by an othe, two daies after, the gouernour calleth the Senate, and demaūdeth of them, what is the ſomme of their cōmon treaſure: that their gunnes with al their fourniture be brought into an accompt. He cōmaundeth alſo, that no townes man do weare any longe ſworde, that no man preſume to come to the fortifications, nor where the watche is. That their names, whiche during ye war admonyſhed the citie of daunger, be reuealed. That an inuentory of their goodes be taken, whiche are abſent, and flit from thence, and that the ſame be deteined. That they delyuer vp all publique writinges. And that ſome man that is expert therin, declare whereunto euery of them aperteineth. After this, he cō
               maundeth all the miniſters of the churche to depart out of the citie within eight daies. In this moneth Auguſtus, brother vnto Maurice Duke of Saxony, taketh to wyfe the lady Anne Auguſtus maried a wyfe. the daughter of Chriſtian king of Dēmarke. In the cōuenaūts of mariage it was condicioned, that Duke Maurice, ſhould aſſigne him his portion, not out of the lādes of Iohn Fridericke, but of his owne inheritaunce. The ſame time was a great cō
               motion in Guienne, for ſaltpits & cuſtomes. The head citie of all that countrie is Burdewx, a great towne, of much welth, & lieth open to the Sea, which in time paſt was vnder the dominion of Englād. They alſo chiefly rebelled, & had ſlaine ye kings A cōmotion at Burdeux Lieftenaunt. Wherfore whan ſo ſhrewed an example was ſhewed, & the thing tended to a further daunger, the French king ſent thither the Coneſtable of Fraunce & Duke Danmal with a power of .xxxi. enſeignes of fotemē, wherof .xi. were Almaignes, and a force of horſemen. Which thing once knowen they of Burdeux, make meanes to ye Coneſtable, & ſay yt they are cōtented, that he ſhal enter with the Frenchmē armed, but they beſeche him not to ſuffer the Germanes to come within their citie. He made anſwer, yt thei ſhuld not preſcribe him: the Germains ſerue the king aſwell as the reſt. Therfore wil he doe herein, as he ſhall thinke good. And albeit they ſet not open the gates of their citie, yet hath he keyes wherwith to vnlock yt ſame. Wherfore thus he entred the, xix. day of October. And whā he had placed his men here & there in due order, and alſo planted his ordenaunce in place conuenient, firſt he cōmaundeth the citezēs to bring forth al their armure & weapons, & the ſame to be caried into the caſtel, ſo were ſpent two daies. The third daye they began to make inquiſitiō from houſe to houſe, & a great nōber of The ſlaughter that was at Burdeux. ſedicious perſones were apprehēded. After they came to an horrible ſlaughter: For they wer not executed wt one kind of death.

There were alſo brought forth .xiiii. Gentlemē, with haulters about their neckes, wherof one or two were executed. But the Almaine Captaines made interceſſion for the reſt, and begged their pardon of the Conſtable. This ſoroufull and bluddy ſpectacle laſted .xii. daies. And beſides thoſe that were put to death in this tyme, very many were alſo condempned to the Galees. Moreouer all wrytinges, wherin their fredomes and priuileges of the cōmon wealth were conteined, were burnt all, they themſelues making the fyre. And becauſe they had murthered the kynges Lieftenaunt, the Conſtable driueth them to ſcrape vp the earth, wherwith he was couered and buried, without any toole, euen with their nayles and fingers. Whan they had thus ſcraped ye dead coarſe out of his graue, the ſame was buried againe with a great & ſolemne pompe of Freers & prieſtes. All the citezens folowe after to the nomber of fiue thouſande, with euery man a candell in his hande. And as they came before the Coneſtables lodging, the Bere was ſet downe, and ſtayed betwene times. Than doe they fall downe there vpon their knees, and with a lamentable crie beſeche him of mercie, they deteſte their owne offence, and geue thankes vnto the kyng, for that he hath not punyſhed the ſame more extremely. Whan all theſe thinges were finiſhed, the .ix. daye of Nouember they departe thence, leauing behinde them a garniſon. About this tyme there chaunced a maruelous thing in Italy. There is beſydes Padwey, a towne belonging to the ſtate of Ueniſe, called Citadella. Herein dwelte a citezen named Fraū
               ces Spiera, an experte man in the lawe, and a great pleader Fraunces Spier a Lawier. of cauſes. Who with a wonderfull feruent zeale, began to imbrace the doctrine of the Goſpel. And whan he profited therin dayly more and more, he declared not only at home amonges his frendes, what he thought of euery article, but alſo abroad amonges all men whereſoeuer he came. This thnig could not long be hidde, and at the length was reported to the Boſhop of Romes Legate, whiche was than at Ueniſe, Iohn Caſe, Archbyſhop of Beneuento. Whan Spier vnderſtode this, he perceyued eaſely in what daunger he ſtode. Whan he had therfore taken long deliberation, and cōſulted euery way, what was beſt to be done, at the laſt he reſolued, being ſent for, to goe ſpeake with the Legate. Wherfore going to Ueniſe, and confeſſing his errour (as he thought, or els ſaid for feare) craueth pardon, and promiſeth obebience from henceforth. The Legate, although he were glad of this voluntary cōfeſſion, yet for an example to all others, he commaundeth him, that retourning home he do

openly ſuche thinges as he hath ſpoken before. He was cōtent: And albeit he began euen than to repent him of his doing, yet His recantation. through the inſtigation of his frendes, affirming that ye whole hope not of him only, but alſo of his wyfe, children, and ſubſtaunce conſiſted herein, he did obeye. But ſhortly after he fell into ſickenes both of body and minde, and began to diſpayre of Gods mercy. Therfore by the aduiſe of his frendes, he was caried from Citadella, to Padwey, that he might haue ready at hand both helpe of good Phiſitions and cōfort of learned men. The Phiſitions, Iohn Paulus Craſſus, Bellacata, Friſimelega, as ſone as they ſawe him, iudged by & by the diſaſe to come of a vehement thought, and that there was no better remedy, than the cōſolation of the mynd. Wherfore many learned men reſorted to him daily, and by the teſtimonies of holy ſcripture, whiche declare vnto vs the great mercy of God, they endeuoured to cure his mynde. But he ſayd, he could not in dede denye theſe thynges, howbeit they concerned him nothing. For in as muche as he had once abiured the truthe knowen for feare of perill, he affirmed that he was appointed to euerlaſting tourmentes, and that in his minde he felte and ſawe them already, neither could he loue God, but hate him exceadingly. And here in he perſeuered neither would he nowe eate any more meate, Spier wold receiue no comforte. and whan it was crommed into him by violence, oftentymes would ſpitte it out againe. It were long to recite all thinges, whiche eyther he him ſelfe ſpake, or other men alledged out of the holy ſcriptures, to bryng him from deſperatiō. What tyme therfore all their counſelles were ſpent in vaine, and both the infirmitie of his body, & alſo the anguyſh of his mynde increaſed daily more and more, he was caried home againe, and there He dieth in diſpaire. died miſerably in the ſame ſtate and deſperatiō. As he lay ſicke at Padwey, there came often to comfort hym amongeſt many others Peter Paule Uerger, Byſhop of Inſtinople, whiche is in Hiſtria, a towne vnder the dominion of the ſtate of Ueniſe.
            It hath bene declared in the fourmer bokes howe the Byſhoppes of Rome Clement, and Paule haue vſed the ſeruice of Uergerius before in germany. Certes he was in hygh fauour with king Ferdinando, whileſt he was in Hongary, in ſo much that whan his daughter Catharine was borne, Uergerius, & George Marques of Brandenburge, and Iohn Archebyſhop of Lunden, were her godfathers at the founteſtone. But after he reuolted from the Byſhop of Rome by a wonderfull occaſion. A wōderfull conuerſiō of Uergerius. Whan he was ſent for to Rome from the conference of Wormez whiche was in the beginning of the yeare .M. CCCCC. xli, as

before is ſaid. The Byſhop going about to make newe Cardinalles, appointed him alſo amongeſt others. But there were ſome that priuely whiſpered in his eare, yt he was now through muche familiaritie with the Germains become a Lutherane. After that Uergerius had heard this by Cardinall Ginucius, vnto whome the Byſhop had tolde it, he was maruelouſly aſtonied. And to the intent he myght pourge hym ſelfe, he goeth home into his countrey, and begynneth a boke, whiche he intituled, againſt the Apoſtatas of Germany. And whyleſt to confute their argumentes, he tourneth ouer diligently the bookes of his aduerſaries, and pondering depely their reaſons: he feleth hym ſelfe taken and vanquiſhed. Than caſting away all hope of his Cardinalſhyp, he goeth to his brother, Iohn Baptiſt, Uergerius vanquiſſhed with the force of truth. Byſhop of the citie of Pole, and reciting the whole matter, aſketh his counſell. His brother being afrayde at ye beginning, lamenteth his caſe much. But after he was perſwaded by hym to applie hym ſelfe to the ſearching of the Scripture, and had conſidered diligently that article of iuſtification, comparinge the ſentences together, he geueth place, and iudgeth the biſhop of Romes doctrine to be falſe. Wherupon they reioyſed the one to the other. And as the very duty of Byſhops is, began to inſtruct the people in Iſtria, and preache diligently the benefite of Chriſte imployde vpon mankynde, and declare what workes God requireth of vs, to the intent they myght call men againe to the true Religion. But there ſprang vp many aduerſaries, eſpecially Freers, ſuche as are called obſeruauntes, who reported the thing to the inquiſitours, the chief wherof was Anniball Gryſon, and ioyned with him in commiſſiō Hierome Mutius, Inquiſitours agaiſt Uergerus. whiche after wrote an inuectiue againſt Uergerius, and not that only, but ſet forth a boke alſo, wherin for the Hatred of Religion, he diffameth Germany with moſte ſclaunderous & rayling wordes. Whan Griſon was come to Pole and to Iuſtinople, he ruſheth into mens houſes, and ſearched if they had any bokes prohibited. Than, whan he had ſpokē many thynges in his Sermon, he curſed all thoſe, that wold not preſente ſuch as were ſuſpected of Lutheraniſme. Yet he promyſed a leſſe puniſhment vnto ſuche as would come to amendement, & of their owne fre wyll aſke hym pardon. But on thoſe that would not wyllyngly cōfeſſe their crime, and were after accuſed of others, he ſayde he would be auenged by fyre, and entringe into euery houſe, feared all men. Wherfore there were founde diuerſe that accuſed them ſelues, & for feare refuſed nothyng: Of the which nomber the rycher ſorte pryuely, and poorer openly were conſtrayned

to confeſſe their errour. Suche as confeſſed, how they had red the newe Teſtament in the vulgare tongue, he diſſwaded moſte earneſtly to abſtayne hereafter. Than, the common multitude, whoſe myndes were ſtryken with feare, accuſed one an other full buſely, without any reſpect had, eyther of kynred, frendſhyp or benefites. For the ſonne ſpared not the father, nor the wyfe her huſbande, nor the cliente his Lorde and patrone. The complaintes were all for the moſte parte of triflyng matters, ſuche as one reprehended in an other for ſuperſtitiō. Hereunto were added preachinges againſt the doctrine of Uergerius. And on a certen daie, whan there was a great audience of people aſſembled in the head churche of Iuſtinople. The inquiſitour Griſon, whiche ſayed maſſe than pourpoſly, getteth him vp into the pulpet in a rych veſtiment, & amongs other things to the intent he might thruſt in his ſting, at this time ſaith he, and theſe certen yeares paſt, you haue had many ſtormes and much vnſeaſonable weather, which deſtroyeth one whyle your Oliues, an otherwhyle your Corne: And nowe marreth your Uines, now eftſones your cattell & other goods. And the cauſe of all theſe euilles commeth of your Byſhop, and the other ſort of Heretikes. And neuer loke for any better, vnleſſe they be firſt reſtrayned. Therfore the next way is to ſet vpon them & ſtone them. Through this their violence Uergerius was conſtreined Uergerius repareth to Mantua. to repaire to Mantua, vnto the Cardinall Hercules Gunſage, with whome he was familiarly acquainted. But where bothe diuerſe at Rome, and alſo Iohn Caſe, ye Byſhops Legate with the Uenetians, admonyſhed the Cardinall by letters and meſſengers, that he ſhould no longer mainteine ſuche a man, he goeth to Trent, where the coūſel was holden at the ſame time, to make his pourgation. Whan the Byſhop of Rome knewe therof, albeit he had rather haue had hym deteyned priſoner, yet leaſt any ſuſpicion ſhould aryſe namely in Germany, as though the counſell were not free, he wryteth agayne to his Legates there, that they permitte hym not to haue any place in the ſeſſion, but that they commaunde hym to departe from thence. Being after this ſorte repulſed, he wēt to Ueniſe. Here He isputont of yt counſell the Biſhops Legate before named, exhorteth him by al meanes that he would go to Rome: But he, whiche vnderſtode his daū
               ger, refuſed. Than the other a fewe daies after cōmaunded him in the Byſhops name, that he retourne no more to Iuſtinople. Therfore went he to Padwey. And whyleſt he there was, he behelde this miſerable example before rehearſed. Wherewith being wehemently moued, whan he had ſene preſently the wrath

of God, wherwith that wretched man was ſtryken, he began more and more to be confirmed, and than he determined plainly, to forſake contrie and all that euer he had, and go into volū
               tary exile rather, and to be in place where he might frely profeſſe Chriſte. Whiche he did within a fewe monethes after, and taking his iourney out of the countrey of Bergome he came in to Rhetia, bordering vpont the ſame. And whan he had preached the Goſpel there, and alſo in the vale of Tely that ioyneth Uergerius preacheth yt Goſpell in Rhetia. next vnto Italy, certen yeares, Chriſtopher the Duke of Wirtemberge ſent for hym to Cubinga. Before he departed out of Italy, the Byſhop of Polle his brother was dead, and it was ſuſpected that he was poyſoned. Moreouer many notable mē beſides Uergerius, ſawe Spiera in the ſame ſtate, and amongeſt others Matthewe Gribalde, a Ciuilian of Padwey, who compry ſing in wryting the whole matter whiche he preſently ſaw and heard, ſet it forth in printe. As Uergerius did alſo, and Sigiſmunde Gelowe a Polonian, and Henry Scotte. The Archbyſhop of Beneuento, before mentioned, compyled a booke of The abhominable filthynes of an Archebyſhop. Buggery, and ſo filthy as nothyng can be deuiſed more. For he is nothing aſhamed to extolle and prayſe the moſte deteſtable vice of all others, yet commonly vſed in Grece and Italy. In the meane tyme the Archebyſhoppes of Germany, eſpecially of Mentz, Collon, and Treuers, euery man in his owne dioceſe holde conuocations, to thintent to refourme their churches after the order preſcribed by the Emperour: For this had they promiſed him to do. In the prouince of Collon Bucer had taught before, as in the .xv. boke is ſpecified, and there were diuerſe miniſters of the churche, that had maried wyues. But although the Emperours decree did permitte the mariage of prieſtes, tyl the counſell ſhould determine the ſame, yet ſayed the Biſhop of Collon, how that appertained only to the Lutherians, and not to ſuche as folowed the churche of Rome. Wherfore by a decree made, he diſanulleth matrimonies contracted, and declareth Maried prieſtes pluct frō their wyues them to be inceſtuouſe, and commaundeth the children be gotten of ſuche to be baſtardes. The Archebyſhop of Treuers hath but a ſmall prouince, conteining only thre Byſhoprykes, Metz, Tully, and Uerdon. There neded no ſuche lawe. For the prieſtes in theſe places, had rather haue cōcubines thā wyues. But in the Archebyſhopryke it ſelfe where there appered to be more daunger, he decreed as his fellowes did. The iuriſdiction of Mentz, is moſte large. For vnder hym be .xii. Byſhops, and almoſt all Heſſe is alſo win his prouince. Therfore he began to inſtaunt and vrge them to obey ye Emperours decree. Like wyſe

did the Archebyſhop of Treuers, who had alſo ſome iuriſdictiō there. But the Lantgraues ſonnes, and the other rulers and counſellours, heard theſe thinges with deafe eares. The Archbyſhop of Mentz ſent alſo to Frāckfurth his ſuffragan Michel Sidonie. Who firſt hallowyng the churches there, preacheth & teacheth after his maner. The Byſhop of Auſpurge compelled certen prieſtes that were not conſtante, to abiure their religiō and doctrine. I ſpake before of the Frenchmen, which in ſommer went to ayde the Scottes. They at the laſt bryng away in to Fraunce, Mary the yonge Quene, daughter and heire to the kyng that dead is, beyng thā ſyx yeares of age, that they might The inheritour of Scotland led into Fraunce. thus take away from the Englyſhemen all hope of optaynyng her. This yeare yt Byſhop of Rome created Charles Uandome, a Frencheman, Cardinal. After that Maximilian of Auſtrich, was arryued in Spayne, and had maried the lady Mary themperours daughter, Phylippe the Emperours ſonne, a younge Prince of .xxi. yeares of age, being ſent for of his father, prepareth him ſelfe to take his iourney. And leauing behinde hym his coſin Germane, & the ſame his brother in lawe, to gouerne The Empe. ſonne commeth into Flaunders. the common wealth in his abſence, whan he was imbarked & had ſet vp ſayle, the .xxv. daye of Nouember he arriueth at Genes with fiftie Galeis, and as many ſhyppes of burthen, by the conduite of Androwe Daurie, who had tranſported Maximilian, accompanied with a great nomber of Nobles, & amongeſt others the Duke of Alba and the Cardinall of Trente. A fewe dayes after his arriuall, he remaineth wout the walles in the houſe of Androwe Daurie the Admirall, in the meane tyme yt the Shippes were vnlading, and preparation made in the citie. The ſecond daye of December, he entred and was receiued moſte ſumptuouſly, and being there furnyſhed aſwell of money as all other thinges mete and requiſite to trauell by lande, he departeth thence the eight daye after, and paſſing by Alexandria and Pauie, goeth to Millan. At Pauie were the great battering peces, which the Emperour had taken from Iohn Fridericke Duke of Saxon, and ſent thither, as before is ſayde. At Millan, where he arriued the .xix. daye of December, were ſet vp in euery place triumphant arkes, pageōs, and images, with honorable poſies written. At his entring were ready to receiue He is receyued at Millā
                him the Duke of Sauoye, the Ambaſſadours of Ueniſe, Florence, Ferrare, & Seines. About this tyme at Bruiſſelles, died Maximilian Erle of Bure, of a diſeaſe in the throte called the Quinancie, whan his Phiſition had tolde hym before as they ſaye, the very houre of his death as ſone as he ſawe him, whoſe

name was Andrew Weſſel. I ſhewed you before of Duke Manrice, how after the decree of Religiō was red, he departed from Auſpurg. Whan he was come home, he aſſembleth the Nobilitie and the other ſtates. And propoundeth the whole matter at Miſene, declaring vnto them what the Emperours mynde is. They vrge the Emperours promeſſe and his alſo, and requyre inſtauntly, that they may be ſuffered to kepe ſtyll the Religion profeſſed at Auſpurge. After it was agreed, that the diuines of Wittemberge and of Lipſia, ſhould be called to counſell. Wherfore they met firſt at Begge, after at Celle, laſt, at Iuterbock. Thither came alſo Iohn Iſlebie ſent frō the Marques of Brā
               denburg. Here was a decre made of thinges indifferent, ſuche A meting of Diuines in Saxony. as are called Adiaphora, the laſt conuention of all was at Lipſia. Here was a fourme of Religion written, whiche all men ſhould obſerue vnder the dominions of Duke Maurice. Which boke afterwardes bred much contention, as ſhalbe declared in his place. In the meane tyme the Emperours ſonne procedeth on his iourney, and paſſing by Mantua and Trent, he cōmeth to Auſpurge, and ſo to Spire. After he paſſeth through the lād 1549. of Luke to the Emperour his father, accompanied amongeſt others with the Cardinall of Trent: The Emperour had ſente to mete hym in Germany a goodly nomber of Horſemen, at the conduite of the Duke of Areſcot. Duke Maurice goyng forth to mete him as farre as Trent, rode forth with a ſmall cōpany to ſee Mantua and Ueniſe, and was moſte honorably interteyned of the Senate. He intreated diligētly the Prince of Spain that he would be a meane to the Emperour for the Lantgraue his father in lawe, whiche after alſo he ſignified vnto him. & for as muche as the other had promyſed right gently, he byddeth hym be of good comfort, yet neuertheleſſe admonyſhynge hym to diſſemble the matter, and not to be acknowen therof. At this tyme was muche trouble in the partes of Barbarie & Affrica. For one Zeriphius (as they ſay) arriſing of a ſmal beginning, Ciuile warres in Affrica. and atteyning to a kingdome, had erpulſed Feſanus a kyng by hym out of his Realme, who came after to the Emperour at Auſpurge, complayning of his miſfortune, and deſyryng ayde. Nicolas byſhop of Metz, the ſon of Anthony Duke of Lorayne, and Tutour to the Duke his Nephew, as I ſhewed you in the xvi. boke, forſaking eccleſiaſticall order, maried one of the houſe of Eckmount, whiche was an inheritour in Brabant. So the Biſhoprike returned to the Cardinal of Loraine. In what ſorte the Ambaſſadours of Straſburge treated with the Emperour at Collon, is before declared. Whan they were

retourned home, ſhortly after they began to conferte with the Byſhop, who callyng before hym the Nobilitie, ſheweth them what the Emperours pleaſure is to haue done, and commaundeth them all to obey. He chargeth alſo ſtraightly the Clergie of Straſburg, to followe the ſame. And where he propounded ouer harde thinges, the Senate the .xii. daye of February, ſending Henry Cope, Ambaſſadour with letters to the Emperour ſaie, howe they haue treated diligently with their Biſhop, but Straſburgs wryteth letters to the Emperour. that he propoundeth ſuche conditions, as if they ſhould admit, they can not retayne thoſe thinges, whiche the decree lately made at Auſpurge, doeth permitte and graunt them. For after muche debating we haue, ſayeth they, declared vnto him, how we ſhall geue commaundement to our citezens, that they ſhall obſerue the holy dayes, and abſteyne certen dayes from fleſhe. Moreouer we haue bene in hande with the Miniſters of the church. And certen of thē we ſuppoſe wil of their owne accorde leaue the office of preaching. Wherfore it ſhalbe lawfull & free for hym, for all vs, to eſtablyſhe Religion according to the order preſcribed at Auſpurge. For we ſhalbe no let vnto him, and wil alſo commaunde our citezens, to doe nothing to the contrary. And ſeing it is thus, we beſeche you moſte victorious Emperour, that you would permitte vs miniſters of the churche, euē ſuch as be maried amongeſt vs, and put vs to no further extremitie, eſpecially conſidering that we wyll both ſhewe all moderation, and geue none occaſion of offence.
            I ſhewed you before of them of Magdenburg, how the Emperour had outlawed them: And where they refuſed the decree of religion, lately publiſhed, the diſpleaſure was augmented. Where vpon the Emperour ſetteth forth againſt them new proclamations, and maketh them a praye vnto all men, and earneſtly Thei of Maidenburg are made a pray for their god lines. admoniſheth the Princes and ſtates that are their neighbours, to make warre againſt them, and to annoye them by all meanes poſſible. It hath bene tolde you before, howe the Emperour cauſed ye preachers of Ulme to be apprehēded. Thei were at the length, in the ſeuenth moneth, enlarged the third day of Marche, & ſet at libertie, whā they had payd for their charges. At this time yt ſtate of England waxed troubleſome. Edwarde Trouble in England. Duke of Somerſet, yt kings vncle, & Protectour of the Realme, had a brother that was lord Admiral, of whom he had cōceiued a ſuſpiciō, or at leaſt was cōtent ſo to be perſwaded, as though he did aſpire to yt crown, & wold bring yt king vnder his cuſtody. The Admi. of England b. headed. Wherfore he cōmaūdeth him to be apprehēded, & after examination had, he was condēned to die, & yt xx. day of Marche was be|

He had maried Quene Catherine, the laſte wyfe to kyng Henry the eight, and that ſame alſo increaſed the ſuſpicion muche. But the emulation and enuie of a woman was thought to haue bene the greateſt occaſion of this miſauenture. The Biſhop of Straſburge agayne warneth the clergie, to obeye the Emperours decree. There is a churche of ſainct Thomas the annual reuenewes wherof, are, by the cōſent of the Senate, imployed vpon preachers and learned men, whiche teache and bryng vp yougth. With thē he traueled chiefly, and deſired to know, with in what tyme they would obeye the Emperours decree, and ſatiſfie his expectation, moreouer what mete men they had for this purpoſe, and what ornamentes of the churche were, yet remaining. Thei take a time for a further deliberation. Thomas Cranmer, Archebyſhop of Canturbury, and primate of Englande, Thomas Cranmer a furtherer of learning & Godlines. a man of excellent learning, was wholy geuē to further good learnyng and auaunce Godly religiō. Who ſeing the ſtate now of Germany, and the daunger of learned men there, ſollicited with ſondry letters Bucher chiefly, and Paulus Fagius, moſte expert in the Hebrew tongue, to come into England, promiſing them all loue and frendſhip. Wherfore by the conſent and will of the Senate, at the firſt of Aprill, they take their iurney, that they might there ſowe the ſede of pure doctrine. Their comming was moſte acceptable both to yt kyng him ſelf, Bucer and Fagius cominto Englād and in maner to the whole Nobilitie and people. And what tyme they had ſtaied a whyle with my Lorde of Canturbury, they were both ſent vnto Cambridge, to be readers there. The firſt day of Aprill, Philippe of Auſtriche entreth into Bruſſels, with a wonderfull pompe, where his father that tyme was. There were the Ambaſſadours of Duke Maurice and the Electours of Brandenburg, ſent to ſollicite the ſuite vnto Prynce Philippe and the Cardinall of Trent, who was a great frende to Duke Maurice. And albeit they put the Lantgraue, which was than at Audenarde, in good hope, yet was nothynge brought to paſſe. And a lyttle whyle after, whan the Lātgraue being ſickely would haue eaten fleſhe on a certen daye forbidden, the Captaine that garded hym, commyng in the way, turneth vp the diſhe botome, and caſteth the meat on the ground.
            At this ſame tyme the Byſhop of Straſburge, in the eight The byſhop of Straſb. ſingeth his firſt Maſſe. yeare at the leaſt, taketh holy orders, as thei terme it, and ſaith Maſſe, he calleth a conuocation of all his Clergie at Taberne, and maketh Decrees commodious for theyr pourpoſe.
            After thys he ſendeth meſſengers to the Senate of Straſburge, requiring them to reedifie the Aultars, and to geue

him libertie to appointe the Myniſters of the Churche. That they woulde releaſe the Clergie of their Othe, reſtoore all their priuileges, and rendre agayn the ornamentes of the churches. But he commaundeth the Thomiſtes, to aunſwer directly, whether they wyll obeye the Emperours decree, or no? They ſpeaking firſt of the reuerence they beare to the Emperour, after, of their duties and vocation at large, declare vnto hym, what euery man teacheth and doeth, that is to wytte, diuines, Phyloſophers, Logicians, Rhetoricians, and ſuche other lyke, whiche are al not only profitable both for the Scole or youth, but alſo neceſſary. Than ſhewe they by whom they were admitted into the College, by the conſente of the Senate, and after a long declaration, they deſyre hym very lowely and louingly, that he woulde not diſturbe this order ſo well eſtablyſhed, nor wyll them to be occupied with thinges leſſe nedefull. Contrarywyſe the Ambaſſadours alledge, howe that College was not founded for ſuche exerciſes of Scolars, neyther ought the olde order to be chaunged. If there be any amongeſt them, whiche finde themſelues greued, and can not obeye with a good conſcience, the Byſhop ſurely is not he, that wyl perſwade them to do any thyng againſt their wylles, but that it ſhalbe lawfull for them to geue place, and as the common ſaying is, let them either drynke or departe. For in caſe the Senate wyl haue profeſſours of Artes & learning within the citie, it is reaſon that they fynde the ſame, and beare their charges, not of the abbey landes, which were aunciently appointed to an other vſe, but of their common treaſure. The Byſhop & his predeceſſour haue nowe bene many yeares impeched in their iuriſdictiō, but this may no longer be ſuffered. Thus whan they had much contended in wordes, they departed without any thynge concluded. And the Senate, whan they knew therof, make interceſſion to the Byſhop, and in their moſte gentle letters deſyre and praye hym, that he would at the leaſt haue ſome conſideration of the yought, who taketh great profit and rypenes of the wyt by the ſame Schole. Thus was the matter by letters and meſſengers ſent betwyxt, long and muche debated, tyll at the laſte it was taken vp by arbitrement, as heafter ſhalbe ſayde. The Biſhop, whiche was euer accompted to be of a mylde and a quiet nature, was not thought to haue done this ſo muche of his owne accorde, as through the inſtigation of others that were about hym, whiche affirmed that this occaſion of recoueryng his iuriſdictiō was not to be neglected, & ſayd moreouer that vnleſſe he were earneſt in yt matter, he might feare thēperours diſplea|

He vſed for his chief doer in theſe caſes, Chriſtofer Welſinger a Ciuilian, who ſometime was ſtudent in the vniuerſitie of Wittemberge. Againe the clergie of the head church of Straſburg, had for their aduocate Iohn Tiſchel a doctour of yt ciuile lawe.
            In the laſt boke is mention made of Wuolfgange Prince of Bipounte, how after the decre of Religiō was enacted, he was The duke of Swaybrig moleſted for Religion. ſent for to Auſpurg. Whome the Emperour had preſſed with ſō dry letters, that he ſhould obeye the decree. And for ſo muche as he had referred the matter to the Byſhoppes, the Emperour demaundeth of hym, whether he wyll ratifie the decree? And whether he wyll diſplace the miniſters of the churche, that wil not obeye the ſame? Wherupon he writing his letters to themperour in Frenche, repeteth in fewe wordes, what was done in the ſomer before at Auſpurg. And ſaieth, howe at his retourne home, he ſet forth vnto the people that part of the decree, that concerned holy daies and faſting daies, cōmaunding the ſame to be obſerued. Howe he hath alſo red ouer diligently oftener than once the decree of Religiō: and graunteth that therin are many thinges which are conſonant to his faith, by the which he loketh for eternal ſaluation. And that ther be many things alſo, which differ much from the ſame. Neuertheleſſe he hath charged the preachers & miniſters of the churche, to way euery thing diligently, & after to declare vnto him how they ſuppoſe the thing may be inſtituted. But where al they with one voice affirme, that they can not allowe the ſame in al thinges with a quiet conſcience, he thought it not his part, to compell them to worke againſt their conſcience. Wherfore he required the byſhops. yt they them ſelues wold take ſome order in it. But what thing they haue aunſwered, he hath certified heretofore, being in good hope, that nothing more of him ſhuld be required. But now ſaith he, in as much as you wil haue a direct anſwer, moſt mightie Emperour, I wyl ſay, what myne opiniō is. And firſt His playne trouth. as concerning the religiō, rites & ceremonies, which haue bene certen yeres obſerued within my dominiō, verely I was borne & brought vp in the fame, as I haue alſo ſhewed you before, Ceſar, euē vntil this day; & neuer heard any other kind of doctrine moreouer I haue beſtowed my ſtudy & paines therin, & ſo farre forth as my wyt is able to cōceaue, it appereth plainly to be agreable vnto Gods worde. For this muſt I nedes confeſſe, ſeing I am aſked the queſtion, leaſt I ſhould both hurt myne own cō
               ſcience, & litle regarde my ſaluatiō. This is the cōſideratiō alſo why I can not approue y• decre, otherwiſe moſt willing & ready after yt maner & exāple of mine aunceſtours, to do any thing for

Howebeit, your highnes, whiche is the ſupreme Magiſtrate, maye determine herein, what ſhall ſeme good vnto you. It is wholy at your pleaſure. This only I beſeche you that I be not conſtrayned to doe againſt myne owne iudgement, nor yet the people that be vnder my dominion. As touching the miniſters of the churche, I deſyred you in my laſt letters, that they might tary through your licence for the chriſtening of chyldren, and viſityng of the ſicke chiefly, tyll others were ſubſtitute in their place. Notwithſtanding if you ſhall commaunde them to departe immediatly, not abydyng tyll others come, albeit theſame ſhalbe a great grief and hynderaunce to the people, yet ſhal it be done accordingly. For many of them are gone already, and in thoſe thinges that may or ought to be perfourmed, I know that all loialtie & obeyſaunce muſt be ſhewed you. What time in the dominions of Duke Maurice, there was a great apparence The Inter. confuted by them of Lubeck and others. that Religion ſhould be altered, the miniſters and preachers of Lubeck, Luneburge, and Hamburge, compiled a boke, wherin they confuted at the full the booke and decree of Auſpurge: Wherof the chief authour was Iohn Epine. Moreouer the doctours of Maydenburg, Nicolas Amſtorfe, and eſpecially Matthie Flacie, borne in the citie of Albone in Slauonie, & Nicolas Ganles, bende them ſelues earneſtly againſt the diuines of Wittemberge and of Lipſia, and in many little bookes ſet forth, do reprehende them, as though they ſhould deale diſſemblyngly, and ſhoulde through their indifferent, or meane thynges ſet open a waye to the Romiſh Religion. Finally they Adiaphora. place this as a generall Rule, that all rites and ceremonies, al though they be of their owne nature indifferent, be no longer meane thynges, whan force, an opinion of holines, and neceſſitie byndeth men, and whan occaſion of wickednes therby is geuen. This Flacie had bene certen yeares, Phillippe Melanchthons ſchollar, but in this contentiō, he went to Magdēburg, ſetting forth a boke afterwarde, wherin he declareth the cauſe of his ſo doing. Furthermore they of Hamburge addreſſinge their letters to them of Wittemberge, eſpecially to Melanchthon, doe recite what they call indifferent or meane thynges, and declare in what caſes they ought to be admitted, deſyryng them alſo to wryte, what thynge they would haue compryſed vnder that name, to the intente men maye haue ſome certen thynge to followe, and not to wauer in theyr myndes, and leaſt that name of indifferent thynges geue occaſion to ſondrye errours, whiche may crepe in by lyttle and lyttle.
            Unto ye which epiſtle Melanchthō maketh anſwer, & amōgſt

other thinges ſayeth, how ſome bōdage is to be borne withall, ſo it be not annexed to wickednes. The Archebyſhop of Mentz, Melanchton defendeth yt Adiaphoriſt. in the beginning of May, holdeth a counſell prouinciall. The decrees wherof he ſetteth forth in a boke afterward. Lykewyſe do the Archebyſhoppes of Treuers and Collon, who hath alſo a large prouince. That booke amonges other thynges eſtablyſheth for confeſſion, that no mā be admitted to the Lordes ſupper, vnleſſe he be firſt confeſſed. Of the hallowyng of Salt, water and other thynges, which through exorciſmes and praiers, are prepared, as they ſay, for the vſe of faithful men. Of the Reliques, of the inuocation and adoration of Saincts, of Pilgrimages, of prayers for the dead, of pourgatory, of faſting, and choyſe of meates, of the canonical houres, as they terme them, of the tremblable miſteries of the Maſſe. Unto this Synode came Maurice Byſhop of Eiſtet: The reſidue ſente Ambaſſadours. But that ordynaunce of hallowyng and conſecratyng, aparteineth to many matters. Euery ſeuenth daye, whiche is called the Sonday, whan there be many people in the churche, the prieſt exorciſeth, as they terme it, firſt Salte, after Water. And whan he hath mixed the ſalte and the water together, he The force of holy water. ſprincleth the people withall. And this ſprinklyng is thought to geue health both of body and ſoule, and to dryue awaye the diſceiptes of the deuyll, & clenſe not only men, but alſo things without lyfe. For it is caſt vpon the grounde, and vpon ſtones, and throwen into dead mens graues, & the prieſt praieth God to geue it that vertue and ſtrength. After the ſame ſorte alſo is ſalte handled at the chriſtening of chyldren. And whan it is conſecrate, the prieſt putteth it into the chyldes mouth, and cō
               maundeth the deuil to come out, and thriſe ducketh the infant in the water, and with oyle, wherin he dippeth his thombe annointeth the breſt and ſhoulders of the childe. Women alſo after their childebed, whā they come to be churched, at their firſt entring in at the churche dore, are purified with this water. Finally, it ſerueth for many, vſes, but chiefly, whan they haue to do with ſpirites in the nyght, and practiſe coniuryng. And they hallowe with certen prayers, whatſoeuer apperteyneth to the apparell of Prieſtes. Moreouer the water of the fountſtone, tapers, candels, palmes, the Paſchall lambe, as they terme it, made of waxe, Egges, Fleſhe, Cheſe, Bakō, Flowres, Herbes, and fruictes of trees, and vpon all theſe thynges is caſt the forſayd water. When any churche muſt be buylded, the Byſhop or his ſuffragan layeth the firſt ſtone of the foundation, and Hallowyng of churches. throweth on ſalt water. And when it is edified, he goeth thriſe

about it, and firſt he ſprinkleth the vpper walles, than the middle, and after the loweſt of all. And with his croſiers ſtaffe maketh the ſigne of the croſſe vpon the higheſt walles, that the deuill do not approche. After entring into the churche, whan certen ſonges are ended, the prieſt ſtroweth aſhes after the ſimilitude of a croſſe. Which done, the Biſhop with his ſtaffe wryteth Greke letters in the aſhes, at the left ſyde of the croſſe: and Latin letters on the ryght, and afterwarde caſteth on an other water, mixed with ſalte, wyne and aſhes, wherwith he ſprincleth the churche agayne, and exhorteth the people to bountefulnes & liberalitie. In lyke ſorte are the belles vſed. And firſt forſouth, they muſt hange ſo, as the Byſhop may goe round about Hallowyng of belles. them. Whiche after he hath ſayde certen Pſalmes, he conſecrateth water and ſalte, and mingleth them together, wherwith he waſheth the belle diligētly both within and without, after wypeth it drie, and with holy oyle draweth in it the ſigne of the croſſe, and prayeth God, that whan they ſhall rynge or ſounde that bell, all the diſceiptes of the deuyll may vanyſhe away, hayle, thōdryng lightening, wyndes and tempeſtes, and all vntemperate weathers may be aſwaged. Whan he hath wipte out the croſſe of oyle wyth a linen cloth, he maketh ſeuē other croſſes in the ſame, and within one only. After ſaying certen Pſalmes, he taketh a payre of ſenſours and ſenſeth the belwithin, and prayeth God to ſende it good lucke. In many places they make a great dyner, and kepe a feaſt as it were at a ſolemne wedding. And they hallowe their aultars thus. They take oyle, creſme, a pounde of Frankēſenſe, a panne with hote Hallowyng of aultars. coales, ſalt, water, wyne, aſhes, hyſſope, one canuas clothe to wipe with, and an other finer and ſofter, to couer with: fiue croſſes of waxe, a chalice, morter, two tapers, finally whatſoeaperteineth to the furniture of the aultar. In the meane ſeaſon the Byſhop and the prieſtes ſaye certen Pſalmes and prayers. Than doeth he ſprinkle the altar in fiue ſondry places, ſo beſtowyng the water, that it repreſenteth ye ſigne of the croſſe, than goeth he ſeuē tymes about the aultar, and caſteth theron water tempered with wyne, hyſſope, and Aſſhes. Moreouer, he tempereth morter with water, and powreth it out aboute the aultar. Streight wayes are brought forth ſolemnely the reliques of Sainctes, whiche after they be ſenſed, are agayn ſayde vp in their place. After the Byſhop ſwingeth the aultar thryſe about with the ſenſours, which than he deliuereth to yt prieſt, who ſenſeth continually, til the hallowyng be al finiſhed. And whan he hath drawen out vpon the aultar thre croſſes of oyle

in ſeuerall places, he powreth out the oyle and ſuppleth it in, and takyng fyue ſmall pieces of Frankenſence, and as many croſſes made of waxe, he placeth them here and there, and after ſetteth them on fyre. The aſſhes that are gathered therof, are kept for holy thinges. Finally, he anoynteth the foure corners and edges, and alſo the forefront of the aultar, & ſingeth maſſe. But the oyle and chreſme as they call it, is made euery wheare on Maundy thurſday in the paſſion weke, next before Eaſter.
            Theſe were in tymes paſt had in great reuerence and eſtimation with all men. But whan Luther and after hym others taught, howe al creatures were cōſecrated by the mouth Luther brought in cōtempt the popyſh ceremonies. of God, what tyme he created the whole worlde, all this gere came in contempt and mockery, as full of iugglyng and trompery. Nowe therfore the Byſhoppes of Germany hauynge the wynde at wyll, reſtore the ſame and bryng them home agayne, as it were from death to lyfe. And touchyng the makyng of holy water as they terme it, there is a decree in the Biſhop of Romes lawe, whiche they aſcribe to Alexander, the fifte Byſhop after Saint Peter, to the intent the thyng may be of more credite and authoritie, by reaſon of the antiquitie therof. Howe The Popes Legates to yt Emperour. the Byſhop of Rome had ſent thre Byſhoppes into Germany, it is ſpoken of before. Whan they came to themperour at Bruſſelles, the .xxv. daye of May they declare firſt their commiſſion. In the beginning the Biſhop of Rome reciteth how ful of care he is, for them, that haue torne the Lordes cote. Howbeit two thynges do comforte hym chiefly. Firſt, for that Chriſt him ſelfe did prophecie, that Sathan ſhould aſſault the churche, but yet in vayne. Secondarely, that by a generall counſell may be taken away al ſuche thinges as are wickedly crept in. And for ſo much as ye fruict of the coūſel is come already to other natiōs, but amōgs the Germains as yet is nothing done, by reaſon of diuers diſſentiōs in religiō ther, therfore hath he, partly of his own mere motion, & office paſtoral, partly alſo at themperours requeſt, by the conſent of the Senate of Cardinalles, ſent forth certen byſhops, whiche haue authoritie to receiue vnto grace, ſuch as ar willing to retourne into the boſom of the churche, & to promeſſe them al ioyful thinges of his clemencie & great benignitie, ſo that they be content to receiue lawes & not to preſcribe. Which benefite verely he graūteth to al men in general, no degre at al, nor alſo no crime of that ſort excepted though it haue continued neuer ſo many yeares, yet ſo, as they yt be ſuch offendours, do confeſſe their errours & ſinnes to ſome catholike prieſt, and do ſuche penaunce as he ſhal therfore inioyne them.

But for open confeſſion, abiuring, and ſatiſfaction, by the lawes preſcribed, he doeth vtterly remitte, and forgeue them. He hath geuen alſo to the Byſhoppes that be his Ambaſſadours full power and authoritie, to vnloſe ſuche as are bounden to the Lutherians, by conuenaſit promeſſe or othe, from all thoſe bondes, to abſolue monkes that be fallē into hereſie, and haue forſaken their houſes, and to permitte them, chaunging their coates to ſerue in an other vocation of the churche. Moreouer to geue pardon to eate milke, butter, cheſe, egges and fleſhe, hauing The Pope graunteth licence to eate fleſhe. a reſpect to the place and perſone. Finally to permit thē to receiue the whole Supper of the Lorde, who laying aſyde all other errours, ſhall allowe the decree of the counſel of Conſtance, whiche will openly confeſſe, that there is as muche receiued vnder one kynde, as vnder both, and that the churche erred, not for making that decre of one kynde only. And that this may be graunted them, for a certen tyme, as ſhalbe thought mete, yet ſo, as they them ſelues doe this ſeuerally at an other tyme and place, and not at the ſame tyme, whan others doe receiue vnder one kynde only. Laſtly, they haue authoritie to compounde with the poſſeſſioners of churche landes, for the fruictes receiued and ſpent, ſo as they wyll departe from the poſſeſſion from henceſorth. Furthermore to puniſhe obſtinate perſones by the cenſure of the churche, and herein to craue aſſiſtaunce of the Magiſtrates. And lykewyſe to chouſe and ſubſtitute Byſhoppes throughout Germany, whiche ſhall put the thing in execution. Theſe Ambaſſadours of Rome followynge this commiſſion; in ſuch places as they thought moſte nedefull did ſubſtitute Byſhops, wherof the Byſhop of Straſburg was one, whome they commaunded to execute thinges before reherſed. And ſo finally to receiue into fauour eccleſiaſtical perſons, if they firſt would forſake and put away their wyues. And mē ſaye, howe they went to the Emperour, to haue cōference with hym touchyng the meaſure and maner of execution. And after they vnderſtode, that it was not poſſible for them to go vnto al places, whiche had nede of remedy, of neceſſitie they ſuborned others. This graunte or indulgence, as they terme it, of the byſhoppe of Rome, the Emperour ſendeth immediatly to the byſhoppes of Germany, and warneth thē all ſeuerally, to handle the matter gently and peaſeably, and that they firſt trye and The Archbyſhop of Meiz to the councelloure of yt Lantgraue. and aſſay al wayes, by fayre ſpeach, exhortations and praiers, before they come to excommunication and curſyng. Wherfore the Archebyſhop of Mētz addreſſing his letters both to diuerſe others & alſo to the gouernours & counſellours of yt Lātgraue.

And ſpeakyng many thynges of his cure and charge paſtorall, and of the Emperours fayth and dilygence, requyreth them to exhibite this order ſent from the Byſhop of Rome, to the miniſters of the churche, commaunding them to obeye the ſame. The preachers being moued herein, ſaye how their doctrine is conſonant to the doctrine of the Prophetes and Apoſtles, the The Godly anſwer of yt Preachers. lyfe it ſelfe in dede doeth not aunwere to the profeſſion, but yet do thei acknowledge no errour in their doctrine. Wherfore thei haue no nede of the Byſhops indulgence. They haue preferred mariage before the filthie ſengle lyfe, accordinge vnto. Gods worde, neither can they forſake their children & wyues, whome Chriſt him ſelf commaundeth to embrace with all loue, fidelitie, and beneuolence. Where ther churches do receyue the Lordes ſupper wholy, the ſame is done by the commaundement of Chriſte, and after the cuſtome of the primatiue churche. And they wyll admit no alteration herein. In the moneth of May, was an open diſputatiō at Oxforde, betwene Peter Martyr & An open diſputation at Oxforde. the Diuines of the ſame vniuerſitie, cōcerning the Lordes ſupper, and the preſence of Chriſt his body. Theſe concluſions dyd Martyr ſet vp and defende. That the ſubſtaunce of bread and wyne is not chaunged. That the body and bloud of Chriſte, is not carnally or corporally in the bread and wyne, but to be vnited to them ſacramentally. Afterwarde there was ſet forthe a boke of the ſame, wherin the preſidentes of the diſputation, appointed by the kynges commaundemēt, do ſufficiently declare, that Martyr had the maiſtrie in that contention. The tenth day of the moneth of Iune, the Quene of Fraūce was crowned at Sainct Denis, as is accuſtomed, by the Cardinalles of Bolon, Gwiſe, Chattilion; Uandome and Bourbon, for al the reſt were at Rome. The .vi. daye after, the kyng with a maruelous goodly trayne and richely apparrelled, entreth into Paris the The king is receiued in to Paris. head citie of his Realme, where he had not bene yet ſene opēly ſynce the death of his father, & two days after him the Quene. Whyles he ſoiourned there, diuers were put to executiō for Lutheraniſme, whiche, as it is ſayde, he behelde him ſelfe. After Erecution done in his ſight. The king cō
                  maundeth to go on proceſſion. that, the fourth day of Iuly, he cōmaundeth to go on proceſſion in euery church. The next day after he publiſheth a wryting in prynte, declaring this to be the cauſe therof; that he might geue God thankes for his manifold benefites imployed vpō him. And that he might praye to God for the preſeruation of hym ſelfe, his wyfe and his children, and of the whole Realme and commō wealth, and cōmende vnto him the ſoules of godly mē, but chiefly the kinges of Fraūce, his progenitours, & his father

lately departed, after whoſe example, he was fully prefixed to vndertake the defence and tuition of the catholique fayth, Religion, the authoritie, and liberties of the See Apoſtolique, & miniſters of the churche: amōgeſt the cauſes this alſo to be one principall, that it mygh be openly knowen howe muche he abhorreth them, whiche contrary to Chriſtes commaundement, contrary to the traditions of the Apoſtles, and conſent of al antiquitie, denie the preſence of the body and bloude of Chriſte, whiche take away all vertue and ſtrength from Baptiſme, penaunce, good workes, and Sacramentes, whiche do vtterly cō
               temne the authoritie of the churche and order archepreiſtſhip, whiche reiecte the praying, adoration, and reliques of ſaintes. Moreouer that by that deuoute ſupplication he might teſtifie what his opinion and mynde is, verely, that after the example of his progenitours, and by a certen imitation of inheritaūce, he doeth ſo thinke and beleue of all opinions, as doeth the Catholique churche the Crede of the Apoſtles, the firſt counſell of Nice, and many other counſelles of the holy fathers. Further more, that he is fully determined to banniſh out of his realme and dominions, the hereſies long ſince condemned, but in this tyme partely reuined and partly inuented by Luther, Caroloſtadius, Zwinglius, Oecolampadius, Melanchthon, Bucer, Caluine, and ſuche other Archeheretikes, monſtrouſe and peſtiferous perſones, and to puniſhe moſte extremely ſuche as ſhall offende herein. This wryting ſetforth in the vulgare tōgue, he ſendeth abroade into all partes of Fraunce, commaunding thē to go a proceſſion in all places, and declare the ſame vnto the people. Not long after he beheaded Monſour Ueruine, for rendring Ueruine beheaded. the towne and caſtel of Boloigne to the king of Englād, as is ſpoken in the .xv. boke. And his father in lawe Mounſ. Dubees, an aged mā, which was gouernour of al Boloignois, and one of the foure Mreſchalles of Fraunce, he cōdemneth to perpetuall priſon. He had diuerſe monethes paſt, ſollicited the Swiſſes to renewe the league whiche they had made with his father. And although the Emperour by letters and intermeſſē
               gers did greatly diſſwade them, yet they neuertheleſſe, for that they thought it more expedient for their pourpoſe, aſſente ther unto, firſt in dede thoſe that are of the Romiſhe Religion, and the Lepontians and Ualeſians, and after alſo they of Baſill, & the Schafuſians, wherat many men marueled greatly, by reaſon of thoſe forſayd proclamations and executions. For moſte men ſuppoſed, that they ought not to enter into league and ſocietie with him, whiche ſo cruelly perſecuted the true Religiō,

and cōdemned their churches and doctours by name. But they of Bernes and Zurick, followyng the counſel of Zwinglius, as I haue ſhewed you in the third and ſixt boke, abſtained frō this league. The conuocation of Lipſia, is before mentioned. A cōuocatiō at Lipſia. But where many ſayd and complained, that the Romiſh Religion was by litle and litle reſtored, Duke Maurice, the fourth day of Iuly, addreſſing his letters to his lieftenauntes, ſayeth how he heareth that ther be many, which partly for ouermuch carefulnes, partly being ſo perſwaded by others, feare, leaſt the olde errours ſhould one after an other be reſtored. And that certen miniſters of the churche, with other buſy braines, and troubleſome perſones, are not fre from this ſclaūder. He hath verely at ſōdry times heretofore declared by opē wryting, what his minde and purpoſe is, and for thoſe ſclaunders doth repete the ſame againe, to the intent he may ſhewe & teſtifie, that he hath an eſpecial care of Religion. Wherfore he deſireth thoſe, which either for lightnes of belief, or through the perſwaſiō of others do feare an alteration, to lay al feare aparte, and geue credit to this his wryting and teſtimonie. And as cōcerning them, that bring vp ſuche reportes, let them not thinke, to eſcape vnpuniſhed, if they ſo continue. Howbeit out of the decree lately made at Lipſia, were gathered certen chapters by his commaundement, which ſhould be taught and preached. Let them inquire therfore and learne to vnderſtand, whether the miniſters of the churche do followe this fourme, or whether they reprehend the ſame in their ſermons. What ſo euer it be, he commaūdeth thē to aduertyſe him, and if any doubtes ſhall aryſe, to repare to yt diuines of Wittemberge and Lipſia, and that theſe thinges be declared vnto the people. In theſe daies departed ye Lātgraues wyfe, mother in lawe to Duke Maurice, whiche pined awaye through care & ſorow for her huſbandes impriſonment. About this time the people rebelled in England for two cauſes. One was for landes & cōmons encloſed. For the people complayned, Rebellion in Englande. that the Nobilitie had taken in much groūd, whiche before lay cōmon, & had incloſed & imparked the ſame for dere, & for other priuate vſes. The others in Deuonſhire demaūded theſame alſo, but they were chiefly offēded with thalteratiō of religion, & wold haue the ſyx articles, wherof is mētioned in the .xii. boke to be reſtored. What tyme therfore they flocked together in armure, and the matter was ful of daunger, neither would admonitions take any place. The kyng and his coūſel, though moſte vnwilling, ſende forth a force againſt them, and diſconfite thē in ſondry places, and certen thouſandes were ſlayne.
            
               
The French King eſpiyng this occaſion which gaped after Bolain that was loſt, prepareth an army ſpedely, and partly by force, partly The French king ſtealeth fortes. by ſurrendrie, taketh certain caſtels and fortes, by ſea coaſte betwixt Bolain and Caleis, and by that meanes putteth the ſoldiors of Bolain to an extremity. The Lordes of England toke this miſfortune moſt greuouſly: and becauſe the Lorde Protector ye kinges vncle had the gouernmente, the whole faulte was imputed to him that he had not in time furniſhed the places with things neceſſary. This blame and enuy increaſing daily, the protector in the beginning of Octobre, was by common aſſent of the nobles, appreheded at Windſore, where the king was at the ſame time, and brought to the Towre of London priſoner. The Lords afterward declare vnto the people the cauſes, & charge him with euil gouernement of the common wealth, and ſetforth a proclamation of the ſame in Print, wherunto for a further teſtimony, euery mā ſubſcribeth his name: amonges the which, Ihon Earle of Warwicke was principal. In the meane while, that the French king attempteth theſe thinges againſt the Engliſhmen, themperour leadeth about his ſōne throughe King Philip inueſted in Flaunders. Flaunders, Henault, and Artois, and ſweareth the people to be true and loyall vnto him. After they both retourne to Andwarp about the .viii. daye of Septembre. There was themperors ſonne receiued with Pageauntes and ſhowes moſt ſumptuous, not only by the Townes men, but alſo by marchaunts ſtraungers, Spaniardes, Italians, Germanes, and Engliſh men. After this accōpanied with his aunt the regent, he goeth alſo into thother prouinces & receiue theyr fidelity by an oth. I tolde you before of the Senate The Senate of Strauſburge do cō
                  pounde with their biſhop. of Strauſburge, how they ſent an ambaſſadour to the Emperour to abate the controuerſy, they had with theyr Biſhop, wherefore by themperors permiſſion there were choſen certain arbitrers on bothe parties. Whan they were met in the monthe of October, after long diſceptation, the Senate permitteth the Biſhop .iii. Churches that he may eſtabliſh therin Religion, according to the decree lately made. Moreouer, he receiueth the Cleargye into his faithe and tuition. The Biſhop againe couenaunteth and graunteth to the Senate, the Colledge of Saint Thomas, for the maintenaunce of the ſchole, and the reſt of the churches. The Cleargy alſo payeth to the Senate an yerely tribute & ſome of mony, in other thinges they obtain their immunity and fredome. The Emperour ſetforthe proclamations The pearil & fear of them of Mayden burge. againſt them of Maydenburge, as I haue declared before, and called on the ſtates in Saxonye for aid: many refuſed not, ſo yt thother ſtates not only of Saxony, but alſo of thempire would do the ſame. The menne of Lubecke and Luneburge, by conſente

of themperors deputies, going to Maidenburge, aſſaied to make a reconcilemente, but all in vaine. At that tune did no man impugne them openly: but for ſo much as they were outlawed: they were euermore in daunger, nether might they withoute pearill of life and goods depart out of yt city: For it was lawful for euery man to trye fortune againſt them. Therfore the Senate, where they had before cōplaind of thiniuries of their neighbors by publicke letters. Now they ſetforth another wryting vnto al men in general, but chiefly to their next neighbors, and ſay how they are ſelanderouſly reported, Theyr Purgation. as though they ſhould arrogantly and proudly demeane thē ſelues againſt themperor & thempire, and that they ſhould forſake peace, & wryte many contumelious things: but herein they ſuſtain great wrong: for they do acknowledge Charles themperor for theyr ſupreme magiſtrate, and haue opēly proclaimed that nothing be ſaid a miſſe againſt him or any ſtate: nether is there anye other cauſe of diſpleaſure ſay they, than that we profeſſe the Goſpell and word of Why they cā
                  not get pardon. God: for thother ſlaunders are deuiſed and forged by theyr enuemies: howe deſyrous they be of peace, it is not vnknowen to them, which haue bene at a few of the laſt conuentions: for they do not only vnderſtand, but alſo know by experiēce, how ſwete is ye name of peace, and how comfortable a thing it is: and againe what euils warre bryngeth.
            Moreouer, it ſhuld be greuous and diſpleſaunt to them, if theyr neighbours ſhould for theyr ſake, be in daunger, or receiue any domage: Furthermore they do confeſſe that neyther is it lawfull for them, neyther is it in theyr power, obſtinately to reſiſt themperour and thempire, but that beyng dryuen of neceſſitye, to defende them ſelues and theyrs from iniury, they haue beaten downe certayne buildinges, and haue taken certen holds, ſmal townes, & villages in the time of warre, not minding to kepe them for them ſelues, but that they ſhuld not come into the hands of foraine nations: neyther do they refuſe to rendre the ſame again, ſo that theyr neighbors do attempt nothing. And that there is two cauſes chieflye, wherefore they can not obteyne peace: fyrſte, for that they do retain the doctrin of the goſpell, and refuſe that Romyſhe Idoll. Secondlye, for that the condicions of peace propounded, are to them not only greuous, but alſo intollerable, and altogether ſuch, as cannot be performed.
            For if they ſhuld betray theyr liberty, geuen thē by themperor great Otto, the firſt of that name, and the which they haue receiued of theyr elders, and maintained vnto this day, it can by no reaſō be defended or excuſed in time to come: Nowe alſo it appeareth, and is manifeſtly ſene, what thing the authoures of the booke made at Auſpurge intended, and where about they went: for they indeuonred

to plucke awaye from men the chief article of doctrine of iuſtification, the very force of ſaluation: They called in doubte alſo the Lordes ſupper, and marriage of prieſtes: Moreouer they teach the inuocation of deade men, and what ſo euer dependeth of the ſame: furthermore they go about to reſtore all papiſtry, as hath bene declared of many excellent learned men: certainly this ſo great a wickednes woulde not be winked at, or paſſed ouer in ſilence, yea God is to be called on with continuall praier, that he ſuffer not the glory of his name to be thus polluted: for aſſuredly it is an heauye and a ſorowful ſight, that men ſhould be violently inforced to falſe Religion and Idolatry, the miniſters of the churche caſt into priſon, or wyth theyr wiues and chyldren dryuen into exile, ſome alſo myſeſerablye ſlaine: it is as much to be lamented, that albeit theſe thinges are openly ſene, eſpeciallye in the vpper partes of Germanye, yet there ſhould be men that dare affirme, that Religion is not impugned: Howe be it, is no newes: for euer ſynce the worlde began, the ſtate of good and godly menne hathe bene alwaies to ſuffer affliction: Againe there be many examples both in the old and newe Teſtamente, that declare the conſtancy of holy men, which they vſed, whan Kinges and Princes ſetforth theyr Proclamations contrary to Gods word: For in ſuche caſes was this alwaies of force, that is wrytten in holy ſcriptures, howe we oughte rather to obeye God than men. This hathe Chriſoſtome, Auſten, Ambroſe, and other holy men not only taught, but alſo perfourmed in dede, whan Emperoures commaunded any thinge againſte the commaundementes of God: in like caſe are they at this preſent: They ſe the dā
               ger they are in, and yet may not otherwiſe do: for they muſt ſoner abide all pearill, than to praiſe and receiue manifeſt errors.
            It is wrytten of Gordius the martir, who beinge requeſted of The ſayinge of Gordiꝰ the martyr. his frendes, whan he was caried to execution, that for ſauinge of his life, he woulde forſake his opinion, aunſweared, that the tonge ought not to ſpeake any thinge in reproche of him that made it: the which thing aſwel apperteineth vnto al mē: For this is the opiniō bothe of the aunciente Churche, and alſo of certaine of the fyrſte They betray the truthe yt hold it in ſylence. Biſhoppes of Rome, that they do not only betray the truth, whiche teache falſe Doctrine, but alſo ſuche as dare not profeſſe openlye and defende the truthe knowen: wherefore the whole caſe muſte be cōmitted to god, nether ought they, ether for yt pleſure of any mā or fearce of any peril, to forſake the profeſſiō of yt Ueritie, but to ſet before their eies thexample of Daniel, who cōtrary to yt proclamatiō of king Darius, worſhipped God wt the windowes ſet open on euerye ſide. Certes, he mighte haue done the ſame priuatelye and cloſelye, withoute any daunger, but for as much as the ſame thing

concerned the profeſſion of his faith, and glory of gods holy name with a great and a conſtant courage, he called vpon God openlye, and had no reſpect of any daunger, which being procured for him by his aduerſaries, lighted after on theyr owne heades.
            Wherefore they beſeche all men, to attempte no force nor warre againſte them, whiche are members of the true Churche, and that they woulde followe herein the ſteppes of the Chriſtiane Souldioures of former time, whych in dede would not obey, whan themperoures in the warres required theyr ſeruice againſte the Chriſtians, as is to be proued by the example of Saincte Moris the martir: howe greuouſlye alſo God was offended with the Iſraelites for that they being afraid of the multitude of their ennemies did not healpe theyr weake felowes, is expreſſed in the boke of iudges, that it mighte be a doctrine for al men, not only not to forſake in their neceſſitye the brethren and fellowes of their Religion, but alſo to ayde and ſuccoure them: They doubte nothing, but yt good men will be moued by theſe thinges: For God liueth, & is immortall, which hath full oft in times paſt ſhewed the mighty power of his right hande, and nowe can alſo declare the ſame. They deſyre them alſo hartely, that they would cauſe theſe letters to be exhibited to the Emperor, to king Ferdinando, and to other princes and ſtates, and alſo to make interceſſion for them, that no extremity be wrought againſt them: for they wil refuſe to do nothing, that may be godly and honeſtly performed: they require moreouer, that they would commend them vnto god by their praiers, to thend verely, yt through the xample of the Niniuites, they may from the bottom of their hartes bewail their ſinnes, & hartely ſigh vnto God, that they may boldly profeſſe this doctrine of the goſpel, whiche hathe nowe theſe .xxx. yeares bene preached, and may ſet it forth with the godlines of life, that they may ſhew the worckes of loue vnto all men, but chiefly to the miniſters of the church, now baniſhed and exiled, and to theyr children and wiues and ſuche other miſerable people: And that they may kepe this holſome doctrine pure and ſafe from the deceites of them, which vnder the pretence of reſtoringe Ceremonies, do now bryng in againe the whole rabble of the Romiſhe doctrin. In the month of Octobre, Fraunces Duke of Mātua, the ſonne of Duke Fridericke, marieth the Lady Katherine, daughter to Ferdinando Kinge of Romaines. After, the tenth day of Nouē
               bre departeth out of this life the biſhop of Rome, Paule the thirde, The deathe of pope paul the third. whan he had liued .lxxxii. yeres. The daye before he died, he releaſed the cuſtomes which he had impoſed vpon Saltpits and diuers other thinges, not without the ſighing of the people.

Certaine monethes before, he had treated with the Emperoure for the reſtitution of Placence: but that was in vaine: and if he had liued longer, he was thought verely, that he woulde haue taken the French kinges part. For euer ſence the murther of his ſonne Peter Aloiſe, he imagined how to be reuenged. His bodye was caried into the chappell of biſhop Sixtus, and there remained .iii. daies. Many people reſorted thither to kiſſe his fete, which were put out A boke in Italiā againſt the Pope. at an Iron grate, as the manner is. Before he lefte his life, there came forthe an Italian booke againſte him ſore and vehemente, vnder the title of Barnardinus Ochinus, but compiled as it is thoughte, of others, with a preface to Aſchanius Colomnois, whom he had baniſhed.
            This boke amonges other thinges, which were ouer longe to recite, adreſſinge his talcke towardes him, and callinge him Antichriſte, In the time that Innocentius was biſhop of Rome, thou waſt, ſaieth he, committed to priſon, a prelate moſte abhominable, for two deteſtable murthers, and for committing Paracidie, that is to wit, for poyſoninge thy Mother. and a Nephew of thine, that the whole inheritaunce might deſcend vnto the. And after bēing ſet at liberty, where you were nothinge aſhamed to ſue for the Purple His Siſter a whore made him cardinal hat, a man of ſo greate wickednes, and were thriſe repulſed by the colledge of cardinals, your owne natural ſiſter. Iulia Farneſia, at the length obteined your ſute. For where ſhe threatned the high biſhop, that ſhe wold be no longer at his commaundement, the biſhop Alexander the ſixt fearing her anger and diſpleſure, choſe you into the fellowſhip of cardinals. After this alſo you poyſoned an other ſiſter of youres, which was more than halfe whoriſhe, after the cuſtome of your familye. Whan you were ambaſſador in the prouince of Aucona, what time Iulye the ſeconde was biſhop of Rome, full naughtely you begiled a maid of the ſame citye, diſſemblinge what you were: For making her to beleue, that you wer a gentleman, attending vpon the ambaſſadour, you defloured her, which ſhameful acte the maides vncle, Cardinall of Aucona, charged you moſt earneſtly before Cleinent the ſeueth than Pryſoner after the citye was taken. Nicholas Quercey toke the with his wife Laura Farneſia The monſtrus lechery of the Pope. thy Nece, and gaue the a iobbe with hys Dagger, that the ſcarre thereof remaineth to this daye. What ſhoulde I ſpeake of thy Daughter Cuſtaunce, wyth whome thou haſte ſo ofte offended? For to the end thou mighteſt haue her more frelye at thy pleaſure, thou diddeſt poyſone her huſbande Boſius Sfortia. Who perceiuing your wickednes, toke ſuch an inward thoughte, that he was neuer ſene mery after. In filthy luſt aſſuredlye you paſſe farre the

Emperours Commodus and Heliogabalus: and that may be well proued by ſo many baſtardes as you haue. Lot lay with his daughters ignorauntly, and whan he was made droncke: but thou ſobre haſt medled not only with thy Nece, but alſo with thy Siſter and daughter. Nowe that ſame whiche thine vngratious ſonne Peter Aloiſe did to the Biſhop of Fane, how ſhameful is it to be ſpoken, and how horrible a crime. When Biſhop Clemente was deteined priſoner in the Caſtell Aungele, and ſente the Ambaſſadour to the Emperor for recouering of his liberty, thou wouldeſt not take thy iourney, before he had geuen the Biſhoppricke of Parma to thy Nephew Farneſius, who than was but ten yeres old. That done, you diſceiued him neuertheleſſe: for whan you came to Gene, you fained your ſelfe ſicke. But what Marchaundiſe haſte thou made with the Church goodes being Cardinall? And ſince thou waſte The Popes rauening. made Biſhop, liuing God, how filthelye haſte thou conſumed the goodes of the Church of Rome? Art thou not aſhamed to haue beſtowed the high office and gouernemente vppon thine vngratious Sonne, with forty thouſande Ducats yearely, and as muche in a manner to thy Nephew Octauius? I ſpeake not what vnreaſonable ſubſtaunce, thou haſt waſted vpon all the wemen of thy houſe, and vppon thy Neces Sanflorians After thou dareſt make mention of the Turkes, which are like now to inuade pore Italy. Which thou doeſt for this intente. that thou mighteſt haue ſome occaſion to polle the people, whiche vnder thy gouernmente do ſuſtaine a mooſte heauy and intollerable burthen. Thou diddeſt ſell to the Duke of Farrare Mutina and Reſo. Thou haſt aliened the Cities of Parma and Placence from the church of Rome, whiche were neuer begotten by the, and the which Biſhop Clemente was verely aſhamed to do. To thintent thou mighteſt enrich thine own houſe and family, thou haſt handled others contrary to righte and equity, and ſuch as could not, or refuſed to beare that burthen and bondage, thou haſt perſecuted with warre, that do the Peruſines declare, amongs others, and Aſcanius Columnois. He that taketh yerely of his ſubiectes more than ordinarye, iii .C. M. Ducates, he that oft impoſeth new cuſtomes, one while of Salt, an other while of other thinges, he that exacteth now the tenthes, and nowe the moytie of the fruites, he ought verely to be taken for the enemye of Chriſten bloud. The Turkiſh nauy during your biſhoppricke, ſailed by the coſtes of the Church of Rome without damage, and that not long ſence, what time Barbarous entred into our ſeas. Wherfore that ſecreat trafficke, that thou haſte with infidels, cutteth of from the all occaſion, that thou canſt not hereafter pretend yt name of the Turkiſhe warre. And yet in the meane ſeaſon, you dare be

bold to taunt the kinge of Fraunce, for kepinge frendſhip with the Proteſtantes, and the Emperoure with the King of England, is it not a great ſhame, that thou ſhouldeſt wholy depend vpon Aſtrology, Paule geuen to Aſtrology & coniuratiō
                and Necromantie? the thing can not be denied: for the expert mē in theſe ſciences, thou haſt auaunced with honors, giftes and promotiōs, as Ceſius, Marcellus, Gauricus a portugal, with others. Which thing vndoubtedly doth manifeſtly reproue the of vngodlines and miſbeliefe, and is a cauſe ſufficiente enoughe, for whyche thou oughteſt to be depoſed from thy ſeate. Many ſuche other like thinges are contained in the foreſaid boke, which is to be hadde in Printe. Now let vs retourne to the dead coarſe. The .ix. day after began the buriall to be made nine daies together. In the meane An aſſemble of Cardinals to chuſe a newe Pope. ſeaſon the Cardinals that were abſent repare to the Citye with all ſpede, Trent, Mantua, Cibo, Montane, Auſpurge, Auria, Urbine and all theſe were at the buriall. The firſte that came thither was the Cardinall of Trent. For he was than at Mantua, at the marriage before mentioned, whan word was broughte him, of the Biſhops death. The funerall charges did amount to the ſome of fifty thouſand crownes. The .xviii. day of Nouembre, when maſſe was done, they went into the Conclaue, as they call it, to chuſe a new biſhop. The fourth day of December, Cardinal Pacieco a Spaniard came thither from Trent, and the .xii. day came Cardinall Bellay, Uandome, Chaſtilion, Guiſe, Tournon, & at thend of yt ſame Moneth, Bolon, Ambois, Lorayne, after alſo Bourbon, a man of great yeres, Frenchmen all, and many were at Rome before, whome the King had ſent thither two yeres paſt, as I ſhewed you in the .xix. boke. And in ſo muche as we are come to this place it ſhall not be a miſſe, to declare here certain things. Ther is a Palace at Rome in Mount Uaticane, ioyning to the Church of Saint Peter, wherein dwell the high Biſhops, and there, whan occaſion ſerueth, they do call the Senate of Cardinals. In this palace amonges other buildinges, be fiue halles, and a galary thre ſcore and ten paſes longe, and two Chappels. Theſe together make that ſame that is called yt Conclaue. The one chappell is appoyn
                  •
               e
                  •
                to ſaye Maſſe in, and to take theyr voyces in. The other, and the foreſaid Haulles, the Cardinals haue theyr manſion. And at this time after the deathe of Paule, for as much as the Cardinals were in nombre fifty & four, there were ſo many chambers prepared. The Conclaue in tymes paſt had many dores: but nowe were they all ſhut vp, ſauinge one dore only. Moreouer there be no glaſe windowes, but in the chappels, and they be of ſuch an height, that no man can reach them. Wherfore nether ayre, nor lighte pearſeth thither, but burne waxe lightes both day and night. Nowe haue they theyr chambers builded.

xiiii. fote wide, xvi. fote long, and .xii. fote depe, nether of brick, ſtone, nor timber, but of cloth, ether Uiolet or Grene. And becauſe ſome be more commodious then others, they draw lottes to auoid diſpleaſure and enuy. Euery hall hath .ii. rowes of Chambers. In this ſpace, and within theſe limites, muſt the Cardinals kepe them ſelues, with their family and houſhold ſtuffe. And euery Cardinal is alowed .iiii. Seruauntes, to lie in his chamber, and alwaies to wait vpon him, whileſt the reaſt make the beds, and do other thinges neceſſarye. Againe there be .xii. appoynted in generall, whiche make cleane the chambers, and conuey the filthe and ordure to a place aſſigned. Thoſe that be once within, are compelled to remain vnleſſe they fall ſicke, and whan they be once gone out, they are receiued no more in, except they be cardinals. Whan they be come in to the Conclaue, to the election, ſtraightwaies are choſen .iii. or iiii cardinalles, which ſhall prouide all thinges neceſſary, and anſwer the ambaſſadours of Kinges and Princes. They haue one key of the ſame gate that I ſpake of, the Nobility of Rome hath an other the third haue the biſhops. And the fourth, the maſters of the ceremonies. This gate is not vnlocked, after they be once comen into the Conclaue, vnleſſe it be at the comming of ſome cardinals. And The maſters of ceremonis in the ſame gate is a little wicket, wherof the maſters of the ceremonies haue the kay, and at the time of dinner and ſupper it is opened only. For than is the meat brought in by the ſame from the kitchins, which are without, and there be ready certain biſhops apoynted for the ſame purpoſe, which ſearch diligently euery piece of meat, that there be no letters conueied therin priuely. Of thē doth maſters of the ceremonies receiue the diſhes, and deliuer thē to the cardinals ſeruaunts, in at the ſame wicket: for no man els may be ſuffred to approche neare. The meat is ſerued in earthen platters, and the wine in flagēs of glaſſe, and are daily brought in new. For loke what veſſels are once ſerued in, the ſame of an old cuſtom are the fees of the maſters of the ceremonies, who gather thē vp right diligentlye. For they be fine bothe in ſtuffe and workmanſhip, and are ſold deare. This time watched without, not farre from the palace, gate, v .C. fotemen, Italians, at the leadinge of the county of The cuſtody of yt Cōclaue Petilia. Againe the garde of the Swiſſes, that ſerued Paule the thyrd, and the light horſmen. After, the gentlemen of Rome, than the ambaſſadors of Kinges and Princes, laſt, and next to the gate, the Biſhops before mentioned, that are ſearchers of the meate. For the defence of the city, were placed .iiii. M. ſouldiours at the cōduit of Oracius Farneſius, beſides that in the priuate houſes of Cardinals, and noble men were alſo certain bondes of ſouldiors. Now wil we ſpeake of thelection. Albeit they were wonte in olde time to

enter into the conclaue the x. day after the biſhoppes departure, yet now after the death of Paule the thirde, the matter was differed vntil the .xix. day, which was the .xxix. day of Nouembre, as before is ſaid. That day the cardinals entring into the conclaue a litle before the euening, binde vnto them by an othe, the nobility of Rome the capitaines and centurions, appoynted to the defence of the city. after they reſort euery man with his family into his owne chamber, and commaund all others to depart out of the conclaue. Some of the cardinals be biſhops, ſome prieſtes, and other ſome deacōs. Before they went to the election, certain lawes were recited, which they thē ſelues vſe to make, according to yt ſtate of the time. They do concerne the fredomes & priuileges of the cardinals. Firſt therfore The othes of the cardinals they be all ſworne, that if it be there chaunce to be choſen Byſhop, to obſerue all thoſe thinges exactly. Moreouer that they wyll chuſe him, whome they ſhal thincke moſt comfortable for the commune weale. After they go to the matter. This was the ſecond day of December. There, the maſters of the ceremonies by ringing of The maner how to chuſe the Pope. a little Bell in the conclaue, calleth them al to Maſſe, that finiſhed there is brought vnto euery cardinall a chaire, and therin a pece of paper conteining the names of all the cardinals. After this, before the aultar of the chappel is ſet a table, couered with a purple cloth, where vppon is ſet a chalice, and a ſiluer bell, and about the table, ſixe ſtoles. And euery cardinall wryteth his voyce in a little paper and afterward foldeth vp and ſigneth it in ſuch ſort, that his name only, which is choſen, doth appeare. Than euerye man ariſinge in order, goeth and kneleth downe before the aultare, and when they haue prayed, they put the Paper into the chalice, and ſit downe againe in theyr places. That done, two Biſhops, ſo many Prieſtes, and as many Deacons, ſit them downe vpon thoſe ſixe ſtoles. The fyrſt biſhop taketh out of the chalice all the papers in ordre, and ſo deliuereth them to the firſt deacon: who vnfoldeth the ſame, & with a loud voyce, readeth the name of the elected, but not alſo of thelectaure. There by and by the cardinals which haue euery one of thē papers, wherin all theyr names be wrytten, as I ſaid before, adde vnto euery name that is red and pronounced the nombre of voyces geuen to the ſame. The accompt being thus made, the firſte prieſt, who hath alſo a paper conteining the names of the cardinals, doth pronounce how many voyces euerye man hathe. If the nombre be not ſuch as is required, the papers are caſt againe into the chalice. Than doth the other deacon ring the ſiluer bel: ſtraightwais commeth the maſters of the ceremonies, that tarieth without, and bringing in a fire panne with coles, burneth all thoſe little papers. And euery cardinall maye at one time, geue foure ſeuerall voyces to didiuers

men, but that chaunceth ſeldome. And this verelye is the manner of theyr election: Nowe let vs retourne to our purpoſe. The Cardinals being thus incloſed, the ſecond day of Septēbre, as before is ſaid, begin the matter, how be it they wēt to it but ſlowly, for that they heard ſay, how the Cardinals of Fraunce were cō
               ming. Many men ſuppoſed, that they ſhould haue ſene a newe biſhop of Rome, before Chriſtmas, but their expectation was vaine, The Cardinalles were all deuided into thre partes or factions, Thre factiōs of cardinals. whereof one was with the Emperoure, another with the Frenche king, and the third was of the Farneſians. The Frenchmen wold haue choſen the Cardinall of Traues, Saluiate, Rodulphe, Lorayne, or Theatine. And the imperialles, Pole, Burges, Carpes, Crucey, Moron or Sfoudrate. And of Poole and Saluiate, there was a great brute raiſed in the City. For all be it they would that the thing ſhould be kept very cloſely, as before I haue ſaid, yet for as much as oft times diuers went oute of the Conclaue, eyther for cauſe or faining of ſome ſicknes, it is could not be kept ſecreate, in ſo much as it is ſaid, how the Emperoure and the Frenche Kinge, were aduertiſed of all that was done. And the cauſe which Cardinall Poole obteined not the place, was throughe the meanes of The cauſe why Pole was not Pope. Cardinall Theatine, who ſaid (as it is reported) that he ſmelled of Lutheraniſme. For many both in Italy, and others alſo, bear witnes, that he was of a right iudgemente concerninge the true Doctrine, as is ſaid in the tenth boke. At the ſame time were very manye Pilgrimes were at Rome, whyche were come thyther oute of diuers countries and nations, to thentent they might at the beginning of the new yere, which was than, as it is commonly called, the yere of Iubeley, receiue cleane remiſſion and forgeuenes of theyr ſinnes. Upon Chriſtmas euen, they reſorted all to the porche of S. Peters Church, hoping wel, that the ſame, which is called the golden gate, ſhould haue bene opened by the newe Biſhop. And albeit that long delay was to them very diſpleaſaunte, yet thoughte they not good to depart before the election were paſte. And that matter The yeare of Iubiley. ſtandeth thus, Bonifacius the .viii. Biſhop of Rome, in the yere of oure Lorde .M. CC .xcv. ordeined the yeare of Iubiley firſte of all men, and commaunded that it ſhould be renued euery C. yere, and promiſed vnto all ſuch as ſhuld than come to Rome, and ther make their deuoute prayers, at the Sepulchres of S. Peter and Paule, ful remiſſion of al theyr ſinnes. After his death whan thys diſtance of time ſerued ouer long, Clemēt the ſixt reduced the ſame vnto fifty yeres. Whoſe decre alſo remaineth, wherin he commaundeth the angels, that they ſhould carry vp into the heauenly kingdome, ſuch as died in the time of this Pilgrimage. And Sixtus the fourth decreed,

that this benefite ſhould be graunted to men euery .xxv. yere. Whan therfore the yere after the incarnation of Chriſt, a .M.D.& L. was at hand, Paule the third, a fewe monethes before, ſente abrode his letters vnto all nations, moſt earneſtly exhortinge them, not to let paſſe ſo goodly an occaſion of vnburtheninge thē of theyr ſinnes, and obteining the kingdome of heauen. He him ſelf alſo reioyſed much, that he had liued vnto this time, & ſayd that day wold be to him moſt delectable, wherin he ſhould deſerue ſo wel of mankinde, but this his ioy was not effectuall, for a fewe wekes before Paules ioye was vain. that ſame day, which he ſo greatly deſired, he departed, as before is ſpecified. Paulus Fagius, which went with Bucer into Englād, about the end of Nouembre, died at Cambridge of a Feuer Quartane. How the matter was taken vp by arbitrement betwixt the biſhop of Strauſburge and the Senate, I haue ſhewed you before. Now had the biſhop intended to begin the thing in his churches at Chriſtmaſſe, and had preſcribed the cleargye an ordre whiche they ſhould followe: but for that they were not fully furniſhed, he differred it till the firſt of February. Than, in thoſe thre temples, which the Senate by compoſition, had graunted him, the Prieſtes begin 1550. againe fyrſt to ſing theyr Euenſong, and the next day maſſe, which for the ſpace of .xxi. yeares, hadde bene omitted: there was a great concourſe, eſpecially of yong people. For vnto them it was a ſtrāge A ſtraunge ſight & neuer hard of. ſight, and before neuer heard of, to ſee there ſo manye with ſhauen crownes, and in a new kind of apparel; whiche ſange that no man could vnderſtand, Tapers and Lampes, burning at noone dayes, ſmoking and perfuming with ſenſours, to ſe the prieſt and his miniſters ſtanding at the aultare, pronouncing al thinges in a ſtrāge language, vſing manye curteſies, and ſondrye geſtures, bowynge downe with his handes faſt cloſed, one while caſtinge abrode hys armes, an other while bringing in the ſame; ſomtime turning him ſelf about, now crying out a loud, and now again muttering ſomething in great ſecreatnes, ſomtime loking vp a loft, ſomtime down to the ground, and cannot ſtand ſtil in a place, but remouinge now to the right hand, and now to the left hand of the aultare to croſſe & bleſſe with his fingers, to breethe in the chalice, and lifte it vp on highe, after to ſet it downe againe, in certaine places to name, one while the quicke, an other while the dead, to break the hoſt, as they call it, and put it into the chalice, to knocke on his breaſte wyth his fiſt, to ſigh, and to wincke as thoughe he were a ſlepe, to a wake againe, to eat one part of the bread, and ſuppe of the reaſte wyth the wine, leaſt any drop ſhould remaine, to waſhe his handes, to croſſe and bleſſe with the gilt patent, to put the ſame to his foreheade and breaſt, to kiſſe one while the aultare, another while an Image incloſed

in timbre or metall: theſe thinges, I ſay, and ſuch other like, the yong people beheld not without great maruel and wonder, nor certainly without laughter, and could hardly be kept vnder. At after none, a certain prieſt, whom they had procured thither from an other place, maketh a Sermon in the head church, wher he had no great audience, yet diuers reſorted, as they are wōt in a new thing There did a certaine yonge man make a noyſe, I know not what: A trouble in the thurch of Strauſburg. whome one of the Sergeaunts rebuked, and made a buſines with him as though he would haue caried him to pryſon. By and by the youth came al flocking about him, and as in ſuche a caſe it is commonly ſene, there aroſe an vprore and tumult, while euery man inquireth what the matter is, and ſtirre vp and down in the churche. Wherupon the preacher, who thought verely there had bene a ſedition raiſed, being ſore afraid of his owne part, went downe ſodenly out of the pulpit, & by his fellowes let into the chauncel which was fēſed with dores of Iron. For al the prieſtes were there, & amongs them were certain prebendaries of the ſame church, borne of noble houſes, which ſitting neare the pulpit to heare, conueied thē ſelues in alſo quickly, knowing not what would come therof. The whole matter immediatly was declared to the conſul and Pretour, who with the reaſte of the Senate were hearinge Sermones in other churches. They came in all haſte to appeaſs the Tumulte: but before they came all was quieted, for beſides a fewe younge men, no man once ſtirred. Wherefore the Senate, amonges others, ſent to them Iames Sturmius, who declareth to the principal of the clargy before ſaid, that the Senate is ſorye for this diſturbaunce, and ſheweth thoccaſion therof, and affirmeth that there was no citezen found in the ſame, and for as muche as it was done withoute theyr knowledge, prayeth them not to take it diſpleaſauntly, and promiſeth them, that they wil ſe to it from this time forward, that no ſuch like thing happen. But they woulde not thus be ſatiſfied, and ſaye plainly how they wil no more from henceforthe put theyr lines in ſuch a daunger, and the next day they depart in great diſpleaſure, leauing of their work begon, and reparing to the biſhop at Tabernes, complaine of theyr miſfortune. Thus therefore was the matter diſcontinued for a fewe monethes after. In the meane time they had complained to the Emperoure of the whole matter, as ſhall be declared hereafter Many men ſuppoſe, how they reioyſed inwardly in theyr mindes, they had ſo good an occaſion to leaue. For ſo lōg as the Maſſe was aboliſhed by a decre of the Senate', they had liued moſt at liberty, and receiued theyr whole reuenewes withoute any paines taking: but now, that they are bounden to daily ſeruice, although the laboure be not great, yet was this occaſion thoughte

vnto them right acceptable, wherby they might ſhake of that yoke of bondage: eſpecially ſeinge theyr doinges were derided and contempned of the common people, and they them ſelues poynted at with fingers, and hated of moſt men. The Senate, after inquiſition made, could perceiue no fault in anye townes man. Aboute the beginning of February, the ambaſſadors of England and Fraūce mete, to treat a peace. For the Engliſhmen hauing loſt thoſe fortes before ſaid, were driuen to an narrow iſſue. Aboute this time alſo The Protector of englād the Protectoure, the kinges vncle was deliuered out of the towre, wheras the counſel perceiued that the ſame ſhould pleaſe the king wel: and for ſo much as the Earl of Warwick was the chief occaſiō of his apprehenſion, this meane was found, that theyr frendſhippe ſhould be renued through affinitie. Wherefore the Earle of Warwickes ſonne marieth the Duke of Somerſets daughter. And afterward the Kinge gaue vnto the Earle of Warwicke the Dukedome of Northumberland: but this frendſhip laſted not longe, as ſhalbe declared hereafter. In the meane ſeaſon at Rome was all full of factions and partakinges: eſpeciallye the Farneſians were very earneſt that one of theyr ſide might be choſen, and at the firſt in dede Alexander, that was Nephewe to Paulus, and certatne other Cardinals his clients ioyned them ſelues to the Cardinalles imperials: but when the frenche Cardinals gaue theyr voyces to Cardinall Saluiate a Florentine, Alexander, fearing leaſt at the next ſeſſion, Saluiate ſhoulde be pronounced Biſhop, reuolted to the French part, taking firſte an othe of them, as it is reported for certaintie, that they ſhoulde not chuſe Saluiate. By this meane at the lengthe, Ihon Mary Mountane, whome we ſaide before was high preſident of the counſel at Trent and Bononie, the .vii. day of February was created Biſhop. And he was euer accompted to be a moſte earneſt fauourer of the French partie, and alſo of the Ferneſians. The cauſe why Farneſius bare no good will to Saluiate was reported to be this, for that he feared, leaſt if he ſhould obtain the dignity, he would cut ſhort both him, his brethren & kinſfolkes of much riches, which they had heaped together by right & wrong, and would auenge the Iniury done to his houſe by Paulus and the Farneſiaus. And it is ſaid, how Cardinall Farneſius woulde not promeſſe the good will of him and his to Mountane, whome Paule the third made Cardinall till he had aſſured him by his fidelitie, that he would frely permit Parma to his brother Octauianus. The biſhop after an old cuſtome, chaungeth his name, and is called Iuly the third of that name. At the ſame time the Frenche King ſetforth a proclamation againſte the Luthexanes And a penalty alſo appoynted for the iudges that are ſlacke and negligent

in executing the ſame. Before the biſhop was elected, departed out of this life two Cardinals, Uerulan and Rodulphe: therfore there The French kynges Proclamation againſt Lutheranes. remained in the conclaue lii. wherof there were .xiiii. frenchmen, ii Germains iiii. Spaniards, ii. Portugals, and one Engliſhe man, al the reſidue Italians, and of the .xi. Romains. The .xxii. daye of February, Iuly was conſecrated biſhop, by Cardinall Cibon: two daies after, he openeth the golden gate as they cal it, wheras, was Iuly yt third. infinite nombre of people, to obtain remiſſion of theyr ſinnes, as before is ſaid. The biſhop ſtriketh on the gate with a golden mallet: Thopenyng of the golden gate. for ſo ſtandeth the Ceremony, which afterward he is wont to geue a way to ſome man, in token of honour. For there be ſome yt thinck them ſelues happy men if they may get it: and at this time the cardinal of Auſpurge obteined it through much intreaty, and caried it with him into Germany. Whileſt the biſhop beateth on the gate with his mallet, worcke men breake it open with crowes of Iron. there the people, which ſtriue, who may firſt thronge in, gather vp full buſely the morter and rubbiſhe that falleth by the ruine of the ſame, and kepe them as precious Iewels. Many men ieſted vpon the fact of the Cardinal of Auſpurge, whan they heard therof, ſaying, A ieſt of the Cardinall of Auſpurge. that he intended with yt ſame mallet to knock the Lutheranes in the head. Than came to Rome to ſalute the Biſhop, & to do theyr duty to him, the duke of Urbin, the duke of Farrare, the ambaſſadors of Ueniſe, of Sauoy, of the duke of Florence, Genes, Senes Scotland, Fraunce, and after alſo themperors. The biſhop did not only reſtore Parma to Octauius Farneſius, but alſo gaue & made him the high gouernor, whome they call Confalonier, and reſtored alſo Aſcanius Colunnois, whome Paule the third had exiled. The new biſhop, of an auncient cuſtome, geueth his Cardinals hat to Ganimede nouryſhed of Poope Iuly. whome he liſt: and this biſhop Iuly, what time he was Legate at Boloigne, loued a yong man, Innocentius out of meaſure: whom although the reaſt did miſlike, yea ſpake againſt him, he choſe into the nombre of Cardinals, and receiued him again into his daily familiarity, geuing vnto him his ſurname, and armes alſo. It was bruted at Rome, and libels ſetforth of the ſame, how Iuppiter kept Ganymedes, although old were deforme: yea the biſhop him ſelfe would not let to tel it to the Cardinals, and as it is ſaid, would recite in his mery mode, how wanton a lad it was, and howe importune, Whileſt they were occupied in the Conclaue, there were letters Dute of the Conclaue came moſt fil thye letters. takē, which Camillus Olius, one about the Cardinal of Mā
               tua, was reported to haue wrytten to a certain louer of his, Anniball Contine, the .xxvi. of Ianuary, and verſes wrytten in the vulgare tounge, where he ſpeaketh of his affection, and loue of hym that his abſent, he vſeth ſuch deteſtable and ſhameful wordes, that

they can not without offence be ſpoken againe. Wherupon a roſe a ieſt of them, that ſaid, ſome filthy biſhop was ſignified to come out that Conclaue, which yelded ſuch kinde of letters. The .xiii. day of The Emperours letters to the 
                     •
                  ates of thempyre: March, themperour addreſſeth his leters to the ſtates of the Empire. Howe after the conuention at Auſpurge, he retourned into Flaunders, that he might binde the people of his dominions to his ſonne, whom he ſent for out of Spaine for the ſame purpoſe. Hys intent was, that thing once finiſhed, to retourne ſtraightwaies into Germany, but becauſe the winde ſerueth not to ſaile at al times and the diſtaunce of the places were farre a ſondre, therfore was it long before his ſonne came out of Spaine: and after his arriuall, the hole Sommer, and a great part of Harueſt was ſpent aboute neceſſaries affaires: and albeit that winter was than at hand, yet had he fully prefixed to haue gone into Germany, but at the ſelfe ſame time he chaunced into the diſeaſe of the gout, and not long after, word was brought him of the death of Biſhop Paul: wherſore he chaunged his purpoſe, tarying thelection of the new biſhop: after how Iuly the third had both aduertiſed him of his election, and had alſo promiſed very franckly and largely of his good wil & zele to the cōmon wealth and religion: which thing known, he thought mete, not to let ſlip ſo great an occaſion and longe wiſhed for, of accompliſhing the thing deſired, eſpecially, cōſidering how the whole wealth of Germany conſiſteth herein: therfore ſome way muſte be deuiſed, that ſuch thinges as in the laſt aſſembly were decreed and commenced, may be accompliſhed: again, it muſt be foreſeue, that yt cauſes of diſſention be taken away, and certaine obſtinat parſons and rebels ſtraitly puniſhed: for theſe cauſes verelye he intendeth to hold a counſel of the ſtates unperiall: wherfore he commaūdeth them, that againſt the .xxv. day of Iune, they be readye to attende vpon him at Auſpurge, and to finde no manner of let, but that they come them ſelues, vnleſſe it be ſicknes, which thinge not withſtanding they ſhall be bounden to iuſtify by an othe. And that they ſend theyr Ambaſſadours with large and full commiſſion of all thinges concerninge the common wealth, to thintent that in conſultation there be found no let nor delay.
         
         
            
            
               ✚ The .xxij. Booke of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the ſtate of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne of the Empyre of Charles the fyfte.
            
               
                  ❧ The Argument of the .xxii. Booke.
               PEace is concluded betwixt England and Fraunce. They of Maidenburge make their purgation by wryting. The Emperours proclamation againſt the Lutheranes aſtonied manye Marchauntes of hys Countryes. Whileſt the aſſemble was holden at Auſpurge to continue the Counſell at Trent, Granuellan diſceaſeth. George Duke of Megelburge, perſecuteth them of Maidenbourge, who going by the worſe, haue alſo Duke Moris and other to their enconues. Pope Iuly publiſheth a Bull of a very ſtraunge ſorte. Duke Moris being made Chieftaine againſte them of Maidenburge, propoundeth conditions of peace, againſte whome alſo, the Cleargy publiſh letters to charge them. Wherunto they aunſwer fully, and purge them ſelues. Oſiander inuenteth a new doctrine of mans iuſtification. The decree of this aſſemble is to geue ſaufconduit to go to the counſell, Bucer dieth in England. Thre Sunnes and thre Mones are ſene. The Pope citeth Octaulan Farneſe Prince of Parma, againſte whome alſo themperoure publiſheth his letters Patentes. Upon this the French King maketh hys excuſe to the Pope. The Duke of Saxon priſoner, healpeth and comforteth the Miniſters of the Church baniſhed by the Emperoure, an other beginninge of a Counſell at Trent, and the order of the ſeſſions in the ſame counſel, the meane how to deuiſe and frame Articles of the faith, the beginning of the warre of Parma.
            
            
               ABout this time thambaſſadours of Englād A peace concinded betwixt Frāce & Englande. and Fraunce, whan they had longe debated the matter, at the laſt conclude a peace. And that was ſo much the more eaſy to brynge to paſſe, for that they both ſaw, how there were ſome, vnto whome this contention of theyrs ſhould in time to come, be profitable & gainful. Wherfore the Engliſhmen, reſtore to the Frenchmen Boloigne, which they had kepte nowe ſixe whole yeares, not without the greate maruell of many: and the Frenchmen pay them Mony: In that peace were alſo the Scottes compriſed. After, ſending ambaſſadors on bothe parties, the two Kinges confirme the peace with a new amity. For ye french King was made Knight of the Garter in England, and the Kinge of England againe of the French order. Whiche verelye amonges great Princes, is as it were a cogniſaunce of moſte aſſured frendſhip. Where they of Maidenburge were defaced with ſondry Proclamations by themperour, the .xxiiii. day of March, they publiſhe an other wryting, chiefly to the next inhabiters about them.
            Firſt they proue, that they can neither by Gods lawe, nor mans

law be conuicted of rebellion: after they declare, how ſuch as put on armure againſt them, do make warre againſt Chriſt him ſelfe. Thirdly they confute the crimes obiected, and ſhewe that they be ſclaunders, ſurmiſed by theyr aduerſaries, And albeit, ſaye they, that through theyr prouocation the Emperour hathe exiled vs, yet may we truely affirme, that we haue as yet refuſed no reaſonable condition, ſo that we might inioy ſtil the doctrine profeſſed at Auſpurge, and the liberties that oure elders haue lefte vs: of the ſame minde be we now alſo, neither refuſe we anye kinde of dutye that ought to be done to the Emperoure, or to the Empire, and take god to witnes, that we haue geuen none occaſion of any warre or trouble, but couet chiefly to obſerue peace with all men, and by ye meane of the true religion and doctrine to attaine to the life euerlaſtinge. And this doubtles is the cauſe of all the hatred, that is rayſed againſt vs. Now is it deuiſed by the law, that the inferioure magiſtrate ſhall not impeche the right of the ſuperioure.
            Moreouer, if it ſo fortune that the Magiſtrate paſſe the boūdes of his authoritye, and commaund any thing that is wicked, that he ſhould not only be obeyed, but alſo, if he attempte any force, be reſiſted. There is no man, we thincke, that can denye, but that all rule and gouernement dependeth of God only: againſte whome if anye proclamation come forthe, or if any decrees be made, the matter is clearely out of doubt, that the ſame oughte to be reiected and refuſed, but of this ſort is the decre made at Auſpurge concerning religion: Therfore can not we obey them, that woulde make vs to receiue the ſame Mauger our heades, and take from vs the lighte of the Goſpel, and ſetforth that Romiſh Idoll, that they might draw vs into euerlaſting damnation. And ſeinge the caſe ſtandeth thus, ther can no rebellion of right be obiected vnto vs: again, euery mā may eaſely perceiue, how vnlawful it is to worke anye violence againſt vs, for in yt are not we only aſſaied, but this thing is wrought: to thend that the profeſſors of the true doctrine might vtterlye be extinguiſhed, that through our ſide mighte be wounded Chriſte him ſelf, and al godly people, For we are al the members of Chriſte. Wherfore ſuch as defile them ſelues with ſo wicked a facte, what thing els may they loke for, but Gods vengaunce? Touchinge the fortes and villages taken, we haue ſpoken in our laſt former wryting, neither is it neadefull to repeate the ſame. For ſo ſone as we ſhalbe aſſured of peace, we will reſtore them to the right owners. Where alſo our enemies haue raiſed a brute, as though there were vſed amonges vs an intermixed & vncerten lechery, it is a moſt impudēt lie. Therfore we beſeche you for the honor of God, yt ye do not defile your ſelues with innocent blud, but pray God that he would

confound the bloudy coūſels of the wicked, & if it fortune to be war yt they wold not deny them their aid. After, in the month of Aprill, the miniſters of the church, ſetforth a wryting, wherein they recite A confeſſion of faith by ye Miniſters of the Churche there. the confeſſion of their doctrin, and declare how it is lawful for the inferior magiſtrate to defend him ſelf againſt the ſuperior, compelling him to forſake the truth: and here they ſpeke vnto and beſeche themperor, that he wold geue no credit to ſuche, as incenſe him to practiſe vniuſt and wicked cruelty, but that he wold firſt truly and duely examine ye whole matter. Finally, they make earneſt requeſt that they may haue no war, and if the thinge come ſo to paſſe, they deſire aid alſo of the inhabiters next them. Of the trouble that I ſaid fortuned in the head church at Strauſburge, the biſhop made complaint to themperor: but the Senate, by an ambaſſadour ſent, declareth that ther was no fault in them: wherfore themperour adreſſing his letters to the biſhop, commaundeth him to renue hys worke omitted, & to procede therin. The biſhop taketh firſte aſſurance by othe of the Senate, that ther ſhuld be no violence ſhewed, nor any diſturbance in theyr doing. Thus at the length the clargy at the feaſt of Pentecoſt, which was than the .xxiiii. of May, began The cleargy of Strauſburge renueth their miſteries. their matter again. A few daies at the firſt, the conſuls, & certen other Senators wer ther in thother ſide of the Cathedrall church, leaſt any tumult ſhuld be raiſed. And the clargy of the ſaid church had incloſed that part of the chauncel, as they go into the reueſtry with grates of yron, yt no man could come nere. At thend of May, themperor departeth from Bruſſels with his ſonne Phillip, & goeth to thaſſembly at Auſpurge, leading with him the duke of Saxon priſoner, & leauing the Lantzgraue at Machlin. Not long after A proclamation againſte the Lutheranes. his departing thence, ther was ſetforth a proclamation againſt ye Lutheranes, which was written both in French & Flemiſh ye .xxix. day of April, and that was after this ſort, albeit ſaith themperor, I haue alwaies indeuored, that thauncient and true religion, might within al my dominions be obſerued: albeit I haue bene euermore wholly bent, that therrors, ſectes & hereſies, which haue now theſe many yeres benſowen ouer al chriſtendom might vtterly be aboliſhed, albeit that for the ſame cauſe, I haue ſetforth ſōdry proclamations, wt moſt extreme penalties, yet hearing ſaye, not without the great grief of my mind, that not only men of our own dominiō, but alſo ſtrāgers which dwel within our prouinces, & occupy the trade of marchandiſe, haue ſpread abrode thinfection of this miſchief far and nere: in ſuch ſort as it is doutles requiſite to lay to this diſeaſe ſome corraſine or other ſharp medicine, & make diligent inquiſitiō after the offenders, that the ſame plage maye be plucked vp by the rotes, as in the laſt aſſemblies prouincial I admoniſhed the ſtates

and gouernors, yt euery man for his part ſhuld diligētly apply him ſelf hereunto, and ſtil remain in thold and catholick religiō. Eſpecially cōſidering how it is openly ſene of al men, what tumultes & commotiōs this infection hath ſtirred vp, to ſpeake nothing in the meane time of the loſſe of ſaluation, & of ſoules. Wherfore by thaduiſe of our moſt derely beloued ſiſter, and aſſent of oure nobles, we make this new law, & ſtraitly charge and commaund, that no man whatſoeuer he be, haue, bie, or diſtribute any bokes of Luther, Oecolāpadius, Zwinglius, Bucer, or Caluine, or any other bokes ſet forth xxx. yeres paſt, without the names of the authors, as in the A regiſter of the deuines of Louaine. regiſtre of the deuines of Louain is furthermore conteined: moreouer that no man kepe any Image or picture made in contempt or mockery of our Lady or other ſaincts, nether that he caſt down or breake any Image painted or pourtraied in the honor of any ſaint: that no man open his houſe vnto priuy conuenticles, wherin bothe erroures are wont to be ſowen, men and wemen rebaptiſed, and alſo conſpiracies made againſt the church and the common wealth: that no man either priuely or apartly diſpute of the holy ſcripture: eſpecially of hard and doubtfull matters, or take vpon him thinter pretation of the ſame, vnleſſe he be a deuine aucthoriſed by ſome commendable vniuerſity: they that ſhall otherwiſe do, ſhalbe puniſhed as ſeditious perſons and diſturbers of the common tranquility, and if they be men, they ſhal die with the ſword, and womē ſhal be buried in the ground quick, in caſe they wil forſake theyr error: but if they will be obſtinate, they ſhall be burnt, and theyr goodes confiſcated, whether puniſhment ſo euer they ſuffer. Againe they ſhall haue none authority to make any will, and whatſoeuer they ſhall do herein ſince the time they firſt began to infringe thys oure law ſhalbe fruſtrate and take no place. Furthermore we charge & cōmaund that no man receiue into his houſe, or aid with any thing ſuch as he knoweth to be ſuſpected of hereſy, but that he aduertiſe immediatly thinquiſitour or gouernour of the place, and ſhal ſuffer puniſhment if he do it not.
            Such as not of obſtinate malice, but throughe infirmitye haue fallen into errour and hereſies, and yet haue not tranſgreſſed thys To talcke of faith is for bidden. our law, and haue done nothing ſeditiouſlye, but of their owne accord haue retourned to amendement, and after they haue abiured, be receiued again to grace, ſhal after yt haue no conference amongs them ſelues of matters appertaining to faith and religion: if they haue, to ſuffer, as thoſe that are returned to their vomit, he that being not conuicted, but vehemently ſuſpected of hereſy, ſhalbe condē
               ned, ether tabiure or to do open penance, if ye ſame man ſhalbe after accuſed of hereſye, he ſhal ſuffer as one that is reuolted. Unto ſuch

as be ſpotted with hereſy, and ſtained with like crimes, ſhalbe geuen none honor nor dignity, nether ſhall they beare anye office in the common wealth. Unleſſe a man bring with him a teſtimoniall from the Curate of the Church, where he dwelt laſt, let him not be ſuffered to haue any habitation or dwelling. For ſuche ought to be had for ſuſpected. That the gouernors of peace, and all other oure Clients, euery man in his prouince, inquire diligently for ſuch as ſhall breake this law, and that they aſſiſt the inquiſitoures and eccleſiaſticall iudges, ſo that thoſe whiche be founde culpable, maye ſuffer according to che fourme preſcribed: excepte they ſo do, they ſhall ſuffer for it at oure pleaſure. Let the common Proctoure alſo know, whether they do their duetie, and if they ſhalbe found negligent, let him commaund them to come to iudgement, and if it ſhall appeare that they haue offended, let them either be depriued of theyr office, or otherwiſe puniſhed, as ſhalbe thought expedient. Beſides this, let all Biſhops, Archdeacons, and Abbots with ſuch other like Prelates, ſearch with all diligence, if any of the Cleargy be infect with this diſeaſe, and puniſhe it extremely. They that know any man defiled with this Peſtilence, or in what places the Heretickes lurcke and frequent, let them preſente them immediatly, vnleſſe they do ſo, to ſuffer the ſame puniſhment that the others ſhould. The promotour, if the accuſation be not falſe, ſhal haue the Rewards for promotours one half of his goodes. Which goodes in dede ſhall not exceade the ſumme of vi .C. crownes. For whatſoeuer ſhalbe aboue this ſōme, the tenth part therof ſhalbe alotted vnto him. He that ſhal detect to thinquiſitour priuy conticles, although he were of theyr Counſell, ſhall not be puniſhed, ſo that he thinke well of Religion, and from henceforth refraine theyr company: but he that ſhall preſent them, being not of their followſhip, ſhalbe rewarded, as before is ſaid, let the puniſhments, yt we haue appoynted, be ſo executed accordingly nether ſhall it lie in any mans power to alter or mitigate the ſame, which we perceiue is oftentimes done, for the iudges that offende herein, ſhal not eſcape vnpuniſhed. They that being accuſed of hereſy, and cited to appere haue fled, and haue bene after outlawed, whan they haue heard that the cōpanions of their offences be dead, are wont to make ſute, that they may be ſuffred to make their purgation, for ſo much as they ſuppoſe, how the crime can no more be proued, & by this meanes it chaunceth, that retourning again, they ſow abrode falſe doctrin and errors: but that the ſame be in no wiſe done, it is for the cōmon profit. Wherfore we cōmaund, yt ther be no place geuen to their requeſts, but yt al ſuch, as after they wer cited haue appered, but ſought to ſaue thē ſelues by fleing, ſhalbe accōted for conuictes, & perſons condemned. They that ſhal make any ſute

for ſuſpected, fled, baniſhed, or for Anabaptiſtes, let them be taken for ſupporters of heretikes. And that iudges & gouernors receiue none ſuch into fauor, vnles it be ether by the permiſſiō of vs, or of ye Quenes ſiſter. Thoſe yt ſhal do otherwiſe, ſhalbe depriued of theyr A proclamation for printers. gouernmēt. That no printers or bokeſellers, do print, ſel, or vtter any thing cōcerning the ſcripture, but by theyr aduiſe & conſent, vnto whō this charge is cōmitted: & for ſo much as there is a regiſter of bokes, which thuniuerſity of Louain hath reiected, let ye ſtationers haue ye ſame hāged vp in their ſhops in opē ſight, leaſt after, either thē ſelues or the biers, plead ignorance: again yt they haue another regiſter of al theyr bokes, he yt wil not obey ſhal loſe an C. crowns. Finally yt no man take any children to teach, vnles it be through ye permiſſion of the magiſtrat, and the chief miniſter of the church authoriſed, & that he teach or inſtruct the youth in nothing, but according to the form preſcribed by the deuines of Louaine. When this decre was proclamed, many were ſore aſtonied, eſpecially the high duch & Engliſh marchants, which occupy the traffick of marchandiſe in themperors townes & countries, eſpecially at Andwarpe a great nōbre. Wherfore they wer of this mind, yt vnles the decre wer mitigated, thei wold remoue to another place: yea mani of thē ſhutting vp their ſhops purpoſed to depart, for thauoyding of ye dāger. The Senate of Andwarp alſo, & thother citezens ther, which ſaw what a wōderful loſſe this wold be to thē, wer in a great perplexity: & Andwarp aſtonied at the Emperors proclamatiō
                whē thinquiſitors came thither, they wtſtode thē withal theyr indeuor, & riding to the Lady regēt, declare vnto her, what a loſſe it ſhuld be not to thē only, but alſo to the whole region, if this decre take place. Wherfore the matter was, in the ſame city, for ye which the decre was chiefly made, by reaſō of ſōdry natiōs & people there, appeſed for yt time. This decre being after trāſlated into the highe duch tōg, Matthie Flacie, of whō mētiō is made in ye former boke, ſetteth forth, & moſt ſharply tāteth Iſelebie, & the Adiaphoriſtes, as he termeth thē, which aſſay to perſwade the people, as though religiō wer not impugned. But the form of inquiſition, which they cal an inſtructiō, conteineth a moſt ample authority. For it is lawfull for them to cal before thē not only al priuate perſons, but the magiſtrates thē ſelues alſo, and to compel them by an oth to anſwere to interrogatories, & to vtter what they know. And the queſtions cō
               cerning religion are in nombre. xxxviii, wherin ſuch ar are preſented or ſuſpected be examined, & amōgs others, whether they beleue the ſacrifice of the maſſe to be auailable for the dead, ſo yt they may be deliuered hereby from the pains of purgatory: whether they beleue yt S Peter was prince of thapoſtles, Uicar of Chriſt, & high biſhop of the church of Rome, and yt thoſe alſo are to be accōpted for

which do lawfully ſuccede in his chaire: whether they beleue that it is lawful to forſake thobedience of the high biſhop, being nether heriticke nor Sciſmatick: whether they beleue that Matrimony priuely cōtracted, is lawful: whether they beleue the Lutherans, Buceranes, and ſuche others to be of the Churche. The Cardinals of Fraunce remaind at Rome a certain ſpace, after that Iuly was elected: The death of the cardinall of Lorayne. and than they return home again. Howbeit by the way, whē he was come now into Fraunce before he had ſene the Kinge, died Ihon Cardinall of Lorayne, who had bene all his life time a moſt pleaſaunt geſt and companion with king Fraunces. By this occaſion Robert Lenoncourt Cardinall, obtained the Biſhopprycke of Mentz, who was afterward ſuppoſed to haue holpen greatly, that the towne of Metz, a city of thempire, came into the hands of Hēry the french king, as hereafter ſhalbe declared. In the laſt ſeſſion at Trent, was decreed amōgs other things, that ſuch as had mo Biſhopprickes than one, ſhould kepe of them which they liſt, & forgoe the reſt, as before in the .xix. boke is ſpecified: Neuertheles, ſo long as Paul liued, the thing was not put in executiō: but whē this mā was made biſhop, the cardinals of Fraūce obeyed it in dede in aparence, but to no loſſe of theyrs. For wheras diuers of thē had ii. or iii biſhoppricks, & many others aſpired to yt dignity, by an exchāge made, they permitted ſome other to inioye one, and in ſteade of one biſhoppricke, which they left, they had of them again many abbotſhips, or ſuch other like promoitōs. In the month of Iuly, Adolphe biſhop of Colon, making a compoſition with the Senate, entreth The archbyſhop of Collon entreth the city with pompe. the city of Colon, with an exceading great pomp and train, hauing gotten together all his Clients, kinred and alies, yt they might honor him with theyr preſence the ſame day. He was accompanied as they report, with ii .M. horſe & aboue. And the duke of Cleue verely had brought him a notable bād of horſmē, he had lately a daughter born by his wife Mary, the daughter of king Ferdinando. Her Godmothers at the fount ſtone, where both the Emperors ſiſters, Elenore the French Quene, and Mary Quene of Hongary, and tharchbiſhop of Colon was her Godfather: but not long after ther aroſe a great diſſention betwene the Duke and the Archbiſhop, about theccleſiaſticall iuriſdiction. The .xxvi. day of Iuly, the Emperor beginneth the counſel imperial at Auſpurge. Wherin he propoundeth of followynge the generall Counſel, of obſeruing the decre of religion, lately made at Auſpurge, of puniſhinge rebelles, of reſtoryng the iuriſdiction and goodes of the Church. This aſſēbly was armed alſo, albeit yt the ſtate of things was ſōwhat more quiet. The princes of Mentz and of Treuers were preſente, the reaſt of thelectours ſent ambaſſadours? Moreouer there were preſente

Wuolfgāge maſter of Pruſſe, and the biſhop of Wirciburge, Eiſtet Coſtintz, Auſpurge, Trent, Cambray & Merſeburge: and none of thother princes beſides the duke of Bauier, & at the length alſo Hē
               ry the duke of Brūſwick. The matter being debated, the moſt part The proteſtation of D. Moris agaīſt the counſell. were content, yt the counſel ſhould be followed: but duke Moris by his deputies declareth yt he can allow the ſame none otherwiſe, vnleſſe the whole matter from the beginninge may be retracted, & the deuines of the proteſtants not only heard, but yt they may alſo haue power to decide matters, yt the biſhop of Rome do ſubmit him ſelf to the counſel, & not occupy the place of a iudge there, and that he releaſe the biſhops of their othe, to thintēt they may ſpeke their mind frely. After this proteſtation of his was red opēly, his deputy wold haue had it recorded, as the manner & cuſtom is, but the ſame was denied him, ye whole doing of ſuch matters is in the power of tharch biſhop of Mentz, chauncelour of thempire. Themperor afterward moued the biſhop for a counſel. The ſeuenth day of Auguſt, the cardinall of Auſpurge, in his Sermonne, inueighed ſoore againſte The knauery of Spanyardes. the Lutheranes. And a few dayes after, certain Spanyardes, in mockery and contempt of the Citezens, which were than hearing ye Goſpell preached, plaied certain partes in the church, in ſuch ſort, yt the matter was like to haue tourned to ſome great tumult. But at the comming of the Conſull, the thing was by a goodly meane appeaſed and quieted. About thend of the month of Auguſt, Granuellan, The death of Granuellan. who came lately from Bezonſe, a Towne in high Burgundie, to Auſpurge, leaueth his life, not withoute themperoures greate heauines, as it is reported, he had ſucceded Marcurine, Caſtinarie Cardinal, as I ſhewed you in the .vii. boke, and by the ſpace of xx. yeares had ben in chief authority, and was priuy in manner alone to all themperours ſecreat counſels and working. In whoſe place and function ſucceded his ſonne Anthony, biſhop of Arras, a man of great learning, who before in thabſēce of his father, was wōt to anſwer the matters of ye common welth, & was very familier with themperor. In the mene ſeaſō Henry the duke of Brunſwick laieth Duke Henry beſiegeth the Citye of Brunſwick. ſiege to ye city of Brunſwick, to the which he had born great hatred theſe many yeres, for religiō, & for other things: & whan he had don theyr coūtry much harm by firing and ſpoiling, & yet could not win the city, through the mediatiō of certen, themperor cōmādeth both partes to leue theyr war, and pleade theyr cauſe before him. Thys was in the month of Septembre. The Emperours army beſieged than Affrick, a towne of Barbarie, ſome men ſuppoſe it to be Leptis, howbeit Liuie maketh alſo mentiō of ye city of Affricanes: that city kept Dracutus a notable Archpirate, who had lately ioyned hī 
               Dracutus an archpirate. ſelf with the Turke. Themperor had cōmitted the chiefe gouernenient

to the Uiceroy of Sicilie. Who after he had beaten the town wyth his ordenaunce a certain time, being certified that Dragutus was comming with a newe army, ſaw he had nede to make haſte. Wherfore the tenth day of Septembre, he geueth the aſſault bothe by ſea and land, and within a fewe houres ſpace, taketh it by force. The Knightes of the Rhodes, that were vpon the ſea, did themperor that day good ſeruice: but the Spaniards which fought by lād, The taking of the city of Africa. and excelled in nombre, whan the City was taken, had the mooſte part of the ſpoyle. The nombre of the pryſoners was great, aboute an .viii. thouſand: which being put into Shippes, were led awaye captiue into Sicilie, Sardinie, and to other places. The ſituation of the city, is ſaid to be very pleaſant, by reaſon of grene medowes A goodlye ſituatiō of the ſame. and hilles ſet with Oliues & palme trees, and fair ſpringes of water. Not far from thence is reported to be a goodlye corne Country, which with a moſt ample increſe yeldeth again to the plowmē that it hath receiued. Coſmus the duke of Florence ſent themperor men in this war vnder the conduit of Iordane Urſine, & Alaſtor Balion. For becauſe winter was now at hand, and vitaile coulde not be prouided, the Uiceroy, leauing there a garriſon of Spaniards, retourneth with his army into Sicilie: Dragutus fled to the Turke, traueling to Conſtantinople. This thing was thoccaſion of a new warre, which the Turke attempted afterward, not only againſte ye Emperour, but alſo againſt King Fardinando. Whan themperour had commaunded Duke Henry, and the Senate of Brunſwick to lay a ſide their weapons, their armies were diſcharged on bothe parties: but all thoſe forces afterwarde, George Duke of Megelburge, the ſonne of Albarte, a younge man that had ſerued Duke Henry, allured vnto him. The cleargy of Maidenburge, and Prelates of the head church, moſt of them gentlemen borne, who were chiefly offended with the city, had waged him with great rewards & promeſſes, as it is reported, that through his aide they might auenge thē ſelues, but this do they deny, as ſhallbe declared hereafter. And their archbiſhop Ihō Alberte was lately departed: wherfore they promiſed him ye gouernment of ye hole prouince, in caſe he could ſubdue it, & by wrytings laid to pledge to him iii. principal caſtels. Thus he marching firſt through ye coūtry of Halberſtat, cam after into ye prouince of Maidenburge, & ther practiſing ſlaughter, ſpoyling & burning, ſurpriſeth the towne of Wancelebe, ſpoyleth & ſetteth it on fire: and whan he had there attēpted the caſtel in vain, & loſt diuers of his mē, he marcheth forward, & which way ſo euer he wēt, did exceding much harm. Wherfore ye people of the country & villages, whē they ſaw their goodes & cattel taken and driuen away, come to ye Senate of Maidēburge, crauing their aid & ſuccor

and declare how they wyll refuſe no peryl nor coſte herein. The Senate therfore aſſigned them a daye, wherin they ſhoulde be all in a redines: That was the .xxi. daye of September. Than went out of Maydenburg together with the huſband men the citezens iointly and the ſoldiours of the garryſons, with thre bandes of horſemen, with field pieces and other furniture, and reſte that night two myles from the citie. In the mornyng before daye lyght, auauncing their campe, they marche ſtreightwaye towardes their ennemie, and when they came into his ſyght, put them ſelues in order of battell. In the forewarde, where was thought moſte daunger, ſtode the citezens and ſoldiours: After them were placed the countrie people. The Duke of Megelburge perceyuing this order, ſodenly tournyng about his rankes, inuadeth the huſbandmen, a kynde of people neyther well armed, nor exerciſed in feates of warre, and that vpō ſuche a ſoden, that he gaue the charge, before the others coulde tourne them ſelues, with their ordenaunce, or be able to reſcewe them. So therfore they caſting awaye their weapons, The ouerthrowe of ye Maidenburgians. fled, who myght runne faſteſt, and breaking the rankes of their fellowes, make the waye open for the ennemy to get the victory. The moſte part of thē all, what at the geuing of the charge, and what after in the chaſe were ſlayne. Of the citezens and ſoldiours were not many loſte, but dyuers taken. The gunnes, carriage and al warlyke furniture came into the handes of the ennemies. In the meane ſeaſon the Emperour was very inſtant, that both decrees made at Auſpurge, ſhould be obſerued, and maketh a greuous complaynt of the cities of Maydēburg and Breme. For they only of all the cities remayned conſtant, albeit the Bremers were not outlawed. But the Princes make interceſſion, and require that they myght haue the hearyng of the matter. And whan the Emperour had cōſented, they adreſſe their letters to eyther citie, the .xxii. daye of September and The princes letters to thē of Maydenburg. cite them to appere at Auſpurge the ſecond day of Nouember, and by ſaufe conduicte to come aunſwere in their cauſe, ſendyng their Ambaſſadours with full power and authoritie to conclude. There was a certen woman at Auſpurge, a citezen of the towne, who ſeing the prieſt paſſe by, who caried the hoſte to A woman in perill for a light worde. a ſycke man, with lyght borne before him as the maner is, maruelyng therat demaunded of hym, why he caried that lyght at noooe dayes? For ſo ſaying ſhe was apprehended, and in great daunger of her lyfe, but through the great intreaty of women, and finally at the interceſſion of the Emperours ſyſter beyng pardoned of her lyfe, was bannyſhed.
            
               
For Mary Quene of Hungary Regent of Flaunders, was come thither, boeth for other matters and alſo for this cauſe chiefly, that the proclamation lately ſet forth in Flaūders and thoſe parties myght be mitigated. For vnleſſe it were ſo, ſhe ſayde it would come to paſſe, that Andwarpe, whiche is nowe the beſte frequented marte towne in the whole worlde, ſhoulde fall in decaye and loſe her former beautie. Moreouer that ther was great daunger in all places of an iuſurrection, in caſe the thinge ſhould be put in execution. The Emperour very hardly acconſented at the laſte, and altering thoſe thinges that concerned marchauntes ſtraungers, taketh away the name of inquiſitione abhorred The proclamation for religion is mitigated. of all men, the reſidue he commaundeth to take place & to be obſerued. Whyleſt the letters were cōueyed to the Bremers & thē of Maidēburg, the Princes & ſtates inquire of the Emperour, vpon what condicions he will accorde with them. Wherfore he propoundeth for the Bremers theſe, that they ſubmit them ſelues vnto his power, humbly craue pardō, forſake al leagues, & make no cōfederacy wherin he & his whole familie be not compriſed. That they obey the chāber imperial, and be contributaries to the charges therof for their portion. That they agre with their Archbiſhop, if they can not, to ſtand to the arbitrement of ſuche Umperes as he ſhal appoint. That they accorde alſo with the whole clergie. That they reſtore the munition taken from Duke Erricke, and recompence hym for the harmes done. That none within their iuriſdiction ſerue in the warres againſt him. That they paie vnto him an hondreth and fiftie thouſand crownes, and deliuer .xxiiii. pieces of ordenaunce furniſhed. That they obeye the decree of the former cō
               uention, and ſuche as ſhalbe now decreed. And to them of May denburg, he impoſeth in maner the ſame lawes. This was added moreouer, that they ſhould aunſwere all men to the lawe, and obeye the ſentence geuen. That from the tyme of theyr rebellion, they commence no action againſt any man. That they Raſe their fortifications and bulwarkes. That they receyue into their citie hym and his Lieftenauntes, at any tyme, with what power ſomeuer they brynge, without any condicion. That they paye two hondreth thouſande crownes. That the publication of theyr goodes be ratified, and the Poſſeſſours thereof not diſturbed. The reporte of the battell of Maydenburge, was immediatly ſowen abroade farre and nere, and within ſyxe dayes was brought to the Emperour at Auſpurg. And where as many men thought, they had now bene almoſte vndone, beholde, they publyſhe a wrytynge the fyrſte daye of

October, wherin they recite the whole matter, and ſaye that they haue not loſt aboue two hondreth of their Citezens and ſouldiours. And they whiche appered to nede comfort, do them ſelues confirme others. For God ſay thei, would by this meane trie our conſtancie. And of his infinite goodnes towardes vs, we doubt nothing. And albeit it be his will, that we ſhal thus wholy periſh & be oppreſſed, yet can there be no euil therin. For how much better were it, to abide thextreme peril, than forſaking the profeſſion of the truth, to reuolte to the Romiſh Antichriſt? For ſuch as either for feare, or for a certen couetouſnes & ambition do relent, & ſubmit them ſelues to the coūſel of Trēt, and do admit & allowe that wicked decree made at Auſpurge, there is no doubt, but that they, both in this life, & in the life euerlaſting, ſhall ſuffer moſt greuous tourmentes, except they retourne to amendemēt. We know alſo that God hath appointed our aduerſaries boundes & limites, which they ſhall not paſſe. Wherfore we deſire all men, that they wold ioyne their praiers with ours, & attempt no warre againſt vs. For if we be once oppreſſed, the ſelfeſame calamitie ſhall redounde vnto al Germany without any reſpect. And ſeing the caſe ſtandeth thus, certenly the very zeale, loue, and preſeruation of our natiue countrey, require this of you, that you ſhould with your ayde aſſiſte vs, whiche for the doctrine of ye Goſpel are afflicted. After they of Maydenburg had this ouerthrowe, incontinently very many prepare them ſelues vnto warre. And amōges others Duke Maurice, the Electour of Brandenburg, with his coſyn Marques Forces bent againſt Maydenburg. Albert, and Henry Duke of Brunſwicke. Moreouer the whole Nobilitie were alſo called vpon to bring horſemen. Many ſuppoſed theſe forces to be leuied for this intent, that the Duke of Megelburge myght be expulſed out of the contrey. And at the firſt in deede certen would ſeme to haue taken armure for this cauſe, that he ſhould not ſtraie to farre. But whā they were all aſſembled, the eight daye of October marchyng forewarde, they incamped not farre from the citie, and the ſyxt daye after, at nyght, they runne forth with a great clamoure euen to the ditches and gates of the citie, to proue what the townes men coulde or durſt doe. But they beyng repulſed with great ſhotte, loſte many of theyr men. And as they retyred them ſelues to their Campe in hyghe diſpleaſure, by the waye they ſet on fyre the poore Lazarus houſe, cleane contrary to the lawe of armes. The next daye they bickered agayne, whan the Townes men had made ſaley out. For they were full of courage, and where as dyuerſe others, very many alſo of the Nobilitie

repaired thither for the hatred of the Duke of Brunſwick expert men of warre & worthy captaines. The .xii. day of October was truce taken & certen Ambaſſadours came into yt citie to treate a peace: But that was in vayne. Whyleſt theſe An Ambaſſade againſte them of May denburge. thinges were in working, yt ſtates of tharchbiſhoprike of Maydenburg, amongſt whom the clergie is principal, mete at Hale & the .xv. day of October ſende Ambaſſadours to themperour & Princes of thempire. Whā they came to Auſpurg the .x. day after, thei accuſe moſte heinouſly the ſenate & people of Maydenburg. And for ſomuch as Duke Maurice had taken vnto him ye power of yt Duke of Megelburg, & they had alſo thē ſelues ſent him ayde, neither lyeth it in their abilitie: to ſuſteyne ſo great charges long. They require, yt the Princes woulde finde ſome meane to quenche this common flame, & that ſo ſhortly as may be, how both the ſoldiours may be paide, & alſo thoſe naughtie outlawes puniſhed, tofore they recouer againe their ſtrength & courage after their late ouerthrow. For els wil the ſouldiours reuolte to thennemy. Which thing wilbe a moſte preſent daunger, not only to thē that ar next thē, but to al other ſtates alſo. For they intende nothing els, but the deſtruction of yt high Magiſtrate, & are wholy addicted to ſteire vp the people to rebelliō throughout the whole Empire. And they demaunded ayde of viii .M. fotemē, & a .M. & .CC. horſemē. The ſame day were red the aunſwers of the Bremers, & ſenate of Maydenburg, which they made to yt Princes letters, as befor is ſaid. And yt Bremers firſt declare how greatly thei alwaies haue deſired peace, & the Emperours frendſhip, & how ofte they haue ſued vnto him for peace, not only by their own Ambaſſadours, but alſo by yt king of Denmarke & the cities ye border on ye ſea, & ſhew what ſtrayte condicions were offered. And yet to thende it may appere, how much they eſteme themperours authoritie, they ſaye, that they wil not refuſe to ſende Ambaſſadours, & promyſe that if they may haue their Religion & libertie permitted thē, they can be contente to do any thing. And they of Maydēburg: how in the The anſwer of the Maydēburgians. fourmer aſſemblie of the Empire, they made great ſute to the Emperour for peace, but the condicions impoſed were intollerable, and ſaye that ſynce that tyme, they haue ſuſteined great dammage, & where there was no ende nor meaſure of wrōges, they repulſed from them violēce, yet moderatly. And the cauſe of all the hatred to be that they couet to retayne the trew doctrine, and to flee Idolatrie. As concernynge the daye preſcribed, becauſe they are commaunded to ſende Ambaſſadours with full authoritie, they can fynde none that wyll go in that

ſorte. Moreouer, how George Duke of Megelburg hath lately moued warre againſt them, and confeſſeth openly, that he doth this by the commaundement of the Emperour and thempyre. And nowe alſo the ennemies armie lieth before their citie. If they may be remoued, and their Ambaſſadours well aſſured, & ſhall and may reporte the demaūde vnto them, they refuſe not that ſome be ſent. About the beginning of Nouēber, dieth Ulriche The death of Ulriche Duke of Wirtemb. Duke of Wirtemberge, the ſuite hanging ſtil, that he had with kyng Ferdinādo, as before is ſayd. His ſonne Chriſtopher ſucceded him. After the Emperour had receiued the aunſwers of the two cities, concerning the Bremers, he thinketh good to tary for thē, in aſmuch as they ſay, they wil come: But as touching them of Maydenburge, for ſo much as the thing is farre otherwyſe than they ſay, and becauſe they aunſwer frowardly and in a maner contemptuouſly, he requireth them to procede in conſulting, what is to be determided againſt them, & chiefly that they wold waie diligētly the requeſtes of the ſtates of the Byſhoprike, & herein do that thing whiche may both be for the commoditie & dignitie of thempyre. The Princes & ſtates perceiued right well, that there would neuer be pacificatiō made vpon theſe conditions. Wherfore thei require that more gentle thinges might be propounded. But the Emperour perſeuereth A cruell decree againſt the Magdeburgians. in his purpoſe. So they at the length, albeit againſt many of their willes namely of the cities, aſſente vnto him, & promyſe their ayde. But againe they deſire the Emperour, firſt, that he him ſelf would be cōtributory herunto. Secondly, that in caſe he can not be at this warre him ſelfe, he would appoint a generall. That charge they cōmit to Duke Maurice, if it ſeme ſo good vnto him, & ſay that ye charges of this war muſt be borne of yt ſame mony, that is now already leuied for the vſes & affayres of the cōmō weale. Themperour again replieth what charges he had ben at in ye fourmer war, ye he might reſtore peace vnto Germany, & requireth thē to haue cōſideration therof. Touching Duke Maurice, he is wel pleaſed, & ſaieth yt he knoweth no man at this preſent time, yt is more fit for yt charge, than he, & that for diuerſe cauſes. And yt the mony ſhuld be taken out of the cōmon treaſury, he doth allow & permit, ſo yt ſo muche as is takē frō thēce, be within a certē time reſtored. For yt mony was not gathered for this vſe. And he exhorteth thē to followe this thing wt their whole indeuour, yt they may be puniſhed according to their demerites. Which he ſheweth may thus be don, if yt citie be inuironed wt a trēche & a bulwark made, & the ſiege cōtinued, til thei be ſubdued. For vnleſſe yt licēcious & obſtinat rebellion

be repreſſed, they ſe how gret a daūger & ſhame it wilbe to thempire. Thus therfore Duke Maurice, whiche had buſied him ſelf herein as I ſaid before, was by cōmon aſſēt made high. Duke Maurice general of this war. generall of the warre. And for the charges of the war were appointed .lx. thouſand crownes monethly, and an hōdreth thouſand crownes payed for the charges paſt. Concerning the counſell, the Emperour affirmeth to the Princes, that it ſhalbe continued againe at Trent before Eaſter: For ſo doeth the Byſhop promyſe him. Yet doeth he in the meane ſeaſon vrge the decree of Auſpurge, and commaundeth them to declare the cauſes vnto hym, why thoſe orders that were wrytten two yeares ſynce, of Religion, and reformation of the Clergie be not obſerued? The Archebyſhops Electours ſaye, howe they haue omitted nothing, and are yet wholy about the ſame. But the cauſe which letteth that they are not fully accompliſhed, is the exemptions and priuileges of certen. The deputes of the Electours abſent, ſay they haue applied the thing diligently, but the long continuaunce of tyme, hath bene a hinderaunce. For this Religion can not ſo ſodenly be plucked out of mens myndes, & that they had nede to be inſtructed, that men might by litle and litle accuſtome them ſelues, who are thorowly perſwaded, that theſame decree diſſenteth much from the holy Scriptures, that nothing can be violently altered without trouble and ſedition. And if any man ſhould cōſtraine ye prechers to it, ther would no man ſerue in yt churche. For hardely can there any one be found that wyll abaſe him ſelfe hereunto, for the ſtate of the ſyngle lyfe, and condition of the Lordes ſupper. The reſidue of Prynces and ſtates of the Romyſhe Religion, alledge theſe cauſes, yt 
               The cauſes that the decre is not obſerued. Scholes wherin yougth is not ryghtly inſtructed. The Miniſters of the churche that diſwade the people from the ſame decree. The want of prieſtes: The negligēce of Magiſtrates. And ſaye moreouer, that this thing is an hinderaūce, that many of the ſpiritualtie liue vitiouſly. Again, that many inuey & rayle vpon the decree made with bokes of reproche vnpuniſhed. Iuly the Byſhop of Rome being oft treated with by the Emperour, about the eight day of Nouember, ſending forth his bulles, calleth Pope Iuly ſomoneth a counſell. a coūſell, affirming it to be coincident to his office, to call and directe counſels. That he coueteth alſo to prouyde for the trāquillitie of Germany, which hath alwayes ben moſt obediēt to the church & Byſhops of Rome, who in earth are Chriſtes Uicars. Wherfore let all men repare to Trente, againſt the firſt day of May, whiche either by ryght, cuſtome, or priuilege haue intereſt to be there, and ſuche as Paule the thirde hath called

before, what tyme he ſomoned the counſell in the ſame place: For that daye ſhall the counſell be there continued. And if it ſo Thei repare to Trent bē
                  fore contemned. fortune that either for age or ſicknes or affayres of the commō
               wealth he can not himſelfe be preſent, yet will he by his Legates, be preſident of the ſame. This bulle he ſent after to themperour. Duke Maurice being made chiftayne, attempteth the thing with great force, and buylding vp certē bulwarkes, that the ſouldiours myght wynter therin, about thende of Nouember he aſſayleth the citie. Whiche citie is diuided into thre partes. Maurice beſegeth Maydenburg. Wherof one, whiche is called newe, he ſurpriſeth by nyght, ſcalyng the walles and gates, and neither drumme went nor trompet blewe tofore he had brought in his ſouldiours. The citezens reiſed vp with the clamour, ſo many as were found in armure are put to the ſworde, the reſt being taken and ſpoiled, are expulſed. Wherfore they of the citie, to the intēt they might take away from the ennemy this commoditie, ſendyng forth their ſouldiours, burne that part, that was theirs. Agayn: the other part, whiche is called Sudeburg, they ſette on fyre alſo, receiuing the townes mē into the citie. About this tyme came Lazarus Schuendie, into the campe to Duke Maurice, that he myght in the Emperours name gyue his counſel. The ſame tyme was Erle Hedeck in Saxony, whome the Emperour had Hedeck and Manſfeld diſcomſited by Duke Maurice. outlawed two yeares paſt, as before is mentioned. He and Albert Erle of Maunſfeld do leuie bandes of ſouldiours in the cities by the Sea coaſte, to ayde them of Maydenburge. Duke Maurice therfore in the moneth of December, goeth vnto thē with part of his armie, and ſcattereth them, and allureth vnto him foure enſeignes of the ſame men, and after alſo counte He decke, as you ſhall heare. The .ix. daye of December the Emperour in a long proclamation, and with heinouſe words inueieth The Empe. proclamatiō againſt thē of Maydenburge. againſt them of Maydenburge, and commaundeth that no man ayde them, and ſtraightly chargeth the Captains and ſoldiours, whiche be within the citie, that within fourtene daies after theſe letters be deliuered they departe out of the citie, & geue knowledge hereof vnto Duke Maurice, or in his abſence to Lazare Schuendie. If they obeye, he promyſeth pardon, if not, he appointeth extreme puniſhement. There was in the citie Albert Erle of Manſfelde, whome the Emperour in dede had not banyſhed, but had tourned him out of al his poſſeſſiōs, what tyme he perſeuered in the fidelitie and frendſhip of Iohn Friderick Duke of Saxon. Howe the Emperour left the Lantgraue at Machline, taking his iourney to Auſpurg, it is before declared. Duke Maurice and the Marques of Brandenburge,

were earneſt ſuters that he might be deliuered, but aunſwere was made them, how not he only, but alſo his ſonnes and coū
               ſellours ſo demeane them ſelues that as yet he might not be deliuered. His kepers alſo ſaid vnto him, how he ſhould be caried into Spaine. Wherupon he requireth ayde of his ſonnes, admoniſhynge them of the faith and duty they owe vnto hym, & The Lantgraues ſōns ſue for their father. commaundeth them to ſue Duke Maurice and the Marques of Brandenburg, that they yelde them ſelues pryſoners according to the forme of their obligation, and fulfill their promiſe. His ſonnes obey him herein, and ſending Ambaſſadours moſt earneſtly and oft admoniſh and ſue them. But they, one whyle ioyntly together, another whyle either of thē ſeuerally by him ſelfe, ſome tyme by meſſengers, ſometime preſently excuſe the matter, and declare that it is not expedient either for them or for their father, that it ſhould ſo be, & euer bring newe reaſons, wherby they truſt he may be deliuered without any daunger. Therfore they deſire them to forbeare thē a whyle, and to geue them reſpite. But ye Emperour who before had moued the Lātgraue by Lirane, to deliuer thoſe obligations, as is declared, whan he was further ſued vnto, he ſendeth Lazare Schuendie to his ſonnes and counſellours, commaunding them not only from henceforth neither to cōmence action nor ſue Duke Maurice and the Marques of Brandēburg, but that alſo they ſende vnto him all ſuche maner of wrytinges, & ſurceaſe their ſute: vnleſſe they obeye, he threateneth thē with the greateſt puniſhment that may be deuiſed: But that was yet in vayne. Moreouer he releaſeth by his letters the Princes bounde, and pronoū
               ceth them fre from that bonde. Wherfore whan the Lantgraue The Lantgraues purpoſe. ſawe no hope, he was fully prefixed to make an eſcape if he might, and deuiſeth ſondry meanes with his ſeruauntes, whō he had ſent for out of Heſſe, ſome of them Gentlemen of good houſes. But they being afrayd of the daunger, ſought delayes. At the laſt he perſwadeth two, Conrade Bredeſten, and Iohn Rommelie, which all the waye from Heſſe vnto Machlin layed poſt horſes, whiche he might leape vpon and eſcape. But the matter came to light by a certen man of his, who had told one Frendely at Machlin, that within a fewe houres his maiſter ſhuld be at libertie. The ſame going from one to an other, was reported to the captaine of the garde, in the very ſame moment His deuiſe of fleing bewrayde. and inſtant that he ſhould haue fled in. Than was al that matter daſhed, and two of his ſeruauntes were ſlayne out of hand, others taken and beheaded, and he him ſelfe caried to a ſtraiter pryſon. The Emperour, when he knewe therof, toke it moſt diſpleaſaūtly,

and wryting his letters to Duke Maurice and the Marques of Brandenburg, ſignifieth that this ſo bolde an enterpryſe, apperteineth to the iniury of hym and his dominion, and ſaith he wil be ſore auenged of them, that haue geuen him either aide or counſell herein. The copie of theſe letters they ſende to William the Lantgraues ſonne, and amongeſt other thynges they ſaye that in caſe there be any ſuche parte played from henceforth, they wyl ſtande no more bounde to them. Yet neuertheleſſe Duke Maurice ſeuerally comforted them, and to deliuer their father, promyſeth to ſpende not only his goodes but his life and bloud alſo. And than ſayeth ther ſhalbe a tyme conuenient to yelde him ſelfe, whan the ſtate of thinges ſhalbe ſuche, as the diſpleaſures of certen are leſſe to be feared.
            The .xix. daye of December, all the fotemen and horſemen of Maydenburge, that were not appointed to the watche, iſſue out of the citie at after midnight, that they might oppreſſe the The iſſuyng out, & victory of the Maydēburgians. ſtoute courage of their ennemies in a vyllage not farre of. The enterpryſe was very daungerous, for yt they muſt paſſe through theyr ennemies campe: But yet it chaunſed luckely, for before the ennemy could be armed, thei had taken the Uillage, and ſet it on fyre in diuers places. They had all put ouer their harneſſe white ſhirtes, as the maner is in Camiſado. So many of their ennemies as reſiſted wer ſlayn, which wer many noble gentlemen. Diuerſe fought out of the houſes, but the ſame being ſet on fire, they were burnt. Uery many of ye Nobilitie wer taken, and immediatly brought into the citie, with two hōdreth and lx. horſes. On the morrowe as ſone as the daye appeared, they retired home warde, and by the way met a troupe of horſemen, whiche were led by the Duke of Megelburge, who at the laſte The Duke of Megelb. takē priſoner geuing the charge, whan the horſemen preſſed him before, and the fotemen gaue the onſet at his back, was takē and brought into the citie, euen he, whiche had firſt begon the warre.
            In theſe dayes alſo came out of Spaine to Auſpurg Maximilian Marimilian cometh out of Spayne. of Auſtriche, the Emperours ſonne in law, created king of Boheme in his abſence, called home by his father king Ferdinando, betwene whom and the Emperour was than a great contention, about the ſucceſſion of the Empire, for the whiche cauſe alſo the Emperour was ſayde to haue ſent for his ſyſter Cōtentiō for the Empyre betwirte the Emperour & Ferdinando Mary, who retourned thither in the moneth of Ianuary, that ſhe might be a meane, where ſhe had departed from thence in September before. For the Emperour, who knewe what commoditie it were to annexe Germany to his inheritaunce, coueted to eſtabliſhe his ſonne, whiche ſhould reigne ouer ſo many

large and diuers Regions, with this as a ſure fortreſſe. But kyng Ferdinādo hauing the ſame reſpect thought that nother his nor the expectation and commoditie of his children ought to be diminiſhed herein. Moreouer Maximilian who was a Prince of great towardnes, & could ſpeake ſondry languages, eſpecially the highe dutche, and in Prince like maners excelled, was very muche fauoured and beloued of all mē. Thoſe letters wherby the counſell was denunciatour, as before I haue ſaid, the Byſhop promulgat at Rome at the latter ende of December. what things offend many In the whiche are many thynges whiche myght offende mens myndes, of the which ſorte is that he ſayth it is his part to gouerne counſelles, that he calleth hym ſelfe Chriſtes vicar, that he will haue the action continued, and not repeted from the beginning, that he chalengeth to him ſelf the place and authoritie of the preſident, that he ſemeth to call thither only mē of his own order. Theſe thinges alſo the Emperour, whan the letters were deliuered hym, is ſayde to haue noted right well, & to haue required of him, that ſuche thinges as were ſomwhat rough, might be altered, fearing, as it was thought, leaſt the Germaines being affrayde of theſe thinges, as mariners be of Rockes, would either refuſe the ſommoning, or els fynde ſome let or delay in this buſines, which he with ſo great labour had brought to paſſe. I wyll not affirme this to be true, and ſuche maner of coūſelles ar wont to be kept ſecret. But if it be trwe, it is manifeſt, that he obteined nothyng. For the ſame fourme that I ſpake of, the Byſhop publiſhed, not one worde altered. Yea there be ſome that ſuppoſe he dyd it of a ſette pourpoſe, that he might feare awaye the Germaines from the counſell, that they ſhould not come there, or if they came, he might haue them intrapped by certen ſnares. Certenly Paule the thirde, was reported to haue vſed this policie, as I haue ſayde in the ix. boke, that after he had learned by his eſpialles, what ye Proteſtauntes could beare and what they refuſed, calling than a counſell, he would vrge and propounde thoſe thinges chiefly, where with he knewe their myndes to be moſte offended, as a man may aſo perceiue in this bull of Iulius, whiche is framed after that ſame of Paule the thirde.
            In theſe dayes, Duke Maurice and the Electour of Brandenburge, offer conditions of peace to them of Maydenburg, & Thei of Maidenburg are moued to rē
                  der. requyre them to render them ſelues and ſhewe their fidelitie vnto them & to their Archebyſhop. Thus if they wyll doe, they ſhalbe permitted to haue and retaine the Religiō and doctrine exhibited in times paſt at Auſpurge, there ſhalbe nothing deminiſhed

of their priuileges, lawes and lyberties, the fortifications alſo of the citie and goodes ſhal remayne ſafe, and no violence offered vnto any man. Moreouer they promyſe to make interceſſion to the Emperour that he wyl abolyſh the ſentence of publication, verely vpon theſe conditions. That as other Princes and cities, ſo they alſo may humbly deſire pardon, and deliuer him .xvi. pieces of ordenaunce, and an hondreth thouſand crownes, to the end they may inioye their goodes already confiſcated. And that ſomme of mony they ſaye they will laye out and debource for them, that they reſtore vnto the Clergie their goodes: Concerning the hurte done on either ſyde, & touchyng the habitation of the clergie, and ceremonies of the cathedrall churche, they them ſelues will take order. And to the intent the Emperour may the eaſlier be perſwaded, that a garriſon be receiued into their citie, tyll the Emperour haue confirmed the pacification, and the reſt of the condicions ſhalbe accompliſhed. And that the ſoldiours ſhal do them no iniury, thei them ſelues wyll forſee. But in caſe the Emperour refuſe theſe thinges, than wyll they haue out their ſouldiour immediatly, reſtoring vnto them their citie ſafe, and in euery point ſuch as they founde it. But the Senate refuſed to make ſurrender or to receiue a power into the citie.
            In the moneth of December, the States of the Byſhoprike of maydenburg, but thiefly the Clergie ſet forth a wrytinge in A writing of the Clergie againſt the citie. the vulgare tongue, againſt the Senate and people of Maydē
               burge, and ſaye howe they haue aunciently and by right apperteined to the iuriſdiction of them and of the Archebiſhop, and that is to be proued by the letters of Otto the firſt Emperour. And many thinges ſaye they, haue they proudly and preſumptuouſly done, chiefly againſt Burcarte and Gunther, Archebyſhops, but being reduced to their dutie, they haue ſuffered condigne puniſhment, as by hiſtories it may be declared. But in ye tyme that Erneſt of the houſe of Saxon, and Albert of Brandenburge were Byſhops, a compoſition was made for all controuerſies, but they kept not conuenauntes. And ſo ofte as the Byſhops by the common aſſent of the other ſtates decreed any thyng for the profit of the common wealth, they alwayes drew backwarde, and ſought the meane, howe they myght rule the reſt. And what tyme the Cardinall of Mentz had reciued Iohn Albert his coſyn to be his coadiutour: They would not only allowe the ſame, but alſo toke from hym the title and honour due vnto hym, although they were oftentymes ſpoken to for ye ſame. And agayne whan he had ſucceded in the Byſhopryke after

the death of Cardinal Albert, they would neither take hym for their Byſhop nor geue hym their fidelitie, and herein perſeuered ſo longe as he liued, albeit noble men ofte times intreated therin. And this did they for this intent, that they myght obteine the gouernment, whiche may eaſely appere vnto any man, that wyll conſyder their doinges. And albeit that in bookes ſet forth, to the intent to reyſe a commotion, they go about to perſwade the people, as though they had nothing offended, as though they were clerely faultles, as though they ſtoode in daūger for the truth ſake only, and for Religiō, but the matter is far otherwyſe. For their Religion hath had no let nordiſturbaunce, although thei poſſeſſed yt churches of our Iuriſdiction. Their actes againſt the Clergie. And for ſo much as they ſayd how they would aunſwer it in a lawful coūſell, we ſuffered all thinges patiently. But they not content therwith, made a conſpiracie, & entring into a league, whiche thing was not lawfull for them to doe, but by our conſent and the Archebyſhoppes, would haue inforced vs to theyr Religion. Wherof it doth well appere that they ſought not religion, but the goodes of the churche. And yt this was wrought that they might vnder ſome honeſt pretence couer and cloke their treaſon and rebellion. Full many ſeditious thinges haue thei wrought againſt the Emperour and ſtates of the Empire, neither can all be recited, but we ſhall touche thoſe thynges whiche properly apperteine vnto vs. And foure yeares paſt, breakyng their faith and conuenauntes wherby they are boūd to vs. Thei gaue vs the defiaunce, and entring into our houſes toke our goodes and expulſed vs, ſome alſo they caſt in priſon, wherof ſome are dead and the reſt doe remaine captiue at thys preſent. Than bete they down our houſes euen with the groūd and brought our townes, landes, and gouernmētes into their ſubiection. And fortifiyng their citie ſtrongly, that they might the more ſafely rebelle, they impoſed to the commō people payment of mony monethly, and certen other charges. The churches and houſes of Religion partly they raſed and partly defaced, and caſting downe the belles out of ye ſteples, made gunnes of them, and toke vp the dead bodies not only of monkes and prieſtes, but alſo of Noble men, and caſt them vpon their rampares. Images, aultars, and graueſtones, they haue cowched & layde in their walles. In the churches that were ſtanding, thei haue put downe all Gods ſeruice. What ornamētes or precious Iwelles, what wrytinges or monumentes ſo euer they founde in churches, they ſpoiled, and beating the prieſtes and other miniſters of the churche with their fiſtes and ſcourges, droue thē
               
out of the holy places, yea from the very aultars. They haue in ſondry places exacted new tributes, cleane contrary to the cuſtome of the countrey. Yea they haue broken down in their fury, the ſepulchre of our founder great Otto the Emperour. And theſe be domeſtical euils. But not contented herewith they inuaded the byſhoprike of Halberſtate, & there ſpoyling the College of Hamerſleb, & plucking the prieſtes yt were ſaying maſſe, from the aultars, ſome they woūded, & ſome they ſtewe, and polluting all thinges hallowed, trode the hoſte conſecrated vnder their feete. After diſguiſing them ſelues in Monkes apparell, whan they had done many thinges in great oultrage & mockerie: they returned home loden with ſpoyles & boties. And a certen wall or rampare of yt countrey, that was made with a very gret coſt, & was right neceſſary in thoſe parties, they caſt down without any cauſe, burning & cutting vp the bridges that no mā might paſſe. Moreouer they haue ſought to take away our liues, as they do alſo at this preſēt, inſomuch ye we can neither remaine in our own houſes, nor with our frēdes, without gret daunger, and whome they ſuſpected to geue vs lodgyng, they would breake into their houſes by night, take their goodes, & cary away diuers of the nobilitie captiue, whom they alſo put vpon the racke. Yea they haue ſpoyled Noble matrones & virgins, & ſtriped them out of their apparel, & ſo euil intreated thē that thei haue brought them in daunger of their life, and haue not kept their handes alſo frō yonge babes & children. Briefly we ſuppoſe, that there is not the like example of crueltie ſene amongeſt the Turkes. And if any man wold make an eſtimate aſwel of thoſe goodes that they haue gotten of ours, as alſo of the harmes done vs: he ſhal finde it at yt leaſt to a mount aboue viii .C. M. crownes. To ſpeake nothing in the meane ſeaſon of the contumelious reproches & raylinges, of ye famous libels & picturs which they haue ſet forth in contēpt & mockery of thē
               perour & ſtates imperial, & of the iniuries alſo, which we haue ſuſteined fully now xxvii. yeares. For they haue caſt ſtones at vs, & throwen vpon vs the filthe of the ſtretes, and as we haue gone through the citie, haue oftētimes made a clamorous outirie againſt vs, and driuen vs from place to place, many tymes alſo in the nyght they haue ſet our houſes and gates a fyre, & with ſtones broken our glaſe wyndowes. Finally: no kynde of outrage hath bene of thē omitted. And foure yeres ſince, ye xxvi day of Iuly, whā at ye requeſt of yt conſuls we aſſembled in our college, they required of vs, firſt that we ſhuld profeſſe the ſame religion yt they did. Secōdly, yt towardes the furniture of ye war

within eight dayes we ſhould paye .xx. thouſand crownes. After this, entring into the churche, and the citezens reparinge thither, thruſte out the Prieſtes by violence, and ſhut vp the churche dores, and demaunde of the inferiour ſorte of prieſtes a great ſome of mony, and when they wer not able to pay it, wer driuen out of the citie into exile. After the ſelfe ſame ſorte alſo haue they handled the reſt of the clergie, entring vpon all their landes and goodes. In the whiche thing verely, they haue not only tranſgreſſed the lawes both of God and man, but alſo broken conuenauntes and their faith geuen. For we are their Megiſtrates, and they may chiefly thanke vs both for their landes & goodes. And what time lately George Duke of Megelburge, had interteined thoſe forces whiche had defended and alſo beſeged the citie of Brūſwick, in nomber about thre thouſand, and without our knowledge, marched through the coūtrie of May denburg and Halberſtat. They through a wonderful preſumption iſſued out of the citie, of this intent and purpoſe, that after they had firſt diſcomfited the ennemy, they might bend the whole force and brunt of the war againſt vs, yea vtterly to diſtroye vs. For they had two tunnes full of haltars, and had hired certen hangmen with ſwordes, that ſome thei might hāge, and head other ſome. Howbeit, through the goodnes of God, it chaunced far otherwyſe. For where they wer an eight thouſād men, they were diſcomfited, and ſlayne aboue two thouſand, & The ſlaughter of the citezens. amongſt theſe were many innocēt people, whom they had partly by force, partly by flattery allured vnto thē, & eight enſignes taken, & al their munition & furniture. And they goe about to aſcribe the cauſe of this warre vnto vs, & ſay how the Duke of Megelburg moued warre through our impulſion: But that is falſe. For both oftētimes before, & alſo after the battel, we ſent Ambaſſadours for peace, and wiſhe for non other thing at this tyme, than that they being reconciled to themperour, woulde reſtore vnto vs our olde tranquillitie and quietnes. But for ſo muche as they refuſe all peaceable wayes, and deteyne by force and iniurie our caſtels, townes and villages, we are driuen to ſeke ſome meane, wherby we may recouer the ſame. Now ſuch thynges as they inferre and alledge for their purgation, be all forged and fained, as it is commonly knowen. For we haue not diſturbed or hindred their religiō. And whan lately the moſt noble Princes Duke Maurice & the lectour of Brandēburg offred them reaſonable cōditiōs, they proudly reiected thē, & making a ſalee out in the truce time, aſſaulted by night a certen aūciēt gentleman at home in his owne houſe, which had done thē no

diſpleaſure, and being a ſlepe in his bed at their cōming, whan he had hardly eſcaped awaye half naked, rauening and diſtroying his goodes, they ſpoyled his wyfe and chyldren of all theyr apparell, and threatening them ofte with death, left thē ſtarck naked, in ſo muche that one of the Nobilitie comming thither by chaunce, couered the woman with his owne garment. Certenly what oultrage they dyd that nyghte, can not with fewe wordes be expreſſed. They haue alſo made their aduaunt openly, that we may loke for reſtitution in vayne. For they be ſo highly auaunced with our landes and goodes, that they haue accuſtomed them ſelues to a finer kynd of lyfe, neither can they be eaſely brought to render agayne other mens goodes. And where as the matter is thus, and ſeing they adds vnto the iniuries of the former yeares contempt alſo, and are vtterly bene vpon our diſtruction, we could not but recite theſe worthy actes of theirs, though ſomewhat briefly. Wherfore if meanes be founde now to reduce thē agayne to their dutie, no man ought to maruell therat. For who ſoeuer they be that loue this ciuile and common ſocietie of men, can not choſe but be of ſtomake againſt them, muche leſſe ought to ſuccour and aide them. After the ſame ſort had thei accuſed them a litle before ſending their Ambaſſadours to Torge, where than Duke Maurice helde aſſē
               blies concerning the ſame warre. But not many dayes after, in the ſame moneth, the Senate maketh anſwer by opon wrytinge. Howe they ſuppoſe that all the ſtates of the Byſhoprike do not make this complaint of them, but that it procedeth altogether The anſwer of yt citezens of the clergie, for it greueth them ſay they, that the Goſpell is taught ſincerely amongeſt vs, that their wickednes is diſcloſed, and their dignitie decayed. This is the chief cauſe of all hatred. Theſe thinges haue pricked thē forwarde, to accuſe vs falſely to the Emperour, that beyng by him once outlawed, we myght be ſo muche the more ſubiecte to iniury. Aſſuredly we haue offende the Emperour in nothing, and inioying our religion and libertie, there is nothing but he may haue at our handes. We be in dede bounde to the Archbyſhop of this citie: But yet vpon certen conditions, that they ſhall not diſturbe vs in our liberties, thoſe conditions haue we not broken: But our aduerſaries counſelled the Archebyſhop Iohn Albert, that he ſhould demaunde certen newe thynges that were not accuſtomed. And therfore refuſed we to geue him our fidelitie. Yet is there no great cauſe why they ſhould alledge hym: For they were not faithful to him them ſelues, & it greued them, what tyme in former yeares they ſawe the waye prepared for hym

to be Archebyſhop. For they had rather haue had him excluded: But vnto them are not we ſubiect, nor bounde in any point. So longe as the conuenauntes of former time were obſerued, we refuſed no kinde of dutie. But after that they ſwarued from the ſame, we reſiſted, & hereof grewe ſondry diſpleaſures. And verely in theſe latter yeares, whan new wayes were inuented to exacte mony in this prouince, we ſpake againſt it in opē aſſē
               blies, & declared how this was not vſed by byſhops of former time, although it was al in uayn. For diuers of ye ſtates & chiefly the clergie had a great part of that pray. This is yt frowardnes that they obiect againſt vs. They went out of the citie but Why yt clergle forſoke yt citie. of their owne accorded, and incenſed with a certen pryde, whan they ſawe the Duke of Saxon & the Lātgraue ſubdued. For than they ſuppoſed how the tyme was come, wherin they might accompliſhe their mynde, obteine gouernment, & come to that their filthy kinde of life, certēly we did not expulſe thē. And albeit that the preachers in their ſermons, reproue their abhominable liuing, yet dwelt they ſafely amongeſt vs many yeares, and euen now lately certen of them did inhabite the citie. And if we had bene diſpoſed to haue wrought any violēce againſt them, it was not harde to be done: But we attempted nothing. And whan the ſtate of our thinges was ſuch, that we were conſtraimed to feare the power of our ennemie, we called together the fellowes of the cathedral church. And for ſo much as the light of the Goſpel is reuealed, and God alſo requireth the profeſſion of the ſame, we requyred them dilligently, as we had doue many tymes before, that they them ſelues woulde choyſe ſome experte Diuine, whiche myght teache Goddes worde in the Cathedrall churche. For the ſame were boeth of it ſelfe very Godly, and wold alſo helpe greatly to increaſe mutuall loue and beneuolence betwene them and the citezens. And where as they refuſed, we our ſelues prouided the thyng. And becauſe the ennemie was at hande and had already inuaded our limites, we requyred of them, that they would paye vs a certen ſomme of mony, that they ſhould ſende no letters out of the citie, that they ſhould remayne with vs, and inioye their owne poſſeſſions. But they not long after departed out of the citie, and beyng after requyred of vs, to ſende theyr Ambaſſadours at a certen day to Salſie, with whome we might treate, they proudely reiected the talke. Wherfore whan they vttered their malice and ſpitefull hatred againſt vs, we were alſo conſtreyned to requite them with the lyke. For in caſe they had remayned with vs, all this trouble myght haue bene auopded.

But they burned in malice againſt vs, and many times to our diſtruction forged new diuiſes, ſo muſt we of neceſſitie take armure for our own defence. For vnleſſe we had taken their townes & villages, there had bene a place of refuge left for the enne my. And ſeing they be the reuenewes of the church of Mayden burg, & not theirs which perſecute ye church, they may be rightly imployed to the defence of religion againſt falſe doctrine & idolatrie: Neither doeth the thing want examples of fourmer tyme. Themperour hath in dede outlawed vs, but by no deſert of ours, as we haue heretofore oftener than once declared. And this fortune or ſtate is common to vs with the Prophes, Apoſtles, All Godly folke are afflicted for proſeſſinge the veritie. & finally with Chriſte him ſelfe, who for the profeſſion of yt truthe were afflicted, as ſeditiouſe, rebelles, and moſte hurt full men of all others. We haue intreated the Emperour cōcerning our religion & liberties, but hitherto we labour in vayne, & to what ende belonge all their deuiſes, in our former wrytinges we haue ſufficiently declared, verely the thing it ſelf ſpeaketh, that this is ment only, how wicked papiſtrie may be reſtored. This controuerſie hath oftentimes bene brought to a cōmunication, and certen conuētions haue ben had for the ſame cauſe, but in the principall pointes we neuer were ſatiſfied, for that thambaſſadours ſayd, how their cōmiſſion ſtretched not ſo far. Aſſuredly it greueth vs & that exceadingly, if any man ſhuld ſuſteyne any dāmage for our cauſe: But yet ſuch as are godlymē, we doubt not, but they will thinke as we doe, & will iudge all thinges to be ſuffered rather, than the confeſſion of the truthe All thynges muſt be ſuffered for the truthes ſake ſhuld be forſakn. For ſeing Chriſt hath ſo lōg before prophecied of the incōmodities that inſue vpō this profeſſion, & hath alſo appointed euerlaſting rewardes for them, that leaue their wyues, chyldren and poſſeſſions for his ſake, why do we not truſte to theſe certen and large promeſſes? Certenly they that relent for feare of their owne daunger, and feare diſpleaſures, thoſe procure vnto them ſelues euerlaſtyng damnation, vnleſſe they repente. That thing whiche our aduerſaries impute vnto vs, may be rightly aſcribed vnto them: For they lyue a fylthie, ſhamefull, and a beaſtly lyfe, and which places as thei beare rule, there can the citezens very hardly deſende from them the chaſtitie of their wyues and daughters. We toke of the commons a litle monie, and not with ſuche an extremitie, as they fayne we dyd. Unto that whiche they ſpeake of the cuſtome, aunſwere myght be made, yf they had ſpoken more playnly. The Rampare wherof they make mention, whiche yet belongeth nothyng to them, we cut a ſonder for a commune commoditie.

For through the meanes therof many tymes hath hurte bene done in our countrey, and whan thei had taken their botie, the ſpoylers were wont to eſcape that waye, and to retyre them ſelues out of daunger. Theycrie out that we haue intreated euill the Gentlemen that are our neighbours. But what ſo euer we haue done in that behalfe, we haue bene conſtreyned to doe it, whan we had a yeare and more ſuffered the iniuries of many. That whiche they ſaye concerning women and maydens, we vtterlye denie: ſuch of the Nobilitie as were taken pryſoners: we releaſed with their ſeruaunts, without raunſome, and the matter was quieted emongeſt vs by cōpoſition. They enlarge exceadinglye, the accoumpte of the harmes done, and name it to be eight hondreth thouſand crownes. What if we ſhuld ſhew againe into how much myſery thei haue brought vs? Pictures & ſuche other thinges haue bene ſet forth priuely in mo places then one, but al the blame is layd on vs. Where as for certentie we haue ſtraightly commaunded, by ſetting vp letters openly, that no man ſhould attempte to do any thyng preſumptuouſly againſt the Emperour, or any other Prince. And certen alſo haue therfore bene puniſhed. There haue bene other bookes alſo ſet forth amongeſt vs, we denie not, wherin both Idolatrie is impugned, and many mens conſciences erected. We confeſſe that we had an ouerthrowe, the good wyll of God being ſo, not vtterly to diſtroye vs, but to alure vs to the amendemēt of life. Certenly thei died honeſtly and Godly, for the glory of Gods holy name, and preſeruation of the common wealth. And we God woundeth & healeth. doubt not, but God when he ſeeth tyme, will mercifully loke vpon our affliction, and alſo puniſhe our aduerſaries. Neither chaunced this thing by fortune, as they pretende. For they intiſed hereunto George Duke of Megelburg, with large giftes and promeſſes. And yet in the meane tyme through a crafty policie, they called the other ſtates of the byſhopryke to Staſfort, as it were to conſulte, by what meanes they might driue thoſe robbers, as they themſelues than called them, out of their coſitrie. For it is to be proued by their own letters that they hired ſoldiours, yea they boaſte and glory, that they care not greatly for common hurte and dammage. For beit that they ſuſteyne ſome loſſe and hinderaunce, yet ſaye they howe the lande and grounde remaineth in their poſſeſſiō. What time therfore word was brought vs, that the towne Wanſlebe was by them ſodenly taken, ſpoyled and brent, a great nomber alſo of villages diſtroyed, in ſo muche that there came rūning vnto vs out of the countrey huſband men, women, and maidens, with plentie of

teares deſiring our aids, we could not aſſuredly fayle thē. And although the thing had no good ſucceſſe, yet doubt we not, but that we did God thanckfull ſeruice. And now where they ſaye to pike a thanke, that our intent was to oppreſſe the nobilitie and ſtates of this Byſhoprike, it is a ſtarhe lie, and can not be proued. For we haue euerntore honoured the Nobilitie: But if we haue indammaged ſuche as haue done violēce toward our men, as they haue paſſed by to and fro, who is ſo vnreaſonable a iudge that will impute that thing vnto vs, as a crime blame worthy? Touching that they reporte of the ſwordes founde after the battell, is a fained thing: As for the haltars & collars we denie not. For the vſe of thē was right neceſſary for our wagons and other cariage, as it is manifeſt. The condicions of peace, that were offered by Duke Maurice & the Marques of Brandenburg, we could not admit for cauſes moſte weightie. For in caſe we had yelded, & receiued a power, it is eaſy to vnderſtande, what ſhould haue bene the ſtate both of Religiō and the common wealth alſo. God of his infinite mercy hath opened vnto vs the knowledge of his Goſpel: Whom we befeche to graunt vnto vs this ſo great a benefite perpetually, but thoſe whiche promiſe vs aſſiſtaunce herein, howe it is credible that they can or alſo wyll perfourme the ſame, whan they them ſelues be of wauering myndes in Religion, and ſtudy to pleaſe men? that our aduerſaries may recouer their goodes, and that dāmage done on both parties may be egally borne, we refuſe not. But that they ſhould retourne in the citie, & agayne ſet vp their idolatrie, that can we by no meanes ſuffer. Thei ſay how they were no impediment to vs in religion, but certenly they wanted no wil therunto. But we haue cauſe to geue God thā
               kes yt ſent ſhrewed cowes ſhort hornes. The bodies of dead men were not ſo intreated as thei report. But where as for our own defence we plucked down certē churches nere vnto the citie, ſo many bodies as were founde not wholy cōſumed, were cōueied to an other place, & buried deper. Again it was permitted vnto al men, that ſuch of their kinred as they foūd there, they might tranſporte whether they would. That ſame of thēperour Otto the firſt, is moſte falſe, & a ſhameful lie by them deuiſed. For we The prayſe of great Otto. are not ignorant, what honour is due to that chief magiſtrate & eſpecially to him of whom they ſpeake, thēperour Otto, who did many worthy actes, & was a moſte earneſt defendour & protectour of yt libertie of Germany. That ſeruice, which they call holy & Godly, & which they complaine that we haue diſturbed in their churches is nothing leſſe than holy, but cōcerneth the

high reproche of God. They thēſelues had lōg before caried out of the citie their veſtimentes, chalices & other ornamētes. But their wrytinges & publique monumētes we kepe ſafely, & haue not aboliſhed, as they falſly accuſe vs. Moreouer their prieſtes wer not whipped, but they thēſelues ſpoiled the churches & caried the pray els where. The college or monaſtery of Hamerſlebie, which neuertheleſſe belōgeth not to thē, therfore did we aſſaile at the laſt, for yt our ennemies had a place of refuge therin & there deuided the boties takē frō our felowes & vs. Wher they adde moreouer that our men did many thinges there inſolētly & outrageouſly, that ſame was forged by the monkes. As cōcerning the iniuries, which they ſay were done vnto thē in the citie, thus ſtandeth the matter. About .xxv. yeres ſince, whā they on the eight day before Eaſter, whiche is called Palm ſondaye, were in hand with their fond & trifling ceremonies, they were laughed at by ye cōmon people that thether reſorted, but whoſe Folyſhe ceremonies. raſhnes & boldnes proceded further, & ſuch as brake glaſſe wyndowes, they were ſuerly puniſhed of vs & baniſhed, for other iniuries we knowe none, neither haue they euer brought thē before vs. Wherfore we haue done nothing contrary to our promeſſe, or cōpoſition, neither haue we geuē our aduerſaries any cauſe of warre. And ſeing the matter is thus, we deſire all mē, that they geue no credite to their ſclaundrous reportes, but to lament our chaunce, which are cōſtreined to defend the warre yt is attēpted againſt vs, to thintent we might mainteine ye pure doctrine of the Goſpel, & the liberties receiued of our elders, for the which thinges alſo godly kinges & magiſtrates of fourmer times, & the Machabeis men of moſt ſtoute courage, haue refuſed no perill or daunger. We wiſhe for peace moſte chiefly aboue al thinges: But that is denied vs hetherto. Wherfore being lōg & ſore afflicted with the inuaſions of our nere neighbours, we could not repulſe frō vs vniuſt violēce. Wherby we haue alſo ye better confidence, that ſuche as we haue prouoked with no iniury, wil iudge this war to cōcerne thē nothing, & ſtande in the awe & feare of God, the reuenger of al vnrighteouſnes. For the ſelf ſame cauſe that hath ſtired vp this trouble againſt vs, wyl ſhortly after wrap vp thē alſo in great diſtreſſe & perils, ſo many as couet to retein & maintein the pure doctrine. The letters 1551. wherwith the byſhop of Rome had called the coūſell. Themperour the fifth day of Ianuary cōmaundeth to be red in the Senate of ſtates & Princes, exhorting thē, that they wold prepare thēſelues. The ſame day king Ferdinādo, informeth the ſtates, how in yt truce time, the Turks waxe buſy in Hongary, & build a caſtel within his dominion, & went about to ſurpriſe his caſtel

of Zolnock, & fortifie theirs with a garriſon, how alſo they haue made an inrode into Tranſſyluania: Wherof verely he hath geuen them none occaſion, & doth al that he can, that the truce taken may be obſerued, but in caſe the Turke ſhal refuſe, he deſired to haue aide geuen him. I told you in the xx. boke of Stephen byſhop of Wincheſter, for what cauſe he was apprehē
               ded in Englād. And where he perſeuered in his opinion, & wold neither allowe the ſtatutes already made, nor ſuche as ſhuld be made hereafter cōcerning religion, during the kinges nonage, he was depriueth of his byſhoprike this yeare in the moneth of Ianuary, & cōmitted again to warde. Andrew Oſiāder, whom I ſayd went into Pruſſe, ſet forth this time a new opiniō affirming A newe doctrine of Oſiander. ye man is not iuſtified by faith, but by the rightuouſnes of Chriſt dwelling in vs, & ſaith that Luther was alſo of his opinion. But the reſt of the diuines his fellowes did ſtoutly impugne it, affirming that he ſaid of Luther to be falſe, who not many monthes before his death, left a moſt ample & goodly teſtimony in the preface of the firſt Tome of Melāchthons boke, wherin are treated the cōmon places of holy ſcripture: Where therfore he inueieth againſt Melanchthon, he maketh alſo Luther his aduerſary, for that they were both of one opiniō. Moreouer by a conference made, they proued manifeſtly that Luther taught cleane cōtrary to him in this matter: and ſay yt his doctrine is peſtiferous, which ſaith yt the iuſtification of fayth cōſiſteth not in the bloud & death of Chriſt, wherby we are redemed & iuſtified. The matter was handled with great cōtentiō. He him ſelf verely pretended, as I ſaid, as though Luther had ben of his opiniō. But in ye meane time he made his auaunt amongſt his adherentes, as it is written, yt Luther & Melāchthō had made & cōpiled a diuinitie after Ariſtotels doctrine, which ſauereth more of the fleſhe than of ye ſpirite. Albert the Duke of The Duke of Pruiſſe addicte to Oſiander. Pruſland deſired at yt firſt yt the matter might haue ben appeaſed by mediatours. But perſwaded by Oſiander, after much debating, he became of his opinion, & cōmaundeth his aduerſaries to depart out of his dominiō. Amongſt whō was Ioachim Merlin, who muſt nedes be packing, although not only ye citezens, but alſo womē & children beſought yt Prince right hūbly, that they might not be depriued of ſuch a paſtour. This Oſiander taught many yeres at Norinberg, & that much to his cōmē
               dation, & neuer made buſines, but ſemed in al things to folowe Luthers doctrine ſo long as he liued. But whan after themperours decree of religion, he forſoke Norinberg, & went into the land of Pruiſſe, he reiſed vp this ſame queſtiō. Which many mē ſuppoſed yt he durſt neuer do ſo long as Luther liued. He chiefly

prouoketh them of Wittēberg to confute theſe thinges if they can, & ſayth how he wil defend his opiniō, whoſoeuer impugne theſame, & taunteth Melanchthon bitterly. Whoſe opinion al learned men for the moſt part namely in Saxonie, reproued, by bokes ſet forth, & rebuked, that in a time moſte troubleſome he diſturbed the congregation. And where he had hādled ſo vngodly Melanchthon, a man of ſo great modeſtie & learning, with yt were al men offended exceadingly. In an other certen booke he Melanchthō beſt learned and modeſte contendeth, that albeit mankinde had not ben loſt through the ſinne of Adam, yet ſhuld Chriſt haue bene borne neuertheleſſe. The eight day of February is diſſolued the coūſell of thempire. Therin made themperour a decre, & forſomuch, ſaith he, as this The decree of Auſpurg. great diſſention in religion, can by no meanes be better appeaſed, than by a general, Godly, & fre counſell. Again, for that in yt former aſſemble the ſtates haue ſubmitted thē ſelues vnto the counſel, & therin perſeuer, this ſhalbe cōfirmed & ratified. That thing alſo, which I my ſelf than promiſed, I wil procure with all trauell & diligence, that eche thing may be orderly & rightly done. And ſithe that this bull of the byſhop of Rome, apperteyneth vnto all chriſtian Realmes & prouinces, I ſuppoſe verely, that all kinges & rulers, remembring their dutie, will obeye, & furder ſo Godly a buſines to thuttermoſt of their power, what ſoeuer alſo ſhal become me to do therin, as the aduocate of the church, & defendour of counſelles, yt ſame will I performe. And to al ſuch as wil repare to the coūſel, whether they haue chaunged their religion or not, I wil graunte ſaufe conduicte, yt they may there remayn & propoūde ſuch thinges as they ſhal thinke to concerne ye quiet of their conſcience, & after ſhal & may ſafely retourne home againe garded with a cōmon cōduct. Moreouer I will indeuour, yt the whole matter ſhalbe treated & determined Godly & chriſtiāly, al affections ſet apart, according to the holy ſcripture & doctrine of yt fathers, yt as wel the ciuile as eccleſiaſticall ſtate may be reformed, all errours & falſe opinions cleane taken away. I intende moreouer to remain within the limites of thempire, or at the leaſt very neare, to thintent to defende the coūſel, ſo that it may come vnto thende wiſhed for, & the fruict therof may redoūde vnto al men, & may be chiefly for the cōmoditie of Germany. Wherfore I require & exhort al princes & ſtates, but chiefly thē of the clergie, & thoſe that haue altered their religion, & cleaue to ye confeſſion of Auſpurg, that according to the byſhops bul, they prepare thē ſelues, & come thither furniſhed, leaſt after they complayne, yt they were through ouermuch haſte ſupplanted, or els not admitted to the ſufficiēt declaration of their cauſe. For as I ſaid, I will aſſure them by

ſaufe conduict, & bring to paſſe, that they ſhalbe heard ſo much as ſhalbe requiſite. But where as the ſtates haue alledged ſondry reaſons, why the decrees of the former conuention of Auſpurg concerning religion & reformation, be not kept, al this I reuoke to mine owne conſideration & wil know of eche man ſeuerally what impediment there is. Therfore let euery man for ſee, yt the matter may come to reherſall. It was alſo decreed ye at the firſt day of April thambaſſadours of thelectours, & of ſyx other Princes, ſhuld mete at Norinberg, to conſulte, howe that Mony for yt warre of Maydēburg. mony which was taken out of the cōmon treaſorie for the war of Maydenburg, ſhuld be reſtored. Whatſoeuer they ſhall determine, is cōmaunded to be of like force, as if the ſame had ben enacted in the full aſſemble of thempire. And for ſo much as this war ſhuld concerne the welth of al Germany, it ſhalbe lawfull for euery Magiſtrate to taxe yt people for yt ſame cauſe. Againe, in caſe any citezen of thempire or ſtraunger ſhall ayde them of Maydēburg, thā doeth thēperour alſo promiſe to be at charge. As concerning the iuriſdiction & goodes of the churche, themperour ſaith he wil foreſe, yt being ſued to, by thē whom it concerneth, he wil miniſter iuſtice vnto thē, that euery man ſhal recouer & inioye his own. They decreed to ayde king Ferdinando againſt the Turke, although vnwillingly, with ſuche ayde as was promiſed him in the former conuention. Finally becauſe therles of Manſfelde & Hedeck, muſtring men the laſt wynter, had intended to aide thē of Maidenburg, as before is ſayd, the Emperour chargeth & cōmaundeth, yt in caſe any ſouldiours aſſemble hereafter in any part of Germany, the Princes & ſtates next thē ſhal immediatly ioyne their forces together to ſubdue thē, & to quēche yt flambe before it be of force or violēce. In this ſelfſame time Henry the Frenche king, receiueth into his faith & tuition, Octauins Farneſius, who was both mortal ennemy Octauian Farneſe cliente to the Frēch king. to Ferdinando Gonzage, themperours lieftenaūt in Lūbardy, for ye ſlaughter of his father, & alſo being ſo nere vnto Placēce, which thēperour held, fearing leaſt he ſhuld not be able to kepe Parma by his owne force, craued foreine aide, & receiued into ye citie a garriſon of Frenchmē. Which thēperour toke right diſpleaſauntly, & eſpecially the biſhop of Rome, as ſhalbe declared hereafter. In theſe daies gaue thēperour ſentence againſt the Lantgraue for the contie or lorſhip of Diece. For he was condē
               ned of contēpt, for that he anſwered not: But he ſaid how it lay not in his power to anſwer, for ſo muche as he might not cōferfrely wt his coūſellours for the awayting & harkening of thē ye had him in their cuſtody. For after that it came to light how be

would haue made an eſcape lately, as I ſhewed you before, no man might haue acceſſe to him, nor ſpeake wt him without a witneſſe. The .xxviii. daye of February, Bucer ended his life at The death of Bucer. Cambridge, & was buried very honorably & was celebrated wt thepitaphes of lerned mē, amongſt whom alſo, wer two noble yong men of the houſe of Suffolke, brethren, whoſe mother the Ducheſſe, both at al times before, & whileſt he was ſick alſo ſhe wed al fauour & beneuolence to Bucer, a woman of a moſt earneſt zeale towards religiō. In theſe daies the byſhop of Straſburg, maketh a greuous cōplaint to ye ſenate of their preachers Complainte of the Byſh. of Straſb. by letters written, as though they ſhuld ſtyre vp yt people, & put the prieſtes in hazarde of their lines. Wherfore he requireth yt theſe thinges may be reformed, or els will he do as his counſell ſhal ſerue him. The .x. day of March, king Ferdinādo & his ſōne Maximilian, depart frō Auſpurg. For vnto this time thei ſtode in termes with thēperour, & the Regēt of Flaūders. Thambaſſadours alſo of Breme depart at the length without peace making. In this meane time at Maidēburg were diuerſe cōflictes & ſkermiſhes, for ofttimes wold the townes men iſſue out. And whan the riuer of Elbe ouerflowed, in ye ſhips yt they had made they brought in vitayle both vp the ſtreame & down. The ſame time were diuers wonders ſene in Saxony, & amongeſt other thinges, thre ſunnes, & as many mones, one while of a pale colour, Wōders in Saxonye. an other while as red as bloud. They of Maydēburg deſired aide of the cities by the ſea coaſte, by Uolrate & Iohn, ſōnes to the Erle of Manſtelde, but it was in vain. Than do thennemies build bulwarkes by the riuer of Elbe aboue & beneth the citie, & laying ſhips on either ſide wel māned, kepe the townes men frō ſayling. Oftentimes they fought alſo whā they wold driue away the cattel, which the townes men daily turned out into the paſture about the citie. The xi. day of April ye byſhop of The Pope accuſeth Octauian Farneſe Rome in a boke ſet forth, ſore accuſeth Octauius Farneſe, and what time, ſaith he, he receiued of me Parma & ye high gouernment, he promyſed by his fidelitie, that he wold neither addict his ſeruice to none other Prince, nor receiue any forein power into Parma but through my licēce. And what time he appered to bend towardes an alteratiō, oftentimes I admeniſted him of his duty frendly, by intermeſſages & by his brother Alexāder Cardinal: And becauſe he anſwered yt time ſomwhat ſtraūgly, ſending my letters, I threatned him wt moſte greuous puniſhment, if he ſhould doe otherwyſe. Afterward being aduertiſed, that he kepte not conuenauntes, I was (as it well became me) ryght ſore offended, that he ſhoulde worke me ſuche an iniurie, whome I had auaunced with ſo great honours and benefites.

Nowe therefore, although I might ſtraightwaies determine, in a matter that is ſo euident, yet to thintent he may vnderſtande oure great humanity, I wil and commaund him, that within xxx daies he appeare at Rome; and anſwer to his accuſations, and make vs good aſſurance from henceforth. For this, if he neglect to do, I wil that he be euen now condemned of treaſon, periury and other moſt greuous crimes: and what landes or goodes ſo euer he hath, I cō
               maund it to be publicke and common, & require herein themperors fidelity, that he wil aid me in puniſhing the ſame; and commaund yt no man aid him with any thing. When May day was come, thaction of the counſel was commenced: but becauſe very few wer than The counſel at Trente is cold. commen thither, and the warre of Parma was at hand, the matter was adiourned to the firſt day of Septembre. Thambaſſadors of Princes which met at Norinberge, in the moneth of April, toke ordre, that there ſhould be a new contribution of Mony, for the ſiege of Maidenburge. And albeit themperoure commaunded the ſame afterward by proclamation, yet was ther an exceading great difficulty in the thing, and all men were vnwilling to paye, for that the ſiege was long, and there appeared no end. Wherfore Duke Moris alſo treated oftwith the Townes men of peace, and the fiſt day of Maye, what time they were come into the Campe by ſafe conduit, the matter was long and much debated, he him ſelf being preſent, A fewe monethes before Duke Maurice had taken to his ſeruice Counte Hedecke, whome the Emperoure had outlawed, and Erle Hedeck frende to thē of Maidenb. made him gouernour of Lipſia. Who for the zeale vnto Religion, & hatred he bare to themperour, wiſhed wel to them of Maydenburge, and was a counſelloure of peace, that the ſame war beinge finiſhed, Duke Moris might attempte greater thinges. For euen than entred into theyr heads the deuiſe of the war; that was moued afterwards againſt themperor, as ſhalbe declared in his place. Notwithſtanding they coulde not than agre vpon a peace, for that ouer hard conditions were propounded, and that of ſet purpoſe, as many ſuppoſe, whileſt duke Moris differred the time, and ſoughte oportunity for his enterpriſe, which than at the length was geuen, after that the French king had proclaimed war againſt the Emperor, as ſhalbe ſaid hereafter. In the meane ſeaſon a roſe a great rebellion in the Campe before Maidenburge, for want of paiment of certaine monethes wages. Neither came the Prince Octauius to Rome whan he was cited, but aided with the French kinges garniſons, toke in hand to defend Parma.
            Wherfore the Emperour, the .xiii. day of May publiſhing his letters, for as much, ſaith he, as of our duety & good wil towardes yt biſhop & church of Rome, I couet to perform ſuch things as I am

den, and to forſee, leaſt by this occaſion greater commotions ariſe in Italy, and after in other places: again, whileſt I conſider vpon how iuſt cauſes the biſhop is moued and how he hath omitted nothing, that Octauius might do his dutye, I haue committed thys charge to Fernando Gonzage, becauſe I cānot my ſelf be preſent, yt he ſhal aid the biſhop in my name. Wherfore we wil & command al our louing ſubiects throughout Lumbardie, yt they be to him obedient in this war none otherwiſe thā to our ſelf, and yt they indeuor to anoy thenemy as muche as is poſſible for them to do. So therfore Gonzage beginneth the war, and firſt ſpoyling the country, be The war of Parma betwixt themperoure and french king. ſegeth the city of Parma, and the biſhop of Rome Mirandula. For therle of Mirandula was of the French parte, and except he were cooped in, might haue holpen greatly the Prince and city of Parma. At the twenty day of Maye the Biſhop of Rome wrote to the Swiſſes very louinglye, like as he had taken vnto him the name of Iuly the ſecond, which loued them intierlye well, ſo had he alſo purpoſed in louinge them to immitate his example and foteſteps. Hitherto in dede he hath bene ſo occupied with ſondrye, and that moſt waighty affaires of the publick weale, that he hath had no leſure to declare thaffection of his mind, yet hath he borne them ſtill in perfect memory: and that the ſame apeareth chiefly in ii. thinges firſt, that for the cuſtody of his body, he hath choſen in the Citye a garde of the ſame nation. Secondly, that he hath done alſo ye ſame at Boloigne Lagraſſe, truſting both to their induſtry and fidelity alſo: and now, in as much as the counſell is called, and latelye the firſt day of May begon at Trent, occaſion is geuen him to wryte vnto them: wher therfore their preſence ſhould be a great help and furtherance to ſo godly and nedeful a worke, he exhorteth them very much, yt ſuch prelates of the church as be within their iuriſdiction and liberties, be not wanting, but be there at the next ſeſſion the firſt day of Septembre: the reſt they ſhall vnderſtande of S. Hierome, Franch, Knight, his ambaſſadour, whoſe faith and diligence hath of them now many yeres ben wel tried: again, for becauſe the matter in hand is greatly to his contētation, he wil ſend or it belōg one of his principal biſhops, which may treat with them touchinge the counſel more at large. About thend of May, the Emperoures ſonne departing from Auſpurge, by Italy returneth into Spain, with him wente Maximilian his Coſin and Brother in lawe, to fetche awaye his wife, the mother of two Children. In the meane time, the kinge of Fraunce, to appeaſe the Biſhoppe and Senate The French kings excuſe to the Pope. of Cardinals, declareth at Rome by his ambaſſadoure Mounſour de Thermes, that where he hath receiued into his tuition Octauian the Prince of Parma, it deſerueth no reprehenſion: For thys

thing proprely belongeth vnto kings, to ſuccor thafflicted: Moreouer, that he hath ſought no priuate commodity in that matter, but whatſoeuer he hath done, to haue done it for the church of Romes ſake, after thexāple of his progenitors, which haue ben more beneficial to the ſame than any others, & many times alſo defēded it by force of armes. For ſeing that Parma is the patrimony of ye churche, he was very careful to forſee, that it ſhuld not come into other mens handes, and for the ſame cauſe is at great coſt & charge daily: wherfore he deſireth him and that moſt earneſtly, that he wold take it in that part, and leaue the opinion that he hath conceiued of him: for the ſame ſhalbe to the great cōmodity of the cōmon weale. But if he refuſe this ſatiſfaction, and chuſe warre before peace, he him ſelf ſeeth how greatly that wil be to the damage and daunger of all Italy and Europe, and that alſo there can be no certen treaty had in Religion, that may continue: wherefore concerninge the mooſt pearillous commotions that ſhal ariſe hereof, that the counſell already called, can not aſſemble, or if it do, of neceſſity muſte be diſperſed, and that in this troubleſome time he can ſende none of the biſhops of his realme vnto Trent, of all theſe thinges ther can be no fault laid in him, who is willing not only to offer conditions of peace, but alſo to take, & this ſo proteſteth ſo openly. Howe be it the biſhop truſting to thaid and promeſſes of themperor, was nothing The ſterſe minde of Pope Iulye. the mileder for thys ambaſſade. The xvii. day of Iune, duke Moris graunteth againe ſafeconduite to them of Maidenburge, that they ſhould ſend vnto him ambaſſadours concerning peacs. Who taking theyr iourney, being conducted by Marques Alberte, finde Duke Moris at Pirne a Towne of Meiſſen. For he was retourned home, and ſemed to worke ſlackly. When they were come, in themperors name he propoundeth theſe conditions. That they ſhould yelde them ſelues without any condition, and humblye deſire pardon. They ſhal make no leage againſt themperor, king Ferdinando, Auſtriche, or Burgundie: they ſhal obſerue al the decrees of thempyre. They ſhall aunſwere to the law, and recompence the cleargy for domage done, that they caſt down theyr fortifications & Rampires, and admit into theyr City a garriſon of a M. and CC. ſoldiours. They ſhall receiue themperor, Kinge Fardinando, and theyr deputies at all times, wyth what power ſomeuer they brynge with them, that they deliuer twelue greate pieces of ordenaunce, paye an C: M. Crownes, and confirme all theſe conditions by an oth. Theſe thinges, although they were not able to perfourme, yet did they not vtterly refuſe, & through thinterceſſion, of Counte Hedecke, by little & little ſome thing was remitted. Themperor before this ſending his letters into Germany, eſpecially to the ſtates of ye
               
proteſtants religion, had ſufficiently aſſured thē by ſafeconduit, exhorting thē to be at Trent the firſt day of Maye: but inaſmuch as for the war of Parma, the day of the counſell was differred to the firſt of Septēbre, as I ſaid before, he admoniſheth them again yt they come in any wiſe, promiſing thē all equity & faithfulnes. But albeit ther were very many of the ſame profeſſion, yet did they not confer together, which thing hath ben chiefly neceſſary, either for yt they diſpaired touching the ſucceſſe of the thing, or els for that they feared themperors diſpleſure, or for yt they waxed faint hearted, as it were in the very entrance of the daunger. And amonges ye cities only they of Strauſburge ſent meſſagers to enquire what thinge both they yt were nere, and alſo far of, wer purpoſed to do herein. And certenly duke Moris gaue in cōmaundement to Philip Melanchton, The confeſſion of Duke Moris by Melanchton. that he ſhuld pen tharticles of doctrine, which ſhuld after be exhibited openly: whan that boke was finiſhed, the prince commaunded al the diuines & miniſters of the church to mete at Lipſia the viii. of Iuly, wheras the ſame was red and approued by conſēt of them al. The ſame ordre alſo toke Chriſtopher, duke of Wirtemberge, who cauſed Brentius to compile a boke of the ſame argument. And albeit that the ſence of either wryting was all one, yet wold Duke Moris haue his boke exhibited by it ſelf, leaſt if many together ſhould propound the ſame thing in common, themperour might conceiue a ſuſpition of ſome conſpiracy made: Neuertheleſſe ſēding their bokes to and fro, both they of Wirtemberge approued the Saxons boke, & the Saxons the boke of Wirtemberge, and the diuines of Strauſburge ether of them both, whan they had red the ſame: and ſo it was agreed, that when time ſhuld ſerue, ther ſhuld be ſent to the counſel certen to prefer and defend theſe things. The Duke of Wirtemberge, after thexample of his father, made muche of Ihon Brentius for his excellent learning, vſing his aide in reſtoring of the godly doctrine, after alſo, he reſtored him to the Miniſtration The humanity of the Duke of wirtemberge, to ward Brentius. of the Church, and made him preſident of Stutgarde. The .xxv. day of Iuly, the Marques Albert, in thabſence of Duke Moris, reiecteth ſuch thinges by a trompetter, as they of Maidenburge had anſwered to the conditions of peace, propounded at Pirne by duke Moris. The day before he had taken an ouerthrow: for they bickered with greater forces than euer they did before. About the viii. day of Auguſt ther had like to haue bene a greate ſedition in the city. For letters wer brought to the ſoldioures, wherein this was conteined, how ther wer certen of the Senators, which wold betray the city to thenemy, and amonges them was Henry Alman. Wherfore the ſoldiors flocking together cal for him: whē he came, he ſaith it is to him an iniury, and refuſeth no puniſhment, if it cā
               
be proued, affirminge this to be inuented by the ennemye, that the thing which they are not hable to do by power and force of armes, they might bring to paſſe by craft and policy: againe whan the hole Senate were become ſureties for him, the matter was appeaſed, & a certain nombre of Citezens & Souldiors were choſen, whiche ſhuld marke what manner of letters from henceforth were ſent to & fro. The eight day after, Duke Moris adreſſing his letters to ye 
               Duke Moris letters to the Emperour. Emperoure, declareth how he verely can be content with the ſafe conduit, which he had geuen, neither doth he greatly find any lacke therin: how be it, he heareth ſay, that a decre was made in the coū
               ſell of Conſtance, that inquiſition ſhoulde be made againſte Heretickes or ſuſpected of Hereſy, if haply being called to the Counſell, they repaired thither, and that ſentence ſhoulde be pronounced againſt them, although the Emperour had graunted them ſafeconduit, this decre to remaine in the common recordes.
            And like as they had decreed, ſo did they practiſe in deede, in burninge Ihon Huſſe, who came thither by the ſafeconduite of the Emperoure Sigiſmunde: and ſeinge it is ſo, he canne ſende none of his to Trente, vnleſſe the Prelates there will graunte alſo their ſafeconduit in the whole name of the counſel, as in times paſt was done in the counſel of Baſil, which was next vnto the ſame: for the Bohemers being feared with the former example, would not come The burnt child the fyre dreades. thither at the ſame time, vnleſſe they had firſt receiued the publike ſafeconduit of the whole counſell: his requeſt is therefore, that he ether through his authority or fauour would obteine this at theyr handes: for except they might be in like caſe aſſured, as they wer in times paſt at Baſill, it ought not to be preiudiciall to him, or to any other of the ſame profeſſion, if they ſuffered no man of theyrs to trauel thither. But cōcerning the Bohemers, and Ihon Huſſe that was brent at Coſtantz, and of the warre that inſued therof, I haue ſpoken in ye third boke. And becauſe a decre was made at Coſtantz, that the next counſel after the ſame ſhould be holden, the fift yeare after, an other after vii. yeares, and from that time foreward euery tenth yere, the fathers aſſemble again at Baſill. And for ſo muche as the Bohemers were not as yet reconciled, the matter was treated betwene them by letters and intermeſſagers, & in the towne of Egre was made a draught of a ſafecōduit, which if yt fathers wold admit, the Bohemers ſaid, how they woulde not refuſe to come. After that thoſe which were ſent had declared theyr ambaſſade, the fathers approued the ſame fourme, and ſet to theyr feales, and ſending vnto them withal moſt frendly letters, exhort them to prepare them ſelues, that, what time the ſafe conduit alſo of the Emperour Sigiſmund ſhall come vnto them, they may take their iourney.

This was in the fourth ſeſſion, in the yeare of grace .M.CCCC.xxxii. But what maner aſſuraunce of the fathers that ſame was, ſhalbe ſhewed in the boke that followeth. Wherefore whan Duke Moris was warned hereof by his counſel, he maketh ſute to themperor, and vrgeth the preſcript of Baſil, as the laſt, and moſte conuenient for this time. For the proteſtantes caſe was in a maner al one with the Bohemers, and for much like cauſes was the counſel of Trēt called, as it was in times paſt at Baſil, that is to wit, that hereſies might be roted out, that peace and tranquillity mighte be reſtored to the common wealth, and that vices being taking away, the church might be refourmed. The xxvi. day of Auguſt, in yt morning after a ſermon, the doctours and preachers of the Churche of Auſpurge, to the nombre of ten, were ſent for to the lodginge of the biſhop of Arras, euery man by him ſelf: when they were come thyther, ſome after others, knowing nothing of the matter, they were commaunded to ſtand apart, and not to ſpeake together: After they were called into a hall, where ſate the biſhop of Arras, with Haſie, Seldie, Maluēda, and certain others, in ordre one after an other. Interrogatories for the Miniſters of Auſpurge. Seldie had the talke, and as he was commaunded, propoundeth queſtions. Whether that in the Lords ſupper, there is as much cō
               tained vnder one kind, as vnder both: Moreouer how many Sacraments they beleued to be? Finally, why they taught not after the forme preſcribed by themperor thre yeares paſt, wheras they promiſed ſo to do: as wel as the Senate, and all other ſtates do? They make aunſwer euery man for him ſelf ſeuerally, how Chriſt did inſtitute the whole ſupper, whoſe preſcript is to be followed: that in holy ſcripture are found only two Sacraments, Baptiſme, and the Lordes ſupper: and that they receiued not that fourme of doctrine, for that it diſſenteth from holy ſcripture. Here ſpake the Biſhop of Arras in a great coler, thinke you than that themperor may not as The conſtancy of the prelates. wel in deuine matters, as in ciuill, make lawes and preſcribe certain orders? what themperor may do, we now diſpute not ſay they, but, as we haue ſaied, that fourme we neither receiued, nor certenly can allow. Than waxed he alſo more angry, and being ful of furye, taunted them with ſore rebukes. Whan they alſo ſpake of the Sacraments, Seldie a Ciuilian, as an interpretoure, did rebuke them, being thus ſent from them, they are cōmaunded to tary with out, and being led by a keper, are beſtowed euery man in his place, that they might not come together. After were ſent for, certaine of the chiefeſt Senatours. whan they were commen, they were let in altogether, and commaūded that within iii. daies, theſe preachers ſhuld depart out of the city before the ſonne ſetting: that hereafter they preach no more within the limites of thempire, nor ſo farre as

the Emperours dominion ſtretcheth: that they ſpeake with none of their frendes nor kinſfolkes, nether tell any man the cauſe of their The preachers exiled. departure, nor after to wryte to any man within the city, or ſignify what is done with them. Theſe thinges were they conſtrained ful ſore againſt their wils, with holding vp their fingers, as the ceremony is, to promiſe by an othe: after was the Senate commaunded to ſhutte vp the Church dores, wherin Luthers Religion was taught, til the Emperor ſhould contremaund them. After the ſame ſort alſo, they dealt afterward with the ſcolemaſters, and with the city of Meminge, and others in Sweueland, which were alſo ſent for to come thither: for they were both forbidden to teach, and alſo to retourne home againe. And wheras one of them alledged that his wife was neare the time of deliuerance, and therfore beſought them earneſtly, that he might only be permitted to ſe her: the biſhop of Arras turning towardes his company, he calleth her, ſaith he, his wife, which is an harlot. Thus therfore they beinge compelled to depart, cauſed great heauines in the City: but the citezens ſhewed them what pleaſure they could both by giftes, and other liberality. The Duke of Saxon alſo priſoner, whan he hard therof, both comforted them by intermeſſagers, and alſo holpe them with mony at theyr departure. The cauſe, why the Emperor proceded on thys wiſe againſt them was thought to be, firſt, for that he was ſtirred vp hereunto of many: ſecondlye, for that after inquiſition made, he found that the preachers were a let, that his decre of religion toke not place: Finally, for that he had heard report of the conſent and agrement of the diuines of Saxon, Sweuelād, and Strauſburge. And the readieſt way was thought to be, if they were exiled, to the end the fathers at Trent might haue the leſſe to do, and the victory more eaſily, in caſe they ſhould hardly haue anye aduerſaries to ſend againſt them. They therfore being thus driuen oute, and baniſhed, fled partly to the Swiſſes, and partly to other places, when the brute of this thinge was blaſed abrode, it made manye men a fraid. For that which chaunced there, no man douted, but the ſame ſhould alſo be done in other places: but behold, whileſt all men are in the ſame feare, the french king maketh warre againſte themperor, The French king warreth vpon themperour. and withall taketh certain ſhips of Flaunders, carieth them away into Fraunce and ſpoyleth them, and in Piedemount & Turrin ſurpriſeth many Townes, and amonges other, Cherie, & San damians, by the conduit of Briſſake. Touching the ſhippes intercepted, the imperials in a writing ſetforth, report that whan themperour loked for nothing leſſe than warre, and commaunded hys ſubiectes to ſit quiet, the french Captaine Poline chaunced vppon them, and as though he caried the Quene of Scotlande, ſignified

vnto them that for honoure ſake, after the olde accuſtomed facion, they ſhuld vaile their bonnets, ſtrike ſaile, and hailſe her with, ſhoting of their ordinaunce: which thing whan they had done, beinge vnarmed, they were fradulently circumuented, and caried awaye. Many men had great maruel, that the king durſt, in this ſo great good fortune and proſperity of the Emperor, renounce his frendſhip: yea it is ſayed to haue chaunced to the Emperour, contrary to his expectation For all be it he warred againſte the Duke of Parma, yet would he not ſeme therfore to be enemy to the French men with whome he had made peace ſeuen yeares before. How be it the king, for that he ſawe howe through the ſide of Octauius, he him ſelf ſhuld alſo be wounded, for yt he had alredy intelligence that ye Turkes wer ſailing on the Sea. Again, for that he had intelligēce by intermeſſagers, how Duke Moris was affected, & for ſo muche as the Emperoure was thought in that imbecillitye of bodye, and diſeaſe that retourned ofte, to be of no longe life, he attempted the thing with a ſtout courage.
            And in manner about the ſame time, the Turkiſh Fleete, whan it had aſſailed Malta in vaine, ſurpriſeth Tripolis a City in Affricke. The blame hereof the Emperoure laying all together in the French King ſendeth his ambaſſadors to the Princes & Cities of Cōtrarye tales of ye King and the Emperour. Germany, affirming this to be done through his craft and Policy. But the King ſo ſone as be knew therof, ercuſeth the matter, and ſaith how the cauſe of the Turkiſh warre is, for that the Emperor reſtoreth not to them the city of Affricke, according to his promes, for that King Fardinando doth hold and fortify the Caſtel of Zolnocke ſtanding at the frontiers of Hongary within the Turkiſhe dominion, for that he denieth to pay him his yearely tribute, and attempteth new enterpriſes in Tranſſyluania. After this he confuteth the Emperours narration, wherin is declared, how Tripolis was loſt through the treaſon of Aremount the French ambaſſador, with a contrary narration, and confyrmeth the ſame by the letters of the great Turke. Whileſt theſe things wer a bruing, the day of the conſel came, the firſt of Septēbre, at the which day were ther preſent, beſides the biſhops of Italy & Spaine, tharch biſhops of Mentz & Treuers, to the great ioy & gladnes, as it appered of al mē, & not long after came alſo tharchbiſhop of Colō. For themperor had earneſtly moued thē both preſētly in ye coūſel at Auſpurge, & after alſo by letters & meſſagers, yt they ſhuld be ther, for they exceld al others in dignity, welth & power, & the moſt part of yt biſhops in Germany are cōpriſed vnder theyr dominiō: wherfor thincking to tary lōg, they ſold altheyr horſes, reſeruing only a few, & made theirprouiſiō for houſkepīg a lōg ſeaſō, thither came alſo yt biſhops of ſtrauſ

Uienne, Coſtintz, Chur, and Numburge: others being let with affaires, age, or ſicknes, whan they had obtained licence, ſente theyr Proctours. In the Biſhop of Romes name, Cardinal Creſcēt was there preſident: and had ioyned in commiſſion with him tharchbiſhop The counſel renued at Trent. of Sipount and the biſhop of Uerona. Themperor had ſente thither Fraunces Toletane, Hugh, Earle Mounforte, and William Pictaue, diuers were there alſo in the place of king Ferdinando and Hongary. Making therfore an aſſembly in the head church which they call a ſeſſion, the firſt day of Septembre, whan Maſſe was done, and other accuſtomed ceremonies finiſhed, ſodēly came in the French Kinges ambaſſadoure, the abbot of Belloſan, with letters which were indorſed to the conuention of Trent, which after The French kinges letters to the counſel. he had deliuered to the biſhops Legate, and he had red the ſuperſcription, a queſtion aroſe, why he ſhuld call it a conuention, rather than a counſell: and vnleſſe he could ſhew a commiſſion, thoſe letters were neither to be red nor yet receiued, and where an exceading great clamour was raiſed, eſpecially by the Spaniſh biſhops, and he affirmed that his commiſſion was compriſed in the letters, the biſhops Legate ariſeth, and calleth a ſide the fathers into the reueſtry. The matter being decided, that the indorſinge mighte be taken in good part, they condeſcended to heare him. Therfore whē they had red his letters priuately, wherin the king did briefly ſignify his grief, and that he had iniury done him, and required them to credite his Ambaſſadour. They all ſit downe againe, and than reading the letters openly, make this anſwere. Where the kinge, vnder the name of a conuention doth ſignify the counſell, it is takē of them in good part: neither will they therefore conceiue any ſiniſtrall ſuſpicion of ſo great a king, who hath the title of the mooſte Chriſten: but in caſe his mind and wil be otherwiſe, than take they thoſe letters, as not wrytten to them. After he was commaunded to declare his meſſage. Than he reciteth a long oration wrytten.
            And firſt, the king rehearſeth what he treated by his ambaſſadour Paulus Thermes, with the biſhop and Senate of cardinals: and how by all theſe meanes he hath nothing preuailed, notwithſtanding that he had opened alwaies vnto peace: and ſaith how biſhop Iuly, who after thexample of his predeceſſoures ought to appeaſe the controuerſies of Princes, hath kindled an exceading great fire at ſuch time as he ought leaſt to haue done it, whan doubtleſſe the ſtate of the Chriſten common wealth was ſore afflicted: and ſeing the matter is thus, & for ſo much as he dealeth ſo ſharply & roughly with him, which is theldeſt ſonne of the church, he proteſteth, as he ſaith is likewiſe done at Rome, firſt, that for the moſt troubleſome tumultes of warre, he may not ſend the biſhops of his realme vnto

Trent: again, that he taketh not this for a publike or general coū
               ſel, but rather for a certain priuate conuention, which is not inſtituted for the profit of the common wealthe, but for the vtilitye of a few: Finally, that nether he, nor any man within his realme can be bounden to the decrees therof: but declareth alſo furthermore that he wil vſe ſuche remedies, if the caſe ſo require, as in a like matter his progenitors haue accuſtomed: he will be euer of a ſounde and ſincere mind towardes religion, and the Church of Rome, neither wil he cōmit any thing worthy of iuſt reprehenſion: but in as much as he is burthened with thiniuries and hatred of certain, without his deſert, he can not otherwiſe do at this preſent. Therfore let thē take this proteſtation in good parte, and Communicate vnto him the doctrine or teſtimony of this action, to thend he may certify other Princes and people of Chriſtendome, concerninge the whole matter. But wheras he ſaith, he wil vſe the remedies of his progenitoures, thus it ſtandeth, like as in all other Regions, ſo alſo in Fraunce, if any Biſhoppricke or Abbotſhip be vacant, ſuch as are called Chanons or Monkes had fre election to chuſe them: but the meane benefices, which were not electiue, as they terme it, the Biſhops and Patrones beſtowed: Moreouer all maner of ſutes and controuerſies touching benefices or matters of the church wer decided within euery prouince. But biſhops of Rome, as Couetouſnes Reſeruatyōs and graceser pectatiue. increaſed, began to ſubuert thoſe elections, and by reſeruatiōs and graces expectatiue, as they name them, haue deriued all the gaine to Rome, and to them ſelues, & called alſo to Rome, all ſutes, euen the fyrſt inſtaunces, as they call them. And the beginning of this alteration chanced in Fraunce, in the time of King Lewes the ninth: but he reſiſted ſtoutly, and in the yeare of our Lord M .CC. lxvii. made a law, that thold cuſtome ſhuld be reteined, nether that any tribute ſhuld for that cauſe be paid to the biſhop of Rome.
            This law was verely of force many yeares, but at the lengthe the violence of the biſhops preuailed againſt it, and ſo far as chriſtendome ſtretcheth, they publiſhed thoſe foreſaid graces and reſeruations, and were very chargeable to all men, vntill the Synode of Baſill toke away this kinde of pillage, and reſtored the aunciente lawes of contributions and elections, and prohibited firſte frutes to be paid. This decre of the counſel, the King of France, Charles the ſeuenth by thaduiſe of his Counſell did ratify, and in the yeare M .CCCC. xxxviii. confirmed by Proclamation. But Eugenius the fourth pronounced this counſell to be fruſtrate, and of none effect, as I ſaid in the firſt boke, and the Biſhops that ſucceded him reiected that decre, and ſaid it was Sciſmaticall: and in dede Pius the ſecond, ſendinge his Ambaſſadoure to Lewes the eleuenth,

ſonne to Charles the ſeuenth, moued him earneſtly to aboliſh that ſame confirmation: and the king aſketh counſell of the Senate of Paris, the mooſt famouſe of all Fraunce, which in a maner conſiſteth wholy of lawyers. They, repeting many thinges of great antiquity, declare, what the biſhops of former time, what the Counſels, and finally what his progenitors, Clodowey, Charles yt great Phillip Deodate, Lewes the ninth, Philip le Beau, Lewes, Hutine, Ihon the firſt, and laſte what his father and grandfather haue herein determined: and except thauncient lawes be obſerued, it wil come to paſſe, ſay they, that al theccleſiaſtical ordre ſhalbe brought to confuſion, and that Fraunce ſhalbe leſſe populous, whan ſo many ſhal run to Rome, and ſhalbe ſo much impoueriſhed, that churches, and many ſuch other ſumptuous buildings in France ſhalbe neglected and fall to ruine. And as touching the mony matter, vnles your fathers confirmation of the decree at Baſill maye be of The ſum of mony that is caried to Rome. force, there ſhalbe caried yerely out of Fraunce vnto Rome ten C .M. Crownes. For to let other thinges paſſe, in the time of Pius the ſecond, now biſhop, there haue bene vacant at the leaſt twentye Biſhopprickes, which haue paid euery one of them aſwel for their firſt frutes, as for other charges, vi .M. There haue fallen abbotſhips about lx, and euery one of them haue paied two thouſand, of other benefices haue bene void aboue two hondreth, whiche haue paid v .C. crownes a piece. Moreouer, within your realme are an hondreth thouſand pariſhes and aboue, out of the which an infinite quantity of gold hath bene gathered by that ſame deuiſe of the biſhop of Rome. Walke therfore in your fathers foteſteps, & ſwarue not from the decre of Baſil. Certainly this was the counſell of the Senate: but the king being ouercommen with the Biſhops, either authority or policy, would neades aboliſh the confirmation, & the The vniuerſity of Parts apealeth frō the Pope. chief worker of this matter was Cardinall Baluen, in great fauor with the king, whom the biſhop of Rome had corrupted: how be it both the kinges procurer, and alſo the vniuerſity of Paris, whome it much concerned, reſiſted with a ſtout courage, and appealed frō the biſhop to the counſel. Afterward Lewes the twelfth had great emnity for the ſame cauſe with Iuly the ſecōd, and the matter was brought into the counſel of Laterane, and Fraunces the firſte, that ſucceded Lewes, concluded at the length with Leo the tenth, vpon certaine conditions at Bononie, after he had taken Millan: verely that when a Biſhoppricke or Abbotſhip were vacante, the Couent in dede ſhould not haue thelection therof, but that the king ſhoulde within .vi. monethes nominate ſome man to the Biſhop of Rome, whome he thought worthy of that office. This ſame therfore is the thing amongs others, which King Henry now, by his ambaſſador

ſignified vnto them of a remeady. For kings are on this wiſe wōt to bridle the biſhops, when they are at diſſention with them, and ſo to put in practiſe the confirmation of the decre of Baſil, eſpectally at this time, when their thondrebolt is not ſo greatly feared as it was in time paſte. And for ſo muche as the Realme of Fraunce is both moſt large and rich alſo, Rome can not without great hinderance want the reuenues therof. And that which he ſignified here that he would do, the ſame did he not longe after, as you ſhal hear? The ſame remeadye alſo in times paſte vſed the King of Fraunce Tharrogancye of Poope Boniface againſt ye king of Fraunce. Phillip le Beaw, againſt Boniface the eight. For wheras he commaunded him to war againſt the Sarazens, and refuſing his excuſe, forbad that he ſhuld take no mony of the churches within his owne Realme, which the King was driuen to do for the neceſſitye of his warres, and vnleſſe he obeyed the ſame, did ſuſpend him out of the Church: he aſſembleth all his Nobles and ſtates at Paris, and reciting the wronges of Boniface, whan both all the Biſhops, Princes, and Nobilitie being demaunded had confeſſed, that they held al their landes and reuenues through his liberality & benefit, he commaundeth, that from henceforth ther be no mony conueid to Rome, and cauſeth alwaies and paſſages to be watched diligētly. But wheras the Senate of Paris made thaccompt, how much the biſhopprickes and abbotſhips vacant do pay, as before is ſaid, this ſay they, is to be vnderſtand of former time: for now is the paimēt dubled, and exceadeth the yearely reuenues, in ſo much, that many beneficed men, by reaſon of the great exaction, do leaue their buls in the handes of the Banckers. And within the realme of Fraunce be xii. Archbiſhopprickes, Aygnes, Uienne, Lions, Narbony, Tolouſe, Burdieux, Auxi, Burges, Tours, Roan, Rains, and Sens: Twelue archbiſhopriks in Fraunce. and Biſhopprickes aboute. lxxxxvi, by the vacations whereof, as they terme it, is caried to Rome a wonderful ſome of gold, and out of tharchbiſhopprickes verily about thre ſcore thouſand crownes, and thre hondreth, as thaccompte was made in the time of Lewes the twelfth. What time theſe letters were red, the fathers ſay, howe they ſhalbe anſwered at the next ſeſſion in caſe ye king wil acknowledge the counſel to be at Trent. But ſuch thinges as are nowe in treaty, they do not admit, but in as much as they may do lawfully: and therfore can not graunte him any teſtimonye or inſtruction of this action. After whan the day of the next ſeſſion, was appoynted the .xi. of Octobre, euery man returneth home, which was about ii. a clock at after none. And here ſemeth a mete place to declare what is the manner and ordre of the publicke ſeſſion, whan the ſame day came, the fathers as they vſe to ſpeake, aſſemble in the houſe of the biſhops Legate. And ſtil from ye cathedral church vnto his lodging

ſtand ſouldioures on either ſide the way, about foure hundred, and fifty horſmen, or mo. At ix. of the clocke commeth forth the Legate with his Croſier before him: and the cardinall of Trent goeth on his lefthand After follow thoſe that are in commiſſion with him, and tharchbiſhops that are Princes electors. Than the Ambaſſadors of themperor, and kinge Ferdinando ioyned together, afterwarde the reſidue of the biſhoppes euerye man in ordre. Whan the laſt of them are come to the church, the Souldiours by and by diſcharge their pieces: and after repair to the market place, and there and about the Temple kepe warde till the counſell breake vp. All they for the mooſt part are taken vp in the country, that they maye be preſt and ready at the ſame day: and the Towne it ſelf alſo doth kepe many, whan they be come into the church, they heare Maſſe, that done, the decrees of the counſel are recited, and the day alſo aſſigned for the next ſeſſion to come. Than alſo if any ambaſſadours haue ought to ſay, they are hard: But by reaſon of diuers, ſondry, & many buſy ceremonies that are vſed in all matters, thaction is delated til it be far in the day: which at the lengthe beinge finiſhed, the legate retourneth home with the ſame pompe. In ſittinge, the Biſhops Legate hath the chief place, next him the Cardinal of Trent, than the Legates copartners, after tharchbiſhops electors: on the lefthand ſate thambaſſadors of themperor and other Princes. On the middle fourmes ſit Archbiſhops, Biſhops, and other prelates, euery man in order as he came. The ſecond day of Septembre, the Theames geuen to the deuines. the deuines had Themes geuen them to diſcuſſe and reaſon vpon, wherof euery man may ſpeake his mind, to thintent, at the next ſitting they may be determined. And in pronouncing of ſentences of this meane was preſcribed, that they ſhould cleue to the holy ſcripture, to the traditions of the Apoſtles, to the receiued and approued counſels, and authorities of the holye fathers, that they vſe a breuitie, that they abſtain from ſuperfluous and vnprofitable queſtions, that they eſchue all frowardnes and contention. But as cō
               cerning the ordre, it was agreed, that thoſe deuines ſhoulde ſpeake The order of ſpeaking. firſt which the biſhop of Rome ſent, ſecondly whome the Emperor ſent, and ſo forth. Moreouer the biſhops Legate permitteth them, that for the ſearching out of the truthe, and as they ſaye, to confute falſe opinions, they might read ouer all maner of bokes. And there were deuines a great nombre, Spaniards, Italians & Germanes whome both the biſhop of Rome, and themperour, and alſo his ſiſter Mary, had ſente, whome alſo tharchbiſhops of Collon & Treuers, and the biſhops of Spaine and of Italy had broughte wyth them. Unto whome was referred the knowledge of al matters, nether was it lawfull for others, than for ſuche as were of the ſame

profeſſion, and that had taken the degre of doctorſhip, to ſpeake any thing. Yet for the fauor of the Archbiſhops of Colon and Treuers, was admitted Ihon Gropper a lawyer, and Ihon Delphe a batchelor of diuinity, but no doctor. And for ſo much as in certaine former ſittinges of the yere a M .D. xlvi. and the yeare following, they had made a determination, of original ſinne, iuſtification, and frewil, of the vii. Sacraments, of the new law, as they terme it, in general, and alſo of baptiſme and confirmation particularely, they condeſcended, that al thoſe ſtanding in force of the decre, they ſhuld procede to the reſt, and firſt in dede to the Sacrament of thanckes geuing. Wherfore certain Theames wer deliuered to the deuines, with theſe ſelf ſame words, that they ſhuld ſearch and try, whether they were heretical, and mete to be condēned by the holy Senode: which Theames they had collected oute of the bokes of Luther, Zwinglius, Bucer, and ſuch others. And the deuines vſe the matter after this ſort. They aſſemble all daily in the houſe of the Byſhops The maner of making ye Articles of faith. Legate, by the ſpace of many hours, & obſeruing thordre be foreſaid euery of them reaſoneth of the ſaid Theames without any interruption, yet ſo, as they ſubmit al their ſayings to the iudgment of the church of Rome. For none of the proteſtāts wer ther. This place is open indifferently for all men: and the Biſhops Legate, and the reſidue of all the fathers are many times ther preſēt: but the deuines only ſpeake, and the wordes and ſentences of euery man are regiſtred by the Scribes. What time all men had done reaſoning, which was than accuſtomed to be done in a Monethes ſpace, the biſhops reſorte to the biſhop of Romes Legate, and examine The maner of making ye decrees. the ſentences of the deuines whiche the Scribes had noted: after, out of euery nōbre & natiō wer choſē certen, which peruſing ouer al their opinions, might therof make a doctrine: what thinge ſhould be determined and beleued in euery poynt: after this they cō
               demne the contrary doctrin and errours, as they call them, wyth a greuous ſenſure, yet not with many words: al theſe thinges are in fine related to the whole aſſemble. When they be throughly agreed they come vnto open ſeſſions, as I ſaid before, and the decrees be red openly: that done the biſhops are demaunded, whether they allow the ſame. They anſwer all, that they pleaſe them well. And ſo the deuines declare what is theyr opinion of euery matter: but the biſhops only, and with them a few other mitred men haue authority to determine: that thing which is thus decreed, they commaund to be ſacred and holy, and call thoſe decrees, Canons. Theſe thinges in dede are thus done outwardly, but thoſe that are better acquainted with Romiſh matters, wil affirme that all thoſe articles of doctrine are written before at Rome, by the biſhops commaunment,

and ſent to his Legate in time, that the deuines may in their reaſoning folow that preſcript and ordre. For the Biſhop finedeth ther diuers of them, and many biſhops alſo, and therfore it is commonly ſpoken by a fond prouerbe, that the holy ghoſt commeth many times from Rome to Trēt incloſed in a male. For this cauſe verely that the biſhop ſendeth ofttimes letters in poſte, ſignifying to The holy ghoſte at the Popes commaundemēt. his Legates there what he woulde haue done. The fourth day of Septembre, Erle Hedeck commeth to Maidenburge: by him duke Moris did ſo mitigate the conditions before propounded, that they thought mete to proceade in the treatye. In the meane while was truſe taken, which was after alſo prolonged for many daies, as I ſhall hereafter declare. The French king hauing his mind alienated The French kinges wryting agaynſt the Pope. from the biſhop of Rome, publiſheth a wryting, and ſpeakinge many thinges of thiniury done vnto him, of the cauſe of the warre of Parma, and whye he receiued Octauius into his tuition, commaundeth vnder a great penalty, that no mony from henceforth be conueied to Rome: for conſidering that the ſinewes of warre conſiſteth in mony, what madnes were this, with his own mony & his ſubiectes to maintaine the force of his aduerſarye, and ſtrengthen his power? how it is the peculiare office of the biſhops of Rome to appeaſe: he controuerſies of kings: this verely did Paule ye third, who being almoſt worn for age came to Nice in Ligurie to make a reconcilement betwene his father and themperor: but Iuly followeth cleane an other wates, and hauing lately called a counſell, very neceſſary in dede for the common weale, hathe ſtirred vp war againſt him, ſurely of a ſet purpoſe, that he mighte exclude all the french church, which is one of the principall: ſo that ther can not be holden a lawful counſel, wherin both therrors of the prelates and miniſters of the church mighte be refourmed, and their faultes amended. This proclamation of the king was openlye proclaimed at Paris, the vii. day of Septembre, whereas a few daies before, ther was an other moſt hainous proclamation ſetforth againſt the A cruell proclamation againſte the Lutheranes. Lutheranes, whiche partly confirmed ſuch like decrees of former yeres, partly where they ſemed not to be diligently enough writtē, ſharpned them, omitting nothing that concerneth great ſeueritye, and ſuch as wil vtter any thing are promiſed great rewards, whiche thing in dede the king was thought to haue done for this intēt that he might bridell hereby ſuch as in Fraunce deſired to haue an alteration of Religyon, leaſte by reaſon of thys diſſention of hys with the biſhop, they ſhould take ouermuch libertye:
            And againe, leaſt they whiche beare a reuerence to the Churche of Rome ſhuld conceiue any apinion of him, that his minde ſhould be altered concerning Religion: Finally, that both the biſhop him ſelf

and the Senate of Cardinals might ſee, that they might be receiued into his frendſhip whan they wold. Than out of themperours court came forth a wryting, wherin is recited the original cauſe of the warre of Parma, and how iuſte an occaſion of diſpleaſure the biſhop of Rome hath againſt Octauius, and the Earle of Mirandula, and of what an vnquiet mind the Frēch king is, which ſeketh all manner of occaſions, and bendeth his whole force, that he maye impeche and defeat the moſt noble enterpriſes of themperor: how beit themperor being nothing moued withall theſe thinges, wil ſo much the more couragiouſly and ſtoutly procede. Octauius pretē
               ded, as though he had come of neceſſity into thobeiſance and tuition of the French king, for thiniuries and laying in wayt of Fernā
               do Gonzage. But that is confuted by this wrytinge: For if there were any cauſe of feare, the occaſion was geuen of him ſelfe, who hath ofttimes laid wait for the life of Gonzage After it is recited, how Placence came into the hands of themperor: For Peter Aloiſe the biſhop of Romes baſtard ſonne, whan he had obteined Pirma and Placence, gouerned the common wealth cruelly and like an other The wicked luſtes of the popes ſonne Nero, and accompliſhed his wicked luſt not only vpon womē, but on men alſo: wherfore he was ſlain at home, and murthered of his citezens, which could no longer abide ſo great crudelitye: after the townes men, for yt they ſaw a preſent daunger prepared againſt them, in caſe they ſhuld come again into the iuriſoiction of the Biſhop and church of Rome, had this only refuge to ſaue them, if they gaue them ſelues to themperor, eſpecially, conſideringe alſo, howe they were once fre citezens of the Empire: ſo therefore they moued Gonzage, and deſired him that they mighte be receiued into themperors tuition: For otherwiſe wold they prouide them aid and ſuccour elſſe wher: Therfore it is vntrue that he ſhuld faine him ſelfe to be a fraid: For themperor hath imploid many benefits vpon the Farneſians: He hath choſen Octauius to his ſonne in law, & gaue to his father Aloiſe the city of Nouaria for euer, and honored hym with the dignity of a Marques: but great hath bene their vnthākfulnes, both at other times, and chiefly whan through the pretence of frendſhip they aided him, in puniſhing certain rebels of Germany, their whole endeuor was to haue taken from him Genes and Lumbardy: For verely in the ſame tumult was ſlain ful wickedly amonges others, Ioannine Aurie, a man of an excellente vertue, whileſt he both did themperor faithful ſeruice, and repulſed pearil from his country. After came forthe an anſwer to theſe thinges in A purgation of the french kyng. the French kinges name. Wherin is made mention, how themperor, to haue the frendſhip of the biſhop of Rome Paule the thyrde, gaue vnto his ſonne Peter Aloiſe, the title and degre of a Marques,

how he toke vnto him Octauius the ſonne of Peter to be his ſonne in law, how he preferred his other ſonne Alexander to many eccleſiaſticall promotions: how afterward he made a league with the biſhop, wherin it was prouided that the decre of the Senate of Cardinals, that was made concerning the gouernment of Parma and Placence, themperor ſhuld confirme to the houſe of the Freneſians: but what time themperor made war in Germany, and pretē
               ded, The cauſe of diſſention be twixt ye pope and emperor as though he moued not the ſame war for Religion, but to puniſh the rebellion of certain, this deuiſe was diſpleaſaunt to the biſhop, for that he ſaw how by this meane, he went about his priuate affairs, and to procure to him ſelf rule & gouernment: neither was he diſceiued in his iudgement: For the war being almoſte finiſhed whan themperor had no great neade of the Freneſians ſeruice, he declared plainly, how he bare the biſhop no great good will: For euen than his lieftenants in Lumbardy fixed their eies and mindes to ſurpriſe Placence, and not long after were procured certain murtherers, whiche ſlue Peter Aloiſe in his chamber, and before the Townes men heard of the murther committed, ſouldioures were brought in, which in themperors name did take the Caſtel. And if themperor were not priuy to this act, it had yet ben reaſon, that after the death of biſhop Paule, he ſhuld haue reſtored the City to the churche of Rome: but he hathe not onlye not reſtored the ſame, but hath alſo gone about to take Parma from his ſonne in law, and euen than was in hand with the ſame deuiſe, whan the Biſhop yet liued, in ſo muche, that Paulus, beinge ſore vexed in his minde to thinke vpon ſuch vnkindnes, departed out of this life: Afterwarde wer murtherers takē at Parma, which ſpake it of theyr own mind, that Fernando Gonzage had waged them to ſlay Octauius: whan he therfore was brought into this diſtreſſe, whan he ſaw, how they, of whome he loked for healpe, and alſo his father in lawe, laye in wait to take from him bothe landes and life alſo, he requireth his aid and ſuccor, which he could not deny him, ſo humbly crauing the ſame.
         
         
            
            
               ✚ The, xxiij, Booke of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the ſtate of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne of the Empyre of Charles the fyfte.
            
               
                  ❧ The Argument of the xxiij. Booke.
               The fathers of Trent enter into matters, and graunt ſafeconduit to come to the Counſell, The French king accordeth not to the ſame: pea he diſſwageth the Swiſſes from goinge thither: a compoſition was made with them of Maidenburge vnder certaine conditions. The moſt part of the Cities in Germany ſend to the Counſell. The ambaſſadours of the Duke of Wirtemberge might not be there harde. Duke Maurice hauing for the laſt time ſent ambaſſadours to the Emperoure, for the deliueraunce of the Lantzgraue, and obtaining nothinge but delaies, ſecreatly is reſolued to make warre. The Monke, Biſhop of Uarady, by whoſe meanes king Ferdmando had taken Tranſiluania is ſlaiue. Themperor in his letters which he ſendeth to appeaſe the Archbiſhops, aſſureth him ſelf of Duke Moris, who to make fayre weather ſendeth his Ambaſſadors to the Counſel, with whome thothers ioyned, and make requeſt for a ſafeconduit for theyr deuines, and aboue all, that thoſe which are of the contrary parte be not iudges in the Counſell. But obteining nothing they departe, vpon the brute of the preparation to warre that theyr Prince would make. The fathers of the Counſelare at diſcorde, and after that newes came of the takinge of Auſpurge, they fled al, Creſcencethe Popes Legate, fel into ſo terrible a feare, that he admitteth no conſolation at his death.
            
            
               DUke Moris, for the pacification, aſſembleth the ſtates of his dominion, and about thend of Septembre cōmaundeth them to repaire to Wittemberge. Thither alſo they of Maidenburge ſend ambaſſadours, as it was couenaunted, which the tenth day after return home, at the conuoy of Marques Albert. I haue ſhowed you before howe Duke Moris by his letters required that the deuines might haue ſafeconduit from the whole counſel: to the Emperor, therfore commaundeth his Ambaſſadoures to preferre the matter to the fathers, and bryng it to paſſe.
            Wherfore when the .xi. day of Octobre was commen, ther was A decree at Trent of the Lordes ſupper. a ſitting wherin was fyrſt rehearſed the expoſition of the doctrine of the corporall preſence of Chriſt in the Sacrament of thanckes geuing, of the manner of the inſtitution therof, of tranſubſtantiation, as they call it, of the worſhipping and adoration of this Sacrament, of reſeruing the hoſte, and cariyng it about to the ſicke, of the preparation that a man may receiue it worthely. After, al chriſtians are forbiddē to beleue or teach any otherwiſe, than it is here

decreed: Than were the Cannons recited. Wherein all thoſe theames were condempned, which I ſaid before were collected oute of Luthers workes and others: Notwithſtanding to gratify the Emperour, they leaue foure of them vndiſcuſſed. Whether it be neceſſary to ſaluation, and commaunded by Goddes lawe, that all men ſhould receiue the Sacrament vnder both kinds. Whether he that receiueth but one, taketh les, than he that receiueth both: Whether the Church hath erred, in ordeining, that only Prieſtes ſhoulde receiue vnder bothe kindes, and not the reſidue. Whether the ſacramente oughte to be miniſtred vnto children alſo. Touchinge theſe theames, before the Synode ſhoulde determine any thinge, they ſaied how the Proteſtantes deſired to be heard, and to haue ſafeconduit graunted them: where therfore they haue longed greatlye hitherto for theyr comming, and are in hope that they will returne to the auncient concord of the Church, they graunt them ſafelye to come, and ſafely to retourne: And differ the determination of theſe queſtions to the fiue and twenty day of Ianuary, that they may be fore that day repair thither, and declare what they haue to ſay: thē will they treat alſo, touching the ſacrifice of the Maſſe, becauſe the argument is like. Theſe thinges did they read openly in ſuch ſort, as if theyr aduerſaries had made requeſt to be heard in theſe thinges only, wheras they neuer thought of any ſuche matter. For beſides Duke Moris, no man once moued the Emperoure, and hys ſute was framed after an other ſort, as before is ſaid, and the matters were much more waighty, that they would haue propounded. But for what intent the thing was thus pronounced, a man may make a coniecture, but nothinge can be affirmed.
            How be it, of two thinges the one muſte neades be: For either the requeſt of Duke Moris was coldlye and ſlenderlye preferred vnto them, or els haue they vſed the matter craftely and negligentlye, which thing is more like to be true, by the ſafeconduct that they ſent. For where Duke Moris would haue had the ſelfe ſame aſſuraunce for his men, that the Bohemers had in time paſte: They wrote the ſafeconduite with a few wordes, and very negligently, The ſafeconduit of the fathers at Trent. ſetting to, neither ſigne nor ſeale publicke.
            How it was lawful for all the Germaines indifferentlye to repaire vnto the Counſel, and of matters to be treated there, either in the full aſſemble, or with certain commiſſioners, to propound, confer and reaſon, what they ſhal thinke good, either in talke or wryting, without contumelious wordes and reproches, and after, whē they wil, to depart, and return home? for this conſideration ye counſell graūteth thē ſafeconduit, as farforth as to ye ſame apertaineth.

Moreouer, it ſhalbe lawfull for them, that as wel for their ſinnes paſt, as hereafter to be committed, although they be moſt heinous and ſinell of Hereſy, they may at their owne pleaſure chuſe iudges for them ſelues. The ſame eleuenth day of Octobre before mentioned, they made certain lawes, vnder the title of reformation, whiche concerned theyr iuriſdiction. After was an other ſeſſion decreed the xxv. of Nouembre, wherein ſhoulde be treated of penaunce and extreame vnction. Than alſo the electoure of Brandenburge, Ioachim, ſending his ambaſſadour, Chriſtopher Straſie, a doctour of the ciuill law, offered his duety and obeiſance. And certainly thāmbaſſadour ſpake manye thinges at large of the great good The Marques of Brā
                  denburge ſtatereth the counſell. wil of his Prince: They anſwer again how they haue taken much pleaſure to hear his whole Oration, eſpecially that part. wher the Prince ſubmitteth him ſelf wholy to the counſell, and ſaith that he will obſerue the decrees of the ſame: For their truſte is, that the thing which he hath nowe preſently ſpoken, that ſame will he perfourme in dede. After the deathe of Ihon Albert, whiche had the Archbiſhoppricke of Maidenburge, both wealthy and large, the gouernement was committed to Fridericke, ſonne to thelectour of Brandenburge, whome the Colledge had deſired for their archbiſhop: but the matter was impeached, and could not be broughte to paſſe at Rome: And becauſe thelectour Ioachim, was before of the Proteſtantes religion, as it was openly knowen, that ſame was a great let. Wherfore to auoid the ſuſpicion, this ambaſſadoure was ſent, who fawning vpon the Prelates, omitted no poynt of exquiſit diligence. Ther was peace concluded at Wittenberge: And all beit the ſiege was not leuied immediatelye, yet were there frendly metinges betwene them, the xii. day of Octobre. And ye ſelf ſame time Duke Moris conſtraineth the Chats, a people in the countrye of Duke Moris ſeaſeth vpon the dominiō of Chats. Heſſe, which wer iii. yeres paſt by themperours ſentence taken frō the Lantz graue being priſoner to be ſworne vnto him, by the conſent of the Lātzgraues ſonne, by reaſon of the league of inheritāce as he ſaith, which is betwene the houſe of Heſſe and Saxon: ſo that for default of heirs males, the one houſe ſhould ſuccede thother.
            And no man doubted but this concerned the iniury of themperor. that had geuen the ſentence, and ſome new commotion, and all mē marueled what would be thend therof: but in the Emperors court was in a manner no talcke of it, and made as they knew not therof. At this time was the Duke of Somerſet, vncle to the kinge of Englande, apprehended the ſeconde time, and with him the Lorde The duke of Somerſet apprehended. Paget the Lord Gray and certain others.
            Than had Ihon the Duke of Northumberlande the chiefe rule and gouernemente: The cauſe of his apprehenſion was, as

it is reported, that the Duke of Northumberland ſaid, howe the other laid wait for his life: For this by a law newly made was deathe amonges them.
            About the eight day of Octobre, the Biſhop of Rome created Cardinall, George Martinuſe biſhop of Wardin, of high authority in Hongary: the common people named him Monke, becauſe he was of thordre of Paule, the firſt Hermit. How the French ambaſſadour was commaunded to attend for an anſwer at the xi. daye of Octobre, ſo that the king would acknowledge the counſell, I haue tould you before: Certes he came not, but yet in the Counſels name was ſetforth a wryting to the king.
            Firſt they recken vp how they loked for moſt ample things at his hands, and that for ſondry cauſes, but at the comminge of this The counſel writeth to yt french king. meſſenger, and after they had red his letters, they conceiued an inward ſorow, for that they are fallen from their expectation: and yet forſomuch as they are neither touched with the gilt of conſcience, nor haue geuen none any occaſion of diſpleaſure, they haue not yet laid aſide thold hope they had of him: wherfore thopinion which he hath conceiued, as though this counſel were called for the priuate profit of a few, can leaſt of all take place in ſo worthy a Sinode.
            For the cauſes of calling this Counſell were propounded not only Cauſes of calling the counſell. of this Biſhop, but alſo of Paule the thirde, verelye, that hereſies mighte be roted oute, the ſchole of Diſcipline amended, and peace be reſtored to the Church: is not this plaine inoughecan ther be any more godly or Chriſtianlike thing be done? For now are hereſies ſpredde, not only throughout Germany, but in manner in all Countries: which great calamity the counſell is in will to redreſſe: This is the very cauſe, and this is alſo the end of all theyr doyng, and all thinges are referred to this poynt: Let him therfore permit the Biſhoppes of his realme to further ſo godly a buſines: For he neaded not to feare, leaſt they might not be ſuffred to ſpeake frely that they thought: For lately was his ambaſſadoure bothe quietly and patiently heard, whan he told no ioyfull newes.
            Than ſeing a priuate man was heardwith ſuch a lei tie, why ſhould any man beleue that the ſame ſhuld be denied vnto publike parſons, & ſuch as are placed in ſo high dignity? how be it though he ſend no man, yet ſhall the counſell neuertheles haue bothe his dignitye and authoritye, for that it was lawfullye ſummoned, and now for iuſt cauſes reſtored: And where he ſignified, that he would vſe the remedies, that his progenitoures had done before: they ſuppoſed he would neuer procede ſo farre, as to reuoke thoſe thinges, which were taken away & aboliſhed in times paſt to the great commodity of the kinges of Fraunce: and ſeing that god hath ſo highly

auaunced him, and indued him with ſo great benefites, they truſte verely, that he wil do nothing, wherby he ſhuld ſeme vnthankeful, ether towards God, or to our mother holy church: let him only haue a reſpect to his progenitors, to that ſame title and ſurname of moſt chriſten king: Finally, to his father king Fraunces, who honoured the former Sinode by ſending thither his biſhoppes and ambaſſadors. Men of moſt excellent learning: he oughte to walcke in theſe foteſteps which are both freſh and domeſtical, and follow this exā
               ple, and remit priuate diſpleaſures for the common wealthes ſake. Themperor and the Biſhop had exhorted the Swiſſes, that they ſhuld be at the counſel: but it was in vaine: and the Biſhop in dede treated with them by Hierome Francke, as before is ſaied, but the French king gaue charge vnto Morlet, that was his ambaſſador The French diſſwageth yt Swiſſes frō the counſell. there, that he ſhuld indeuor to perſwade them all, that they ſend no man thither. Morlet, fineding ſome difficultye herein, ſendeth for Uergerius, an expert man in ſuch affaires, out of Rhoetia, and axeth his counſel. He both furniſhed him of argumentes, and ſhortly after ſetforth a boke, of eſchuing the counſell. Morlet beinge thus inſtructed, came vnto thaſſemble of Baden, and there alledgynge his reaſons, perſwaded not only them, which had longe ſence forſaken Papiſtry, but alſo all the reſidue of the Swiſſes, euen as he deſired. Wherfore none of them came to Trent. Out of Rhetia cam thither, at the Biſhop of Romes commaundement, Thomas Plāt biſhop of Chur: but whan the Rhetians vnderſtode, by the aduertiſement of Uergerius, what the biſhop of Rome intended, & howe he would by him recouer his authority amonges them, he was called home againe.
            The Spaniardes, which wer in the land of Wirtemberge, were ſent for about this time by themperor, and ſent into Italy, to ſerue The land of Wirtēberge delyuered of Spaniardes. in the warre of Parma. By theyr departure was the whole country deliuered from a moſt greuous ſeruitude, wherwith it had ben oppreſſed by the ſpace of fiue yeares: onlye the Caſtell of Aſperge the Emperoure reſerued to him ſelf, placing in it a garriſon of Almaines. In theſe daies alſo, Henry Haſie, by the Emperors commaundement, traueling throughout Sweaden, euery wher chaungeth the ſtate of the common wealth, and ordeineth newe Senators: he diſchargeth alſo the preachers and Scholemaſters, vnles they wyll obey the decre of Religion, as was latelye done at Auſpurge. It is mentioned before how Duke Moris, and the Duke of Wirtemberge had commaunded Articles of Doctrine to be wrytten, which after ſhuld be exhibited: how alſo the Senate of Straſhurge had ioyned them ſelues vnto this theyr doing.
            
               
Wherfore the duke of Wirtemberge, ſending two ambaſſadoures, Ihon Theodoricke Pleninger, and Ihon Hecline, commaunded Thambaſſadour of Wirtemberge to the counſell. them, both to exhibite openly this confeſſion of doctrine, and to ſay alſo that the deuines ſhuld come, which ſhal treat al thinges more plentifully, and defend the ſame, ſo that they may haue ſafecōduit according to the decre of Baſill.
            They, ſo ſone as they came to Trent, which was almoſte at the end of Octobre, go vnto the Earle Mounforte, and exhibite vnto him the commiſſion of theyr ambaſſade, and ſhew him how in theyr princes name, they would propound certaine thinges in the counſell, he in his talke tended to this end, that he thoughte good they ſhould repair to the biſhoppes Legate: but they ſeinge that if they ſhould confer with him any thing, it wold apere that they ſhoulde attribute vnto him the chiefe right and authoritye of iudgemente, wherin they perceiued a preiudice and hinderance of their matter. Wherfore they come not at him, but wryting letters to theyr prince fary for an anſwer of his pleaſure herein. In the meane ſeaſon the deuines do reaſon after theyr manner, of the queſtions before propounded concerning penaunce and vnction. The third day of Nouembre, Counte Hedeck being ſent of Duke Moris, came to Maidenburge, and calling out the captains of the ſouldiors into a place The pacificacion of Maydenburge. without the city, made a ful end, and wrytinges of the ſame matter were drawen and ſealed. And the ſoldiors in dede were aſſured by ſafe conduit, that they might ſafely depart. This was the viii. daye of the ſame month, but ſo ſone as they were diſcharged, they were priuelye reteined, and hired againe, by the duke of Megelburge, which was now by the pacification releaſed: for Duke Moris purpoſely woulde not do it in his owne name. And the conditions of peace were theſe. That they ſhould humbly craue pardon of themperor: that they ſhuld do nothing againſt the houſe of Auſtrich and Burgundy: that they ſubmit thē ſelues to the chambre: that they obey the laſt decre of Auſpurge: That they anſwer al mē to the law: That they caſt down the fortification of the city, at themperoures pleaſure: That they admit into theyr city, themperors garriſon at all times, and ſet open theyr gates for him: That they pay L .M. crowns to themperors cofers: That for the charges of the warres they deliuer to themperor xii. great pieces of ordenaunce: that they ſet at liberty the duke of Megelburge & thother priſoners. Whan the ſoldiors of the garniſon wer gon out of the citye, the ſame daye, which were to the nombre of ii. M fotemen, and an hondreth horſmen, Duke Moris ſent in v. enſeignes of footemen, and the nexte day, the Senate going forth to mete him, he entreth the city wt hys whole army, and receiueth them al into thobeiſance of themperor,

thempire, & of him ſelf, which had bene chiefe captain of the ſame warre, after, leauing there a garriſon, he leadeth away the reaſt. Than cauſeth he the preachers to be ſente for, and by his counſelloures, Faccie, Carlebice, and Mortiſie he complaineth of iniurye done him, by reaſon of the bokes and pictures ſetforth by them, as though he ſhuld haue forſaken the doctrin of the goſpel, as though he ſhould haue moued warre againſt the city, for the conſtant profeſſing of the true doctrine: wherfore he hath iuſt cauſe to be offended, if he would followe his affections, but all theſe thinges he remitteth for the common wealthes ſake, & requireth that they wold from henceforth exhort the people to amend their liues, and honor the Magiſtrates: he commaundeth alſo praiers to be openly made for the Emperoure, for him ſelfe and for all other Magiſtrates: he ſaith moreouer howe there is at this preſente a counſell holden at Trent, wherin he will exhibit the confeſſion of a godly doctrine, as well in his owne name, as alſo of other Princes and ſtates, let thē pray therfore, that God would proſper and turn to good the whole action of the counſell, and that they raile not againſte the ſame, as they haue accuſtomed to do. They, deliberating vppon the matter, make anſwer, that in dede they ſet not forth thoſe pictures, how be it they iudge them worthy no reprehenſion: and that certaine with in his dominion haue by the ſpace of iii. yeares ſwarued from the pure doctrine of the Goſpell, it cannot be denied: for there be bokes and monuments extant: and that the city was beſieged becauſe of the Goſpell, it is eaſy to proue, if a man conſider only the fyrſte authors of the warre: In admoniſhinge the people they haue omitted nothing, the ſame wil they alſo do hereafter: for the counſel, which is aſſembled to quench the verity, wherin that Romiſh Antichriſte obteineth the higheſt place, they can none otherwiſe pray, than that God may confound, breake, and diſſipate their enterpriſes and deuiſes: for there is no good thinge to be loked for at theyr handes. Such conditious of peace were in dede ſpread abrode: but certaine it is, that they were well aſſured both for their liberty and religion. Duke Moris alſo had rather the City ſhould be open for him, then for themperour, as thend declared afterward. After this ſorte they of Maidenburge being deliuered, beſides thexpectation of many, got them ſelues great praiſe and renowne amonges foraine nations, for ſo much as in manner they alone throughout al Germany, declared by theyr example, what thing conſtancy may do. Moreouer The noble fame & conſtā
                  cy of Maiden burge. thend of theyr miſery, was thentry and beginning of the warre againſt them, by whoſe aid and counſel they were afflicted, as here after ſhalbe declared. Whileſt Duke Moris was in the city, he declared ſufficiently, what his intent was, that is to wit, how he wold

hazard his life to deliuer his father inlawe: Neither did he diſſemble the ſame the next daye after, being moued by a certen man. He had ſent Ambaſſadours to the Emperour before, for ye deliueraunce of the Lantgraue. And had alſo ioyned with him herein the king of Denmarke, and many Princes of Germany as you ſhall heare hereafter. And vnleſſe he could bringe it to paſſe, was fully determined to attempte the thing by force, and Duke Maurice intēdeth to war vpon the Emper. was already at a compact with the French kyng touching the ſame, who had ſent to him priuely Iohn Fraxinie, Byſhop of Baion, a man well acquainted in Germany, and that vnderſtode the tongue. But the Emperour appered to be nothing moued with all theſe thinges, and was wholy addicte to the war of Parma, and the treaty of the counſell of Trent. About this tyme alſo Maximilian the Emperours ſonne inlawe cōming out of Spaine, arriued at Genes with his wyfe and children. The Frenche men ſayling out of the porte of Marſeilles, and bording certen of his ſhippes, toke and ſpoyled the ſame. The cauſe whereof was ſaid to bee, for that thoſe horſemen, which king Ferdinando had ſent into Italy to receiue and conduicte his ſonne comming out of Spayne, had ayded Ferdinando Gō
               zage in a certen warlike exploicte. But the Frenchemen before that alſo, vnder the pretence of amitie entring into the hauon of Barcelona, had takē away a Galley & ſix ſhippes of burthē, furniſhed with all thinges neceſſary for the vſe & nauigatiō of Maximilian as certenly the imperialls recite in a certē inuectiue, wherin they complaine of the iniuries of the Frenchmen & the peace broken. The Princes had intreated the Emperour in the conuentiō at Auſpurg, that in caſe he might not be preſent, at the leaſt he wold not be far from the place of the coūſel. Which thing he graūted to do, & had ſaid vnto thē how he wold remaine vpō the borders of thempire, as I ſhewed you before. Wherfore departing frō Auſpurge in the beginning of Nouēb. he came to Inſpruck, which is thre daies iourney from Trent. This he thought to haue done, both for bicauſe of the coūſell, & alſo for the warre of Parma, that being ſo nere al thing ſhuld be done with more diligence. Shortly after, about the .xxi. day of Nouēb. Iohn Sleidane, Ambaſſadour for the citie of Straſburg, Iohn Slefdan, Ambaſſadour for Straſburge in the counſell. came to Trent, yt he might further ye cōmon cauſe ioyntly wt Duke Maurices, & the duke of Wirtēberges Ambaſſadours. And vnto this citie had ioyned themſelues, Eſting, Rauēſburg Rutelinge, Bibrach and Lindawe, and gaue commiſſion, that they ſhould treate alſo in their names. But why, they of Frankefort, and chiefly of Norinberge, ſent not, it may be doubted:

Ulmes hadde before chaunged theyr Religion, after the preſcript of the Emperour. From Auſpurg and other places, were all the preachers banniſhed lately, as I ſayde before: So that they could not well ſende any. Howbeit though the ſame had not chaunced the Senate would haue done nothinge herein but by the Emperours conſent.
            In the moneth of Nouember the Byſhop of Rome, in one daye created .xiii. Cardinalles, all Italians. For they be wont The Pope createth. xiii Cardinals. to prouide ſuch, as it were garryſons, to defende them ſelues. Whan the .xxv. day of Nouēber was come, and the fathers placed in their ſeates accordingly, the decrees were recited. That penaunce is a Sacrament inſtituted of Chriſte, and neceſſary, for ſuche as after Baptiſme fall vnto ſynne agayne. That it is A decree of penaunce. alſo a ſeuerall Sacrament from Baptiſme, and as it were an other table of ſaluation, after the ſhipwrake hath chaunced. That the ſame wordes of Chriſte, by the whiche he geueth to his Apoſtles the holy Ghoſt, ought to be vnderſtande of the power to forgeue ſinnes by this Sacrament. That the ſinn ſhuld be forgeuen, thre thinges be required, contricion, confeſſion, & ſatiſfaction. And that contrition is in dede a true and profitable ſorrowe, which prepareth the man vnto grace. And confeſſion, or the maner ſecretly to recite the ſynnes to the Prieſte, to bee ordeyned by Goddes lawe, and neceſſary to ſaluation. That all ſinnes whiche come to remembraunce, and circumſtaunces of the ſame are to be reherſed. That confeſſion ought to be euery yeare once at the leaſt, and that chiefly in the tyme of Lent. That abſolution is not a bare miniſtery, wherby the remiſſion of ſinnes is denounced, but an act iudicial. That only prieſtes, though they be neuer ſo ſynfull, haue authoritie to geue abſolution. Where as Byſhoppes doe reſerue vnto them ſelues, certen caſes and offences, for the whiche other prieſtes can not aſſoyle, to be well done. Although the crime be remitted, yet is not the puniſhement therfore releaſed, and that ſatiſfaction conſiſteth in worke, and not in fayth. That by ſuch penaunce, as eyther God ſendeth vpon vs, or the prieſte inioyneth, or els of our owne fre wyll we choſe vnto our ſelues, the ſynnes are clenſed, concerning temporall punyſhement. That ſatiſfactions wherby ſynnes are redemed, be Goddes ſeruice. That the prieſte hath power to bynde and lowſe. And therfore may inioyne penaunce to hym that confeſſeth his ſynnes. And this muche concerning penaunce. They decree that extreme vnction is a Sacrament inſtituted of Chriſte, for that it geueth grace, remitteth ſynnes, and comforteth the ſycke. The

vſe of this Sacrament to be the ſame, wherof ſpake Saint Iames the Apoſtle. Thoſe ſeniours alſo wherof he made mention not to be aunciēt in yeares, but prieſtes, and thei only to be the Miniſters of this Sacrament. This doctrine they commaūde to be celebrated and obſerued. Suche as teache or beleue other wyſe, they deteſte and accurſe as peſtilent and wicked.
            The next daye after the ſeſſions, were brought the Duke of Wirtemberges letters to his Ambaſſadours, Whome he commaunded, that they ſhould procede, and in the aſſeſſion, at the xxv. daye of Nouember, they ſhoulde exhibite the confeſſion of the doctrine wryttē. When therfore thoſe letters were brought ſo lyttle tyme to late, and that it was a long ſeaſon to the next ſitting, and Earle Mounfort was alſo abſente, they goe to the Cardinall of Trent, and ſaye they haue certen thynges whiche they ſhould in their Prynces name propounde in the counſell: And howe the ſame ſhould haue bene done in the laſte ſeſſion, but that the letters came ſo late that the occaſion was paſte. Wherfore they requyre, that he, whiche is a Germayne borne, would both for the loue of the countrie, and for their Prynces ſake alſo, whome he knewe, further thē in this caſe, and bring to paſſe, that the fathers being called together, they myght declare their meſſage. He with moſte ample wordes, promiſeth great beneuolence. Howe he wyl preferre the matter to the byſhops Legate: But ſayeth howe it is agreed amonges the fathers, that no man ſhal propounde any thyng openly, vnleſſe it A diſcipline amongſt the fathers. be firſt knowen, what maner a thyng that ſhould be. And how the Frenche Ambaſſadour was cauſe of the ſame decree, whan lately in the opē ſittyng there was reyſed an vnſemely vprore, and a very clamorouſe outcrie. Wherfore he inquireth what ſhould be the effect of their requeſte. Who for the deſire they had to further the matter, ſhewe him the letters of their cōmiſſion. Wherby vnderſtanding that they ſhould exhibite ſome boke of doctrine, he letteth thē ſo departe at that time, as he put them in hope, that within a fewe daies, the thing might take effect. The next daye he calleth for them againe, and ſaieth howe he hath conferred with the legate of the whole matter, & for the better credit alſo ſhewed him the letters of cōmiſſion. But that he is ſore offended, for that they ſhoulde thynke to exhibite a wryting, and thynketh thus, that thoſe whiche ought of dutie reuerently to receiue and obeye the rule and order of doctrine, woulde preſcribe theyr Elders, whiche thynge is both abſurde and vncommely. Other aunſwere coulde he get none at thys preſent, but yet woulde he bee in hande wyth hym agayne.
            
               
And biddeth them alſo to be of good comforte. Within a fewe The Ambaſſadours of Wirtimb. deluded. dayes after, what tyme Maximilian of Auſtriche approched nere, the Cardinal going forth to mete him at Mantua, admoniſheth the Ambaſſadours of Wixtemberg, that, for ſo much as he muſt nedes departe, thei ſhould repare to Toletane, the Emperours Ambaſſadour: Who both by vertue of his office and authoritie, may profite them greatly, and will do it right gladly, euen for his ſake, whiche hath cōmended the matter vnto him. They followyng his counſell, ſpake vnto him: Who promiſing them gently many thynges, ſo departeth. But whan thei came againe the ſecond tyme, he began to make an excuſe, by reaſon of the diſputations that the Diuines ſhould nowe haue, wher at the fathers muſt be preſent. Whiche finiſhed, he would eſpie an occaſion. It is to be thought that he receiued a muche like aunſwere, as the Cardinall had done before: But leaſt he ſhuld take awaye all hope of being heard hereafter, he alledged this cauſe, eſpecially conſidering bothe howe the Emperour hath had procured the counſell, and that it was permitted by a publique decree of the Empire, that euery man myght frely propounde of what matters ſoeuer he wold. In the meane ſeaſon the Ambaſſadour of Straſburge goeth to the Emperours Ambaſſadour, William Pictaue, in the abſence of the Erle Monforte. And for ſo muche as they were all of lyke condition and authoritie, he ſheweth him the commiſſion of his Ambaſſade, as the maner and cuſtome is, and ſayeth he is ſent thither to ye intent he might conferre and conſulte with the reſidue of the profeſſion of Auſpurge, howe this controuerſie of religion and doctrine myght be appeaſed, and a publique quiet eſtabliſhed. He taking a copie of his commiſſion, whiche he ſayde he would ſende to the Emperour, and ſpeakyng many thinges of the doctrine and dignitie of the counſell, like as he was in dede a learned man and an oratour, offered his ſeruice and diligēce. This was the laſte of Nouember. And at the ſame tyme the Diuines had Theames deliuered them, touchynge the ſacrifice of the Maſſe as they terme it, that they myght ſpeake their myndes of the ſame, after the maner before mentioned.
            Howe Duke Maurice ſent his Ambaſſadours to the Emperour Thambaſſadours of D. Mauris and the Marques of Brandēb. to the Emp. for the Lantgraue, is declared before. And with thē were ioyned the Ambaſſadours of the Prince Electour of Brandenburge. Wherfore being admitted to his ſpeache aboute the begynnynge of December, whan they had in theyr Prynces name done theyr commendations. You knowe, ſaye they,

moſte redoubted Emperour, in what diſtreſſe ar the moſte Noble Princes electours, Duke Maurice & the Marques of Brandēburg, Their Oration. for ye deteyning of the Lantgraue, wher into thei chaū
               ced beyond all expectation, whileſt by their ſinguler induſtrie, they wolde procure vnto you, an eaſye and honorable victorye, demynyſh the charges of the warre, and reſtore to the common countrye peace and quietnes. Which thing hath ben the cauſe alſo, that they haue ofte intreated you, ſometime by their Ambaſſadours, and ſomtime in their own perſons, that you wold haue cōſideratiō of them, and ſet him at lyberty. At the which time verely, they added this moreouer, that in caſe ye requyred a further aſſuraunce, beſydes the ſuertyſhipp: wherwith they both, and Wulfegange countie Palatyne, with all the people of Heſſe are bounden to you, they wolde not refuſe. Unto theſe their requeſtes you made aunſwer to Chriſtopher Carlebyce, & Iames Schillinge, whom they ſent laſte vnto you, that to deliuer hym before it ſhould appeare, what the action of the Emperiall aſſemblee ſhould be, whiche was than at hande, you myght not: Againe that you promiſed nothing els, but that if he kept conuenaūtes, he ſhould not be deteined in priſon perpetual. And where they being occupied with other affaires, could not them ſelues come to the aſſemblee, they moued you agayne by their counſellours and letters at Auſpurg, but you writing againe the cauſe, why you were offended wyth him, and might not deliuer him, did pronounce them free from the bonde wher by they are bounde to the Lantgraues ſonnes. Wherfore they determined to moue your highnes againe: And woulde haue come their ſelues, but you knowe, howe they were both letted by the war of Maydēburge, and the Marques alſo by ſicknes: And therfore wold haue the thing done by vs. And firſt in dede, whan your pleaſure was, that the Lantgraue ſhould ſubmitte him ſelf vnto you without condition, they receiued intelligēce by the Byſhop of Arras, what your mynde was, this verely, that he ſhould admitte and obſerue the conditions of you propounded, and deliuered vnto them. Nowe, if he ſhould haue ben perſwaded to render him ſelfe in this ſorte, it was aſſuredly nedeful to declare vnto him, that he ſhold neither be deteined priſoner, nor farther burthened, than was in the pacification preſcribed. So therfore ye Prince did aſſure him. Which thing alſo your coūſellours vnderſtode right well. And where he deſired yt certē articles of yt ſame peacemaking might be further declared vnto him, & alſo requeſted yt he might not be ſtaied in the ſame matter aboue .vi. daies, & ye thing ſignified to ye biſhop of Arras

in other thinges alſo the Princes in a maner obteined what they would. And albeit that in this ſame treaty the caſe was not vnderſtande of all men after one ſorte, in ſo muche that he, whan he came, was contrary to their promyſe, committed to warde. Yet did they neuer blame you, Ceſar, for the ſame, neyther ſtode they in termes with you therfore, for that they had had to do only with your counſellours, & not with you, ſauing than, whan the Lantgraue was coming, and had ſignified vnto them that they ſhould come vnto him to Numburg. For thā ſpake they with your ſelfe, and ſayde how they had perſwaded him to admitte the conditions propounded, and that he was cō
               ming not far of, and how they, if you wold permit them, wold go to mete him: And for ſo moch as he was come thither vpon ther fidelitie, they beſought you that he might not otherwyſe be burthened, then was in the pacification compriſed. Which thing when your ſelfe had graunted then frankely: they went forth, & brought him to Hale. And in the laſt treatie, ther was no mention made, that he ſhoulde be detayned priſoner. Which The Lantgraue kepte priſoner againſte the leage made. thing thei ſuppoſe that your owne men can alſo teſtify, namely the Biſhop of Arras, with whom onely they had conference, and Seldus, whome he many times ded aſſociate vnto him. For after the cōditions admitted, and his humble ſubmiſſion: the Princes beleued verely, that he ſhoulde haue bene releaſed immediately, and that for many cauſes they thought ſo. Fyrſt, bycauſe youre counſelours made no mention of impriſōment, which is the chiefeſt point of the ſame peacemakyng, and diligētly marked of ye Lantgraue doubtles aboue al other things: Agayne, for that in the pacification, are many things contayned, that cannot be perfourmed of a captiue Prince, but onely of him that is at libertie. After when he had made his ſubmiſſion: you pardoned his offence, & promyſed to abolyſh the preſcription, and to geue him letters of reconcilement: moreouer for that ye were content with their ſuertyſhip, wherby it was prouided, that in caſe he obſerued not cōuenauntes, the people ſhould preſent him to you captiue: and the ſuerties by force of armes, ſhoulde compell him to his dutye. Certeinely, all theſe things were to no purpoſe, and al together ſuperfluous, if ther had ſuppoſed that he ſhould haue ſuffred puniſhment with his owne body. But where as they neuer thought of any ſuch matter, nor yet your own coūſellours had made any mention therof, vpon this truſte and cōfidence they ſent for him, and if any thing ſhoulde chaunce vnto him beſyde, they promyſed & were bound to his ſonnes, to abyde the lyke fortune that he ſhoulde.

This was their minde and opinion, which was alſo cōfirmed, what time after the ſubmiſſion, the Duke of Alba badde them and the Lantgraue to ſupper. Which bedding & hoſpitalitie, they, for the maner of Princes, and cuſtume of Germany, could not ſo interprete the thing, that he ſhoulde goe to the Duke of Alba his houſe as vnto priſon, & they ſhoulde accompany him, and bring him thyther. For if they had conceaued the leaſte ſuſſpection The Lantgraue blod
                     •
                   to ſupper, was kepte priſoner. in the world of that matter: who ſhoulde beleue that euer they wolde haue done it? For ſeing they be Princes of the Empyre, and that electours, borne of moſte noble houſes: they wolde neuer haue imployed their ſeruyce in that ſorte, as to in tyſe a noble Prince, being their nere friend and kynſman, into ſuch diſtreſſe, and themſelues as it were, bring him to priſon. But they neither knew any thing therof, till it was after ſupper: For then ded the Duke of Alba fyrſte ſay vnto them, howe he muſte remaine in the Caſtell, as in cuſtodie. But howſoeuer it be, they ded it of a very good mynde, as we ſayd at the begenning: And for ſo moch as they be bounden to him of their fidelitie, you may eaſely perceiue, that in caſe after ſo great & long ſuite, and ſuerties put in, he ſhoulde be longer detayned, howe greuous and harmefull the ſame wolde be to them, their chyldren and kynſfolkes: You ſe alſo moſt mightye Emperour, cō
               ſydering you are come of the Germaynes race, for aſmoch as ye Lantgraues ſonnes pourſue theyr ryght, & vrge them to yelde them ſelues captyue, after the fourme of the obligation, what is mete for them to doe, to maintayne ther honour and eſtimation, according to the auntient and accuſtumed manner of the Nobilitie of Germany, and how they can haue none excuſe vnto other Princes, although eyther ye power to ſue them, or dede of obligation, which they haue, ſhould be taken a waye. And if peraduenture the Lantgraue, which neither by cōpoſitiō, nor geuyng his faith, but by the ſame occaſion as we haue ſhewed you, is deteyned priſoner, for a certeyne wearynes, and impacience of long impriſōment, hath ſought ſom meanes to obteine liberty, and that perchaūce his miniſters haue attempted any thing againſt his kepers: the Princes doe beſech you, that the ſame be not to them preiudicial: But for ſomoch as by reaſon of ther obligatiō, they ar in a great perplexitie, out of ye which you only, nexte after almighty God, may delyuer them. For ſo moch as it is not vnknowē vnto you, how they ſtroke vpō theſe rocks, for ſo moch as you haue certen inteligence of their good will, fidelitie and duty, what time in your aduerſitie, they employed all their lands and goods, lyfe and bloude, for your commoditie,

followyng herein the foteſteppes of their aunceſters, they moſte hartely and earneſtly require you, that you would, in releaſing your captiue, ſuccour them, and haue reſpect herein not ſo much to the Lantgraues doinges, as vnto thē, which honour you exceadingly. Eſpecially, ſince that a fewe of their families, haue for your progenitours, and for the houſe of Auſtriche and Burgundy, ſpared neither coſte nor perill. And in caſe you feare, leaſt he being ſet at libertie, ſhould not kepe conuenaunt, your highnes knoweth well enough, whan the matter ſhal come to that iſſue, what the nobilitie & people of Heſſe haue promiſed you by an othe, & what the Princes haue done likewyſe by ſuertiſhyp. But and if you require a further aſſuraunce, they haue both made you the offer diuerſe tymes heretofore, and nowe do alſo, and haue geuē vs authoritie to treate of the ſame matter. Moreouer concerning the conditions, for ſuche as might ſtreight wayes be accompliſhed, they ſuppoſe there can no lack be founde. And where as the caſtels were not ſo ſodainly raſed, if you knewe wel the cauſe, they doubted not, but for that matter you would holde the Lantgraues ſonnes excuſed. Furthermore, if any lacke be founde, they wyll do their whole indeuour, that you may be cōtented and ſatiſfied. Wherfore, if thei themſelues haue at any time, or their fathers and grandfathers done any thing, that hath bene acceptable either to you, or to the Emperour Maximilian, and the reſt of your progenitours, or if you thinke that they may doe or perfourme any thing in tyme to come that to you may be pleaſāt and ioyfull, they deſire you moſte effectually, that you woulde ſuffer them nowe to receiue ſome fruicte of the ſame, and that you would cauſe that hope & promeſſe to appeare, whiche firſt you made them at Hale, after at Numburge, & laſt alſo at Auſpurg to the intent verely they maye honor you from hēceforth, with ſo muche the more induſtrie & courage, and may reioyce, that their ſidelitie and ſeruice, which thei haue done you, hath bene well imployed, and largely rewarded. For if it ſhould be otherwyſe, and ſhould nowe obteyne nothing, you may coniecture, moſte puiſſaunt Emperour, what diſcommodities wyl in ſue, what tyme they ſhalbe enforced to anſwer the matter and to declare their innocēcie, but they hope vndoubtedly, that you will graunt their requeſtes. Whiche verely they will accept for an high benefite, and not they only, but alſo the Lantgraue with his ſonnes and all his frendes, ſhall euermore endeuoure that they may requite this your benefite. And for bycauſe the ſame thing doeth ſo muche concerne their eſtimatiō, they haue

alſo intreated other Princes, to make interceſſion with them, whoſe Ambaſſadours you ſe here. And this haue they done for this intent, that the thynge whiche they could not yet obteine of you by prayers, meſſēgers and letters, that ſame myght they bryng to paſſe through their commendation and fauour, and praye you to take it in that parte. What tyme they had thus ſpoken, they deliuer vnto hym the letters of Ferdinando kyng of Romaines, of Albert Duke of Bauier, of the brethrē Dukes of Luneburge, wrytten in the behalfe of the Lantgraue. And The names of ye Princes that intreated for the Lantgraue. the Princes that ſent Ambaſſadours were theſe, Friderick the Electour of Palatine, Woulfgange Prince of Bipounte, Iohn Marques of Brandenburg, Henry and Iohn Albert Dukes of Magelburge, Erneſtus Marques of Baden, and Chriſtopher Duke of Wirtemberge. Their Ambaſſadours, ſtreight way after the oration before reherſed, whan they had ſhewed their cō
               miſſion, Duke Maurice ſay they, and the Marques of Brandē
               burg, Electours, wher for the deteining of the Lantgraue they were in great perplexitie, and ſayde they would make ſute to The Oratiō of the Prices ābaſſadours to the Emp. your highnes for hym, moſte mercifull Emperour, intreated our Princes, that they would ſue with them, to the intent the treatie myght be of more commendation and importaunce. Whiche dutie verely they could not in ſo iuſt a cauſe denie thē, for the great frendſhyp and alliaunce that is amongeſt them. Conſidering therfore that the matter is thus, as hath bene ſufficiently heard of either of their Ambaſſadours. And becauſe, if he be longer deteyned, the ſame ſhulde be greatly to the obloquie and defamation of them that haue promiſed him their fidelitie. The Princes whiche haue ſent vs, do praye and beſeche you to ponder all theſe thynges dilligently. For they ſuppoſe it to concerne them alſo, that their dignitie, honour and eſtimation be preſerued, neyther can any thinge chaunce vnto them more greuous, than if any blotte ſhould redounde to their noble fame. Whiche doubtles wyll come to paſſe, vnleſſe the captiue be deliuered. Wherfore they moſte inſtauntly require you, that theſe interceſſions and praiers maye take place with you, and that he may be ſhortly deliuered, eſpecially, ſince he hathe both acknowledged his faulte, and humblie alſo craued pardō, and bene nowe deteined captiue a long ſeaſon, but chiefly, becauſe the great neceſſitie of two Princes Electours ſo requyreth. Who at what tyme they handled the matter right faithfully, and would gratifie you, fell into this pecke of troubles. And albeit peraduenture that in the treatie ſome errour was committed, and ſome thinges not wel vnderſtande, yet were it

conuenient and comly for your clemencie, to preferre equitie before extremitie, and not to regarde ſo muche the captiue, as the fatall neceſſitie of the Electours, and deale frankely with them, after the example of your progenitours. Who had euer a great reſpect and care to the dignitie of the Princes imperial. This verely ſhould both redounde to your honour amongeſt almen, and alſo more excite them, to ſhewe vnto you all fidelitie and beneuolence, and make them preſte and willing to doe all thinges for your ſake. The king of Denmarke alſo ſending his Ambaſſadours, maketh interceſſion in a maner to like effecte. The Emperour a fewe dayes after maketh aunſwere. For as The Empe. aunſwer to the Ambaſſabours. muche as the matter is weightie, and requireth deliberation, and that in the meane ſeaſon mention is made vnto hym of Duke Maurice, that for certen other weightie cauſes, he wyll ſhortly repare to him, in ſo muche that hauing wrytten his letters to him, he loketh for him dayly, therfore will he, bycauſe the matter may beſte be treated of whan he is preſent, differ it vntil than. And as for thē, they may retourne home vnto their Princes, and ſhewe them in his name, that he will remember their interceſſion, and ſo vſe the matter, that they may vnderſtand, how their cōmendation was of him not lightly eſtemed. Not long after, William the Lantgraues eldeſt ſonne came to The Lantgraues ſon cometh to D. Maurice Duke Maurice. And bycauſe he had put him in hope of the interceſſion to be made, and certen moneths were now paſt, ſince ye Ambaſſadours toke their iourney, he inquireth what is done He ſaieth, for that the Ambaſſadours of Denmarke came late, and not till the Emperour went from Auſpurg to Inſprucke, the thing was delayde, and againe ſheweth him what anſwer the Emperour made. And bycauſe he deſireth to ſpeake with him, & differreth the matter till than. Albeit he is lothe at this preſent to leaue his countrie, yet for that he tendreth the caſe greatly, he ſayeth he is determined to go, hauing firſt receiued letters from him. Than ſayeth the other, the anſwer is vncerten & doubtful, neither can he ſee what good is to be loked for. In ye meane whyle his fathers eſtate is miſerable, who pineth a way for ſorrowe, and lotheſomnes of the pryſon. Whome he may by no meanes leaue deſtitute, bothe bycauſe of his duty, and alſo of his promeſſe. Therfore let hym indeuour and bryng to paſſe, that within a certen and that a ſhorte tyme, there be made a direct aunſwere. If the ſame be not done, neyther he nor the Marques of Brandenburge, may take it diſpleaſauntly, if they be ſued, and cōmaūded to anſwer to their obligatiō. As cōcerning his iourney, he wold he ſhuld take further delibe|

For he knoweth not, whether it be wyſdome for him ſo to do. Theſe thinges were thus handeled for a countenaunce, before certen counſellours, whome Duke Maurice woulde not make priuie to this deuiſe of his. For ſince he firſte began to treate with Counte Hedecke, which was at what tyme he allured to him 
                  ••
               me part of his force, as I told you in the fourmer booke, he would ſcarſly let any of his owne coūſell know any thyng of that matter, in ſo muche that none of them vnderſtode, wherfore Fraxineus ye Frenche Ambaſſadour came, or what he made there. Whan he had therfore receiued this anſwer from themperour, by and by he fixed his minde to make warre, and taried only for the ſeaſonable tyme of the yeare. And touching thoſe forſayd theames they began to diſpute the ſeuenth daye of December. And the ſixt daye after, whiche was the ſhorteſt daye of wynter. Maximilian entring into Trent with his wyfe & children, was receiued of the Byſhop of Romes Legate, and of the Maximilian entreth into Trent. Byſhops of Spayne, Italy, and diuers alſo of Germany, but not yet of the Electours. He brought with him out of Spayne an Olyphaunt of Inde, whiche the kyng of Portugall had geuen him, a rare ſpectacle, and a beaſt not often ſene in Germany. The next daye after, it fortuned yt Iohn Gropper, of whome I ſpake before, did diſpute, and after that he waxed hote, he inue
                  •
               ed The railing of Groppes. ſore againſt Melanchthon and Bucer, though he were dead, and rayled moſte bitterly on thē both, being a Germain, where both the Spaniardes and Italians, were a great deale more temperate. Whiche thing was againſt the decree of thempire, and alſo againſt the lawe by them ſelues made, that verely the matter ſhould be treated, all affections ſet aparte, and without rayling. Wherfore a few daies after, Iohn Sleidane, by occaſion of talke ſpake of the ſame to the Emperours Ambaſſadour, Pictaue, and complaineth that they ſhould be permitted to haue ſuche libertie. He ſayde, they did it cleane contrary to their willes, and alſo the mindes of the fathers, & that they haue bene moſte earneſtly admoniſhed, that thei ſhould abſtayne. And albeit that perchaūce they are prouoked to do this by the example of their aduerſaries, whiche haue nowe theſe many yeares triumphed in this kynde, yet will they take ſuche order, that it ſhall no more be ſo. And that the Emperour wold alſo be loth that any occaſion of offence ſhuld be geuē any mā. A Cardinal of Dalmatia ſlayne in his owne houſe. About the .xviii. daye of December, the Byſhop of Wardin in Hongary, lately made Cardinall, was ſlaine at home in his owne houſe, for ſuſpicion of a conſpiracie with the Turkes. The authour of this murther was Iohn Baptiſte Caſtalde, an

Italian, whome the Emperour had before ſent into Hongary, to aſſiſte king Ferdinando with his ayde and counſell. Sfortia Palauicine, was alſo preſent at the ſame. After the Byſhop of Rome heard of the murther, he appointed certen to examine the matter, and alſo doeth excommunicate the parſons aboue named. Whan the wydowe of Iohn Uayuode ſawe yt ſhe coulde hardely defende Tranſſyluania, ſhe made a conuenaunt with king Ferdinando, and permitted him to haue the gouernment, and deliuering him the armes and ornamētes of the Realme, retourned into the lande of Poole. By this meane therfore Ferdinando poſſeſſeth in a maner all Tranſſyluania, by the helpe of the byſhop of Wardin. But becauſe he appered afterwardes to attempt newe deuiſes, and to aſpire to the gouernment, he loſt his life. I ſhewed you in the fourmer boke of the preachers and miniſters of the churche, that were expulſed frō Auſpurg, wherfore the moſte part of the church were diſtitute of prieſts, not without the great grudge of the people, who ſuppoſed that the ſenate had cauſed the Emperour thus to do. Where therfore it was to be feared leaſt this heate would ſomtime breake out, at the length, whan they had ſought long and much, they foūd one Caſpar Huberine, whiche profeſſed the fourme of doctrine preſcribed by the Emperour. There be certen bokes of his wrytten concerning Religion, whiche were alwayes very wel commended, euen of Luther him ſelfe. But why nowe he had altered his mynde, I can not affirme. Who after he came to Auſpurge, began not to preache by and by, for that he feared the mutinie of people, but at Chriſtmas after he began, to the wō
               der of many, which had red his bokes before. The ſoldiours, as well ſuche as beſeged Maydenburg, as thoſe that defended the ſame, wyntered in Thuringe and there aboutes, and did much harme, eſpecially to men of the churche, and amongeſt others alſo to the Archebyſhop of Mentz, whoſe limites reache vnto thoſe places. Tharchebyſhops of Mentz, Treuers, & Collon, being herewith offended, he for the damage receiued, & they, for yt they ſawe alſo, that the ſame chaunce might redounde vnto them, determined to retourne home, ſending bothe letters and meſſengers to the Emperour of the ſame matter. But the Emperour, who deſired greatly to haue the counſel continued, anſwering the third day of Ianuary, your letters, ſaith he, of the 1552. xxi. of Decēber, are come to my handes. And bycauſe I had commaunded The Empe. letters to the Byſhops Eleciours. Fraunces Toletane to treate with you of ſuche matters, as you wryte vnto me of: againe, for as much as ye byſhop of Arras had declared vnto your Procurer here certen thinges

of the ſame ſorte in my name, I had thought you had bene ſatiſfied: But for ſo much as I heare ſay, how for an vnpleaſaūt brute, reiſed, you intende to retourne home, I thought good to admoniſhe you by this wryting that you geue not credit to althinges that are reported. For although there hath ben now for a certen tyme a brute, as though it were to be feared, leaſte there ſhould be ſome commotiō in Heſſia, yet am I credible informed, that if there be any thing at all, it is but the deuiſe of a fewe, whiche the greater part alſo diſcommendeth, wherfore it is the rather to be thought, that they thē ſelues wilbe mindful not only of their othe and fidelitie, wherby they be bounde to me, but alſo of their dutie, whiche they owe both to me and to the common wealth, neither truſting to thinges vncerten, will take ſo great daunger vpon them. Moreouer, I haue ſent intermeſſagers vnto all the Princes, ſtates, and cities thereaboutes, and haue ſearched diligently, what the matter ſhoulde be, and what euery man goeth about. But I haue founde all men to be obſequious and to do their dutie. For ſurely I haue geuen none occaſion of offence to any man. Of Duke Maurice in dede there went a reporte alſo not long ſince, whiche peraduenture had his original hereof that he had bene captaine before of the ſame bandes, whiche after the rendring of Maydenburg aſſembled together and did hurt in certen places: But he wryting to me his letters of late & ſending his Ambaſſadours alſo, promiſeth al his endeuour. And euen at this preſent, two of his Ambaſſadours ſhal go from hence to morrowe to the coū
               ſell at Trent. Furthermore he hath ſignified, that he him ſelfe will repayre vnto me for certē weightie and neceſſary affaires, and I knowe by certen reportes, that he wyll either this daye or to morrowe at the furtheſt, take his iourney hytherwarde out of Maydenburg. Finally, he maketh me ſo large and ample There is craft in dawbyng. promeſſe of his loialtie and obeiſaunce, that I ought to loke for nothing at his hande, but that is honorable, in caſe there be any fayth in this worlde yet remaining.
            And ſeing he is both in bloud and birthe a Germayne, I can not be brought to beleue that he ſhould attempte or imagine ſo craftie deuiſes, but as concerning thoſe bandes that Wyly begy
                  
                     •
                  ed. were at Maydenburg, I haue heard many complaine, & certen ſtates be carefull, leaſt they will remoue their campe & worke ſome greater miſchief. But after I vnderſtode, that for lacke of paiment of their wages, they flocke together & worke this oultrage, ſending Ambaſſadours & gouernours, I cōmaunded thei

ſee that in any wyſe there were mony leuied to paie them. And not that only, but wryting my letters alſo to Duke Maurice, became ſuertie for the ſame money that is owyng, ſo that the ſoldiours may be diſcharged. And this I did, not bycauſe I was bounde, but for that I loue chiefly the peace and tranquillitie of Germany. Nowe therfore I loke in a maner euery moment, that the ſame be done, and ſuppoſe verely, that they ſhal ſlippe awaye without the dammage of any man, and all this mutinie and trouble be appeaſed, but in caſe whan the payment is made, the armie be not diſcharged: than is it eaſely perceiued, that there is ſome other deuiſe in hande. Than ſhall we alſo take an other waye, whiche we haue in our head at this preſent. Nowe, as touching other reportes that are brought vnto me, whiche are many in dede, but yet doubtfull and ful of contrarietie, al theſe I ſuppoſe be imagined for the moſte part of our ennemies, and according to their olde maner and lightnes ſpred abrode, to diſturbe the counſell & peace of Germany. But I truſte in God that ſuche priuie conſpiracies ſhall at the laſt come to lyght, and haue an ende according to their demerites. For ſince the rendring of Maydenburge, all thinges were quiet in Germany, and all Princes and ſtates do ſo louingly & obediently demeane them ſelues towardes me, that certenly I can not ſee what cauſe of any new mutinie can or ought to be imagined or pretēded. I am not ignoraunt that men ought to be circumſpecte, and eſpecially at this time, & in theſe ſturres of foreine nations, & that no ſuſpicion of the leaſt daūger is to be neglected. Againe I am neyther ſo cleane voyde of care nor diligence, that I wyll let paſſe with a deaf yeare, ſuch thinges as are reported, for I haue in a maner in all places eſpialles, to inquire of euery matter. And herein do I ſpare neyther coſte Kings haue long armes. nor trauell. Howe be it to make a full determinatiō of a thing, vpon euery light reporte, you your ſelfe of your wyſdome conſider, how vndiſcrete a thing it were. And that you ſhuld nowe leaue the counſell, vnleſſe ſome extreme neceſſitie vrged you, it is in no wyſe to be committed. For conſidering howe great a furtheraunce conſiſteth in your preſence, it is to be feared, leaſt through your departure, the counſel ſhould not only be diſperſed, but alſo Religion it ſelfe ſhoulde vtterly peryſhe, wherin verely bothe the common ſaluation of men, and all your priuate commoditie reſteth. And conſideryng the caſe ſtandeth thus, I hartely deſyre you, my Lordes of Mentz and of Treuers, that altering your counſell you doe not as yet take your iourney. And you my lorde of Collon, which make not ſo great

haſte, I exhort erneſtly to perſeuer ſtyll. And generally I require you all, that you who occupie the chiefeſt places amōgeſt the ſtates of the Empire, would helpe one an other with ayde and counſell, declaring amonges your ſelues a brotherly loue and beneuolence. In the meane tyme I wil kepe diligēt watch for the common wealth, and as muche as I am able by polycie and power, will ſeke to quenche in tyme, the flambe that ſhall haply ariſe, to the intent that (ciuile euils oppreſſed, and our force increaſed) forrein warre may more eaſely be defended, and that you hauing your countries quiet, and trāquilitie recouered, may altogether applie the affaires of the chriſtian commō wealth. Yet neuertheleſſe I would aduiſe you, that ſuche of your counſellours and officers as you haue left at home, do prouide for all thinges, that nothing chaunce vnloked for, & that they conferre their counſelles with ſuch of their frēdes & neighbours, as are to be truſted. Wherin if I may alſo profite you any thing, I will do it gladly: So that if any tumulte be, which I can not thinke there wyll, you may be ſo muche the more ready what ſo euer chaunceth. And ſeing there is no great diſtaunce betwixt vs, you ſhall do me a pleaſure, in caſe you ſhall wryte vnto me of ſuche thynges, as from hence forth you ſhall haue intelligence of. And I ſhall do the ſame, and whatſoeuer I ſhall thinke to concerne you and the common wealth, I wyl let you vnderſtande, and as I haue oftentimes promyſed you, ſo wyll I in dede perfourme all defence and tuitiō. A few daies before Erle Montfort was returned to Trent. Unto him therfore go the Ambaſſadours of Wirtemberg, & declare howe they haue brought nothing to paſſe hitherto by the Cardinall, and Toletane. And for ſo much as he & his fellowes Ambaſſadours do preſent there the Emperours perſone, they require yt theyr Princes demaundes might be heard. But where as than they receiued no very good aunſwer, they being almoſte in diſpaire of the thynge, were pourpoſed to goe home. As the Prince had lately commaunded them, in caſe they were longe delayed. The Ambaſſadour alſo of Straſburge declared his commiſſion to the Erle Monfort, as he had done before to Pictaue, and he alſo toke a copie of the commiſſion. And now the Diuines diſputations ceaſed, and the fathers aſſembled dayly, that ſearching the opiniōs of all them, they might make decrees, as I ſhewed you before. And of the contrie of Germany, were choſen for the ſame thre biſhops, Collō, Uienne, & Nūburg. This was Iulius Pſſugius. And whileſt they were occupied with thoſe affaires, & prepared al things for ye next ſitting, the .vii. day of Ianuary

come thither the Ambaſſadours of Duke Maurice, of whome the Emperour had written a litle before, Wuolfie Coler, and Leonard Badehorne a Ciuilian, by their coming, the Byſhops of whome I ſpake were well chered vp, and chiefly the Emperours Ambaſſadours, for that they thought there was nowe no more doubte in Duke Maurice, whiche followed peaceable wayes. The thyrde daye after they came, they declare their meſſage Thābaſſad. of Du. Maurice come to the counſell. to the Emperours Ambaſſadours. Firſt, they recite, howe the Diuines that ſhould come were not ſufficiently aſſured by the counſell, and for that cauſe their Prynce did ſende no man. He is in dede right wel affected towardes the common wealth, and deſyreth much that ſome waye of concorde might be foūd. And therfore was fully reſolued to ſende of his owne, ſuche as are good men, and louers of concorde, and doubteth not but that diuerſe others wyll lykewyſe do the ſame. But that the ſame may be done, theſe be his requeſtes.
            Firſt that thoſe that ſhall come, may haue ſaufeconduicte according to the fourme of the decree of Baſill, as the Bohemers were aſſured in tymes paſt. That they ſurceaſe from all action in the meane tyme tyll they come. That when they ſhal come, all fourmer actes may be retracted, and the daie appointed for the ſeſſion, be adiourned. That there may be had a counſell, wherin all nations and people may aſſemble. That the Byſhop of Rome take not vpō hym the authoritie of preſident, but ſubmitte hym ſelfe to the counſell, and releaſe all Byſhops of their othe, that all mens voyces in the counſell may be free, and their iudgementes not intangled. Whiche thynges alſo, whan they ſhall thinke good, they wyll declare more at large in the aſſemble of the fathers, and make requeſte that ſome thing may be done in it ſo ſhortly as may be. For the Diuines haue already taken their iourney, and are come at the leaſt fortie myles on the waye, and tary nowe tyll they be called. This was the tenth daye of Ianuary. They ſayed howe they were both ryght glad of their comming, and that alſo they woulde preferre all theſe thynges vnto the fathers. They ſignified alſo the whole matter to the Emperour, who to gratifie Duke Maurice, did aduiſe and counſell the fathers, that they ſhould D. Maurice feared of the Emperour. aunſwere myldly and frendly to his requeſtes. Moreouer the Duke of Wirtemburge, where he had heard no certentie before after he knewe that Duke Maurice had ſent thyther, commaū
               ded his Ambaſſadours to tary tyll the next ſeſſions, and to exhibite theyr wrytinge in the ſame. He ſent them alſo an other wrytinge, howbeit very brief, of the ſame tenure in a maner,

as was the requeſt of Duke Maurice, and wylled them to put vp that alſo with the confeſſion of doctrine. The Ambaſſadour of Straſburge was commaunded to attende till either Duke Maurice men came, or that it were certenly knowē, they wold not come. Whan they were come therfore, he communicateth with them the cauſe of his Ambaſſade, and ſheweth them how thinges ſtode, and vnderſtandeth by them againe, what their commiſſion was. The ſame do the Ambaſſadours of Wirtemberg, and the caſe was comen to them al. Which they notwithſtanding for that it was long or they came, followed and vrged chiefly, and therfore they intreated diligently the thre Archbyſhops Electours, and the Cardinall of Trent, a great-frende to Duke Maurice, and the Emperours Ambaſſadours, that for the common wealth ſake, they would both be wylling them ſelues, and alſo perſwade the reſt of the fathers herein. For none of the Ambaſſadours would go to the legate Creſcentius, or any of his fellowes legates, leaſt thei ſhould appere to attribute to them any thing. But bycauſe they were ſent to followe the Emperours mynde, & ſatiſfie the decre of the Empire, therfore they vſed his Ambaſſadours, which was their high & chief magiſtrate, for their interceſſours. And at this preſent time came newes, ye within a few daies Duke Maurice wold come to the Emperour. Whiche made al men to be of better hope, & a great deale more willing. In this moneth was beheaded at Lōdon ye Duke of Somerſet, vncle as I ſaid before, to the king of Englande, & with him certē of his frendes, as Michel Stanope, ſir The Duke of Somerſet beheaded. Rafe Fane, & ſir Myles Partrich knightes. And ſome reported that the ſame was done by the procurement of the Duke of Northumberland. They that were of the wittier ſorte, began euen than to feare the good king, whome after his kinſfolkes were diſpatched out of the waye, they ſawe was more open to daunger & treaſon. For after the Duke of Somerſet was dead, the Duke of Northumberland put to the king newe chamberlaines, & amonges them his own ſonnes & kinſmen. Whan the daye of the next ſeſſion was now at hand, the Emperours Oratours, ſending for thambaſſadours of Duke Maurice, declare what thei haue done with the fathers in their cauſe. How thei haue obteined a ſaufeconduict ſuch as they wyſhed for. How alſo thaction may be diſcontinued & differred, vntill they come & may be preſent at the ſame: For that al nations & people be not there aſſembled, that lieth not in the fathers to perfourme. The counſel was lawfully ſōmoned. And although al mē come not, yet ſtandeth it neuertheleſſe in his ful ſtrength & dignitie,

that ſuche decrees as are made ſhould be reuoked, let them conſider them ſelues, howe vndecent a thing it were: For it belongeth to the reproche and infamie of ſo great an aſſemblie. Let Diuines come only: They ſhall both be in all matters hearde, and alſo intreated moſte gently. And if any thyng offende thē, or be done without reaſon, if they ſee them ſelues ouermuche aggrauated, they haue free libertie to departe whan they wyl. They deſyre them earneſtly that they would geue ſome thynge to the tyme, and not to couet to haue all thynges graunted thē in this one moment. Whan they ſhall come to the action, than may dyuerſe thinges by occaſion be obteyned, whiche appeare nowe very harde. The fathers, they ſaye, be very deſyrous of a reformation, and wyll not fayle to doe their dutie, and longe ſore for the Diuines comming, vnto whome they wyll ſhewe all good wil & fidelitie, and haue thynges to propoūde of great importaunce, and deſyre that they may begynne, to the intent that by this occaſion, they may come forth alſo. That whiche they requyre moreouer touchyng the ſubmiſſion of the Byſhop of Rome, they deſyre them ſome thyng to qualifie. The fathers do ſee and perceyue, that there is ſom what in that high dignitie, that may be reprehended, and ought in dede to be redreſſed. But yet muſt they procede after ſome fine deuiſe. The Emperours mynde and wyll is, that all thinges ſhould be ritely and lawfully done. But they finde by daily experience, howe fayre, and diſſemblingly they muſt treate with the Byſhops legates. For verely they muſt vſe a ſingular dexteritie, and deale with them by policie. Wherfore let them nowe contente them ſelues with ſuche thinges as are graūted, which are ſurely not without their great trauell obteyned, and fynde the meanes, that the Diuines may make haſte. And than will they neyther in publique nor priuate cauſe omitte any parte of their dutie. And whan they were come hytherto, they deliuer vnto them the ſaufeconduicte: Whiche they byd them reade, and after to ſende it them againe. This was the .xxii. daye of Ianuary.
            And thus ſending them awaye, in the ſelfe ſame momente, D. Maurice Ambaſſad. ſent awaye. call for the Ambaſſadours of the Duke of Wirtemberge. And firſt make an excuſe touching the fourmer tyme, by the moſte weightie affaires of the fathers. But nowe if they haue anythyng to doe, they be ready to further theſame. They ſayd, how they haue had a long tyme nowe thinges to propounde, and to be hearde with ſpede. Aſſone as they were dimiſſed, they ſende for the Ambaſſadour of Straſburge, and ſpeake to the ſame effecte. He declared briefly, wherfore he was ſent, by reaſon of

Coletane, vnto whome he had not ſpoken before. For this preſent he ſayde he had nothing els to ſaye, and how he loked dayly for letters frō home. For immediatly after that Duke Maurice Ambaſſadours were come, he was commaunded to wryte home what their cōmiſſion was, and to attende what the Senate would haue done further more. Howebeit he required thē in the meane tyme, that in thoſe matters, whiche the Ambaſſadours of Duke Maurice had preferred vnto them, they would ſo vſe them ſelues, that they myght come forthwith, to open treatie. They ſaide againe, howe they had certen thinges to do with the Ambaſſadours of Duke Maurice and of the Duke of Wirtemberge. Whan any thing ſhalbe done, they will let hym vnderſtāde, that he may ſignifie the ſame to his citezens. They verely do greatly wyſhe for a concorde. And the Emperour alſo applieth his whole endeuour & ſtudy to the ſame. They deſire very muche alſo, that thaction might beginne, and doubte not but God wyll aſſiſte that moſte honeſt enterpriſe. Whan this was done, the Ambaſſadours of Saxon, Wirtemberg & Straſburge, hauing cōference together, do way that fourme of ſaufe conduicte whiche they had receiued. And for ſo muche as they had wrytten out before euery chapter of the decree of Baſill, ye all men might ſee, eſpecially ſuche thynges as concerned any weightie matters, it was not hard for them by and by to diſcerne in what places this diſſented from that. Whan they had The ſaufecō
                  duict altered therfore peruſed it ouer, ſtreight waye they perceiued, that the chiefeſt places, were partely altered and partly omitted. For in the ſaufeconduicte that in times paſt was geuen to the Bohemers, are theſe thinges amongeſt others. That they ſhuld haue alſo authoritie to decide matters. That in al matters of cōtrouerſie, the holy ſcripture, the order of the primatiue churche, & ſuche counſelles & interpretours as were agreable to the ſcripture, ſhould be in ſtede of the iudge. That they might vſe their owne ſeruice at home. That nothing ſhuld be done in contēpt or reproche of their doctrine. Wherof, the firſt, the thirde & laſte were cleane omitted. And the ſecond and chiefeſt thing in dede was ſore altered. Whiche thinges conſidered, they them ſelues deuiſe a new fourme, following the foteſteppes of the decree of Baſil. But in the meane tyme Toletane, ſent his ſeruaūt once or twyſe for ye paper, fearing, as it appered, ouermuch diligēce: But they neuertheles procede, & at the laſt whā the thing was finiſhed, Duke Maurice Ambaſſadours come againe vnto Toletane, & comparing thone with thother, ſhewe him, what lack they find therin. Than began he to ſtomack the matter, & was

right ſore offended. For why ſhould they not be content with ye, whiche they with great labour & dilligence had obtained? For ſuche as ſhould come, were aſſured ſufficiently. For the chiefeſt point is wherby it is prouided that they may ſafely come & ſafely goe. All other thinges ſerue nothing to that purpoſe, but only concerne the maner of treatie in the coūſell: Which thing might a great deale better be determined what time the Diuines be preſent, than now. They make aunſwer, how they may not paſſe the bōdes of their cōmiſſion, which is, that they may not receiue a ſaufeconduicte contrary to that of Baſill. Two dayes after, the fathers aſſemble all in the houſe of the byſhops legate, and with them themperours Ambaſſadours. Who call before them there thambaſſadours of the Duke of Wirtēberge, which the day before they had ſayd they would doe. Whan they were brought in, they are cōmaunded to declare their meſſage. Who after they had ſhewed their cōmiſſion, & made a brief preface, bring forth the confeſſion of doctrine written, & deliuer it to the ſcribe of the counſel, as the maner is. And ſaid alſo that Diuines ſhould come from their Prince, whiche ſhould treate of all things more aboundantly, howbeit vpō theſe cōditions. Firſt, yt by cōſent of both parties, conueniēt iudges ſhuld be choſen, which ſhuld heare the diuines reaſon, & iudge vprightly of matters yt be in cōtrouerſie. For in aſmuch as the Prince perceiueth, yt the doctrine of his diuines, doth for ye moſt part diſagre with ye doctrine of ye biſhop of Rome & of other biſhops, whiche ar many wayes boūd to him, he thinketh it very vnreaſonable & againſt al right, that they, which ſuſteine ye parſone either of plaintife or defendāt, ſhuld chalenge to thē ſelues thauthoritie of iudgement. Secondly, that it was decreed in thaſſembles of thempire at Auſpurg, that the counſel ſhuld be continued, & althinges Godly & rightly done. And this was euermore ſo takē of their Prince, that ſuch thinges as were decreed in the counſel in fourmer yeares, ought not to haue the force of a law, but that all thinges ſhould be repeted frō the beginning. For what right or reaſon were it, whan two men go to the lawe, that the thing whiche is decreed, whan the one hath iuſt cauſe to be abſent, ſhould be taken for ferme and ſtable? Moreouer, ſeing many dcerees were made not only in the fourmer, but alſo in this ſame counſell, contrary to the holy Scriptures, and alſo many olde errours eſtabliſhed, their Prince requireth that the ſame be of none authoritie, but ye al thinges may come to a dew examinatiō. Thoſe ſame articles cōpriſed in writīg they exhibited together wt the cōfeſſiō of doctrine. Whā this was done, anſwer

made them, that the fathers, whā they ſawe time, ſhould ſhew them their opinion, & thus were they dimiſſed. Theſame daye in the euening they ſent like wiſe for thambaſſadours of Duke Maurice. They, whan they came, recite with a long oration ye demaundes of their Prince, in like ſorte as they did of late to ye 
               The franke ſpeache of D. Maurice Ambaſſad. to the Fathers. Emperours Ambaſſadours: ſauing that the ende was more pithie. Wher this was ſaid moreouer, that ye ſame ſeruice & order that is vſed in the popiſh churches, was not the true religion, but a countrefeated thing, & as it were a ſhadowe of religion. Whan they had made an end of thoration, they were anſwered with the ſelfſame wordes, as before were the Ambaſſadours of Wirtemberg. Amongſt other thinges this greued thē moſte, yt their religion was deſcribed by ſo vile & contēptuouſe a name. Which was afterward well knowen. Thambaſſadours had intended to haue vttered their meſſage openly in the publique aſſize: But to auoyde this, which they knew certenly they wolde do, they were heard priuatly. For either muſt thei nedes do this or els leaue al to ye cōmon treatie. They had brought with thē a confeſſion of doctrine written by Philip Melanchthon, as I ſhowed you before, but where as they had no cōmaundemēt of this thing, I know not for what cauſe, thei did not preſent the ſame. The next day, which was ye .xxv. of Ianuary, was thopenſaſſions, & the biſhops legate was brought to the church with ye pompe before reherſed. Than was the nōber of ſoldiours much augmēted, & alſo a greater reſort of people out of ſōdry places, for that they ſuppoſed that the treatie of theſame day ſhuld be very notable. Whan the maſſe & all other ceremonies were fully finiſhed, it was recited in the pulpit, how for the proteſtātes cauſe the whole matter ſhould be differred till the .xix. daye of Marche, before the whiche day, they will be here in good time, to propound their matters. And this to be frendly graūted thē, for that the counſel truſteth, that they wil come not obūinatly to impugne the catholique faithe, but for a zeale to knowe the truth, & that they will in fine admitte & obeie the decrees of ye churche & ſchole of correction. How they haue more ouer a larger ſaufeconduicte, ſo that no lack can be founde. Furthermore that in the next ſitting, the treatie ſhalbe of the Sacramēt of Matrimonie. The third daye after, whan nothing came forthe at al, the Ambaſſadours of Duke Maurice & their fellowes demaunded of Fraunces Toletane, with whom they chaunced to dine that day, a copie of theſame ſaufecōduict, which was ſpoken of openly: Who made them a gentle anſwer, but whā other thre daies were paſt, thambaſſadour of Straſburg at ye requeſt

of the reſidue goeth vnto Pictaue. He cōplaineth that this is the ſixt daye, wherin they can heare nothing. And that before was a longer delay, for that the ſaufeconduicte was not ſufficient, & nowe is the time tracted again. And certenly the diuines wil not come, before ſuche time as the magiſtrates be contented with their ſaufeconduicte. He ſaide howe there was no faulte in him, & marueiled why Toletane thus differred them, who had the chiefeſt place amongeſt them. He would go talke with him, & doubted not but the matter ſhould be diſpatched ye ſame day. That thing whiche he ſhould learne by him, he wolde ſhe we him. And thus went to him. This was the laſt daye ſauing one of Ianuary. Within a fewe houres after, al thambaſſadours were commaunded to come to the houſe of Toletane, who deliuered to euery of them a copie of the ſaufecōduicte, ſigned vnderneth by the ſcribes of the counſell. There was alſo ye Earle Monfort. Pictaue beginneth the talke, & firſt in dede he excuſeth the delay made, and than ſpeaking much of their own zeale, and the great good wyll of the Emperour, he admoniſhed them, that the diuines might come with all poſſible diligence, whiche they truſted doubtles they would, hauing once receiued their ſaufeconduict. Than go they apart and reade it. And the The Ambaſſadours of ye Proteſt. deluded. places whiche they had amended before the ſeſſions, they finde nothing altered. Wherfore they come to them againe, and complayne therof, and ſhe we what lacke they finde in euery point. Thambaſſadours of Saxon deſire alſo to know, what anſwere the fathers haue made to their requeſtes. Theſame do they of Wirtemberge. Againe ſpeaketh Pictaue, & touching the ſaufe conduicte, anſwereth. Where they deſire, that their men might haue authoritie to decide, that ſame do they ouertimely. Whan the diuines be here preſent, & in ye worke it ſelfe, many thinges may fortune vpon occaſions to be graunted, whiche are nowe refuſed. Where they would that holy ſcripture only ſhoulde be iudge of euery controuerſie, there is no man againſt that. But whan there arriſeth ſtrife about thinterpretation of ſcriptur, vnto whom ſhuld credit be geuen ſoner than the coūſel? Scripture is a dome thīg & without life, as alſo other politike lawes How muche the papiſtes eſteme the Scripture. be: But the mouth of the iudge muſt be applied therunto, that it may be wel perceiued. Which mout verely is the voice of the councell, & this maner hath bene alwayes obſerued ſince the Apoſtles time, whanſoeuer there aroſe any doubtful matters. Where they would vſe their owne ſeruice at home, it is not indede openly graūted thē, neither yet it is prohibited. Leaſt any thing ſhould be contemptuouſly done againſt their Religion &

doctrine, they nede not to feare for it ſhould be ſtraightly prohibited. For both the Emperour wold haue it ſo, & the fathers alſo hate all ſuche intēperauncie. And ſeing thaſſemblie is made for peace & vnitie, immodeſte & opprobrius wordes ſhall not be vnpuniſhed. Unto ther requeſts they make in a maner the lyke aunſwere, as they did lately before the ſitting. How al the treatie was diſterred for their cauſe vntill an other tyme: But that the decrees made ſhould againe be repeted, they pray them not to diſgrace ſo many notable men. They will promyſe & become ſuerties, yt whan the diuines ſhal come they ſhal be heard in althinges. Where they would haue the Biſhop of Rome brought in ſubiection, & the other releaſed, for aſmuche as the ſame belongeth properly to hymſelfe, ye fathers can determine nothing before the matter be declared to him. Concerning the requeſtes of thambaſſadours of Wirtemberge, for ſo muche as they be of the ſame ſorte, the iudgement of the fathers is like alſo. Wherfore they intreate them, that they would not for ſo ſmall matters, ſuffer the occaſion ſo long wyſhed for of accompliſhyng a moſte holy thyng, to be letted and diſpointed, wherof doubtles all the nations of Europe ſhall receiue fruite, but that they would indeuoure and perſwade their magiſtrates, that the diuines might come with ſpede. Thei can not at this time worke a greater benefite for the common wealth. Whan the Ambaſſadours had againe replied, and vrged this thing chiefly, that it is againſt all reaſon, that ſuche as ſuſteyne a parte of the ſuite, ſhould iudge in a matter of controuerſie, at the length they departe thus, that they receiue the copie of the ſaufecōduite vpō no other cōdition, but to ſende the ſame to their magiſtrates, whiche they would do immediatly with all expedition, neither wyl they faile to further the matter, ſo much as in them lieth, nother do they diſpaire alſo of their cōming. Thambaſſadours of Duke Maurice ſende their copie out of hand, & ſo did thambaſſadour of Straſburge, they of Wirtemberge carie their copie with them, going home the firſte daye of February, by the Princes permiſſion, who not long after ſent others, as hereafter you ſhall heare. A litle before this tyme came the Diuines from Duke Maurice to Norinberge, and amongeſt them Malanchthon, The diuines come to Norinberge. being commaunded to remaine there tyll the Ambaſſadours ſent them ſaufeconduict from Trente: But a fewe dayes after they were come thither, they are forbidden to goe any further, but to attende til they know what the Prince ſhal make wt the Emperour, vnto whome it was ſaid he ſhould go. Whan the decrees are confirmed in the counſell houſe, there

were theames wont to be deliuered to the diuines for the next diſputation, as I ſhewed you before: But ſynce the laſt ſitting this was cleane omitted, wherof were reported cauſes mo thā one. Yet was it ſayde commonly, to be done for the Proteſtantes ſake. For in the beginning of February, whan the one of Duke Maurice Ambaſſadours and the Ambaſſadour of Straſburge, went forth of pleaſure to ſee the hether part of Italy & Ueniſe, the other, whiche had ſene Italy before, treated with the Emperours Ambaſſadours for ſo much as he ſuppoſed the diuines would come right ſhortly, whiche in his opinion were now at Auſpurg, that ye whole intreatie might be differred vntill than, and that the fathers would patiently beare ſo ſmal a delay. Tharchebiſhop of Treuers had with him a black Freer, Ambroſe Pelarge, who on a certen holy day, whiche was than the vii. of February, expounding yt place of the Goſpel, which is of the cockel mixed with yt wheate, ſaid amonges other things The bitternes of freer Pelarge againg yt proteſtauntes. that thyl cockel muſt be deſtroyed, after any ſorte or maner, ſo yt the ſame might be done without the loſſe of the wheate, appliyng all his ſermon to heretikes, whiche were ſignified by this worde, cockell. And it was reported to thambaſſadour of Duke Maurice, how he had rayled bitterly againſt heretikes, & had ſaid this alſo, that there was no faith nor promeſſe to be kepte with them, if any were haply made.
            He therfore, after he had made more diligēt inquiſitiō, goeth to the Cardinal of Trent, who was there with authoritie, and to the Emperours Ambaſſadours, and complaineth of that he had heard. The Freer being called for, confeſſed in dede that he ſpake of heretikes generally, and that they ſhould be diſtroyed with fyre, ſworde, hanging or any other meane, in caſe the ſame may be done without any great hynderaūce or publique commotion. But concerning that promeſſe is not to be kepte within them, he had ſpoken neuer a worde, and if he had ſo done, he ſhould haue incurred the penaltie of loſyng his lyfe, for breakyng the decre of the counſell. After this they call for the Ambaſſadour, and reciting the Freers purgation, bid hym loke for nothyng of the Fathers, but fidelitie and vpryght dealing. If any thyng alſo be blabbed out lyghtly, whiche neuer theleſſe is ſtraytely prohibited, that they ought not to be moued therewith. Whether the Freer were belied or no, I knowe not certenly. For ſome of his auditours beinge demaunded, Duke Maurice letters to his ambaſſadours. ſayde not the ſame thynge.
            In theſe daies were brought thither yt letters of Duke Maurice, dated the laſt of Ianuary. In the which he ſignified to his

ambaſſadors, that ſuch thinges as they had not obteined of the fathers hitherto, they ſhould vrge: he was all together in preparing him ſelf to go ſhortly to the Emperor: Than will he amongs other thinges treat with him alſo of theſe matters preſently: and that alſo with his diuines ſhould come.
            Moreouer the ambaſſadors and diuines of certain Princes and Cities: amonges the which he named the Duke of Pomeranes coſins, the copy of the which letters, thone of thambaſſadors, for that his felowe was not yet retourned from his iourney, ſendeth to the Cardinall of Trent at Brixna, which was lately gon thither. For he, becauſe he was both moſt ſeruiceable to the Emperor, and alſo loued Duke Moris by reaſon of muche familiarity, dearely well, and chiefly wiſhed that the counſel might procede, toke very heauely this diſſention growing, wherof ther was much talk. And that was the cauſe that thambaſſador ſent theſe letters, wherwith he knew he ſhould be comforted.
            And he verely after he had receiued thoſe letters, where before he doubted, now at the length he began to take more comforte, and to hope well, and wrote againe to thambaſſador, that ſo ſone as Duke Moris ſhall come to Inſprucke, he will go thither immediatly to him, or a great way further. For by reaſon of the amity and frendſhip that was betwene them, he thoughte he could perſwade him to peaceable waies. And theſe letters were ſubſcribed wyth Duke Moris own hand, and to them was alſo annexed letters of theyr commiſſion, to exhibite, if nede required, for the ſame was before neglected. Not long after, tharchbiſhop of Treuers, to refreſh him ſelf, departeth from Trent homeward the xvi. day of February. For that they ſaid, how themperor had geuen him leaue, that ſo ſone as he might recouer his health, he ſhould come thither again: yet left he the Frier Pelarge ther, that he might be preſent at al actions: Tharchbiſhops of Mentz and Collon brought him goinge a mile or two on his way. And he tourned on the lefthande, and toke not his iourny by Inſprucke, wher themperor lay.
            Shortly after, many began to mutter how the counſell ſhoulde be proroged, and that Duke Moris, making league with the frēch A brute of war againſt themperor. king: prepared to warre vpon themperor.
            This rumour was not great at the firſt, but it increaſed daily, and ſecreatly was one ſent from Trent to themperor: to vnderſtād his pleaſure. After alſo came one thither from themperor: but all thinges were kept very cloſe.
            The ſeconde daye of Marche, whiche was than Aſhewedenſday, the Biſhop of Romes Legate, ſettinge vp papers on the churche Pardons. walles, whiche they call indulgences or pardones, graunteth

remiſſion of ſinnes to al men in generall, but ſpecially to Biſhops, Ambaſſadoures, and deuines, whiche either haue or will confeſſe their ſinnes by a time preſcribed, will go to certaine Churches in Trent on daies appoynted. And there ſaying fiue Pater noſters, & fiue Aue Maries, & other praiers, will pray to God for the concord of Princes, for the conſent and vnity of the church, and for the lucky ſucceſſe of the counſell: and how this ſo great a benefit is geuen by the high biſhop Iuly the third, who is careful for the health of ſoules, yt men may as wel enioy the ſame at Trent, as at Rome. Wherfore many ran daily to the churches both Biſhops & others, eſpecially Spaniardes, obſeruing the difference of daies. For they attributed to this religion one while les time, an other while more. In this great taciturnitye, as before is ſaide, the ambaſſadoure of Straſburge inquired of themperors ambaſſador Pictaue, of the ſtate of thinges, who ſaid, how the brute that went, that the counſel ſhoulde be proroged, was vntrue, and that themperor would haue them in any wiſe to proceade, and continue their action: where alſo ther hath nothing bene done of late, that is for theyr cauſe, whiche haue put the fathers in hope of the comming of the diuines. This was in the beginning of Marche, whan Duke Moris had aboute thend of February called backe the deuines from Norinberge, who after the brute was raiſed that he ſhould come to themperor, whē he had paſſed a certain way of his iourny, retourneth home, and beginneth to take munſters, as in the nexte boke ſhalbe recited. When theſe things wer knowen, and ſondry meſſagers came daily one after another, and that the matter was now out of doubt, the Archbiſhops of Mentz and Colon, vnto whome came lately great plenty of vitaile out of the nether partes of Germany, prepared thē ſelues to horſbacke with great expedition, and the eleuenth day of March they depart in the dawning of the day, wheras ouer nighte the biſhops of Romes Legate, accompanied with the reſidue of the Biſhops of Italy and Spaine, came vnto them to bid them farewel. The ſame day came thither new ambaſſadours from the duke New ambaſſadors from Wirtēberge of Wirtemberge, Werner Munchinge, and Hierome Gerarde, a ciuilian. They go the next day to themperors ambaſſadoures, and ſhewing their commiſſion in wryting, deſyre to haue an anſwer of theyr Princes demaunds, exhibited to the fathers the .xxiiii. of Ianuary: And ſay moreouer how the deuines wil be ther within theſe few dais, to declare more at large the confeſſion of doctrine, yt was lately put vp the whole aſſembly Wherat they meruailed greatly, I know not for what cauſe, except it wer that one of thē had made all things ready to take his iourny, and was purpoſed to go home, which than of neceſſity muſt tary ther ful ſore againſt his will. It

was anſwered them, how they muſt deuiſe and haue conference of the matter with the fathers, and loke what they ſhall hear of them they will let them vnderſtand.
            In the meane tune duke Moris ambaſſadors were in great diſtres and carefulnes. For they wer ſuppoſed both to haue handled the matter craftely, and to haue bene priuy to their princes doings and to haue plaid all together the diſſemblers: where they againe affirmed, that neither they knew any thing that was don at home, nor yet receiued any letters from thence, and knew not which way to retourne home out of daunger. And for ſo muche as they ſawe, that the longer they taried, the more daunger it were for them, the xiii. day of March they depart as priuely as they coulde, aſſone as the day apeared, and ſpeding them haſtly to Brirna, axe thaduiſe of the Cardinall of Trent, what is beſt to be done. At the laſt thone of thambaſſadors, which before he came to Trent, had made longe abode at Iuſpruck, and in his princes name had with ye reſt made interceſſion to themperor for the Lātzgraue, hauing firſt receiued except I be diſceiued, a ſafe conduit came to Inſprucke, & made his purgation to themperors counſel, & proueth that he was not made priuy to this war, in ſuch ſort as they did credit him. From thēce he goeth ſtraight home: and thother taking his iourny through Carnia, returneth into Saxonie. When tharchbiſhops of Mentz and Collon approched nere vnto Inſpruck, they were honorably receiued of ſuch as themperor ſent to mete them. Amonges whom was the biſhop of Arras. After they both talking long & much with the Emperor alone, ſpede thē on their iourny, for the matter required haſt. The vi. day after that, thambaſſadors of Duke Moris were The diuines of Wyrtemberge. departed from Trent, came thither iiii. diuines from the Duke of Lirtemberge, wherof Brentius was one, and ii. of Straſburge. Wherfore thambaſſadors immediatly repair to Earle Monfort, & name the diuines vnto him that be cummen, and praye him ſo to deuiſe with his fellowes, that the fathers may anſwer to theyr demaundes, and that the action may begin.
            The next day, which was the .xix. of March, and appoynted for the open ſeſſions, as before is ſaid, the fathers aſſēble in the houſe of the Biſhops Legate. There was thambaſſador of the Kinge of Portugall, which was lately come thither: who after he had ſhewed his cōmiſſion, was after a ſolemne manner, receiued and admitted of the fathers: This done the cōmon ſeſſion was adiourned to the firſt of May, and other thing was ther none done. And at theſe thinges were wrought priuatelye. The duke of Wirtemberge had The confeſſion of the duke of Wirtemberge. cauſed in yt meane time ye confeſſion of doctrin, which his ambaſſadors had exhibited, to be ſetforth in print, wherof firſt thambaſſa|

and after alſo the diuines had brought with them certain Copies, wherof though many had the ſight: yet a great deale moe wanted. For the Biſhoppes Legate reſerued to him ſelf that wryting that was openly exhibited the xxiiii. day of Ianuary, and would hardly ſuffer any to read it. Which thing was than firſte knowen, in ſo much that now, whan it was commen forth in Printe, diuers Biſhops both of Italy and Spain, and diuines ſought for it diligētly, althoughe perauenture not all for one intente. But the Legate Creſcentius, taking the ſame diſpleaſauntly, blamed ſore a certain learned Phiſition of Trent, for that he hadde ſowen abrode ſuche kinde of bokes. And alſo thearle Mōfort diſſembling not the matter one whit, ſpake in ſuch ſort, as though they had tranſgreſſed the conditions of their ſafeconduit, and ſaid that ſuch as were openly aſſured from daunger, oughte alſo to eſchue all occaſion of offence. Two daies after that priuate treaty in the Legates houſe, Pictaue ſheweth the ambaſſador of Straſburge, in the night, whē they reaſoned together certaine houres before of the treatye to be commenced, that in caſe they would haue any thing propounded to the fathers by him and his fellowes, they wold not fail them herein, & alſo appoynteth them an hour. Wherfore the next day, which was the xxii. of March, thambaſſadors of the Duke of Wirtemberge, & of Straſburge reſort to the houſe of Toletane, whan Pictaue had begon the talk, thambaſſadors of Wirtemberge ſaid how they deſire the ſame now, that they did at their fyrſt cōming, namelye that they might haue an anſwer to the demaunds, long ſince exhibited which thing done, they may the better procede vnto the reſt: & wher after many words to and fro it appeared euidently, that if they did ſtick at this, the whole treaty ſhoulde be let thereby: The ambaſſadors, as they wer commaunded, make this recitall. All be it they cā not obtaine ſuch thinges as before they required, yet, to thintent it may appeare and be knowen, howe greatly deſyrous theyr Prince is both of peace and concorde, againe that the treatye of the matter ſhoulde be no longer delaied. Moreouer to obey the Emperoure, and fulfill the decre of thempire, they are contente to admit the diuines to the diſputation, and to preſēt them in their princes name. Howbe it vppon this condicion, that they graunte no part of theyr right hereby, and that all ſuch thinges may remain ſafe and whole vnto them and theyrs, as are agreable to the lawes and cuſtomes and to the decrees of thaſſemble at Auſpurge. Whan they had pronounced this forme of Proteſtation, they deliuer it vnto them by wryting, and after depart out of the place. Whan they were called in againe, the others commend their doing, and ſay how they perceiue rightwell, that they be wholy bent to a concorde.

And ſeing it is ſo, the next conſultation they ſay is, concerning the manner of the treaty, and deſyre to know, what their opiniō is, touching the ſame. Thambaſſadors go a ſide, and after they had conſulted of the matter, declare vnto them, how they haue found two wais. That is to wit, that ether the deuines may be hard, touching all the decrees of doctrin made in this counſell, or els that the confeſſion of doctrin preſented to the fathers, and now alſo ſetforth in Print, may be laid forth amonges them, and euery Chapter therof be decided in ordre: for theyr diuines are commen for this intent, yt they may more at large erpound and declare the doctrin compriſed in that boke, and anſwer ſuch as will impugne the ſame: This ſemeth vnto them the readieſt way, and know no way better. Than alſo thambaſſador of Straſburge ſaid, how the magiſtrates of his city had red the ſame wryting of the doctrine of Wirtemberge, and did approue and profeſſe the ſame, & had ſent diuines thither, whiche ſhould ioyne them ſelues to his confeſſion, and with the diuines of Wirtemberge ſhould defend the ſame: This was he commaunded to ſhew them, and confirme in the name of his city & fellowes, wherunto it was anſweared.
            That where they wer ſo forward, and wrought ſo plainlye and ſincerely, where alſo the ſtate of Straſburge and other cities ther vnto annexed haue ioyned them ſelues to the ſame doctrine, they are right glad and geue them harty thankes, and withall expedition wil ſignify the ſame to themperor, doubtinge not but he will be very deſirous to hear it: but as touching the treaty of the deuines, and the manner of diſputing by them deuiſed, they will ſhortly aduertiſe them, what is thopinion of the fathers therin.
            A few dais after, wher they kept ſilence, and the biſhop of Numburge departed thence, and the reſidue alſo of Germane Biſhops, which wer but ii. that remaind, were ſaid to prepare them ſelues to take their iourney. Thambaſſadors went to Monfort, to heare, if the fathers had anſwered any thing: he had nothing els to ſay: but but this only, how the fathers as yet had made none anſwere And whan mention was made of the Biſhops departing, he ſaid howe the Biſhop of Numburge went no further but to themperoure: for ther ſhould come certain commiſſioners thither out of Saxonie to treat a peace with Duke Moris: and for ſo much as he is of yt ſame country, and that one of the principall, beinge hereunto requeſted, he could not ſay them nay: for the reſidue he ſaid, he knew nothing. For in ſo much as the Emperour deſyred ſo greatly that the counſell might procede, they them ſelues alſo applied hereunto all theyr wordes and dedes, leaſt men ſhould diſpair in the thinge.

The nexte day, which was the xxvii. day of march, thambaſſador of Straſburge goeth to themperoures orator. Pictaue, and tolde him howe the ſtate of his buſines was ſuche that he muſte return home: And therefore deſired to knowe what he ſhoulde reporte at home of the deuines matter. By this occaſion they entred againe into talke of the manner of the treaty that ſhould be. And he affirmed verely, that to procede after thordre by them lately preſcribed, it might not be conueniently: For now they were in hand with the Maſſe, which thinge ſhould be next diſcuſſed: which matter ſemed vnto him mete firſt to be diſcided, and after to come vnto all ye reſt: How be it this, he ſaith, he ſpeaketh of him ſelfe priuately, not that his fellowes haue ſo willed him. Thother inferreth againe: howe like as their deuines haue accuſtomed to debate thinges from the very beginning in ordre. Of the creation. Of the fall of man. Of originall ſinne, as they terme it. Of iuſtification. Of faith. Of workes, and finally of the Sacraments: ſo ought they nowe alſo to be permitted to vſe the ſame ordre: Moreouer the ſame daye wherein they deliuered them the ſafeconduite at the end of Ianuary, theyr promiſe was, that the deuines ſhould be hard in all matters: wher in they ought to perſeuer, and not to ſubuert and altare the nature of thinges: for vnleſſe the former thinges be well determined, all diſceptation of the laſt, that depend of the firſte is to no purpoſe. And after they could not agre of this thinge betwene them ſelues, he anſwereth touching his iourney, that this may not be graunted him: for themperor hath commaunded them, that they ſuffer no mā to depart. After much talcke, where he alledgeth that he hathe no more to do, and whatſoeuer alſo remaineth, ſhoulde be done by the diuines, which had commiſſion in wryting for the ſame: he biddeth him go to thearle Monfort, and ſhew him the letters of commiſſion. After verye gently he biddeth him farewell, and wiſheth him wel to retourne. Whan thearle Montfort had ſene the commiſſion, he ſaid in dede that he would his buſineſſe ſo required, yt he might longer remain: but for ſo much as the time muſt be ſerued, he will not be againſt it: and ſo letteth him frendly depart. The next daye whan he was ready to depart, themperors ambaſſadours ſend for Thambaſſador of Straſburge deteyned. him, Pictaue beginneth to ſpeake. Wher yeſterday they wer agreed that he might depart, now they haue more diligently conſidered the thing, and conferred their heades together, they can not geue him leaue to depart: for nowe is the matter brought to yt paſſe, that the frute of the time ſpent is to be loked for, and thaction to be commenced: ſo that if the biſhops Legate were not ſickly, ſome thinge might be determined this ſelf ſame day: therefore muſte he ſtill remain: for if he ſhould now depart at this inſtaunt, the fathers wold

be offended, which know that he hath ben certain Monethes here preſent. Themperours commaundement alſo is ſuche, as no man at all may depart: and if his magiſtrate haue ſo commaunded him, he ought to exhibite the letters of the ſame, to thintent they mighte excuſe it to themperor. Than ſaid he, how it was not the commaū
               dement of the Senate, but that his owne matters ſo required: and alledging certain cauſes, vnleſſe it wer for ye ſame, he ſaid he wold not ſtirre one fote: for that both thauthority of the Senate, whych would haue him to remain ther longer, and alſo their honours that requeſt him hereunto, and the cauſe it ſelf moreouer, whiche he loueth, of reaſon ought to obtain this of him: Howbeit ſince that the deuines be commen, he may now much better be abſent, eſpecially ſeing this thing remaineth only, that they be admitted to thaction: Here be alſo thambaſſadors of Wirtemberge to aſſiſt the deuines, and the cauſe is common to both, as lately it was declared: and if it ſo be that the matter be earneſtly and conſtantlye handled, it is poſſible, that the Senate will ſubſtitute an other in his place, whō he hath all ready aduertiſed of his departure hence. Ther replieth he againe, willing him at the leaſt to abide ſo long, till thaction be commenced, which ſhould be out of hand: and if perchance the Legate Creſcentius recouer not his health, they will yet ſo folow the cauſe that his felowes in commiſſion ſhal execute the thing. Whan he could neither by excuſing, nor intreating preuaile any thing, he fleeth to the laſt remeady, which vntill that time he had purpoſelye reſerued, and ſaid how both he and all others that wer proteſtants might lawfully by theyr ſafeconduit depart thence at any time. Than at the laſt ſaith Toletane, that is ſo in dede, neither can they let or be againſt it, but that he may depart: howbeit they could not but declare what themperor hath commaunded, and what alſo they them ſelues would haue done. Thus therfore he departing, commendeth vnto them the cauſe and deuines alſo. Than were the fathers at diſſention amonges them ſelues, and not bent al one way. For the Spaniards, Neapolitans, and Siciliās, and whoſoeuer wer of themperors part, but chiefly the Spaniardes, and themperors ambaſſadors, wer importune that thaction might be continued: but the biſhop of Romes clients, for that they ſuppoſed that the Spaniards wēt about a reformation of the court of Rome, ſought to find ſome let and delay: and for ſo much as the chiefeſt Biſhops of Germany by reaſon of ciuill tumults, wer departed all ready. They loked alſo for the ſame occaſion, and ſo much the rather, for that by daily letters and Meſſagers, it was reported how Duke Moris and his confederats were already in armure. The French kinge alſo by the Cardinall Tournon treated diligentlye with the

Biſhop of Rome for peace: which if it toke effect, for as much as yt French king had war that time with themperor. No man doubted but that for his ſake alſo the counſel ſhould be diſſolued. Wherfore themperors ambaſſadors which knew and feared all theſe things laboured this chiefly, that the thing which they moſt coueted, they might bring to paſſe by thambaſſadors of the Proteſtantes. Thys was little perceiued than, but afterward certenly knowen. About The blaſphe my of a gray Frier. thend of March, a certaine graye Frier expounded the Epiſtle of Paule to the Romaines, before a great audience, and oftētimes by octaſion he railed bitterlly againſt Luther and his felowes, & waded ſo far that he ſaid ſuch as had no knowledge of Chriſt, and yet liued honeſtly, haue obteined ſaluatiō: and that this alſo is the very meaning of Saint Paule, in the ſecond chapiter of the foreſaid Epiſtle. Whan certain deuines of the Proteſtants had heard him ſpeke this opēly, after deliberatiō takē, by cōmon aſſent they write The requeſtes of the proteſtantes deuines. to themperors ambaſſadors, the laſt day of Marche, declaring for what intent they were ſent, verely to expound and defend the confeſſion of the doctrine exhibited: they complain that ther is none action commenced, and that the decrees of the counſel already made, haue in manner nothing els, but a bitter reproch and deteſtinge of that doctrin which they do profeſſe: and that alſo this other daye a gray Frier ſpake not only many abſurd things openly, and contrary to the conſent of the Church and expoſition of thold doctors, but alſo poured out great aboundaunce of railing words againſt their doctrin and churches: and all be it that many will ſay that he dothe theſe things againſt the wil of ye fathers, yet ſe they wt what an aſſent he teacheth and is hard: if this be thonly cauſe, why they wer ſent for hither, that they might be verely a ſpectakle and laughing ſtock to others, and ſhould be compelled to hear daily thiniuries & reproches of theyr doctrin, ther was doubtles no nede to haue taken this iourney in hand, and all theſe things might haue ben declared by wryting: wherfore they earneſtly require them according to their office and authority, they would bring to paſſe, that both the fathers would at the laſt declare what lack they find in the confeſſion exhibited, and that they may againe alſo be openly hard in all matters. Thoſe letters thambaſſadors receiue very gētly, and ſay they are glad alſo, that they haue an occaſion miniſtred to vrge the matter, to thintent that if the Legate Creſcentius do refuſe, they may treat with his fellowes, and with the fathers. Than alſo the ſame Frier left reading, excuſing the matter by ſickneſſe. The firſt day of Aprill Duke Moris and his league frends, laid ſiege to the Duke Moris taketh Auſpurge by cō
                  poſition. city of Auſpurge, and toke it the third day after by compoſition, as in the boke that foloweth ſhalbe declared. The v. day of Aprill, the

Ambaſſadors of the Duke of Wirtemberge, beinge ſent for to the houſe of Toletane, came, and brought with them as they were cō
               maunded two diuines, Brentius, and Ihon Marpache of Straſburge. Pictaue beginneth to declare, firſt of their owne good will, and zeale, after of the Legates ſickneſſe, and how, vnleſſe he were preſent, neither his fellowes, nor yet the fathers wold do any thing and that the fault hath not bene in them, that they do not procede; and ſheweth that they will alſo hereafter omit no manner of diligence, and hereof maketh proteſtation. Thothers, whan they had conſulted, ſay, that they know rightwell their good will and diligence, howbeit they had loked for an other and a more certain anſwer to their demaundes, which they might haue ſignified to their Magiſtrates: but now ſith the matter is thus, they muſt take coū
               ſel the beſt they can for them ſelues. Than ſaid he againe, that the matter is not brought to that poynt, neither ought it ſo to be taken, as though ther wer no hope of any further action remaining: to aduertiſe their Magiſtrates, and ſignify vnto them in what caſe all thing ſtand, it is wel done of them, and according to their duty: nether doubt they, but they, when they ſhal hear therof, wil both maruel at this long delay and ſurceaſing, and will take it alſo in euill part: Howbeit he requireth them to take paciently the tediouſneſſe of a few daies: In the meane time they will trauell, that they may haue a direct anſwer. Unto this, ſay they, they will gladly for their ſakes acconſent. The next day with great expedition came meſſagers and letters that Auſpurge was taken, and howe the Princes marched ſtraightway toward thalpes, to ſtop all the wais and paſſages. Wherefore they were commaunded to take armure in the county of Tiroll, and bandes of ſoldiors, hired, and commaunded all to repair to Inſprucke. Now wer all the biſhops of Germanye The fathers fle frō Trent departed thence: ther remained only the deputies of the biſhops of Spier and Manſter. Whan theſe newes were broughte, immediatly the biſhops of Italy flee, carying all their baggage down the riuer of Atheſis. Wherfore thambaſſadors of Wirtemberge being herewith moued, what time of their own accord the councell nowe ſlipped away, come to themperors orators, and ſhew thē for what cauſe they purpoſe to go home with the diuines alſo. Who in dede at the firſt were ſore againſt it, and ſay howe they may not aſſente therunto, except themperors pleaſure be knowne: but when that might not preuaile, they require to haue the cauſes of their departing deliuered to them by writing, & ſigned with their own hands, to thintent they may make an excuſe to themperor, and to the fathers. Pictaue demaunded this alſo, if haply after theyr departure the fathers ſhall proceade in thaction, what than ſhall the diuines

ſay? wherunto thambaſſadors conferring with the diuines vppon the matter, ſay they wil make them anſwer, and the viii. day of Aprill early in the morning, they deliuer vnto them a wrytinge. In the ſame they recite, what time the confeſſion of their doctrine was The anſwer of the proteſtantes ambaſſadors. exhibited: wherfore the diuines came. How they haue in vain ſollicited hitherto, that they might receiue an anſwer to their Princes demaundes: How vnto that day ther appeared no hope of any action that ſhould be: Now alſo ther is war raiſed, ſo, that not only yt biſhops of Germany, but alſo of Italy do depart, & that all ſtates are now ſo intangled with troubles, that they can loke for nothing at this preſent: Moreouer the biſhops of Germany being abſente, perauenture it were not expediente that anye progreſſe ſhoulde be made: And if any time hereafter chance, wherin this buſines may be treated wel and ordrely, they ſuppoſe, how their Prince will not be wanting: The diuines moreouer thinke thus, that ther be many decrees made both in this, and alſo in the former counſel, which might be wel reproued, in caſe they be lawfully hard: And if the fathers do now procede herein, it is to be thought, that their doings wil be like the reaſt. Neuertheleſſe, in caſe ether the decrees already made, may be amended, or ſuch may hereafter be decreed, as are conſonant to the holy ſcripture, ther is no doubt, but the ſame will be receiued with moſt obedient harts: This thing vnto them doutles will be moſt ſorowful, as in certain places of the confeſſion exhibited hath bene declared: which wryting verely, they iudge to be good and godly, and alſo whan time ſhal ſerue, will declare it more at large: They pray them therfore, to take in good part, their departure: and ſay in dede how they might by vertue of the ſafeconduite depart thence what time they liſt, and are not bounden to make any man priuy to it: but for ſo much as they haue manye times proued their gentlenes, they wold not omit this kind of duety. Thus therfore taking their leaue, they departe aboute none time, and a fewe hours after they met with the Cardinall of Trent, whiche rode in great poſte haſtr from Brixna to Trent: And whan he heard that they were of Wirtemberge, inquiring for Brentius, he ſpake vnto him, and gaue them all moſt gentle wordes. Two daies after met them king Ferdinandoes daughters, which went by Inſprucke to Brunecke, a towne in the Alpes, bordering on the limits of the Uenetians. Of the fathers I ſhewed you before, how they drue not all by one line. The Spaniſh biſhops in dede ſemed of all others moſt Diuers mindes in the counſel of Trent. diligente: diuers alſo of the Germanes pretended, as thoughe the thing required much reformation: but the mind of them yt thought beſt of al others, was this, that the ſchole of correction and maners of the church ſhould be refourmed, that al ſuperfluous exceſſe, ambition,

and diſhoneſt examples of liuing ſhuld be taken away, that euery man be reſident in his own church, and that eche man ſhuld haue one benefice, and no man be permitted to haue mo. Furthermore they purpoſed alſo to include within certain limites the power Refourmation of the papiſtes. of the biſhop of Rome, & not to attribute vnto his court ſo great authority ouer all realmes. Theſe and ſuch other like thinges they compriſe by this word of reformation, and thoſe thinges they acknowledge to belong proprely vnto them: but touching religion & doctrin, they will be acknowne of none error, yea they decreed that The Church can not erre. counſels could not erre, and thought verely that their aduerſaries would in fine reuolt and obey the counſel, as it apeareth manifeſtly by an Epiſtle written to the French king, and by the form of the the ſafeconduit. And this thing alſo increaſed their hope and opinion, for that they iudged few profeſſors of that doctrine, leaſt being ſo many of them dead & baniſhed, as before is ſpoken of Sweuia. This was alſo common there amonges them, that whatſoeuer concerned religion ſhould within a fewe monethes be determined. For of the chief articles ther remained two only, the Lordes ſupper and Matrimony: All other articles of doctrine were all ready diſcuſſed. The fathers that were at Baſill did attribute the whole iudgement to holy ſcripture, and to other wrytinges agreable to ye 
               The counſel of Baſil purer thē Trēt ſame: but theſe men would be iudges them ſelues in expoundinge the ſcripture, neither woulde they admit that place of the decree of Baſill, by thambaſſadors reſtored, but chaunginge the wordes of the decre, determined alſo to follow the traditions of thapoſtles in euerye doubtfull matter. And whanſoeuer they were deſtitute of ſcripture, they boſted that it was ſo lefte by thapoſtles, and deliuered them as it were from hande to hande, as in the diſputations of the deuines was oft times noted. Which cauſed alſo the ambaſſadors, whan they receiued the ſafeconduit of themperors oratoures at thend of Ianuary, to proteſt, that by the traditions of thapoſtles they vnderſtode thoſe wrytinges, which were annexed to the newe Teſtament, or ſtory of the foure Euangeliſtes. I ſhewed you before, how the firſt of Maye was appoynted the daye of ſeſſion. But The laſt ſeſſion of yt coū
                  ſell. now the fathers that remained, being in diſpair of the thing, aſſemble together, and for the diſcord of kinges and princes, proroge the counſell for the ſpace of two yeares or longer, in caſe the diſſention be not appeaſed. This was the xxix. day of Aprill, and nowe was the biſhop of Rome agreed with the French king. A few daies after themperors ambaſſadors depart thence alſo. But the Legate of The frenche Kinge hathe peace with ye Pope. Rome Creſcētius, deteined by ſickneſſe, abode ſtill: who being feared by a viſion in the night, as it is ſaid, fel ſicke, and began to diſpair alſo of his life, notwithſtanding that both his frends, and alſo

the Phiſitians did comforte him. Neither was he diſceiued in his iudgement: For the diſeaſe increaſing, he died at Uerona. And this was thend of the coūſel, which being right ſtoutly renued thought The ende of the Counſel at Trent. verely to reſtore the Romiſh doctrine, and ſhortly to eſtabliſhe the ſame. Beſides the Legates of Rome and the Cardinall of Trent, ther wer preſēt lxii. biſhops, wherof viii. wer Germanes, fiue and twenty Spaniardes, two of Sardinia, four of Sicilie, one of Hō
               gary, the biſhop of Agria, all the reaſt were of Italy: and diuines there were xlii. and of them xix. Spaniards, of Germany & Flaunders The death of the popes Legate. xii. By what occaſion the Legate Creſcentius fel ſicke. I had purpoſed not to haue ſpoken: for that there was ſome ſuſpicion, it might be deuiſed of mallice: but in as much as his frendes & thoſe of his own family, which went to comfort him whan he laye ſicke, do thus report it, I thought mete to adde to the ſame. The xxv. day of March he had ben very much occupied in wryting letters to the biſhop of Rome, and continued this trauel til night. At the whiche time ariſing, that he might refreſh him ſelf, behold, he ſaw a greate blacke dogge going, with gliſtring eies, and eares hanging down almoſt to the ground, and went ſtraightway to him, and after ſlipt vnder the table. He being aſtonied and amaſed, whan at the lēgth he was cummen againe to him ſelf, he calleth vpon his ſeruaunts, that were in the vtter chamber, commaunding them to bringe in a light, and to beate out this dogge: but whan he coulde no where be found, neither there, nor yet in the next chamber, he toke a great thought, and fel ſicke, as I ſhewed you before. When he lay on his death bed alſo, he is reported to haue cried oute manye times to his ſeruantes, that they ſhould driue out the dogge that came vppon his bed.
         
         
            
            The, xxiiij, Booke of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the ſtate of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne of the Empyre of Charies the fyfte.
            
               The Argument of the xxiiij. Booke.
               DUke Moris publiſheth his letters to all the ſtates of thempire, not to hinder his enterpriſes: the ſame doth Marques Albert. The French kinge alſo publiſheth his, and nammge him ſelf Protector of Germany, taketh Metz in Lorayne, and marcheth vp to Straſborough, and from thence retireth to Hagenaw. Whither came vnto him ſondry ambaſſadors, beſeching him to ſtay his army. The king retireth his armye oute of Germany. Duke Moris and his company hauing won the ſtraites of thalpes, putteth themperor to flighte, who a little before had enlarged the Duke of Saxon. After they publiſhe their letters at Auſpurge, whereb yt they reſtore the miniſters of the Churche that preached the Goſpell. Whileſt Duke Moris wente to Paſſaw for the treaty of peace, Marques Albert practiſeth great cruelty againſte them of Nurinberge, and conſtraineth them to make theyr peace, vnto meaner Princes of the peace, ſondrys thinges were declared aſwell by letters as by ambaſſadoures: and they be pleaſed with certaine conditions. They of Seine do reuolt from themperor, who cometh to Straſborough; goinge to beſiege Metz.
            
            
               HOw in the laſte aſſemble of thempire, the gouernment of the warre of Maidenburge, was by common aſſente of the Emperoure and other ſtates committed to Duke Moris, I haue before declared, during the which warre, continuinge the ſpace of one yeare: he, hauinge the armye at hys commaundemente, began to ſeke meanes howe to deliuer the Lantzgraue his father in lawe, ſeinge he had ſo longe time ſued to themperor for the ſame matter in vaine. Wherefore compelling the Chattes by an othe, to be true to him, and makinge peace with them of Maidenburge, and ſendinge his ambaſſadoures to Inſprucke, as in the former boke is mentioned, he entreth into league with the Frenche kinge, and aſſuraunce made on either ſide by pledges geuen, they thoughte good by wrytinges ſetforthe to declare the cauſe, of the warre, to thentent they might win therby the good wils of many. Moreouer the Marques Albert of Brandenburge, going priuely into Fraunce to the king withdrewe him ſelf wholy to the ſame buſineſſe.
            
               
In the meane ſeaſon the ſouldiours, aſwell thoſe that defended Maidenburge, as they that beſeged the ſame, wintered at Mulluſie, and the places there aboutes, and did muche hurte to the Northuſians and them of Herfurd. And whan themperor demaunded the cauſe therof of Duke Moris which had of the whole war bene generall, he was anſwered that this tumult was for want of paiment of their wages. For this he pr
                  ••••
               ded the cauſe, wher in dede they ſerued him, and ſecreatly were bounden to him by an oth. And that he might the better perſwade the ſelf ſame time, he ſente ambaſſadoures throughe Inſprucke to Trent, whiche might obtaine a ſafeconduit for the diuines that ſhould come, and propound certaine other thinges in the counſel: Afterward he commaunded the diuines to follow, whiche goinge as farre as Norinberge, taried there loking for letters from the foreſaid ambaſſadours, as before is mentioned: he ſent alſo other ambaſſadors to the Emperoure. Chriſtopher Carlebice, and Ulrich Mortiſe, which ſhould tary for his comming in the borders of Bauier, whoſe aduiſe and counſell he might vſe in the treaty. Furthermore he commanded a lodging to be prepared for him at Inſpruck, and he him ſelf toke his iourney, and whan he had gone two or thre daies iourny on his waye, ſending from thence to Inſprucke moſte gentle letters, and alledging a certain cauſe for an excuſe, returneth home again, and thus tracting the time, whan he had driuen it of from day to day. In the beginning of the ſpring time, hauing called backe his men in due ſeaſon, he began to take muſters of his ſoldiors, which in the winter time he had gathered very ſecreatly, and addreſſing his letters vnto all ye ſtates of thempire, ſaieth: Ther is nothing in this world to him ſo deare as concord: but he wiſheth chiefly for an agrement in religion according to the doctrin of the Prophets and Apoſtles: wherof our aduerſaries haue many times put vs in hope, both priuately and alſo by publike decrees: but nothing is performed, and they do not only conſtre a miſſe thoſe promiſes and decrees, but alſo do abrogate the ſame and take them cleane awaye: This alſo haue they ſpoken vnto certen, that vnleſſe they followe their procedings, let them not truſt greatly or leane to former promiſes: For at what time thoſe promiſes wer made, the ſtate of time was other wiſe: but now they muſt obey, or els, ſuch as refuſe muſte be puniſhed: and not contented with theſe wordes, they haue ſtirred vp alſo forein kings againſt him and other princes of his ſtate and profeſſion, and haue inuented ſondry cauſes to bring them in hatred, whileſt they blame vs for religion or certen other things, wheras the thing it ſelf declareth, that they care for no religion, but haue alwaies had an eie, how throughe thoccaſion of diſſention in Religion they might aſpire to the gouernment.
            
               
For now is theyr craft ſene of all men, whiche they vſed, that they mighte wholly rote oute and aboliſhe the true Religion, in former yeares ſetforth and expounded at Auſpurge: For this is the matter wherfore they haue in all places exiled the preachers and miniſters of the Church, oute of the limites of thempire, and tarye neither for the decree of a lawfull Counſell, nor yet of the Biſhoppes of Romes neither, and begin the thing by and by with execution. Wherfore, althoughe he with force of armes ſhoulde repulſe 
                  〈◊〉
                him and his, this ſeruitude of minde and conſcience, there oughte no man to blame him: How be it for ſo much as this thing apperteineth to Gods glorye, who alone can both auaunce and defende his worde, he committeth the whole matter vnto him, and pr
                  •
               yeth God, to graunt him conſtancy in the true knowledge of him vntill his liues end. An other thing wherof he intendeth to ſpeake, is cō
               cerning the Lantzgraue, his father in law. For certainly v. yeares The ſeconde cauſe of war ſince, was he and Ioachim the Elector of Brandenburge put in hope in themperors name, that if the Lantzgraue mighte be perſwaded to come to ſubmiſſion, and humbly to craue pardone of the Emperor, that themperor ſhoulde than require no more of him beſides that which was conteined in the pacification than conceiued, but would frendly let him depart: wheruppon they ſent for him by theyr letters, geuing their faith vnto his ſonnes, that if any thing chaunced to theyr father otherwiſe than well, they would abide the ſame fortune.
            So therefore came he vppon this faithe vnto Hale, and aſked the Emperor pardon. And afterwardes ſupped with the Duke of Alba, til it was far in the night, very pleaſantly, and what time The Lantzgraue deteyned priſoner againſt ſidelity. he would haue returned to his lodging, beyond al mens expectation, he was deteined, and caried to priſon, wherin he hath nowe remained in a manner fiue whole yeres, not without exceding great miſery: and although both his ſonnes, his nobilitye and ſubiectes haue confirmed the pacification: Albeit that he him ſelf, the Marques of Brandenburge and Wuolfgange, the Paulſgraue, became ſureties for him, that vnles he perfourmed couenaunts, they wold deliuer him into his cuſtody, albeit that according to the forme of couenaunts, the mony he was condemned in, is paid, his artilerye, and munition deliuered, his Caſtels and fortes raſed, Henrye the Duke of Brunſwicke and his ſonne ſette at libertye, the letters of confederacye exhibited, in ſo muche, that nothinge more can be required, yet coulde neither the ſuite of him and the Marques of Brandenburge, nor the lamentable teares of his wife, whiche pined to deathe for ſorowe, nor the Prayers of the people or interceſſion of other princes preuaile any thinge vnto this daye: For he

hathe ofttimes ſpoken to themperor, and becauſe diuers men haue had a ſiniſtrall opinion of him, he hath intreated him moſt earneſtly, to haue ſome reſpect to his honoure and eſtimation, and that he would graunt him this for the benefits which his elders had done vnto his Progenitors, and for his deſerts alſo towardes him and king Fardinando, and that he woulde ſette him at libertye: but all theſe things could moue him nothinge, yea he conſtrained the captife to anſwer to matters in the lawe out of priſon, and to plead his cauſe, lying in fatters, which can be done by no lawe, eſpeciallye in matters ſo waighty: to ſpeake nothing in the meane time, how ſuſpiciouſly, and howe raſhly he handled the matter, after a ſtraunge example, ſuch as neuer was hard of in Germany, that verely vnder this pretence of the law, he might by little and little tourn both him and his children out of all theyr landes and poſſeſſions, and bring them in ſuche diſtres, that they ſhoulde be no more hable to maintaine theyr ſtate and dignity: which thinge that it come not to paſſe, toucheth him very much, by reaſon of the alliaunce and hope of ſucceſſion that he hath with the houſe of Heſſe.
            This thing in dede might be thought a wonder, were it not that theſe craftes and pollicies are manifeſt in the ſight of al men, whiche doubtles tende vnto this ende, that the ſame Monarchye, that hath ben now ſo many yeares in framinge, maye at the lengthe be eſtabliſhed.
            The third, and chiefe poynt is that, which concerneth all men, The thirds cauſe. and our common natiue country of Germany, whoſe ſtate doubtles is moſt miſerable: For contrary to the lawes and couenauntes, forain ſouldiours are brought within the limits of thempire, whiche haue now many yeres ben here ſetled, and euery wher bothe in towne and Country conſumeth other mens goods, and exerciſe al kind of filthy luſt: Moreouer, many times ther be new wais inuented to get mony, and the auncient liberty diuers waies infringed, neither is any ſtate, no not the Princes electours, in this caſe ſpared: & thambaſſadors of foren kings, which be ſory for theſe things and loue the wealthe of Germany, are prohibited to come at anye publike aſſembles, clean againſt the manner of thempire: Finally, The bōdage of Germany. this is altogether wroughte, that all men maye be broughte into a ſhamefull and ſtraight bondage: for the which thing doubtles our poſterity and ofſpring may haue moſte tuſte cauſe to deteſt the cowardiſe and ſlouthfulnes of this time, wherin that moſte precious iewell and goodly ornament, that is, the liberty of our coūtry ſhuld be loſt: ſeing therefore that the caſe ſtandeth thus, at the laſte is he awaked, and William the Lantzgraue, the ſonne of Phillip, whōe the iuſt ſorow for his fathers miſerye hathe raiſed, and makinge a

league with the french king, whom thenemy ſeketh alſo to depriue of that he hath, are determined for the deliuerāce of the Lātzgraue and the duke of Saxon, to maintaine their honor, and recouer the liberty of all men, to attempt the matter by force of armes: therfore doth he exhort, that no man diſturbe this his enterpriſe, but that al men do further and profeſſe the ſame, and put in good aſſuraunce: For if it be otherwiſe, and if any man by one meane or other and the aduerſary, he wil take him for his ennemy. Iohn Albert, Duke of Megelburge ſubſcribed alſo to the ſame letters, chiefly for the preſeruation of religion, forſomuch as duke Moris had ſaid howe he warred for the ſame cauſe alſo. And the Marques Albert of Brā
               denburge Marques Alberts letters agaynſte the Emperoure. publiſheth a wryting in manner of the ſame effecte, and complaineth that the liberty of Germany is oppreſſed enē of them, which of duety ought to maintain and auaunce the ſame: he ſaithe ther is holden now a counſel, wherin be a few aſſembled for to ſubuert the truthe: and that alſo there be many aſſemblies of the Empire. Wherof the end is this, that by certaine corrupted with bribes and faire promiſes, mony maye be gotten by ſome ſubtile fetche to The heauye burthens of Germany. the vtter vndoing of Germany, and the ſame to be wrought chiefly by the cleargy, which in the conſiſtory of the Empire ſurmounte in nombre, and now is the matter brought to yt paſſe, that the effect of al counſels dependeth almoſt of one mannes pleaſure, which is neither gentleman nor Germaine borne, nor annexed to the Empire, to the great reproche aſſuredlye and hinderance of all Germaines: And if this ought to be the ſtate of the weale publike, it were much better to call none aſſembles at all, but that mony ſhoulde be frelye and franckly geuen, whanſoeuer it is cōmaunded and required: for ſo ſhuld ther be no loſſe of time, and beſides great charges ſhoulde be ſpared. By ſuche like craft alſo is the ſeale of thempire commen into ſtraungers hands, which foreiners at theyr pleaſure abuſe to the damage of Germany: yet is ther no man at al that dare bewail theſe things, vnleſſe he wil enter into high diſpleaſure: Nether yet are the Germanes matters and ſutes diſpatched, but are moſt lōg delaid in ſo much that many men complain much of the ſame: For the ſtate of the things is ſuch that the Germanes had nede to learn other lāguages, in caſe they ſhould be there to do them ſelues anye good: of the ſame ſort is this, wher againſt tholde cuſtome of Germany it is prohibited, that no man may ſerue anye foreine Prince in his warres, that the proteſtantes being reconciled ouer & aboue moſt greuous penalties, wer conſtramed to admit other more vnworthy conditions, and for that a great ſome of mony aroſe of the Proteſtants clients for ſeruing them in theyr warres.

The ſame burthen alſo was laid vpon other ſtates and Princes, that had nothinge offended, and as thoughe that warre had bene made for the common wealth, they were commaūded to pay mony, to recompence the charges of the warres, for this intent verelye, yt ther ſhould no ſinewes nor force at all be lefte in all Germany: Of like ſort is it, that ciuill controuerſies of moſte waighty matters, are committed, not to the publick iudgement of thempire, but vnto a few commiſſioners, that it may be in their power, either to eſtabliſh or diſplace great princes: Againe that it is prohibited that no Prince maye ſet his owne Image in his coyne, that newe Senators are made in euery towne of the Empire, that this bondage is impoſed in manner vppon all Germanes, that they be conſtrained to ſuffer forreine ſouldiors in their country, whiche bothe do verye much harme, and bring many men to beggery, and alſo practiſe al kinde of arrogancy and lechery that hath not ben hard of: For his own land was not ſpared, although he promiſed him better, for the fidelitye and ſeruice done to themperor: Howbeit at what time he was deteined by reaſon of the warre of Maidenburge, and about matters of the common wealth was abſent, ſoldiors wer brought into his country. Notwithſtanding that his officers deſired much to the contrary: and thus certainly both he and other princes, whiche in the former war againſt the proteſtants, for his preſeruation and dignity, put in great hazarde their liues and goodes, haue receiued a goodly recompence in that boke which Lewes Auila ſetforth The ſtory of Lewes Auila, of the proteſtants war of matters done in the ſame war, a naughty and a lying fellow, whileſt he ſpeaketh of all Germany ſo coldly, ſo diſdainfullye and ſtraungely, as though it were ſome barbarous or vile nation, whoſe originall were ſkarcely knowen: And the vnworthineſſe of the thing is ſo much the more, for that the ſame boke is printed and ſetforth by a certain eſpeciall priueledge of themperor: Now verely be many thinges excuſed, by letters ſent throughout Germany, but it is the ſelf ſame ſong, that hath ben ſongen now many yeres, and all thinges tend hitherto, that they ſay, how accordinge to the ſtate of times the decrees muſt be altred, and that men muſte obey the preſent counſels, or els ſuffer puniſhment: And wheras certen Princes haue taken armure to repulſe this ignominye and ſeruitude, he hathe alſo promiſed them all aide and fidelity, yea and his life alſo: And this he proteſteth openlye, and deſireth, that no man aid their aduerſaries, but that all men woulde further this endeuoure of him and his fellowes, and defend the commen cauſe: For although very many perchaunce will followe the contrarye parte, yet let no man promiſe him ſelf better things, if the aduerſary may vanquiſhe: for than ſhall the ſtate and condition of all Germaines

be common: but in caſe anye manne beare armure againſte him and his felowes, him wil he perſecute with ſword and fire. There goeth a brute, he ſaieth, of him and his fellowes, as thoughe they wold bring into Germany forein nations, and euen the Turk him ſelfe, but this is a falſe and an abſurd ſclaunder: For what a madneſſe were it to procure ſo greate a daunger to them ſelues & theyr countrye? It is vaine alſo, that diuers report of him, as though he ſhoulde attempte this warre to enriche him ſelfe: he hathe ſerued nowe manye yeares the Emperoure, and kinge Ferdinando, and hereby hathe ſoughte no gaine, but rather praiſe and honor. Not without the great loſſe of his ſubſtaunce: he hath had alſo large offers made, and not to be contemned, but all thoſe refuſed, he hathe fixed his minde on this warre, wherin the liberty, and former dignity may be reſtored to the common country. In the which warre, if it fortune, that the ſame ouermuch authority of the Clergy, and prohibited by holy Scripture, be infringed and weakned, no man ought to blame him therfore: For certainly the chiefe biſhoppes of the Empire haue bene the occaſion of al theſe euils: yet is it not his intent, that thoſe Colleges which were founded chiefly for the nobility ſhoulde be diſtroyed, but that the vices beinge taken awaye, and thoſe thinges amended, that can not be borne with, they maye remaine in their vocation and be auaunced alſo: wherunto he will be a furtherer to them, ſo that they will be contente, and not ſuffer them ſelues to be perſwaded otherwiſe by his enemies. The king The frenche kingsletters of Fraunce alſo, in his letters ſetforth, ſaithe, he hathe this reſpecte chiefly, that Religion being eſtabliſhed, he may profite the publike weale, and chiefly his frendes. And therfore immediately after the death of his father, he had reſtored Scotlande to their former dignity, renued the league with Swiſſes, recouered Boloigne, and broughte againe the old inhabiters and Citezens diſperſed hither and thither, into theyr landes and poſſeſſions, he hathe made peace alſo with the king of England, and entred with him into perfite amity: and whileſt he was occupied with theſe matters, the Emperoure by ſecreat deuiſes hath Imagined many thinges for his diſtruction, and oftner than once hath geuen occaſion of warre, how beit both for the common wealthes ſake, and priuatelye alſo to relieue his people, he would attempt nothing, but winckinge at the iniuries, he gaue his minde whollye to the eſtabliſhmente of his realme: but this his quietneſſe, afterward, by his aduerſaries was aſcribed to a certaine timerouſneſſe and cowardlineſſe: but in the meane ſeaſon were broughte vnto him greuous complaints of the Princes and ſtates of Germany, whiche ſaide that occaſion was

ſought partly for Religion, partlye for the Turkiſhe warre, and to puniſh rebellion, to bringe them in to bondage, and that by craftye counſels, diſſention, and faction are mainetained, and Germanye impoueriſhed, ſo, that it can no longer be doubted, but that he goeth about to make a monarchy for him ſelfe and the houſe of Auſtrich: of the which thing verelye he conceiued an inwarde ſorowe, both for the common originall of either nation, and alſo for the old amity and frendſhip, which euer continued ferme and inuiolated, ſo long as it might by themperoures crafte and policye: For if that ſtate ſhould haue an alteration, and Germanye loſe her liberty, he perceiueth well, what damage and daunger the ſame will be for him and all his realme: For Germany is not only the fortreſſe and ſtrength of Fraunce, but alſo of the whole chriſtian commō welth: Germanye ye fortreſſe of Chriſtendoe. And therfore hath he deſired oft with earneſt prayer, and wiſhing, that either nation with their forces ioyned together, might ſo ſtay them ſelues, that they ſhould nead to be afraid of no man: & where no hope of this thing appeared, and yet many craued his healpe, he coulde not ſee by what meanes he mighte ſuccoure the Empyre, ſo rente and torne a ſondre: but in this conſultation ſo waighey, God, which is a righteous iudge, hath ſhewed a goodly way. For Octauian Freneſe, Duke of Placence and Parma, whome themperour and the Biſhop of Rome, Iuly, laide in waite for, required aide of him, and declaringe al their iniuries, hathe perſwaded him, to take vppon him, the defence of him and the countye of Mirandula. After this came alſo thoſe complaintes of the Princes and ſtates of Germany, which required they might enter into league with him, for that they ſaid, howe by that meanes onlye, the common wealth mighte be reſtored: but howe iuſte and waighty cauſes they be, for the whiche the Princes attempte warre, he will not recite, for that the ſame may be vnderſtande by theyr owne wrytinges: Notwithſtanding let euery man way with him ſelfe, whether this vnſatiable couetouſneſſe of oure aduerſaries dothe not geue a moſte iuſte occaſion of griefe, whiche deſtroyinge the wealthe of the Empire, ſwepe all into theyr owne coffers and treaſury. The Burgonians do nowe inuade them of Treuers, Gelderland, and Wirtemberge, Coūtryes oppreſſed bi the Emperoure. and make inuaſion into their countries, and deſtroyeth the Lātzgraues dominion diuers waies: of lyke ſorte is it, that themperor excludeth his ambaſſadors from thaſſemblies of the Empire, that he prohibiteth, that no manne may ſerue in foreine warres, that he putteth to death noble capitains, and worthy ſeruiceable men, and amonges others, Uogelſperge, whoſe execution he him ſelf beheld at Auſpurge, to thintent he mighte ſatiſfye his bloudye minde: Is

if not a mooſte euill an example, that he ſhoulde prouoke and hyre men with greate rewards to ſlay ſuch as ſerue him in the warres? Aſſuredlye it can not with fewe wordes be expreſſed, what craftes oure ennemies vſe: For into the ſame iudgemente of the Chamber and conſiſtorye of the Empire are admitted and placed ſuch, as by their meanes they may bring to paſſe and obtaine what they liſte: For doubtles the blame of all theſe euils is to be imputed to thys kinde of menne. Eſpeciallye to the iudges of the Chamber: For the which cauſes verely he could not deny ye Germains, requiring his aid: Therfore hath he made league with them, and not only yt, but alſo is determined to imploy vpon this warre all his force and his royall parſon. Neither yet doth he looke for anye priuate profite or gain therby, but minedeth this thinge only, that Germany beinge reſtored, and Ihon Fridericke the Duke of Saxon and the Lantz graue deliuered, whome he hathe detained priſoners in longe and vnworthy captiuity, he maye win praiſe and renowne immortall, as did in times paſt Flamminius, for deliuering Grece from bondage: neither is there cauſe, that any man ſhoulde feare anye force or violence: For in as much as he attempteth this warre for liberty he will wholly endeuoure that no man be hurt vndeſeruedly: let them truſte therefore to this promeſſe, whiche he confirmeth vnto them faithfully, and geue no creadit to aduerſaries, which ſay his purpoſe is to afflicte and plage the Cleargy: For he not only intendeth no ſuch matter, but alſo receiueth al them into his defence and tuition, ſo that they do not annoy him nor yet his league frendes. For after libertye recouered, he is put in good hope by many mens letters, that the concord of the churche, ſhall and may alſo be reſtored, and that by lawfull meanes, whan all ambition and priuate lucre is farre remoued. And what ſo euer he may helpe hereunto, he will do it gladly: Theſe are the things, wherof he thought good to admoniſh them, to thend they may vnderſtand, what his will and purpoſe is: wherfore he requireth them, that in ſo iuſte warre, which of neceſſity is attempted for the wealth of Germany, no mā would impeche or hinder him or his confederates: for otherwiſe, if any man be ſo cleane voide of all loue and duety, that he oweth to his country, that he intend to make reſiſtaunce, him wil he deſtroy with ſword and fire: and albeit he ſhal do ſo vnwillingly, yet, if any ſuch ſhalbe, the ſame as a naughty and a corrupt membre, muſt be cut of from the reaſt of the body, leaſt it do hurt by his infection, and in ſuch ſorte be reſtrained that it do no more harme: The reſt they may know of his ambaſſador Ihon Fraxine, Biſhop of Bayon, whom he hath ſent vnto them with further of his pleaſure vnto

whome he praieth them to geue creadit. This wrytinge beinge ſet forth in print, in the vulgare tonge, had ouer the head, a bonnet betwene two daggers, and wrytten by, that the ſame was the badge Tharmes of liberty. of liberty. And vnderneath that was the title of the kinge, who named him ſelfe the reuenger of the libertye of Germany, and of the Princes captiue. This badge or cognoiſaunce many ſay was foūd in old coynes, and vſed by them, that ſlue Iulius Ceſar. Where he ſaieth, how themperor had aſſigned a reward for them, that coulde ſlay certaine of his captaines, thus ſtandeth the caſe. Themperor by proclamation lately ſetforthe, had againe with wordes mooſte waighty outlawed the Rinegraue, Recrode, Riſeberge and Scherteline, which in dede ſerued all the French king, as I haue ſaid before, and appointed foure thouſande crownes in rewarde for him that could bring forth any of them, either quicke or dead. For they furthered the cauſe very muche, and whan this league was made, going into Germany, preſted ſouldioures, and broughte them into Fraunce. And Scherteline in dede whan he had ſued many yeres in vaine, and coulde by the interceſſion of no man be reconciled to themperor or King Fernando, being in a manner conſtrained fled to the French king.
            Theſe letters of the kinge, and the Princes, diſpearſed abrode in Germany, raiſed in ſome hope, but in manye, feare and carefulnes. Duke Moris, which wrought all thinge by diſſimulation the firſt of March, holdeth an aſſemble of the ſtates of his dominion, and amonges other thinges he propoundeth, becauſe he is ſued of the Lantzgraues ſonnes, to preſent him ſelf, he may no longer ſeke delaies, or diſceine their expectatiō. Therfore wil he go vnto them, to kepe his faith and promeſſe: let them therfore in the meane time obey his brother Auguſt, whome he hath made his deputye in his abſence, and let them gather a force to defend the country, that nothing chaunce vnto them vnprouided. Thelector of Brandenburge was preſent at this treaty, for that he was ſommoned to appeare: but when the Lantzgraues ſonnes did permit him, that he ſhoulde at the next proceſſe, appeare, and diſcharge his bond, he retourneth home. Duke Moris hauing put in ordre his thinges at home, and Duke Moris goeth to the field. appoynted certain counſelloures to aſſiſte his brother Auguſte, he goeth with a few ſmall company to thoſe forces, which I ſaide before he had in the country of Turing, and marching forth abideth for the Lantzgraues ſonne.
            Before he departed frō home the Burggraue of Meyſſen, as they call him Henry, of the noble houſe of the Plauians Chauncelor of Boheme, in the name of king Ferdinando, treated with him diligently

for a reconcilemēt. The Lātzgraues ſōne, leading forth his armye, when he came to Erlebache the eightene daye of Marche, where alſo was the French ambaſſadour, Fraxine, they bothe requeſt them of Franckfurt by letters amonges other thinges, that they receiue no garriſon of the Emperours into their city. And all beit that they anſwered neither plainlye nor purpoſelye, yet, for ſo much as they muſt go forward, there was none other thing done.
            The ſixt daye after, he ioyneth with Duke Moris: And when they were commen wyth their whole armye thre dayes after to Schwinfurt, Duke Moris declareth vnto him, how king Fardinando woulde make interceſſion, and ſignified the ſame plainlye both by letters and ambaſſadoures, as thoughe he had authoritys of the Emperoure to treat, yea touching the deliuery of his father.
            He therfore making priuy to it the French ambaſſador, refuſeth not, that the conditions and requeſtes of king Fardinando, ſhould be heard, which thing determined, they march with great expedition, by Roteburge, Dingelſpelle, and Norling to Donauerde: At Roteburge, Marques Albert ioyneth him ſelfe to them with hys power bothe of horſe men and fote men. Whiche waye ſo euerthey wente, they broughte the Citezens into theyr ſubiection, and diſplacing thoſe, whiche the Emperoure before had choſen, do ordain newe Magiſtrates: And exact of them alſo mony and munition. And becauſe Auſpurge was kept with no great garriſon.
            And again becauſe in the ſelfe ſame daies, a certain piece of the wall and Rampeare was fallen downe, they marched with exceading greate iourneis, and the laſte daye of Marche, reaſted not ſo much as in the night ſeaſon, and came thither the firſte daye of Aprill at midday, and making roades there, declared them ſelues to be ennemies: In the Citye were foure enſeignes of fotemen, ſente by them peroure: but where the Townes men the fourth day after rendred the city, they wer permitted to depart.
            Than they that ſommoned the Cities of high Germany, and amonges them alſo Norinberge, and commaund them to be before them at Auſpurge, at thend of Aprill, and alſo vrge them of Wuolmes, whiche were but nine miles from Auſpurge, that they ſhould aide them with all thinges, and come into theyr ſociety.
            Aboute this time, the Prince of Salerne, by occaſion of falling oute with the Uiceroy of Naples, reuolteth from the Emperoure, The Prince of Salerne reuolteth from themperor. and goeth into Fraunce:
            Whileſt theſe thinges are done in Germany, the Frenche kinge, marching forth, with an huge army, ſurpriſeth Tullie, & Uerdome townes of thempire, at the borders of Fraunce, after he inuadeth

Lorayne, and ſendeth the yong Prince into Fraunce, aboute nine yeres of age, though the Lady Dowager his mother intreated neuer The frenche ſubdueth Loraine. ſo much to the contrary, & promiſeth him his daughter in mariage: Whileſt the king him ſelf was occupied with theſe affaires, his lieftenaunt the Conſtable, Annas Memoraunce, who led the Uantward, ſurpriſeth Metz, a famous city of thempire, the tenthe day of Aprill, whan bothe the garriſon within was ſmall, and the French men made fair promiſſes, and ſaide howe the kinge made this warre to maintaine theyr liberty. For what time the Frenche king went out of his owne pale, which was aboute the eighte day of Marche, ſendinge vnto them letters, and meſſagers, he deſired only that they would prepare him vitaile, yt he might paſſe through theyr country with his armye, promiſinge all benenolence. And he vſed for his miniſter the Cardinall Lenoncurt, biſhop of the Citye, The Cardinall betraied the Citye of Metz. who ſetforth his good will and zeale to the Senate.
            The coneſtable alſo wrote vnto them moſte frendlye: but whan he came neare vnto the citye with his force, he deſired to be let in, and obteined: the next day he was maſter of the gates, and of al the fortifications. Thither came alſo afterwardes the kinge him ſelfe at the xviii. day of Aprill, and there remaining four daies, after he had taken thothe of the Senate and people, he appoynted Mounſir Gōnorie to be theyr gouernoure, and commanded their armure to be deliuered, and caried into one place, and the Citye to be fortified, likewiſe doth he in the Townes before named, and in Loraine, and ſending his meſſagers before to Straſburge, to Haganawe, and other places neare, and to the biſhoppe of Straſburge, required to be aided with Wheate and Uitaile. Whan Auſpurge was taken, as I ſaid, and thold Senate reſtored, which themperoure had diſplaced, and the liberty of geuinge of voices, reſtored alſo to the people, the Princes contederated marched towarde Woulmes, that refuſed theyr league Whan they came thither the xii. day of Aprill, they ride aboute this Citye: And whan they were ſhot at with the greate pieces, they damaunde to be ſatiſfied for the iniuries done them with the ſumme of three hondreth thouſande Crownes, which denied, they becommed their enemies. But duke Moris goinge from thence, wente to Lintz, a towne of Auſtriche, that he mighte vnderſtande by kinge Farnando the conditions of peace. For he, as I ſaid, by the Emperoures conſent, was a meane to intreat a peace. Afterwarde the Emperoure exhorted by his letters the chiefeſt Princes of Germanye, that they woulde aſſaye to quenche this fire, and deuiſe ſome meanes of peace, the whiche he woulde not be againſte.

And where as diuerſe required his aide, for that thei were able to do nothing againſt ſo great a power, comforting their myndes, he anſwereth, that he hopeth wel that the treatie of peace commenced ſhall haue a lucky ſucceſſe, if not: than will he neyther faile them, nor the common weale. Whan Woulmes had bene beſeged ſix daies, the Princes, the .xix. day of Aprill, remoued to Stocach, a towne of Hegouia. There they receiued mony in the French kinges name for thre monethes (as is conuenaunted) and Gamey Marchiane, the Frenche pledge was deliuered: For the other, Nantoliet died by the waye. The Princes The pledges of Fraunce & Germanye. pledges, whiche they gaue to the Frenche kyng, were Chriſtopher Duke of Megelburg, and Philip the Lantgraues ſonne. The laſt of Aprill the Princes retourne to Thonaw, certen myles beneth Woulmes. In the meane ſeaſō Marques Albert burneth the townes and villages belonging to Woulmes, and extorteth money, and taketh their caſtell of Helfeſteyne, ſituated on a high hill, and placeth therin a garriſon, and the towne of Giſſing nere vnto it, whiche is thre myles frō Woulmes, with certen villages by the ſame, he condemneth to paye .xviii. thouſand crownes. Whā Duke Maurice was come to Lintz, he propoundeth of deliuering the Lantgraue his father in lawe, of Conditions of peace, offered by Duke Moris. appeaſing the diſſention of Religion and doctrine, of wel ordering the common wealth, of peace to be made with the French kyng, their fellowe, and confederate, of the outlawes to be receiued agayne into fauour.
            Thoſe were the Ryngrane, and others before named, and alſo Erle Hedecke whiche in fourmer yeares gaue hym ſelfe into the tuition of Duke Maurice, as before is ſayde. Howheit the Emperour had appointed no rewarde againſt his lyfe, leaſt he ſhould offende Duke Maurice, as it is to be thought. Unto theſe demaundes, Ferdinando, with whom were Maximilian his ſonne, and his ſonne in lawe Albert, Duke of Bauier, and alſo the Emperours Ambaſſadours, maketh aunſwere. Howe the Emperour is content that the Lantgraue be ſet at lybertie, yet ſo that the warre maye ceaſe immediately. Touchinge Religion and the common wealth, he is well pleaſed, that the matter be determined in the next conuention of German. But the Emperour is very lothe that the Frenche kyng ſhoulde be herein compriſed. Neuertheleſſe Duke Maurice may knowe of him, in what ſorte he wyl be accorded. The outlawes may alſo be taken to mercie, in caſe they wyl obeye the condition offered by the Emperour. Moreouer, Ferdinādo requeſted, that whan peace were once concluded, Duke Maurice would helpe him in

Hongary, and that the ſoldiours ſhould not ſlippe away to the Frenche kyng. Wherunto whan Duke Maurice had aunſwered, and ſayde that that he could determine nothing without the conſent of his fellowes, they departed ſo, as at the .xxvi. day of May, they ſhould mete againe at Paſſawe, whiche is a towne betwene Lintz and Regenſpurge, where the Ryuers of Thonawe, and Oene mete. Thither ſhould come alſo the Princes that were interceſſours, and their deputies. On Maydaye the Lantgraues ſonne, and Iohn Albert Duke of Megelburg, leade the armie of Gundelfinge, & there lye eight whole dayes together lokyng for Duke Maurice retourne out of Auſtrich. Whan he was come, the next daye was the armie munſtred at Lawginge, a towne of Otto Henry the Pauſgraues. For they The coūtrie of Oto Henry recouered had alſo recouered his prouince, poſſeſſed by the Emperour, and had expulſed the Byſhop of Auſpurge out of his countrie. And verely Otto the Paulſgraue, ioyned hym ſelfe vnto their league. From thence they goe towarde the Alpes. And it chaunced at the ſame tyme that kyng Ferdinando had obteyned of them a truce, whiche beginning the .xxvi. daye of May, ſhould ende the eight daye of Iune. In the meane tyme Themperour leuied a power at the fote of the Alpes, whiche aſſembled at the Towne of Rwe. In this hurly burly the Byſhop of Auſpurge Cardinall, which before was not very ryche and had nowe ſuſteyned great loſſe, as I ſayde, went to Rome, that he myght obteyne of the Byſhop new promotions and benefices, wherwith he might fill vp thoſe ſinkes agayne. After this the iudges of the chamber imperial flie away from Spiers. For by The iudges of the chamber ſlie. the Frenche king and the Princes in their forſaide wrytinges, ſignified plainly a diſpleaſure, & aſcribed to thē in a maner the blame of all their trouble. The Frenche king came with his armie by ye borders of Loraine to Saberne, the third day of May, foure myles from Straſburg, a town belonging to the biſhop. He had before requeſted them of Straſburg to ayde his armie with thinges neceſſary. For the whiche cauſe Ambaſſadours were ſent vnto him to Sarburg, ſeuen myles from Straſburg whiche ſhould offer him a certen quantitie of wheate & wyne, thoſe were Peter Sturmie, Fridericke Goteſſeme, and Iohn Sleidane. But the Coneſtable accompted that as nothynge, whiche they offered. And albeit the Ambaſſadours departed from hym in ſuche ſorte, as that they would aduertyſe the Senate, and after make reporte vnto hym, yet ſente he the nexte daye two Gentlemen for a ſpedy aunſwere, ſpeakyng muche of the kynges great good wyll and zeale towardes Germany, and

alſo for what intent, the kyng had moued his warre, verely that he might reſtore the libertie of Germany oppreſſed. An other requeſt was, that for ſo much as the ſoldiours had nede of many thinges, they might bie the ſame in their citie, and that artificers might be ſuffered to bryng forth their wares and ſel them within the campe. Wherunto the Senate made this anſwere; that in ſuche matters of weightie importaunce, there is nothing wont to be determined, but by the conſent of the whole ſtate. Whan the matter ſhalbe debated, they wyll ſende agayne Ambaſſadours to declare, what their mynde is. Whan they were thus ſent away, the next daye ye ſame Ambaſſadours were ſent again into the campe, which was than at Saberne. Whan they were heard ſpeake, and offered ſome what more, thā before, and had alſo declared cauſes, why the ſoldiours might not be permitted to come within the citie, the Coneſtable began to ſpeake diſpleaſauntly, and makyng a compariſon, how The Coneſtable chideth wt them of Straſh. partiall iudges they were, both of the kynges benefites, and alſo of the Emperours iniuries, gaue very ſharpe language. The concluſion of his talke was, that the nexte daye they ſhoulde heare the kyng hym ſelfe ſpeake, whiche would affirme al that he had nowe ſayde. On the morrowe were the Ambaſſadours ſent for before the kyng, with whome was the Cardinal of Loraine, the Duke of Uandome, and the Coneſtable. And there reporte vnto hym, what talke they haue had with the Coneſtable at two ſeuerall times, and offer as many raſers of Otes, as thei did before of wheate, and after alſo ſome what more wyne, beſeching the king, that both for the olde amitie, that ye kinges of Fraunce haue had with the ſtate of Straſburge, and alſo of his owne humanitie, he would take in good parte their offer. For they haue great force of ſoldiours within their citie, and a great nomber of people alſo be fled thither out of the countrie, ſo that the citie can not ſpare that corne, that they haue for theyr prouiſion. The kyng, after he had fyrſt conferred with his counſell, began him ſelfe to declare, for what cauſe he came into Germany, to the ſelfe ſame effect, that the Coneſtable had the daye before. Saying that vitayle was moſte neceſſary, and not to be denied any man, that would paye for the ſame, vnles he wer an ennemy. If ye Soldiours want that, they wyl fynd a waye, howe to come by the ſame. But what inconuenience wold come therof, euery man may eaſely perceiue. That thing whiche was offered, the kyng in dede refuſed not, but he would haue had it deliuered in bread. Thābaſſadours again in corne:

Where vpon when they coulde not agree, they departed with out the matter concluded. Whan the Ambaſſadours were retourned, the Senate made a decree. For as muche as no parte of that wheate, whiche is in the citie, can be ſpared, that there ſhould be as much bread made, as myght be in the places theraboutes. For the Ambaſſadours had alledged both to the Coneſtable, and the kyng alſo, that the ſtate of the citie and condiciō of time was ſuche, that from thence was nothing to be loked for. But in caſe any thyng myght be gathered in the countrie, belonging to the ſame, they ſhould haue it right gladly. And this did ye Senate decre, leaſt any extremitie ſhuld be wrought vpon the plowmen and people of the countrey. And ſo, that whiche could ſodenly be gotten in townes and villages with out the citie, was caried to the Campe, but that ſame was very litle. Whan the countrey of Loraine, and citie of Metz were taken, they of Straſburge immediatly toke vp to the nomber of fiue thouſand ſouldiours, to defende their citie, agayne they pulled down very many aſwel publique as priuate buildinges about the citie, and cut downe trees, and orcherdes and what ſo euer did let the proſpecte, or that might be a ſuccour to the ennemie, and where moſte nede was began to fortifie their citie. This ſame was a great diſpleaſure to the Frenchmen, and in the later communication the Coneſtable did not diſſemble the ſame to the Ambaſſadours. For it is thought, howe they were in a certen hope, that like as by a certen face of frendſhip, they entred Metz, ſo alſo they ſhould not haue bene ſhut out of Straſburg. But whan they knewe, that the citie was exceading ſtrong, and ſawe moreouer all thinges prouided ſo diligently for the defence of the ſame, chaunging their purpoſe, as it is to be thought, they tourned an other way, and remouinge their campe the ſeuenth day of May, marched towarde Haganawe and Wiſſeburg. Hither came vnto ye king, Ambaſſadours from the Paulſgraue Electour, from the Archebyſhoppes of The requeſt of the Prynces to the kyng. Mentz and of Treuers, commiſſioners, and from the Dukes of Cleaue and Wirtemberge, whiche for the common wealthes ſake, were lately aſſembled at Wourmes. Whoſe requeſte was this, that the kyng would abſteyne from ſpoyling the countrie and ſpare the poore people. And for ſo muche as he proteſteth to make warre for the lybertie of Germany, that he woulde ſtaye with his armie. For if he ſhuld goe further, the ſame wold be to the great loſſe and dammage of the Empyre. And they requyre hym to geue his mynde to the wayes of peace, whereof they bothe haue alreadye made mention to the Emperoure,

and wyll doe alſo hereafter, and truſte that all ſhall be well. Where he writeth of entring into league with him, they deſire him to conſider herein their honour and eſtimation. For by reaſon of their othe and faith they owe to the Empire, they are not able to perfourme it. But yet will they do their endeuour, that a generall peace may be eſtabliſhed. Furthermore they require him moſte inſtauntly, that he would ſpare the dominiōs of Straſburg, whiche is a fre citie of the Empyre, and that by his mediation Marques Albert would intreate more gently the Byſhop of Wirciburge.
            At the ſelfſame tyme, which was the .xi. day of May, letters were brought to ye king frō Duke Maurice, wherin was wrytten D. Maurice letters to the kyng. what was done at Lintz. Duke Maurice required moreouer, yt the kyng, whom he wold haue alſo compriſed in the treatie of peace, would declare, vpon what conditions he would accorde with the Emperour. Whan theſe letters were receiued, the kyng, vnto whome this thing was thought to haue chaunced vnloked for, two dayes after, remoueth his campe, and leauing Germany, marcheth agayne towardes Loraine. But before his departure, he aunſwereth the Ambaſſadours of the Princes before named. How he hath already obteined the ſame The kinges anſwer to ye Prynces. thyng, for the whiche he came with his army into Germany. For the captiue Princes ſhall be deliuered. And this was the cauſe of his warre: He therfore hath wonne honour enough. And if there chaunce any tyme hereafter, wherin Germany may requyre his ayde, he wyll ſpare neither paynes, coſte, nor perill. And nowe leading backe his army, he intendeth to retourne home, chiefly, for that his ennemies haue inuaded Fraunce. As concerning the complaintes of the poore people, he is hartely ſory. Howbeit there can not be ſo good order taken in any Armie, but that licentiouſe ſoldiours wyll alwayes do ſome harme. Notwithſtanding he taketh moſte dilligent hede, that bothe as little harme be done as is poſſible, and alſo that offences be moſte ſtraytely punyſhed. Touchyng that whiche they wryte of the Emperour and of peace, he loketh certenly for at their handes. Through his paynes, force and dilligence, Germany is releaſed from thoſe miſeries, wherewith it laye oppreſſed. Nowe muſt they well forſee, that they doe not diſhoneſtly loſe theyr libertie, by hym reſtored. For theyr requeſt touchynge them of Straſburge, he can not ſaye them naye, not withſtanding, that what tyme he was there with his army, ye ſoldiours of that citie vſed great preſumption and arrogancie towardes his men. Whan the king was entred into Germany,

the Emperours power of the low countreis, by the conduict of Martin van Roſſem ſpoyleth Chāpanye. Marten Roſſeme, inuaded Champaignie in Fraunce, burning and deſtroying all before them, and toke the towne of Aſteney, ſtanding by the Ryuer of Maſe, belonging to the Duke of Loraine, but lately ſurpryſed by ye Frenchemē. This was thought to be one cauſe, why the kyng retourned with his armie, another, for that he miſliked Duke Maurice doinges, and againe, for that his hope failed hym at Straſburge. Whan he had remoued from Wiſſeburge, Ambaſſadours came to the kyng, ſent The ſuite of the Swiſſes to the Kyng. from all the Swiſſes. King Ferdinādo hath a Region ioyning to the Heluetians, called Sontgouia. And they of Enſeme are the chiefeſt of all that countrey, who being afrayde of their partes, had intreated the Swiſſes, that for the aucthoritie and fauour that they had with the kyng, they would make interceſſion for them. Wherfore at their requeſt and charges takynge their iourney, they commended to the king alſo the cities nere vnto the ſame, Colmar, Seletſtat, and Straſburg, ſaying how this countrie was linked vnto them in great amitie, both for the nerenes therof, and alſo chiefly for that they ſerue them in a maner of all their wheat, ſo muche as to them is nedefull, ſo that no diſpleaſure can be done to them, whiche they ſhall not feele alſo. Unto whome the kyng maketh aunſwer the .xx. daye of May beſides Bipont. Howe he doth forgeue them of Enſem ſo that they wyll releaſe ſuche of his ſoldious, as they haue priſoners. As touching the reſte, for whome they ſpake, he neuer ment them euill. And albeit that the ſouldiours of Straſburg receiued his men ſomwhat roughly before the gates, and put them back that came thither to bie thinges, yet wil he not forſake their amitie therfore, euen for their ſakes that intreate & be meanes for them. Nowe that he poſſeſſeth Lorayne, he ſhall be their nere neighbour, and wyll do nothing againſt the maner of neighbourhead. And loketh again for the ſame good wil and dutie of them alſo. There were before at Saberne, Ambaſſadours ſent to the king by ye Senate of Baſill about theſame matter, vnto whome alſo was made a gentle aunſwere. I ſhewed before of Duke Maurice, howe he departed from Lintz. Kyng Ferdinando alſo whan the conuention was done, went immediatly to the Emperour at Inſpruck, to infourme him of all the matter. And Duke Maurice retourning to the campe, marcheth with his fellowes toward Thalpes as before is ſaid. And whan he came almoſt there, by the perſwaſiō of the Frēch Ambaſſadour, he determined to ſet vpon the ſoldiours, whiche the Emperour had leuied in thoſe partes. And where as ye. xvii

daye of Maye he was not far from Fieſſa, which is a towne ſituated at the entring vp to the Alpes, by the ryuer of Leyche, he ſendeth forth eſpialles, to vnderſtande of the ennemie. They all in a maner bryng worde, howe they kepe the ſtraytes and narrow paſſages of the moūtaines, and haue ſo fortified themſelues, that they can be hurt by no meanes. Wherfore the Princes ſende forth certen horſemen, choſen out of the whole nomber, whiche riding almoſte to their ennemies campe, intercept diuerſe, and bring them away to the Princes. By whome they vnderſtande many thynges, and the next daye marching forewarde Skirmyſhes of ye Princes with ye in Eperialles. with their fotemen, and hauing with them but two hō
               dreth horſemē only, they go to Fieſſa. And what time thei were not farre of Rewe, they come vnto the ſtraytes whiche were kept by the Emperours ſoldiours to the nomber of eight hondreth, and with two field peces. Upō whom geuing the charge whan they were once entred into ye ſtraytes, ouerthrowe their ennemies, who ſlipping away by flight, made them that incā
               ped at Rwe, to feare and tremble. The Princes purſuing with ſpede, geue charge vpon thē alſo, & finally put them to flight. Wherof a thouſand wer taken, and ſlayne, and drowned, in the Ryuer of Leych: And loſt alſo one enſeigne. The next morning they go to the Caſtell of Erenberge, wherof we haue ofte made mention. And whan as fortune would, they had taken the fortreſſe, ſtanding vnderneth the caſtel, and had wonne the ſtraite wayes and paſſages, and had moreouer ſurpriſed diuerſe peces of great ordenaūce furniſhed, they clyme vp the ſtepe & pitchell hill vnto the caſtell, and albeit they were layde at with many Erenberge take agayne weapons, yet toke they it by ſurrender. There were in the caſtell .xiii. enſeignes of fotemen: Wherof .ix. were taken, and. iiii eſcaped, of the whiche thre were of Germaines, and one of Italians. And they that were taken, were about thre thouſand, where they loſt but fewe of their owne men. After that, was Rebelliō, in D. Moris cāp Duke Maurice in great daunger. For whan he woulde haue marched forewarde, the ſoldiours that were vnder Riſeberge, would not, vnleſſe they might haue an extraordinary paye for the wynning of the caſtell. But Duke Maurice ſayd that was no reaſon, and commaunded with al, to apprehēde a ſeditious felowe that was more clamorouſe than the reſt. There all the reſt make towardes him not only with their pykes, but alſo Duke Morisuye ſlayne. with their handgunnes, in ſo muche, that with moſte ſpedy flighte, he could hardely ſaue his life. The .xxi. day of May two legions were ſent by the Alpes to Inſpruck, whiche was from thence two dayes iourney. Al the horſemen were left with one

legion of fotemen about Fieſſa and Rwe, to defende and kepe the paſſage. The next daye Duke Maurice & his felowes Princes followyng after, ioyne with the army of fotemen, at Zirley, whiche is not two great myles from Inſprucke. But when the Emperour heard that Ereberge was wonne, he departed ſodenly in the night awaye from Inſprucke, with his brother The Empe. ſleeth away by nyght. Ferdinādo, who was lately come thither to perſwade a peace, as I ſayd before, and through the Alpes, as they go to Trente, tourning on the left hande he came to Uillace a towne in Carnia, by the Riuer of Draue, whan he had a little before ſet at libertie Iohn Friderick, Duke of Saxon, which had bene fiue yeres priſoner, leaſt his ennemies ſhuld aſcribe this vnto their The Duke of Saxon ſet at libertie. glorie, whiche thing in dede the priſoner alſo hym ſelfe woulde not. Whā he was at libertie, he followed the Emperour neuertheleſſe, whyther ſoeuer he went. In the ſelfe ſame tyme, quene Marie, the Emperours ſyſter helde an aſſemblee at Achen in lowe ducheland, to make a league with the princes about her. And the Duke of Cleaue in dede, excuſeth the matter by Ambaſſadours. But Adolphe, Archebiſhop of Collon comming thither entreth into league with the houſe of Burgſidy. Likewiſe doth the Byſhop of Luke, George of Auſtriche. Whan Duke Maurice came to Inſprucke, what thinge ſoeuer was founde The Empe. ſtaffe ſpoiled there of the Emperours, and of the Spaiardes, and the Cardinalles of Auſpurge, it was ſpoyled. But to kyng Ferdinandos and the citezens goodes, there was no harme done. And for ſo muche as there remayned but thre daies only, vnto the truce, whiche for the treatie of peace, was taken, as before is mentioned, Duke Maurice went from thence to Paſſawe. And the other Princes, Marching the ſame way they came ye .xxviii. day of May retourne to Fieſſa, and afterwarde by menſſengers as well, in their own, as in the name alſo of Duke Maurice, they publyſhe letters at Auſpurge, of this effect. In what ſorte ſaye they, ye ennemies of truthe, haue alwayes done their indeuour, that all Godly Preachers oppreſſed, the Romiſhe idolle might be reſtored, and that the yought being brought vp in thoſe errours and falſe opiniōs might by litle and litle increaſe in the ſame, that thing is ſo manifeſt, that it nedeth no further demō
               ſtration. For euen at the ſame time, whan they did not ſticke to proteſte that they ſought not Religion, they wrought with all their force that the pure doctrine might be cleane roted out. For they did not only caſte the Godly preachers in pryſon, but Crueltie againſt godly preachers. in this citie alſo compelled them by an othe, & with great vngentlenes, that they ſhould departe out of the limites of the

Empire. And albeit that ſame othe was very wicked, and therfore is grounded vpon no lawe nor reaſon, yet, leaſt any ſclaunder might aryſe, we haue called home agayne thoſe ſelfe ſame preachers and ſcholemaiſters, whiche our aduerſaries had exiled, thinking it our dutie ſo to doe. Wherfore all ſuche as after this ſorte were banniſhed, as before is ſayd, we do clerely releaſe from that bonde of othe, wherunto through force & violence, contrary to the lawes thei were bounde, and reſtore them vnto libertie, in ioyning them, that not only in this citie, but alſo in other places, according to their vocation, they teache Gods worde ſyncerely, according to the confeſſion here in tymes paſt exhibited, and rightly and godly bring vp yougth in learning, truſting vnto our defence and tuition. We cōmaunde alſo that no man moleſte them with wordes or iniuries, as though they ſhould do contrary to their faith geuen. For inaſmuche as not through their deſerte, but only for the profeſſion of the truthe, they haue liued many monethes in exile, we doubte not but all good men wyll lamente their chaunce, and accompte them worthy of all good wyll and fauour.
            And for as much as thoſe which in their abſence haue preached in this citie, be men ſuſpected and vnconſtant, inſomuch, that they may not conueniently be with theſe, that we haue called agayne, by reaſon of their contrarietie in teachinge, we require the Senate, to put them to ſilence, and ſo to demeane them ſelues, that this decree of ours may ſtande in ful ſtrēgthe and authoritie. Whan the Princes had thus proclaimed the ſeuenth day of Iune, the fift day after, they reſtore the miniſters The princes reſtore ye miniſters of ye churche. of the churche to their places, and geue them agayne authoritie to preache, to the great reioyſing & contentation of the people. Before Duke Maurice retourned from Lintz, Marques Albert going a parte with his armie, doeth much harme with ſpoyling and burning to Wuolfgang, maiſter of the Almaigne order, as they call hym, and whan he had exacted mony of him, inuadeth the countrie of Norinberge, and the fift day of May taketh by compoſition, Lightnaw, a caſtell of theirs, ſtandyng fiue myles from the citie, with the towne ioyning to the ſame. His armie was of two thouſand horſemen, and .xix. enſeignes of fotemen. The nexte daie ſending his letters to them of Norinberge, The Marq. Albertes armie. albeit the Frenche king ſaieth he, and the Princes cō
               federated, haue declared by wrytinge ſufficiently, and at large what they thought of the common wealth, and how thei were bent to recouer the libertie of Germany, and Religiō alſo, vpō hope and confidence that all good men with wylling myndes,

woulde not only imbrace this their enterpryſe, but would alſo with all their force and indeuour further theſame, whiche many haue done in dede: yet haue you neyther declared what your mynde and pourpoſe is, nor as I heare, haue ſent no Ambaſſadours to the aſſemblee appointed at Auſpurge, but prepare all thinges for defence, plantyng your ordenaunce here & there on your walles and Bulwarkes, and hiring force of ſoldiours, make auaunt, that you wyll perſeuer to the vttermoſte extremitie, as I am credible informed, and it maketh me to beleue it the more, for that hetherto you haue ſent no Ambaſſadours to me for peace. Whiche ſome notwithſtandinge haue done, bothe Princes and Cities further of. Where therfore the ſame wryting, of the kyng and Princes confederated, doth manifeſtly declare, that ſuche, as either ſhall reſiſte this enterpryſe of theirs, or not further theſame, ſhall be taken as ennemies. And againe, for ſo muche as I am adioyned to the ſame warre, to the ende to bryng all thoſe, in whoſe limites I come, to do their dutie, and to leaue behynde my backe no fortified place, out of the whiche any force or ſaleinge out is to be feared, therfore haue I taken from you, whiche as yet haue not ſatiſfied my expectation, the caſtell of Lightnaw, whiche was a great annoyaunce to my campe, preſeruing the ſouldiours of the garriſon, whome neuertheleſſe I might haue otherwyſe vſed. But bycauſe the chief thing yet remaineth, I require you both in the Frenche kinges name and my fellowes, that you wyll make a direct aunſwer, what you are purpoſed to doe for the defence of the libertie of Germany, and for the ſtabliſhyng of Religion, and let me vnderſtande it tomorrowe, that I may knowe, what thyng is to be loked for of you, and in what ſorte I ought to accept you. Howbeit, what tyme Duke Maurice and his fellowes were at Schwinfurte, whiche was the .xxvi. daye of Marche, as before is ſayde, they demaunded of them of Norinberge, faith, ſocietie, munition, vitayle, & a great ſomme of monie. But after muche debating, all other conditions omitted, what tyme they had paied them an hondreth thouſand crownes, they promyſed them peace as well for them ſelues as their fellowes, by letters deuiſed in moſte ample wyſe.
            Nowe therfore what tyme Marques Albert aſſayled them, they make complainte to them. And bycauſe Duke Maurice was not yet retourned from Lintz, the Lantgraues Sonne wrytynge to them agayne the thyrde daye of May, from Gundelfynge, byddeth them be of good comforte,

And the fift day after whan Duke Maurice was retourned, they wryte both, & promiſſe to kepe conuenauntes, ſaying that this acte of the Marques is cleane beſides their expectation, neither do they like it, but will do all their indeuour, that they may recouer their own, & wyll alſo call back immediatly ſuche ayde as they haue lent him. Whan they of Norinberge had receiued the letters of Marques Albert, they wrote againe the ſame day, ſignifiyng what thing Duke Maurice and the princes had promiſed them by compoſition, and ſaie how that was the cauſe, that they ſent no Ambaſſadours to him. Wherfore they earneſtly pray and beſeche hym that he wyll reſtore fully the caſtell taken, and gratifie his fellowes herein. Thre dayes after he wrote againe: For ſo muche as he doth not know, how they haue compounded with them, and yet it concerneth the Frenche king very muche, vnto whome he is no leſſe addicted than to the others, he requireth to haue ſaufeconduicte for a credible man of his, whome he wyll ſende into their citie, to ſe the inſtrument of their accorde. They followe his mynde, and let him ſe it. But he neuertheleſſe, although Duke Maurice & his fellowes were meanes and diligently intreated him to the contrary, the .xi. daye of May, wryteth to them againe. And in the Frenche kinges name eſpecially doeth charge them, that within a fewe houres they would aunſwer him playnely, whether they wyll be obedient. And where he receiued not, ſuche aunſwer as he would, the towne and caſtell of Lightnawe he ſpoyleth, burneth, ouerthroweth and maketh euen with the grounde. And whan he had exacted mony of the townes men, he cauſed them to ſweare to be true ſubiectes to hym & to his coſin George Friderick, alſo Marques of Brandenburg, and beſegeth the citie. Wherfore the the Lantgraues ſonne calleth agayne by and by two guidons of horſemen whiche he let hym haue againſt Woulfgange, the maiſter of the order, and commaundeth to come vnto him, wherwith he was ſore offended. He attempted therfore cruell warre, and whan he had burned and ſpoyled an hondreth villages in their dominiō, and about Albertes crueltie to them of Normberg. thre ſcore and ten maners and fermes of the citezens, and the churches alſo, he ſetteth on fyre moreouer an exceading great wood that they had, whiche ſerued not them only, but alſo other inhabiters therby of tymber and firewood, and burned therof aboue thre thouſand acres. And he had before this proclaymed open warre to all others, there aboutes that wold not obeye, both of the nobilitie and others, but chiefly to ye Byſhop of Bamberge, and of Wirtemburg, whome alſo in this caſe he

droue to moſte vnreaſonable conditions. And verely the biſhop of Bamberge, to ſaue hymſelfe and his prouince from preſent Bamberge redemeth peace dearelye. daunger, bought peace of him for wonderful loſſes. For he was fayne to geue him .xx. townes & ſignories within his iuriſdiction, & made hym wrytinges of the ſame, the .xix. daye of May, and alſo permitteth him to haue all his wardes and clientes. And the Byſhop of Dirtemburge payde hym two hondreth & twenty thouſand crownes, and alſo taketh vpon hym and promyſeth to paye his debtes, whiche amounted to the ſumme of thre hondreth and fiftie thouſand crownes. The cities of Sweuia hauing compaſſion of this vnworthie and lamentable fortune of the Norinbergians, whiche were lately aſſembled at Auſpurge (as before is ſayd) to the nomber of .xxvi. by Ambaſſadours choſen out of the whole nomber, make interceſſion, eſpecially they of Auſpurge. And whan they were come by ſaufecō
               duicte to Norinberge, alledging many reaſons, they exhorte them to peace, and tell them of the takyng of the ſtrayte paſſages in the Alpes, and of the caſtell of Erenberge, and declare that the ſtate both of Hongarie and Italie is ſuche, that there can be no ayde nor ſuccour loked for of any man. After they exhibite the condicions propounded by Marques Albert. They geue them thankes for their good wyll and paynes taken, and declare both howe the Marques hath no cauſe to war againſt them, and alſo what was treated with Duke Maurice & his felowes. And becauſe the conditions be ſuche, as partly they are not able to perfourme them, and partly can by no meanes be excuſed to the Emperour and kyng Ferdinando, they ſaye, they wyll abyde the extremitie, and commit the matter vnto God. For they knowe them ſelues ſo cleare, that they can be contented to be iudged herein not only by the Emperour, but by all other Princes alſo, yea by the next frendes & kinſfolkes of the Marques him ſelfe. Whan the interceſſours had reported theſe thinges agayne to the Marques, and had duely placed their wordes with termes apte and conuenient, and he not only relented nothing, but alſo threatened moſte cruell thynges. The fourth daye of Iune, they aduertiſe them by their letters, that his mynde is ſet all on crueltie, and howe they could not bring him to any more reaſonable conditions. And nowe the Marques ſhoteth of his ordenaunce into the citie, with much more violence, than before, and one night maketh the batterie, more ouer to put thē in the more terrour, he burneth one of the ſuburbes. And about the ſame tyme came into the Campe to hym George Thanberge, and William Schacthe, ſent as Ambaſſadours

from Duke Maurice, & the Lantgraues ſonne, to make peace. They, taking to them the Ambaſſadours of the cities, whiche being in diſpayre of the matter, were els mynded to departe, after a long & laborious treatie, at the length perſwade both partes, and conclude a peace. For the Marques has his armie lately augmented, by Iob Dalbeck and Chriſtopher Oldē
               burge, Norinberge hath peace with ye Mar. Erles, and Duke Maurice wryting his letters to the ſenate, ſignified that he was moſte greuouſly offended with this the Marques doinge, yet now could not remedie it. The condicions of peace were theſe. They ſhould paye two hondreth thouſand crownes, and deliuer him ſixe great pieces of artyllarie, with all thinges furniſhed. They ſhould beare their fauour to the Princes confederated, as they of Auſpurg do. That he hym ſelfe ſhould againe reſtore ſuche thinges as he had taken from them. Wherfore about the .xx. day of Iune, was leuied the ſiege of the moſte famous and mightie citie in maner of all Germany, & beſt furniſhed of all thinges, but eſpecially moſte ſtrongly fortified. The Marques full of luſty courage by reaſon of thys lucky ſucceſſe, the .xx. daye of Iune, wryteth letters to them of Albert to thē of Wolmes. Woulmes out of his campe. Wherin was conteined, howe the Norinbergians, to their exceading great hinderaunce, by hym vanquiſhed, had receiued conditions of peace, & would do what ſo he and his fellowes ſhall cōmaunde them. Nowe therfore is he determined to beſege them alſo, but far otherwyſe, & muche more ſtreightly, than he did of late. And if fortune fauour his pourpoſe, he will ſpare no mankinde, that is paſt ſeuen yeares olde, except thei retourne in time, and immediatly ſending Ambaſſadours, do fully ſatiſfie him and his league frendes, and alſo make their purgation of their rebellion lately committed. And what they wyll doe herein, he cōmaundeth them to ſende playne worde, by the brynger of theſe letters. Unto the whiche letters they aunſwer briefly, that whyleſt they be ſaufe, and ſo longe as they haue lyfe, they wyll doe no ſuche thynge as he demaundeth.
            The Frenche king paſſing out of Germany, with his army deuided in thre partes, came at the laſt to Walderfing, whiche is a litle towne of the dutchie of Lorayne by ye Riuer of Sare. There vniting his armie, the .xxv. day of May, marching forth and paſſing ouer the riuer of Moſel, what tyme he came into ye 
               The Frēche king deſtroyeth Themperour coūtrie. lande of Lutcemburg, he diſtroied all before him with ſpoiling and burning, prouoked by the example of Roſſeme, as they thē ſelues reporte, and recouereth the towne of Aſteney, voyde of ſoldiours to defende it. For Marten Roſſeme was retourned

home. Againe pitching his tentes, he taketh a little towne by ſurrender called Danuillers, after that alſo Iueye, one of ye chiefeſt fortes there. In the ſame town was Count Manſfield Erneſtus, gouernour of the whole countrey, with the floure of the youth there with him. Al they were taken priſoners. Afterwarde was the towne ſpoyled of the outragious ſoldiours againſt the kinges will, as they reporte. Now let vs retourne to Duke Maurice. He, for to treate a peace, as I ſaid, was gone to Paſſa we. There he repeting the treatie that was at Lintz, the Thaſſemble at Paſſawe. firſt of Iune, propoūdeth & declareth al thinges more at large. There were themperours Ambaſſadours, kyng Ferdinando, Albert Duke of Bauier, the Byſhops of Saliſburge & Eiſtet, and of all the chief Princes of Germany, the Ambaſſadours alſo of Cleaue and of Wirtemberge, and many others beſides. He complaineth that the ſtate of thempire whiche chiefly ought to be The cōplain te of Prynces Elect. free, is gouerned by ſtraungers, that thauthoritie of the Princes Electours is deminiſhed, & that many things be done with out their aduiſe & knowledge. That certē thinges alſo are plucked away, & alienated frō thempire. Howe meanes are deuiſed, that thautoritie of electing thēperour may be takē from thē, in cōmon aſſemblies the Electours voices are in a maner neglected, that the priuate conuentions of the Electours, are for a certen feare omitted, and their liberties infringed, whyleſt the chamber imperiall receiueth thoſe, that appeale from thē, contrary to the auncient cuſtome. That the controuerſies of the ſtates Imperial are purpoſly maynteined, and be neuer accorded, before either partie haue ſuſteined loſſe and dammage. Howe in the Emperours courte a man can hardly be heard ſpeake, neyther is his matter exactly knowen, chiefly for that they vnderſtande not the tongue, and that there is muche loſſe not only of coſtes, but of tyme alſo: In open aſſemblies matters are handled nothyng frendly, and if any man propounde ought for the common wealth, it is taken in euyl parte. That Germany is ſore impoueryſhed and beggered with thoſe ofte and dayly conuentions, and at home oftentymes are many thynges neglected, and neyther yet is the publique ſtate any whyt amended, yea it is made worſe and more intricate. By ſtrayghte proclamations it is prohibited, that no man ſerue in foreyne warres. That ſuche as be reconciled, are bounde, that they ſhall not warre againſt the Emperours countrey, and ſo are plucked from the Empyre. In the Proteſtaūtes warre ſuch as ſerued their Lordes, according to their dutie, were puniſhed by the purſe, ſuch as in the ſame war remained in thēperours

frendſhyp, were commaunded to paye alſo, and that their landes and goodes ſhould be put to ſale, vnleſſe they payed immediatly, and their Ambaſſadours, bicauſe they did not by and by aſſent, were commaunded vnder paine of death, that they ſhuld not departe from the court. That foreine ſoldiours haue bene oftentimes brought into Germany, and the laſt warre beinge finiſhed, were diſtributed hither and thither into Prouinces, whiche haue done many thinges diſſolutely and vitiouſly, and haue gloried of the conqueſt of Germany, and haue ſayde, how it ſhould be annexed 
                  〈◊〉
                the Emperours patrimonie, and that in the head cities ſhould be buylded caſtelles and fortes. Howe muche ordenaunce and warlike munition, was, as it were in a mockerie, caried out of Germany into foreine nations. Howe diuerſe men, for a certen ambition, haue cauſed the armes of ye Princes of Germany to be ſet vpon ye gunnes which they made for themſelues, as though they had taken them from thē. How there be ſet forth bokes, & that with the Emperours priuilege, whiche ſounde to the great reproche and infamie of Germany, as though it were cōquered and brought in bondage. That in common aſſemblees, vnder the name of the Emperours prouinces, certen men were placed amonges the Princes and ſtates, and this to be wrought through ſecret deuiſes, that the nō
               ber being augmented, they may preuayle by the nomber of voices. Howe foure yeares paſt was ordeyned the iudgemēt of the chamber imperial, and lawes made by a very fewe, which wer after publiſhed, to the great hynderaunce of many, eſpecially of them, that be of the Proteſtauntes Religion. For all thoſe are vtterly excluded from that benche. Wherfore the thinge it ſelfe requyreth, that thoſe lawes be better ſkanned in the next conuention. Theſe and ſuche other lyke thynges he propoundeth, and for as muche as they chiefly concerne the Emperour, he requyreth that they be redreſſed out of hande, and that the Empyre be reſtored to the fourmer dignitie, and that others be not permitted to delude and contempne the ſame.
            The interceſſours conferring together, iudged nothinge amiſſe in theſe requeſtes. Howebeit to the intent, that both the Emperours dignitie ſhould be mainteined, and might ſo much more eaſely be perſwaded, they thynke, that many thynges, whiche concerne the reformation of the ſtate publique, may be ryght well differred tyll a generall conuention of the Empyre. There was preſent the French Ambaſſadour, Fraxineus: Who The oration of the Frenche Ambaſ. the thyrd daye of Iune made an oration before the Princes.

How betwene the Frenchemē and the Germaines, in old time, and before the name of Francons was knowen, there was ſo Tha
                     ••
                  nitie of Frēchmē and Germaines. great lykenes of life and maners, that ye Germains be theſame people, whiche the Romaines in times paſt called the brethren of the Frenchemen. But after that the Francons had planted them ſelues in Fraunce, both natiōs were ſo vnited, that there was one Empire, one Prince, and the ſame lawes for both. Afterwarde, whan an alteration chaunced, and that thempyre was deuolued to the Germains: The Dukes of Saxon & other Emperours, for that they had their originall of the kinges of Fraunce, had continual amitie with the Frenchmē, in ſo much that Philip king of Fraunce, cauſed ye auncient league, whiche could ſcant be read for the olde antiquitie therof, to be written out in goldē letters, and layd vp in an holyer place. And verely not without iuſt cauſe. For during that league of amitie, the cō
               mon wealth of either nation was in dede moſte floriſhing. And certenly the force of Germany was thā ſo great, that it preſcribed lawes, not only to the Hongarians, Bohemers, Poloniās, and Deanes, but alſo to the Italians. And ye kinges of Fraūce, for the maintenaunce of religion, haue warred many times againſt thennemies of Chriſtendom. The Saracenes & Turkes, both in Aſia. Affricke & Europe, and haue had moſte noble victories. But after chaunced a time more vnfortunate, whan certen Emperours as newly entred, and not very Germaines, nor worthy of ye dignitie, haue forſaken that amitie with ye kinges of Fraunce, and haue induced great calamitie to the common wealth. But this ſore plage, through Gods benefite, was healed by the noble houſe of the Dukes of Lutcemburg, out of the whiche haue iſſued certen Emperours, men of great vertue, & linked moſte aſſuredly to the kinges of Fraunce. For the father of themperour Charles the fourth, died in battell for the kyng of Fraunce. The like good will beare alſo the Princes of Auſtriche, amongeſt others Albert the firſte, who neither for promeſſe, nor threatening of the hyghe Byſhops, could be brought to warre againſt Fraunce. Theſe thynges he reciteth for this intent, that they may ſee, howe euell certen councellours and miniſters of the moſte puiſſaunt Emperour Charles the fyfte, prouyde for the common wealth, whyleſt they worke not thys thinge only, that they plucke a ſonder the one from the other, theſe two moſte excellent nations: but alſo through their craft and ſubtiltie haue brought this to paſſe longe ſynce, that the moſte noble Prince, kyng Fraunces, was iudged an ennemie, his cauſe not harde. This do they to their owne priuate gaine,

but to the exceading great hinderaſice of the cōmmon wealth. For how harde it were for them, during the amitie of the two nations to infringe the libertie of Germany, and to buylde vp that their kyngdome, it doeth hereof ſufficiently appeare, for The libertie of Germany reſtored by ye power of Fraunce. that they being nowe affrayde of the force of Fraunce, be not ſo importune as they were, nor doe not ſo muche vrge that Spanyſhe yoke and bondage. Theſe be verely they whiche by intreatie and tributes, obteyning peace of the Turke, vnder the colour of Religion, and obedience, haue brought in diſſentions and factions into Germany, who ayded with the power of Germaynes, haue warred againſt Germany, whiche haue exacted money of all men, and made the State of the Empyre miſerable, by placing here and there garriſons of Spanyardes by vnarmyng the armaries, and openyng the waye to confiſcation. For the matter is brought to that paſſe, that bothe the ſeale of the Empyre, and the iudgement of the chamber, and alſo the ryght and libertie of aſſemblies depende only vpon the pleaſure of the Byſhop of Arras. For what example is this or what equitie is it, that ſuche as to get their liuing ſerue in foreine warres ſhould be therfore executed, outlawed, and with great rewardes ſet forth? be in daūger of murtheryng, to omit in the meane ſeaſon ſo many murthers, lecherous actes, ſpoylynges and robbinges of townes, and eſpecially the handlyng of Religion, whiche hath not bene after one maner, but diuers according to the tyme. Certenly what ſo euer hath bene done theſe many yeares nowe, tendeth all to this ende: that, contrary to the lawes of the Empyre, kyng Ferdinando being herunto eyther compelled, or els by fayre promeſſes allured, the Prynces alſo by a certen feare and terrour ſubdued, the Prince of Spayne might be made Emperour. And ſhuld not noble courages The way opened for ye Prynce of Spayne to be Emper. wyſhe for death rather, than to beholde ye lyght of ye Sun in ſuche diſtreſſe and miſeries? Aſſuredly there can no man be imagined ſo very a coward or ſo barbarouſe, whō theſe thyngs would not moue. Wherfore no man ought to maruell, that in the ende ther ſhould arriſe ſome Princes, and amongeſt them Duke Maurice thelectour of Saxony, which thought it their parts euen with ye hazarde of their liues to recouer ye libertie of their natife coūtrie. And they, being of thē ſelues not able, nor of power ſufficiēt to ſuſtein ſuch a charge alone, haue deſired ye ayde of the king of Fraūce. And he doubtles ſetting a part ye diſpleaſure of former yeares, hath not only made thē partakers of al his fortunes, but hath alſo imploied him ſelfe wholy to the ſame buſines, making a league with them, wherein amongeſt

other thinges it is prouided, that thei may not cōpounde with the ennemie, but by the kinges conſent. Howbeit, Duke Maurice, although he be tied with that ſame bonde, yet, for ye weale of his countrie, and to followe the mynde of kyng Ferdinando requiring him hereunto, hath lately demaunded of the moſte chriſtian king, how he could be content to haue peace. Whiche thing chaunced vnto him in dede ſom what contrary to his expectation, for that, conſidering his benefite is ſo great, he ſuppoſed that in matters touching him, he ſhuld not haue ſent to him a far of, but to haue deuiſed with him preſently. Neuerthe leſſe becauſe he ſetteth much more by publique, thā by his own priuate profites, he would deny nothing to a Prince of his confederacie. Wherfore if the woundes of the cōmon wealth may be healed, as they ought, & from henceforth aſſuraunce made, yt they breake not out again, if the captine Princes may be releaſed, vpon ſuche conditions as be in the league expreſſed. Moreouer, in caſe the olde leagues of Fraunce with the Empire, and this new confederacie alſo made of late with the Princes, may ſo be confirmed, yt they may take place for euer, if theſe thines, I ſaye, may be brought to paſſe, he is ſo well affected towardes the common wealth, that not only he wyll aſſent gladly to the treatie of peace, but alſo wyl giue God hartie thākes, that his aduiſe and helpe hereunto hath not wanted. As touching his priuate matters, for ſo much as the Emperour deteineth many thinges by force, and hath made warre vpon no iuſt cauſe, the king thinketh it reaſon, that he ye hath firſt done wrong, ſhould firſt ſeke alſo to make ſatiſfactiō. He verely, althoug he neither diſtruſte his force nor yet his cauſe, will ſo demeane him ſelfe, yt it may be well perceyued both how deſirous of peace he is, and how willing alſo to gratifie Duke Maurice & them all. Hereunto the Princes aunſwere. Howe that recitall of antiquitie repeted of fourmer memory, cōcerning the coniūctiō of Fraūce The princes aunſwer his oration. and Germany was to them right ioyfull, and no leſſe pleaſaūt to heare, that the kyng preferreth the common wealth aboue his priuate cōmodities, and is not againſt, but that the Princes confederate may conclude a peace with the Emperour. For that it ſhould ſo be, it is for the profite, not only of one nation, but alſo of all Europe, whiche afflicted with ciuil diſcorde, ten deth to diſtruction. And ſuche conditions of peace, as the kyng requyreth, they doubte not but that they may be obteyned. For the Emperour both before this tyme, and alſo in this trouble thinketh well of the common wealth, and wyll not haue the libertie of Germany deminiſhed. There is good hope moreouer

that he wyll ſhortly delyuer the captiue Princes. But that both the olde leagues ſhould be renewed and the newe confirmed, the king of his wyſdome vnderſtandeth, that in this ſame conuention ſo great a matter can not be finiſhed. Neuertheles they wyſhe vnfainedly, that the ſame amitie, which hath bene alwayes betwene bothe nations may remayne ferme and vnuiolable. That ſuche priuate ſuites as he hath with the Emperour, myght be appeaſed, they both couet chiefly, and alſo wyll refuſe no paynes and trauell therin. And where as the kyng affirmeth that the Emperour deteineth diuerſe thinges that ar his and ſignifieth plainly, that he hath thinges to lay clayme to, they thinke it not againſt reaſon that he ſhewe, what thing that is. For they are mynded to preferre the controuerſie to the Emperour, & be as meanes therin. And they deſire very much, that the kyng would accept theſe thinges in good part. Nowe as concerning the alliaunce betwene the Germaynes & Frēche men, I haue ſpoken in the eight booke. And that whiche the Frenche Ambaſſadour ſpeaketh here of the houſe of Lutcemburge, The houſe of Lucēburg thus it ſtandeth. The Erle of Lutcemburge Henry, had a ſonne named Henry, whiche was after made Emperour, the ſeuenth of that name, he had a ſonne Called Iohn, whiche by mariage was made king of Boheme. Who aided Philip Ualoſe the Frenche kyng, againſt the kyng of Englande Edwarde the third, goyng hym ſelfe with hym to the fielde, and the battell The battell of Creſſie. being foughten, where the Engliſhmen had the victory, he was ſlayne, and amonges others, lefte a ſonne called Charles, whiche afterwarde was made Emperour, the fourthe of that name, father to Wenceſlaus and Sigiſmunde, whiche were after both Emperours, and this Sigiſmunde alſo kyng of Hongary and Boheme, the procurer of the counſell of Conſtance. Albert of Auſtriche of whome he ſpeaketh, the ſonne of Raffe the Emperour, whan he was Emperour he obſerued perfit amitie Albert of Auſtriche. with Philip le beau kyng of Fraunce, notwithſtanding that the Byſhop of Rome Boniface the eight, did wonderfully incenſe him vnto warre. Duke Maurice beſydes the deliueraunce of his father in lawe, vrged two thynges chiefly. One, that of ſuche matters, as annoyed the libertie of Germany, & the whiche he hym ſelfe had recited by name, kyng Ferdinando Maximiliā his ſonne, and the interceſſours themſelues, ſhuld nowe forthwith examine, and according to the lawes and cuſtome of Germany, determine the ſame. Another was that peace myght be graunted to Religion, and that no man ſhould he moleſted therfore tyl ſuche tyme as the whole cōtrouerſie were

fully reconciled. This way did not thinterceſſours diſcōmend: but themperour by his Ambaſſadours declareth, what lacke he findeth therin, & thought it reaſon, that thoſe which had bene faithfull to him, and therfore had chaunced into extreme miſerie, ſhould be firſt recompēſed their loſſe. After much debating, what time diuerſe pointes were mittigated, they agreed at ye length, that the third day of July, the Emperour ſhuld anſwer directly, & that the war ſhould ceaſe in the meane time. Wherfore thinterceſſours wryting their letters the .xvi. day of June exhorte themperour vnto peace. Whan yt caſtel of Ereberg was taken, and afterwarde Inſpruck ſpoyled, I ſhewed you, howe the Princes, retorning through thalpes about thende of May came backe again to Fieſſa. And marching frō thence, the .xix. day of June, pitched their tentes at Eiſtet, which is ye Byſhops town, bordring vpon Bauier, and ther the whole army longed ſore for Duke Maurice cōming, not without great thought & carfulnes. Who comming thither at the length, ſheweth them in what caſe the matter ſtode: and the laſte daye of Iune, he retourneth from thence to Paſſaw by poſt horſes, that he might be there at the daye appointed, and his fellowe Princes remouing their campe, the next morning, the fourth day after came to Roteburg, whiche is a towne nere vnto Francony by the riuer of Duber. But Marques Albert neuertheleſſe purſued his enterpriſe, and hauing driuen the citie of Norinberge to make Marques Albert warreth for himſelfe. their peace, he compelled alſo the nobilitie and ſtates in theſe parties, to be at cōmaundement. For albeit he mainteined the common cauſe at the firſt, as in the writing ſet forth he profeſſed to do, yet was he not of the ſame league, and whā the ſiege of Ulmes was leuied, he went about his priuate affaires, whether it were for that he would wynne to hym ſelfe alone, what ſoeuer the chaunce of warre had geuen hym, or that he myſlyked Duke Maurice his doinge, or els moued by the Frenche kynge, was bent otherwyſe. Notwithſtanding thoſe that he toke the faith of he commaunded to perfourme the ſame fidelitie alſo to his felowes. Afterwarde inuading the prouince of the Arch
                  •
               biſhop of Mentz, by the Ryuer Meyne, doeth exceading muche harme with burning and ſpoyling, and demaundeth of hym a wonderfull ſumme of money. And where diuers made interceſſion, neither yet could thei agree vpō the ſumme. The Archebyſhop, fyrſte ſynkynge hys great Artylarie in the Rhyne, the fyrſte daye of Iuly fled awaye, to ſaue hym ſelfe.
            The ſelfe ſame tyme alſo, Marques Albert, whiche lefte nothynge vnattempted, wylleth the Archebyſhop of Treuers

to deliuer vnto him the chiefeſt caſtell of his dominion, whiche is ſituated, where the Riuers of Rhine and Moſell mete, vpon an hyghe hyll, naturally ſtrong, and very commodious. And he ſayd, howe he required this of him in the Frēche kynges name. He, after he had conferred with his counſell, ſent him worde yt he could not accomplyſhe his requeſt herein. For as muche as the Princes interceſſours in the latter part of their aunſwere that they made to the Frenche Ambaſſadour (as before is mentioned) ſayd howe they thought it reaſon, that the kyng ſhould declare what he required of the Emperour. The Ambaſſadour, by the kyng aduertiſed, whan he was with the armie beſydes Eiſtet, the .xix. daye of Iune, wryteth to them agayne, how the kyng hath attempted this war, for none other cauſe doubles, The Frēche kinges aunſwer to thin terceſſours. but to profit the whole common wealth, and chiefly to reſtore the libertie of Germany ſore opreſſed, what tyme certen Prynces had long and muche requeſted hym to the ſame. And aſſuredly ſought no priuate gayne to him ſelfe therein, and that may the thing it ſelfe beare witnes. For he had taken nothyng at al in Germany, where it had not bene harde for him to haue done. He permitted the Princes alſo to warre frely as they liſt. And albeit that in the meane tyme that he hymſelfe laye ſtyll with his armie by the Riuer of Rhine, his ennemies had inuaded Fraunce, yet did he not once remoue tyll he was aduertiſed by Duke Maurice, that ſuche thinges myght be obteyned by peaceable meanes, for the whiche this warre was attempted. Whiche thing knowen, he was not a litle glad, whan he ſawe the thinge procede, after their hartes deſire. For his aduiſe and counſell was, firſt that the Princes ſhould not neglect, ſo goodly an occaſion as this was, neither diſceiue them ſeluws, or by others be abuſed, as they were before. Moreouer, for ſo muche as he had ſhewed ſo notable a token of his good wyl and fidelitie, that the amitie of both nations might aſſuredly be eſtabliſhed, to thintent that he himſelf may afterwardes haue better leaſure to ſe vnto other cōmodities of the cōmon wealth: And becauſe Duke Maurice hath demaunded of him, in what ſorte he would be accorded, this is his opinion, that he ſayth howe ye Emperour moued warre againſt him without any iuſt cauſe. And the kinges of Fraunce be not wont to deſire peace of their ennemy, eſpecially of ſuche one, as neither in power nor other thing they be inferiours to. Now to propounde any thing (vnleſſe there were certen hope to obteine yt ſame) he ſeeth no cauſe why. And as touching them ſelues he ſuppoſeth, that they wil require nothing of him, but that may ſtande with his honour

and dignitie. And he ſo loueth them againe, and ſo eſtemeth them, that in caſe he may ſe them treate the cōmō peace of the whole worlde, he would for their ſakes geue ouer a great parte of his right. And is contented alſo, that they ſhall bothe heare and determine his requeſtes, ſo that the Emperour refuſe not to doe likewyſe, and wyſheth greatly that for the ſame cauſe, there might ſome conuention be had as ſone as might be. And if it may ſo be, than ſhall all men vnderſtande, both how much he loueth the common wealth, and alſo howe farre from the truthe are thoſe thinges, whiche are bruted of him by his aduerſaries, cōcerning the Turkiſhe league. But if theſe thinges can take no place, and that all conſultations be referred only to his diſcretion, neither can obteine that league of amitie with the Germaines whiche by good deſerte he loked for, the blame ought not to be imputed to him, if there chaūce further trouble to ariſe. Theſe letters were red before the Princes the firſt day of Iuly. Whan Duke Maurice was come to Paſſawe at the day, on the morowe was brought the Emperours aunſwere to king Ferdinando. Than he whan the Princes were ſet ſayd, howe the Emperour in dede had written his mynde, but did not aſſente to many thinges. And for ſo muche as it is ſo, it is not nedefull to declare expreſſely, what thing he hath aunſwered to the reſt. Neuertheleſſe to thintent it may appere, how greatly he himſelfe deſireth peace, and howe well he wyſheth vnto Germany, he wyll go with great expedition to the Emperour, doubting not but that he ſhall perſwade him. Wherfore he deſireth erneſtly, that Duke Maurice woulde be content to expect ſo long as he may goe and come, whiche ſhall not paſſe eight daies at the moſte. Whiche thing when he refuſed immediatly, the king was very importune: But that was in vayne, and Duke Maurice calling vnto him the Princes and Ambaſſadours ſaith, how they them ſelues know right well, whiche haue bene preſent and priuie to all doinges for the ſpace of a D. Maurice weary of delayes. moneth, that he hath lefte nothing vndone, that he might eyther by ſtudy or trauel, worke to conclude a peace. And doubted not but yt they wolde aſſuredly witneſſe wt him the ſame. Wher fore he requireth them, yt they would ſtill beare him their good will, & helpe to further the cōmō cauſe of Germany, for he may graunte no further reſpite, for this long treatie is had in ſuſpition of his fellowes already. Wherunto, whan they had made a gentle aunſwer, cōmending his good will, they deſire king Ferdinando, that he in themperours name would make a playne determination. For they ſuppoſe that what ſoeuer he did, the

Emperour would confirme and ratifie. Unto this Ferdinando anſwered, that his brother had geuen him no ſuch authoritie. For than would he not take ſo muche paines to trauell to and fro: For he might in no wyſe paſſe the bōdes by him preſcribed. I ſhewed you before how the Princes that were interceſſours, by their letters wrytten the .xvi. day of Iune, exhorted themperour to peace. Unto the whiche letters the laſt of Iune thempe The Empe. letters to the interceſſours rour anſwereth from Uillace. How from the time he firſt receiued the crowne imperiall, he hath euer deſired peace, yea and now wiſheth for nothing els. Wherfore there is no cauſe that they ſhould cōmend the ſame ſo greatly to him, but vnto them, whiche be thauthours of theſe cōmotions. And that thei wold ſo do, he requireth thē by the faith, they owe vnto him. As touching his owne priuate affaires, he will for their ſakes graunt very muche. And concerning the whole pacification, he hathe wrytten his minde to his brother king Ferdinando, of whome they ſhall heare al thinges. Unto the which letters they write Their aunſwer to the Emperour. againe the fift day of Iuly, what time king Ferdinando returned to the Emperour. Howe thei at his requeſt and deſire came firſt vnto this treatie, and ſo muche the rather, for that he promiſed to doe any thing for the commō wealthes ſake. And how they haue through their exceading great labour, carefulnes, & diligence, founde out the way of peace. Wherfore they beſeche him eftſones, & that moſte intierly that he would haue ſome reſpect to the cōmon countrie. Many, and the chiefeſt ſtates of thempire, keping their faith vnto him, haue already ſuſteined great calamitie, and nowe the condicion of thinges is ſuche, & the occaſion of deliberation to be had, ſo brief, that the other Princes & ſtates, eſpecially ſuche as are nere the fire, although they would neuer ſo faine perfourme vnto him al faith and loialtie, yet can they not ſo do, no they are conſtreined to conſult by what meanes they may ſpedely eſche we the preſent calamitie and diſtructiō. And in caſe he refuſe peace, intēding to make warre, there wyll doubtles moſte greuouſe and perillous alterations arriſe therof in Germany, whiche afterwarde wyll redounde to his prouinces alſo. Wherfore ther were nothing better, than that he would content him ſelfe with the conditions of peace, whiche they wyth ſo great trauell haue procured, eſpecially, ſince ye chiefeſt pointes were firſt approued at Lintz, the fourme and foteſteppes of the whiche treatie they haue followed herein. Againe for as muche as all ſuche thinges, whiche properly concerne his dignitie are pourpoſly referred to the cō
               uention of thempire, to the ende they may there more gently &

quietly be treated. The ſame day, wherin this was done, Duke Maurice departeth thence, and whan he was come to his fellowes D. Maurice retourneth to his fellowes. the .xi. day of Iuly, which that tyme incamped at Mergetheme, he ſheweth them, what is done, and ſaith howe kyng Ferdinando is ryden in poſte to the Emperour, and ſuppoſeth that very ſhortly he will ſende of his counſellours, whiche ſhal bring a full and determinate aunſwer. And in this doubtfull ſtate of thinges, leaſt they ſhould ſit ſtil and do nothing, and bycauſe there was at Franckefurt a garriſon of the Emperours of .xvii. enſeignes of fotemen, and a thouſand horſemen, at the leading of Conrade Hanſteyne, ſo that they of Heſſebye were in no ſmall daunder, they condeſcended to goe thither. Wherfore whan they had done much harme to Woulfgange, Maiſter of Pruſſe, by burning and ſpoiling his countrie, where they were at the ſame time, marching forwarde through the lande of the Archebyſhop of Mentz, the .xvii. day of Iuly they come to Frācfurt. But the Princes & interceſſours and Ambaſſadours, ſent immediatly after Duke Maurice and his fellowes into theyr campe Ambaſſadours, whiche might mollifie their myndes & perſwade thē to peace. During the whiche ſiege, George Duke of Megelburge, adioyned vnto Duke Maurice, euen he which firſt of all men moued warre againſt them of Maydenburge, was ſlayne with a great piece. What tyme they began firſte to George Du. of Megelbu. ſlayne. beſiege Franckfurt, the Princes confederated deſyre a great quātitie of batteryng pieces of the Paulſgraue Electour, who ſayeth them nay ones or twyſe: But whan he myght none otherwyſe choſe, and they threatened to come with their whole armie, he gaue them eight of the beſt he had, with all their furniture. Kyng Ferdinando retourning to Paſſawe at the daye, which was the .xiii. day of Iuly, declareth to the interceſſours what the Emperours mynde was in euery thyng.
            Uerely that the matters concerning the Empyre, whiche I ſayde before Duke Maurice had propounded, ſhoulde not be Conditions of peace offered by the Emperour. heard of certen commiſſioners ſeuerally, but of all men in generall in the whole aſſemblee of the Empyre. Agayne that the cauſe of Religion ſhould quietly remayne vnto the next conuention of the Empire. In the which conuention, that which ſhall ſeme good to be done therin from henceforth by the common aduiſe of the ſtates, the ſame to be cōfirmed and ratified. Themperour alſo ye .xi. day of Iuly anſwereth thinterceſſours to their laſt letters, yt like as they haue by their letters ſo hath his brother king Ferdinādo treated wt him diligently to accept

And he in dede would gladly haue pleaſed both parts, but he is for diuers cauſes letted, whiche he declareth to his brother: for it lieth not in him to cōfirm & approue al things indifferētly: and wher by thoccaſion of this cōmotion, diuers, without al deſert are fallē into much calamity, yt is he as ſory as one man liuing: yet hath not the ſame chanced through confidence in him, which put no mā in that hope, wherunto he ſhuld truſt: For although he ſēt vnto certen chief princes, yt they ſhuld remedy this euil growing, at the beginning of yt tumult, promiſing thē al his indeuor, yet was not this his mindē therfor, yt whatſoeuer ſhuld be propoūded, he wold alow ye ſame: for ſuch things as cōcern the hole Empire, he thinketh reſō they ſhuld be referd to the publik aſſēblies: at the which time verely if any mā ſhal bring forth any iuſt cōplaint of him, he wil not fail to do his duty, which verely he hath not omitted hitherto: For ſith as yet there hath no ſuch requeſt ben brought vnto him, which neuertheles ought to haue ben done, before war had ben attēpted, he could not cō
               iecture, what thing ſhuld be required of him, much les geue inſtructiōs to his ambaſſadors ſēt to Paſſaw, what thei ſhuld anſwer to euery poynt, which in dede for thoffice & dignity of his perſon, he intēdeth to do him ſelf preſētly: wher therfor he aloweth not al things yt many perauenture go about to perſwade him to, ther is no cauſe why any mā ſhuld reprehend this in him: but thoſe yt be interceſſors ought rather to perſwade & exhort thē to reſonable & moderat condiciōs: eſpecially ſince they ſe, how he doth hardly at the leaſte, & not before he is of neceſſity cōſtraind, attempt war, which he intendeth not to folow now nether, if he may chuſe, and in caſe they cā deuiſe ſome reaſonable & conuenient way of peace: And ſeing the caſe ſtā
               deth thus, his truſt is, yt they wil declare all fidelity to him rather, being their chief magiſtrate, than that they ſhuld geue ear to ſuch, as contrary to theyr duty, haue made league with theyr ennemies, and raiſed vp cōmotions: he perceiueth, and is not ignoraunt what euils approche neare, whan both armies are brought forth to ioyn in battel, and is exceadingly moued with the loſſes of the common weale, & chiefly, of thinnocent people, & therfore minedeth peace, as he hath done alwaies, and wil refuſe no condition reaſonable: and it is not to be aſcribed vnto him, that in the mean ſeaſon, whileſt he conſulted of the condicions ſēt vnto him at ii. ſeueral times, certen ſtates ſuſteind great loſſes: For ther was a truſe al the time of the interceſſion: and wheras, during the ſame time, the Marques Albert afflicted diuers, ye coulde not he do withall: For euen from the beginning was he euer againſt the treatye of peace? Moreouer in anſwering the ſame, he neuer made any delay: And if they had perſeuered in the ſame way, which by thē was firſt propoūded, & afterward

altred, anſwer might haue bene much ſoner & more plainlye made, yea if they had not ſhronke from the treaty of Lintz, wherof they thē ſelues make mention, al things might haue ben concluded lōg ſince: wher therfor they ſe how he is minded towards ye commō
               welth, he earneſtly requireth them, that together with his brother Fernādo, vnto whō he hath opened him ſelf wholy, thei wold bring them to reſonable cōditions, & therin haue reſpect to the welth and dignity of thempire: for certenly he wil vſe the ſame lenity & peaceable wais frō henceforth that he hath done hitherto, for yt he abhorreth very much al ciuil war: but in caſe peace can not vpon theſe cō
               dicions be eſtabliſhed, he loketh for all fidelity of them, whyche are bounden to him. He anſwered than alſo by king Fardinando to the letters of the French ambaſſador, red vnto the Princes, as before is ſaid. How he had peace with the French king, which he obſerued diligently: And although he did many things arrogantly & proudly, yet hath he diſſembled the ſame for a common quietnes: but he, albeit he promiſed by his ambaſſador very largely, & pretended no ſuch thing, made war againſt him both by Sea and land, before he had proclaimed the ſame: How be it he hathe offered this condition all ready, that if Duke Moris, electoure, ſhould in his name bring any reaſonable conditions of peace, and to former actes agreable, he wold not refuſe them: but ther is no certen or determinate thing propounded, and this his drift, that wher he hath laid the blame of breaking the peace in him, he ſaith how the way of concorde muſte be ſet open by him alſo.
            Moreouer he ſeketh to purge him ſelf of the turkiſh confederacy, as though he had wrong done him: but al this is wholy forged: for if ye caſe ſhal ſo require, there may be brought to light & ſhewed the cōmentaries of Aremont, the frēch ambaſſador, wrytten at Cō
               ſtantinople Thambaſſadors commē
                  taries intercepted. for a memorial, and ſent to the king by one Coſte a cē
               turion, ther are forth comming alſo, and to be ſene the letters of the Turkes lieuetenant in Hongary, ſent at this time to the Princes confederated & others but intercepted, wherby it appeareth euidētly, yt he was the cauſer of the hurt, that the Turkiſhe nauye did the laſt yere, and motioned alſo that the like might haue ben done this ſame yere, and that he is right ſory, that ther is no more harm don. To be brief, that is his intente and purpoſe, and the Emperours of Turkes alſo, vtterly to vndoe him and his brother Ferdinando, to thintent they may afterward bring the whole common wealth, but chiefly Germany into extreme danger & diſtres: but how wel theſe thinges do agre with his fair promeſſes, and what care he taketh for the wealth of Germany, any man may eaſilye perceiue: For the thinge it ſelfe declareth what his minde is: For that the chiefeſt

ſtates of thempire wer this yere ſore vexed & afflicted, and vtterly diſtroid, that many others wer in moſt pearil & danger, yt through the help of the Germains, that linketh thē ſelues with him, certain places of thempire wer brought into his tirannical power, and are nowe by him alſo fortified, the whole blame is to be aſcribed vnto him: ſeing therfore that the caſe ſtandeth thus, he cannot ſee what credit may be geuen to his ambaſſadors letters vtterly forged, and fained: and in dede after his opiniō it had ben much better to haue reiected the ſame, than to haue receiued any ſuch kinde of anſwer: and if they conſider al thing diligently, he douteth not but they ſhal perceiue, what he by his ambaſſador intendeth & goeth about: and forſomuch as that ſame wryting maketh not for this preſēt treaty, he thinketh it nothing nedeful to anſwer any more to the ſame. About the xiiii. of Iuly, king Ferdinando, ſente Henrye of the noble houſe of the Plauians, Burgraue of Meiſſen, & chancelor of Boheme, vnto the camp before Frankfurt. Who cōming to duke Moris the xxiiii. of Iuly, after the matters wer a while debated, at the Duke Moris admitteth peace. laſt parſwadeth him to peace. Wherfore the laſt day of Iuly, cōtrary to many mens expectation, they concluded of the whole matter, as hereafter ye ſhal heare, amonges other reaſons which he had to perſwade, this was one alſo. Let him conſider with him ſelf, vnles he receiue the conditions, what danger he ſtandeth in, bothe of the Emperor, which hath now a puiſſant army, and alſo by the Duke of Saxon Ihon Fridericke, whome themperor hauinge inlarged will incontinently ſend home: Let the Lantzgraues ſonne alſo cō
               ſider into what pearill he ſhall bring both his father being priſonner, and alſo his whole prouince. The gunnes of the Paulſgraue elector, which he was conſtrained to lend them, as before is ſaide, whan the peace was made, wer receiued into the towne, leaſt they ſhould come into the hands of Marques Albert. In the monthe of Iuly the French king hauing taken certen townes of the Duchie of Lucemburge, as before is ſaid, brought his armye into Artois, The French king diſchargeth his army. but without any notable exploict done, to the end he might relieue his army from trauel and infection, diſchargeth his power, & him ſelf returneth home, hauing fortified ſuch places, as he had taken with garriſons & fortifications. Ouer al the which things he made gouernor the Duke of Guiſe, a Prince of great authority through out Fraunce. And he commaunded the Duches of Loraine widow to depart the country, which was neare to themperor by his ſiſter. She, the xii. of Iuly came to Straſburge, and ther remained certen dais with her huſbands ſiſter, which was alſo cōmaunded by yt french king to depart. To Straſburge came alſo, driuē frō his coū
               try, ye forenamed Wuolfgange, maſter of thorder of Knighthode in

Germany, which in the conſiſtory of thempire hath the next place to tharchbiſhops.
            Marques Albert who ioyned him ſelf by the way to his felowes Marques Albert y ſcourge of prieſts. going to Franckfort, leauing them at the ſiege, goeth to the Rhine, and ſubdueth Wuormes, and Spiers, exacting of them both mony and alſo munition. Which way ſomeuer he went, the prieſts either wer fled away before, or els chaunged their apparell, and diſſembled theyr profeſſion and order. And what time the army came neare vnto Frankonie, the biſhops ther abouts, & thother prelates of the ſame ordre, ſought to ſaue them ſelues by flight: and tharchbiſhop of Mentz, who for fear of the Marques was gon longe before, the xxv. day of Iuly came fleing to Straſburge, and lodgyng ther one night, paſſed ouer the Rhine. The biſhop of Spiers a very aged man, fled to Saberne, wher he died not long after. The Biſhop of Wuormes, through the mediatiō of the Paulſgraue, returned home, after he had paid xii. thouſand Crownes. Whan he had taken theſe cities before ſaid.
            Marques Albert the xxviii. of Iuly, ſending his letters to the Senate of Strauſburge, requireth that he and his fellowes may His requeſts to Straſbo. haue acceſſe into theyr city at al times, and ther to place a garriſon whan neade ſhalbe, and they to ſhew them fidelity, as well in hys own, as alſo in the French kings name: For all this war, ſaith he, is moued to reuenge al Germany: nether ſhal it be honeſt or profitable for them to reſiſt this enterpriſe: For to the intent they maye bring this to paſſe, therfore hath he and his fellowes ioyned together The anſwer of Strauſbo. again now al theyr power. To which the Senate two dais after wryteth again. Theſe many yeres now they haue wiſhed for no thing more than that the true Religion of Chriſt, and alſo thanciēt ſiberty might floriſh throughout al Germany, and to this end haue they bent not only all their doinges and counſels, but alſo haue alwais imploid hitherto their mony & goods, and are now of ye ſame mind alſo, nether wil they at any time fail either the wealth or dignity of the cōmon country, for ſo much as they are able at all times to performe: They know moreouer that thys is theyr bounden duty, for the ſame oth and fidelity, by the which they are bounden to yt Emperor: And ſeing it is ſo, there nedeth no further declaration of theyr wil: The king of Fraunce alſo, what time he was in Alſatia, had demaunded no ſuch thing of them: Again, that wryting, wherof he maketh mention, ſetforthe by the Princes confederated, was not ſent nor ſhewed vnto them: Wherfore they deſire him to accept this ſatiſfaction, and work no violence to them nor to their coūtry. In this ſelf ſame inſtant Marques Albert being aduertiſed, that duke Moris intended to make peace, leuing at Spiers a garriſon

returneth with his army to Franckfurt, & renueth the ſiege, which Duke Moris hauing made peace, had forſaken, pitching his tents on thother ſide of the town, on this ſide the riuer of Meyne vppon the higher ground ſomwhat, from whence he might very commodiouſly beat the town with his ordinaunce. And this pacification he toke moſt diſpleaſantly, and ſpake euil words of duke Moris, and would not be compriſed therein. The conditions of peace be theſe. That the Princes confederated ſhal leaue theyr armure before the xii. day of Auguſt, and ſo diſcharge their army, that they may ſerue king Farnando, if he ſo will, and neither annoye themperoure nor Germany At the ſame day alſo the Lantzgraue, being ſet at liberty, Conditions of peace. ſhalbe deliuered at his caſtel of Rinfelſe, which he hath vpō the Rhine, putting in firſt ſurety, to obſerue couenaunts geuen by the Emperor at Hale in Saxony: They alſo whiche at the ſame time became ſureties for him, Duke Moris thelector of Brandenburge and Wuolfgange Duke of Sainebricke, renuing their obligation entre again into bondes: The ſuit that the Lantzgraue hath with the Earle of Naſſow for the Lordſhip of Chats, ſhall be examined by the Princes Electors, and of ſuche alſo as bothe the plaintife, and alſo the defendaunt ſhal aſſign to the ſame matter: of the whiche afterward themperor ſhall chuſe out ſixe, which ſhall determin the caſe, yet ſo, that the matter be diſcuſſed within two yeres ſpace. Within ſixe monethes, the Emperoure ſhall holde an aſſemble of the Empire, to conſult chiefly, howe and by what meaue the diſſention of Religion may beſt be appeaſed: In the meane time all men ſhall obſerue peace, and no man ſhall be moleſted for religion: and what ſo euer ſhall be decreed, concerning the manner of appeaſing Religion, by the common aſſent of the ſtates, and by the authority of the Emperor, that is to wit, that the controuerſy may be quieted by godly and rightfull waies, the ſame to be firme and ſtable: Unto the iudiciall place or Chamber of the Empire ſhall be admitted alſo thoſe, whyche are of the Proteſtantes Religion: All other thinges, which proprely concerne the dignity and libertye of Germany, ought to be intreated of in the conuention of thempire: Otto Henry the Paulſgraue is alſo permitted frely to enioye his lande and dominion: during this warre ſo many as by geuing their faith to the Princes confederated, haue boūden them ſelues vnto them, ſhall be free from all bondes, and theyr owne men, as before: they that haue ſuſtained any domage in this warly tumulte, ſhall commence none action therfore, againſt thoſe that haue done it: yet ſhal it be the part of themperor and ſtates, in the nexte aſſemble to deuiſe ſome meane, whereby they maye receiue ſome recompence for the loſſes they haue receiued.
            
               
As concerning the French king, for ſo much as matters of thempire concern him nothing, it ſhalbe lawful for him to declare vnto duke Moris, ſuch priuate actions as he hath againſt themperor yt they maye after be related to themperor: The outlawes are receiued to mercy, ſo as they attempt nothing hereafter againſt themperor, and thother ſtates, ſo that they alſo, which ſerue in the French kinges warres, retourne againe into Germanye within three moneths, cleane forſaking him and his ſeruice: he that ſhal breake this peace, ſhall be iudged an ennemye. Unto all theſe thinges, the princes that wer ther preſent, of the chiefeſt dignity, and the deputies of others ſubſcribed. For this pacificatiō was deuided at Paſſaw, whiche was ſigned alſo by themperor. Whan this peace was concluded, Fraxineus, the Frenche kinges ambaſſador retourneth home. And certenly the king toke this compoſition greuouſly: but hearing, that the Lantzgraue ſhould be in great daunger, excepte this compact were made, he aſſented, and ſent againe the pledges ſafe into Germany. The third day of Auguſt, Duke Moris, and ye Lantzgraues ſonne, departinge from Frankfurt, go two ſeuerall waies: This man into Heſſe, and thother leadeth his army to Donauerde, and ſendeth them downe the riuer of Thonawe into Hongary, againſt the Turke inuading, but that legion which was vnder the leding of Riſeberge, paſſing ouer the riuer of Moene, went to Marques Albert, not withoute the greate care of the Prynces, which feared, leaſt themperor woulde take an occaſion hereby, not to dimiſſe the Lantzgraue. Marques Albert liyng before Frankfurt, where he might haue bene compriſed in the peace, and would Marques Albert refuſeth the peace. not. The ix. day of Auguſt he departeth thēce, and trāſporting his army ouer the rhine, ineampeth beſides Mentz, and broughte the citezens into his ſubiection. About thend of Iuly, themperor returning from Uillace to Inſprucke, and the eight day after departing thence, and marchinge throughe Bauier, with Almaignes, Bohemers, Italians, and Spaniardes, which at the beginning of Iuly arriued at Genes, at the conduit of the Duke of Alba, the xx. day of Auguſt came to Auſpurge. Tharchbiſhop of Mentz, whā he had wandred certain daies in Swenia, ſo ſone as he vnderſtode of the Emperors comming, he taketh his iourney thither. At this preſent time they of Senes, through the procurement and aid of the french king, caſt out a garriſon of Spaniards, and pull downe a caſtell, that was begon ther to be builded by themperors commaundemēt and recouer theyr former libertye. In the meane ſeaſon Marques Albert impoſeth a great ſome of mony to theccleſiaſticall perſons, eſpecially of Mentz and Spiers: whan the ſame could not be leuied, by reaſon that many wer fled, he ſpoyleth the churches of either

city, and began to take the lead of the cathedrall church at Spier, but at the requeſt of the Senate he ſurceaſed: And at Mentz he burneth the biſhops caſtell, ſtandinge by the Rhine, his owne lodging, and fiue churches. Moreouer all the ſhippes, yea thoſe, that were laden with wine and wheat: And calling away thoſe ſouldiours of his, that he had ther placed in garriſon, marcheth towards the borders of Treuers. The xiii. day of Auguſt, Herman, archbiſhop of Collon, a pure aged man, ended his life in his natiue coū
               try, The deathe of Herman Archebiſhop of Colon. His wiſh. and had ſuch end, as he deſired. For he had many times wiſhed that either he might ſetforth the doctrin of the goſpel, & put in good order the churches of his prouince, or liue a priuate life: and being ſometime by his frendes admoniſhed, how much enuye he ſhoulde procure vnto him ſelf by this alteration of religion, he was wonte to make them anſwer, how there could chaunce nothing vnto him, vnloked for, and that his minde was eſtabliſhed againſte all that might fortune, he came of the noble houſe of the Earles of Weden. The Lantzgraue being ſet at liberty, as couenaunte was, and taking his iourney homeward, whan he was commen to Utrecht, a Towne ſtanding by the maſe, by the commaundemente of Quene Mary regent of Flaunders which was there preſente, he was attached againe, and committed to the cuſtodye of the ſame Spaniardes, which had kept him theſe v. yeres. And the cauſe hereof was for that Riſeberge, who had ſerued the Lantzgraues ſonne, went with all his force vnto Marques Albert, as before is ſaid. Wherin the Quene ſaid, how the peace was brokē, and therfore might not ſhe let him depart, before ſhe knewe themperors pleaſure therein. Duke Moris, as I ſaid, comminge to the water of Thonawe, the xxii. day of Auguſt ſendeth his army before, the footemen, downe the riuer, and the horſmen by lande: he him ſelfe for his priuate affaires rideth home in poſte, mineding ſhortly to return to them againe. Whan Marques Albert came to the frontiers of Treuers, George Holie, a captain of themperors, had brought ten enſeigns of fotemen, to defend the citye: but kepte oute by the Townes men, which refuſed to haue any garriſon, he bringeth again his men to Lucemburge. And the Marques the xxvii. of Auguſt ſommoneth the towne to be rendred vnto him: The next day being receiued, he Marques Albert entreth Treuers. beſtoweth his ſoldiors in the city, and places there aboutes. The biſhop in the meane ſeaſon was in the caſtel, which I ſaid was ſituated where the Rhine and Moſelle mete: neither was there any prelate of the ſame ordre there. Themperor remaininge certaine daies at Auſpurge, diſplaceth the Senate, whiche the princes had lately ordeined, and abrogateth all the tribes, & reſtoreth the ſame ſtate of the common weale, and the Senate by him eſtabliſhed, &

of the miniſters of the churche he remoueth thre, and the reaſte he permitteth to teach and miniſter according to the fourm and order of the confeſſion of Auſpurge, which thinge declared in the pulpit, made many mēright glad. This was the xxv. day of yt mōth of Auguſt. Wheras in the yeare before, they were in a manner the ſame day exiled, as I haue in the xxii. boke declared. After that, departing thence the firſt day of Septembre, and leauing behind him a garriſon of vi. enſeignes of fotemen, two daies after he came to Wuolmes: but his army wente an other waye, till they came to the borders of Wirtemberge which was done for their ſakes of Wuolmes, leaſt theyr country, which had ſhewed to themperor ſo greate fidelity, ſhould ſuſtain a new domage: The ſame day that themperor departed from Auſpurge, he ſente awaye Ihon Fridericke the The duke of Saxon goth home to hys owne houſe. Duke of Saxon, with moſt gentle wordes, & promiſed very largely of his beneuolence towardes him, who on the next day toke hys iourney homeward. The Lātzgraue alſo being releaſed the fourth of Septembre, retourneth home the ſixt day after. The ſame time came forth the fourth Tome of Luthers worckes. To the whiche Melanchthon making a preface, reioyſeth much at the Dukes returne, and highly commendeth his conſtancy, which he vſed in the time of his moſt aduerſity. In the meane time that Marques Albert was at Treuers, all the churches were ſhut vp, who remaining there viii daies, whan he had burned certen Abbaies, and a caſtel of the biſhops not far from the towne, he leaueth in the city a garriſon of xii. enſeignes. Afterward marching towards Sircke, which is a towne of the Duchie of Loraine, in the midway betwixt Metz and Treuers the xiii. day of Septēbre, he paſſeth ther with his army ouer the riuer of Moſelle, and inuadeth the land of Lucemburge, and from thence retourneth again into Loraine, and euery wher doth very much harme, attending to ſe what manner of condition the french king would offer him. How he had ſore afflicted the biſhops in Franctonie, it is before recited: but whan themperor approched neare, being ſued to of the Biſhops, he dothe diſcharge thoſe compactes, and chargeth them, that they ſtand not to them, but ſeke to recouer theyr owne, the ſame doth he permit alſo to them of Norinberge, and after exhorteth them, that for the defence of theyr country, they would make a league: the ſame thinge wryteth he to them of Sweuia to the inhabiters of the Rhine and others, aſwell princes as cities. Wherfore theſe foreſaide Biſhops with the ſtate of Norinberge do fortify them ſelues afterwarde by a league, and what time Marques Albert, at the Emperors comming, went into Loraine, the biſhop of Bamberge, aboute the end of Auguſt, and in Septembre, recouered the townes of Forcheme

and diuers others. Themperor paſſing out of the land of Wirtemberge, held the way toward Spiers: but whan he came to Bret, Themperor goeth wyth his army toward Lorain which is a town of the Prince Palatines, altering his purpoſe, he tourned on the lefthand, & marched towards Straſburge. At his coming, vi miles frō the city came vnto him ambaſſadors, Iames Sturmie, Friderick Gotteſſeme, and Lewes Grempre, to intreat Ambaſſadors of Straſburge to the Emperor. him that he would ſpare their country, and lead his army another way, neither that he him ſelf would enter into the city wt any great power, or alter any thing in their cōmon wealth. Who, after he had right gently receiued them, ſaith, how he knoweth rightwell, how worthely and valiauntly that city hath lately ſhewed it ſelfe, and what a benefit they haue done to him & the whole Empire: which thing he wil beare in perpetuall memory, and in very dede wil declare, as occaſion ſerueth, how much he is bounden to them for the ſame. Afterward he excuſeth diligently his ſodain cōming, by reaſon of the ſhips brēt by Marques Albert, for the newes that came how the Frenchmen inuade Alſatia, and alſo for the time of yt yere which requireth expedition, that they may come to thenemy ſo ſone as is poſſible: wherfore he wil lead his army a long by the Citye, wherinto he him ſelf wil enter with his owne family only, and taking a dinner, wil not tary ther one night. Whan therfore the .xv. day of September, he was cummen into a certaine village, a mile without the City, his whole army deſtowed here and there in the country abouts, he remaind ther v. dais: In the which time all his Themperor entreth into Straſburge. cariage was conueied down the Rhine, wherin was no ſmall difficulty, and aſſone as it was day, commaūding his army to march forth, he him ſelf, with no great company, about none came into the City, which he had neuer ſene before, and was both louingly & honorably receiued of the Senate. It was his chance to paſſe by the headchurch: whan he came thither, he alighted, and being led in by the prieſtes, making ther ſmall abode, went ſtraight to dinner. The Senate than preſenteth him with a gift, after the cuſtome of the city, praying him to accept it in good part, he anſwereth, that it is to him right acceptable, and that whiche he had ſpoken certaine dais paſt cōcerning his good wil towards them, for theyr ſtout gouerning of theyr ſtate in a moſt doubtfull and pearillous time, he repeteth again, and for that the townes men haue hurt done them without the city, by the ſoldiors in their Orchardes and heritages, he ſaith he is right ſory: but for ſomuch as it is vnpoſſible to ſaue al vpright, amonges ſo great a multitude, he praieth them to take it patiently, chiefly for that this warre is made for thempire. Afterward, toward the Euening, entring into the way of Hagenaw, he tourned into the next village, and ther reaſted al night. What time

he was at Straſburge, going to Metz, he commaunded thambaſſadors of forain Princes, which followed his court, to go to Spier and there remain. That time was ſir Richard Moriſine, knight Sir Richard Moriſine ambaſſadour of England Marques Antonius Ambaſſadour of Ueniſe. The ſpoil of the ſoldiors. ambaſſador of Edward the vi. King of England, who amongs mē learned hath a worthy name: and for the ſtate of Ueniſe, Marcke Anthony Amulie, who alſo was him ſelf very well learned, and a great fauorer of learning. In thoſe few dais that themperor ſtaid at the city, no man would beleue what hurt the ſouldiours did in ye country, and it was an heauy ſight to ſe the pore huſband mē, their wiues and children come running into the citye, ſpoyled of all that euer they had. The matter was complained vppon to the Duke of Alua, by the Senate: And all be it he ſaide he was very ſory for it, and would ſe, that the like ſhuld not be done from henceforthe, yet did it preuail nothing, and which way ſo euer they wēt, after their manner they ſpoyled all thinges. The Duke of Alua was lieftenant generall of the whole armye, and all manner of complaintes were brought vnto him, neither might any man be ſuffred to ſpeke with themperor, which was thought to haue any ſuch thing to ſai. In the meane ſeaſon the Frenchmen, by the conduit of the duke of Guiſe, fortify chiefly Metz and Nancey, and alſo conuey thither al the wheat and forage of the country. Ther ſerued themperor, Thō the Marques of Brandenburge, Alphonſe Duke of Holſt, brother to the king of Denmarke, Philiberte ſonne to the duke of Sauoy. The outlawes, refuſinge the condition of peace, remained ſtill in Fraunce. The Ducheſſe of Lorayne, expulſed oute of the country, The deathe of Caſpar Hedio & Andrew Oſiander. ſpake with themperor her vncle at Straſburge, and after went in to Brabant. The xvii. daye of the monthe of October died Caſpar Hedio, the chief miniſter of the church of Straſburge. The ſame day alſo died Andrew Oſiander, at Coningſperge, which is a town in Pruſe by the ſea coaſt. Themperor remoueth from Hagenaw to Landaw, and ther making abode xvi. dais of very faire weather, not without the great wonder of many, at the length he taketh the way to Metz, and the xxii. day of Octobre beſiegeth the City. Uery many citezens and Senators, by the permiſſion of the Frenche Themperor beſegeth Metz. men went their waies ſome into Loraine, & ſome to Straſburge. Than was the Marques Albert in the borders of Lorayne, at the Towne of Pontamoſſe, with l. enſeſgnes of fotemen, and no ſmal power of horſmen, but wher the French king and he could not agre vpon wages, aſwell for the time paſt, as alſo for the time to come, through the mediation of certaine, he was reconciled to themperor Marques Albert reconciled to themperor. who both pardoned him for all his offence, and prohibiteth that no action ſhould be commēced againſt him, for his enterpriſes in this warre, and ratifieth the compacts made with the biſhops of Bamberge

and Wirciburge, and releaſeth him of the warfare into Hongary, and for his ſake pardoneth the Earle of Oetinge, the father and the ſonne, of whoſe miſfortune before is mentioned: likewiſe Albert the Earle of Manſfeld and his ſonnes. This thing known Duke d'Anmalle, brother to the duke of Guiſe, who was ſent into Lorayne with a great power of horſmen, by the king, leaſt yt Marques of whom they ſtode in doubt of, ſhould worke any miſchiefe, was purpoſed to ſet vppon him. For nowe had the French men ſecreatly plucked from him one legion of fote men, at the conduit of Riſeberge: for he was reuolted to the Frēch king: Afterward, they attempted the reaſt of his army alſo, and their purpoſe was, that, for want of mony, being made naked and deſtitute of his men, thei mighte put him to flighte with ſhame. Duke d'Anmalle had of his counſell Ihon Fraxine, Biſhop of Baion: And whan he exhorted him to do likewiſe, he gaue the charge with his whole force. The fotemen for want of a paye refuſed to fighte: wherefore his whole truſt was in his horſmen, whome the Marques ſpeaking frendly to, and exhorting them to be valeaunte, ſet vpon them, and fortune Albert ouerthroweth the French men fauored his bold enterpriſe: For breaking throughe their maigne battell, he ouerthroweth them, and putteth them to flighte, all be it they were far mo in nombre, ſlayinge many, euen of the nobilitye: Fraxine the biſhop eſcaped away by flight: duke d'Anmalle, receiuing thre woundes, is taken. This was the fourth day of Nouembre, Duke de Anmalle taken priſoner. whan Marques Albert had obteined this victorye, he came to Metz with duke d'Anmalle priſoner, and pitcheth his tents by the riuer of Moſelle, and what time he healed his priſoner of his woū
               des, he ſent him into Germany, to be kept, his lieuetenāt was now as alſo in the proteſtants war, George of the noble houſe of Lichteberges. After he adnertiſeth the biſhop of Bamberge of the compactes confirmed by themperor, and admoniſheth him that he kepe his promeſſe, and reſtore vnto him his townes: he commaundeth his captains alſo, that vnles he ſo do, they recouer them by force of armes. In this ſelf ſame time, themperors army of the low countries, inuadeth Fraunce, and taketh Heſdine, the ſtrongeſt caſtell in thoſe parties, which after a certaine time the French king recouereth again, and ſending his letters into Germany, taunteth the Emperor bitterly, and exhorteth them to kepe amitye with him, as mindful of a benefit receiued, and of theyr liberty by him reſtored. About this time the iudges of the chamber imperiall, of whoſe fleinge I haue ſpoken before, retourne to Spiers. The Emperoure who had yet remained at Dedehoue, whiche is a towne by the Riuer of Moſelle foure miles beneath Metz, the twenty day of Nouembre came into the campe.

Than chiefly was the city maruelouſlye beaten with ſhot, the violence wherof was ſo great, that the noiſe and Thondering thereof The greate battery of Metz. was hard, not only to Straſburge, but alſo iiii Dutche miles beyond the Rhine. And Straſburge is from Metz xviii. great dutch miles. Duke Moris, whom I ſaid went with his army into Hongary for the king Fardinando, about this time retourneth home. That time Uolrate, the ſonne of Albert, Earle of Manſfeld made The duke of Brunſwicke driuen out of his country. warre againſt Henry the Duke of Brunſwicke, and had in a maner driuen him out of his whole Countrye, Duke Henry therefore commeth to the Emperor at Metz, complaining of his miſfortune, and deſireth aid, but that was out of time. Counte Manſfelde had ſerued vnder the Marques Albert, whileſt he was yet of the frēch party. Whileſt themperor beſiegeth Metz, Wuolfgange, maiſter of the Almaigne order, taketh the Towne of Eluange. There is a very ritch promotion eccleſiaſticall, whiche he had ſued for manye moneths. The fellowes or prebends of that Colledge haue authority to chuſe the Prouoſt, as they commonly call him.
            Whan therfore they had choſen one of a noble houſe, he, which was ſory that it paſſed by him, vpon the ſoden ſurpriſeth the place. This known, the Duke of Wirtemberge, whome the fellowes of that Colledge had beſought to defend their righte, leuieth his men immediatly, and ſetting forth in the cold winter ſeaſon, recouereth that eaſely, and beſides winneth an other Town or two from him, till he were recompenced for the charges he was at with his ſoldiors. The French men that wer beſieged make many ſales oute, eſpecially into Mar. Alberts Camp, & amongs others, Lichteberge his lieftenaunt was ſore wounded. The winter was very ſharpe with froſt and ſnow: And althoughe themperor had an exceadinge great army, yet did he abſtaine from the aſſault, and attempted the thing by mines: but that was in vain, whan both the time of ye yere was a let therunto, & thenemy alſo knew it by eſpial. Ther defēded the City moſt choſen captaine, commen of noble houſes: but ye chief The duke of Guiſe defended Metz. gouernor was the duke of Guiſe. What time the lieuetenauntes of the Marques Albert, hired ſouldiours by his commaundemente, the biſhop of Bamberge complaininge therof to thimperiall chamber, the xxix. day of Decembre obtaineth letters, wherby the Albertines wer cōmaunded to lay away their armor. They of Wuolmes recouering their caſtell of Helſeſteine, by expulſinge the garriſon, which Marques Albert had there lefte, raſed it downe to the harde ground. Themperor enforced by thextremity of the cold winter, about thend of Decembre, being in diſpaire of the thinge, leuied the ſiege, and remouing from thēce to Dedehouie, and ſo returning into Flanders, cōmaundeth certen legions to remain in the countrye

of Treuers, amonges the whiche was alſo Marques Albert. By cold and ſickneſſe, themperor leſt the third part of his army.
            The French men the xxii. day of Ianuary go a proceſſion about all the Churches in Metz, geuing God thankes for theyr good fortune. 1553. The next day are ſearched out al Lutherian bokes in the citezens houſes, and by the hangman are brente openlye: After this, the Duke of Guiſſe, leauing ther his deputie, returneth into Frāce In this ſame moneth the captain of Marques Albert wone many things again from the Biſhop of Bamberge: and after the ſiege of Metz was leuied, whan Marques Albert had wintred a while in Treuers, til themperor, had paied him his wages in the moneth of February returning into Germany the Biſhop of Bamberge, the .xvii. day of the ſame moneth, obteyneth newe letters of the chā
               ber, wherof in one was commaunded agayne, theſame as, was before: in thother are inioyned the nobilite of Franckeconie, they of Norinberge, the Paulſgraue electour, and Iohn Friderick Duke of Saxon, as his next neighboures to helpe him. About thende of the moneth of February, the French king which was puft vp with pride, that Metz was ſo defended, ſetteth forth a wryting in printe The french kinges wryting againſt themperor. vnto all the ſtates of the Empire, verye ſtinginge and hatefull to the Emperoure. For he goeth aboute to bringe him in hatred and contempt alſo: How he verely is nowe no more to be feared, whoſe power is all readye in fringed, and the craft of many yeares detected, whiche is alſo ſo ſicke and diſeaſed, that they can hardlye kepe life in him: he doubtles wil be alwais of one mind towards thē, that is to wit, frendly and liberall. And all be it that diuers of thē, whiche haue receiued of him greate benefites haue not ſhewed thē ſelues verye thanckefull, yet wyll not he therefore renounce the Frendſhip of the reaſt. After that Marques Albert was aduertiſed of the commaundement of the chamber Imperiall, he wryteth manye letters to the Biſhop of Arras, to the Duke of Alua, and to the Emperoure him ſelfe, ſignifyinge what the Biſhops go aboute, and howe they breake couenauntes, and for ſo muche as he hathe ratified thoſe compactes that were made him, he requyreth that ther maye be a penaltye appoynted, vnleſſe they obey the ſame. Afterwarde ſendinge a meſſager to the chamber at Spier, declareth how the Biſhoppes haue not only broken couenauntes, but themperors commaundemente alſo: wherefore he requireth them, that they woulde ſuffer none action to be commenced againſte him, and that they woulde aboliſhe the letters, whiche his aduerſaries had obtained. Wherunto they make anſwer, how it is theyr partes and duety to miniſter the law vnto all men: which they coulde not denie the biſhoppes alſo requiring the ſame.
            
               
But he again after a longe confutation, requireth the ſame that he did before. For els in caſe he ſuſtain any loſſe, he ſhal haue good cauſe to require amendes and recompence at their hands.
            Themperor the xiii. of March wryteth an anſwer to the letters The Emperours letters of aunſwere to Marques Albert. of Marques Albert. How he ratified that compacte he can not deny: How he paied him alſo and his men theyr wages moſt liberallye, to his owne greate hinderaunce, where he gaue to the reſidue nothinge: And he woulde haue bene righte glad, if the Biſhoppes woulde haue ſtirred no more in the matter, and for the ſame cauſe he ſent an ambaſſadoure to them, to perſwade them: but ſince they haue refuſed, and haue appealed both to him, and alſo to the Princes electors, and to the Chamber imperiall, he ſeeth well inoughe how this can not be denied them: Eſpecially, conſideringe howe diuers ſtates haue conceiued a ſuſpition of him, and ſpreade diuers brutes: For in caſe he ſhould now accompliſhe his requeſt, and cō
               maunde them to kepe couenauntes, it woulde be ſaide that he did wronge, and it ſhoulde increaſe ſuſpicion: For his office is, to miniſter iuſtice indifferently vnto all men, and prohibite wronge and violence: Therefore the only way is this, that the matter maye be frendly taken vp, and he doubteth not, but he him ſelf, if he ponder the matter diligently, wil take this ſame way: and to the intent the matter may the more eaſely and purpoſelye be broughte to paſſe, he will appoynt his owne kinſmen, the Dukes of Bauier and of Wirtemberge, that they ſhall be meanes in the matter.
            The biſhops verely in diuers and ſondry letters haue complained to him greuouſly: Neuertheleſſe he truſteth that they will not refuſe the treaty: for the controuerſy that is betwene the Duke of Brunſwicke and his nobility, he hath committed the hearinge of ye matter to Ihon Marques of Brādenburge: And hath appoynted alſo the dukes of Bauier and Wirtemberge, to end the matter betwene therles of Deting, the father and the ſonnes. In manner about this time, both tharmy of counte Manſfeld ſhrank away, and thambaſſadors of Ihon Friderick & duke Moris met together, to accord thē two: For he in his letters & coyne, that he ſtamped, vſed ſtil the name of elector and ii. ſwords a croſſe, which is tharmes of Tharmes of Electorſhyp Electorſhip, & by themperors permiſſiō fortified again his caſtel of Goth, which thing duke Moris toke greuouſly, & cōplaineth therof to his ſtates: the opiniō of al thē was to deuiſe meanes of peace: wherfore, as I ſaid, ambaſſadors wer ſēt, but yet in vain. In this The Cardinall Lenoncourtes ambition. time alſo Robert the biſhop of Metz, Cardinal Lenōcurt, moſt addict to the french king came to Metz, & chalengeth to him ſelfe, the hole iuriſdictiō, & ſaith it belōgeth to him, which is a prince of themand

ordeineth a newe Senate, and placeth in that nombre diuers of the Cleargy, and fortifieth Marſey a little Towne ſtandinge at the Frontiers of Germany, with fortificatiōs & garriſon of french men. His letters wer before intercepted, wherein he deſired of the king, that he would permit him to haue the iuriſdiction, whiche the Biſhoppes, his predeceſſors haue had: For his intent is, to ordain a new Senate, and to receiue none into the ſame: but that ſhall be wholly addicted to him: or els will it come to paſſe, that ſuch as be of the Emperors part ſhall remaine there, and the others ſhall depart thence, which doubtleſſe woulde be to his great hinderaunce: For vnleſſe all ſuſpected perſonnes be cleane remoued, let him not loke to kepe the City in quiet poſſeſſion. And he deſireth to declare his hart and good wlil towardes him: For euen for the ſame cauſe chiefly, came he into theſe parties, and receiued this biſhoppricke, that he might do him ſome notable ſeruice.
            Than was Marques Albert at Hedelberge with the Paulſgraue elector, and had ſente thoſe foreſaid letters to the iudges of the chamber. That time came alſo to Hedelberge, by themperors commaundement, the Dukes of Bauier and Wirtemberge, for a pacification: thither came alſo the Duke of Cleaue. The matter being longe debated, whan the Biſhoppes had offred him a wonderfull ſumme of mony, eſpecially Bamberge, that he might haue his Townes in quiet, and the interceſſors alſo approued this condition: The Marques which would haue his couenauntes obſerued, which themperor had alſo confirmed, wheras in the ſame time, his captaines leuied horſmen for him in Saxony, and was now aſſured of certen other mennes aid, he departeth and nothing done, the interceſſors being ſore offended, and bendeth him ſelfe to war, and publiſhing a wrying the xxvii. of March, repeteth the whole matter in order, complaining mooſte greuouſlye of his aduerſaries for breaking theyr promeſſe, and confuteth that reaſon, whereby the Biſhoppes alledge, that they maye alienate nothing of the church goodes, and ſheweth how he is driuen of neceſſitye to defende hys righte by force of armes. The biſhop of Wirciburge was ther him ſelf, Bamberge had ſente deputies.
            The grudge and controuerſy was betwene the Duke of Wirtemberge, and the maiſter of the Almaigne order, through the mediation of princes was here appeaſed, where this man to recouer his townes again, paid xxx. thouſand Crownes. At the ſecond day of Aprill, whyche than was Eaſter daye, Duke Moris came alſo vnto the Princes at Hedelberge, vſing greate expedition. Thre dais after, he returneth home againe in poſte. Theſe prynces that were interceſſoures, make a league, that they maye defende them

ſelues from iniurie, and therin be cōpriſed alſo the Archbiſhops of Mentz and Treuers. Whan Marques Albert refuſing the condicions, wente from Hedelberge to gather his armye, the Biſhoppes of Bamberge and Wirciburge procure other letters from the chā
               ber, in the which both the Archbiſhoppe of Mentz, the Paulſgraue Duke Moris, the Maiſter of Pruiſſe, the Duke of Saxon, the Duke of Wirtemberge, the Lantzgraue, the Norinbergians, and all theyr neyghboures, are commaunded to aſſiſt them: This was the ſecond day of May.
            Duke Moris, who ſuſpected Marques Albert, and ſuppoſed that he was alſo pricked at by the ſame, for his owne aſſuraunce, maketh a league with the Duke of Brunſwicke, and promiſeth aid to the Biſhoppes and Norinbergians. In the meane ſeaſon Marques The ſpoylinges & burninges of Marques Albert. Albert, hauinge leuied his power, marcheth forewarde, and in the Countries of the Biſhoppes and ſtate of Norinberge, he deſtroyeth all with burninge and ſpoylinge, and taketh the Citye of Bamberge, the head Towne of all that Countrye, and threatneth warre to the Nobilitye of Frankonie, vnleſſe they will obey, and ſurpriſeth Schuinfurt, a Towne imperiall, and fortifieth it with a garriſon. The Norinbergians, becauſe they hold certain townes and Caſtels by the benefite of the Realme of Boheme, had intreated king Farnando that they might leuy certaine horſmen in hys dominions to defend thoſe places: The king was content, and permitted them to gather fiue hondreth: but the Marques, as they were comminge intercepteth them, and taketh alſo certaine of the foreſaide Townes and Caſtels. Againe on the other ſide, Henrye Duke of Brunſwicke, which had drawen vnto him a greate parte of Counte Manſfeldes army, by Phillip his ſonne moueth warre againſte his neighboures, inuadinge the borders and Countries of the Biſhoppes of Munſter and Minden, and of his Coſin alſo Duke Erike of Brunſwicke, and of the ſtate of Breme, and extorteth of them a maruelous great ſome of Monye. Aboute this tune the controuerſy that the Duke of Cleaue had with the Archbiſhop of Collon, for a certaine iuriſdiction, by the mediation of the Paulſgraue and the Biſhoppe of Treuers, whiche met at Bacheracke, was throughly appeaſed.
            A little while after, at the beginning of the monthe of Iune, the Paulſgraue, tharchbiſhop of Mentz, thambaſſadors of the dukes of Bauier and Wirtemberge, by themperors cōmaundement mete at Franckfurt, aboute the warre of Franckonie. The Emperoure had ambaſſadors ther Coūte Conigſten, therle of Solmen, & Hēry Haſie: king Ferdinando had theralſo diuers. And wher the biſhops brged the Emperours abrogation, & the Marques his cōfirmatiō,

thelectors admoniſh his ambaſſadors, to ſignify this vnto him, to thintent he may aduertiſe them, whether he wil haue to take place. Themperor the xvii. day of Iune maketh anſwer. Wheras in the laſt yeare paſt he had hard of the compoſition of Marques Albert and the biſhops, at the ſute and requeſt of certen, he aboliſhed the ſame, cōmaunding the biſhops not to kepe it, for that it was a matter of an euil preſident, to compell any man to ſuche ſubiection, for doing of his duety to him and to thempire: But afterwarde, whan Marques Albert would none otherwiſe accord with him, excepte thoſe former compoſitions were ratified, (he) to eſchue a further in conuenience, which was than like to inſue vpon all Germany, ſerued the time preſent. And, for ſo much as he had an armye readye, and Counte Manſfeld alſo, in his name was gatheringe a newe power in Saxonie, and he him ſelf being troubled with the french warres, could not ſuppreſſe him, neither was ther in al Germany, that was hable one day to abide his force, he made peace with him, in hope verely that he ſhuld quiet him afterward: Eſpecially, if the Princes that be his kinſmen ſhould trauell in the thing: and certē
               ly, if God had ſente him good ſucceſſe before Metz, he had deuiſed meanes, wherby he ſhuld haue ben ſatiſfied: For he did him muche good ſeruice in the ſame warre, in ſo much that he was deſirous to gratify him: but after that the ſiege toke no place, he aſſaid howe to make a concord by them at Hedelberge: and wher the Marques refuſed the conditions ther propounded, and again hath moued war, it was to him very diſpleaſaunte, and therfore did he aſſigne thys other conuention at Franckfurt: And now it is reported vnto him, that he attempteth warre, not only againſte the Biſhoppes, but againſt certen others alſo: which thing both greueth him exceadinglye, and is done alſo contrarye to the compactes: For he, what time he was receiued into fauoure, promiſed faithfull ſeruice hereafter bothe to him and to thempire: And yet if he would now at the leaſt obey, he coulde be contente to forget all thinges paſt: but where he him ſelfe alſo is had in ſuſpicion of diuers, it is wrongfullye done: wherfore let them indeuoure wyth all theyr force to make a pacification, and require no further declaration of him in this matter: The ſame ſhall be to him mooſte acceptable, and in matters concerninge the Empyre, he will do nothinge from henceforth, but by theyr aduiſe and Counſell. At the lengthe they departed frō Frāckfurte, wythoute the matter ended. Aboute the ſame time alſo, by themperors commaundemente, the Duke of Bauier and of Wirtemberge with others aſſemble at Lawginge, that they might pacifye The father & the ſōnes cō
                  tend for inheritaunce. the Earles of Detinge, the father and his Sonnes. For euer ſince the Proteſtantes warre, vnto the ſiege of Metz, Lewes the

father and his eldeſt ſonne of the ſame name, haue wandred vp & down at moſt vncertenty, for that they warred againſt themperor: but all his landes and poſſeſſions, by themperors permiſſion had his ſonnes Fridericke and Wuolfgange, whiche were of a contrarye Religion. Whan they came to the treaty, the father, accuſeth them of moſte ingratitude: and all be it the Prynces laboured the matter diligently, yet coulde there be nothing determined.
         
         
            The, xxv, Booke of Sledaines Commentaries, concerning the ſtate of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne of the Empyre, of Charles the fyfte.
            
               The Argument of the xxv. Booke.
               THe warre beginning in Piedmount, Duke Moris and the Marques Albert being at deſiaunce, loyne in battell. wherin Duke Moris was ſlaine, but the Marques loſt the field. Auguſtus his brother ſuccedeth Duke Moris. Iohn Fridericke maketh reclaime to hys landes. At this time are nine martirs executed at Lions. The good king Edward of Englād being dead, his ſiſter Mary is proclaimed Quene, and the Popiſh biſhops reſtored to their dignity. Marques Albert hauing loſt the field againſt Henry Duke of Brunſwicke, ſurpriſeth the towne of Holſe: After he is baniſhed. A diſputation in England about the Sacramente of thaultare. The Lady Iane, which was proclaimed Quene is beheaded, & greate execution is done in England. The bleſſed death of the Duke of Saxon and his wife. Alberte again exiled, worketh greate crueltye. Marye Quene of Englande maried to kinge Phillip. Cardinall Poole geueth full abſolution to England. An aſſemble at Auſpurge. Many excellente parſonages are condemned in Englande, being wholy reconqueſted to the Pope.
            
            
               TO the intent ſome remeady might be founde for theſe troubles and tumults in Germany, the Emperour in the month of May calleth an aſſembly of thempire, the xiii. day of Auguſt: And whan he had beſieged the Citye of Terwen, in the dominion of Fraunce, from the end of Aprill. The xx. day of Iune he taketh Terwen raſed. it by an aſſaulte, ſpoyleth, burneth, and raſeth it down to the ground. The Conſtable ſonne was taken in the ſame. The king of Englande ſendinge an honorable ambaſſade, by the ſpace of certaine monthes intreated a peace. The ſame did the biſhop of Rome, but that was in vain.
            
               
In the month of May, Ihon, Duke of Northumberlād, which after the death of the Lord Protector, the Kinges Uncle, had ye chief The Lady Iane of Suffolke maried to Buylford Dudley. gouernment (as before is ſaide) marieth one of his Sonnes to the Lady Iane of Suffolke, daughter to the Lady Fraunces, whiche was Nece to Kinge Henrye the eighte, by his Siſter the Frenche Quene. That time was Kinge Edwarde greuouſlye ſicke. Than was it warre alſo in Piedmont, and in the hither partes of Italy. Kinge Edward ſore ſicke. War in Italye. For the Emperour purpoſed to recouer Senes, ſendinge thither a power from Naples vnder the conduit of the Uiceroy, Peter Toletane: but wheras he died, and the Turkiſh Nauy, to the whiche the Prince of Salerne, going out of Fraunce, had ioyned him ſelf, was ſailing on the Seas of Grece and Italy, the ſoldiors retourned home, to repulſe the neare and domeſticall daunger.
            Marques Albert kepinge warre in Franconie, Duke Moris and his fellowes ſend their army thither. The Marques therfore leauing a garriſon at Schuinfurt and other places, whan he had euerye where exacted Monye, haſted with greate expedition into Saxony, leading away with him many pledges oute of the dominions of Norinberge and Bamberge captiues. Whan he was cō
               men to Aruſtet, there were the ambaſſadors of Ihon Fridericke, Duke of Saxon, to intreat him that he would not hurte his country: he promiſed right gently, and kept it. After, marching into the limites of Erfurde, he ſpoyleth there manye villages. Duke Moris amaſed at his ſoden comming, which had ſente his armye into Franckonie, as I ſaide, commaundeth all his Nobility, after alſo thother ſtates to put on armure, and hyreth as many as he coulde, The Mar. maketh war in Saxonye. but the Marques paſſing through his countrye, with oute doinge anye hurte, whan he came to Halberſtat, he taketh the gates, and impoſeth to the Cleargye there a greate ſumme of Monye, after that, he burneth and deſtroyeth the Countrye of Henrye the Duke of Brunſwicke, beinge aided by Duke Ericke, and the Nobilitye of Brunſwicke.
            The Duke of Brunſwickes armye, whiche I ſaide before, was gone into Franckonie, by the conduit of Phillip his Sonne, whan they had attempted Schuinfurte in vaine, and ſaw ther was pearill at home, retourne into Saxonie: likewiſe do the Souldioures of Duke Moris, whereof the Earle Hedecke had the leading, and ioyn wt Duke Moris about Northuſe. And for ſo much as ye Marques tourned downe into the prouince of Minden, Duke Moris thinckinge that he woulde haue gone throughe Heſſe, and againe made inuaſion into Franconie, from Northuſe marcheth to Embecke, that he mighte preuente him. Than in the ende ioyninge all his forces together, he incampeth in the countrye of Hildeſſeme, at

Oſterode, and the firſt day of Iuly, not only he, but alſo the Chaū
               celour of Boheme, Henrye Plauie, in kinge Fardinandoes name King Fernādo proclameth warre agaynſte Albert. Proclaime warre againſte him, and ſending abrode theyr letters. (Themperor) ſay they, in theſe former yeares, hath by common aſſent and conſent of the princes and ſtates, eſtabliſhed peace throughe out the Empire, and gaue commaundement, that what action ſome euer any man had, he ſhould try it at the law, and worcke no force nor violence: And certainly the ſtate of Germany, which hath bene nowe certaine yeares nowe ſore afflicted with Ciuill warres doth much require peace and quietneſſe.
            Wherfore, what time there aroſe warre lately within the limits of the Empire, kinge Ferdinando, with the healpe of others, indeuoured and toke paines, that the warre was appeaſed. And here in at the lengthe had the Princes conſentes, that were chiefe Captains of the warre, and finally, through the Emperoures permiſſion concluded peace. Wherin it was prouided amongs other thinges, (not only) that nothing be done to the contrary, but that ſuche alſo as be in dāger ſhuld be aided and aſſiſted, but that ſame peace did not Marques Albert refuſe only, but alſo did wryte openly to certen renowmed princes, that the ſame tēded to the great reproche and dommage of Germany, and was more worthye to be called a treaſon, than a peace making. By which wordes you declare ſufficiently, what minde you beare to your natiue country. Again, whā you had with ſpoyling and burning diſtroied the countrye that lieth by the Rhine, wheras you had no good ſucceſſe in Fraunce, and themperor had an army prepared, throughe interceſſion you were reconciled to him, vpon reſpect only, that he would confirme youre compoſition with the Biſhops of Bamberge and Wirciburge. But you ſtraightwaies abuſinge this confirmation of themperor, who permitted you to ſhew no violence, haue by youre miniſters manye times put in feare, either prelate, with moſt terrible threatninges, ſaying how you would inforce them, by tharmies of the Earles of Manſfeld and Oldenburge, to obſerue their couenauntes, as it is by your own mens letters to be proued. And that alſo you mighte bring this to paſſe, the ſoldiors, which you diſcharged after ye ſiege of Metz was leuied, you commaunded to retourne to you againe, at the beginning of Aprill. And all be it that they put their matter to the arbitrement of themperor, king Ferdinando, and the Princes, or cls referred the controuerſy to the iudges of the chamber, & lawes of thempire, and namely at Hedelberge offered ſuche conditions, that not only the princes interceſſors, but alſo themperor by his letters approued the ſame: yet you refuſinge all theſe offers, haue inuaded their prouinces, and ſurpriſing certain places, haue

not ſpared to ſpoile gentle women, and ſo practiſing ſpoilinge and exactions of mony, haue fired many Caſtels, Townes, Uillages, The ſpoylinges of Al. and other buildinges, burning cruelly not only them, but the men in them in ſome places, aſwell of theyrs, as of the ſtate of Norinberge, which both by the publicke law of the Empire, and a league alſo lately made did aſſiſt them. After this haue you taken oute of ſondrye places, Townes men and Citezens, of greate yeares: and for age vnweldie, as pledges for the mony impoſed, where it is not to be had, and haue caried them aboute with you into the lower partes of Saxony, cruelly and tirannically which way ſoeuer you went. Moreouer, againſt all righte, you haue proclaimed warre agauiſt the Nobility of Franckonie, and taken Sthuinfurt a town imperiall, and fortified it with a garriſon, by the whyche thynges doubtleſſe you haue raiſed vp a wonderfull trouble and terrour in all places. Furthermore, you haue not ſpared the king Fardinando: And all be it you are bounden to him by wardſhip, and league of inheritaunce, yet throughe a certaine deſperate raſhneſſe, you haue not only made Rhoades into the borders of Boheme, but alſo haue ſore afflicted the poſſeſſions of his kingdom, graunted out in times paſte by compoſition to them of Norinberge, and diuers honeſt men alſo of the ſame iuriſdiction, you haue partlye ſlaine, and partly brought into extreame pouerty and miſery, and the ſame guidons of horſmen, which the king licenced the Norinbergians, to leuy for the defence of theyr Country, and not to wrong any man you haue ſet vppon, and taken, and ſpoyling them of horſe and armure, you haue compelled them to retourne home again. Furthermore, you kepe certaine Traitoures, and ſuch as the Kinge hathe outlawed for rebellion, and ſpeake wordes, as it is reported, full of threatninges againſt the Kinge and the Bohemers. Yet hathe the king geuen you none occaſion ſo to do, but hath euer auanced your commodities, by what meanes he coulde: And all be it you entred his Country one yeare paſt, full like an ennemy, yet are you not ignoraunt, how frendly than he wrote vnto you, that both you ſhuld amend this fault: and alſo beware from henceforth.
            Now, for my part, ſaith Duke Moris, all be it that in all my life The complaint of D. Moris vpon Marques Al. I neuer gaue you any occaſion of diſpleaſure, but haue rather beſtowed vpon you many benefits, yet, the laſt yeare, whan after the peace concluded, departing from Franckfurt, for the common welthes ſake, and king Ferdinandos, I led my army into hongary againſt the Turke, you remember by what meanes you ſoughte to allure my men from me, and what opprobrious wordes you gaue me, both to your ſoldioures and others, what time, ſpeaking of the pacification of paſſawe, you called it the betraying of Germanye.

meaning it by me, and my frend Henrye Plauie. Moreouer I am not ignoraunt, what thing was attempted the laſte winter, whan I was in Hongary, to the deſtruction of me and my country, by the army of the Earle Manſfeld, which was than in the duchy of Brū
               ſwicke. And whan you wer reconciled to themperor, what manner of wordes, and not only how ſtinginge and bitinge, but alſo howe threatning and contumelious ye ſpake againſte me and my prouince at the ſiege of Metz, they know, which were-than in Campe with you. And whan you retourned home, after the ſiege was leuied, being demaunded of me by letters, of the ſame matter, and of your mind towards me, you anſwered proudlye, yt whatſoeuer you haue ſpoken of me or of others, you both remembre it, and will not deny the ſame: And to thother you made ſuch anſwer, as I can gether no certaintainty therof. After, wryting to me of the ſame matter from Hedelberge, you alledged certain thinges of great parſonages for this intent as I ſuppoſe, that you might cauſe me to ſuſpect and diſtruſt them: but wheras I gaue no great regard to ſuch matters, I aduiſed and counſelled you, bothe by letters and intermeſſagers, that you ſhould obſerue the peace, and alſo deſyred to know, what I my ſelf ſhould loke for at your hand. But you, wryting letters to thelector of Brandenburge: All be it you ſpake of me ſomwhat temperatly, yet, wher you come to the pacification of Paſſaw, you ſignified plainly enough, howe you were affected towards me, and not long after declared it alſo in dede. For in certen of your laſt letters, you required me, that I woulde call backe my army, which was in the tentes of the confederates in Franckonie, for this intent verely, that vnleſſe I ſo did, you mighte haue an occaſion to war againſt me. Againe, ſhortly after you led your army through my country and my brothers Auguſtus, wher you had geuen vs no knowledge ther of before, cleane contrary to thaunciente cuſtome of Germany. You make your boaſt, that you did no hurte as you went, but my men report to me far otherwiſe. And all be it, that it were ſo, yet do I not ſo much aſcribe this to your will, as to neceſſity. For it is knowen how faſt you marched, and how weary the Souldiours wer: And you knew rightwel, that in caſe you had attempted any force or ſhewed violence, it had not ben harde for me to haue reſiſted you and your army, being ſo faint and weried with traueling, and to haue called home thoſe that were in Franckonie: but doubtleſſe your purpoſe was, to haue ſet on me at your return, and that haue your Souldiors not let to ſaye. Moreouer, paſſyng through the country of Thuring, you ſpoiled certen villages of the city of Erfurd, which is vnder our tuition. Which you denye not in your owne letters wrytten to me from Brunſwicke. Your ſoldiors

alſo haue ſlaine diuers in my brothers Country, and neare vnto Bichlinge, they toke two gentlemen, and whan they had appealed vnto me, bette them with whippes and caſt them in priſon.
            Yet for all this could not I be broughte, to attempte warre: but required the ſame by letters, that I did before, and exhorting you to peace, wherof there was than a treaty at Franckfurt, inquyred what minde you were of towardes me and my fellowes. But how bitterly & angerly you anſwered, it appereth by your own letters. For neither woulde you vtter your minde, and yet accuſed the treaty of Franckfurt as ſuſpected. Whereof I could gether none otherwiſe, but that you were determined to continue the warre of Frankonie, yea and as occaſion ſerued, to ſpare neither me nor my fellowes. Which you alſo denounced to them of Erfurde, and immediatly after declared alſo to others.
            For beſides many others diſpleaſures, that you did the Biſhoppricke of Halberſtat, which themperor, as you knowe, hathe committed to my protection, you impoſed a great ſome of Monye, and ſpoyled theyr colledges in the country neuertheleſſe. The ſame did you alſo in the Archbiſhoppricke of Maidenburge, which is likewiſe compriſed vnder my tuition, and haue exacted Monye of the Northuſians and Mulluſians. And Henrye the Duke of Brunſwicke, with whome I haue made a league, righte honeſt in dede, Duke Mor. league with the Duke of Brūſwicke. and not repugnant to the treatye of Paſſawe, you haue perſecuted with ſword and fire, ſo ſone as I had aduertiſed you by letters, of the league, and the reaſt of my fellowes. Theſe thinges doubtles, be not correſpondent to certain of your former letters.
            Now therfore, although that king Ferdinando (I) and our fellowes do greatly deſire peace: eſpeciallye of Germany, & euer ſence the pacification of Paſſaw, to indeuor that al thinges may be quiet: Eſpecially in theſe parties: which thing alſo very manye of the nobility of Brunſwicke, which ſerue now in your camp can teſtify: yet, for ſo much as you haue remoued the war into theſe parties, & declare manifeſtly, whan you inuade our fellowes, what your intēt is. Moreouer, for ſo muche as there is a brute, yt you are hyring of greater forces, though it be in an others mās name, which you are not hable to find, except you permit them to robbe and ſpoyle, and worke what miſchief they liſt, in ſo much that not only Frankonie, but other prouinces alſo, ſtand in great danger of you, which your ſelfe can not diſſemble, whileſt you ſaye, you will brynge to paſſe, that no man els ſhall be in better caſe than you are: For theſe cauſes I ſay, and for ſo muche as you leaue no place vnto Concorde, king Fernando (I) and our fellowes, ſeing we are next the dāger,

are conſtrained to put on armure, to repulſe from vs violence and iniury, to the end we may deliuer our natiue countrye, and recouer the Publike quietneſſe. For this do the lawes of the Empire, not only permit, but inioyne vs alſo, and the high court of the chambre imperiall commaundeth vs, to aid and aſſiſt our neighbors of Frā konye. And althoughe at this time that you leuye men in, you pretend to do it in themperors name, yet knowe we aſſuredly, that the ſame is forged and famed. For he hath declared what his mind is, not only to you, but to vs and other alſo, and ſhortly you ſhal know more, what he thincketh. But, ſince this our enterpriſe is attempted for the common wealthes ſake, and therfore neaded no declaration of our mind, yet to thintent, you ſhall not be ignorant, we both do proteſt, that we will do hereafter, as the thinge it ſelfe ſhall require, that this your diſſolute, and more than Tirannicall cruelty, may be ſuppreſſed. And this verelye in oure owne name, and oure fellowes, we do you to vnderſtand, and hear teſtify, that the blame of all the calamity, that ſhall chaunce in this warre, is wholy to be imputed vnto you, which will come to no reaſonable condition: nether doubt we this alſo, but the euerliuing God will aſſiſte rather thoſe, that ſeke the ſafegard of their countrye, than him, that goeth about deſtruction, and warreth on his natiue country. What time theſe letters were deliuered, in the campe of Marques Albert, the Ambaſſadoures of the electoure of Brandenburge, were ſente to perſwade a peace.
            Whan he had red the letters, he cōſulteth of the matter with his captaines, & demaundeth of them, whether they will take his part: Who affirming, he calleth for the yong gētleman that brought the letters, and tourning his talke to him. Thy Prince, ſaith he, hathe thriſe broken his faith before this, and hath done wickedly, & thys is the fourth fact of the ſame ſort: let him come hardly, I wil proue what he can do: This tell him in my name. The Mar. annſwere to duke Moris.
            
            With theſe wordes he geueth him certaine crownes in rewarde, and ſendeth him a waye. There the ambaſſadoures that were interceſſors, ſhall we do nothing than ſay theyrnothing, ſaith he, you may retourne home. Whan therfore he perceiued the waight of the warre, he ſendeth Duke Ericke of Brunſwick to the Emperor the third day of Iuly, and ſignifieth vnto him, how through the policy Marques Albert ſendeth to the Emperor of certen, ther wer many aduerſaries raiſed againſte him, whiche indeuor, that the couenaunts be not only not kepte, but alſo that he might be expulſed out of al his lands and poſſeſſions, by reaſon of a new conſpiracy, and that is he able to proue: that certen Princes electors, and the chiefeſt of all Germanye, haue conſpired to chuſe

a newe Emperour. And the cauſe why the Biſhoppes be ſo ſore againſt him, is long of the iudges of the Chamber. He prayeth hym therfore that he would not be offended, if he ſhall attempt ought againſt them. His aduerſaries alſo, to bryng hym in hatred, and to allure mo vnto them, haue reyſed this brute of him, as though he hath conſpyred with him to oppreſſe the libertie of Germany. This doubtleſſe haue certen Prynces obiected vnto hym, and letters are caſte abroade in Germany, as ſent from the Byſhop of Arras, howe he verely for this intent, hyreth an armie, that he myght accomplyſhe his wyll. For the Duke of Alba ſhall brynge his ſonne, the Prynce of Spayne into Germany to the next conuention of the Empyre, that he may be denounced the ſucceſſour of the Empyre. With this is kyng Ferdinando ſo fully perſwaded, that entryng into league with his ennemies, he hath proclaimed warre againſte hym. He hath verely excuſed this vnto many ryght dilligently: but the ſuſpicion increaſeth dayly. Therfore is he ſubiecte vnto great perilles and daungers, in a maner for this cauſe only, that he wyll not forſake his frendſhyp. Wherfore he humbly beſecheth hym, that he wyll bothe ratifie thoſe compoſitions of the Byſhoppes, and alſo defende hym and his. This if he wyll doe, he wyll brynge vnto hym (whan the matter ſhall be agreed vpon) .ix. thouſande horſemen, and an hondreth enſeignes of footemen.
            In the meane tyme the Norinbergians, and the Byſhops; in the abſence of Marques Albert, inuade his dominion, he, The biſhops in his abſence inuade his counitie. publiſhyng letters, blamed ſore them of Norinberge, as thoſe that had broken their fayth and conuenauntes, and entrynge into league with the faulſe Byſhoppes, imbraced agayne the Popiſhe doctrine. Wherunto they afterwarde, ſetting forth a boke make aunſwere, and recite the whole matter in order, euer ſynce the yeare before, howe cruel warre he hath kept, how they made compacte with hym, howe after by the Emperours permiſſion and conſente, they made a league with the Byſhoppes aboute them, howe he hathe refuſed mooſte reaſonable conditions, offered by the ſame Byſhoppes, and againe moued warre agaynſte them: and howe, at what tyme, bothe for the league made, and alſo for the commaundement of the Chamber, they ayded theyr fellowes, he inuaded agayne theyr Countrie lately. Amongeſt others of hys wycked Actes, they recite this as a rare example of ſuche crueltie as hath not bene hearde of, that, hauyng taken two townes of

their dominion, Altorfe and Lanſe, he ſhut in not the townes The great crueltie of Mar. Albert men only, but alſo the people he could fynde in the countrie, and eattell, and after ſet them on fyre in ſondry places, but chiefly about the gates, pourpoſing doubtleſſe to burne them all vp. In the which fire they ſay chyldrē and women with chylde, and many ſicke perſones, which were not able to breake down the walles and eſcape, were there miſerably brent. Touchinge that he ſaieth of altering their Religiō, they declare to be falſe for the league is made only, to repulſe violence from them and theirs. And that he careth for no Religion, it is well knowen to many, and they alſo haue many thinges to ſaye in this behalfe: But for the noble familie he commeth of, and for certen Princes, his kinſmen, they wyll temper them ſelues.
            The fift daye of Iuly Sigiſmunde kynge of Pole, marieth the Lady Katherine, daughter of kyng Ferdinando, which had bene wyfe to the Duke of Mantua, where as ten yeares ſynce, he had maried his ſyſter, as is mentioned in the .xv. boke.
            Edwarde the ſyxte, kyng of Englande, a Prynce of vndoubted and excellent hope, the ſyxt daye of Iuly, as it was knowen The death of good kyng Edward. abroade, departed out of this lyfe, of a conſumyng diſeaſe, beyng of .xvi. yeares of age, to the exceadynge great grief of all good and Godly men. For after his death enſued a maruelous alteration of thynges in Englande, as ſhalbe declared hereafter. It was bruted abroade, that he was poyſoned. Certenly, there was not in Europe a kyng of ſo great expectation theſe many yeares. From his very chyldhode he was excellently well brought vp and inſtructed in vertue and learnyng, and had The vertues of Edward the ſixt. not only the Latin tongue, but the Greke and Frenche alſo, and loued the doctrine of the Goſpell exceadyngly, and gaue vnto all learned men enterteinement and ſuccour, to Germaines, Italians, Frenchemen, Scottes, Spanyardes, and Polonians.
            What tyme both armies were not farre a ſonder in Saxonie, A battell fought betwixt Duke Maurice and Mar. Albert. and the Marques was come ouer the water of Weſer, the nynth daye of Iuly at after none, they ioyned in battell with all theyr forces. After a longe fyght, Duke Maurice whiche excelled in horſemen, had the victory, but he hym ſelfe beyng ſtriken with a dagge through his bowels, died within two dayes after. The Marques came to Hanobrie in ſafitie. There were ſlayne aboute foure thouſande, in a maner al horſemen. There were taken exceadyng many. Henry the Duke of Brunſwycke, loſte in that conflicte two ſonnes, Charles and Philippe.

The nexte daye came fiue hondreth horſemen out of Boheme, ſent by kynge Ferdinando to Duke Maurice. The Lantgraue had alſo ſent to Duke Maurice ſeuen hondreth horſemen. At the ſame tyme therfore, there were together in one campe the Lantgraue and the Duke of Brunſwick, with the Byſhoppes, by a maruelous chaunge and contrarietie in thinges, where Duke Ericke of Brunſwicke, that had maried Duke Maurice ſyſter, ayded Marques Alberte. Many menne thought that tyme, that lyke as kinge Ferdinando gaue ayde againſt Marques Albert, ſo did the Emperour incourage and ſtrengthen the Marques againſt Duke Maurice. Howebeit the Emperours letters (whiche hereafter I ſhall recite) importe no ſuche kynde of thynges.
            The Frenche kyng was ſayde than to haue treated of newe deuiſes with Duke Maurice, & was ryght ſory for his death. Duke Maurice being caried into his Tente, the ſame nyght wryteth letters to the Byſhop of Wirtemburge, his fellowe in that warre, wherein he declareth the whole matter, and ſaieth howe the victory is his, but that he is ſore wounded: And ſuppoſeth that Albert is fliyng. He admonyſheth hym therfore, that he commaunde the wayes to be layde for hym in certen places, that he may be intercepted, and not ſuffered to paſſe. What ſo euer his owne ſtate or ende ſhal be, he is of a good conſcience. For he toke in hande this warre, that he myght ſuppreſſe that diſturber, and recouer the quietnes of Germany. He was buried at Fridberge a Towne of Meiſſen, the fourtenth daye after the battell by Henry his father, and his yong ſonne Albert. He was .xxxii. yeares olde and vpwarde: His preſence was thought to be a great cauſe of the victory, or els it was ſuppoſed that the Marques ſhould haue wonne the fielde. For D. Maurice wan yt fielde and loſt his lyfe. many of his horſemen were fled. There were taken of the ennemies and brought vnto hym out of the battell .liiii. enſeignes, and .xiiii. guidons. For the whiche Duke Maurice in dede ſpent his owne lyfe, but yet he ouerthrewe the force and power of the Marques. For after that battell he was neuer able to gather any mayne power. Whan the corps went through Lipſia, Ioachim Camerarie, made the oration funerall, and ſpeakyng muche in his commendation, he rekened vp the wonders The wōders before his death. that went before his death. Droppes of bloude ſtyckynge vpon the leaues of trees, the moſte importune barkynge of Dogges, and werieng one an other. The neyinge of Horſes hearde, and the clatterynge and clankynge of Harneſſe, and certen other thynges full of terrour.

Againe, his owne Tente ouerthrowen with a whirlewynde, & the reſidue ſtanding ſtill and not touched, and certen wordes of his owne, as foreſpeaking and prognoſticating his death to come. And certenly as touching thoſe red droppes, they were commonly ſene in diuerſe places, and euen at Straſburge aboute the beginning of Iune, what tyme they fell vpō bowes, graſſe, tyled houſes and ſtones. That tyme did there flie a wonderfull number of butterflies, and ſome there were, that ſayde, howe theſe bloudy droppes came of them. Againe others iudged that it did pourtēde and ſignifie ſome thing. Betwene Duke Maurice and Marqes Albert, being both of one age, there had bene Great frendſhip betwixt D. Maurice and Marqu. Albert. alwayes very great frendſhip, ſo that there could be no derer frendes. For thei both had ſerued the Emperour in thre warres together, in the Frenche, the Proteſtauntes, and the warre of Maydenburge, after, this fourth and laſte warre they attempted againſt the Emperour. But diſpleaſures aryſing, as before is ſayd, their amitie had at length this doulefull and ſorouful ende. What tyme Duke Maurice died, his brother Auguſtus was in Denmarke, with his wyfe, with the kyng his father in lawe. Wherfore the Nobilitie and States doe retaine parte of the armie, for to defende his countrie, about .xii. enſeignes of fotemen, and fiue guidons of horſemē: The reſidue are diſcharged, and for the moſte part retourned home with the funerall. But the .xviii. daye of Iuly, Marques Albert wryteth letters to the nobilitie and people of Duke Maurice. Where as of late The Marq. letters to yt ſtates of D. Maurice. he went through their coūtrie into Saxon, he paſſed without harme doing, for that he had no hoſtilitie in his mynde. But Duke Maurice hath not only hurt men of his dominion, but alſo to the intent to gratifie certen wicked & periured biſhops, had renounced yt auncient league, that is betwene his familie and ye houſe of Saxon, in a maner for no cauſe, & after a ſtraūge example had made warre againſt him. Whiche thing being ſo in dede, and for ſo muche as they thē ſelues haue furthered his enterpriſe, cleane againſt the Emperours cōmaundement, therfore muſt he ſee for hym ſelfe, howe he may recompence himſelf for the domage receiued, and therfore renounceth their league and amitie. The Emperours armie, after Turwen was ouerthrowen, marching from thence into Artois, in the moneth of Iuly toke the Caſtell of Heſdine by aſſaute. There was ſlayne Oratius Farneſe, the Frenche kynges ſonne in lawe. There were manye of the Nobilitie taken, amonges whome was the The death of Orace Farneſe. hyghe Mareſhall of Fraunce, Marchian, that dwelleth in the foreſte of Arden.
            
               
The newes of the battell in Saxonie was brought to the Empu
                  •
               y within a very fewe dayes. Who after the .xxii. daye of Iuly, aunſwereth Duke Ericke of Brunſwicke, whome Marques Albert had ſent, as before is ſayde. Howe he is not a little ſory, that the diſpleaſure is growen ſo farre, for he had muche rather that all this controuerſie had bene appeaſed, and vnles it be ſo, he feareth leaſt it wyll come euyll to paſſe, not only to the Empyre, but alſo to Marques Albert, eſpecially, ſince that ſo many of the chiefeſt States doe ſet in fote herein, and haue made a league. Therfore his aduiſe and requeſt is, that with al ſpede they laye downe theyr weapons, and deuiſe ſome meanes of concorde. If the Marques be ſo content, he wyll deuiſe, that the contrary parte ſhall ſurceſſe alſo, and diſtruſteth not, but that he ſhall perſwade them. And he earneſtly deſyreth, that he refuſe not ſo to doe: For otherwyſe, the caſe ſtandyng as it doth nowe, he can not vſe his ſeruice, leaſt he ſhould increaſe the ſuſpicion that is reyſed already. Whiche doubtleſſe vnto hym, that hath nothyng derer, than the peace and tranquillitie of the Empyre, ſhould be very greuous and diſpleaſaunt.
            About the begynning of the moneth of Auguſte, Auguſtus Auguſtus brother and heſre to Du. Maurice. Duke Maurice brother, commyng home out of Denmarke, a fewe dayes after, conſultyng with his Counſel, taketh an othe of all the people, and amongeſt others, of the Wyttembergians to be true to hym and to his heyres males, and if none remain, to retourne to the fidelitie of Iohn Fridericke and his chyldren, in caſe he obey the Emperour, and obſerue the compactes of fourmer yeares, if not, that than they be obedient to the Lantgraue. This done, he is ſaluted Prynce Electour, and calleth an aſſemblee of his States, to appere before hym, the xx. daye of Auguſte. The .xvii. daye of that moneth, was a marueilous great earthquake in the towne of Meſen. Whan all were aſſembled at Lipſia, at the daye, very many. Duke Auguſte bryngeth in queſtion: fyrſte, whether he ſhould ioyne hym ſelfe to the newe league of kyng Ferdinando, the Prynces and Byſhopes, and to proſecute his brothers warre againſt Marques Albert. Secondarely, if he ſhould forſake the league, how he ought to auenge his brothers death. Finally, by what meanes he may compounde with Iohn Fridericke. For he, in his abſence, ſendyng letters to the nobles, required that the dignitie of Electourſhyp, and his poſſeſſions that were taken awaye myght be wholy reſtored to hym. The effect of the conſultatiō and counſell was, that he ſhould obſerue peace with both, and that the Electour of Brandenburg ſhould treate a pacificatiō.

And hereof an order was made, although king Ferdinando by Henry Plauie, Chauncelour of Boheme, had treated earneſtly with Duke Auguſte concerning the league. In this conuention, the Duke of Saxon ſending againe an other Ambaſſade, Iohn Frederick demaū
                  deth his landes and dignities. demaundeth his owne, and that with ſharpe wordes, the ſame did the States of his dominion, but that was in vaine. And Auguſte ſayed, howe he was not bounde ſo to doe, and that he would ſticke to thoſe compactes and conuenauntes which the Emperour had made whan he was takē, but yet would he not refuſe all treatie. During that ſame aſſemblie, Henry Duke of Brunſwicke deſyred ayde of Duke Auguſte againſt Marques Albert, whiche hyred new bandes of ſoldiours. After the death of Duke Maurice, the Duke of Saxon ſent thone of his ſōnes, Iohn William, into Brabant to the Emperour, that he might be reſtored. And in a maner about the ſame time, the nobilitie and ſtates of his dominion, ſent thyther Ambeſſadours alſo in the abſence of Duke Auguſte, that the Emperour, wold accept their Prince as by them commended. The Duke of Saxon had ſent Ambaſſadours alſo, to kyng Ferdinando, and to the kynge of Denmarke, about the ſame matter. In the meane ſeaſon the Biſhop of Wirtemburg beſegeth Schninfurt, which was kept with a garriſon of Marques Albert, as before is ſayd. And the Byſhop of Bamberge, and the Norinbergians, whan they had a whyle beſeged Collebach, leading away the power, ioyne thē ſelues to Counte Plauie, whiche layed batterie to the towne Hoſie, belonging to the Marques.
            In theſe monethes were .ix. burnt at Lions, whan diuers of them had bene in pryſon a yeare and more. Articles were propounded Nyne burnt at Lions. to them al, of the preſence of Chriſtes body in the Lordes ſupper, of Purgatory, of the Maſſe, of priuate or auricular Confeſſion, of Ceremonies, of praiyng to the virgin Mary, and other that be dead, of the ſupremacie of the Biſhop of Rome, of Free wyll, of Iuſtification of workes, of the authoritie of the churche and of Byſhoppes, of Monaſticall vowes, of choice of meates, of vnction and confirmatiō, and of Images. And they aunſwered to euery point conſtantly, and after one ſorte, ſeuerally, alledging the teſtimonies of Scripture. Whyleſt they were in pryſon, with their letters they comforted not only one an other, but alſo their frendes and other churches, and wrote euery thing as it was done. What tyme Lewys Marſake, one of the pryſoners being a mā of warre, alledging many things Lewys Marſake. out of the holy Scriptures, the inquiſitours that were preſēt demaunded of him, whether it were his part to read the bokes

of Scripture, and aſked him how he knewe theſe thinges to be the Goſpell? The kinges liftenaunt alſo ſayd there were onely but two Euangeliſtes, Matthew and Iohn: For the other two The blaſphe my or yt lieftenaunt. and Paule alſo, had as it were ſowed together certen fragmentes, and patches. And if it were not that the Doctours of the churche did attribute to Paule that authoritie, he wold ſet no more by his Epiſtles, than by Eſopes fables. And whan Marſake inferred agayne, that there were Godly teſtimonies of the vocation and office of S. Paule, eſpecially in the .i. chap. of the Epiſtle to the Galathians. That maketh nothing for the matter ſaith he, for he beareth witnes of him ſelf. Unto thoſe that ſuffer with hym, the hangeman put an haltar about their neckes, as the maner is. But Marſake, whome the iudges cōmaū
               ded to be led without a bande about his necke, ſayed vnto thē, is their cauſe better than mine? Why wil you not geue me ſuch a chaine alſo? Why will you not dubbe me knight of this noble and excellent order? alluding to ye accuſtomed maner of kinges, who at what tyme they wyll honour and auaunce their frendes, they make them knightes of their owne order, and geue them a chayne of Golde, as a token of honour. Fiue of them ſtudied at Loſanna, Frenchemen in dede borne, but founde at the Fiue ſtudēts of Loſanna. charges and liberalitie of the Lords of Bernes. Whan therfore they had heard that they were taken, and vnderſtode their daū
               ger, they made diligent ſute to ye king, deſiring him, thei might be geuen to them: But it was in vayne, where the kyng alledged that he might not doe it by the lawes. The Cardinall of Tournon, was thought to haue bene the occaſion hereof.
            I ſpake a litle before of the death of the moſte noble Prince, Edwarde the ſixte, kyng of England. He was in a conſumptiō, and in the moneth of Ianuary he fell ſicke. And where as his ſicknes increaſed, being carefull for his Realme and Religion, he conferreth with his counſell of the matter, and inquireth of them, vnto whome chiefly he ſhould committe the gouernmēt. For albeit that king Henry his father whā he died, had appointed next in ſucceſſion vnto him. Mary and Elizabeth, as before is ſayd, yet for ſo muche as he him ſelfe was of lawefull yeres, he accoumpted it to lie in his power to make his heire, eſpecially, ſeing that moſte men doubted of the lawful birth of his ſyſter, and Mary was alſo of the Byſhop of Romes Religion, which if ſhe ſhould haue the gouernment, he ſawe howe there was great daunger, leaſt both this preſent Religion ſhould be ſubuerted, and the Realme alſo be gouerned by a ſtraunger. Wherfore after deliberatiō had, it was agreed to choſe the lady

Iane of Suffolke, daughter to the Lady Fraūces, nece to kinge Henry the eight. Whan the reſt of the Counſell, and the Maior The lady Iane. of London, and the Lordes of the Realme had this allowed. The Archebyſhop of Cantorbury, primate of Englande, was ſent for to the court, that he myght ſubſcribe, whiche he refuſeth to doe, vnleſſe he maye firſt heare the kyng ſpeake. Wherfore being admitted to his ſpeache, whan he had reaſoned the matter with him familiarly as he laye, he aſſēted, being of him earneſtly required hereunto. Whan the kyng was departed, whiche was the ſyxt daye of Iuly, as before is ſayd, the fourth daye after, the Lady Iane is proclaimed Quene, and a proclamation openly ſet forth howe kyng Edwarde by the conſent of his Nobles, for moſte weighty cauſes, had diſherited the Lady Mary, and the Lady Elizabeth his ſyſters, and lefte the ſucceſſion of the Realme to the Lady Iane. The Nobilitie and commons toke this moſte diſpleaſauntly, not ſo muche for the loue of the Lady Mary, as for the hatred of the Duke of Northumberlande, where no man in a maner doubted, but that he was the authour of this counſell, to the intent, that by this meane, he myght as it were conuey the kingdome into his own houſe. Whyleſt theſe thinges were a workyng, the Lady Mary fleeth into Norfolke, and from thence to the caſtell of Framingham in Suffolke, and wryting abroade for ayde, taketh vpon her as Quene. That knowen, the Duke of Northumberlande aſſembleth a power, and ſetting forth of Londō, marcheth towardes her, by the conſent of the reſte, to apprehende her. But in the meane ſeaſon the counſellours that remayned in the citie, perceiuing the hartes of the people, & that the forces of Norfolke and Suffolke, reſorted to Quene Mary, chaunging their myndes and pourpoſe, proclaimed Quene Mary, and kepe the lady The Lady Mary proclamed Quene Iane in pryſon. After theſe newes came into the Campe, al mē for the moſte parte, bycauſe they ſerued againſt their wylles, & hated the Duke, do reuolte. And whan letters and commiſſion came from Frammingham, thei take the Duke at Cambridge, and the .xxv. daye of Iuly bryng him agayne into the citie. It is vncredible, with what rebukes & railinges ye people receiued hym, whyleſt ſome cal him traytour, ſome parracide, & others the murtherer of the moſte innocent kyng. For in as much as he was thought to haue brought his ſonnes wyfe to the Roial crowne, there aroſe a ſuſpicion, that he had imagined theſe thynges longe before, and layde in wayte for the kynges lyfe. After were apprehended his ſonnes and his brother, and certē other Nobles, and the kynges ſcholemaiſter, Sir Iohn Cheke,

knight, a mā of great vertu and learning. Yet was he diſcharged afterwardes, but put in a maner from all his lſuing. After came Quene Mary to London, & entring into the holde, which they call the Towre, deliuereth out of priſon the Duke of Norfolke, who had bene almoſte ſeuen yeares in captiuitie, & Gardiner Byſhop of Wincheſter, and Tunſtall Biſhop of Dureſme, and certen other Byſhops of the popyſhe Religion, whiche had bene put from their Byſhoprikes, and reſtoreth them to their fourmer places. And certenly yt byſhop of Wincheſter, although in bookes ſet forth, he had defended the doing of king Henry, what tyme he diuorſed him ſelfe from the Lady Katherine the mother of Quene Mary, as in the .ix. booke is mentioned, yet nowe he obteined the place of the chauncelour, whiche is there Wincheſter made Chaū
                  celour. the higheſt degree of dignitie. For where the lady Katherine alledged the Byſhop of Romes licence, Iuly the ſecond, who had confirmed that matrimony, and the kyng againe ſayde it was naught, and therfore ſent the Byſhop of Wincheſter, before he was Byſhop, to Rome, that Clement might pronoūce theſame fruſtrate. Who comming thither in the moneth of February in the .xxix. yeare, was an importune ſuter. The Biſhop of Rome, who as the prouerbe is, helde the woulfe by both eares, where as both he coueted to gratifie the kyng, and alſo feared themperours diſpleaſure, aunſwereth that he wyll wryte to themperour, that the true licence vnder ſeale might be ſhewed. He aſſenteth in dede, but he requireth to haue two monethes only appointed for the ſame matter: Whan that tyme ſhalbe runne out, Gardener requireth ye the licence might be compted vnlawfull. But that thought the Byſhop of Rome both ſtraunge and alſo vnreaſonable, and ſeketh with gentle wordes to ſatiſfie the kyng. But the Ambaſſadour tolde hym playnly, that vnles he might obteyne the kynges requeſt, it would be to the great hinderaunce of the See of Rome. Agayne the Emperour, and kyng Ferdinando, the .xxvii. daye of Aprill, by Ambaſſadours declare their grief, and expoſtulate with byſhop Clement, that he fauoured the kyng onermuche, and would haue the matter iudged in Englande, and alſo appointed their procurers with large and ample commiſſion, whiche ſhould treate and followe the cauſe, in their names, at Rome. Wherfore the Byſhop commaunding at the laſt Campegius to retourne home, reuoketh the ſuite to him ſelfe, ſo much the rather, for that he vnderſtode by the Cardinall of Yorke of the kynges new loue, as I ſaid in The Duke of Northumberland condemned. the .ix. booke.
            The .xxii. daye of Auguſt, the Duke of Northumberland, cō
               demned

of treaſō, was beheaded, and whan he was brought to the Scaffolde, made an oration, and amonges other thinges, he exhorteth the people, to perſeuer in the ſame religion, whiche they had receiued of their forefathers, as it wer from hand to hande: For he iudgeth this to be the only cauſe of all the calamitie, that hath come into Englande, of longe tyme nowe, His incōſtancie at hys death. but chiefly ſince the death of King Henry, that they are ſeperated from the reſte of the body of chriſtianitie. Of many yeares nowe, he had bene of a contrary opinion (as he pretended at the leaſte) and had vtterly forſaken the Popiſh doctrine. And the cauſe why he nowe ſpake thus (as they ſaye) was for that he was put in hope to be pardoned. And albeit that the reſte of his talke being finiſhed, he ſayd he ſpake as he thought, yet be ther ſome that affirme he was ſory for ſo ſaiyng, what time he loking round about him, perceiued no ſuccour, & ſawe that he was begiled. And other that ſuffered at the ſame time, one ſir Thomas Palmer, knight, profeſſed the doctrine of the Goſpell Thomas Palmer. with moſte conſtancie. And the Duke was condēned (as I ſaid) of rebellion & treaſon. And albeit there were great ſuſpiciōs, ye he had geuen the king poiſon, yet was he nothing at al examined for that matter: Nor in the ſentēce pronoūced againſt hym any mētion made therof. Of Peter Martyr the Florentine, we haue ſpoken before, whiche going into England ſix yeres paſt, by the kinges ſending for, was reader of the diuinitie lecture at Oxforde. Whome many made muche of for his excellent learning and vertue, but he wanted not alſo euil willers. Wherfor when the king was dead, he was commaunded not to ſtyre one fote thence without the pleaſure of the Quene firſte knowen, nor cary away any thyng that he had, vnder a great penaltie, in caſe he ſhould doe otherwyſe. He was content to obeye, but whan he ſawe he was longe delayed, he wryteth to the counſelours of the Realme concerning his ſtate, and if he had ought offended, he requireth that his accuſer might be brought forth, and the matter examined: Wherupon through their permiſſion, he came to London. There he fyndeth the Archebyſhop of Cantorbury his Patrone and frend, of whome the Popyſh preachers The cōſtancie of the archebyſhop of Cantorbury had reyſed a brute, as though he ſhould be vnconſtant & wauering, as though by his commaundement the Maſſe were reſtored at Cantorbury, & as though he had promyſed the ſelfe ſame thing to the Quene. And bragged with al of a diſputatiō that ſhould be. After he knewe of this, immediatly he ſet forth a writynge to pourge him ſelfe, and ſayth, how a terten prieſt, vnknowyng to hym, had ſayde Maſſe at Cantorbury.

he denieth the other thing alſo, yea, he proteſteth, if the Quene wyll geue him leaue, to proue, that the actes of kyng Edwarde concernyng the Lordes ſupper and other articles of doctrine, be conſonaunt to the holy Scriptures, and that the Romyſhe Maſſe is cleane repugnant from the inſtitution of Chriſte, for the declaration wherof, he deſyreth no great nomber, but euen a very fewe, and amonges them, Peter Martyr, to ayde and aſſiſte hym. And for ſo muche as the contrary parte, adourned their Religion by the commendatiō of antiquitie, ſaiyng that it hath continued aboue a thouſand and fiue hondreth yeares, he affirmeth that thei be not able to proue the ſame, but he wil proue, that the doctrine, whiche in kyng Edwardes daies, was ſet forth, and is as yet obſerued in England, is the very natiue and auncient Religion inſtituted and left vs of Chriſt and his Apoſtles. Whan he had publyſhed this wryting at London about the fift daye of September, Peter Martyr the ſame tyme came thither from Oxforde (as I ſayd) & aduertyſed by hym of the whole matter, commendeth his doing, and ſheweth him ye he wyll refuſe neyther paynes nor peryll herein. But beholde, whyleſt they are in this expectation, the Archebyſhop of Cantorbury was committed to pryſon, and alſo the Archebiſhop of The biſhops caried to priſon. Yorke, and Rydley Byſhop of London, H. Byſhop of Worceſter and certen other Byſhops, for the profeſſion of the Goſpell, and for ſermons made againſt Quene Mary, by the counſelles commaundemēt, before ſhe atcheued the crowne. Moreouer Hughe Latimer is than alſo apprehended, whome kyng Edward deliuered out of the tower, layd in there by his father for doctrine. In the meane tyme Peter Martyr, albeit he perceiued his daū
               ger, yet for that he had nothing offended againſt the lawes of the Realme, truſting to his innocencie, thought not good to departe, before he had obteyned leaue. Wherfore whan he had brought that to paſſe, and receiued his paſſeporte ſigned with the Quenes hande, he came to And werpe, from thence to Collon, and after to Straſburge, from whence he went firſte into Englande, and a litle before hym Bernardine Ochine, both in health. It was once written and ſignified into Germany, that the Emperour ſhould haue geuen coūcell to his auntes daughter Quene Mary, that ſhe ſhould gouerne with mercy, and not alter Religion, nor marie without the Realme. For what daū
               ger were in that, in caſe ſhe ſhould chaunge the Religion, he knewe beſt of all men. Whether this were ſo in dede I can not affirme: The ende it ſelfe declareth it to be farre otherwyſe. For euen for the doctrine of the Goſpel, ſtraungers being cōmaunded

to departe, and the natiue countrie men there caſte in pryſon, the Romyſhe Religion was wholye reſtored, as ſhalbe declared The popiſhe Religion reſtored in Englande. hereafter. The firſt daye of October after Quene Mary was crowned. And not longe after began the Parliament at London. But the conuention of the Empyre, which the Emperour called againſt the .xiii. day of Auguſte, as I ſhewed in the beginning of this boke, was proroged to the firſt of October, & than to the moneth of Ianuary. After that ſame battel, wherin Duke Maurice was ſlayne, Henry the Duke of Brunſwick, and the Marques Albert, euery of them for them ſelfe, make them ſelues ſtrong, and gather their power about them. The Warres reuiued betwixt the D. of Brunſw. & Marques Albert. Byſhoppes and States of Norinberge fed Duke Henry wyth monie. But all men for the moſte parte marueled at Marques Albert, from whence he had al that ſtore. Wherfore it was ſpoken commonly, that Quene Mary the Emperours ſiſtes ſupported him with mony: But the Emperours folkes denie that vtterly, and maruell, that there are any ſo fonde ſo to thinke. But what tyme the mony was brought to the Duke of Brunſwicke ſomewhat to late, he was in very great daunger. For whan the Marques had intelligence therof, he practiſed with the ſoldiours to forſake hym, who abode this delaye moſte impatiently: But very luckely, in the ſelfe ſame momente, whan that heate and mutine began to ryſe the .x. day of September, was brought a remedy, and all the tempeſte appeaſed, & Duke Henry for his better aſſuraunce, fel at a cōpoſition with Duke Ericke his coſin, whiche was his ennemy before. The kyng of Denmarke had long ſince ſent his Ambaſſadour into Saxon, to further the matters of Duke Auguſtus his ſonne in lawe. They at the length through the helpe of the Electour of Brandenburges Ambaſſadours, reconcile hym to Marques Albert. The conditiōs were theſe, that Duke Auguſtus ſhould neither Albert recō
                  ciled to Auguſtus. proſecute his brothers warre, nor ayde the ennemies of Marques Albert. The ſame ſhall the Marques doe, and if he ſhall chaunce to leade his armie nere vnto the limites of Duke Auguſtus, he ſhall go forth without harme doing. That Duke Auguſte ſhall beware, that what tyme he diſchargeth his armie, thei go not to the Marques ennemies. Finally that the league of inheritaunce, whiche is betwene the houſe of Saxon and of Brandenburge, be renewed ſo ſhortly as may be. The next day whiche was the .xii. of September, Marques Albert leadeth his armie out of Brunſwicke. And where as he chaunced vpon his ennemies, not far without the citie, he geueth the charge. But vanquiſhed with the nōber, eſpecially, where he had none

and the Duke of Brunſwick had .xx. enſeignes of footemen, he was diſcomfited and put to flight, albeit he left to the ennemy a bluddy victory: After the battel he retourneth to Brunſwick. In the meane ſeaſon thei were in great diſtreſſe, whome Coūte Plauie and his companions had beſieged at Hoffie. For where the towne was both very ſore battered with ſhot, and the Marques was vanquiſhed in battell, and no reſcowe came, beinge dryuen through penurie and want of all thynges, they render vp the towne. And Counte Plauie ſweareth the townes men to be true to hym and his chyldren, and leaueth there in garriſon one enſeigne of fotemen, and the great ordenaunce.
            We haue ſpoken before of the Turkiſhe flete: Unto whome The Turkiſhe Naute taketh the Iland of Corſica. ioyned them ſelues certen Frenche captaines, ſetting forthe of Marſeilles, and in maner in theſe dayes take the Iland of Corſica, belonging to the ſtate of Genes, a fewe townes excepted. Howe the Emperour toke the caſtell of Heſdine by force, is before ſaid. And ye ſame he raſeth, as he had done Terwen before: The French king in the meane ſeaſon leuieth his armie about Amiens, and attendeth, tyll the Swyſſes, whiche he had ſent for were come. Whan Heſdine was now ouerthrowen, the Emperour at the ende of Auguſte was in mynde to attempte Dorlans, but whan the Conſtable heard therof by eſpiall, he leadeth forth a great number of horſemen, and ſome part of footemen, ſo ſpedely, that he ſet vpon them or euer thei were aware, and putteth them to flight, ſlaying and takyng many of them. And what tyme the Swiſſes were come about the beginninge of September, a ten thouſande footemen, the kyng went vp the water of Some, on the banke wherof ſtandeth Amias, and commeth to Corbie. From thence ſending out certen guidons of horſemen, he runneth about the Towne of Bappam, as though he would beſiege it. But the ſeuenth daye of September ſendyng an Herault of Armes to Cambraye, he requireth to be certified, what hartes the Townes men beare towardes hym, that is a very large towne, belongyng to the Byſhop, and aunciently to the Empire, and in the ſame warre whiche the The Frēche king attemteth Cābray Emperour made with the Frenche king, it was a neuter town indifferent to both, but at this tyme it was more of the Emperous parte. The king therfore ſendeth them worde, that he wil do nothing againſt cōuenauntes, ſo that they wyl do the ſame, and let their citie be ſet open for him, who is protectour of thē
               pire, & be ready to ſerue him in all thinges, as wel as they be to themperour. But when yt gouernour of yt town had ſignified ye
               
matter to the Emperour he made aunſwer, that for ſo muche as the Frenchmē had with ſpoyling and burning diſtroyed al the coūtrie, yt he ſhould take them for his ennemies. But before this meſſage came againe from the Emperour, the kynge making roades out, began to aſſaie the citie certē daies. But wher nothing preuailed, about the middes of September, he rayſeth his campe, and pitcheth his tentes two myles from the Emperours campe, whiche was than at Ualencene, a towne of Henault, nere vnto the riuer of Scalde. Thā he approcheth nerer. and certenly the thing was like to haue come to a batell, but yt end was this, that the king, for that he had approched ſo nere yt Emperours fortifications, after he had loſte very many of his men, retourned with his army the .xviii. day of September. At his departing he diſtroyed all far and nere with fire. The matter was after wrytten priuatly vnto frendes, & the Frenchemē in dede ſaie, howe the Emperour would not fight, but this the imperials deny. The king retourning home, diſchargeth the Swiſſes. In this ſame moneth are diſcharged the garriſon of ſixe enſeignes of fotemen, whiche had by the Emperours commaundement bene all that yeare at Auſpurge, as I ſayd in the fourmer boke. About this tyme alſo met at Hailbrune, ye Paulſ graue, the Archebyſhop of Mentz, the Duke of Bauier, and the Duke of Wirtemberge. From the Archebyſhop of Treuers, and the Duke of Cleaue came Ambaſſadours. There was preſent in the name of king Ferdinando, the Byſhop of Paſſawe. This Peſtilence & firing at Paris. ſommer the rage of yt plague made a great ſlaughter at Paris, and in the meane time diuers were burnt there alſo for Lutheraniſme. The king had a darling, whoſe huſband in tyme paſt had bene gouernour of Normandy. The ſame woman being a wydowe had two ſonnes in lawe at the ſame time priſoners: Duke de Anmalle, and the Mareſchall Marchian as before I ſayed. And for the raunſome of Duke de Anmalle, Marques Albert demaundeth a hondreth thouſande crownes, but that was aboue his habilitie. Wherfore the brute went, that ſhe, which might do with the king what ſhe liſt, to yt ende ſhe might make the monie, without her owne hinderaunce, had obteined that the kynge ſhould geue her their landes and goodes, that were condemned for hereſie. For the cuſtome of Fraunce is, that the kynge taketh not only the lyfe of ſuche as be condemned, but their goodes alſo. What tyme therfore this praye was obtayned many they ſaye, were brought in daunger. I wyll not certenly affirme this, but it commeth to paſſe many tymes in Fraunce and in other places, that the bloude of innocent

perſones is not only a pleaſure, but alſo a gaigne to many. The bloud of innocētes gaynfull to many.
            
            Marques Albert, after his ouerthrowe in battell, retourneth to Brunſwicke, as a little before I haue ſayed, but where he vnderſtode by eſpiall, that the Duke would beſege the citie, making no longe aboade, he gathered vp what horſemen he could, and commaundeth them to abide his comming in Turingia, and ſending to his kinſfolkes and allies for ayde. Whan he was holpen of them, he haſteth into Turinge, and the fifth daye of October, vſing great expedition, beyond al mens expectation, came to Weymer, where he was ryght gently receiued of Iohn Fridericke, and there remayning two nightes, that he myght refreſhe his ſouldiours after their trauaile, that laye ſcattered a broade in the coūtrie, he marcheth towardes Franckony. That tyme the Erle Plauie and his fellowes beſeged a towne of his named Birnt. But hearing of his comming, they leuied their ſiege, and gote them to Bamberge. But he being accompanied with no great bande of horſemen, goeth forthe the .xi. day of October to eſpie what is done at Hoſie, the town lately loſte. The ſoldiours of the garriſon chaunced than to be ſome what vn warely without the gates, for their pleaſure, being altogether careleſſe. Wherfore, fynding this occaſion, and exhorting his men to be valiaunt, ryding vpon the ſpurre, ſetteth vpō them quickely, and putting them to flight, followeth after, and entring in at the gates with them: whan the towns men reioyſing at his ſight and preſence, came running to him, he ſlewe the moſte parte of them. He founde there great pieces of Artillerie, and certen others, whiche they call field pieces, but without any cariage or furniture. For the enemies had caried awaye all that were furniſhed to make the batterie at Birnte. Leauing ther an enſeigne of fotemē, he goeth to Blaſſeburg, his chief caſtell. After he came awaye from Brunſwick Duke Henry beſeged the citie, and battered it ſore with ſhot. Brunſwick beſeged. But the Byſhoppes, and they of Norinberge, whiche ſupported all that armie, ſendyng hym worde, that he ſhould repayre to them. Duke Henry demaundeth of the citezens about foure thouſande crownes. Whan they refuſed this, and the Souldiours vnleſſe they were payde their wages, woulde beare none enſeignes, they being afrayde of their owne daunger, promyſe to geue hym ſo muche. Than at the lengthe leuieng the ſiege, whan he had appoynted his Soldiours a daye, whan they ſhoulde be payed, he taketh his iourney through Turinge.
            That knowen, the Duke of Saxon, Iohn Friderick, for that he was not as yet made at one with him, goeth him ſelfe & his

thre ſonnes to Gothe, leauing his wife at Weymer, for that ſhe was not very wel in health. Duke Henry being now furniſhed The Duke of Brunſwletters to the D. of Saxon to take his iourney, ſending vnto him letters, albeit ſayeth he, I haue had iuſt cauſe, and good occaſion alſo, in theſe certen yeares paſt, to reuenge the iniuries of fourmer time done vnto me, yet, for ſo muche as you were in the Emperours cuſtody, I haue attempted nothing againſt either your ſubiectes or children, but haue permitted the thing to lawe & iudgement. But you not contented with fourmer iniuries, haue holpen now of late alſo with your ayde and counſel, Albert of Brandenburg, the diſturber of Germany, and my vttermoſte ennemy, whiche I knowe for certentie, although you wrought it ſecretly. Wherfore, in caſe my army now ſhal doe any hurte to your countrie, there is no cauſe to cōplaine therof: For yt beginning is of your ſelfe. Duke Henry was determined to haue playd the vtter ennemy, with Albert & Uolrate Erles of Manſfeld, for the laſt yeres war. Howbeit through thinterceſſiō of Duke Auguſt, whō they ſought vpon, the matter was appeaſed. Iohn Fridericke, receiuing the Duke of Brunſwickes letters, began to treate wt him by ambaſſadours, & to mitigate his minde, ſo that he ſhuld come to Weymer with two guidons of horſemen, & fiue enſeignes of fotemen, & the reſidue of his armie, be placed in ye coūtrie therabout. Hither came to him from the Prince, Minquice his chaūcelour, & declaring his cōmiſſiō, perſwaded him throughly The Du. of Brunſwick is reconciled to the Duke of Saxon. to quietnes. And where before he required a great ſōme of monie, the ſame now doth he partly remit, & remaining there two daies without doing any hurt, departeth frendly. At the .xviii. day of October, began a diſputation at Londō, by the Quenes cōmaundement, of the preſence of Chriſt in the Sacrament of the altar, as they terme it. The matter was reaſoned ſix daies, A diſputatiō in England not without opprobrious wordes, where one of the Romſh dictrine, Doctor Weſtō, that was proloqutour, demeaned himſelfe diſorderly what was decreed of the ſame, and what was thend of that parliament, I wyll declare here after. About the end of October, Michael Serueto, a Spaniarde, was executed at Geneua. He had many yeares ſince ſet forth diuerſe bookes, amongeſt Serueto a Spanyarde burnt at Geneua. other thinges of the trinitie, vtterly repugnaunt to yt cōmon conſent of the church. And whan at the length he came this yeare to Geneua, ye Senate being certified of him, cōmaū
               deth him to be aprehended, and after appointeth Caluine who before had wrytten againſt him, & other miniſters of yt churche, to haue conference with him. Wherfore there was a great and a bitter diſputation amongſt them, where as he would many

tymes tell Caluine he lied, very immodeſtly. But the Senate, leaſt any thing ſhould be done in ſo weightie a matter raſhely, aſketh counſell touching the ſame opinions of the Doctours of Bernes, Zurick, Baſill, and Schafuſians. They all make aunſwer, that the ſame thinges redounde to Gods high contumelie. And where he wold not only not forſake his opiniō, but alſo with opprobrious wordes & curſed ſpeakinges defende the ſame, he was condēned to die. Whan he came to yt place of execution, & William Farell did exhorte hym, he would not call vpon Chriſte, the eternall ſonne of God. And where he ſhe wed no token of repentaūce, yet did he not defend his cauſe vnto the people. Many men aſcribed the blame of his death to Caluine: But he, ſetting forth a booke, reciteth his opinion, and all the matter as it was, & declareth that heretikes may be puniſhed with death. The laſte ſauing one of October, Iames Sturmie a man moſte iuſte and wittie, and the very beaultie of the Nobilitie of Germany, both for his excellent gyftes of mynde, and notable lerning, departeth out of this life at Straſburg, whā he had layne ſicke of a quartaine, by the ſpace of two moneths. He was paſt thre ſcore and thre yeares olde. In theſe dayes Reynold Poole, an Engliſheman borne, a Cardinal, comming from Rome, goeth through Germany to the Emperour. And Reynold Poole Cardinall. whan he was come to the frontiers of the Paulſgraues countrie, receiuing newes from the Emperour, who ſent vnto hym Mendoza, he retourneth to Dilling, whiche is a towne of the Byſhops of Auſpurge by the water of Thonawe, and there attendeth, till he ſhal heare more from the Emperour. The Duke of Brunſwicke, departing from Weymer, the ſeuenth daye of Nouember came to his fellowes Campe, whiche was than at Lichtefelſe a Towne belongyng to Bamberge. In the whiche Towne were placed the Soldiours of Marques Albert, a .ix. enſeignes of fotemen, the ſelfe ſame that had bene a little before at Birnthe. And the Counte Plauie and his Fellowes had beſeged it. And what tyme the great pieces of Artillerie came from Norinberge, wherwith the Towne myght be battered, they makyng ſurrendrie, the tenth of Nouember yelde them ſelues in their ennemies hādes. Who taking certen of the Captaines, let goe the reſte without armure, or enſeignes. That done, they go to Colembach, a Towne of Marques Albertes, and batter it very ſore. And the towneſmen perceiuing that they were not able to defende it from the ennemie carie out all their goodes and houſhold ſtuffe into the caſtel of Blaſſe burge,

and after, ſetting the houſes on fire, flie thether them ſelues alſo. Thus in fine the ennemy entreth the towne, and kylling diuerſe that were founde there, quencheth the fire, and ſpoyleth the reſte that was lefte. Afterwardes whan Coūte Plauie had taken by ſurrendrie the caſtell of Lichteberge and the townes of Biruth and Hofie, and raſed the walles, he beſegeth the caſtell of Blaſſeburge, the chiefeſt forte that the Marques had, & kept with a great garriſon. This tyme, the Frenche men, going priuely out of Piedmount, vpon the ſoden, take Uercelles, Uercelles ſurpriſed. a towne of Turin, whiche the Spanyardes kept. But where they thought them ſelues hardly able to defend the ſame being ſo nere Millan, and Gonzago, the Emperours lieftenaunt approched alſo with a power, they ſpoyled the towne, and retourned home in due ſeaſon, laden with boties. Not long after it was ſignified and written both from Ueniſe and other places, of Solyman Emperour of Turkes, who had hanged his eldeſt ſonne, Muſtapha, for ſuſpicion of treaſon. They reporte, that The Turck hanged his ſonne Muſtapha. the murther was committed, through the procurement of his ſeconde wyfe, whiche coueted to haue her ſonne auaunced, and to ſuccede his father. I haue, ſpoken before of the Archebyſhop of Cantorbury: He, and Quene Iane, with thre ſonnes of the Duke of Northumberlande, being brought to the barre, in the The Archbyſhop of Cantorbury and others condemned. moneth of Nouember, were cōdemned to ſuffer for treaſon: but according to the cuſtome of the Realme, thei were caried again to pryſon, and through the interceſſiō of certen, were reſerued. Sebaſtian Scherteline, of whome ofte mention is made, for whoſe death the Emperour had appointed a great rewarde, as in the laſt boke is declared, was at this tyme reconciled to the Emperour and king Ferdinando, and recouered all his goodes. At the ſuite of the byſhoppes and their conſortes, the iudges of the chamber imperiall, with a ſolemne ceremonie, the fyrſte of December do outlawe Marques Albert of Brandenburg, as a diſturber of the publique quiet, and of the Empire, diſpatching Marques Albert outlawed. abroade their letters hither and thether, and the ſame ſet vp openly, and permitted his lyfe and goodes to be ſpoiled of al mē. Duke Henry of Brunſwicke, leauing Counte Plauie at ye ſiege of Blaſſeburg, the ſixt day of December goeth with his power to Schuinfurte, whiche towne in dede being ſituated on the banke of the Riuer of Moene, the Marques kept with a ſtrong garriſon. The Duke had an ayde of Soldiours that came from Norinberge and Forcheme. But Marques Albert ſuſpectinge the matter firſte, what vitaile ſo euer was in places thereaboutes, he brought it into the Towne, after he burnte all the

buildinges about it, to the intent he might take away the occaſion of beſieging from the ennemie that tyme of the yeare. Wherfore Duke Henry, without any exploicte done, hauinge loſt alſo many of his men, what tyme the Marques ſaleed out, and fought, retourneth home with no great company, paſſing through the countrie of Iohn Fridericke, without harme doing. Whan Marques Albert vnderſtode that he was outlawed by the chāber, he ſueth to the Emperour, that he would reuerſe the iudgement: But he ſayeth howe he may not let the execution of the lawe. So than he refuſeth the iudgement as corrupted with bribes and rewardes, and maketh a proteſtation, in a wryting ſet forth of the ſame. But the iudges do commaūd the next prouinces of the Empire to ſe the thinge executed.
            This tyme was holden in Englande a parliament of al the The Godly lawes of good Edward repealed. States of the Realme. And for ſo muche as in kyng Edwardes tyme, there were actes made, of the Lordes ſupper, of ceremonies, of the miniſtration of the Sacramentes, of the mariage of prieſtes, of the election of Byſhoppes, of ordeining the miniſters of the churche, of the fourme of praying, and of ſuch other like thinges. In this parliamēt it was enacted, that thoſe ſtatutes ſhould take no place, but that all men ſhould followe the ſame Religion, whiche was obſerued at the death of kyng Hē
               ry. Moreouer, that no man ſhould moleſte or diſquiet ſuche prieſtes and miniſtrs of the churche, as ſhalbe ordeined hereafter. Furthermore the diuorcement of Quene Katherine, the Quenes mother is pronoūced to haue bene onlawfull. Finally there was debated amonges the Nobles concerning the Quenes Quene Mary: affiaūced to the Emperours ſonne mariage, and a greed that ſhe ſhould be eſpouſed to the Emperours ſonne, king Philippe. Of whome there went a report before, that he ſhould marie his Coſin, daughter to Emanuell king of Portugale, and to his aunte Elenore. Whan this was agreed vpon, the Emperour ſendeth for Cardinall Poole. The cauſe why the Emperour would haue hym to ſtaie in Germany was this (as many ſuppoſed) leaſt he being of the bloud roiall, and well beloued in his countrie, ſhould haue bene ſome let to the mariage. In ſtede of thoſe Byſhoppes, whiche I ſayd before were thruſt in priſon, were created others at this tyme. For the full confirmation of the Matrimony, the Emperour ſent a moſte honorable Ambaſſade into Englāde, which might affiaunce Quene Mary to kyng Philippe being abſent. The 1554. chief Ambaſſadour was Counte de Egmonde. They arriuinge at London about the beginning of Ianuary, after they had treated of the matter a fewe dayes, bryng it to paſſe. The commons

of the Realme toke this matter moſte greuouſly, and diuerſe alſo of the Nobilitie, and laiyng their heades together, Commotion in Kent. do rebelle. The chiefe authour and rynge leader hereof was ſyr Thomas Wiat. Who reyſing a rebellion in Kente, made greuous and bitter orations, againſt the Quene and her counſell, how through the mariage of a ſtraunger, they wyll procure to the Realme of Englande a perpetuall and moſte miſerable bō
               dage, and ſeke alſo that the true Religion being extinguiſhed, they may agayne eſtabliſhe papiſtrie. And Kente is a countie by the ſea coaſte, nexte vnto Fraunce, by reaſon of the citie of Cantorbury right famouſe. The brute of this commotion was brought to London the .xxv. daye of Ianuary, and not long after was heard alſo of Henry the Duke of Suffolke, who reyſed vp men in Leceſter ſhyre. Wherfore the Quene aſſembleth what power ſhe coulde, ouer whome ſhe maketh generall, Thomas the Duke of Norfolke, lately deliuered out of priſon. Who about the ende of the ſame moneth meting with his enemies at Rocheſter bridge, being forſaken of his ſoldiours, was faine The Duke of Norfolke forſaken of his men. to ſaue himſelfe by flight, and with much payne came to London. Wherfore amongeſt theſe tumultes, the Emperours Ambaſſadours to mitigate the rebellion & for their own daunger together, the firſt day of February take ſhipping & depart. And the ſame daie came the Quene into the citie of London, & making in her oration a greuous complaint againſt Wiat, declareth what his intent is, and what loue ſhe beareth vnto them, The quenes oration to yt commons in yelde hall. and ſayeth howe ſhe hath determined nothing of her mariage, without the conſent of her counſell. For ſhe hath liued a good part of her tyme a mayden, and doteth not ſo of mariage, but that ſhe would remayne in the ſame kynde of lyfe ſtyll, in caſe her Nobles and commons iudged mete that it ſhoulde ſo bee. For that the Realme ſhould be in daunger bycauſe of her mariage, and that all ſhould be ful of ſlaughter, it ſhould be to her moſte greuous. Wherfore let them perſeuer in doinge theyr dutie, and aſſiſte her in reuenging the treaſon of wicked perſons. For this is their dutie to doe, whiche haue commaunded her, as the lawefull heyre of her father, by common aſſente to bee Quene. Whan ſhe had on thys wyſe pacified them, ſhe appointed certen to defende the citie, and aſſigneth the Erle of Penbroke to haue the charge abroade. Nowe was Wiat proclaimed before by an Heraulte of Armes, Rebell and Traytour to the Realme, and to bryng hym in greater hatred there were read his requeſtes ſent vnto the Quene, wherof the fyrſte (as they ſaye) was, that he would haue the Quene in his cuſtody, &

that it ſhould be lawfull for him to determine concerning her mariage, and either to reteine or diſplace her counſellours at his pleaſure. The third daye after was proclaimed a pardon to all the cōmon people, ſo that they would forſake the captaines and authours of rebellion, and to him that would bring Wiat pryſoner, was appointed a great rewarde. The Duke of Suffolke was alſo accompted in the nūber of traitours. And wheras the ſame daye the conſpiratours came nere vnto the citie, the Quene cutteth in two London bridge ouer the Ryuer of Temſe, leaſt any ſhould go out to them. The next day thei come into Southwarke, ſuppoſing that the citezēs would haue ioyned with them: But they were holden in with a garriſon. In the meane ſeaſon the Duke of Suffolke is taken in an other parte of the Realme, by the Erle of Huntington, whome the The Duke of Suffolke. Quene ſent after him with horſemen. Whan the confederates had ſpent two daies at the citie, and traueled on that ſyde in vayne, taking an other way they paſſe ouer the Temſe at King ſtone ten miles aboue London, and ſo marche towardes the citie. There at the laſte was Wiat and his felowes intercepted, of that power, whiche the Quene had ſent out with the Erle Wiat taken and committed to Priſō. of Penbroke, and committed to pryſon. The next daye, whiche was the ſeuenth daye of the ſame moneth, proclamation was made, vnder payne of death, that who ſo euer had receiued any of theſe rebelles into his houſe, ſhould brynge them forthe and preſent them immediatly. A fewe dayes after the Duke of Suffolke is brought pryſoner to London. And the .xii. daye of February, the Duke of Northumberlandes ſonne, Guilford Dudley, and the lady Iane his wyfe, the Duke of Suffolkes daughter The Lady Iane & her huſband beheaded. (which after kyng Edwarde I ſayde was admitted Quene) were both beheaded, for that, contrary to the lawfull ſucceſſion they had aſpired to the crowne. And the Lady Ianes miſhappe in a maner all men lamented, that ſo vertuouſe a Lady, ſo wel brought vp, and ſo learned, ſhould chaunce into ſo great a calamitie, for none other cauſe verely, thā that ſhe had not refuſed the kingdome offered. She made an oration to the people, very Godly and modeſte, and calling to God for mercy, through Ieſus Chriſte, toke a clothe of one of her gentilwomen, and couered her own face and bound it about her eies, and than offered to the hangeman her necke to be ſtriken of. The ſelf ſame daye was Corteney, Erle of Deuonſhire, whome the Quene a fewe monethes before had deliuered from long captiuitie, agayn taken vpon ſuſpicion of a conſpiracie made. After this in Londō and Weſtminſter, where the Quene than was, many were caried

to execution, and that of the Nobilitie not a fewe. Some of them alſo eſcaping, and amongeſt them a worthie Knight ſyr Peter Carrew, fled into Fraunce. The Duke of Suffolke alſo The Duke of Suffolke beheaded. the .xxi. daye of February was beheaded, whan he had bene condemned foure dayes before. Whyleſt theſe thynges are done in Englande, Sibille of Cleaue, the wyfe of Iohn Fridericke, Duke of Saxon, the foreſaed .xxi. daye of February departeth Sibille Duches of Saxō departeth. at Weymer, and the .xi. daye after her the Prynce hym ſelfe, whan he had layen a whyle ſicke. They died bothe in the true knowledge of God: And ſuerly he, whan his wyues tombe was a making in the churche, had commaunded a certen place to be reſerued for hym by the ſyde therof, for that he ſhould ſhortely followe after. Neyther was he diſceaued in his opinion. For the thyrd daye of Marche, about ten of the clocke before noone, whan he had heard a Sermon liyng in his bed, callyng vppon Gods mercy, and commending his ſpirite vnto God, he flitted The Godly end of Iohn Friderick. out of this myſerable life into the heauenly countrie.
            And nowe was the compoſition made betwene hym and Duke Auguſtus. For where the kyng of Denmarke, ſendynge Ambaſſadours, as I ſayd before, made great interceſſion, after much and diuerſe, and almoſt an half yeares diſceptation, now at this tyme was the matter appeaſed, vpon theſe condicions. Iohn Fridericke departeth from the Electourſhyp, from Meiſſen, and from the Townes of mettell mines. Duke Auguſtus diſceaſing without Heires males, all theſe thinges retourne to the Duke of Saxon & his heires males. In the meane tyme the Duke of Saxon may vſe the name and the armes of Electourſhip, as well in ſealing of letters as in coyninge of monie. Duke Auguſtus alſo graunteth to hym and to his ſonnes certen townes and gouernementes, and for the debtes that were behynde of certen fourmer yeares whiche Duke Maurice had not payed to his ſonnes, he payeth downe to the ſumme of an hondreth thouſand crownes. He redemeth alſo the Caſtell An end made betwixt him and Auguſtus. and towne of Conigſperge, ſtanding in Franconie, and layed to morgage to the Biſhop of Wirtemburge for .xl. thouſande crownes, and reſtoreth it to the Duke of Saxon & his ſonnes. Finally the league of inheritaunce of the houſe of Saxon, in theſe fourmer yeares infringed, is renewed, and eſtabliſhed agayne. The ſame compoſition Iohn Fridericke, lying on his deth bed, not long before he ended his lyfe, confirmed with his wryting and ſeale, and commaūded that his ſonnes ſhould doe likewyſe. Wherfore with a noble courage vanquiſhyng all euilles and miſeries, wherinto he chaunced, he died not in

priſon, nor in the cuſtody of foreine ſoldiours, wherūto he was appointed, but through the notable benefit of God ſet at libertie, and retourning home to his wyfe, his children, and his owne religion, ended his lyfe moſte peaceably, leauing to his ſonnes and ſubiectes peace and quietnes. His wyfe alſo the Ducheſſe, hauing her owne wyſhe; left this earthly manſion. The Godlines of his wyfe. For often tymes ſhe had ſaied, that ſhe coulde be content to dye with all her harte, ſo that ſhe might firſt ſe her huſband ſafe & at libertie. And the ſame many times did ſhe pray to the liuing God for, with many teares and ſighinges. The ſame daye that ſhe ended her lyfe, had Duke Auguſt a ſonne borne named Alexander. In theſe ſame dayes the reſt of the ſtraungers that were in Englande, yea and many of the ſame natiō, forſakyng their countrie for the alteration of Religion, and the Quenes proclamatiōs, conueye them ſelues into Germany, wherof ſome tary at Weſell, ſome at Franckefurte, and many alſo at Straſburg. Iohn Alaſcus, a Polonian, a noble man borne, brother to Hierome, a man of excellent learning, went thence before wynter Iohn Alaſco with diuerſe others into Dēmarke: But where as he was ther not very frendly receiued, by reaſon of his contrary opinion, touching the Lordes ſupper, and for theſame cauſe was denied to dwell in the lower partes of Saxony, he came at the length to Emden, a towne in eaſt Friſeland, and there remayned. The fourth day of Marche, the Quene of England ſet forth eccleſiaſticall lawes, wherin ſhe cōmaundeth biſhops & their officers that they receiue no man. that is ſuſpected of hereſie, into holy Eccleſiaſtical lawes in Englande. orders, that they rote by cleane all hereſies, that they abolyſhe al naughtie and peſtiferous bokes, that they preſcribe an order to Scholemaiſters, and preachers, that they take awaye from maried prieſtes their wyues and benefices, and inioyne them puniſhement condigne for their miſdoing, yet ſo, that ſuche as by the cōſent of their wiues, wil proteſte to make a diuorſemēt they do handle more gently, and ſuche as amende to be alſo reſtored. Moreouer that all prayers at common ſupplications be ſayde in the latin tongue, after the olde cuſtome, that all holy daies be obſerued, and the Ceremonies of fourmer tyme be reſtored that bigge children before chriſtened be confirmed of the Byſhops, and that they be taught in Scholes howe to helpe a prieſt to ſaye Maſſe and ſerue him at the aultar. What tyme the kyng of Englande, Henry the eight baniſhed the Byſhop of Rome, as I ſayd in the .ix. boke, he made this lawe amongeſt others, that no man ſhould be admitted to any office or eccleſiaſtical dignitie, except he would firſt proteſte by a ſolemne othe,

both him and his ſucceſſours alſo to be ſupreme head of the Engliſhe churche, ouer the whiche the Byſhop of Rome hathe no authoritie, neither to be any other thinge than Byſhop of the citie of Rome, with whome they wyll haue nothinge to doe. Whiche othe the Quene whan ſhe publiſhed theſe thinges, did nowe releaſe alſo, and chargeth the Byſhoppes, that from henceforth it be required of no man, ſecretly after a ſorte reſtoryng the ſupremacie of the biſhop of Rome. Where ſhe ſpeaketh of cō
               mon prayer, thus it is. By the kyng her fathers commaundement proceſſion was ſayde in the vulgare tongue: Wherin God was prayed to amonges other thinges, that he would deliuer them from the ſedition, conſpiracie and Tyranny of the Byſhop of Rome. This fourme therfore ſet forth in print, ye Quene nowe commaundeth to be aboliſhed. Not long after the Lady Elizabeth the Quenes ſiſter, a Lady very well learned, was cō
               mitted The Lady Elizabeth cō
                  mitted to yt Tower. to the Tower, for that ſhe was thought priuie to the fourmer conſpiracie. At the ende of Marche, the ennemies of Marques Albert retourne to the ſiege of Schninfurt. In the moneth of Aprill came into Germany, out of England, men of great learning, ſir Richarde Moriſine, Knight, of whoſe Ambaſſade I haue ſpoken in the fourmer boke, ſir Anthony Coke, and ſir Iohn Cheke, Knightes, both the kinges ſcholemaiſters and they went after into Italy. Thither came alſo Iohn Pomet, Byſhop of Wincheſter, whiche by reaſon of this alteratiō of Religion was diſplaced, as likewyſe were diuerſe others.
            About this time, where as the forces of the Duke of Florence, and the Byſhop of Rome beſieged Senes: Peter Stroſſe, who in the Frenche kinges name defended the citie, vnderſtanding The ſiege of Senes. certen thinges by eſpiall, ſet vpon them ſodenly, and ſlew of them a great nomber. They notwithſtanding, reſtoring their ſtrength continued the ſiege. Wherfore the Frenche kyng hyreth about thre thouſand Swiſſes to ayde thoſe that were beſieged. The Duke of Florence had fiaunced his daughter to Aſcanio the Byſhop of Romes nephewe, and meanes were deuiſed, to auaunce hym by this mariage.
            In theſe daies; the gouernour of Millan Ferdinando Gonzago, being ſent for, came to the Emperour in Brabant: Thither came alſo Babtiſta Caſtaldus, whome the Emperour, as I ſayde, in fourmer yeares ſent Ambaſſadour into Hongarie. About the middes of Aprill, Sir Thomas Wiat was executed at London: Before he ſuffered, excuſinge the Lady Elizabeth The death of Wiat. and the Erle of Deuonſhyre diligently, he affirmed that they were not priuie to this conſpiracie.
            
               
Than alſo the Archbiſhop of Cantorburye, the Biſhop of London and Hugh Latimer were caried firſt to Windſore, and after to Oxford, and after they had diſputed with the diuines of that vniuerſity, and alſo of Cambridge, perſeueringe in theyr opinion, they are committed to priſone. At the ſame time againe the Quene helde a Parliament. Wherin ſhe propounded two thinges chieflye, concerning her owne mariage, and reſtoring the ſupremacy to the biſhop A Parlamēt in England. of Rome: wherof ſhe obteined the firſt vpon certain conditions, but this other, the Nobility being chiefly againſte it ſhe coulde not perſwade. Cardinal Poole, after he had bene a certen time with themperor, wente to the French kinge, and was a counſellor of peace to them both: but he preuailed nothing. At thend of Aprill, Marques Albert receiuing lx. thouſand crownes, ſendeth away Duke D'anmalle his priſoner, wher a little before he had loſt Holanſperge, an other fortreſſe of his dominion. Not long after, themperor ſending his letters from Bruiſſels, where he was in the winter before outlawed by the chamber, he outlaweth him again, and complaininge that he ſhould worke ſo much miſchief vnpuniſhed, commaundeth with wordes moſt waighty, that all Princes and ſtates, but chiefly thoſe that are nexte him, do put the Proclamation of outlawrye in execution. They had met twiſe before this at Roteburge to treate a peace: but wheras nothinge was concluded, themperoure decreed this againſte him, and for the ſame the ſtates aſſembled after, at Wuormes, al ſuch as belonge to the prouince of the Rhine. Of the cōmon aſſemble of thempire yt ſhuld be holden at Auſpurge, I haue ſpoken oftner then once: & becauſe themperor, being impeched both with ſicknes and alſo with warres, could not be ther, king Fernando at his requeſt, taketh this charge vppon him, and the Princes being of him deſired to come, excuſed them ſelues by reaſon of the troubleſome ſtate of Germany. Themperor had all ready ſent thither Thaſſemble of Auſpurge certen of his counſell, and had alſo choſen out the Cardinall of Auſpurge for the ſame purpoſe: but what time for the cauſe aboue named, no man came, the matter was differred til a time more conueniēt. Marques Albert had written certen thinges ſpitefully and bitterly againſt the Norinbergians, as though in the former war they had priuely aided the French king and his fellowes, and had paid mony, as though they ſhuld haue had a great ſuſpitiō of themperor, both they & alſo the biſhops theyr fellowes, had ſpoken contumelious words, that they ſhuld fauor the french king more then themperor, yt they them ſelues had attēpted this war againſt him, yt they do what they are able, yt the biſhops ſhuld not kepe couenants as though they ſhuld ſeke to deſtroy al the nobility, as though they ſhoulde haue broken theyr promiſe expreſſed and ſigned in wryting,

as though they ſhould haue made a wicked and a cruel warre againſt the people of his dominion, as thoughe they had corrupted the iudgemente of the Chamber with bribes. He called them alſo traitors to theyr country, diſperſing abrode libels therof, throughe out Germany. This knowen, the Norinbergians, whan after the taking of Holanſperge, they had found certaine thinges of the lyke A wrytinge of the city of Norinberge againſt Marques Albert. ſort, the .xviii. day of May make anſwer at large, and addreſſinge theyr wryting vnto all the ſtates, both confute al thinges in ordre, and verify the moſt thinges of him, and recite, vpon what conditiō they gaue Monye to Duke Moris and his fellowes, and declare who is the author of the warre. For euen at the ſame time ſay they that the Princes interceſſoures met at Hedelberge, he by his vaūtcurrers leuied as muche power as he poſſible mighte in Saxonye, and that is to be proued aſwell by others as alſo by thoſe letters, which one of his curriers, William Grumpache wrote vnto him the xxix. of March.
            Than if king Ferdinando, duke Moris, and the dukes of Brū
               ſwicke, had not imploid all theyr force, yea their liues and blud for theyr country, he would doubtleſſe haue made an horrible deſtruction and waſte through oute all Germany. He had driuen the Byſhops of Franckonie to conditions moſt vnreaſonable: but that cō
               poſition the Emperor made after fruſtrate, and gaue them leaue to recouer againe theyr owne. Wherfore the Biſhoppe of Bamberge wan againe certaine of his Townes and gouernments, longe before that he was receiued againe into the Emperors fauor, and euen than, at what time by reaſon of his high treaſon, not onlye his landes and poſſeſſions, but his life alſo might haue bene taken frō him lawfully. Afterward by the Emperors commaundemente we made this league for the defence of oure prouinces. Than was 
                  •
               e reconciled to the Emperor, and obteined of him the confirmation
                  •
                the compactes made, but yet vppon condition that he ſhould be true to him and to the Empire: but he, all be it the Emperor permitted him no violence, in the time of the ſiege of Metz wrote home to hys captains, that they ſhould feare the biſhops, and vnleſſe they wold reſtore that they had taken to worke force and violence.
            So they, in the monthe of Ianuary followinge, makinge an inuaſion recouered manye thinges by force of armes. Wherefore the Biſhop of Bamberge, admoniſhed his fellowes to aide him according to theyr league: we neuertheleſſe, leaſt we ſhould do any thing raſhly by ſondrye letters and intermeſſagers, exhorted Marques Albert to peace: but he anſweringe contemptuouſlye and opprobriouſly, ſaid amongs other thinges, that the mo ennemies he had, the more honor and praiſe ſhould he win.
            
               
This was in the beginning of March, and not long after began yt treatye at Hedelberge. And whan he ther refuſed moſte ample and large conditions, his kinffolkes and allies, interceſſors, exhorting him vnto peace, he went home and leuied an army, we being ſollicited and moued againe by the Biſhoppes, did than at the laſt profeſſe our ſelues his enemies. This was the laſt yere, the firſt of Aprill. And wheras he him ſelf hath moued a moſt cruell warre, after a very ſtraunge example, and ſuch as hath not bene heard of in Germany, he goeth about to charge vs with that crime. But aſſuredly it is vntrue, neither was ther euer any ſuch like thinge complained of vnto vs. But his ſoldiours haue omitted no kind of cruelty, and chauncing on a time to find plowmen in the field, hanged them vp both the fathers and the ſonnes, in a manner before oure faces: and haue not only inforced women a liue, but haue alſo digged them vp whan they haue bene dead. The laſt yere in ye moneth of May, a certaine gentelman of Franconie, Nicholas Eglofſten, was inforced to yelde vp his caſtell of Conrute: but he did not only The cruell actes of Marques Albert. burne it, but alſo fineding ther about a fortye country men, and with them the miniſter of the church, commaunded them to be hā
               ged vp all in an Orchard adioyning to the Caſtel, and caried away with him his wife and his mother Priſoners. He wente aboute in dede to excuſe this matter by letters to the Nobility of Franconie, but nothing to the purpoſe. How he alſo intreated his priſonners, both our men and the pledges of Bamberge whiche he haled with him into Saxonie can declare, and all other ſuch as he hath deteined in priſone. For bothe he demaunded of them an vnreaſonable ſumme of mony, and mooſte greuouſly tormented them vppon the racke, and alſo ſterued them for honger and cold, ſo that many died, and the reſidue hauing their limmes ſtarke deade, by reaſon of the cold, wer faine to haue them cut of and taken away. And wheras certain of them, had nothing, either to paye their raunſome or to liue by, he forbad they ſhoulde haue any meate geuen them. And if the ſouldioures of the warde, being vanquiſhed with their lamentations and pitiful cry, had not ſomtime caſt them a piece of bread, that was ſo drye and moulded with longe kepinge, that no Cattell nor brute beaſtes, vnleſſe it were for extreme honger, woulde haue touched, they had died all for want of meate.
            And all be it yt ſom of them made a piece of mony by theyr frendes, yet hardly could they therfore get a little ſtraw & water. Wherfore certaine were ſtaruen for honger and thurſte, not onlye in the terrible darkneſſe, but alſo in the ſtench of the priſon, in the mids of thordure, Uermen, & venemous beaſtes. And whan they had thus periſhed, ye coarſes wer not than drawn out, nor remoued frō thēce

but lefte with them that were aliue there, and increaſed the Priſon with ſtench. But howe gently we haue intreated his Priſonners, both captaines and certen centurions, and euen ſuche as deſerued worſt of vs, and haue rendred them ſelues without condition, that may be knowen by their owne teſtimony. And howe vnwilling he is to haue peace, that may well appeare by the two laſt treaties of Roteburge, (as you know) moſte noble Princes, which either wer there your ſelues, or ſente thither your ambaſſadoures.
            For althoughe we ſuſteined by him wonderfull loſſe and calamity, and all be it he was already outlawed, yet in the former conuention we made this offer That if he wold leaue his warre, and demeane him ſelfe well from henceforth, and woulde trye the matter by the law, we would alſo lay a part oure weapons, and put the matter to tharbitrement of the Princes that were interceſſours, or to the iudgement of themperor and ſtates of the Empire: the ſame offer made the Biſhoppes, by the aduiſe and conſente of the ambaſſadours of King Ferdinando: The counſelloures alſo of the Princes interceſſoures, for the loue of peace added this moreouer, that if the ſtates of Franconie, that be in confederacy, would promiſe to reſtore him his prouince, as it was than, they ſhoulde ceaſe warre on both ſides, and kepe peace from henceforth, and that the Publication, in that behalf ſhould be fruſtrate, and the whole controuerſy committed to a frendly and lawfull treaty.
            But he in a contempt and mockery called the interceſſors his enemies procurers, and ſaide he woulde not ſuffer him ſelfe to be broughte into ſuche diſtreſſe, neither did he couet to haue this outlawry as yet reuearſed, and would alſo put in hazard the reaſte of that he had, and ſpake many ſuch other like things, both raſhly, opprobriouſly and with threatninges, to the higheſt, meane, and loweſt degrees, as it is to be proued by thoſe letters, that are in Printe at Holanſperge. After, at the nexte aſſemble, althoughe we offered more largely, yet was he nothing the rather inclined to peace, yea, he went about craftes & policies, neither commendable, nor princelike. For at the requeſt of the interceſſors, committinge the whole matter to the Emperor and certen Princes, he promiſed not to attempt longer warre, and that ſame compromiſe, themperor ſending letters from Bruiſſels the fourth of Aprill, did ratifye, and willed the ſtates of Frankonie, that they ſhould leaue warre alſo, and cō
               mit the cauſe to his care and fidelity.
            And this did Marques Albert for this intent ful craftely, as it appeareth by ſuch thinges as folowed, yt both he might ſtaye themperor that he ſhuld not cōmaūd certen prouinces of thempire to put the outlawry in execution, & that he him ſelf alſo might haue ſpace

to leuy an army, which he was gatheringe that time in all places, to haue oppreſſed vs vppon a ſoden: but through Gods benefit the matter was detected, by his own letters at the ſame time intercepted, which he ſent hither and thither to his chief Captains and Cē
               turions, wherin was this: that he hath admitted the treaty of Roteburge, for this purpoſe only, that in the meane ſeaſon, he may prepare him ſelf, and ſet vpon his enemies: and nowe if thinterceſſors ſhal haply require them to forſake their enſeignes, let them not obey, but kepe together, and in no wiſe ſcatter abrode: and for an excuſe let them alledge this cauſe, that they haue many months wages owing them, and therfore may not depart before they be paid, but ſay, how they will remaine in thoſe parties without any hurte doing, til they haue receiued theyr mony. Hitherto appertaine alſo thoſe letters of his, wherin he commaundeth his chieftaines, wyth out delay to ſet vpon al men, whoſoeuer they be, whan this treaſon therfore was brought to light, and wheras our men demaunded of of his ambaſſadors, ſent to Roteburge, whether he would ſtand to the compromiſe, and could haue no certain anſwer: by the aduiſe of king Ferdinandoes ambaſſadors, we wer conſtraind to commit the matter vnto God firſt and to themperor and thempire, as oure letters ſent to themperor the ſame time declare. And ſeing the matter is thus, and for ſo much, as euery man may eaſily perceiue, by ſuch thinges as we haue truelye rehearſed, that we are hitherto driuen by ſo manye railinges, reproches and diſpleaſures, to repulſe his fury and violence, that we haue obeied the commaundement of the high and chief Magiſtrate, therefore we beſeche all men, that loue vertue and honeſty, and hate violence and iniurye, to conſider diligently, that vnleſſe the ſentence geuen ſhoulde be put in execution, and this his boldneſſe be repreſſed, how great daunger hangeth ouer not vs only, but them alſo.
            Wherfore let no man aid or aſſiſt him, or geue him any ſuccoring place or refuge, but as it becommeth noble Princes, & ſuch as loue their country, we wiſh they would not only not impeche thexecution of the commaundement, but that they them ſelues alſo would ſe the thinge executed to the vttermooſte of theyr power, and woorke ſo herein, that all others may be made afraide by his example.
            And that alſo they geue no creadite to hys famous libels and ſlaunders ſette forthe agaynſte vs, and if he ſhall againe attempt anye thinge againſte vs that they further hym not wyth theyr aide or Counſell, we requyre them moſte earneſtlye. Marques Albert receiuing mony of duke D'anmalle, as before is ſaid, haſteth into Saxony, and there hiringe ſoldiors in the monthe of Maye, goeth

to Schuinfurt priuely, and the tenth daye of Iune, with viii. hundreth horſmen, and vii. enſeigns of fotemen, in the dawning of the Marques Al. goeth to Suinfort. day, he entreth the towne, on that ſide that was not beſieged. And for becauſe they wer in great penury of al things, the third day after whan he had ſpoyled the Towne, in the night he leadeth out al the ſoldiors, aſwel horſmen as fotemen to the nombre of xviii. enſeignes with the artillery, leauing no ward at al to kepe the gates and taketh his iourny to Kitzing, a town ſtanding beneath on the riuer of Moene. Whan it was now light day, and thenemies perceiued the gates vnfurniſhed, at the ſound of the Trōpet, they prepare them ſelues euery man to follow and purſue after him: but diuers, and that chiefly the ſoldiors of the Duke of Brunſwick, wer commaunded of him to enter the towne, who ſpoile and deſtroy all that was left. Wherfore the chief captains and gouernours of the field, leaſt through the delay and taryinge of the reaſte, Marques Albert ſhould haue time to eſcape, ſet the towne on fire in diuers & ſondry places: ſo they being driuen to depart, repair vnto tharmy. And albeit the Marques was gon certain hours before them, yet for that he was ſo letted and hindred with thordenaunce, yt he could make no ſpeade, he was ſtaide of the forewarde, and with them he bickereth: but the reaſt of tharmy approching, whan he ſaw him ſelf to weake for ſo great a multitude, exhortinge his men to make the beſt ſhift they can, euery mā for him ſelf (he) accompanied with His flight. a few horſmen, goeth ſpedely out of ſight, and by ſwimming ouer ye riuer to Kitzing, eſcapeth, loſing all his munition and cariage.
            The viii. day after was the Caſtell of Blaſſeburgh, his chiefeſt Fortreſſe rendred vp, and came into the handes of king Ferdinando, when the Chauncelour of Boheme, Counte Plauie, which beſeged the ſame continually was dead a little before. Thus therefore Marques Albert was expulſed and driuen out of all his dominion. Whileſt theſe thinges were done in Franconie, Henry Duke of Brunſwicke, in the lower partes of Darony, compelleth diuers, aſwell Princes as Cities, and many of the Nobility to pay mony, and be vnder his ſubiectiō, as the Duke of Megelburge, the dukes of Luneburge, the Princes Anhaldes, and Earles of Manſfelde: An other part alſo of his and the biſhops power, hauing diſcomfited the Marques, & taken Schuinfurt, puniſhed right ſore Roteburge, a Towne imperiall, and Counte Henneberge amonges others, and were thus bent, that except they might recouer the charges of the warre, which they ſaid appartained to all men, they pretended to worke much violence: but through mediation the matter was appeaſed, and the war ceaſed.
            In manner about this time, Charles duke of Sauoy, depriued

of a great part of his dominion, as I tolde you in the tenth booke, departeth oute of this life, leauinge his ſonne Philibert his heyre, The death of Charles D. of Sauoy. who had ſerued themperor in his warres now many yeares. King Fernando ſetting forth of late a Proclamation, had commaunded his ſubiectes, that nothing ſhould be altered in the Sacramente of thanckes geuing, and that after thold cuſtom, ſuch as receiued the Lordes ſupper, ſhould be contented with thone kind as they terme it: but the Nobles, Gentlemen, and Cities, wheras they had diuers times before ſued to him herein, now again they require him moſt humblye by theyr letters, and alledginge manye teaſons, that they might he permitted to receiue the whole Supper of the Lorde, according to the commaundement and inſtitution of Chriſte, and cuſtome of the primatiue Churche. Unto theſe letters of theyrs, the xxiii. of Iune, the king auſweringe from Uienne, I had full little The letters of king Fardinando to his ſubiectes of the Lords Supper. thought (ſaith he) that you would haue called in queſtion that proclamation of mine, and haue found cauillations therin. For I mēt only that my ſubiectes ſhould perſeuer in thauncient and true Religion, and obedience of the Catholicke church, without the which, no man can obtain ſaluation, and that they ſhould receiue this ſacrament, the chiefeſt of all others, after the law and cuſtome of the church, and neither through the corrupt opinions of certain, or for curioſity and pride alſo, ſhould ſwarue from that duty, which they both owe to the church and alſo to the Magiſtrate. This is verely the mind and effect of the ſame proclamation: nether is it any new thing that I commaunded, but an old ordinaunce, which hath ben brought as it wer by hād vnto my progenitors, Emperors, kings, and Dukes of Auſtrich, and to me alſo, whan I began to gouerne the common wealth, was deduced, and vnto this time, by me diligently, as becommeth a Chriſten Prince, obſerued, and at ſondrye times to my people alſo inioyned that they ſhoulde remayne in the ſame. Wherfore I ſuppoſed that you would not haue attempted any thyng againſt this my proclamacion, which in all other thinges do contende, that there ſhould be no alteraciō, and that your lawes and liberties myght remaine vnto you whole. For certenly that you do, is a new deuiſe, and lately of you conceaued by a certayne opinion, and now alſo reaſoned at large, as though it were lawful for you to iudge of my commaundementes, whiche am your chiefe and ſupreme magiſtrate, or as though the ſame ought of ryght to be permitted you, which certen yeres now diuers of you, of your own accord, contrary to the lawes of the church and my will, haue taken vpon you priuately to vſurpe. But becauſe the queſtion is harde & ful of difficulty, as you alſo affirme, I will doubtles thincke more therupon, and whan time is, make ſuch anſwer, that it may be well

perceiued, that I do not tender a little the ſaluation of my people: but in the meane time I loke for al obediēce of you, and truſt that you wil do nothing againſt my proclamation. Unto this the ſtates The ſtates make aſwer to yt Kinges letters. afterward anſwer again by wryting: And the ſame (ſay they) that we haue oft times ſpoken before of our ſauiour Chriſtes commaū
               dement, moſt puiſſant king, we now repete again. For he did inſtitute his ſupper with plain and manifeſt words, that after the ſame ſort, that he him ſelf preſcribeth, it might be receiued of al men: nether is it lawfull for any man mortall to alter hys inſtitution.
            It may be proued alſo that this was the manner of thauncient Churche, and the ſame that is vſed now a daies, to haue crept in by little and little. For euen the counſel of Conſtance graunteth that ye ſame was ſo inſtituted of Chriſt. Wher therfore thys cōcerneth our ſaluation, certainly neither curioſity nor pride hath moued vs here vnto. Wherby we truſte the rather, that you will refer your conſultation to the commaundement of Chriſt and his Apoſtles, and conſent of the primatiue Church, and will not that our conſciēce ſhuld be burthened, which thing that it might pleaſe you to do, we beſech you for the honor of God, and the glorye of his name, and for oure own ſaluation. We do acknowledge you, and that moſte gladlye to be our high Magiſtrate geuen vs of God, and there is nothing in this world, but that you both may & ought to loke for at our hāds, if it lie in vs to do. But in this one matter we deſire you to be fauorable to vs. In the byſhop of Wirciburges dominion ther is an Abbay of Mōkes, called Newſtat. The Abbot therof, Ihon Friſe, Thabbot of Newſtat accuſed of Heriſye. after he came in ſuſpition of Lutheraniſme, the fift day of May he is cited, to come the vi. day to Wirciburge, and to anſwer vnto certain interrogatories. And the queſtions were theſe. Whether it be lawful to ſweare: whether anye man be bounden by his othe, whether it be lawful to make a vow of Chaſtity, pouerty and obediēce, Interrogatories miniſtred to him. whether ſuch manner of vowes do binde, whether becometh better the miniſters of the church, mariage or ſingleneſſe, whether ther be one true and Apoſtolical church, whether the ſame, as the ſpouſe of Chriſt, be continually gouerned by the holy ghoſt, whether ſhe can alwaies diſcern true and holſom thyngs, whether the ſame by reaſon of her head, Chriſtes vicar, be called rightly ye church of Rome, whether all the bokes of both Teſtaments, that be in the Cannon, be lawful and true, whether the holy ſcripture ought to be expounded, after the mind of the holy fathers, the doctors of the Church & counſels, and not after thopinion of Luther and others of the lyke ſort, whether that beſides the Scriptures, ther is nede alſo of other traditions as be thoſe of the Apoſtles and ſuch other like, whether the ſame faith, aucthority and obedience oughte to be geuen to the

ſame traditiōs, as to the holy ſcripture, whether we ought to obay ye ciuill magiſtrate in politick matters, & in holy things, theccleſiaſticall ordinary, whether ther be vii. ſacraments of the Churche. whether children oughte to be Chriſtened, whether they oughte to Chriſten in the Latin tounge, with Salt, Oile, Water, Charactes and exorciſmes, whether that by baptiſme be cleane putte awaye Originall ſinne, in ſuch ſort, that concupiſcence, which remaineth loſeth the name of the ſame ſinne, whether the breade be chaunged and conſecrated into the body, and the wine into the blud of Chriſt by the vertue of the wordes which the Prieſt pronounceth, & whether it do ſo remaine, althoughe it be not by and by receiued, whether the Sacrament being after this ſort conſecrated is to be worſhipped, whan either it is borne aboute for the honor of Chriſte, or caried vnto ſickfolkes, or alſo be reſerued in the pix, whether Chriſt is to be worſhipped vnder the forme of bread and wine, whether Chriſt be wholly vnderneath either kinde, whether the confeſſion of ſinnes do prepare a man to the worthy receiuing of the Sacrament, whether Maſſe be a true and continuall ſacrifice, whether yt the Cannon of the maſſe is to be reteined, whether the Sacramēt of confirming is to be vſed, whether ther be iii. parts of penaunce, contrition, confeſſion, and ſatiſfaction, whether the prieſt may forgeue his ſinnes, which hath not before confeſſed the ſame, whether Prieſtes onlye haue authoritye of the keyes, whether the ſoules of good men do loue vs, whether they pray to God for vs, whether we ought to pray vnto Sainctes, whether ſainets Holy daies oughte to be obſerued, whether the relikes of Sainctes oughte to be worſhipped, whether the ſoules of the godly not yet repurged, be relieued with Maſſes, Praiers, Faſtinges and Almoſe dedes, whether there be a place of Purgatory, whether the time of Lent and other times of faſting appoynted by the Churche oughte to be obſerued, whether on daies by the Church forboden, we ought to abſtain frō eating of fleſh, whether the people ought to be ſtirred vp vnto religion by Ceremonies, what Ceremonies be godly, and whiche not, Unto theſe dothe he make anſwer, the xxvii daye of May at large: And althoughe he confirmed his ſayinges with the Teſtimonies not only of ſcripture, but of the doctors alſo, yet was he condemned the xxv. of Iune, and depriued of all his function. About thend of Iune, the french king marching with an army out of Chāpaigne, The frenchē Kinge muadeth themperours countries. Mariburge taken. taketh the way to the riuer of Maſe, and inuading the Emperors country ioyning to Tournay, ſurpriſeth amonge many other thinges. The Townes of Bouine and Dinaunt, ſpoyleth them, and raſeth the caſtels there, and taking Mariburg, fortifieth it with munition and garriſon. Themperor going out of Bruiſſels with hys

army commeth to Namures, which is a town by the riuer of Sabie v. miles beneath Dinant. The French king appeared to haue deſired the battell: but whan the time was tracted, he tourneth into Henault, and taketh Biuſe a town and caſtel of Quene Maries the Lady Regent of Flaunders, wher ſhe had a houſe of pleaſure, all the which he ſpoileth and burneth, and deſtroyeth all the country, farre and neare with ſpoyling and burning. After he commeth to the ſiege of Rentie, a towne in the borders of Artois: but at the Emperors comming, whoſe army was now wholly aſſembled, the ſiege was leuied, after light conflictes had, and ſkirmiſhing on either ſide. This was in the moneth of Auguſt, wheras in a manner the ſame time, the kinges armye in Italy, at the conduite of Peter Stroſſe, ſet vpon by themperors power, wherof was gouernor the Marques of Marignan, receiued a great ouerthrow. Uery many of the Swiſſes were ſlain, which as I ſaid before wer ſent thither by the king.
            In the meane time the Emperors ſonne Phillip, the xix. day of Kinge Phillip arriueth in England. Iuly, arriueth in England with a Nauy oute of Spaine, and the fourth day after in the euening, commeth to Wincheſter, where the Quene taried for him, and going to the Cathedrall Churche, wyth all the Nobility before him, was receiued of the biſhop of Wincheſter and certaine others. Emonges other Princes there was with him the Duke of Alua. The next day he goeth to the Quene, & talking with her long and much, verye familiarely, the ſeconde daye, which was kept holy to S. Iames the Patrone of Spain, the mariage was ſolempniſed: And ther was themperors ambaſſadoure, who affirmed openly, howe themperor had geuen to his ſonne for his mariage, the kingdom of Naples. Afterwardes departing frō thence, at the laſt he entred into London the head city with greate pompe and ſolempnitie. In the moneth of Auguſt certen ſtates of thempire mete again at Wourmes, for that themperor called vpon thexecution againſt Marques Albert. Who being expulſed out of his country, went firſt into Loraine, and after into Fraunce, wher the king denied him not intertainmente. And becauſe it was to be feared leaſt he ſhould attempt ſomething, leaſt he ſhoulde make a roade into Alſatia or the parties neare vnto it: they that are of the prouince of Rhine, about thend of Septembre, ſent certen guidōs of horſmen into the borders of Loraine to kepe the paſſages. But they at the laſt without any exploict done, returne home, not without the domage of them wher they lay. In the moneth of Octobre they aſſemble again at Frankfurt, both for this, and for other cauſes. Unto the which conuention wer broughte the letters of Marques Albert, wherin he complaineth of his enemies laſt war, and

ſpeaking much of yt biſhop of Arras, he taunteth ſpitefully amōges others, the biſhops of Treues and Straſburge and alſo the Lantz The frenche kinges letters. graue, and calleth thoſe bloudy horſmen, that laye in waite for hys life. There were letters alſo red in the name of the Frenche kinge, wrytten in the Dutch tonge the firſt day of Octobre. And ſpeaking of thold amitie of Fraunce and Germany, our eunemies, are wholy addict, ſaith he, to infringe the ſame: And certen yeres paſt, they wrought the matter ſo far, that my father was declared an enemy: but I neuertheleſſe, when about two yeres ſince the ſtate of thempire was miſerable and cleane out of order, forgetting the offences paſt, declared plainly, what good will I bare you, following here in the foteſteps of my progenitors, which ſoughte euer to auaunce your honor and dignity. For it can not be proued that euer they offered you wronge: but our aduerſaries haue many waies, gone aboute to plucke from you all your liberties and goodes alſo, what time they haue deuiſed ſondry policies not only to exact mony, but haue alſo kindled factions betwene noble houſes; as you knowe rightwell: And albeit the caſe ſtandeth thus, yet through their procurement, I heare ſay, howe certaine ſtates, which are in dede my neighbors, of whom verely I loked for no ſuch thing, haue moued warre againſt me, wher they haue proclaimed the ſame before.
            Which doubtles is to me great maruel; and ſo much the more in dede, for that there is no quarrell betwixt vs. For in that, which is commonly ſpoken of Marques Albert, as though I ſhoulde aide him againſt you, I receiue wrong. For inaſmuch as I ſhewe him fauor. I do it both for the ſame old frendſhip, whiche I ſaide hathe bene alwaies betwene vs and alſo for that this hath bene euer the cuſtome and entertainment of the kinges of Fraunce, that Prynces in aduerſity, eſpeciallye Germaines, ſhoulde haue with them a ſafe refuge and ſuccoring place It were much more pleaſaunte to me ſurely, to ſe him in honor at home, and all thinges ſafe and wel, than to ſe him thus diſcomfited, expulſed and deſtitute of all ſuccor: I would haue wiſhed alſo, that he had not chaunced into this calamity, or at the leaſt wiſe might now be reconciled vpon reaſonable conditions. And for ſo much as through the fault of mine aduerſary he is brought into this diſtreſſe, which he hathe pronounced the ſame thing fruſtrate, and after hath ratified it? why ſhuld I be had in ſuſpition, for hauinge compaſſion of his miſfortune? but that I ſhuld geue him aid againſt thempire, it neuer came in my thought: neither will I do it here after, and that you maye be aſſured of, ſo that you again do nothing againſt the lawes of amity. And wheras youu ought to loke for nothing els of me but that is peaceable and frendlye, I require of you againe, that you be not circumuented

through their craftes, which neither loue me nor you, ſo that either you ſhould make warre your ſelues with me, or aid them with men and monye. For this is theyr endeuor, that they maye make theyr priuate affaires common. But rather obſerue amity, and take the condition that is offered you. And what you intende herein, I require you to aduertiſe me plainly by the bearer hereof: Moreouer, that according to thauncient cuſtome and pacification of Paſſaw, my ambaſſadors, which ſhal come to the next aſſemble of thempire may haue ſafeconduit.
            Unto this was made anſwer, how the horſmen that were ſente to the frontiers of Loraine, concerned none iniury towardes him, but was done for this intent, that in caſe Marques Albert ſhould make anye ſodaine inuaſion, his enterpriſe mighte be diſapoynted: touching his Ambaſſadoures and the ſafeconduit, for ſo muche as they haue no commiſſion hereof, they will aduertiſe theyr princes, and diſtruſt not but they will do herein, that ſhall be reaſonable. About thend of Octobre, themperor geueth ouer to his ſōne Phillip Thempeor geueth to his ſonne Phyllip the dukedom of Millan. the Dukedome of Millan, ſendinge meſſagers to inueſt him herein with accuſtomed Ceremonies. The French kinge leuiynge his ſiege from Rentie, as before is ſaid, and not long after diſcharging the Swiſſes, he placed the reaſt of his ſoldiors in garriſons. And themperor not far from Heſdine, which in the yeare before he toke and ouerthrew (as is ſaid) eſpying a place conuenient, began a new fortification of a Towne, and to thintent he might bringe it to paſſe, he maintaineth an army, whiche in the monthe of Nouembre, deſtroyeth all Picardy with ſpoyling and burning as farre as Amias. Wherefore the whole force and violence of the warre lighted vppon the pore and miſerable people on either ſide. Afterwarde themperor diſcharging the reaſt of his armye, interteined ſtill a legion or two for him ſelf. The ſame time the French king ſēt a new power into Italy, and amonges others certaine Almaignes, to relieue them of Senes, whome the Emperors force and the dukes of Florence beſieged hotely.
            At the .xii. day of Nouembre was holden a Parliament in England. For the which Cardinall Poole comming oute of Brabant, wheras certen ambaſſadors were commen out of England, to cō
               duit Cardinall Poole arriueth in England. him, and amonges them the Lord Paget, the xxiii. of Nouembre he came to London, being right honorably receiued, in all places, wherſoeuer he came, and was immediatly reſtored to his blud and houſe of inheritance with common aſſent and conſēt, from the which king Henry the eight had diſplaced him. The v. day after he came into the Parliament houſe, and in the preſence of king Phillip and the Quene, whā he had ſhewed the cauſe of his ambaſſade,

he exhorteth them to return to the cōmunion of the church, & reſtore to the moſt holy father the biſhop of Rome his due authority, who wil graunt vnto thē all clemency & gentlenes: he admoniſheth thē alſo, to geue God thankes, which hath geuen them ſuch a king & a Quene: Finally, wher they haue reſtored him to his houſe & inheritance, he taketh it for a very great benefit, and ſaith he is ſo much the more boūden, to reſtore them again to the heauēly court and coūtry, which he wiſheth moſt of al other things. Whē he had ſpokē to this effect, he goth a part. Ther the biſhop of Wincheſter being Chancelor, repeting his oration, and with many words exhorting thē to vnity and concord, ſaith they are boūden to geue God great thankes, who of his vnſpeakable mercy hath raiſed them vp a prophet of their owne ſede, whiche is, that moſt honorable Cardinall, which is wholy inclined vnto their ſaluation. The next day, when the Nobility and commons had approued thoration & requeſts of cardinal Poole, there was drawne a fourme of a petition, wherin they beſeche the King and the Quene, that they would make interceſſion to him. The ſome of that ſupplication was this. How it repented them ſore of the ſciſme, for that they haue denied their obedience to the Apoſtolicall ſeat, and that they haue conſented to the decrees made againſt the ſame: but from henceforth they wil be at the commaundemente of him and the Quene, and will do all that euer they can, that all ſuch lawes and ſtatutes may be abrogated the ſame Parlament: Wherfore they mooſte humbly beſeche theyr highneſſe, that they wold be meanes, and bring to paſſe, that being abſolued from the ſinnes and cenſures, whith they haue committed againſte the lawes of the Church, they may be receiued again England returneth to her vomit. as penitent children into the boſome of Chriſtes church, that from henceforth they may ſerue God in the obedience of the ſea and Biſhoppes of Rome, to the glorye of his name, and increaſe of theyr owne ſaluation. An other day, whan the King and the Quene and Cardinall Poole were preſent: the Chaunceloure ſtandeth vp and pronounceth openly, what the ſtates had determined concerninge the requeſt of the Biſhoppe of Romes Legate: Afterwarde dothe he exhibite the ſupplication aforeſaide compriſed in wrytinge and ſubſcribed, to the Kinge and the Quene, beſeching them to receiue it. They when they had opened it, deliuer it againe to the Chaunceloure to reade.
            Than he demaundeth of all the companye, whether they be contente herewith? whiche whan they hadde affirmed, the Kinge and the Quene arriſe, and deliuer it to the Cardinal. Whan he had red it, he exhibiteth vnto them the letters of his commiſſion. And than were the ſame red, that all men mighte perceiue, that he had

authority geuen him by the Biſhop of Rome to aſſoile them. After he maketh an oration, and declareth howe acceptable a thing vnto God is repentaunce, and how much thaungels in heauen reioyſe for a penitent ſinner, and alledging for the purpoſe manye examples, geueth God thanckes, which hath put in them a minde deſirous of amendement This done, he arriſeth: likewiſe do the King and the Quene, and knele down vpon theyr knees. There he than calling vppon the high power and mercy of God, beſecheth him to loke mercifully vppon the people, and pardone their offences: And affirming him ſelf to be ſent therfore from the highe Biſhop, Chriſtes vicar, to geue them abſolution, lifting vp and ſtretching forth The Cardinal geueth yt Lordes abſolution. his hand, as their manner is, bleſſeth the whole multitude, and aſſoileth them. After this, they go to the chappell: Here was geuinge thanckes vnto God, playing of the Organes, ſounding of trōpets, and all tokens ſhewed of mirth and gladneſſe, as at ſuch times is accuſtomed. They that knew Cardinal Poole before, by his talke and manner of liuing, marueled much at this his doing, and loked for other manner of ſtuffe at his hand. The xviii. day of Decembre themperor addreſſing his letters frō Bruiſſels, vnto all the ſtates of thempire. Upon how waighty and vrgēt cauſes (ſaith he) Marques The Emperors letters againſt Marques Albert. Albert the laſt yere was outlawed by the iudges of ye chābre, & condemned of treaſon, you haue had certen knowledge by the letters, which than was ſet vp openly, and thoſe alſo which came frō vs afterward. And for ſo muche as he perſeuereth obſtinatelye in his troubleſome and ſeditious purpoſes, and vndoubtedly goeth about more miſchief, to thintent he may vexe and plage again oure natiue country of Germany: Again, foraſmuch as he hath hys recourſe into ſondry places ther, which he taketh for ſtarting holes, & refuge as I am credily informed, I thought it neceſſary for the cōmon countries ſake, to renue ye former decrees. Eſpecially ſince I beleue there is none of you, but both he loueth his countrye, and wold prouide for ye ſafegard of him ſelf, his lands & ſubiects, & alſo wold haue thenterpriſes of him, and his adherents impeched & letted. Wherfore I charge & commaūd vnder the ſame penalties before expreſſed, yt no man aid him or his felowes with any thing, nether with help nor counſel, relief, mony, vitails, nor artillery: And alſo yt nether he nor his fellowes be permitted to make any power or leuy ſoldiors in any of theyr dominiōs, & if he attempt any ſuch thing, yt euerye man let him by alwaies poſſible, and kepe in theyr people and ſubiectes, that they run not oute to him, and ſuch as be offēders, and will not obey this commaundemente to puniſhe extremely. Theſe letters were ſet vp in all places in Print. At the .xxix. of Decembre, king Ferdinando, for becauſe of the coū
               ſel,

wherof I haue ſpoken before, yt it ſhuld be holden at Auſpurge, came thither: and fineding no man there, two daies after, ſendinge Thimperial counſell of Auſpurge. both letters and meſſagers, he exhorteth the princes, yt for ſo much as they ſhould treat of moſt waightye affaires of the Empire, they would repare thither with ſpede: he him ſelf although to his great loſſe and hindraunce, leauing his own country, is commen thither: yt he might conſult with them of the common weale, and deuiſe ſuche meanes as be profitable & neceſſary for thafflicted ſtate of Germany: wherfore let them come thē ſelues, & not do the thinge by theyr deputies: for ſo the waightines of the cauſe requireth: and themperor his brother hath geuē him ful authority to treat, neither wil he tary them any longer, than he neades muſt. Aboute the middes of Ianuary breaketh vp the Parliament at London. Amonges many other thinges, the reſtoring of Cardinall Poole, was enacted. Thactes alſo of kings of former time concerning the puniſhing of 1555. heretickes, and authority of biſhops, were renued: but chieflye the ſupremacy of the biſhop of Rome was wholye reſtored, and all the lawes and ſtatutes that had ben made againſt the ſea of Rome by the ſpace of xx. yeares, were condempned and aboliſhed. Uery many ſuppoſed, that at the ſame Parliament king Phillip ſhuld haue ben crowned: but herein was nothing done. In the beginninge of February, fiue were condemned at London to ſuffer, becauſe they would not returne to the Romiſh Religion, men of excellent learning, Ihon Hoper, Biſhop of Gloceſter, Ihon Bradford, Laurēce Fiue cōdēnd at London for the Goſpell. Saunders, Rolland Tailler, Doctoure of the ciuil law, and Ihon Rogers: And he was burned at London, where he had taught, but the reaſt were caried euery man home, to Gloceſter, Mancheſter, Couentry, and Hadley, and ended their liues with the like puniſhment, all right conſtantly.
            A little after, alſo the Biſhoppe of Saint Dauid was condemned, and ſent home to ſuffer. It was wrytten than out of Englād, that ambaſſadoures woulde go to Rome in the name of the whole Realme, which ſhuld both geue the biſhop thankes for hys greate clemēcy, which he hathe ſhewed towardes them, and promiſe him alſo from henceforth al obedience and fidelitye. The v. daye of February, king Ferdinando, though verye fewe Princes were there, beginneth the treaty at Auſpurge. How they them ſelues knowe, for howe waightye and neadefull cauſes the Emperoure had appoynted this conuention, firſt at Wuolmes, after in this Citye, to begin at the middes of Nouember: And he in dede at the requeſt & aduiſe of his brother wiſhed yt the matter might haue ben cōmenced at the ſame time: Howe be it in puttinge his thinges in ordre at home, that in his abſence all thinges mighte be well gouerned, and

the neare ennemye be reſiſted, in caſe he made anye enterpriſe, he was impeched and letted.
            Notwithſtandinge at the xxix. of Nouember he came hither at the laſte, to conſulte for the common wealth Which thinge alſo the Emperoure deſireth chiefly, that is to wit, that what ſo euer cōcerneth Goddes glorye, and the tranquillitye of the Empire, the ſame might by the common conſente of them all be here determined: For how much hath bene alwais themperors dilligence, ſtudye, paine; and care, for the zeale he hath to the common country, that both the publicke quiet, and offences being taken away, Religion might be eſtabliſhed, that is ſo wel tried and knowen: both by all others, and alſo by the decrees that were made in the two laſte aſſembles, that it nedeth no further declaration. What ſo euer alſo he promiſed at the ſame time to do, he perfourmed in dede: but how pernitious cō
               motions as well ciuill as foreine haue beyond al expectation chaū
               ced ſence, by the which all thoſe ſo holſome decrees were not onlye letted and diſturbed, but alſo taken away, to the greate damage of the common weale, that is ſo manifeſt to all men, that it nedeth no further reherſall: but herein was not the Emperour to be blamed, who gaue none occaſion of offence vnto any man, and hath alwais dealt vprightlye and conſtantlye, and whatſoeuer the ſclaunder of his aduerſaries be, hath chiefly had reſpecte to the common profit: neither doubteth he but they alſo beleue ye ſame, and hold him clearged in this behalf. Wher therfore to remeadye theſe euils, themperor hath called this counſell, he was certenly purpoſed to haue ben preſent him ſelf at the whole treatye, but deteined by ſickneſſe and other affaires, he could not: yet neuertheleſſe he would not, that the thing ſhould be longer delaied, to thintent verely that bothe this euill increaſing might be reſtrained, and he mighte do his duetye to his country, which he loueth aboue all other thinges.
            Wherfore he hath made him his Uicegerent, and geuen him ful authoritye, that together with them he maye deuiſe meanes bothe honourable and alſo profitable for the common weale, and for the ſame purpoſe hathe ſente certen men, and ioyned them with him in commiſſion to treat of the ſame: and the chief and principal matter ſhalbe concerning Religion: For this ſo long a diſſention hath ben the head and welſpringe of all theſe tumultes and miſeries: & that theſe many yeares now, ſo manye thouſandes haue loſte not oulye their liues, but alſo their ſouls and eternal ſaluation, is altogether long of this: and that ſame is ſo manifeſtly known, that it neadeth no further declaration: For doubtles it is a lamentable and an heauy ſight, that thoſe which are al of one baptime, name, Empire, and lāguage, ſhuld be thus torn a ſōdre, in the profeſſiō of ye ſame faith,

which ſo many hundreth yeares they haue receiued of their elders, as it were deliuered from hand to hand: but the caſe is much more greuous, for that there ariſeth daily not one ſect or two, but diuers, whileſt euery man wil maintain his own opinion. Whiche thinge doubtleſſe is bothe to the reproche of God, and breaketh the bonde of charity, and diſturbeth mennes mindes, in ſuch ſort that the vulgare people knoweth not what in the world to beleue, but the greateſt miſchief of all is, that in theſe ſo greate erroures, very many by little and little growe vp in, and that there be found diuers, as wel of the chiefeſt Nobility, as of others, which ſetting cocke on houpe; beleue nothinge at all, neither regard they what, reaſon, what, honeſty, or what thing conſciēce doth preſcribe: and this is done both to the great hinderaunce and daunger of innocent youthe: And certainly it were chiefly to be lamented, if Germanye, which hath had ſo manye yeares the chief praiſe of Religion and vertue, ſhuld now be ſo abaſed, and ſo far degenerate, that it mighte not be compared with the heathen people of old time, neither oughte to be preferred at this daye before the Turkes alſo and, Barbarians, nor in thys poynte to be thoughte one whit better: and becauſe there hath bene no redreſſe made hitherto of this great enormity, althoughe many conuentions haue bene had therefore, for that fewe men cared for it, for becauſe thoſe, whome it beſt became to remeadye it, partlye wincked therat, partly ſeruing the time, had a reſpect more to their priuate commoditye, for this cauſe the euer liuinge God hathe of longe time nowe plaged all Germany, and certaine ſtates priuately with diuers calamities, in ſo muche, that the ſame region, which in times paſt, for nombre of people, excelled in ſtrengthe and valeauntneſſe, and was hable eaſily to repulſe all foraine violence, the ſame being rent and torne with diſſentions, warres, and commotions, as well ciuill as foreines. is now in greate daunger, and tendeth to vtter deſtruction, excepte God do wonderfullye preſerue it: Therfore is it neadfull that euery magiſtrate indeuor for his part, herein to do his duetie, and haue an eſpeciall regarde to the cauſe of Religion, wherein bothe Gods honoure, and the honeſtye of life alſo is conteined.
            Moreouer, ther hath benmo waies than one deuiſed to appeaſe religion: but that an vniuerſall, free, and godlye counſell mighte be had, ſemed alwaies from the beginning, not only to the Emperor, but alſo vnto them all to be the beſt waye. For becauſe that in as much as it is a matter of our faith, it apperteineth not to one only people, but alſo vnto al other nations of chriſtendome, which muſt doubtleſſe be called to the ſame, yt what vices ſoeuer be in any place they may be reformed and taken away. Therfore did the Emperor

both for his own duetie, and at theyr requeſt alſo, labor this waye to the vttermoſt of his power, and at the length brought it to paſſe, that ſuch a counſell was oftner than once called, and ſometimes alſo commenced: but what impediment ther was at euerye time, and why no frute of the ſame returned to the common wealth, that doth he leaue to his place, doubting not, but many of them, whiche were either at the Counſels them ſelues, or hadde their deputies there, know the matter well inough: And now, if they be ſo contente, that the ſame ordre of the counſell maye be repared to, and take place: which thing verely is aboue all others to be wiſhed for of almighty God, he will not only aſſent thervnto moſt willingly, but alſo apply the thing with all ſtudy, faith and dilligence: And than in dede is this thing only to be conſulted of, how thoſe cauſes that wer before a let and impediment might be auoided and taken awaye: but if for the tumultes of warre, and tempeſt of the common wealthe, they ſhall thincke mete it be differred vntil an other time more quiet, he is content, that other godly and tollerable waies be debated, that in the meane ſeaſon the people and all ſtates may liue peaceably, and be kept vnder an honeſt diſcipline, to the glorye of God alwaies, and with a ſafe conſcience: In former yeares in dede there was ofttimes mention made of a counſell prouinciall, as thoughe the ſame were moſt fit and conueniente for oure purpoſe, but for ſo much as bothe the name, manner, and fourme thereof in ouretime hath not in his opinion bene much knowen and accuſtomed, he can determine nothing therof at this preſent. The third way & meanes hath bene diuers times aſſaied by talcke and conference of learned men: And all be it the ſame hath commen to ſmall profit, yet is this well perceiued, that many and that the chiefeſt poyntes might here by haue bene reconciled, in caſe the matter had bene handled wyth a godlye zeale, and no reſpecte had to priuate commoditye of either ſide, which thinge neuertheleſſe he woulde that no manne ſhoulde thincke ſpoken to his iniurye: of this waye therfore we muſte take further deliberation alſo: And all be it that themperors deuiſe and purpoſe touchinge the ſame matter, who all together mente good faith, was otherwiſe taken in former yeares, and had ſmall thanke of either partie, yet doth he againe, if they ſhall thincke good ſo, not miſlike the ſame: if the parties alſo will treat ſincerely, if all affections laid a part, and obſtinacy ſet a ſide, they will haue before theyr eies Goddes glorye onlye and the common ſaluation of all men, he will ſhew herein all faith and dilligence: he can perceiue none other way at this preſent, that is conuenient: but in caſe they haue anye other thing that is more mete for this purpoſe, it ſhall be lawful to declare the ſame. An other part of this conſultation is concerninge

peace, and whan certen yeres paſt there were lawes made hereof, themperor and he had ſuppoſed, that they had well prouided for the common quiet: but thend now declareth, that it was not ſufficiently foreſene, for that they might not condempne nor outlawe the rebels, and ſeditious parſons, vnleſſe they were firſt cited to appere, and after all due order of iudgement conuicted, where they in the meane ſeaſon, hauing time and ſpace, did afflicte diuers without any deſert: it was alſo prouided in former actes, that if any man ſuffred iniury or were by force inuaded, his next neighbors ſhould aſſiſt him: but it is not vnknowen to them, what impedimentes haue chaunced: Therfore muſt they conſult and way with him diligently, how theſe two poyntes of the law maye be amended, that bothe vnquiet and troubleſome perſons may be made a feard, and ſuche as are faithfull to thempire may know aſſuredly that they ſhal not want aid againſt force and violence: which thing may now be done ſo much more commodiouſly for that the foundation hereof is laid of late at Woormes and at Frankfurt: Wherfore they ſhal do wel, if they follow the conſultation there begon, and bring it to an end: He exorteth them moreouer to conſult of eſtabliſhing the iudgemēt imperiall, of publicke contribution of Coyne: and of other politicke thinges, and hitherto to applye all their deuiſes, by what meanes theſe domeſticall euils, diſſentions, tumultes, ſeditions and force may be taken awaye and cleane roted oute: and herein to conſider chiefly the ſtate of thempire, and to ſe in how greate daunger Germany ſtandeth not only by reaſon of the cruell Turke, but for other ennemies alſo, which nothing leſſe, than the Turke, ſeke ye deſtruction of thempire: let them ponder therfore, what commodities they receiue of theſe diſcordes and domeſticall euils, which they vndoutedly haue craftelye raiſed and ſupported, that in this diſſention of the ſtates, they might accompliſh theyr gready luſt, and by a ſoden inuaſion might bring al men into their ſubiection and bondage: for other nations, which haue bene ſo vanquiſhed by them and ſupplā
               ted, ought to be a warninge for them, to take hede to thē ſelues, and to take ſuch counſel, wherby, both the preſent tempeſt and ruine of the country may be blowen ouer, and the Empire conſiſte and perſeuer in full ſtrengthe and authoritye, and all foraine violence, as in times paſte, ſo nowe alſo maye be manfullye and valeauntly repulſed: And what ſo euer the Emperoure and he are able to do here in bothe with theyr aide and counſell, they will do it right gladlye, and that in ſuche ſorte, as all men maye vnderſtande, what intier loue they beare to the common Countrye: And let them perſwade them ſelues of this to be moſte aſſured What time this Oration of kinge Fardinando was publiſhed throughoute Germanye, it was

wrytten at the ſelf time out of ſondry places, that he had exiled out of Boheme, about two hundreth miniſters of the churche: It was The miniſters exiled out of Boheme. ſignified alſo bi letters, how cardinal Morone ſhuld com frō Rome to the counſell of thempire, which would aſſay to do the like in Germany, that Cardinall Poole had already brought to paſſe in England: For it is thought aſſuredly, that for the recoueringe of England, the biſhop of Rome and all his clients conceiued a wonderful hope in their mindes. For in as much as the thing had ſo lucky ſucceſſe, therfore thought they now, or els neuer, yt God was on theyr ſide, and that they maintained a moſt iuſte cauſe, neither that theyr church could be conuict of any error, thus they now chiefly beleued. or at the leaſt ſo pretended: And whan they ſend ambaſſadours into Germany, they do it for this intent, not to acknowledge any faut of theyrs, but that they may helpe and ſuccor, as they ſaye, mennes infirmity. About the end of February, Ihon Albert, Duke of Megelburge, who I ſaid was in league with Duke Moris, and whō Henry the duke of Brunſwicke afflicted ſore the yere before, what time he kept war in Saxonie, marieth the daughter of Albert duke Pruiſſe. Whan I had proceded thus farre, I was aduertiſed oute of England, that of thoſe fiue, of whome I ſpake a little before, Bradford, althoughe he were condempned, was reſerued in priſon, and that the mindes of manye, through the conſtancy of the reaſte that ſuffered, wer wonderfully aſtonied and amaſed.
         
         
            
            The, xxvi, Booke of Sledaines Commentaries, concerning the ſtate of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne of the Empyre, of Charles the fyfte.
            
               The Argument of the xxvj. Booke
               
                  ENgland brought againe in ſubiection to the Biſhop of Rome, a wrytinge is ſe
                     •
                  te for the with Indulgences. The Duke of Saxon by his ambaſſadoures maketh his purgation to Ferdinando, and excuſeth him ſelfe that he can not be at thaſſemble. The miniſters of the Churche expulſed oute of Boheme are comforted by the wrytinges of godly learned men. Townes taken by the French men. The Princes of Germany mete, and enter alſo into league. Pope Iuly being dead: immedidiatly after that Mercellus was choſen in his ſtead he dieth. And Paul the fourth of that name founder of the ſectes of the Ieſuites, ſuccedeth, whileſt they of Sene do yelde them to the Emperoure. Cardinall Poole ſolliciteth themperor and the French kinge vnto peace in vaine. The Quene of England being therin a meane, and perſecuting cruelly the true Chriſtians. At which time a roſe tumultes at Geneua and Lucerues. The Senate of Paris indeuoureth to mitigate and call in the Proclamation ſetforth by the French king againſt the true Chriſtians. Thinges done at Rome by the Biſhop, and by the Normens againſt the Spaniardos. Uulpian taken by the French men, diſſention amonges the Miniſters of the Churche concerning the Lordes ſupper. Whileſt the compact was made for the Lordſhip of Chattes, themperor going into Spain, committeth the gouernment to his ſonne. Thinges doue in thaſſemble of thempire concerninge Religion: And extraordinary wryting of the Papiſtes in the ſame, thanſwer alſo of Ferdinando and of the Proteſtantes to them bothe: and what decrec inſued vpon the ſame. The Parlament and ſtate of England. They of Auſtriche by their ambaſſadoures requiringe that they mighte be permitted to haue the true Religion, are denied it by the diuers anſwers of Fardinando, and ſue in baine. In manner at the ſame time the Bauarians ſollicite theyr Duke about the like matter in vaine. At the lengthe was truce taken betwixte the Emperoure and the Frenche kinge. The Duke of Pruſſe imbraſing the confeſſion of Auſpurge, therror of Dſiander is quenched. About this time appeared a blaſinge ſtarre. The matter of Marques Albert is heard. Tharchbiſhop of Cantorbury openly and conſtantly profeſſyng the true Religion, is burnt. The Pope ſeketh priuelye to infringe and diſſeuer the confeſſion of Auſpurge. The Cardinall of Auſpurge accuſed of treaſon purgeth him ſelf: declaring plainly of what nature and faction he is of. A ſuſpition of a conſpiracye in Englande brodeth trouble, and increaſeth crueltye againſte the faithfull: that xiij. were burnte together at a ſtake. Fardinando alledgeth the reuoltinge of Tranſtiuania and diuers Townes from him: And alſo the Turke now ready to inuade as cauſes and lettes, why he can not come to thaſſemble, which hitherto he had ſo oft differred. Themperor now at length taketh ſhipping into Spaine, leauing his ſoone gouernor of the lowe countries. Sleidan departeth out of thys life.
            
            
               
               HOw England ſubmitted it ſelf againe to the Biſhop of Rome, it hathe bene ſhewed in the Ioy at Rome for England reduced to yt Romiſhe Church. former boke. When theſe newes with a wonderfull expedition were broughte to Rome, greate ioye a roſe in the Citye, and Te Deum was ſong in euery Church. After on Chriſtmaſſe euen. The Biſhoppe ſendeth forth this wryting. Since I lately heard (ſaith he) that England, which of many yeares nowe, was ſeparated and plucked from the body of the Church, is through the vnmeaſurable mercye of God broughte againe to the Communion of the ſame Church, and to the obedience of the ſea of Rome, by the ſinguler dilligence, fidelitye, trauell and induſtrye of kinge Phillip and Mary his wife, and Cardinall Poole, I toke greate pleaſure in my minde: And alſo, as reaſon was, gaue thankes vnto God as hartely as I could, and omitted nothing, but that the frute and profit of this my gladneſſe might redound to the whole City. But, like as that father, of whom the Goſpel mentioneth, hauing recouered his ſonne loſt, not only reioyſeth exceadingly, and is priuately glad in his minde, but alſo inuiteth others to feaſting and making good cheare together with him: Euen ſo I verely, to thintent, that al the world may vnderſtand, how great is my ioy and gladnes, will that common thanckes and praiers be made. Therfore, by the power yt 
               Indulgēces graunted by the Pope for the conuerſion of Englande. I haue, I permit euery man in generall, that he maye chuſe him a prieſt, whom he liſt, vnto whom he may confeſſe his ſinnes rightly: And geue to the ſame prieſt authority, yt he may forgeue al manner of ſinnes, be they neuer ſo greuous, euen thoſe whiche are reſerued to my power alone, and are wonte to be excepted by name: that he may remit not only the treſpaſſe, but the paine alſo for ſinnes due: that he may impoſe ſuch ſatiſfaction as behoueth, and may releaſe all vowes, except chaſtity and Religion: ſo yet, that they be recompenſed by an other worke: yea truſting vpon Gods mercye, and the interceſſion of ſainctes, Peter and Paule, I graunt full remiſſion of all ſinnes, which is wont only to be geuen but euery fifty yeare, to all thoſe, that with an humble hart do conuert to God, and wholy confeſſing their ſinnes, whan they ſhall vnderſtande this indulgence to be ſetforth by vs, will twiſe or thriſe a weke faſt and geue Almoſe and vſe other godly exerciſes, and after receiue the Sacrament, with thanckes geuing and praiers vnto God, that he with ye light of his countenance, would illumine thoſe that walke in darkneſſe, that he would geue peace, and moue the heartes of kinges to concord. And this ſo great a benefite I graunt to them alſo, which are hindred either by reaſon of age or ſickneſſe, ſo that they can not

performe the thinges before ſaid. And to the intent that theſe oure wrytinges may be euery where knowne, I charge and commaund all Patriarches, Archbiſhops, and ſuche other like, that ſo ſone as they ſhall haue receiued a copy of the ſame by and by they cauſe it to be publiſhed euery man through out his Prouince, and ſince the gift is fre, that they ſet it forth without any gain.
            In the laſt boke I ſhewed you how Blaſſenburge the head caſtell of Marques Albert, wherin the hope of the whole country cō
               ſiſted, by ſurrendry was taken: And at this time, leaſt being recouered it mighte geue an occaſion of further diſpleaſure, his aduerſaries do ſubuert and raſe it to the ground, not without the greate diſpleaſure of the houſe of Brandenburge, and the Marques kinred. Ferdinando king of Romaines, both before he came frō home, and than alſo, when he was commen to Auſpurge to the aſſemble, by meſſagers and letters exhorted the Princes to make haſte, and come thither in parſon, as in the laſt boke hath ben ſaid.
            And chiefly he had ſollicited the Prince elector of Saxony, to come to Auſpurge: who had both excuſed him ſelfe before, that he could not come, namely for the ſtate of Saxony not very quiet, and now ſending ambaſſadours thither, excuſeth the matter againe, & by occaſion falling into the mention of the Turk, ſheweth in what pearill Germany ſtandeth, which in times paſt being mightye and feared of others, is now almoſt deſtitute and void of ſtrength, hauing receiued ſo many diſpleaſures and plagues. And that this euill is ſo much the worſe, that there is amonge the ſtates ſo greate an alienation of mindes, and diſtruſt amonges them ſelues: And how the Emperour him ſelf, to remeadye this diſeaſe, had omitted no kind of diligence: but yet yt al labour hitherto hath ben taken in vain: For the minds of men to be ſo bitterly exaſperated, & alwais ſo ſet open to diſpleaſure, that vnneth any hope of reconcilement is to be had: how a few yeares paſt, his brother Moris had ordained that certain Ceremonies, and things indifferēt ſhould be kept ſtill in Churches of his dominion, but that the ſame commaundement was of ſo little force, that it was alſo taunted with the libels, and bitter raylings of many. In ſo much that it was not in his power to confirm it, vnles he would bring him ſelf in daunger.
            And therfore are many afraid for attempted any thingin this behalf: Now on thother ſide, they that be on the contrary part, and impugn the doctrin profeſſed at Auſpurge, how little they thincke to eſtabliſh any godly and lawfull reformation, it is known wel inough by the doings of former time, when the matter was attempted ether by talk and conference, or els by counſels.
            
               
Conſideringe therefore that after ſo much labour taken, and counſels holden, the waye of concorde can not be found, God peranenture ſo willinge and reuenginge oure ſinnes, he beſecheth him earneſtlye, that the ſame Booke, that conteineth the ſome of the Chriſten doctrin, and was in times paſt exhibited at Auſpurge he would not take for an euill or wicked boke.
            But know it for a certenty to be a pure and a godlye wrytinge, which can ſhewe vnto vs the ſonne of God authoure of ſaluation, whiche in Doctrine dothe plainly agree with thauncient churche, and with thoſe foure chiefe Counſels: whiche teacheth and fetteth forthe true Chriſten worckes, and exhorteth the people to ſhew obedience to the Magiſtrate.
            Wherefore in caſe a ſure peace in that aſſemble maye be eſtabliſhed, there is no doubte but that the Emperoure and he maye haue greate aide in Germanye againſte the Turke, where as elſſe they that are of the Proteſtauntes Religion, and manye of theim in dede borne and broughte vp therein, will perſeuer conſtantlye in the ſame Religion.
            For vnleſſe ſuch a peace may be had, that may compriſe bothe Religion and alſo the Churche goodes, and if the matter, as manye times it hathe bene, ſhoulde be differred to an other aſſemble, and delaied from daye to daye, and the people be lefte in this doutfull ſtate of thinges, to be vncertaine howe pacientlye all menne woulde take it.
            For though he and other Princes ſhould be quiet and do their duety, and ſhewe all obedience, yet that it maye be, that menne of the meaner and baſer ſort may raiſe ſome tumulte, and maye pretende this vncertaintye of ſtate, and feare of pearill for Religion: Eſpeciallye in thoſe places, whiche geue oportunitye to attempte ſuche thinges: Since therefore the caſe of the Empire is ſuche, he earneſtlye requireth him to prouide for the common tranquillity, for ſo muche as he hathe full authoritye of the Emperoure to determine. But of late yeares this condition was propounded of his brother Moris at Paſſawe, that in caſe the controuerſy of Religion mighte not be reconciled, that yet neuertheleſſe an aſſured peace might be had, til the thing might be throughli appeaſed: and although the Emperor would not than admit the ſame condition, for that he ſaide it apperteined to all theſtates of the Empire, yet in as muche as at the ſame time he reproued it not, and with expreſſe woordes added to the Compoſition, that he woulde ſee that in the Counſell the matter ſhoulde bee handeled indifferentlye, neyther that there ſhoulde be anye crafte vſed in the

voices concerning Religiō, he truſteth for the ſame cauſe, that he will moue in this behalfe not only thoſe whiche were that tyme at Paſſawe, but other ſtates alſo ſo ſone as the counſel be ginneth, and perſwade them to peace. When thambaſſadours had ſpoken to this effect the fourth daye of February, the nexte daye after king Ferdinando propoundeth to the ſtates in ſuche ſorte as I ſhewed you in ye laſt boke. The miniſters of ye churche driuen out of the lande of Boheme, the learned men that were in Meiſſen and in Wittemberge, and amongeſt others Melāchthon, Melancthon comforteth ye miniſters of Boheme. comfort them with an epiſtle, and ſhew the craft of the cō
               trary part, who affirmed that they kept a neceſſary order in the churche, & that thoſe whiche either had not receiued orders at the Byſhops hande, or had wynes, could not miniſter the Sacramentes. For this cauſe of expulſion they fayned, that they ſhould not ſeme to haue a deſire to oppreſſe ye true doctrine: but theſe men ſhewe how it is a ſtarke tyrāny, that maried prieſtes ſhould be put from the holy miniſtery. For Sathā was the authour of prohiting matrimony, as it is euidēt by ye ſcriptures: And that we ought not to ſeke to be ordeined of the byſhops, yt are the open ennemies of the Goſpell, and defende idols, but of that fellowſhip, which hath pure doctrine, & therfore hath the keyes of the kingdome of heauen. For it were to abſurde & daū
               gerouſe, if Shepeheardes ſhould be ordeined of wolues. The churche to haue had alwayes right to chouſe mete miniſters, and that ſo was the decree of the counſell of Nice. And they that were ſo choſen and tried, to haue bene confirmed of them, that gouerned Godly congregations: The ſame maner to bee nowe alſo obſerued, and therfore that it is a ſclaunder, to ſaye that they diſturbe or breake order. Since therfore the matter is ſo, and that for the true profeſſing of the Goſpell they be expulſed, they ought to take this calamitie ſo muche more moderatly: For God wyll not fayle them in his tyme: And that they be ready with theyr next churches to ſhewe them all loue and hoſpitalitie.
            Where the Frenche men at the Ides of Decēber of the yeare before, had by the conduit of Briſſake, taken Eporedia a towne The towne of Caſſalle taken by the Frenchmen in the Alpes by the water of Durie. This yeare, the third daye of Marche they intercept the town of Caſale nere vnto ye Poo, wherin was a garriſon of Spaniardes and Almaynes, vpon the ſodayne, and with in a fewe dayes after the Caſtell alſo: Afterwarde bringe many other thinges into their ſubiection. And amongeſt others thei raſe and make euen with the groūd, Ualence and Saluadore.
            
               
The ſixt day of Marche Auguſt Duke of Saxony, Ioachim Marques of Brandēburg, Princes Electours: The ſonnes alſo An aſſemble of the Princes of Saxonie at Numburge. of Duke Iohn Fridericke, the Lantgraue & certen other Princes of theſame countrie, aſſemble at Numburg vpon the Riuer of Sale, & there renew the league of inheritaūce, whiche is betwixt the houſes of Saxon, Brandēburg & Heſſia, as I ſhewed in the .xxiiii. boke, & alſo determine, that they would ſticke conſtantly to ye cōfeſſion of Auſpurg: And leaſt there ſhould any ſuſpicion ariſe of any new or ſecret coūſell, the fift day after that they came thether, they ſignifie the cauſe of their aſſemble to ye Emperour in wryting. In the former yeare, what time a compact was made betwene Auguſtus & Iohn Fridericke Duke of Saxonie, this was alſo agreed vpon y• the old & familiar leage The letters of the Princes of Saxony to themp. ſhould be renewed: To witte that league whiche was made an hondreth yeres ſince & more, & after eſtabliſhed by a lawe: And therfore yt they haue now met for the ſame cauſe, & as that league was profitable to their elders & all the people, ſo likewyſe thei truſted, yt it ſhuld com thē luckely to paſſe: ſince thei ſought for nothing els but peace & trāquillitie, & did it to ye diſpleaſure of no man: Moreouer, yt after the maner of their aūceſters, they haue excepted his highnes & his brother king of Romains: and as they intende priuatly to kepe mutual amitie amongeſt thē ſelues, ſo wil they alſo openly doe that their dutie requireth, & which may become obedient Princes of thempire: And yt in Religion they wil not procede any further than is limited in the confeſſion of Auſpurg, but for as much as in the ſame are cōteined the chief articles of ye Chriſtian doctrine, & no wicked ſedicious opinion can be found therin, thei wil through Gods grace perſeuer in theſame doctrine: neither wil they fayle alſo the cō
               mon welth of Germany, ſo far forth as thei are able with their trauel, counſel & treaſures. And for as much as at this time being not moſte quiet, for the auoiding of a further diſcōmoditie they abide at home, they haue ſent Ambaſſadours to thaſſēblee of thempire, who haue in cōmaundemēt to refer al their counſels & doings vnto peace, ſo yt neither for religiō nor any ciuile cauſe any force or violēce ſhould be feared. For ye peace once eſtabliſhed it ſhal be an occaſion yt other cōtrouerſies may be ye better appeaſed: That the ſtate doubtles of ye cōmon welth now is ſuch, yt it is great nede to ioine together all their forces & mindes that a wyder entrie be not ſet open to ye Turkes to inuade vs: How they know wel enough howe greatly he deſireth that ſo ſone as may be, a ſufficiēt army might be prepared, to repres thennemies violence. Wherfore now in caſe ſuch a peace might

be eſtabliſhed, ther is no doubt but the ſtates of thempire wold gladly imploy their ſubſtaunce vpon the ſame war, which verely hitherto by reaſon of ſondry tumultes & ciuile diſcordeshath bene omitted. That they wil be alwaies ready, & haue cōmaunded their ambaſſadours to offer theſe thinges in their name, at the counſel, theſame day they write to king Ferdinādo, in a maner to ye ſame effect, as before I ſaid, ye Duke Auguſt did by his Ambaſſadours. For both they vrge y• ſame cōpact of Paſſawe, & ſhew how deſirous they are of peace. Thei cōmend the doctrine cōfeſſed at Auſperge, and exhort him to confirme the peace, and alſo pray him, that he wold geue no credit to ſuch, as haply ſeke to diſturbe the quiet of Germany. At the Ides of March the The Archbyſhop of Mētz dieth. Archbiſhop of Mentz departed out of this life, whom we ſaied to haue bene at the counſel of Trent, & after was put to flight by Marques Albert: Whom Daniel Brēdel ſuccedeth. The. viii day after yt byſhop of Mentz, which was ye .xxiii. day of March, The death of Pope Iuly the third. dieth Pope Iuly the third. Who for bicauſe he had ſo eaſely beyond al expectatiō recouered England, was thought to haue cō
               ceaued alſo a wōderful hope of Germany: And had therfor ſent thither Cardinal Morone, who the next day after that he was dead, came to the coūſell of thempire at Auſpurg: But with in eight daies after hearing newes therof, ye laſt day of March he departeth thence againe, and with Truckeſſe Cardinal of Auſpurg, ſpedeth him to the Electiō at Rome. The Cardinals that wer at Rome, not tarieng for the reſt made haſt, & the .ix. day of April proclaime Pope, Marcellus, the ſecōd of that name. The Marcellus ye ſecond choſē
                ſame that was ſent Ambaſſadour with Cardinal Farneſe to ye Emperour, of Paul the third, as I ſhewed you in the .xiii. boke The Cardinal of Auſpurg a fewe daies before, that he went to Rome, by his letters ſent to the Senate of Princes & Ambaſſadours, ſheweth that he deſireth in dede peace by al meanes: but in any wiſe to cōſent, that the dignitie of the Sea Apoſtolique or the olde religion ſhould be defaced, he will neuer permitte.
            In the meane time they of Sene, who nowe by the ſpace of eight moneths (to wit) euen from the time that Peter Stroſſe They of Sene rendre them ſelues to Themp. receiued the ouerthrowe, as is ſhewed in the laſt boke, were beſieged with ye power of themperour & of Coſmus Duke of Florence, driuen for want of all thinges, where no ayde appered, ye xxi. daye of Aprill yelde thēſelues to thēperour, & are ruled by a garriſon of ſoldiours, lieftenaunt of themperours armie was the Marques of Marignane, twyſe famous by the policie of war. Thre yeres ſince what time by thayde of the French king, the Spanyardes beinge diſcomfited, they Raſed the Caſtell,

they of Sene, ſending Ambaſſadours, gaue the kinge as harty thankes as they could deuiſe, and from that time forewarde cō
               mended to his tuition them ſelues and all that they had.
            Marcellus the ſecond, newly created Pope, the, xxii. daye of Marcellus ye ſecond dieth his creation, in the night yt goeth before the firſt of May, chaū
               ged his life for death. Alitle before wercome to the citie forduties ſake and to ſalute him, Hercules Duke of Farrare & Guy Ubalde Duke of Urbine. For they had preuēted others, who neuertheleſſe ſhould haue come. The Cardinals aſſembled in the Conclaue, the .xxiii. day of May, proclame Cardinal Theatine Pope. Theſame was Iohn Peter of Naples, Deane of the College, a gentleman borne of the noble houſe of Caraſtes, a man of aunciēt yeares & notably learned. Chaunging his name, he called him ſelf Paul the fourth. Paul the third had choſen him into the nomber of Cardinals. And he is the ſelf ſame that began Paule the fourth. a certen new ſecte of thoſe whiche are called Ieſuites, and haue neſtled not in Italy only but alſo in certen places of Germany. Not lōg after he created his nephew his brothers ſonne The ſecte of Ieſuites. Cardinal, the ſame was a man of warre, and that a chief captayne ſeruing for the moſte part the Frenche Kyng.
            I ſhewed before in the laſt boke how Poole thengliſh Cardinal went to themperour, & French king, to ſollicite & moue thē 
               The trauell of Cardinall Poole to make peace betwene them perour and Frēch king. to peace, and handled the cauſe both by wordes & writinges, & amongeſt other thinges which he vſed to perſwade them. Whileſt you ſaith he, kepe ciuile war, the Turke doeth very much to inlarge his dominion. And hauing wonne by Sea & land two ſtrong holdes, Belgrade & the Rhodes hath made him a way open to Offen, & hath the poſſeſſion of Tonowa: And if God had not ſtired vp the king of Perſia to be his aduerſary, it is to bee thought that he might haue already ſubdued to him ſelf al the prouinces of Chriſtendom. By this ſelfſame occaſion haue euil Chriſtiās alſo increaſed in ſondry places, with ſo much a deprauation & corruptiō of al diſcipline aſwel eccleſiaſtical as ciuile that now your power is not great inough to ſuppreſſe thē. For this declare welenough ſo many rebellions which are ſtired vp euery where, & the duties of religion neglected, & hereſies & ſciſmes which in the meane time ſpring vp & are increaſed. After in an other place, ye ought to conſider (ſaith he) that you ar the Princes of the Chriſten Beligion. And albeit that God hathe permitted Sathan, thauthour of all euil, which is altogether in this yt he might ſift the churche, & wynnowe it like wheate, to ſtyre vp war amongſt you, which are two of ye chiefeſt & moſte noble mēbers of ye church, yet hath he not ſuffred his wickednes

further than to prophane and ciuile matters. For in Religion he hath kept you ſounde, of one and the ſame opinion, and annexed to the body of the churche: For els coulde there hardly be made againe any concorde betwixt you. And where as ſo many other Princes haue reuolted from the churche, and that thennemy of mankinde hath attempted ſo many thinges, yet hath God moſte benignely loked vpon you, and hath made his enter priſes fruſtrate. Wherby, as by a moſte certen token of his goodnes and clemencie towardes you, he ſheweth that he wil at the length vſe your miniſterie, & wil ioyne you both together with his vicar in earth, to the intent verely that ſuch hurtful diſſentions may be taken a way, and that as well in the ſtate ciuile as ſacred peace may be reſtored to al mē. Many ſuch like thīges brought Poole, threatening them alſo with the wrath and vē
               geaunce of God, vnleſſe they leaue, and releaue the miſerie of ye afflicted people. And although he preuailed than nothing, yet whileſt the matter went forwarde in Englande, he holdeth on: And the matter at lēgth was brought to this point, that both the Emperour and the Frenche king refuſed not to ſende Ambaſſadours to the treatie of peace.
            But the Quene of Englande, who was a meane in this matter, appointeth a fit and mete place in the myddes of the A place of y• treaty of peace, choſen by the Quene of England. playne betwyxt Caleis, Arde and Grauelyn, Townes of the Englyſhe, Frenche and Flemiſhe dominion, ſet as it were a treangle, and intrenchynge the ſame rounde aboute wyth Ditches, buylded there foure Pauilions, Sommer houſes in deede, but yet fyne and fitte for the pourpoſe. In this place therfore, the .xxiii. daye of Maye this yeare the Ambaſſadours mete, from the Emperour, amongeſt others came the Byſhop of Arras: From the Frenche kyng the Cardinal of Loraine and the Coneſtable. Out of England came as peacemakers Cardinall Poole, the Biſhop of Wyncheſter Chauncelour, the Erle of Arondell, and the Lorde Paget. This brute blowē abroade far and nere, ſtyred vp diuerſe expectations and iudgementes of men, amongeſt the chiefly vnto whome the controuerſies were not vnknowen. For there came in queſtion the Dukedome of Millan, Burgundy, Sauoye, Piedmont, Corſica, Nauerne, Loraine, the lande of Luke, the cities of Tully, Uirodone and Metz. The matter being long & much debated, where amongſt other thinges at the laſt the Engliſhe interceſſours ſayde how certen of theſe controuerſies ought to be referred to the hearing of the generall counſell, they departed and nothyng finiſhed. Kyng Ferdinando and the ſtates of the Empire ſendinge

their letters to the Emperour ye fourth Ides of Iune, had praied him that in the treatie of peace he would haue conſideratiō of thoſe thinges whiche the kyng of Fraunce had taken from the Empire. Where therfore nothing was done, the Emperour The Empe. letters to the ſtates of the Empire. wryting againe to the ſtates the .xv. day after, your duty, ſaith he, is to me ryght acceptable, that you are ſo moued with the calamities of thoſe thinges whiche both mine and alſo the publique ennemy of the Empire hath afflicted. Doubtles I was very careful that ſuche thinges might be reſtored to their fourmer eſtate: And before your epiſtle was deliuered me, I had inioyned mine Ambaſſadours & chief counſellours, ſent to treate of peace, that amongeſt other thinges they ſhould handle this ſame moſte diligently, nother ſhould they herein relent any thyng. And although all wayes and meanes of concorde being ſet open of vs, I had thought, that he, becauſe of a cōmon quiet would not haue dealte obſtinatly, yet are they at this time broken of without any good done: Neuertheleſſe for the better ſtay of Chriſtendome, I refuſe not peace, vpon ſuch reaſonable conditions as hitherto haue bene propounded. And when occaſiō ſhall ſerue, I wyll wholy indeuour that thoſe thinges may be reſtored to the Empire, and may be in a better ſtate hereafter. The Emperour had a little before ſent the Duke of Alba into Lumbardie, that he might there make warre, where as Ferdinando The Duke of Alba ſent to Millan. Gonzaga had diſcharged him ſelfe of that office, and retourning home out of Flaunders liued a priuate life. Of many monethes before there had bene a report, and that in dede moſt certen, but chifly at this tyme, that ye Quene of Englande was with childe, and nere her time: But the expectation was vain. Then alſo they began to burne againe in Englande, and the ſame Bradforde whome in the ende of the .xxv. booke I ſayde Bradforde burnt in Englande. was a fewe monethes before condemned, and caried againe to pryſon, was than at laſt burnt amongeſt others.
            At the ende of the moneth of May, Iohn Fridericke the eldeſt ſonne of Duke Iohn Fridericke, toke to wyfe Agnes the Iohn Friderick thelect. ſonne marieth. Lantgraues daughter, whiche had bene wyfe to Duke Maurice. Thither came many Princes, whiche vpon this occaſion alſo conſulted againe of their own matters at Numburge. In maner at this ſame tyme the Lady Iane the Emperours mother departed out of this lyfe: Kyng Ferdinando kept her funerall at Auſpurge. The Empe. mother dieth
            
            A certen tumult in the night was rayſed than at Geneua, by certen of the Senatours, who thought to bring the gouernment A tumult raiſed at Geneua. of the citie to them, and to their faction. And chiefly they

hated Caluine: And thoſe, which for perſecutiō were come thither out of Fraunce, they ſought to expulſe: And where there was running vp and downe in the night ſeaſon, in ſondry places, as a token or watche worde, they cried that the Frenchemē were vp in harneſſe, & the citie was betrayed: But where they kept them ſelues in their houſes, the matter at length was appeaſed, and after were certen executed: Many ſaued thē ſelues by flight. The cauſe why they would haue expulſed the French men that were ſtraungers, amongeſt others was this, that many of them were of late choſen in to the nomber of the citezens wherby they ſawe their owne force weakened, the nomber of the other part being increaſed.
            The Turkes nauie, as in certen former yeares, ſo nowe alſo ſayled on the Tuſcane ſea, threatening Hetruria. Wherfore or euer they went any further, or ioyned with the Frenche nauie, the Marques of Maarignane lieftenaunt of the Emperours armie, inuaded the porte of Hercules, kept by the Frenchemen, and by force of his ſouldiours wynneth the caſtell, putting the Porte Hereules taken by Imperials. Plūbine beſieged of Turkes. garriſon to ye ſworde. This was at the Ides of Iune. The Turkes afterwarde beſiege the Towne of Plumbine: And when after an ouerthrowe the matter would not ſuccede, thei attempt Ilua, an Ilande of the Dukes of Florence, but in vayne alſo. Than were certen politicke lawes ſet foorth at Metz, in the whiche citie the Frenche kyng had a garriſon & a gouernour, & alſo a iudge to execute iuſtice. There was wrytten amongeſt other thinges, if any brother or ſiſter or vncle or tutour, or gardien be bawed to any mayde or woman, that he ſhould haue a rynge of Iron put about his necke, and where he ſhall openly vſe ſuche practiſe, being ſubiect to the iniuries and rebukes of all men, let him be beaten with roddes, and banniſhed. But if the father or mother ſhall do the lyke, they ſhal loſe their head. Many men marueled that theſe thinges were ſo ſet forth, for that ſuch vnaccuſtomed vices, and not euery where vſed, ſemed not ſo muche to be forboden, as ſhewed. But howe corrupt maners be in our tyme, hereof it may be eaſely gathered.
            Of that ſame controuerſie, which hath nowe many yeares Controuerſie for the dominion of ye Chattes. vene betwixt the Lantgraue and William Erle of Naſſow, for the Lorſhip of Chattes, we haue ſpoken heretofore oftener thā once. Wherfore to the intent at the laſt an ende might be made leaſt that any further inconuenience might arriſe therof, certen Princes intreate the matter, and as indifferent arbitrers appointe a daye at Wormes the firſt of Iuly. Theſe were the Paulſgraue Prince Electour, Chriſtopher Duke of Wirtēberg,

William Duke of Cleaue, the Lātgraue ſent thither William his eldeſt ſonne. The conditions there propounded, and a certē tyme debated, at the laſt are permitted to a further deliberatiō and a certen tyme appointed for the ſame matter. In ye meane ſeaſon the Frenchemen, to the intent they might haue victualles in a readines, plucke downe many villages in the countrie of Mountfarrate, leaſt if the ennemie ſhould poſſeſſe them, Caſale ſhould be brought in diſtreſſe. There is in thoſe partes a towne Uulpiane, of great force and eſtimatiō: The ſame was Uulpian vitayled. kept by Spaniardes. And where at the newe comming of the Duke of Alba, a great power was gathered, the towne was vitayled. At the ſame tyme alſo the Frenchemen vitayled Maryburge, taken the yeare before in Flaunders, and kept from the Emperour. The Frenche kyng being moued by his counſell, ſet Maryburg vnailed. forth a proclamation, wherby he commaunded all his officers, that ſuche as the eccleſiaſtical iudges, and Inquiſitours of the fayth ſhould condēne, they ſhould for the greatnes of the fault, The Frēche kinges proclamation againſt the cō
                  demned of yt inquiſitours without any delaye, or reſpecte had of appealyng, put them to death. The Cardinall of Lorayne deliuered this proclamation to the Senate of Paris, that after the old cuſtome being of thē allowed and ſet forth, it might be regiſtred in the common recordes, but they ſomewhat aſtonied at the newnes of ye thing, for that the helpe of appealing was takē away, require a time for to take deliberatiō, and after ſending to the king their Ambaſſadours, ſhe we what is their opinion, as ſhalbe declared in his place.
            There is a towne in Rhaetia, next Italy, called Lucarne, whiche belongeth to the common citie of the Heluetians. The citezens of the ſame towne required of the Swiſſes that they The Lucernates require of yt Swiſſes the doctrine of the Goſpell. would permitte them to haue the doctrine of the Goſpell. But they, for as muche as they were in Religion diuerſe, varied in ſentence, where ſome thought mete to graunte them their requeſte, and others that it ought not to be permitted. And there was lyke ſome ciuile tumulte to ariſe therof: But in the ende their voices preuailed, wherby it was decreed, that they ſhould remayne in the Religion of their elders, and that it ſhould be lawfull for thē that would not, to go dwel els where. So there were founde very many, whiche leauing their houſes, went to Zurick, whiche citie in dede receiued them and dealt liberally with them. About this time the Engliſh Ambaſſadours which were ſent to the Pope in the name of the whole Realme, as I ſhewed about the ende of the laſte booke, retourne from Rome homewarde. The Pope allowed well enough al other thinges,

that they had retourned to repentaunce, and craued pardon: But that the churche goodes ſhould not be reſtored, he ſaide it was in no wyſe to be ſuffered. Amōgeſt the Ambaſſadours was the Byſhop of Ely.
            The king of Denmarke had a nauie at that time, which ſailing The Nauie of the kinge of Dēmarke towardes the North, made men to talke diuerſly. For ſome ſaid it was done by the Emperours counſell, who mynded to put the kinges ſonne or his brother in to the poſſeſſion of Scotlande: Others ſayde it was prepared for the vſe of the Frenche kyng, others for this cauſe only, that if the Emperour or king Philip his ſonne (whoſe power was waxed great by reaſon of Englande) ſhould ſtraye any further: they might be reſtrayned. And therfore were the cities of the Sea coaſte thought alſo to haue borne the charges of the ſame nauie. After lōg and great expectation all this rumour vaniſhed away, and all this preparation was found to be made againſt Pirates.
            Than was ye ſtate of Rome troubleſome. For yt Pope hauing Sanſtorian & Camillus Cardinalles led into pryſon. cōceiued a ſuſpicion of certen nobles, prouided him garriſons, and placing ſoldiours here and there in the Citie, committed Sſortia Cardinall of Sanflorian; and Camillus of the houſe of Columnois, to priſon. And for as muche as they were of the Emperours part, many men thought he went about a greater matter: And that ſuſpicion was increaſed, what tyme he required of the Duke of Florēce the Emperours client, a wonderous great ſumme of mony, whiche both Clement the ſeuenth lent Alexander Medices, and lately Iuly the third lent him, at the ſiege of Sene. The captiue Cardinalles at the length putting in ſuerties are inlarged.
            The Spaniſhe flete that tyme came towardes Flaunders, laden with all kynde of Marchaundiſe: And when it came vpō 
               The Spaniſhe flete intercepted by the French. the coaſtes of Normandie, the Frenchemen, whiche knewe it long before, ſet vpon them with a great force. And the fight & conflicte was terrible, the ſhippes being ſunke and burnte on either parte, and very many loſte, wherof ſome with weapon, others with fire, many ſwallowed vp of the billowes did periſhe. The Frenche men caried away certen ſhippes that they King Philip came out of England to his father at Bruſſelles. toke into Depe hauon, from whence they came. This was in the monthe of Auguſt, whereas about the end of the ſame moneth, kyng Philip ſayling out of Englande into Flaunders, came to the Emperour his father at Bruſſelles, accompanied with the Nobles of Englande. Truckeſins Cardinall of Auſpurge, An vniuerſitie erected at Dillinge. had a fewe yeares paſt, founded an Uniuerſitie at Dillinge, a towne ſituated vpon the Riuer of Danubius, by the

wyll and permiſſion of Pope Iuly the thirde, who had graunted for the ſame a publique bull, with exceading great fredoms & priuileges, as a wryting ſet forth in print declareth. Hither therfore amonges other came he whome themperour of many yeares had vſed for his ghoſtly father or confeſſour as they terme him. Peter Aſot, a Spaniarde, a blacke freer. He this yeare began with a contrary wryting to impugne the booke conteyning A boke of Peter Aſot againſt the cō
                  feſſion of the Duke of wirtemberge. the ſōme of the chriſten doctrine, the which boke Chriſtopher Duke of Wirtemberge ſent by his Ambaſſadours to the fathers of the counſell of Trent, as before is ſayde, whiche alſo he was not afrayde to dedicate to the ſame Duke. But Iohn Brentius about this time aunſwereth it at large, and confuteth his ſophiſticall reaſons. Whiche boke of Brentius Uergerius afterwarde tranſlated into Italian, to the ende that men of his owne nation might vnderſtande, both what thing came in to controuerſie, and whether parte handled the ſcriptures more purely and ſincerely.
            About the Ides of September, George Counte of Mountpelicarte, George Erle of Mount pelicarte marieth yt Lantgraues daughter. vncle to the Duke of Wirtemberge maried the Lady Barbara the Lantgraues daughter. After the arriuall of the Duke of Alba in Lumbardie, the king of Fraunce alſo ſendeth thither new ayde, and many warlike captaines, which ioyned them ſelues to Monſour Briſſake as companions of his perils and fortune. There is a towne wherof we haue ſpoken before, called Uulpian, which fortified with a garriſon of Spaniards was a great annoyaunce to Frenche matters, ſeing that from thence roades were made as farre as Taurin and further. To the intent therfore that this only let might be taken away, & that they might haue victualle, the Frenchemen towarde the ende of Auguſt beſiege it with al their force, and batter it with Uulpian taken and raſed by the Frenchmen muche harme done and receiued. At the length the .xxii. day of September they take it by ſurrendry, and raſe the walles both of the towne and Caſtell, and make it in ſhape of a Uillage. And a fewe dayes after, they take alſo the Towne and Caſtell Mountcalue is taken by yt Frenchmen of Mountcalue betwixt Aſte and Caſale. The diſſention that hath bene nowe theſe .xxx. yeares betwixt learned men aboute the Lordes ſupper, and of the preſence of Chriſtes body, began at this time to be renewed, and bokes were ſet forth by the miniſters of the churches of Breme and Hamborough, namely againſte The controuerſie about the Lordes ſupper is renewed by yt bremers. Caluine & Iohn Alaſcus. Caluine afterward aunſwereth ſharpely, and defendeth the cauſe. Theſame doeth Bullinger and Iohn Alaſcus alſo. For ſetting forthe a booke to the Kyng of Poole, he complayneth and bewayleth that there

is no examination had or made by talke or cōference of the ſentences, but that the opinion is only condemned by preiudice, verely after the maner of the Papiſtes, whiche alſo procede not by argumentes and ſcripture, but only by wyll and violence. About the end of September, Auguſtus Duke of Saxony, had Auguſt prince Electour, had a ſonne borne. a ſonne borne, called Magnus, his Godfathers at the fōtſtone were amongeſt others Henry Duke of Brunſwicke, and Iohn Fridericke the Lantgraues ſonne in lawe.
            I haue ſpoken before of the Archebyſhop of Cantorbury, & of Ridley Byſhop of London, and Hughe Latimer, howe they being caried to Oxforde, and reaſoning with the diuines there were of them condemned, being therfore kept in priſon vnto this tyme, nowe at the laſt in the moneth of October, Ridley and olde father Latimer were burnt. The Archebyſhop was alſo Ridley & Latimer burnt in England. brought forth with them, and at the place of execution did openly call vpon God for mercy with them, but he was lead againe to pryſon. In this ſame moneth the Cardinalles of Lorayne and Tournon went to Rome. Then alſo the Senate of Paris, whiche they cal the Parliament, aunſwering the king, Thanſwere of the Parliament of Paris to yt kinges proclamatiō of Lutherians. to that whiche the Cardinall of Loraine requeſted them to, as before is mentioned. By that proclamation of yours (ſay they) whiche came forth foure yeares ſince, moſte mighty kyng, you reſerued to your ſelfe and to your iudges the examination and puniſhment of Luthers hereſie: Neither in it was any thinge exceptep, vnleſſe it were what time it required any declaration of hereſie, or that ſentence were to be pronounced of ſuche as had taken orders: But this proclamation of yours that is now ſet forth, doth plainly eſtabliſh the contrary. For it ſubmitteth the people of your Realme to the eccleſiaſticall iudgement, and to the Inquiſitours, and by this meane it diminiſhed your dignitie, wherby you excelle all men, and geueth to your ſubiectes a iuſt cauſe of grief, when they being of you clerely deſtitute, ar made ſubiect to foreine power. But herein a great deale more inconuenience ſhalbe, when all their goodes, lyfe, health & dignitie ſhall be at their pleaſure, the helpe of appealing being taken away. For verely appellation is the refuge and ſanctuary of innocencie: And you are the protectour and defendour, both of the appellation and alſo of innocentes, yea beſides you no Note howe byſhops ſeke authoritie of kinges to cō
                  demne innocentes. man hath any right ouer the people. But and if the lawe and iudgement be nowe committed to the Inquiſitours and Byſhops officers, appellation taken away, this were to ſet open a wyndowe and to make a waye that euen innocentes might be condemned, and loſe both body and goodes. For they being indewed

with ſo great power, to witte, the kinges ful authoritie will forget their dutie, and will kepe no meaſure, what tyme they ſhall ſee euery degree to them ſubiecte, and not only common perſones, but alſo Noble men & Princes to ſtande in their hande. Howbeit yet this meane waye may you take, that your iudges ſhuld heare the cauſe and geue ſentence. And if there be any obſcure opinion, that the ſame be determined by the clergie. Let thē alſo that be with in orders be iudged of their owne men. Concerning appellations, let a wrytyng be obteined of the Pope, wherby this may be permitted to your iudges. And when the matter ſhall come to this iſſue, that iudgement muſt be made of ſuche as haue appealed, let there be preſent certen of your choſen counſellers of the eccleſiaſticall order, or if ſuche wante, other tried and fit men. In the inquiſition let this be obſerued, that the Popes Inquiſitour doe ſubſtitute and place vnder him in prouinces, men of vpright fame and good men, & that the Byſhop doe beare the whole charges, and not the defendaunt, yet ſo, that the matter being determined, the coſtes be required of whome it behoueth. Theſe thinges tende to this ende verely, that ſuche maner of controuerſies may be reſtreyned within certen boundes and limites. Notwithſtanding, for as muche as it appeareth by the puniſhement of Heretickes, al though it be neceſſary, that this hath hitherto bene thereby brought to paſſe, that their facte ſhould be deteſted rather, than that they ſhould be amended: Moreouer, for bicauſe it is much better, to remedy the diſeaſe in time, than to geue it ſpace whileſt it may increaſe and after to lay to a medicine, it ſhalbe law full for you (moſte mercifull kyng) herein to followe the maner and ſteppes of the olde & primatiue churche: For the ſame was not eſtabliſhed either by fyre or ſworde, but the diligence of the Biſhops did euer reſiſte Heretickes, whyleſt they both preached to them oftentymes Gods worde, and ſhone before them in example of good lyfe. Since it was therfore in tymes paſt by this meane firſte confirmed, it may nowe by the ſame alſo be reteyned and kept, ſo that you would only execute that, whiche lieth rather in your power to do. This verely, that Byſhoppes & Paſtours of ſhepe, ſhould them ſelues gouerne their churches preſently. Let alſo the inferiour miniſters do the ſame. Againe that from henceforth ſuche be made Byſhops as are able them ſelues to teache the people, and not to ſubſtitute deputies in their ſteade. This is the rote, that muſt be tilled: vpon this foū
               dation muſt we builde, for ſo may we hope well that hereſies wyll by litle and litle vaniſhe away: But in caſe this waye be

neglected, it is to be feared, leaſt thei wil increaſe more & more, what proclamatiōs ſo euer be finally made, or what remedies ſo euer be vſed. This was the .xvi. daye of October, when they ſignified theſe thinges to the king by Ambaſſadours & letters. Then alſo the Princes that were vmperes, for the controuerſie of the gouernemēt of Chattes, mete againe as was appointed: The meting of Princes about yt 
                  
                     •
                  ātgrauet matter. Firſt at Bacherach, afterwarde for the ſickenes of the Paulſgraue, at Wormes. The matter in dede was ended, and a certen ſomme of money agreed vpon, whiche the Lantgraue ſhoulde paye to the Erle, and abyde ſtyll in poſſeſſion: But where the Erle (vnleſſe the mony were payd at a certen time) would haue this compact to be vaine, and his action to remayne to hym whole. And the Lantgraue whiche had ſent his ſonne thither, as before, reiected this condition, they departed the matter not finiſhed.
            In this ſame moneth the Emperour calleth before him at The Emre. Charles geueth the gouernemēt to his Sonns Philip. Bruſſelles the rulers of all ſtates, and ſpeaking of his ſicknes, ſheweth them amongeſt other thinges that he would goe into Spayne, and geueth ouer his gouernement, his right and all his power to Philip his ſonne, and exhorteth them to their dutie. Theſe newes were ſpred abroade ouer al Europe far & nere, and a nauie was prepared, and the day appointed for his iourney at the Ides of Nouember: But by litle and litle this brute waxed colde, and becauſe wynter was at hande, they ſayde his nauigation was differred to the next ſommer.
            Nowe muſt we come to the counſell of the Empire, of what matters they ſhould treate, kyng Ferdinando the fifte daye of February had propounded, as is ſayde in the ende of the laſte booke: But where many came very ſlowly, they began not before the nonas of Marche. Than at the laſte the Ambaſſadours of the Princes Electours doe conſulte, of what matter they ſhould firſt treate: And although there were many againſt it, yet doe all conſente at the laſte to treate fyrſte of Religion.
            The ſame alſo was thought mete in the Senate of the other Prynces and Cities. After muche debatynge they agreed to geue peace to Religion: But this thynge came chiefly in controuerſie, Whether peace ſhould be geuen to Religion or no? that the Proteſtauntes woulde haue it lawefull for all men indifferently to followe theyr doctrine. But their aduerſaries with muche contention did reſiſte them, and ſayde that the ſame was not to be permitted either to the cities that had receiued the decree of Auſpurge made ſeuen yeare before concerning Religion, or yet to the whole ſtate of the clergie.
            
               
And yf any Byſhoppe or Abbot woulde chaunge hys Religion, they woulde haue hym remoued, and an other to be ſubſtitute in his place. Therfore the contention was ſharpe, and the Proteſtauntes alledged this cauſe for their purpoſe, that the promeſſes of God as well of the olde as of the newe Teſtament, whiche conteine our ſaluation, doe apperteine generally vnto all men. And therfore not to be lawfull for them to include the ſame within any certen limites, or brynge them to any reſtreinte, leaſt that they ſhould ſhutte bothe them ſelues and others out of the kyngdome of heauen. That there is neither Turke nor Iewe of any zeale at all, that would not bee glad to bringe all men to his owne Religion. Howe muche more than ought we to doe the ſame, whome God hath ſo earneſtly and ſtraightly charged? Wherfore they are able to proue, that all men in this caſe oughte to haue libertie graunted them, bothe by the holy Scriptures, and alſo by the decrees of the fathers and counſelles, howe thoſe whiche take vpon them the title of olde and Catholique Religion, not without the great diſhonour of God, handle Religion and abuſe the churche goodes. Neuertheleſſe to eſtabliſhe a peace, they do permitte that they may kepe ſtyll their lawes, Rites and ceremonies, and inioye all their goodes, landes, and poſſeſſions, cuſtomes, rightes, and priuileges, tyll ſuche tyme as the diſſention in Religion be accorded. Wherfore they can not allowe that they ſhoulde preſcribe that condition to the Byſhoppes: For ſo ſhould it come to paſſe, that they them ſelues ſhoulde be bounde to impugne the approuers and felowes of their owne Religion. And to theyr great diſhonour they ſhoulde condemne their owne cauſe.
            For this were (ſaye they) to graunte, our Religion and doctryne not to be worthy of the Churche goodes, and that the ſame goodes haue bene hetherto applied amiſſe to our Churches and Miniſteries. We ſhould alſo confeſſe theyr wicked doctrine and miniſterie to be grounded vpon Goddes worde, and that the Churche goodes are conſecrated to this fylthie lyfe of theyrs, Lawes and Ceremonies.
            But howe greate an aſſence woulde this thynge ingender, yf we ſhoulde maynteyne the cauſe and lyuynges of them, whyche doe perfourme no profitable nor neceſſary dutie to the Churche? And ſhoulde betraye them who for the ſame Religion oughte of vs to bee moſte ſet by? The aduerſaryes

amonges other thinges ſaide this, if the Clergie ſhould be permitted to alter their Religion, it would come to paſſe, that Byſhoprikes, and ſuche other like colleges ſhould be made prophane, and by litle and litle being plucked away from the churche ſhould come into the handes of Princes, and be made their inheritaunce. But they affirme that this was neuer their intēt: But to haue had a reſpect to this only, that being called again to their olde foundation, they might be imployed to the true vſes, and that the ſame goodes might be annexed to the ſame churches for euer. And to take awaye all doubtes, they promiſe to put in good aſſuraunce, that in what Byſhoprikes or Colleges ſoeuer Religion ſhall be altered, no part of their goodes to be alienated, and that after the death or reſignation of the byſhop, free election and adminiſtration ſhould be permitted to the College. But where after muche reaſoning they could not agree, they exhibite on both partes to kyng Ferdinando their reaſons compriſed in wrytinge, and requeſte hym that he wold fynde ſome waye. This was after the Ides of Iune. For they proceded very ſlowly. The cauſe wherof many thought to be, that the concluſion of peace betwene the Emperour and the Frenche kyng was loked for: For that the ſame was thought to make not a litle for either parte.
            But the Papiſtes made as it were an extraordinary wryting, A wrytinge of the Papiſtes to requeſtes of yt Proteſtauntes. vehement and byting, to the intent they myght the more ſet forth their matter. And firſte ſaye they, the proteſtauntes haue propounded fiue conditions. Firſt that the catholiques ſhould allowe that doctrine, which many yeares paſt, & in this our time alſo, by & by ſo ſone as it ſprāg vp, of the ordinary magiſtrate hath bene alwayes condēned. Secondly that the ſacrileges which they by the ſpace of theſe .xxx. whole yeres haue cō
               mitted, ſhould be ratified & allowed, & that neither by law, nor by other godly & lawful meanes the church may recouer yt ſame goodes. But they wold alſo haue peace to be made with them, where notwithſtāding it is forboden to haue any cōpany with them. Moreouer that thei might place in ye colleges & churches of archbiſhops & of other prelates wicked miniſters, to ſet forth doteſtable & condēned doctrine, to aboliſh the true ſeruice & ceremonies of ye church, & to bring in new & wicked in their place, & that they may noriſh thoſe falſe preachers of ye churche goodes, directly againſt tholde lawes & cuſtome of the churche. Further more that it ſhould be lawefull for all perſones as well eccleſiaſtical as ciuile which as yet followe the catholique religiō, to reuolt frō their true religion, & to come and followe their lore.

Finally when any of the Princes or Byſhops do reuolt to their ſyde, that it ſhall not concerne the ſame perſone only, but muſt apperteine to the people alſo that are ſubiecte to his gouernement, and to the goodes, and the whole eccleſiaſticall iuriſdiction. Nowe although theſe thinges do ſtriue with the lawes of God and man, albeit thei be contrary to the othe both of themperour and of the king and of al the Prelates, in ſo muche that the catholiques may not conueniently receiue them, vnleſſe they would breake both their fayeth and promeſſe, yet for as much as they ſticke obſtinatly to their pourpoſe, and threaten force alſo, the catholiques at the length are contented, ſo farre forth as they ought to do by the pacification of Paſſawe, and haue declared the ſame ſufficiently in the Senate of the Empire, ſhewyng how they can not graunt that libertie of chaunging religion indifferently to all men. For ſo ſhould it come to paſſe that the Empire ſhoulde be broughte to deſolation, and that hyghe top of dignitie taken away from Germany: For it is the dutie of Archebyſhops and other Prelates, that not only The office of Archebyſh. they do not permitte any Religion condemned, but alſo that they ſhould admoniſhe and put in feare Byſhoppes and ſuche others yea the vnlearned that are ready to reuolte, and ſuche as continue in their errour, to preſent to the Catholique and Romiſhe churche. For this maner hath euer ſince the tyme of the Apoſtels bene obſerued, as it is to be proued by ſondry teſtimonies of counſelles, but chiefly by that of Calcedonie. Neyther ought any man to thinke, that ſuche as do reuolte, ſhould be left to their owne conſcience. For in thinges that concerne our fayth, euery man ought not to be permitted to haue his cō
               ſcience free. But when any departeth from the commō conſent of the churche, he ought to be puniſhed and reſtreyned. And in caſe he obeie not, he muſt be excommunicated, after the example of thoſe counſelles, whiche are accompted the chief, whiche condemned Arrius, Macedonius, Neſtorius Eutyches. And in dede the counſell of Calcedonie depoſed Dioſcorides the maynteyner of Eutyches from his Byſhoprike. For where it is ſayde that euery man ought to haue his iudgement and conſcience free: And that neyther Chriſte nor his Apoſtles did euer compelle any to beleue, yea when many went awaye from Chriſte, there was none holden againſt his wyll, this ſame verely is grounded vpon no foundation: And is confuted by Saint Auguſtine at large in the two hondreth and fourth Epiſtle. For if it ſhould be free for Byſhoppes, forſaking the catholique Religion, to reuolte to an other, they wyll not relinquiſhe theyr

Byſhoprike, for they wyll ſaye that they can nōt doe it with a ſaufe conſcience, but they wyll deſyre ayde of the Proteſtaūtes, that they wyll aſſiſte them in mainteining their ſtate, and keping of the people in their Religion. If this be done, there is no doubt, but theſe wyl take in hande to defende them, and wil ſaye they doe it of dutie, to the end that they may haue the gouernment, and alſo the poſſeſſion of the goods. But wher theſe men ſaye they are bounde to admitte fellowes of their Religiō and to exclude no man out of the kyngdome of heauen: It doth not excuſe them, for there is one only fayth whiche all that are chriſtians ought to profeſſe and obſerue. This faith in tymes paſt both Emperours and kynges, and all Princes and Rulers of the Empire, and the people alſo confirmed by an othe. Uerely this catholique faith is the ſelfe ſame, which we of Germany from the beginning vnto this time haue followed, thoſe excepted that haue reuolted from the ſame. Wherfore there is nothing to be made newe, but all thynges ought to be referred to this fayth, and the mynde is to be ſubdued, that it may obeye the catholique churche. He that doeth otherwiſe, and taketh to him ſelfe any priuate Religion, he vnleſſe he obeye admoniſhementes ought of his Byſhop to be excommunicated, and to be remoued from all function: His goodes alſo ought by the ciuile Magiſtrate to be publiſhed, neither is he to be ſuffered within the limites of the Empire. For that ſame libertie or licenciouſnes of Religion the fathers haue alwayes reiected as a certen confuſion of the faith, & made this lawe, that what thinges ſo euer were once determined of coūſels in matters of faith, ſhuld no more be reaſoned, nor called in doubt, ſo that it is lawful for none to ordeine or propounde any thing to the cōtrary. For hiſtories teache vs, what time Ualentinian themperour, admitted all kinde of ſectes, what trouble aroſe of the ſame. Again if this ſhuld be receiued, yt whoſoeuer diſſenteth frō ye catholique faith, ſhuld be excuſed by his conſcience. Than ſhould the Anabaptiſtes & Zwinglians, a Schuuenchfeldians, & ſuche other like alſo be excuſed, & in this peace cōpriſed. They ſaye how the promeſſes of God, wherby he promiſeth vs euerlaſting life, apperteine to all men in generall, neither ought they of thē to be reſtreined. As though thoſe promeſſes apperteined to thē only whiche be of their profeſſion. But the thing is far otherwyſe: For what tyme they ſhall ſwarue from the communion of the churche, they are excluded from the kingdom of heauē, euen by their own iudgement: And where there is no ſaluation out of the churche, howe ſhould the kyngdome of heauen belonge

to them, whiche reiecte the Sacramentes of the churche, and contemne the ordeining of prieſtes, vnto whome Chriſte hathe geuen power to binde and loſe? And if there be no prieſtes conſecrated amonges them, howe obteyne they remiſſion of their ſynnes? And except their ſinnes be forgeuen, how ſhall they be made partakers of the heauenly kingdome? Therfore thoſe promiſes apperteine not to them only: But rather they are to be thought to be of that nomber, whome Chriſte ſayeth he knoweth not. They bragge that they are able to proue, howe the Catholiques by ſondry abuſe both religion & the churche goodes. But let vs ſee what thing is herein to be blamed. After the holy Scripture and the lawes of the fathers and counſelles the churche goodes ought to be diſtributed to Byſhops and miniſters of the churche, to be imployed vpon the poore, vpon reparations, and if the thing require ſo vpon the raunſomyng of them that are kept pryſoners of the Turkes and Barbarians. Uerely this cuſtome hath continued a thouſand and thre hondreth yeares ſince, that the ſame goodes ſhoulde bee imployed to Godly miniſters and vſes: Of the whiche ſorte be, to ſaye Maſſe, to ſhewe Gods worde, to repare and builde churches, to fynde pore men, alſo Monkes, Freers and Nunnes. But what do they? putting out certen Byſhops they make newe, as they were prophane and ciuile officers, vnto whome they geue as ſmall a portion as they can poſſible: They ioyne to them other miniſters, whiche bring ye ſely people into errour, whileſt both they contemne the ſound doctrine, and miniſter to the people the Sacrament, whole, and the bread in dede not conſecrated, to witte a creature in place of the creatour, and vnder the colour of true worſhipping, committe Idolatrie. They ſaye that from henceforth they wyll imploye the churche goodes aboute none other matters, but to the vſe of ſcholes, nor wyll conuert no part therof to them ſelues (well let it be ſo) but by this vſe the catholique religion ſhould be polluted, and vtterly oppreſſed. And this vſe ſhall be a great deale worſe than if the ſame goodes were beſtowed about prophane matters. For theſe cauſes therfore, it is not lawefull for the Catholiques, to allowe this condition, as it is wrytten.
            This wryting (as I ſayed) was extraordinary and priuatly made. The Proteſtaūtes being aduertiſed hereof, write againſt The anſwer of the Proteſtauntes to yt wryting of the Papiſtes it, and firſt ſhewe what is the true doctrine, the ſame verely, whiche is conteined in the wrytinges of the Prophetes & Apoſtles. Secondly, they declare how muche the doctrine of the Papiſtes differeth from the ſame, whiche haue ſo many wayes polluted

the Lordes ſupper, whiche haue brought in ſo filthie errours of purgatory, of praying to the dead, whiche take awaye and denie the remiſſion of ſinnes, whileſt they ſaye we muſt alwayes doubte of the grace of God, whiche ſo muche diſhonour matrimonie, inſtituted of God, which with deteſtable and horrible crimes are defiled in this their ſenglenes of lyfe, euē with the ſame vices that Saint Paule rehearſeth. Of theſe thinges it may clerely appeare who haue forſaken the true Religion. And ſeing it is ſo, ſuche eccleſiaſticall perſones, as either haue nowe already or els hereafter ſhall imbrace the pure doctrine can not be of them neglected. As touching the churche goodes, all thinges be maruelouſly defiled alſo. Truthe it is that a benefice is geuen for dutie, but it is to be conſidered diligently of what ſorte is the office of a prieſt or byſhop. And that a conſideration of ſcholes muſt alſo be had. For euen from the tyme of ye Prophetes this maner hath euer remayned. And nowe the prelates of churches ſeke chiefly, that ſuche thinges as are due to miniſtrs of the churche, to teachers, ſchollers and ſcholes to almouſe houſes and hoſpitalles, they imploye to their own vſes, that they may liue in al voluptuouſnes. The ſame do thei with Abbeies & Colledges. Doeth not the Byſhop repreſent a great Prince, who taking firſt the poſſeſſiō of his byſhoprike, entreth the citie with two thouſand horſemen? And theſe thinges in dede they do, where there is none of them all that can doe his dutie: What mynde or conſcience is there? Can theſe obiecte ſacrilege and extortion to others? Their doctrine is in dede condemned of Freers: But through their wickednes, yt perſwade them not to reade their wrytings. And that the Pope and that the rabble do condemne and deſpiſe it, to be no maruell: For after the ſame maner was Chriſte and his doctrine intreated of Anna, Caiphas, and all the ſorte of Phariſeis and Byſhoppes. They make oft mention of counſelles and of the churche: But it lieth not in the power of the counſelles and churche to propounde or commaunde any newe doctrine, beſides the ſame whiche is left vs by the Prophetes, of Chriſt and his Apoſtles. That they ſpeake of the conſecrating of miniſters to be fonde and worthy to be laughed at: For that foliſhe and hiſtrionicall annointing maketh nothing for ye purpoſe. Finally their wryting to be full of rayling & opprobrious wordes, but this they committe to God, and would only, aunſwer the thynge in fewe wordes. A wryitng of king Ferdinando to the Princes.
            
            When this was the ſtate of thinges, king Ferdinādo, whom both partes had requeſted, that he would ſhewe ſome waye, as

before is ſayde, about the beginning of Auguſte ſendeth Ambaſſadours to the Electours & certen other Princes, with this meſſage, howe to obeye the Emperour his brother and to further the common wealth, he came to Auſpurge the third Kalē
               des of Ianuary, not without the loſſe and hinderaunce of his owne affaires. Againe when he was come thither, how he was driuen to tary long, becauſe fewe or none were come, before he could propounde any thing. For the matter was differred tyll the nonas of February. Than firſte he declared the cauſes of ſommoning the ſayde aſſemblee: But in conſultations to haue had wonderfull delayes, and not before the tenth Kalendes of Iuly was there any aunſwere made hym, and that but of one only point of the deliberation, that is to witte of the peace in Religion, and that ſelfe ſame aunſwere, not of one mynde, but diuerſe and contrary. He verely fearyng this longe before, had admoniſhed them diligently, that they woulde haue bene preſent at the counſell them ſelues: If they followed his aduiſe herein, the matter in his opinion might haue bene brought to an ende wyſhed for: Upon the other parte, whiche concerneth the publique peace, they doe nowe conſulte, but becauſe it is to be thought, that it can not be diſpatched in a ſhort tyme. Againe, for bicauſe the ſtate of his countries requyred his preſence, for as muche as the Turkes ſemed to attempte new matters, and threaten ſore, notwithſtanding that he treateth with them for peace. Moreouer for as muche as nothing can be done or determined to any pourpoſe vnleſſe they be preſent them ſelues, therfore he thinketh good, that the counſell be differred tyll an other tyme, and that nowe a decree be made after this maner. For as muche as through the abſence of the Prynces nothynge can be determined, they are agreed that all treatie be differed tyll the nexte aſſemblee, the begynnynge whereof to be made at Regenſburge aboute the Kalendes of Marche, of the yeare followyng. There the Princes them ſelues to bee preſent, that they may together with the Emperour, or with hym determine and ordeine thoſe thynges wherof they haue nowe conſulted, and hereafter ſhall doe. In the meane ſeaſon the pacification of Paſſawe to remayne in full ſtrength. And for as muche as it conteyneth this, fyrſt, that in the counſell of the Empyre ſhould be treated, whether that by a generall or by a prouinciall counſell of Germany, or els by the conferrence of learned men the cauſe of Religion ought to be appeaſed. Secondly that the thynge be done by the common coū
               ſel of al ſtates, not without the ordinary power of themperour

Therfore he, whiche loueth peace and concorde, hath determined at the next aſſemblee to exhibitie a certen booke compiled for the reconciling of ſuche matters as are in controuerſie: but in it to be none intrapping, and to be made only for this ende, that the diſcorde ſhuld growe no further, and that the offences might be mitigated. Moreouer, to thintent that they them ſelues may the better determine, whether by the meane declared in the boke, the diſſention may be taken vp, or whether that an other way muſt be ſought for. Therfore he requireth them to take this proroging in good part, and that to the next counſell they would come them ſelues, after his example who for the cō
               mon welthe ſake hath bene nowe ſo longe tyme out of his prouinces. And that he hath choſen the place at Regenſpurge, for bicauſe for the iminēt daūger of the Turke, he may not depart far out of his owne countrie. Let them aduertiſe him therfore what they wil do herein, to the ende he may be certen, that the matter ſhall not be forſlowed, that with vaine expectation the better part of the time do not paſſe away, as it hath heretofore oftener than ones. Theſe requeſtes hearde, the moſt part of the Princes thought it not good, that he ſhould departe before the peace confirmed. For al Germany to be in great expectation of this matter. And ſince they agree nowe better in voyces, than euer they did before this time, they beſeche him that he woulde make an ende before his departure: To the intent verely that in the next aſſemblee they might with ſo muche more expedicion, take order and determine of Turkiſhe matters, which yet remained. As touching the boke which he wold exhibite, many of them ſayde howe the like would come of that, as chaunced to the other boke whiche ſeuen yeares paſte was wrytten alſo of Religion and ſet forth. For yet it is freſhe in memory with what rayling wordes it was taunted: For where it was ſet forth, and priuileged by the Emperour to haue made a cōcorde, there aroſe occaſions therof of many offences and diſſentions.
            When Ferdinando had heard theſe of his Ambaſſadours about the eight Kalendes of September, the daye before the kalendes of the ſame moneth, he declareth what his opinion is of the wrytinges of both partes to him exhibited, and amongeſt other matters that chief poinct that concerneth byſhops, that in caſe they chaunge their Religion, they ſhould forgo their office The biſhops whiche chaunge their religion ſhuld loſe their promotions. and goodes alſo, by his wyll, and with many wordes moueth the Proteſtauntes that they would aſſente to the ſame. For this cōdition (ſayth he) taketh from you nothing, but doth this only, that when a byſhop forſaketh his order, and departeth

from the olde Religion, his benefices and promotiōs may neuertheleſſe remaine in the ſame ſtate, wherin they were inſtituted, whiche thinge is both agreable to the ciuile lawe, and alſo to the lawes of the Empire, and to the pacification of Paſſawe: Whiche ſayeth by playne wordes, that thoſe whiche followe the olde Religion, as well of the ſtate eccleſiaſticall as ciuile, not to be moleſted in their Religion, Ceremonies, goodes, poſſeſſions, rightes, priuileges: but that they ſhould inioye all theſe thinges quietly without the interruption of any man. I can not ſe therfore how this condition can be denied them, whiche apperteineth to the ende that we ſpake of (that is) that they may inioye their thinges quietly. Whiche in dede can not be, if they ſhould releaſe this condition: For ſo ſhould it come to paſſe, that ſuche as happely forſake and relinquiſhe the holy order and auncient Religion, would kepe ſtyll neuertheleſſe their office, goodes, and poſſeſſions, neyther ſhould it be lawefull for their colleges in the meane time to trie the lawe with them in this caſe. And this inconuenience wil come alſo, that betwene the Byſhop and them there wyll be no great good wyll. For where it is reaſon, that according to the lawes of the foundation mete perſones ſhould gouerne and rule holy offices, and if they do againſt thoſe lawes, or relinquiſhe their ſtate, that thā their Collegers ſhould remoue them, and forſee, that the ſame reuolting hurt but him alone. Certenly their demaunde ought not to be refuſed. Wherfore I exhorte you agayne and agayne, that you contende no further herein. For amonges other thinges you ought to conſider, how they do not preſcribe vnto you, what meane and waye is to be kept in gouerning of ſuche offices, Colleges, and benefices, as to your ſelues you haue vſurped, nor yet what is to be done with the miniſters of churches of your dominions, whiche breake the lawes ſet forth by you, and neglecte their dutie. For lyke as it ſhould be greuouſly and euyll taken of you, in caſe they would haue ſuche miniſters as forſake and impugne your Religion, of you to be reteyned: So ſhould it be muche more greuouſe vnto thē, if both the gouernment, and poſſeſſion of landes and goodes ſhould be left vnto them, whiche ſhould both forſake and impugne their Religiō. For what other thing myght hereof be loked for, but debate, ſtrife and contention? The foundation therfore of the thinge that is nowe in hande, to witte peace it ſelfe, by this meane ſhould be vtterly taken away. The eight daye after, they aunſwere. Howe it is not their intent, to preſcribe the clergie herein, muche leſſe that the holy gouernmentes ſhould be brought

to deſolation, or that their nature altered they ſhould be made ciuile or prophane. For we'ar not ignoraūt (ſay they) that ſome part of the Empire conſiſteth in theſe matters and poſſeſſions, whiche we couet not to deminiſhe or decaye, but by al meanes to mainteyne them. It would haue pleaſed vs right well, that this queſtion had neuer bene moued, but to haue ſtande in the decrees of fourmer yeares, made at Norinberge, Regenſpurg & Spiers, whiche include in the peace al the parteners of the cō
               feſſion of Auſpurge: And at the firſt in dede the Ambaſſadours of the thre Archebyſhops Electours, did wittely conſider this alſo. But after when this doubte began to be moued of others, they went vnto their ſyde. They that firſt moued this queſtion had peraduenture ſome cauſe ſo to doe, but what hath inſued therof, nowe appereth. For if this let had not chaunced by the way, al ye matter (in our opiniō) had now ben brought to a good ende. But why we ſhould not admitte that cōdicion, there wer Godly and weighty cauſes. For euery man doeth eaſely perceiue, howe muche it ſhould be to the contempte and hinderaunce of our Religion, if we ſhould permitte, that ſuche as imbrace the ſame, ſhould be diſplaced and depriued of all their honour & dignitie, and accompted in the nomber of heretikes. What the firſt foundations of Colleges were, and what vices haue crept in ſince, we wyl here paſſe ouer in ſilence: But we ſuppoſe that many of the ſame ſtatutes be not againſt our Religion. Again, to aſſente that none of the eccleſiaſticall ſtate ſhould be of that Religion, whiche as the true & Chriſten Religion we profeſſe, were doubtles no ſmal offence. For by the ſame facte we ſhould cōdemne it as wicked and vnworthy the ſtate of priſtes, whiche ought chiefly to ſet forth Religion. And ſeing it is thus moſte mightie kyng, we beſeche you to waye theſe thinges in your mynde, and for the authoritie that you haue of the Emperour, you would ſuffer that part to be omitted. But he maketh aunſwere that nothynge more can be graunted them: And ſayeth moreouer that thoſe thinges are nowe permitted them, which of ſo many yeares could neuer be obteined. Therfore let them haue conſideration hereof, for els ſhall they be fayne to departe without any thing finiſhed: Whiche if it ſo come to paſſe, and any incōuenience ariſe therof, there is no cauſe why the blame ſhuld be layde either in ye Emperour or in him, who ſo quietly & patiently hath handled the matter, and hitherto hath remayned: Whiche nowe he can defer no longer. Therfore he geueth them ten dayes, that in the meane time they may wryte theſe thinges home to their Princes, and make him a direct anſwer.

When the daye came, theſe men, for that they had omitted no diligence, that al others were prouided for concerning religiō, and for that they might not preſcribe any meaſure herein to ye king or Emperour, doe aſſent, eſpecially ſince the king alſo releaſed certen thinges, as hereafter ſhalbe ſhewed.
            Therfore the ſeuenth Kalendes of October the decree made was red openly, as the maner is, to this effect. For the doctrine a decrewher by religiō is frely permit to all men. of Proteſtauntes, faith and Religion, the Emperour, king Ferdinando, and the reſidue of Princes and ſtates ſhall hurte no man of the whole Empire in any wyſe, neither ſhall they compell any man to forſake his Religion, ceremonies and lawes, whiche in their dominion the Proteſtauntes haue already ordeined, or hereafter ſhall ordeyne, by commaundemētes or any other meane, nor yet contemne the ſame: But permitte them this Religion free, and alſo their goodes, faculties, cuſtomes, poſſeſſion and rightes, ſo that peaceably they may inioy them. That the controuerſie alſo of Religion be appeaſed by none other but by godly, frendly, and quiet meanes. In like caſe ſhall they that be of the confeſſion of Auſpurg demeane them ſelues towardes the Emperour, king Ferdinando and the reſt of Princes and ſtates addicte to the olde Religion, as well ſacred as ciuile, towardes the whole ſtate eccleſiaſtical, and colleges of the ſame, whether ſo euer they ſhal finally remoue to dwel, ſo that their miniſterie be well ordered, as beneath ſhall be ſayde. To all theſe ſhal they permitte their Religion, lawes, and ceremonies, poſſeſſions, cuſtomes and all other rightes frely, neither by any meane hinder, but that they may quietly inioye them, and what ſo euer diſpleaſure or ſtrife ſhall ariſe, be determined on either ſyde after the cuſtome & lawes of the Empire. That ſuche as be of neyther Religiō, be not compryſed in this peace. If any Archebyſhop, Byſhop, Prelate or other eccleſiaſtical perſone ſhall reuolte from the olde Religion, he ſhall immediatly An eccleſiaſtical perſon that chaungeth his Religion ſhalbe depriued. departe from his Byſhoprike, office, benefice, and alſo from all the proſites, that he receiueth therof: And it ſhall be lawfull and free for the College or thoſe to whome the ſame thing ſhal by ryght or cuſtome apperteyne to choſe or ſubſtitute an other in his place, whiche is of the olde Religion; to the intent that the ryghtes of the foundation, election, preſentation, confirmation, and ſuch other like may remayne to them whole with the quiet poſſeſſion of the goodes: Yet ſo, that nothinge hereby be taken away from the foreſayde reconcilement of Religion, that ſhalbe. And bicauſe diuerſe ſtates of the Empire, and their progenitours, haue taken to them certen eccleſiaſticall gouernementes,

abbeies and ſuche other like goodes of the church & haue diſpoſed the ſame to the miniſters of the church, vpō ſcholes, For churchs goodes al cō
                  trouerſies ar taken away. & other good vſes, they ſhal not be troubled for the ſame nor ſewed in the law therfore, but ſuch goodes, to wit, thoſe which do not belōg to the ſtates of thempire, or to others that be ſubiecte to thempire, & the poſſeſſion wherof the clergie had not at the time of the pacification of Paſſawe, nor after alſo, ſhall remayne as they be, & are cōpriſed in this peace: Neyther ſhall it be lawfull for the iudges of the chamber imperiall to graunte out any proces, or decree any thing againſt them for vſurpinge the ſame goodes. That the eccleſiaſtical iuriſdiction be not exerciſed, nor take place, againſt the Proteſtaūtes Religiō, faith, The eccleſiaſticall lawes ſhall not be exerciſed againſt ye proteſtauntes. rightes, lawes, and eccleſiaſticall miniſterie: But remayne in ſuſpence, and ſtayed, and moleſte them in nothing, tyll the controuerſie be throughly ended and taken away: But in al other matters, that concerne not Religion, ceremonies, lawes, and miniſterie, let it be of force, and be exerciſed after the olde cuſtome and lawe: Againe that the goodes, cuſtomes, rightes, remaine whole to all the ſtate eccleſiaſticall, yet ſo, that they in whoſe iuriſdictiō ſuch goodes be, loſe no part of their politicke law which they had before this cōtention in religion. Moreouer, yt of theſe ſelfſame goodes, the neceſſary miniſteries, of the churche, pariſhes, ſcholes, almouſes, hoſpitalles for the poore & ſicke people, as they were founded in times paſt, ye ſo they be now alſo eſtabliſhed & mainteined, without any reſpect had, of what religiō they be, to whoſe vſe the almouſe or ſuſtenaūce is imployed. And if there fortune any ſtrife or contention to ariſe by reaſon of this ſuſtenaūce, or yt meaſure therof, yt bi the cōſent of ye partes arbitrers be choſen, who viewing ye thing, within ye ſpace of half a yeare ſhall determine & make an eſtimate, howe much ought to be decided & beſtowed vpon ſuche vſes & miniſteries. In the meane ſeaſon, til the matter be decided, that, yt thet whoſe part it is to geue ſuche ayde, be not moleſted in their poſſeſſion, but loke what they were wont to geue & beſtowe in tymes paſt, let thē geue now alſo, till the matter be determined.
            In October and Nouember was a Parliament holden in Englande: many ſuppoſed that they would haue there treated A parliamēt in England of the coronation of king Philip, but nothing was propoūided. The Quene motioned for the reſtoring of abbey landes, for as muche as the Pope vrged the ſame. But many Noble men and gentlemen doe poſſeſſe thē: Wherfore nothing could be brought to paſſe. The Quene her ſelfe in dede, whiche with al ſhe coulde do, reſtored to the clergie the firſt fruictes & tēthes of benefices

during the tyme of this Parliamēt certen biting libelles were Libelles ſtrowed about in London. ſowen abroade in London, wherin were ſome thinges to whet the people againſt the Spaniardes, & ſome other yt might haue withdrawen the Quenes minde frō king Philip. When inquiſition was made nothing could be tried out. Before the end of the parliament the Byſhop of Wincheſter Chauncelour died of The byſhop of Wincheſter dieth. the dropſie: In whoſe place was ſubſtituted Doctour Heth Archebiſhop of Yorke, which had bene in tymes paſt with the Archebyſhop of Cantorbury in Germany, and thought rightly of the pure doctrine. About ye nones of Nouēber the wife of Iohn The wife of Iohn Friderick dieth. Friderick, the Lantgraues daughter died, of whoſe mariage is ſpokē before. Fraūces Uenerie Duke of Ueniſe, for that he had not handled him ſelfe well in the vytayling of the citie, and ſet Frances Uenery diſplaced. more by his priuate profit thā by the publique, was diſplaced.
            What time themperour had geuen ouer all his gouernmēt in the coūtries. Philip his, ſonne ſendeth his Ambaſſadours to the chief Princes & cities of Germany, & ſignified to thē yt ſame Ambaſſad. to the Princes of Germany. and offereth thē his good wil & amitie. At the ſame time alſo ye Ambaſſadours of king Ferdinādo ſollicited the Princes of Germany, that for as much as a moſte preſent daūger hanged euer by the Turke, who required al Tranſyluania to be geuē him, a coūtrie of nature moſt ſtrōg, fertile, & ful of horſemē, they wold at the day appointed be preſent them ſelues in the coūſel of the Empire, & to conſulte for the common wealth. He helde alſo a An aſſemble in Auſtriche coūſel of his ſubiectes for the ſame cauſe, in yt whiche aſſemblee they of Auſtriche required that religiō might be permitted thē fre? But the king differred them to the coūſel of thempire that ſhould be next at Regenſpurg, & alſo toke order that they ſhuld be before him at Uienne at the Ides of Ianuary the next yere. The Marques Marignane diyng at Millan, the Cardinall of Trent is ſent into Lumbardy by the Emperour or king Philip his ſonne, to haue the gouernment there: And the Duke of Alba is made viceroy of Naples. On Chriſtmas day the Pope, after his maner, createth newe Cardinalles, & amongeſt others Iohn Gropper, Counſellour to the Archebyſhop of Collon, of whome often mention is made in the fourmer bokes. Than alſo Iohn Gropper Cardin. Reinold Poole, when of a Cardinall deacon he was made a prieſt (as they call it) began to ſinge Maſſe. For this is not law full for Deacons by the Popes lawe.
            In the beginning of the moneth of Ianuary throughout Saxonie, Meiſſen and Boheme were horrible tempeſtes, thondering, and lightening, and thonderboltes, whiche dyd muche harme euery where, but eſpecially in churches. In the ſame

moneth, at Uirodure, whiche is a towne in Swicerlande two mile from Zuricke, in the night about ſuppertyme, fyre burſting out of one of the towres of the church cracked ſo, that all men came running to quēch it: When they came thither, ther was no flame, twyſe this happened one tyme after an other, to witte the fourth daye of the ſame moneth, and the .xiiii. daye. Certen men of the townes of Heluetia, being moued by the Pope, go afterwardes to Rome, not without the great ſuſpicion of many. Kyng Philippe beginning his newe gouernmēt whiche he had receiued of his father, with great pompe and ſolemnitie, the .xviii. day of Ianuary entreth into Andwerpe the chief towne of that coūtrey. In the meane tyme there is great King Philip entreth into Andwerpe. perſecution and burning in Englande.
            About the Ides of Ianuary thābaſſadours of the prouinces of Auſtriche, aſſemble at Uienne, as was appointed. There the king with an oratiō graue & long, declareth in how great daū
               ger they ſtode all of the Turke now iminent, and therfore doth admoniſh them, that ſo ſone as may be, they would helpe hym with men & mony, that his great & outragiouſe crueltie might be repreſſed. Then they that are of yt lower partes of Auſtriche, ſaye how thei were cōmaunded of theirs, that thei ſhuld treate Thambaſſadours of Auſtrtche require of kynge Ferdinando that the true Religiō may be permitted them. firſt of Religion. Therfore they recite what they haue done in the ſelfſame cauſe, by ye ſpace now of .xiiii. yeares, how oft they haue intreated & put vp ſupplicatiōs, & what maner of proclamations he hath ſet forth contrary to their expectatiō: Again, for as muche as hitherto (ſay they) al coūſelles againſt ye Turke are taken in vaine, & not only as yet he could not be repreſſed, but alſo his violence hath ſo farre proceded, that hauing taken in Hongary and Slauonie many townes, Caſtels & Fortes, he hangeth now ouer yt neckes of vs, it is doubtles to be thought that this is the manifeſt vengeaunce of God, whiche plageth vs for ſinne, and afflicteth vs for that we amende not our life, and ſo in dede afflicteth vs, that vnleſſe his worde be receiued, & the amendement of life followe, the loſſe not only of lyfe and goodes, but alſo of eternall ſaluation is like to inſue. For although the whole worlde toke armure againſt that ennemie, yet, ſo long as it ſhall remayne in that ſtate of lyfe, there is no hope of victory, but rather of deſtruction, and ſlaughter, as it is euident to haue chaunced ſome tyme to moſte floriſhynge kyngdomes. We treated of the ſame matter alſo in the laſte aſſemblee, and prayed you that we myght not be compelled to do any thyng againſt our conſcience: But you referred the matter to the counſell of Regenſpurg. How be it you may cōſider (moſt

mightie king) howe greuouſe it is to them, whiche thyrſte for the health of their ſoules, to be differred to a tyme vncertē. For in the meane time the mynde is in angwiſhe, and in this angwyſhe and perplexitie many thouſandes of mē ende their life. Doubtles the worde of God, whiche through our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſte is opened to vs, ſhould be the only rule, whiche the church ought to followe: And in caſe any thing cōtrary to gods worde haue crept in, although it be grounded of great antiquitie, it muſt be reiected: For God wilbe honored & worſhipped, as he him ſelfe preſcribeth & cōmaundeth, not as men wene and fayne. But with how horrible & greuous plages he reuengeth the neglecting of his cōmaundemēt, & the obſeruation of mēs traditions, both the Empires of fourmer time do ſhewe, & alſo the freſhe and domeſticall calamities of people next vs declare. Therfore after moſte diligēt ſearche, there appereth to vs none other remedy than that thoſe manifeſt errours and deprauations, brought long ſince into the churche, being caſte away, the pure doctrine may be receiued and frely preached, to gether with ſuche adminiſtration of the Sacramentes as Chriſt him ſelfe did inſtitute, for to departe & tourne away from the worde of God ſo manifeſt and ſo plaine, we may not, as we haue ofte ſhewed you at other tymes. For firſte we muſt ſeke for the kingdome of God. Whiche being done, God aſſiſteth vs with his ſpirite, and gouerneth our counſelles and doinges. To the ende therfore that he would deliuer vs from al theſe daungers, that he would be the counſeller of the warre and enſeigne bearer, that he may aſſiſte vs in battel & diſcomfite thennemies force, in moſte humble and earneſt wyſe we beſeche your highnes, euen for the death of Chriſte, for our ſaluation, and for the laſt iudgement that we ſhall abyde, for as muche as this thing apperteineth to the perpetuall felicitie of you and your children, and al your Realme, that we, which are ſpotted with no ſecte, may by your leaue and permiſſion remaine in the pure and ſincere Religion vntyll a free generall counſell, and that we may inioye the ſame benefite of peace, whiche in the laſte aſſemblee of the Empyre you haue made with the fellowes of the confeſſion of Auſpurge. For ſeyng we be all Baptized in Chriſte, we beſeche you, that our State and condicion be not worſe than theirs, nother that you woulde denye vs the thynge, whiche you haue graunted to diuerſe other of your Prouinces, but that you woulde call in thoſe Proclamations of yours, ſette forth concerning Religion, and woulde delyuer vs from thys carefulnes, wherwith we are bounde. Moreouer, we beſeche

you, that you woulde ſet forth by proclamation, that the miniſters of the church, that teache after the wrytinges of the Prophetes & Apoſtels, & after the ſame maner, as before is ſaid, doe miniſter the Sacramentes, be not moleſted, nor yet ſuche ſchomaiſters: Neither that they be impriſoned nor baniſhed, before they ſhall pleade their cauſe before a lawful iudge. If you thus do, as we truſt you wil in this extreame daunger, there is no doubt, but God will rewarde the ſame moſte aboundantly, & alſo the ſtates of the Empire will ſende you more ayde than they haue done hitherto. And we likewiſe will not be behinde with our dutie, but with moſte willing mindes, will beſtowe & geue what ſo euer ſhall apperteine to the cōmon defence & preſeruation of our coūtrie, and wil throughly ſatiſfie your demaūdes, ſo muche as ſhall lie in our power and habilitie to do.
            At the ſelfſame time the Ambaſſadours of themperour and Truce takē betwene the Emperour & the kynge of Fraunce. the Frenche king had met: And where the controuerſie coulde not be finiſhed by a peace, the fift day of the moneth of February, they take truce for fiue yeares by Sea and lande, as well in Flaunders and thoſe partes as alſo for Italy and all other places. Euery one kepeth the poſſeſſion of thoſe thinges whiche he hath gotten in the tyme of the war: Themperour excepteth the exiles of Naples & Scicilie. He compriſeth the Pope in the firſt place, as doth alſo the Frenche king, & afterward euery mā his frendes & allies, as the maner is. The ſame truce not long after the king cauſed to be proclamed both throughout Fraunce and at Metz alſo, but the Emperour ſomwhat later in his coū
               tries. A brute went that the Pope toke it in ſnuffe that this truce was made, and went about afterwarde to perſwade the Frenche king to breake the ſame. Others thought cōtrariwiſe, that it was made chiefly through his aduiſe, yt he might make warre againſt the Lutherians. Touching priſoners nothinge could be concluded in this truce, amongeſt whome the chiefeſt were the Duke of Areſcot, a Bourgunnion, and Monmoraūce the Coneſtables eldeſt ſonne, takē thre yeres before at Terwin.
            When they of Auſtriche (as I ſayde before) had on this wiſe The anſwer of king Ferdinando to yt Ambaſſa. of the houſe of Auſtriche the day before the Kalendes of February put vp their ſupplication to king Ferdinando in wryting, the king the eight day after aunſwereth, and ſpeaking firſt of his good wyll towardes the common wealth, and of the common calamitie and miſerie of times, and of Gods wrath, whileſt I conſider (ſaieth he) and way mine owne ſtate and place diligently, whileſt I thinke howe I haue euer from my yought hitherto followed the preceptes of the chriſten and catholique churche, after the maner

of my progenitours, of whome I haue receiued this Religion He meaneth the Emper. Sigiſmonde that burnte Iohn Huſſe. and diſcipline as it were deliuered by hand, I do ſurely finde, yt I may not aſſent to you in that whiche you require. Not that I would not gladly gratifie my people, but for that I ſee it is not lawful, that I ſhould be preiudiciall to the Chriſte church, & ſhoulde alter the lawes of the ſame, and the holſome decrees, at my pleaſure, where I muſt rather heare it as Chriſt cōmaū
               deth. How beit for as much as I know by long experiēce, what occaſion of great euils this bitter contention about Religion bringeth, I haue doubtles with my brother yt Emperour bene now theſe many yeares wholy occupied, that they might come to a compoſition. And therfore hath the matter bene attēpted in many counſels of the Empyre, & certein conferences of learned men, and through our mediation hath bene begon once or twyſe the counſell of Trent: But where as the treatie came to no good effect, that can not doubtles be imputed to vs, neither is it vnknowen, by what diuiſes and craftes the matter was than hindered, Now where you require that the pure doctrine, and the benefite of the peace newly made for Religion may be graūted you: Like as heretofore I haue kept backe no man frō the true Religion, ſo will I not alſo do it hereafter. Again you are as well compriſed in the ſame peace, as are the people of other Princes. For this is the meaning of the ſame decree, that the people ſhall followe the Religion of their Prince. And it is permitted to temporall Princes to choſe whether Religiō they will, for that the people ought to be content with the choiſe of the Prince, but yet ſo for al that, that ſuch as ſhal not like that Religion whiche the Prince hath choſen, may haue fre libertie to ſell that they haue and go dwell in an other place, without any hinderaunce or blemiſhe to their eſtimation, whiche ſeing it is ſo, your dutie is to perſeuer in the olde and catholique Religion, which I profeſſe. That the Goſpel ſhould not be purely taught after the expoſition of the Apoſtels Martyrs & fathers whiche the churche hath receiued, I was neuer againſt. The Lordes ſupper although it were inſtituted whole, yet was it in the olde churche alſo diſtributed vnder one kynde, as it may be declared at large. Therfore it was not altered firſt in ye time of the counſell of Conſtaūce, but that cuſtome had laſted many ages before: Wherfore you may eaſely thinke, how it is not lawful for me, by my priuate authoritie to chaunge or aboliſh that lawe receiued and approued by generall counſelles, eſpecially at this tyme, when both now lately peace is geuen to Religiō, and in the next aſſemblee we muſt treate further for a reconcilement:

In the which treatie doubtles, I wil ſeke to the vttermoſte of my power, that diſſention may be vtterly takē away: But if that can not be done, thā wil I take ſuch away as may profit both your wealth and your ſoules health alſo. And to ye intent you may vnderſtand my good wil & clemencie towardes you, I wil in dede ſtaye & reſtreine that part of my proclamatiō that cōcerneth the Lordes ſupper, but yet vnder this conditiō, that all ſectes forſaken, you do alter nothing of the lawes & ceremonies of the churche, but tary for the decree of the aſſemble of the Empire next cōming. The miniſters of the churche and ſcholem aiſters, ſo that they followe this order, alſo ſhal not be moleſted, as alſo before this time, I ſuffered no man againſt right to be iniuried. Seing therfore I beare you this good wil my truſte is that you will deſire nothing furthermore, and for as muche as the publique neceſſitie vrgeth, it ſhall become you to conſult for the common wealth, and to geue that behoueth. Wherunto they make aunſwer the .xii. daye of February: And The Ambaſſadours anſwer to Ferdinando. where in the cauſe of all other moſte weightie, whiche conteineth perpetuall felicitie, and eſpecially apperteineth to the ſaluation of him and his children, they can obteyne nothing, thei ſhe we how they are moſte hartely ſory. And where as (ſay they) moſte mightie kyng, you ſay, that this wonted diſtributing of the Lordes ſupper, was in oulde tyme receiued in the churche, that ſame may be aboundantly cōfuted by holy ſcripture, and alſo their errour detected, that haue perſwaded your highnes herein. But where you ſay the meaning of the late decree made at Auſpurg to be, that the people ſhould applie them ſelues to the Religion of their Prince. Uerely for as much as a fewe yeares paſte, and longe before this decree, we haue with common conſent exhibited to your highnes ſupplications concerninge Religion, it were lawfull for vs alſo, in caſe we would dwel in the ſame aunſwer, to ſell our goods, and flitte with our wyues and children to ſome other place: But what diſcōmoditie were herein, agayne, how heuie and ſorowfull newes this would be to the people, who ſeeth not? When verely they ſhal heare, that they, whiche after the cuſtome of their elders, haue bene euer more ready to ſpende their bloud and lyfe for the preſeruation and dignitie of the houſe of Auſtriche: muſt nowe forſake their moſte ſwete natiue countrie, ſo many yeares inhabited and inriched by their fore fathers? Therfore we admit not, nor ratifie the ſame aunſwer, in this behalf, but as we haue done oft heretofore, for the honour of God we beſeche you, that you woulde permitte vs to haue that incōparable treaſure of Gods worde,

and ſuffer vs to haue no let in this matter. For if the condition of the cauſe were ſuche, that the whole blame ſhould be to you aſcribed, doubtles we could be cōtent, lyke as in other thinges, ſo in this caſe alſo, to obey you willingly. But ſince that euery man muſt render an accompt of his owne dedes, ſince there is no difference of perſones with God, and for bycauſe the ende of this lyfe is euery moment at hande, neither is there any thing more vncerten than life, we can not but with earneſt ſuite and labour requyre this thinge of you. Wherfore, we beſeche you that we may haue ſufficient warrauntiſe herein.
            Hereunto the kyng the fourth daye after, I ſuppoſe (ſayeth The anſwer of king Ferdinando. he) there was no iuſt cauſe, wherfore you ſhould not be ſatiſfied with the fourmer anſwer. I permit that as the Apoſtels haue ſet it forth, as the martirs and fathers approued of the churche haue taught and expounded the ſcripture, it be nowe taught alſo, I pray you, what more require you herein? For ſince God hath promyſed to his churche the holy ghoſte, ſaluation is not to be ſought els where. You ſaye you are defiled with no ſecte, of the whiche ſorte be many now adayes, as anabaptiſtes, Sacramentaries, Zwinglians, Schnemfeldians and ſuch other lyke. This in dede is very well: But if the doctrine be ſet at libertie, and be not included within certen limites, as before is ſayde, howe long ſuppoſe you that it wil continue pure? When euery man for hym ſelfe wyll bragge of Goddes woorde, and ſaye it is ſubiect to no creature, but to God alone, nor will admitte the iudgement of no man, as we ſee it happen in many places, where all is ful of trouble, whyleſt euery mā doeth ſtifly mainteine his owne opinion, the authoritie of the churche vtterly contemned. And for as much as in your fourmer wryting you recite the laſte decree of the Empire ſomewhat otherwyſe than apperteineth, therfore haue I declared how it is to be taken, not that I would haue you to go dwell els where. Againe to take frō you all carefulnes, I haue ſuppreſſed ye parte of the proclamation touching the Lordes ſupper, promyſing hereafter all diligence, that a reconcilement may be had. For what cauſes I can not reuolte from the lawes and ceremonies of the churche, I haue ſhewed. For both Chriſt ſayeth that the church muſt be heard, and alſo the thing it ſelfe teacheth the fourmer age, whiche renewyng nothing, abode in the Religion of their forefathers, to haue bene muche more quiet and fortunate in all thinges, than this is nowe, where all thinges are tourmoyled with ſectes and diſſentions, and many men rauiſhed & toſte hither and thither with euery wynde of doctrine. Wherby I

would the rather haue thought that you would not haue anſwered in this ſorte. And nowe, albeit that this aunſwere of yours may be throughly confuted, yet, for as much as we muſt treate of contributions and ſubſidies, and therof ſhortly determine, vnleſſe you be determined to ſuffer extreme miſerie, I wyll not be ouer longe, truſting alſo that you wyl doe, both as the matter it ſelfe, and alſo as the conſideration of your dutie requyreth. They agayne ſolicite the ſame thing, and ſaye howe they can not leaue it: And in caſe they can obteyne nothinge, they ſaye it wyll be the cauſe, that the ſame conſultation of geuing him ayde, wyl ſurely be hindered and letted. For that they haue no commiſſion to promyſe any thing herein, vnleſſe they haue firſt good aſſuraunce for Religion and Miniſters of the churche, and for Scholemaiſters, that they may be authoriſed to teache frely.
            In the moneth of February, Henry Duke of Brunſwick, taketh to wyfe the ſiſter of Sigiſmunde king of Poole. About Duke Hēry of Brūſwick marieth a wyfe. The byſhop of Treuers dieth. Fredericke Counte Palatine dieth. this tyme dieth Iohn Iſemburg, Byſhop of Treuers, and hath Iohn Ley his ſucceſſour. The .xxvi. daye alſo of the ſame moneth departeth at Alzeme Fredericke the Pauſgraue, Prince Electour, a man of great yeares: Whome Otto Henrick his brothers ſonne ſuccedeth, who had lōg ſince receiued the doctrine of the Goſpell, and was in daunger therfore to haue loſt al his poſſeſſions. Taking an othe of his people, he commaundeth by and by, that no man within his dominion ſhould ſay Maſſe, or vſe any other ceremonies.
            Of the trouble that Oſiander ſtyred vp in Pruſſe, who had brought in a newe doctrine of iuſtificatiō, is ſpoken in the xxii boke. But where as the moſte part of learned men reprehended that opinion, Albert Duke of Pruſſe by open wryting profeſſeth The Duke of Pruſe profeſſeth the cō
                  feſſion of Auſpurge. that he wyll followe the doctrine of the confeſſion of Auſpurg: He commaundeth therfore the miniſters of the churche, that they teache according to the ſame, and promyſeth to ſaue them harmeles, in caſe they obeye. And to the ende the matter might be throughly appeaſed, Iohn Albert Duke of Megelburge, ſonne in lawe to the Duke of Pruſe, a Prince excellently learned, going thither, and hauing learned men about hym, brought Iohn Funccius, who was chief of the ſecte of Oſiander, to that poinct, that both he acknowledged his errour, and affirmed that he would confeſſe it openly, and would hereafter teache after the confeſſion of Auſpurg. Where as others would do the ſame, they were agreed with the other diuines, and the ſtate of the churche was appeaſed.
            
               
The fourth daye of Marche began to ſhine a blaſing ſtarre, and is ſene by the ſpace of twelue dayes. In this moneth the A Camete ſene. Ambaſſadours of Princes and cities mete at Regēſpurge, and treate the cauſe of Marques Albert of Brandenburge. For his aduerſaries in the counſell of the laſt yeare had againe required the ayde of Princes againſt him, but through the mediatiō of his frendes, and that the matter ſhould be heard by interceſſours. Where he therfore in the moneth of February of this yere came out of Fraūce into Germany, his matter was heard the cauſes of thempire differred till the moneth of Aprill.
            The Archebiſhop of Cantorbury already condēned, & after Tharchebyſhop of Cantorbu. burnt for Religion the death of Ryddley & Latimer retourned to priſon, as before is ſaid, ye .xxi. of this moneth is burnt at Oxforde. Certen daies before, being put in ſome hope of life, through the perſwaſion of certen, he had reuoked diuerſe articles of doctrine, neither ſhewed he conſtancie. And when he ſawe he muſt die, he made an oration to the people, and ſpeaking many thinges of the amendement of life & of maners, to the ende he might haue his audience attētiue, at the lēgth ſheweth how greuouſly he had offended God by denying of the truthe, & reciting the chief articles of doctrine, declareth briefly, what he thought, and confirmeth Papiſtrie to be the kingdome of Antichriſte. He had no ſo ner ſaid ſo, but he was had thence, not without moſte bitter & railyng wordes to the place of execution. And when he came thither, ſtretching forth his right hand, this hād (ſaith he) hath wickedly offended, in ſubſcribing to ye wicked opinions, which the ennemies of the truthe had propounded to me: Wherfore it ſhall firſt ſuffer puniſhment. Thus being tied to ye ſtake, ſo ſone as the fire began to burne, he ſtretched forth his hande into if, as far as he coulde reache, that it might firſt fele the torment. And ſo was burnt the primate of Englande, a man of greateſt learning & authoritie. From the time that the Popiſhe marke was taken from him, they call it degrading, whiche is wont to be done with many cerimonies, they put vpon him a moſt vile garmēt, & ſo brought him forth amonges the people, to be laughed at: But many hauing cōpaſſion of his vnworthy chaūce, could not kepe thē frō ſheding of teares, although thei doubted nothing, but that he ſhould flitte out of this miſerable lyfe in to the heauenly countrie, and life euerlaſting. His promotions got Cardinall Poole, made Archebyſhop, when he had Maſſed before. The Bauarians ſollicite their Prince forreligiō.
            
            And like as they of Auſtriche, ſo alſo the Bauariās ſollicited Albert their Duke cōcerning religiō, in maner at ye ſame time.

The Duke ſeing that kyng Ferdinando his father in lawe had permitted ſome thing to his ſubiectes, he alſo, when he exacted mony. graunted ſome thing for a time, that they might receiue the Lordes ſupper whole, and on daies prohibited, when neceſſitie requireth, to eate fleſh. Howbeit he proſeſſeth with many wordes that he wyll not departe from the Religion of his aunceſters, nor alter any thing in ceremonies & ſuch other thinges for the ſame not to be lawfull for him to doe, without the conſent of his ſupreme Magiſtrate both ſpirituall and temporall: And where he permitteth theſe two, to be for a tyme only, tyll ſome thing be eſtabliſhed by publique authoritie, or a reconcilement made. For he wyll that his proclamations of fourmer tyme concerning Religion be exactely and ſtryghtly kept, theſe two thinges only excepted: He wyll procure alſo, as muche as in him lieth, that the Metropolitane and Byſhops ſhall confirme this graunte, and that they ſhall not for this cauſe ſeke to moleſte any man. This proclamation was written the daye before the Kalendes of Aprill. The Metropolitan of whome he ſpeaketh, is the Archebyſhop of Saliſburg. At this time certen noble men of Tranſiluania do reuolte from kinge Ferdinand. Ferdinando alſo prorogeth the counſel of the Empire to a time vncerten, and leuieth an army, whiche he ſendeth downe the riuer of Danubius into Hōgary. There is a town of Alſatia called Obereyne, thre leages from Straſburg. A certen citezen of that towne, being a labourer about vines, for penury & want, when his wyfe was abſent, the tenth daye of Aprill ſleeth his A father killeth his thre children. thre children, a daughter of ſeuē yeares, a ſonne of foure yeares olde, and a ſucking babe in the cradell, not fully halfe a yeare olde. That tyme there was a brute, and reporte went of the ſecret conſpiracie of the Pope & his adherentes againſt the Proteſtauntes. It increaſed this opinion, for that there was no doubte, but that the Pope toke moſte diſpleaſauntly, the decre The Pope toke diſpleaſauntly that peace was geuen to religion. of the laſt yeare made at Auſpurge, wherby peace and libertie was graunted to Religiō: It is thought alſo that he ſollicited the Emperour to make it fruſtrate: For he ſawe how many reuolted daily from his kingdome, and vnderſtande what they of Auſtriche and what the Bauarians went about. Moreouer, the Archebyſhops of Mentz, Treuers and Collon by occaſion of the bathes met that tyme together: Whiche was thought to be done not without cauſe.
            King Ferdinando breaking vp his aſſemblees in Auſtriche, goeth into Boheme, and calling the countries there about to Kyng Ferd, goeth in to Boheme. Prage, againſt this iminent daunger, demaundeth mony and

hath it graunted: Than ſending letters to them whiche had bene now certen monethes at Regenſpurg, he excuſeth his abſence, and bicauſe he muſt retourne to Uienna, he appointeth the aſſemblee of the Empire the firſt of Iune. After the departure of king Ferdinando, the Lantgraue came in to Meiſſen, & was a certen tyme with Auguſte Duke of Saxony. The tenth The Duke of Areſcot brake out of pryſon. day of May, the Duke of Areſcot, being priſoner in caſtel Uincent, not far from Paris, eſcaped and came home ſafe.
            The Cardinall of Auſpurge who had taried a whole yeare at Rome, when he being lately retourned frō thence had heard how ſiniſtrally and many euill men ſpake and thought of him, as though he ſhould practiſe with the Pope priuie and perniciouſe counſelles for Germany, he pourgeth him by an open wryting, ſet forth in the vulgar tongue, about thende of May. And where as the laſt yeare (ſayth he) after the death of Iulius the third, I went to Rome, as my dutie was to do, and was preſent The Cardinall of Auſpurg pourgeth himſelf by wryting. at the Election of him that now ruleth: I had pourpoſed doubtles to haue retourned home into Germany with expedition, but I was deteined of the Pope, who went about than a reformation of the churche: And choſing certen excellent men of all nations for the ſame purpoſe, choſe me alſo, although vnmete for ſo weightie a matter, bycauſe I was a Germane, to be of that nomber. But where the charge of my Byſhoprike required my preſence, aſkyng leaue of the Byſhop, the day before the Ides of Aprill, I retourned home. Neuertheleſſe, although I haue ſo vſed my ſelf both alwayes before, and after alſo that I came to this kynde of lyfe that I now am in, whiche I wold ſhould be ſpoken without boaſting, that no ſhamefull matter can be truly obiected to me, although I haue bene oft the coū
               ſellour and authour of peace, not without my great loſſe and hinderaunce, although the welth and dignitie of my countrie hath bene to me alwayes dere, yet ſo ſone as I came againe in to Germany, I heard of great mē and worthy credit that were my frendes, how in myne abſence certen wrytynges were caſte abroade, whiche ſounded to my diſhonour, as though I ſhould not only at Rome with ye Pope, but alſo euery where through out Italy, with ſecret diuiſes practiſe this, that Germany, & namely the league fellowes of the confeſſion of Auſpurg, ſhuld againe be vexed with a moſte greuous warre. And in the ſame wrytinges they alledged this to be the cauſe of this enterpriſe ſiniſire ſuſpicious ſpred of the Card. of Auſpurg. and fecret working, that the Pope did greatly miſlike the decre made the laſt yeare at Auſpurg cōcerning religion, in ſo much that he perſwaded the Emperour that he woulde aboliſhe the

ſame, that he had diſpenſed with him for his faith & promeſſe herein, that he had promyſed him all the ayde and power that he could make to ſubdue Germany, ſo that themperour againe would not fayle hym in recouering the eccleſiaſticall iuriſdiction in Germany, that therfore he had made truce betwixt the Emperour and the Frenche kynge, that bothe their Armies might be conuerted to this vſe. Thei added moreouer that this was written in the ſame libelle, that no foreyne Soldiours ſhould be leuied, but only of Germaynes, that the thing might the better be hidde. Moreouer that the kyng of England wold hire eight thouſande horſemen, and be gouernour of the whole warre, and that mounſters ſhoulde be take in ſondry places: Briefly, that the whole matter ſhoulde be handled ſo circumſpectly, that all theſe powers ſhould ſet forwarde together at one tyme, and ſhould inuade the Proteſtauntes vppon the ſoden, than when many ſhall be from home at the counſel at Regenſpurge, Furthermore, that both the Pope and the kyng of Englande, ſending Ambaſſadours to certen Prynces in Germany, doe promyſe them largely, and that the Pope in dede prepareth a greate army of horſemen and fotemen, to ſende for ayde. Furthermore, that I ſhould ſclaunder Otto Henrick the Paulſgraue, Chriſtopher Duke of Wirtemberge, and Albert Marques of Brandenburge, as Heretickes, and ſeditiouſe and worthie to be driuen out of their countrie. And ſhould hyghly commende the Lantgraue in the Senate of Cardinalles, for that he had forſaken his Religion, and that Titell man one of the Miniſters of his churche had reuoked his doctrine at Rome both by worde and wryting.
            Now for as muche as this ſclaunder toucheth not only the The pourgation of yt Cardinall of Auſpurg againſt the ſuſpicious of certen Pope and the Emperour, but hurteth alſo my name and eſtimation. And bycauſe it is the part of an honeſt man to defende both his owne and alſo the honour and innocencie of his Magiſtrate, I muſt nedes aunſwere to the ſame. And to begynne with all, it was ſurely very greuous and paynefull for me to heare that any were yet remayning and to be founde, whiche contrary to the auncient vertue of Germany, faythe and conſtancie, doe geue their myndes to ſuche ſclaundering, and here to applie them ſelues, that through moſte wicked libelles and lewde talke, they myght ſtyre vp the Prynces of the Empyre againſt their hyghe Magiſtrate, and ſet the Prynces together by the eares in a wycked warre.
            How cruel, troubleſome, and full of perill was the ſclaunder

diuiſed .xxviii. yeares paſt, I ſuppoſe full many doe remember: A ſclaunder deuiſed againſt certi Princes. When kyng Ferdinando, the Byſhoppes of Mentz, Saliſburg, Bamberge and Wirſeburge, the Prynce Electour of Brandenburge, Lewys and William brethren Dukes of Bauier, and George Duke of Saxony, were ſayd to haue conſpired againſt Iohn Duke and Electour of Saxony, and the Lantgraue, where the matter was brought to that poinct, that al thinges tended to a moſte cruell ciuile warre. Doubtles Princes ought to ſet before their eyes, and to remember the ſame tyme. For bothe the wyckednes of that deuiſer was detected, where as euery Prynce for his parte denied the thing by open wryting, and the ſclaunderer afterwarde, loſte his head, as he deſerued. Whiche I truſte ſhall nowe come to paſſe alſo, that euen God beyng reuenger, the authours of ſo wycked a deuiſe may be diſcloſed: For my parte I praye God to ſende them a better mynde, and to confounde theyr counſelles, that they redounde not to the diſtruction of the Countrie. For ſeinge that thys is a lyke ſclaunder, as that furmer was, it may be eaſely perceiued, that the authours haue forged it of the ſelfe ſame mynde, that the other dyd: or after the imitation of hym to haue attempted this, to the intente, verely that they myght nowe bringe to paſſe, that thynge whiche he than coulde not finiſhe.
            But for as muche as the intente of this Sclaunderer is, that he myght perſwade that the Pope and the Emperoure, woulde by force of armes, breake that decree made for peace in Religion, and that the kyng of Englande and the Byſhoppes of Germany would alſo ayde them herein: I proteſte that it is wyckedly forged and inuented, for this intent verely, that mens myndes beyng exaſperated, and diſpleaſures increaſed, all places myght ſwymme full of ciuyle bloud.
            And although I doe not doubte but that the Emperoure and other Princes, to the iniurie of whom this ſeditiouſe and famouſe libelle apperteineth, wyll them ſelues defende theyr cauſe, yet for duty ſake, I can not omitte but that I muſt alſo pourge the highe Magiſtrate. Unfaynedly all the tyme that I remained at Rome, in my preſence or to my knowledge, ther was not one worde ſpoken at Rome of that ſame peace of Religion. It is falſely therfore aſcribed to the Pope, as though he ſhould applie all hys Counſell to force and violence, as though he went about to perſwade hereunto the Emperoure and other kynges: It is falſely (I ſaye) imputed to him, neither can it be proued. And ſeing that is ſo, it is like wyſe falſe that

is wrytten of the Emperour. For ſince there was no cōference nor treatie betwene them for this matter, howe coulde they The Pope had no conference with yt Emperour againſt religion or the libertie of Germany. determine vpon warre, or make a compacte betwene them, for the recoueryng of the eccleſiaſticall iuriſdiction, or ſubduinge of Germany?
            This defamer ſayth, that truce was made betwyxt the Emperour and Frenche kyng, to the intent that the ſoldiours being of either diſcharged, might be led to this warre. What the cauſe of the truce was, the copie of the ſame declareth. Againe, thoſe ſoldiours were not reteined of any Prynce, but ſo many, as kyng Ferdinando commaunded to be taken vp, and ſent thē into Hongary againſt the Turke, thoſe alſo excepted, whome they of Auſpurge and of Norinberge, and the Byſhoppes of Bamberge and Wirtemberge hired, leaſt haply they ſhould be oppreſſed vpon the ſoden. This part therfore of their deuyſe falleth touchyng the Pope, the Emperour, and of the other Byſhoppes.
            Nowe as concerning my ſelfe, I haue verely hitherto followed the olde trewe and catholique Religion, and as it becommeth The Cardinall of Anſpurg addicts to the olde Religion. a Germayne borne, I treade in the footeſteppes of my elders, and perſeuer in the ſame communion of the churche, that I was brought vp in, as alſo in the laſt counſel imperiall I declared both by my letters and counſellours. In this mynde I pourpoſe through Gods grace to perſeuer: Neither am I mynded to doe any thynge, that may ſtriue with honeſtie or conſideration of my dutie: And yet neuertheleſſe I couet to be at peace with all men. But where it is ſayde, that I haue had ſecret conference with the Pope, with the Emperour, with the kyng of Englande, and with other States of the Empire, and and with certen priuate men, about the framyng of this war. Agayne, that ſame of the Paulſgraue, the Duke of Wirtemberge, and the Marques of Brandenburge, to be moſte falſe, neyther that it can be proued of any man: Yea they that bringe vp ſuche tales of me, whether it be done by woorde or wrytinge, I ſaye they be ſclaunderers, and ennemies of the common countrie. And touching Counte Palatine thus ſtandeth the matter. The maner and dignitie of my vocation requyreth, that I ſhould maynteyne the ryght of my Byſhoprike, and kepe the people committed to my charge in the olde and Catholique Religion. And beynge aduertyſed that Otto Henry Prince Electour went aboute, to make certen Townes of my Byſhopryke, of his Religion, and had placed Preachers in them, I toke this doubtles in euyll parte, and had cauſe,

why I ſhould defende me by the lawes. Therfore my counſellours in my abſence, howbeit, yet by my commaundement, brought the matter in to the chāber imperiall, where the matter dependeth as yet ſo: Otherwyſe not ſo much as in worde I neuer hurte his name nor eſtimation, muche leſſe haue I attempted any thyng againſt his countrie: But if I coulde doe any thyng, that might tourne to the commoditie of hym ſelfe, his countrie or people, I would omitte nothing, and I ſuppoſe that the people of his coūtrie can beare witnes of this thing, for they knowe what I haue done for them in tymes paſte in their great aduerſitie. Moreouer I haue euermore loued the houſe of Palatine, being readye to gratifie them by what ſoeuer meanes I myght: And the ſame wil is neuer a whit chaū
               ged. In ſemblable wyſe am I affected towardes Chriſtopher Duke of Wirtemberge, a good man, wyſe, ſkylfull, a louer of peacei And haue euer ſynce the tyme we were fyrſt acquaynted, The good will of the Cardinall of Anſpurg towardes the duke of Wirtemberg. borne hym great good will, and haue ſtudied alſo to perfourme the ſame in dede. But that eyther he or the Paulſgraue ſhould be dryuen out of theyr countrie, the ſame not only came neuer into my mynde, but alſo in caſe I had knowen any ſuche matter as myght haue tended to the loſſe of their eſtimation or goodes, I would both haue bene ryght hartely ſory for the ſame, and woulde haue letted it alſo to the vttermoſte of my power that no ſuche thinge ſhould haue chaunced. And hitherto in dede I haue ſo demeaned my ſelfe alwayes, that I ſuppoſe they haue founde nothyng, ſo ſhal I alſo vſe my ſelfe from henceforth, that I ſhall geue them a more occaſion ſo to thynke, vpon this hope verely, that for as muche as I haue geuen no cauſe to be offended, they wyll beare me the lyke good wyll. And howe muche I lamented the chaunce of Marques Albert, he is not ignoraunt hym ſelfe, for what haue not I aſſayed, what haue I not proued, that this diſcorde myght bee taken awaye, and quietnes be reſtored to the Empire? Doubtles my trauell in that thyng hath bene ſo muche, and my induſtrie ſo great, that although I regarded herein the common wealth, yet came I in ſuſpition with many, that I tendered his commodities ouermuche, and ſought to hynder others. But howe vpryghtly I handled the matter, my letters wrytten to hym can ſhewe. Seyng therfore I am of this mynde towardes thē, neyther is there any duty wantyng in me, I truſte, that for the vertue that is in them and true Nobilitie they wyll ſooner geue credit not ſo muche to my ſaying as doyng, whiche manifeſtly appereth and ſheweth it ſelfe, than to theſe ſediciouſe

perſones, which as certen bellouſe ſeke to reyſe vp flame. With what intier loue alſo and good will being abſent Imbraced al Germaines for the remembraunce of the moſte ſwete countrie The loue of yt Cardinall of Auſpurge towardes yt Germaines. that can both the Ambaſſadours of many Princes, and many alſo of the Nobilitie declare, whiche were than at Rome, when I was of Mentz, Treuers, Collon, Saxons, of Brandenburg, Maydenburge, Bauarians, of Brunſwicke, Paſſawe, Oſenburg, Minden, and of Baſill. For all theſe at once repared to me as a certen hauen, and were faythfully holpen of me in their affayres, and certen alſo through my labour and commendation haue aſcheued offices and great promotions. Now that ſame of the Lantgraue, and of one Titelman what a fonde diuiſe is it. For neyther had I euer any talke with the Lantgraue, and his ſonnes of that matter, neyther can I remember that I ſpake one worde of it either at Rome or in Italy: Much leſſe can I tell what the Miniſters of his dominion do teache or reuoke: This in dede am I able to ſaye, that to my knowledge, there was no ſuche recantation made at Rome. Therfore I doubte not but the Lantgraue, when the matter ſhall ſo requyre, wyll eaſely confute this ſame, and the other alſo of my commendation. Conſidering therfore that the artificers of ſo perniciouſe libelles haue ſhamefully forged all thynges, to the ende that the ſame fyre whiche many yeares ſince they had layde together, myght nowe at the length burne and breake out all at ones, it is nedefull that Princes and Magiſtrates take dilligent hede of them, and when at the laſte they ſhall be detected, that they ſet ſuche an example, as may make all others afrayde. Finally, in caſe there be any that haue conceaued any euyll opinion of me by reaſon of theſe ſclaunders, I earneſtly praye them to laye it awaye, and thynke aſſuredly, that ſynce I am bothe a Germayne borne, and come of a noble houſe, I wyll doe nothinge vnworthy the vertue and Nobilitie of my aunceſters.
            When he had publiſhed this wrytinge the fifte Kalendes of Iune (as before is ſayde) he wrote alſo priuatly to diuerſe Princes to the ſame effecte, and after went againe into Italy, what tyme Bona, the mother of Sigiſmunde kyng of Poole, retourned home, goyng to Naples.
            In the meane ſeaſon commotiōs were in England, & many Commotiōs in England for ſuſpicion of a conſpiracie. Gentle men for ſuſpicion of conſpiracie (as it was ſayde) were caſt in priſon: Wherof, ſome were executed, other ſome fled into Fraunce, and amonges them Sir Androwe Dudley, brother to

the Duke of Northumberland. There were two alſo taken out of my Lady Elizabeth her houſe. At the Ides of May Sir Peter Sir Peter Carrowe & Syr Iohn Cheke takē priſoners. Carrowe, who for an inſurrectiō had fled certen monethes before, reconciled to king Philip, and Sir Iohn Cheke whiche was king Edwardes ſcholemaiſter, retourning out of Germany into Brabant, to fetche his wyfe, as they were going from Bruſſelles to Andwarpe, by the cōmaundement of king Philip being apprehendetd are caried to London. Aboute the ende of Iune not far from London there were .xiii. burnt together at Xiii. burnt at Stretford at the bewe. The Marq. of Baben receiueth the Goſpell. one ſtake for Religion. In the meane tyme Charles Marques of Baden receiueth the doctrine of the Goſpel, and of his neighbours borroweth miniſters to refourme & order his churches. Before this alſo had the Senate of Spire taken a preacher or two of the Goſpell. Maximilian the eldeſt ſonne of king Ferdinando with his wife the Emperours daughter departing frō Uienne, the. xvii, day of Iuly came to Bruſſelles, where he had bene long and much deſirous to take that iourney. Peter Martyr, a Florentine of whome we haue ſpoken before, what tyme the diſſention about the Lordes ſupper was kindled againe, & he in certen bokes was touched by name, wēt from Straſburg to Zurick, that he might handle that matter frely both in teaching and writing. That time Conrade Pellicane died at Zurick: Peter Martyr goeth to Zurick. And therfore the Senate being requeſted by the miniſters of the churche, wryting their letters to the Senate of Straſburg, praye earneſtly that he might be ſent them. So he departeth at the third Ides of Iuly not without the ſighing & grief of many, whiche loued him for his incomparable learning, his moſte exacte iudgement, his great gentlenes and modeſtie and his other vertues.
            At the ſame time the Archebyſhop of Piſe Cardinall, borne in Sicilie, paſſing by Baſil, went to themperour at Bruſſelles Cardinalles ſent from yt Pope to the Emper. and the Frenche kyng. being ſent frō the Pope, where a litle before Cardinal Caraffa the Popes coſin, was come to the kyng of Fraunce. A reporte had bene, and that written that there was moſte heinous diſpleaſure betwixt the Pope & themperour, & that ye matter tended vtterly to war. For amonges other thinges the Pope had taken from the houſe of Columnois al their poſſeſſions in Italy: Whiche thing in dede ſemed to apperteine to the iniury of ye Emperour. Again it was ſaid how he would not inueſte kyng Philip his ſonne, in the poſſeſſion of Sicilie and Naples, propounding ouer hard condicions, for thoſe kingdomes paye tribute to the Byſhop of Rome, and depende vpon his benefite.
            At the Ides of Iuly, Albert Duke of Bauier, in the name of

king Ferdinando beginneth the counſel at Regenſburg, declareth Counſell begon at Regenſpurg. that he is occupied with holding aſſemblees in Auſtriche and Boheme, ſo that he could not come hither hym ſelfe at the time appointed, and ſheweth why he can not be preſent yet neither. For by meanes of Peter Petrouice ye kynges cliente, who had deſired ayde of the Turke, all the coūtrie of Tranſyluania, when no neceſſitie vrged them, & when they had no iuſt cauſe, reuolted from the king to the ſonne of Iohn Uayuode: After that Fraunces Beuecke and George his ſonne, making a rebellion in Hongary haue by the helpe & the aide of the Walachiās taken certen townes and caſtels. Againe that the Turke hath lately ſent a gouernour to Offen. And that an other alſo what time they treated of the truce, beſeged the towne and caſtell of Buda in Latin. Zegeſte the .xi. day of Iune, and began to batter it ſore. Moreouer to be ſignified by the letters and meſſages of many, that the gouernour of Boſnia leuieth an exceading great army to inuade Slauonia: And alſo that the preſident of Grene, gathereth no ſmall power at the citie of Sophie, intending to marche forward, and that the Emperour of Turkes him ſelfe wyll in harueſt next, come in to Hongary and wynter there, or if he defer it to the next ſpring, that he wil come than with a ſtrong army, to wyn Uienne by ſege. For theſe cauſes therfore ye kyng can not at this time leaue his countries, but is wholy buſied & occupied in making preparation to reſiſte. And for as much as it is not for the profit of the cōmon wealth to differ the coū
               ſel any lōger, therfore hath he appointed him to begin the treaty and to procede, till he may come him ſelfe. And in dede thre yeares ſince the king ſent a noble Ambaſſade to the Turke for peace or truce, and they are yet deteined at Cōſtantinople. And albeit that truce was taken betwene thē, till thambaſſadours were retourned home, yet the Turkes in the meane ſeaſon, hauing broken their faith, haue takē many townes & caſtels, vpō the frontiers. And ſeing now alſo Zegeſt of them is beſeged, it appereth not, what peace in very dede is to be loked for at their handes, that can be firme & tollerable: Whiche thing ſeing it is ſo, & for as muche as great daunger hangeth ouer not only the remnaunt of Hongary & Auſtriche, but alſo ouer all Germany to be firſt nede, to conſulte imediatly of ſending ayde, and of cō
               tribution mony, which ſhould be kept in certen places, and for this warre, when nede is, to be defrayed by the publique treaſurers. And that other kynges and Princes alſo are ſollicited by the kyng for ayde, neither wyl he him ſelfe ſpare any coſte or perill either of him ſelfe or his ſonnes alſo, but ſince his countries

being ſore inpoueriſhed with the warres of ſo many yeares, are not able to reſiſte ſo great an ennemy, it is requiſite to contribute thereunto, and that ſpedely. Moreouer, for as much as in the laſt aſſemblee it was decreed alſo, that in this aſſemblee wayes ſhould be ſought to appeaſe Religion, the kyng erneſtly exhorteth that they would ſearche diligently, whether a reconcilement myght be made, and whiche waye. They muſte alſo treate of mony, and of eſtablyſhyng peace in the Empire. And the conſultation of the Turkiſhe warre not to be ſet behinde, but to be chiefly of them conſidered, to the ende the preſent and iminent calamitie may be repulſed.
            About the .xv. day of September, the Emperour hauing a The Empe. goeth in to Spain with both his ſiſters. fayre wynde, and his nauie in a readines, taketh ſhipping to ſayle into ſpayne, and taketh with him both his ſiſters Quene Mary and Elenor companions of his iourney. But before he departed, he ſet kyng Philip his ſonne in poſſeſſion of all the lowe countries. And to his brother kyng Ferdinando he committed the common wealth of Germany, ſending letters to the Electours of the Empyre, wherby he requireth them that they would acknowledge the ſame for Emperour of Romaines, & obey him accordingly. The laſt day of October, Iohn Sleidane authour of this worke, a man for Iohn Sleydane dieth. the ſingular giftes of the mynde, and excellent learnynge all prayſe worthy, departeth out of this life at Straſburg, and is there honorably buried.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               ✚ An Apologie of Iohn Sleidane.
            
               FOr as muche as I heare that diuerſe men ſpeake nothing frendly of my Hiſtory, and haue ſmall thanke requited me for my exceading great paines, I am conſtreined to ſet forth this wryting for defence. Nowe for what cauſes I was moued to write this ſtory, how I proceded in yt ſame, howe I wrote for the diſpleaſure or fauour of no man, and couched thinges in order, I declared in the preface of the worke: And added moreouer, that I was very deſirous of the truthe and therin ſo affected, that if I knewe any thing to be wrytten vntruely, I would ſcrape it out, and admoniſhe the Reader of myne owne accorde, to geue no credit to it. Doubtles I would haue thought that all men here with would haue bene ſatiſfied, eſpecially, ſince the very reading ſhould proue it true that I ſaid: But in as muche as it is reported to me far otherwyſe, whiche to me was very lothſome and greuous, I am driuen of neceſſitie to adde ſome thinges to my preface. And firſt in dede euer ſince the beginning of the worlde it hath bene accuſtomed, that matters as wel eccleſiaſticall as ciuile ſhould be cōmitted to wryting: Which thing in dede bookes do teſtifie, and the ſame cuſtome hath alwayes floriſhed chiefly amonges noble & free nations, eſpecially Grekes and Romaines. The chief precept & ornament of this kinde of wryting is, that it be right and trewe, and therfore Tully calleth an hiſtory the witnes of tymes, and light of veritie, the lyfe of memory, and maiſtres of lyfe. By the whiche wordes verely, he doth both commende it exceadingly, and alſo ſheweth, of what ſort it ought to be, and nowe, for as muche as in this our tyme hath chaunced ſo great an alteration of Religion, as ſince the tyme of the Apoſtles the like hath not bene, & no ſmal ſturre of ciuile policie hath inſued alſo vpon the ſame as is cō
               monly wont to do, I verely, although not the meteſt man of al, at requeſte of certen good men, toke vpon me this kynd of wrytinge, to the ſetting forth of Gods glory, and with great fidelitie and diligence haue brought it to this our tyme. And that I haue herein geuen nothing to affectiōs, and haue vſed my ſelfe ſo moderatly in this argument, as peraduēture none other before me hath done, that ſame I truſte
                  •
               l indifferent iudges wil confeſſe. For although I do gladly prufeſſe this doctrine of the

Goſpel through the benefite of God reſtored, and reioyce exceadingly to be of that nomber and fellowſhip, yet do I abſteyne from al bitternes of wordes, and declare ſimply the whole matter as it was done. God alſo I take to witnes, that myne intent hath not ben, falſly to hurte any man: For what a ſhameles impudencie were it, of thoſe thinges wherof the memorie yet is freſhe, to ſet forth any thyng contrary to a truthe? Again they that know me throughly, haue perceiued, I truſte no ſuch vanitie in me: Notwithſtanding in caſe I haue erred in any pointe, I will both acknowledge it willingly, being admoniſhed, and alſo as I ſaide in the preface, I wil proteſte it openly, that the Reader be not abuſed. And as concerning my paynes I ſuppoſe verely, that in ſearching out of the truthe, no mans dilligence could haue bene no more than myne hath bene, and like as many are able this to teſtifie, ſo I doubte not but the thing alſo it ſelfe ſhall declare. And in deſcribing matters of Religion, I might not omitte polytique cauſes. For as I ſayde before, they came in maner alwayes together, and eſpecially in our tyme they could not be ſeparated. And that they come together, this is a ſure reaſon and grounded vppon the ſcripture. To witte that ſo ſone as amonges any people Religion is chaunged, by and by arriſe offences, diſſentions, debates, vprores, factions and warres. For euen for this cauſe Chriſt ſaith that the ſonne is plucked from his father, and the daughter frō her mother: Alſo that his doctrine bryngeth not peace, but the ſworde, and ſayeth it ſhall ſtyre vp fyre alſo amonges the nere of bloud. And this hath bene euer the ſtate of thinges ſince the worlde was made, neither can it be denied, and the thing it ſelf ſpeaketh. For ſo ſone as in our time gods benefite geuen to mā, and the Goſpell began to be preached, againſt the Popes pardons and traditions of men, by & by the worlde began to reiſe tumultes, and chiefly they of the clergie. Upon this very occaſion the matter was brought into the common aſſemblee of the Empire. And where certen Princes and cities receiued alſo this doctrine, the fire went further abroade, & the matter was handled by diuerſe meanes, tyll at the laſte it ended in warre. And in all this ſame deſcription a man may ſee, what care and diligence the Emperour toke, that the diſſentiō might be takē vp: It is to be ſene alſo, what the Proteſtan̄tes and ſtates haue aunſwered, and what maner of conditions they haue oftentimes offered. But when the matter fel out into warre, the handling of it was variable and diuerſe. And the Emperour in dede that I may bryng of many examples, one ſending his letters

to diuerſe Princes and cities, after alſo ſetting forth a publike wryting, declared the cauſe of his enterpriſe. This wrytinge, wherin the foundation of themperours cauſe conſiſteth, with the aunſwere of the contrary part, might not be omitted. For than I praye you what maner of ſtory were it to be thought, whiche raccompteth but the doinges of the one part only? And yet howe I haue demeaned my ſelfe herein, howe I haue moderated and tempered my ſtyle, it may be ſene by conferring the dutche with the Latin, wherunto I referre my ſelfe alſo. The warre being now driuen of tyll wynter, the Emperour had the vpper hande, where the ennemies were gone euery man home. Theſe victories and triumphes of his alſo, firſte in highe Germany, and after in Saxonie, I recite faithfully all, and this order is kept euery where: For neither I take awaye, nor attribute to any man more, than the thing it ſelfe requireth & permitteth, whiche thing fewe men haue perfourmed, as it is euident. For many in the narrations put alſo their iudgement as well touching the perſones, as the thinges. And to ſpeake nothing of olde wryters, it is knowen, howe Platine hath deſcribed the Popes liues. And a litle before our dayes, a worthye knyght, Sir Philip Commines, ſet forth a notable hiſtorie of his tyme, and amonges other thinges he ſheweth howe after ye death of Charles Duke of Burgundy, who was ſlayne in battell a little from Naunce, Lewys the .xii. king of Fraunce, toke away from the daughter & heire of Duke Charles, either Burgundy and alſo the countrie of Artois. And albeit that Commynes was bounde to Fraunce by his othe, although he were one of the kinges counſell, yet he ſaieth that this was not weldone of him. About the .xxiiii. yeares paſt, the Senate of Ueniſe appointed Peter Bembus to deſcribe the warres which they had made with the Emperour Maximilian, with Lewys the Frenche kyng, and with Pope Iuly the ſeconde, & with others. Which he did compriſing the matter in .xii. bokes: And amongeſt other matters he reporteth, howe Lewys the .xii. kynge of Fraunce denounced warre to the Uenetians: He ſayeth howe the Herault of armes, after that he came before the Duke and the whole Senate, ſpake theſe wordes. To thee, Lawredane Duke of Ueniſe, and to all other citezens of the ſame, Lewys kyng of Fraunce commaunded me to denounce warre, as to mē vnfaithfull, poſſeſſing townes of the Byſhoppes of Rome and of other kynges gotten by force and by wronge, and ſekyng to catche and bryng al thinges of al men diſceiptfully vnder your gouernement: He him ſelfe cometh to you armed to recouer the

ſame. Theſe wordes, would ſome man ſaye for as much as they be heinouſe againſt the Uenetians. Bembus ſhoulde haue omitted. But he would not ſo, but wrote them out of the cōmon recordes into his boke, and added to the aunſwer made to the Herault, no leſſe byting: And the workes was printed at Ueniſe with the priuilege of the Senate. Paulus Iouius, beſides other wrytinges, wherin he compriſeth the forces of certen noble mē, hath not lōg ſince ſet forth alſo two Tomes of thinges done in his tyme: But howe frankely he wryteth, thoſe that haue red them can teſtifie. Not withſtanding that in certen places he doth the Germanes wrong: And yet the ſame worke came forth authoriſed by ſondry priuileges. Who ſo wyll, may ſeke the ninth leafe of the ſeconde Tome, alſo in the life of Leo the .x. leafe .xciii. and .xciiii. And in the lyfe of Alphonſe Duke of Farrare, leafe .xlii. All the bokes of good authours be full of examples. And Comines is for this cauſe chiefly commended, that he wrote ſo indifferently: But he kepeth this maner, as I ſayde alſo before, that not only he diſcribeth the thinges, but alſo addeth his iudgement, and pronounceth what euery man hath done be it right or wrong. And albeit that I do not ſo, yet is it vſed of many. But that whatſoeuer is done on either part ſhould be recited, that ſame is not only reaſonable, but being frequented in all times is nedefull alſo. For otherwyſe can not the Hiſtory be compiled. Where ſo euer be factions, where war and ſedition is, there doubtles are al thinges full of complaintes accuſations, and defenſions with other cōtrary wrytings. Now he that reciteth all theſe thinges, in ſuche order as they were done, doeth iniurie to neither part, but followeth ye lawe of the ſtory. For in thoſe brawlinges and complaintes euery thing is not by & by true that one obiecteth to an other. When there is grudge, hatred, and malice amonges them, it is knowē and tried, howe the matter is vſed on either ſyde. If the euill wordes, that Popes and Byſhops and ſuche other lyke, haue powred out againſt the Proteſtauntes .xxxvi. yeares paſt, were true, what thinge could be imagined more wicked than they? Paule the thirde, being Pope, ſent his nephewe by his ſonne Cardinall Farneſe, Ambaſſadour to the Emperour to Bruſſels the yeare of our Lorde .M.ccccc.xl. He there gaue counſell againſt the Proteſtauntes, whiche not long after was ſet forth in printe, and is of me recited in the .xiii. boke of my Hiſtory. After many contumeliouſe wordes, amonges other he ſayth, that the proteſtauntes do reſiſte Chriſt no leſſe, but rather more thā the Turkes do: For theſe ſleye the bodies only, but they leade
            
               
The ſoules alſo into euerlaſting pardition. I pray you what more heynouſe or horrible thing can be ſpoken,
            And in caſe theſe thinges ſhuld not haue bene recited, then might the Proteſtauntes haue hed iuſt cauſe of complaint againſt me: but the matter is farre otherwiſe: For neither be thinges true, becauſe he ſaid ſo. And if I ſhould haue omitted this, I might iuſtly haue commen into ſuſpition, as though I handled not the matter vprightly, and would gratify more the one part. And that it is thus, as I haue plainly declared, I doubt not, but reaſonable men will iudge, that I haue done nothing contrary to the law of an hiſtory, and ſo much the rather for that the moſte thinges are taken out of common recordes, which had ben ſetforth in Print before.
            Therfore they do nothinge frendly, no they do me plaine wronge, which thus do ſclaunder my worcke, and ſo much the more wronge, if they vnderſtand thorder of compiling an hiſtory, but if they knowe it not, I would they ſhould learne, of ſuch thinges as we haue nowe declared, and of others that wryte ſtories.
            But when I ſpeake of Hiſtoriographers, I meane not thoſe of our time, which ſtudy only, to extoll, and highly commend what part they liſt, and ouerwhelme thother with contumelious and railynge wordes. They that are of ſuch ſort, be not worthy to be ſo called.
            Ihon Cocles .vi. yeares paſt, ſetforthe Commentaries, in a manner of the ſame argument that mine are: but all thynges are heaped vp with ſuch horrible, forged, and abhominable ſclaunders and lyes as haue not bene hard.
            Cardinall Poole in the boke lately ſetforthe, calleth the Doctrine renewed in Germany Turkiſhe ſeede. Of ſuche lyke wordes are al theyr bokes full. But what like thing is found in all my woorke? I haue verely wrytten the wonderfull benefite of God, geuen eo thys our time, orderly and as truely, as I could poſſible, and for the ſame purpoſe, I gathered .xvi. yeares ſince, what ſoeuer belonged herunto, neither haue I wrytten raſhlye, but with a ſure iudgemente proceaded.
            And what labour and paines this worke hath coſt me, nexte the liuing God, I know. For his glory haue I chiefly regarded, and leauing the practiſe of the law, I haue applied in a maner all my ſtudy herevnto: and verely I muſt confeſſe, that throughe Gods motion I haue ben after a ſort drawen vnto this labour And nowe where diuers requite me ſo vnworthye thanckes for my ſo greate trauell and paines.
            I wil cōmit to him, whoſe cauſe chiefly I toke it in hād: for I know vndoubtedly yt I haue offred vp vnto him a moſt acceptable ſacrifice

with the ſame verely good conſcience I comfort and ſuſtain my ſelf, eſpecially ſeing that my labor is commended of learned men, whiche bothe geue me thanckes, and confeſſe alſo that they haue receiued much frute therby. Wherefore I deſire all louers of the veritye, that they wold geue no credit to the ſclander of a few certen mē: but wold gentelly accept my labors, faith, and dilligence, nether conceiue any ſiniſtre opinion of me. Furthermore I proteſt that I do acknowledge the Emperour and king of Romaines, for the high Magiſtrate, whome God hath ordained, and to whom in al things, that be not againſt God, we ought to obey, as Chriſt and thapoſtles teach.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ A Table containing all the Principall matters in this Boke.
            
               A
               
                  A Counſel promiſed. 92
               An Apology deliuered, but not receiued. eodem
               A beaſtly cruelty. 104
               A blaſing ſtarre. 109
               A conſecrating of Cardinals. 113
               Andrew Gritie duke of Ueniſe. 117
               A boke of Romiſh Marchauntes. 118
               A ſtraunge chaunge. eodem
               Alteration in England for Reli. 125
               A Prophet inſpired. 129
               A new king of Anabaptiſtes. 131
               A boke of the miſteries of the ſcrip. 133
               A blinde aſſe. 134
               A counſel called. 147
               An oration againſt the french king. eo.
               A reformation of Collon. 141
               A ſword hallowed. 142
               A wryting of Auſpurge. 143
               Athanaſius, Arius, and Liberius. 148
               A propre ſaying of Ciprian. 153
               A prieſtes ſonne, not enioy his Fathers benefice. 155
               Auarice and concupiſcence, let coū. 156
               Annas Momorancy made Conſtable of Fraunce. 157
               A gentleman of Tolowſe burnt. 158
               Andrew de Aury ſaluteth the king. 159
               A colledge erected at ſtraſborough. 160
               A league of the Papiſtes againſte the proteſtauntes. 173
               Ambaſſadors ſent to Henry brother to George duke of Saron. 176
               A Friers wede maketh the deuell a. 177
               An aſſembly at Smalcald. 169
               A wryting exhibited by the deuines. eo.
               A confutation of the .vi. articles. 171
               An oration of a yong Cardinal. 172
               A priuy hatred of the french king. eod.
               An exceading hot ſommer. 174
               A diſputation betwixt Eckius and Melanchthon. 176
               A great aſſemble at Regenſpurge. eo.
               A mean to get mony by pardons. 177
               A moſt coſtly ſtole or Paile. eodem
               A wollen halter to ſtrāgle the pope. 178
               A boke preſented to the collotors. 179
               A great tempeſt deſtroid his ſhips. 184
               An aſſemble at Spires. 186
               A ſoden fear in the french court. 88
               An army againſt the Turke. eodem
               Any pleaſaunt life is not to be. eodem
               A conſolation of the priſoners. eodem
               A counſel called at Trent. 198
               An aſſembly at Norinberge. 163
               Ambaſſadors to the duke of Saxon, & the Lantzgraue. 194
               A rebellion at Rochelle. 197
               A ſupplication of the proteſtaunts. 194
               A boke called Antididagma. 201
               An aſſemble at Spire. 202
               A league of themperor, and the king of England againſt the french king. 203
               A boke of Caluine againſt Sorbo. 204
               A boke of the relikes of ſaints. eodem
               A falſe report of themperors death. eo.
               A great aſſemble of Spiere. 206
               A ſtraunge tale of the duke of Brū. 209
               An image buried in ye ſtede of Eue. 209
               A decre for religion. 212
               A peace concluded betwixte themperor and Fraunce. 314
               An ambaſſade ſaid to the king. 216
               A Commention of deuines at Mil. 217
               An aſſembly at Wormes. 218
               A lamentable departing. 219
               A ſoldſoure geueth the Merundo. 220
               A cruell fact of Miners. eodem
               A terrible example of cruelty. eodem
               A captain defendeth the women. eodē
               
               A ſharp anſwer of the king. eodem
               A frere obſeruant ſtirreth themperour to warre. 221
               A ſkirmiſh betwixt the Duke. 225
               A conflict betwixt the Duke. eodem
               A league of them of Straſborow, Zuricke and Bernes. 85
               A confutation of the Proteſtantes. 88
               A confeſſion of the Zwinglians. 88
               A ſtory of the king of Fraunce. 101
               A controuerſy of the biſhoppe of Bantberge with the Marques of Brandenburge. 103
               A biſhops office. 111
               An aſſemble at Regenſpurge. 73
               An aſſembly at Spires. 79
               
                  
A treatiſe of peace betwixt Fraunce & England. 227
               A brute of warre againſte the Proteſtauntes. 228
               Ambaſſadors to themperor for tharchbiſhop of Collon. 230
               A decre of the Sinode, read. 231
               Alphonſe Diaze commeth into Germany. 234.
               Alphonſe returneth to Nuburge to kill his brother. eodem
               A communicatiō of the Lantzgraue, & others. 237
               A diuiſion amonges thelectors. 241
               A ſtatute of Trent. 243
               A decre of originall ſinne. eodem
               An aunſwer of them of Straſborough to themperor. eodem
               An heape of euils, of ciuel war. 244
               A league betwixt the Pope and themperor. 246
               A preatence of mouinge war. 247
               Albert of Brunſwicke hurt. 265
               Alteration in Sauoy. 266
               A warlike pollicy of themperor. 267
               An other pollicy of themperor. eodem
               Aucthoritye can not beare equallitye. 271
               A decre of the counſel at Trent of iuſtification. 276
               A Dolphe ſubſtituted to Hermon archbiſhop of Collon. 277
               Alteration of Religion. 278
               Alteration in the Courte of Fraunce. 282
               A pergidu of the ſonne. 285
               An aſſembly of the Empyre at vrmes. 286
               An aſſemble at Auſpurge. 291
               An holy boxe ſent downe from heauen you may be ſure. eodem
               A conſpiraty againſt the Popes ſonne. 294
               A reformation of Religion in Englād. 297
               Albert receiued into the tuition of the king of Pole. 3021
               A diſordained ordre of knightes. 303
               A compoſition of peace. 305
               A counſel called at Trent twiſe 309
               An euil compiled booke ofte corrected. 314
               Ambroſa Blaurer the chiefeſt miniſter of the church. 324
               At Strauſburge the Conſull of th
                     〈…〉
                  
                  ri
                     •
                  , eodem
               Auguſtus married a wife. 327
               A commotion at Burdeaur. eodem
               A wonderful conuerſion of Uergelius. 328
               A meting of deuines in Saxony. 330
               A Diaphora. 333
               An open diſputation at Oxford. 335
               A communication at Lipſia. 336
               A rebellion in England. eodem
               A boke in Italian againſte the Poope. 339
               An aſſembly of Cardinals for to chuſe a new Pope. 340
               A ſtraunge ſight neuer hard of. 342
               A trouble in the Church of Straſburg. eodem
               A ieſt of the Cardinall of Auſpurge. 343
               A peace concluded betwene Fraunce and England. 344
               A confeſſion of faith, made by the miniſters of Auſpurge. 345
               A Regeſter of the deuines of Louaine. 346
               A proclamation for printers. 347
               Andwarpe aſtomed at the Emperors Proclamation. 347
               A woman in pearil for a lyght worde. 348
               An ambaſſade againſt them of Maidenburge. 350
               A cruel decre againſt the Maidenburgians. 351
               A wryting of the cleargye againſte the city of Maidenburge. 354
               All godly folke afflicted for the verity. 357
               A new doctrine of Oſiander. 359
               A cruel Proclamation againſt the Lutherans. 368
               A purgation of the french king. eodem
               A decre of Trent of the Lordes ſupper. 369
               A decre of penaunce. 273
               A Cardinall of Dalmatia ſlaine in hys owne houſe. 378
               A brute of warre againſte themperor. 385
               Albertes crueltye to them of Noremberge. 402
               
                  〈1… pages missing〉
               
               
                  
Aſſembly at Auſpurge. 386
               A poynt of the law. 72
               A Monke forſaketh his religion. 76
               Alteration in Denmarke. 45
               Archbiſhop of Mentz anſwer. 22
               Ariſtotle. 20
               Albert Arch biſhop of Mentz. 3
               Authors of ſciſmes. 47
               An aſſembly called at Auſpurge. 65
               A bloudy preacher bloweth a trom. 56
               A moſt cruell maner of burning. 54
               Albert to them of Wolmes. 403
               Albert of Auſtrich, of whome. 466
               Ambaſſadors of Straſburge to themperor. 413
               Albert ouerthroweth the frēch mē. 414
               A battel fought betwixt duke Maurice & Marques Albert. 421
               Auguſtus brother and heyre to Duke Maurice. 423
               Albert reconciled to Auguſtus. 426
               A diſputation in England. 428
               An end betwixte Iohn Fredericke and Auguſtus. 431
               A parliament in England. 433
               A wryting of the city of Norinberge againſt Marques Albert. eodem
               A place of treaty, of peace choſē, by the Quene of England. 451
               A tumult raiſed at Geneua eodem
               A vniuerſity erected at Dilling. 453
               A boke of Peter Aſot againſte the confeſſiō of the duke of Wittem. eodem
               Auguſt Prince elector had a ſon. 454
               A wryting of the Papiſtes to requeſtes of the proteſtaunt. 456
               A wryting of the king Fardinando to the Princes. 458
               A decre wherby Religion is frely permitted to all men. 460
               An eccleſyaſtical parſon that changeth his Religion ſhalbe depriued. eodem
               A parlament in England. 461
               An aſſemble in Auſtrich. eodem
               A Comet ſene. 465
               A father killeth his iii. children. 466
               A ſlaunder deuiſed againſt certain. 467
               Aucthority of the deuines of Paris. 32
               Agrement betwixt Luther and Zwinglius. 83
               A Concord. 107
            
            
               B
               BIſhops of Rome bound as other is to Goddes commaundement. 3
               Boke burners. 27
               Bloudye preacher bloweth a trompet. 56
               Bokes preſented to themperor. 85
               Bōdage no let to chriſtian liberty. 63
               Bucer laboreth for concord. 96
               Buſy marchauntes. 118
               Brauling Friers. 119
               Barbaroſſa almoſt taken. 121
               By what meanes men be diſceiued. 134
               By what means the deuel is van. eodē
               
               Baptiſme condemned. 135
               Biſhops ſtir vp princes. 150
               Barbaroſſa taketh caſtel Newſtat 178
               Bucer preacheth at Bonina. 201
               Barbaroſſa returneth. 213
               Bolloigne rendred. 214
               Bruly burnt at Tourney, 216
               Bucer declareth how tharticle of iuſtification wās accorded in. 229
               Bucer is ſent for to Auſpurge. 310
               Bucer is in daunger. 313
               Bren. wife & his children banyſhed. 316
               Bucer and Fragus come into Eng. 331
               Baūberge redemeth peace dearly. 402
               Brunſwicke beſieged. 428
               Bradford burned in England. 451
               Biſh. of Merſpurge anſwer to Lu. 22
               Beſt thiuges pleaſeth feweſt men. 34
               Beginning of fyrſt frutes & tenthes. 42
               Bible is to be preferred before al. 43
               Biſhop of Conſtaunce maketh a boke in defence of Images. 48
               Boke of reſtitution. 131
               Bi. Munſter demaūded his charges. 136
               Bold anſwer of the king. 137
               Barnes aid to Geneua. eodem
               Bolde and profitable Counſell of the Lantzgraue. 359
               Bhoemers ſerued againſt the Duke of Saxon vnwillingly. 169
               Bohemers refuſe war in Saxony. 277
               Biſhop of Strauſburge, ſyngeth hys fyrſt Maſſe. 331
               Bondage of the Germanians. 392
               Biſhop of Wincheſter dieth. 461
               Bauarians followeth the Prynce for Religion. 465
            
            
               
               C
               CHarge of the Biſhoppe of Maidenburge. 1.
               Ciuilians vſe of Citing. 2
               Cardinall Caietane wryteth to ye duke of Saxon. 8
               Charles is declared Emperour 14
               Conditions propounded by Luther. 18
               Confeſſion of ſinnes. eodem
               Counſel of Lateran and Piſa. eo.
               Capnio a deuine. 19
               Catarinus wryteth againſt Luther. 27
               Commotions in Spaine. 34
               Cornelis Scepper a good wryter. 42
               Cardinall Campeius wryteth to the duke of Saxony. 45
               Campeius Oration to the Prynces at Norenberge. eodem
               Campeius raileth againſt Matrimony. 49
               Chriſtianity taketh not away bondage 61
               Caroloſtadius wryteth againſt Lu. 65
               Caroloſtadius maketh his purgatiō. 65
               Counſel at Spires. 69
               Contention about the Maſſe. 79
               Certaine Princes reſiſte the decree of Spires. 81
               Ciuil war amongſt the Swicers. 82
               Cardinall Campeius Oration. 88
               Certaine choſen to accorde Relygyon. 90
               Conditions of peace. 104
               Conditions of peace betwene themperor and the Proteſtauntes. 105
               Conditions of creating a kinge of Romaines. eodem
               Criſtine kinge of Denmarke is taken. 108
               Chriſt was called Seditious. 112
               Conditions of peace. 116
               Conditions betwixte Fardinando and Duke Ulrich. eodem
               Crafty marchauntes. 118
               Couetous marchauntes. 119
               Cruelty vnſemely in Churchmen. 122
               Condition of peace. 128
               Ciuill war in the city. 129
               Cnipperdoling was the chief of that faction. 129
               Cnipper doling prophecieth. 130
               Croked necked cattel. 134
               Comotion in Lincolne ſhire. 141
               Captaine Aſke executed for Treaſon. eodem
               Cardinal Pole the Popes ambaſſador to the French king. 142
               Cardinals Poles boke againſt e Kinge Henry the eight. eodem
               Cold reaſons for the Popes ſupremacy 143
               Carninall Poole was vnthanckefull. eodem.
               Cardinall Pole incenſeth the Emperoure againſt the king of England. eodem
               Cardinals Poles Hipocriſy and falſehode. eodem
               Criſtierne king of Denmark, receiueth the Goſpel. 158
               Complaintes of Pillage. 178
               Contention betwixte the electoure of Saxon and Duke Moris. 188
               Conterme in diſpleaſure with the pope and cardinals. 194
               Cardinals ſent to make peace 197
               County William taken Priſoner. 213
               Cabrier yelded. 220
               Cardinall Farneſius, his comming to Wormes. 221
               Counte William deliuered. 226
               Claudius Cenarcleus a yong gētlemā of Sauoy. 235
               Condityons impoſed to the Duke of Wirtemberge. 275
               Conditions offred to the Lantzgraue. 281
               Caſpar Phlugus captain of the Bohemers army eodem
               Conditions wherby the duke redemed his life. 285
               Ciuil war betwixt England and Scotland. 310
               Countries vnited by mariage. 311
               Ciuil war in Affrica. 330
               Contention for thempire betwene the Emperor and Fardinando. 353
               Complaint of the biſhop of Strauſboroughe. 360
               Contrary tales of the king and themperor. 364
               Cauſes of callinge the counſel. 371
               
                  
Countries oppreſſed by the Emperor. 394
               Conditions of peace offered by Duke Moris. 397
               Cruelty againſt godly preachers. 40
               Conditions of peace offred by themperor. 48
               Conditions of peace. 411
               Commotion in Kent. 430
               Cardinall Pole arriueth in England. 438
               Controuerſy for the dominiō of Chatz. 452
               Ciniſtre ſuſpition ſpread of the Cardinal of Auſpurge. 456
               Commotions in England for ſuſpition of a ſpiratie. 469
               Cardinals ſent from the pope to themperor and Freuch king. eodem
               Counſel begon at Regenſpurg. 470
               Cauſe why Luther was not puniſhed. 41.
               Complaintes of them of Zurick. 51
               Cauſe of them hatred. eodem
               Conſtancy of them of Zurick. 52
               Confeſſion of the Proteſtauntes. 88
               Conſpiraty of the Papiſtes againſt the Proteſtauntes. 93
               Complaint of the Pope to the kinge of Pole. 97
               Common wealth hath neade of manye remeadies. 102
               Contentiō betwene Eraſmus and Luther. 114
               Clement the ſeuenth dieth. 117
               Counſel of Conſtaunce. 149
               Counſel of Myllen broken of. 152
               Craft of Popes. eodem
               Cardinall Montaine ſtriken with a fury. 300
               Cruel actes of Marques Albert. 434
            
            
               D
               DUke Fredericke his wiſdome. 2
               Diſputation at Lipſia. 18
               Diſſention betwixte Leo and hys Cardinals. 38
               Decrees of Pius and Iulius. 23
               Dyſſentyon at Baſill for Relygyon. 80
               Daunger of the Turke. 85
               Duke Ulrich expulſed out of his countrey. 113
               Diſputation with the king of Anabaptiſtes. 136
               Duke George of Saxon dieth. 176
               Doctor barnes burnte in Smithfielde. 174
               Dure the chiefeſt Towne in thoſe partes is taken. 196
               Depenſius driuen to recant. 20
               Duke of Moris maketh lawes for the miniſters of the church. 202
               Duke Moris foundeth three Scholes. eodem.
               Duke Moris is beneficiall to the vniuerſity of Lipſia. eodem
               Diſſention in Scotland. 205
               Duke Moris ſerued themperor at Landerſſy. 206
               Duke Moris intreateth a peace. 405
               Duke Henry and his Sonne yeld them ſelues. eodem
               Diaze goeth to Maluenda.
               Duke of Saxon and the Lantzgraue prepareth to warre.
               Duke Frederick choſen Emperor.
               Donauerde taken.
               Donauerde rendred. 265
               Duke Maurice conſulteth agaynſte the Poteſtauntes. 266
               Duke Maurice letters to the Electour. 269
               Duke Maurice blamed of all men. 270
               Duke Maurice Excuſes. eodem
               Duke Maurice nothing couetous. eod.
               Duke Maurice followeth Doeg. 275
               Duke Ericke diſcomfited. 287
               Duke Maurice and the elector of Brā
                  denburge intreat for the Lantgraue eodem
               Duke Maurice letters to the Lantgraue. eodem
               Duke Maurice intreateth liberallye to the deuines of Wittemberge. 291
               Duke of Placence depryued Hierom. 294
               Daughter of Nauarre married to the duke of Uandome. 321
               Duke Henry beſiegeth the city of Brū
                  ſwicke. 348
               Dracutus an archpirate 348
               Duke Maurice general of the war. 351
               
                  
Duke Maurice beſiegeth Maidenburg. 352
               Duke Maurice letters to the Emperoure. 363
               Duke Morice ſeaſeth vpon the dominion of Chatz. 370
               Duke Morice entendeth to warre vpon themperor. 373
               Diſcipline amongſt the fathers. 374
               Duke Maurice feared of themperours. 380
               Duke Maurice ambaſſadoure ſente away. 381
               Duke Maurice letters to hys ambaſſadours. 384
               Duke Maurice taketh Auſpurge by cō
                  poſition. 388
               Diuers minds in the counſel of Trent. 389
               Duke Moris goeth to the field. 395
               Duke Moris letters to the king. 399
               Duke Moris nie ſlaine. 40
               Duke Moris weary of delaies. 47
               Duke Moris reburneth his fellowes. 48
               Duke Moris admitteth peace. 410
               Duke de Anmalle taken Pryſonner. 44
               Duke Morleague wyth the Duke of Brunſwicke. 420
               Duke Maurice wan the field, and loſte his life. 422
               Duke Henry of Brunſwicke marrieth a wife. 465
               Duke Frederickes anſwer. 26
               Deuines of Paris condempn Luthers bokes. 32
               Duke of Saxon, and the Lantzgraue prepare them to warre. 78
               Duke of Saxon Marſhall of the Empyre. 90
               Duke of Saxon letters to the Prynces. 98
               Duke of Saxon and the Lantzgraue wryte to the French king. 166
               Death of the french king. 282
               Daughter of Scotland affianſed to the king of England. 308
               Death of Sigiſmund king of pole. 305
               Duke of Swaybrige moleſted for Religion. 332
               Death of Pope Paule the thyrd. 336
               Diſputation at Baden. 71
               Decre for religion. 70
               Decre of the duke of Loraine. 50
               Diſputation at Zuricke. 44
               Decre of the Swices. 45
               Daniel expounded, how? 89
               Deluge at Rome, and in Seland. 94
               Dombe ſprite walking. 114
               Dukes Confeſſion of the duke of Wittemberge. 386
            
            
               E
               ECkius boke againſt Luther. 2
               Eraſmus iudgemente of Luther. 16
               Eneas Siluius. 23
               Erkius to Luther. 28
               Eraſmus boke of fre wll. 50
               Eckius the Popes champion. 52
               England hath title to Fraunce. 74
               Eraſmus boke againſt Goſpellers. 83
               Eraſmus wryteth to Campeius. 90
               Engliſh Bibles Printed at Parys. 160
               Ebleb a noble Gentleman dyeth for ſorow. 29
               Execution done in the frenche kynges ſyght. 335
               Erle Hedecke frende to them of Maydenburge. 361
               Erenberge taken away. 40
               Eccleſiaſticall lawes in England. 432
               England is tourned to her vomyt. 439
               Emperour ſendeth for Luther. 28
               Emperour wryteth to Luther. eodem
               Emperours letters to the Princes of Germany. 65
               Ende of the Papiſtes dectrine. 67
               Emperoure marrieth a wife. 71
               Exhortation of the Lantzgrane. 57
               Excuſe of ſome to the Proteſtauntes. 94.
               Emperor of neceſſity graunteth peace to Germany. 108
               Emperoure goeth into Italy. 109
               Erroures of the Anabaptiſt. 133
               Erroures of the Mūſterians in fayth. 135
               Engliſh ambaſſadors winter at Wittenberge, 139
               Emperoure inuadeth the frenche prouince. 140
               
                  
Eraſmus death. eodem
               Emperour, French king, and the pope mete at Nice. 59
               Emperors and French kings ambaſſador to the Uenerians. 168
               Emperors priuate wryting for the proteſtauntes. 183
               Emperors letters to them of Collon. 203
               Emperors anſwer to the pope. 195
               Emperors letters to the ſtates of Boheme. 283
               Emperors ſōne commeth into Flaunders, and he is receiued at Millan. 330
            
            
               F
               FRaunce and Germany were vnited. 12
               Frederick the Paulſgraue ſent into Spain. 14
               Flatterers muſt be eſchued. 18
               Fraunce is offred to the ſpoiles. 19
               Feare for the hoſt. 47
               Feare in Muncers camp. 57
               Faith ought not to wauer. 65
               Faber driuen out of Paris. 66
               Fardinando forſaking king Lewes. 77
               Fardinandoes title to Hongary. eo.
               Fraunces Sfortia reforced to the dukedom of Millan. 83
               Florence rendred. 90
               Florence loſeth her liberty. eodem.
               Fardinando proclaimed Kinge of Romaines. 98
               Frances Sfortia marrieth the Emperors Niece. 117
               Foliſh pity marreth the city. 122
               Fredericke forſaketh the biſhoppricke. 128
               From the horſe to the aſſe. 130
               Franckfurt receiued into the league. 139
               Falſe doctrine is not to be born wyth. 151
               Fardinando his army deſtroyed 154
               Fardinandoes requeſt. 173
               Fiers in Saxony. 174
               Fardinando beſieged Buda. 184
               Fardinādo defeateth the requeſt of his nobles. 186
               Frances Lander cōmitted to Pryſon, his weaknes and recantation. 200
               Few Spaniardes loue the Goſpel. 233
               Friers be diſturbers of peace. 236
               Friers are vile in life and learnynge. 237
               Feare in themperors campe. 259
               Force ought not to be vſed in Religyon. 260
               Fraunce denied to aid Proteſtauntes. 264
               Fardinando Sebaſtian deputye, proclaimeth war to Saxony. 269
               Fardinando to the Bohemera. 283
               Fardinando ambaſſadour to the Bohemers. 284
               Fardinādo goth wc his army to Proge. 291
               Freight with others caried to priſone. 325
               Frances Spiera diſpaired. 327
               Fraunces Spiera his recantation, his death in deſpair with comfort. 328
               Forces bent againſt Maidenburge. 350
               Foliſh ceremonies. 358
               Fiue of them ſtudentes of Loſſaunce, french men borne. 424
               Fiue condempned at London for the Goſpel. 440
               For Churche goodes all coutrouerſyes are taken away. 461
               Fraunce venery diſpleaſed. eodem
               Fredericke Counte Palatines death. 465
               French king taken priſoner. 43
               Faith of Abraham obtained greate benefites of God. 56
               French league againſt themperor. 71
               Frenche kinges letters to the Prynces of Germany. 73
               French kinges inuentions againſt the Emperour. 79
               French kinges oration. 120
               French kinges letters. eodem
               French warreth againſte the Duke of Sauoy. 38
               Frenche kinge kiſſed the Popes ryght fote. 159
               French king geueth counſel to ye Duke of Wittemberge. 166
               French kinges anſwer to themperors letters. 199
               
                  
French king cōpared to the Turk. 207
               French king hated of all men for the Turkes ſociete. 211
               Frowardneſſe of the Duke of Brunſwicke. 225
               French king is receiued into Paris. 235
               French diſchargeth his army. 410
               French kinges Proclamation againſt condemned of thinquiſition. 452
            
            
               G
               GRece and Bohemes happines. 3.
               Gerſon of Paris. 8
               Geſmer captain of the boures. 54
               Gods power appeareth in feweſt men. 56
               Gods wrath is ſlow, but yet ſore. 58
               George Duke of Saxon hateth the goſpel. 67
               Godlines is not to be ſought for in the Court. 68
               Great ghoſtly fathers. 89
               God bridleth the power of Sathan. 134
               Great execution done at Gaunt. 171
               Granuellans oration at Wormes. 174
               George of Auſtryche apprehended at Lions. 184
               God offreth hys worde before he Plageth. 185
               Gropper commended Bucer. 187
               Gwelphians. eodem
               Gibellines whiche were names of the Emperiall. eodem
               Geneua. 192
               Graſhopper in Germany and Italy. 193
               Gropper forſaketh the goſpel. 202
               Greate Princes ſue for the Popes fauour. 305
               Griniam the French ambaſſador. 309
               Granuellan his anſwer to the Lantzgraue. 409
               General counſel promiſed. 72
               Great ſlaughter. 105
               Great alteration in England. 113
               Great aſſemble at Regenſpurge. 176
               Gonzage gouerne of Millane. 501
               God is not the author of wrong. 263
               Gropper had the ſpoile of Frede. 277
               Godly preachers flie. 315
               Ganimede nouriſhed by the pope. 348
               God woundeth and healeth. 357
               Germany the fortreſſe of Chriſtendom 394
               George duke of Megelburge ſlain. 408
               Great frendſhip betwixt duke Maurice and Marques Albert. 422
               George Earle of Mount Pelicart, marieth the Lantzgraue daughter. 453
               Goſpell is ſlaundred wyth rebellyon. 63
               Godly conſtancye of the Duke of Saxons children. 322
            
            
               H
               HEbrue bookes of thre ſortes. 20
               How the ſcripture muſte be handled. 22
               Honoures chaunge manners. 23
               Henrye King of Englande wryteth againſt Luther. 34
               How the yoke of Papiſtes is to be ſhaken of. 48
               Henry Zutphan put to death. 50
               How the magiſtrate ſhould deale wyth the Papiſtes. 58
               How wicked dominion is to be ſhaken of. 58
               Hunting, hauking, and fiſhinge prohited. 60
               How miniſters ſhould be ordained. 62
               Hipocriſy of biſhops. 75
               How ſcripture ſhould be expounded. 82
               Hugh Capet Earle of Paris. 101
               How a free counſell is to be vnderſtād. 111
               Hirman Stapred. 128
               Heldus the Emperoures ambaſſador. 143
               Heldus Oration at Smalcald. eodem
               Harlots honored at Rome. 157
               Hatred betwixt counſellers 170
               His arme diſcomfited. 184
               Howe the Turkes atcheued the Empyre. 187
               His death. 194
               His weakenes before the king. 202
               
                  
Holy men haue had leagues wyth men of contrary Religion. 211
               Hermon leueth his Biſhopprick. 277
               How miſerable is it for the Quene for to marry with a ſtraunger. 311
               He that doth againſt his conſcience procureth him ſelf hel fire. 316
               Hallowing of churches. 333
               Hallowing of Belles. 334
               Hallowing of altares. 334
               Hedeck and Manſfield diſcomfyted by Duke Morice. 352
               How much the papiſtes eſteme Scripture. 383
               Heldius anſwer. 147
            
            
               I
               IHon Tecel a Dominican Frier, ſet vp concluſyons at Frankfurt. 1.
               Indulgences to be vſed after the Canon law. 2.
               Iames Hogeſtrate wrote againſte Luther. 3.
               Ihon Wickliffe an Engliſh man. 32
               Ihon Huſſe a Boheme. eodem
               Ihon Huſſe appealeth frō the pope. eo.
               Ihon Huſſe, and Ierom of Prage burned. eodem.
               Iniquity procedeth frō the prieſtes. 40
               It is not lawful for vs to kil any mā 43
               Images burnt at Zurick. 48
               Ihon Fredericke of Saxon, marrieth Sthel of Cleaue. 74
               Ihon Uaivodes letters to the ſtates of thempyre. 76
               Ihon Uayuodes ambaſſadors takē. 77
               Images put downe. 80
               Images burnt on Aſhwedenſday. eod.
               Inas king of Brittain. 114
               Idle Nunnes marchant women. 120
               Ihon Leidan an Anabaptiſte. 128
               Ihon Mathew the high Prophet. 130
               Ieſting puniſhed. eodem
               Ihon Leidan inuadeth the kingdō. eo.
               Ihon Leidans pompe. 131
               Ihon Huſſe at Conſtance. 199
               Ihon Caluin and Peter Bruly ſuperintendantz of the Colledge of Straſ borough. 168
               Ihon Iſleby, chief of the Antimo. 172
               Inuectiues vnmete for princes. 174
               Ioy in France at themperors loſſe. 185
               Ihon Miners preſident of the Counſel at Agnes. 219
               Iuſtus Ionas aſked whether we ſhall know eche other in the life to come. 232
               Ihon Diaze a Spaniard. 233
               Ihon Iſſeby a Reuolt. 310
               It is daunger to vſe forain aides. 311
               Ihon Marques of Brādēburge refuſeth thinterim. 315
               Iſſeby rewarded of themperor. 320
               Inquiſitions of Uergetius. 320
               Iuly the third conſecrated biſhop. 343
               Interrogatories for the Miniſters of Auſpurge. 383
               Ihon Sleidan ambaſſador for Strauſburg to thempire. 373
               Ihon Frederick demaundeth lāds and dignities 423
               Ihon a Laiſco a Polonian. 432
               Interrogatories Miniſtred to the Abbot of Newſtat. 436
               Ioy at Rome for Englande reduced to the Romiſh church. 443
               Indulgences graunted by the Pope for the conuerſyon of England. eodem
               Ihon Fredericke the electours Sonne marieth. 451
               Ihon Gropper made Cardinall. 461
               Ihon Sleidane dieth. 470
               Iudges of the chamber trouble the proteſtauntes. 123
               Ihon Laydon parradocſiſes. 131
               Iudges of the chambre. 144
               Ignorannce of the people is gaine full to the prieſtes. 150
               Iudges of the chambre ſhal kepe theyr place. 212
               Ignoraunce of the people for lacke of teachinges. 237
               Interim permitteth Prieſtes to keepe theyr wines ſtil. 313
            
            
               K
               KInges of Naples paye Tribute to Rome. 11.
               King Henry the eighte calleth hys mariage in queſtion. 113
               Kingdoms deſtroid for Idolatry. 185
               Kinges of Fraunce moſte addict to the

Pope. 200
               King Hēry baniſhed the Pope, but not Popery. 278
               King Ferdinando moueth the Bohemers to warre. 279
               King of Fraunces fautour of 
                     •
                  ear. 282
               King Fardinandoes letters to the Bohemers. 286
               King Fardinando requyreth mouye of the ſtates. 314
               King Phillip inueſted in Flaun. 337
               Kinges haue long armes. 279
               King Edward ſore ſicke. 408
               King Fardinando proclaimeth warre againſt Albert. 408
               King Phillip arriueth in Eng. 437
               Kinge Phillippe came to his father to Brurels. 453
               King Phillip entreth into And. 462
               King Fardmando goeth into Boheme 466
               King of Denmarke ſlieth. 41
               King of England wryteth to the princes of Sarony. 44
               Kinges ſonnes are pledges. 69
               King of Hongary ſlain. 71
               King Henry hated againſte the Pope. 114
               Kinges ſupper and murder. 132
               King of England, patrone of the Proteſtauntes league. 139
               King Edward the .vi. borne. 154
               King of Englande refuſeth the Counſell. eodem
               King of Englande hated of the Pope. eodem.
               King of England maried the .vi. wife. 187
               Kinges purgation. 191
               King of Denmarke warreth vppon the imperials. 266
               King of England warneth the Proteſtaunts of the daunger. 227
               King of Denmarke aided not the Proteſtauntes. 275
               King is apparelled like a deacon. 292
            
            
               L
               LUthers letters to the Biſhoppe of Mentz. 1.
               Luthers queſtiōs at Wittenberge. 1
               Luthers exception. eodem
               Luthers letters to Pope Leo. 2
               Luthers anſwer to Silueſter Prierias. eodem.
               Luthers ſecond aunſwere to Silueſter Prierias. 3
               Luthers forſaking of Rome. eodem.
               Luther cited to Rome. 4.
               Luther is called to Auſpurgē. 5.
               Luthers conference with Cardinal Caietane. eodem
               Luther appealeth. 6
               Luther appealeth from the Pope to the Counſel. 9
               Luthers letters to the Pope. 17
               Luthers boke to the duke of Saxon. 18
               Luthers boke condemned at Louain 19.
               Laurence valla. eodem
               Luthers letters to themperor. 21
               Luthers letters to the archbiſhoppe of Mentz. eodem
               Luthers letters to the biſhop of Merſeburge. 22
               Luther curſed of the pope. 23
               Luther impugneth the Popes cenſure. 24
               Luthers boke of the captiuity of Babilon. eodem
               Luthers bokes are burnt. 26
               Luther burneth the Canon law. 27
               Luther cometh to Wormes. eodem
               Luther pledeth his cauſe before themperor and the hole Empire. 1.
               Luthers anſwer to the princes. 39
               Luther ſent away from Wormes. 31
               Luther is outlawed by themperor. 33
               Luther wrote ſūdry bokes in his exile. eodem.
               Luther is conueied out of daunger. eo.
               Luther returneth to Wittenberge. 35
               Luther foreſeeth the tempeſt comming eodem
               Luther wryteth to the Bohemer
                     •
                  . 36
               Luther wryteth againſt the biſhops. eo
               Luther a Frier. 38
               Luther compared with Mahomet. 40
               Luther expoundeth the Popes laying. eodem.
               Luther interpreteth the decrees of the Princes. 43
               Luther wrote to the Senate of Prage. eodem.
               
                  
Luther wrote of eſchuing the doc. 44
               Luther compared to Mahomet. 50
               Luther diſſwageth al men from ſedi. 58
               Luther did more with the worde, then could haue bene done by forc. eodem
               Luthers anſwer to the boures. 60
               Luthers office. 63
               Luther bloweth the trōpet againſt. 64
               Luther to vehement. 65
               Luther married a Nonne. eodem
               Luther and Zwinglius mete at. 66
               Luthers letters of ſubmiſſion to the. 67
               Luthers letters to George duke of. eo.
               Leonard Ceſar apprehended for the. 74
               Lawes of diſputation. 75
               Lantrech beſiegeth Naples. eodem
               Luther and Zwinglius diſpute at. 83
               Luther wrote a boke to the biſhops. 96
               Luther comforteth Melancthon. eodem
               Luthers opinion of mens traditiōs. eo.
               Letter of the duke and Lantzgraue. 103
               Luthers counſel. 112
               Luthers purgation. eodem
               Luther comforteth thexiles. eodem
               Luthers opinion touching the ſpri. 116
               Luthers wryting of Munſter. 134
               Legions of ſoldiors in Fraunce. 137
               Luthers conſtancy. 138
               Like lips, like lettes. 151
               Longolnis oration againſt the Lu. 167
               Laſcus committed to priſon. 175
               Luthers boke againſt the Duke of. 176
               Luther is curſed of the Pope. 175
               Langeus letters to Alphonſe. 184
               Luthers oration for the field. 189
               Lawes againſt deflowrers of vir. 202
               Launderſey beſieged. 205
               Luthers boke of the Lordes ſupper. 215
               Luthers anſwer to them of Louain. 218
               Luthers boke againſt the Pope. 222
               Luthers Themes of iii. gouern. eodem
               Luthers picture againſt the pope. eodē
               
               Luther a Prophet. eodem
               Luther choſen arbitror. 231
               Luther wareth ſicke. 232
               Luthers laſt prayer. eodem
               Luthers birth. eodem
               Luther ſent to Rome. eodem
               Luther eloquent in the dutch. eodem
               Lightning cauſed deſtruction. 255
               Liberty is exiled out of the counſel. 256
               Letters for the Lantzgraue to. 295
               Letters of Straſborough to them. 326
               Luther brought in contempte, the Popiſh Ceremonies. 334
               Lewes Marſile one of the priſoners 423
               Libels ſtrowed about in London. 461
               Lady Clinor commeth into France. 86
               Lantzgraue departeth from Auſp 89
               Lantzgraue goeth to the frēch king. 113
               Lantzgraue boroweth Monye of the French king. eodem
               Lady Mary proclaimed baſtard. 114
               Lantzgraue taketh his leaue of themperoure. 240
            
            
               M
               MAximilians letter to Poope Leo, concerning Luther. 3
               Maximilians death. 10
               Many ſectes in the popiſh kingdom. 36
               Maner of chuſing themperor. 10
               Matrimony lawful for all men. 47
               Muncer a great Anabaptiſt. 55
               Muncer wil haue a token of God. eodē
               
               Muncer maketh gunnes. eodem
               Muncer teacheth that all thinges ſhuld be common. eodem
               Muncer raileth on the princes. 56
               Muncer diſceyueth the people by the rainbow. eodem
               Muncer is taken, his cruel anſwer, and he is reproued of the Lantzgraue. 57
               Muncer repenteth at the hour of death eodem
               Miſhaps of the french king. 82
               Matters receiued in religion. 89
               Moneſtical vowes. 124
               Munſter a city of Weſtphalia. 137
               Maidens do prophecy. 130
               Mariage counted whoredome. 135
               Many filthy actes of Monkes. 156
               Meanes to reſtore the eccleſiaſtical. 181
               Melancthon and priſtor come to. 201
               Miners preſident of Aygwes. 219
               Miners leuieth a power againſte Ualdois. 219
               Maluenda treateth of iuſtification. 229
               Marquin excuſeth Diaze. 234
               Mariages in broil of warre. 254
               Maurice loueth his townes. 276
               Marques Albert ſent to aid. 277
               Mendoza ambaſſade from the Frenche King to Straſburge. 279
               
                  
Marques Albert taken priſoner. 280
               Mihel Sidonie a great Maſmōger. 294
               Muſkel borowe field. 296
               Muleaſſes king of Tones. 313
               Maximilian marieth his coſen. 315
               Muſculus departeth to Bernes. 316
               Maximilian warred againſt the Swiſſers. 322
               Maried Prieſtes plucked from theyre wyues. 329
               Melanthō defēdeth the Adiaphoriſt. 333
               Monſeur Ueruine beheaded. 336
               Maximilian cometh out of Spayne. 353
               Melanthon beſt learned. 359
               Mony gathered for the warre of Mayden burge. 760
               Maximilian entreth into Trent. 378
               Marques Albertes letters agaynſt thē
                  peroure. 393
               Marten van Roſſem ſpoileth Champanie. 399
               Marques Albert warreth for hym ſelfe. 406
               Marques Albert the ſcourge of Priſtes. 410
               Marques Albertes requeſt to Straſeburge. 410
               Marques Albert refuſeth peace. 101
               Marques Albert entreth Treuers. 412
               Marques Antonius Ambaſſadoure of Ueniſſe. 413
               Marques Alberte reconciled to Themperoure. 413
               Marques Albert ſendeth to the Emperoure. 420
               Marques Albert outlawed. 429
               Marques Albert goeth to Sewinforte and flyeth. 436
               Maryburge taken. 473
               Melanthon conforteth the myniſters of Boheme. 449
               Marcellus the Second choſē Pope. 450
               Marcellus the Second dyeth. 450
               Maurenburge vitaled. 452
               Mount Calue is taken by the Frenchmen. 453
               Maſſe aboliſhed at Zuricke. 54
               Madnes of the Munſterians 57
               Mageſtrates is as neceſſarye as the Sonne to the worlde. vi
               Marques letters to the ſtate of Duke Maurice. 42
               Miniſters exiled out of Boheme. 442
            
            
               N
               NEw pardons. 9
               No man may be kepte frō the goſpell. 6
                     •
                  
               
               Newes of the Turkes Coming. 200
               Newes of the Turkes approche. 1
                     •
                  
               
               Nauius hath the place of Heldus. 174
               Nuburge rendered to the Emperoure. 264
               Notes of the Interim by the Biſhop of Rome. 314
               No man oughte to be compelled to hys fayth. 319
               New ambaſſadours from Wittenberg 375
               Norinberge hath peace with the Marques. 402
               Nyne bournte at Lyons. 423
               Note how Biſſhoppes ſeke authoritie of kinges to condemne. 454
               Nombers of great gonnes taken front proteſtauntes. 29
               Notes of the Interim by the byſſhops of Rome. 313
            
            
               O
               O Eham condemned in Paris. 19
               Of the original of the Turkes. 190
               Of eccleſiaſticall benefites. 281
               Out of the conclaue came moſt fylthys Letters. 343
               Ortauious Farneſius cliēt to the frēch kinge. 360
               Oration of tharchbiſhop of Treuers. 12
               Opinion of the Cyties touchynge the king of Romaines. 102
               Othe of the Electors. 406
               Oration of the Popes ambaſſadour to the Duke of Saxon. 109
               Oration of Themperours Ambaſſadour. 109
               Oratiō of the french ambaſſadours. 123
               Ofſpring of fraunce and germany. 123
               Originall of the Annabaptiſtes. 127
               Oration of the Popes Legates. 231
               Oration of Themperours Ambaſſadours. 240
               Occatiō of taking thēperours loſſe. 267
               
                  
Oration of the kinge of Poles ambaſſadour. 301
               Originall of this order of knight. 303
               Oratiō of the Princes ambaſſadors to thēperour & thēperours aunſwer. 377
               Oration of the Frēch ambaſſador. 404
            
            
               P
               PRinces of neceſſitie muſt reforme Rome. 3
               Popes vnder the Councell. 7
               Pope Iohn is depoſid. 8
               Pope Prius wiſhe. 18
               Picus Myrandula. 19
               Pope Leo his bull. 23
               Prieſtes maried wyues. 44
               Popes ſubiect to themperour. 25
               Pope Clement ſendeth Campeius to duke Frederike. 45
               Phifer compagnion to muncer. 55
               Phyfers entrepriſe. 56
               Preachers ought to be circumſpect. 59
               Prayers for the dead ar ſuperfluous. 75
               Paccius beheadid. 78
               Prayers mixed with threateninges 92
               Poore Luther maketh many men. 95
               Perſecutiō againſt the Lutherians. 115
               Paule was craftier then Clement. 117
               Perſecution in France. 118
               Pope Iohn a woman. 119
               Proude Marchantes. 115
               Popes condempned for hereſy. 121
               Paphūtius perſwadeth ye prieſtes. 124
               Peter wirtē began to preach again. 129
               Perome beſieged. 141
               Popes haue emperors inſubiectiō. 149
               Pope paule euell reported. 154
               Preſidentes of the Councell. 158
               Preaching forbidden. 173
               Perſwaſions to warre againſt the Turke. 187
               Perpiguian beſieged. 192
               Peace is diſceptfull. 196
               Pſalmes tranſlated by Marot. 201
               Philip created king of Spaine. 202
               Pillugius biſhop of Numburg amōges the preſidentes. 230
               Preaching frees. 231
               Peace betwixt Fraūce & England. 246
               Peter ſtroſſe diſceaued ye proteſt. 265
               Penſtellens in Emperors campe. 267
               Perſecution in Fraunce. 270
               Paulus Fagius a man learned and 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  loquent. 273
               Part of the counſell of Trent flit to Bonomie. 283
               Peter Alois ye popes ſonne ſlaine. 294
               Peter martyr goeth into England. 297
               Pruſſe belongeth to Pole. 303
               Pruſſe belongeth to themperour. 305
               Paule geuen to aſtrology and coniuration. 340
               Paules ioye in bayne 342
               Proclamatiōs againſt lutheranes. 345
               Pope Iuly ſomoneth a counſell. 351
               Pardons graunted by the Popes legat. 385
               Peſtilence and fiering at Paris. 427
               Paule the fourth made Pope. 450
               Port hercules taken by thimperialles 452
               Plinabine beſieged of Turkes. 452
               Peter martir goeth to Zurick. 469
               Papiſtes in Swicerland made league with king Ferdnando. 80
               Proteſtantes aſſemble at Norunberg. 86
               Proteſtantes accuſed of Sedition. 93
               Practiſe of Prelates. 117
               Practiſe of the French men. 144
               Popes ambaſſadour diſpiſed. 147
               Popes errours and autority. 148
               Paule the thirdes crafte. 149
               Preachers of the goſpell brought godly workes to light. 150
               Popes accuſed of Idolatry. 151
               Pope would bie Millian. 201
               Princes letters to the Pope. 208
               Popes letters to themperour. 215
               Pope moſt deſirous of warre. 221
               Pope cite the Archbiſhop of Collon. 223
               Popes letters to the Swiſſes. 247
               Proteſtauntes Ambaſſadours to the Swiſſers. 247
               Proteſtauntes accuſed of treaſon. 253
               Proteſtaūtes letters to Iohn marques of Brandenburg. 251
               Proteſtauntes aunſwer to the table of out lawery. 260
               Purgations of the Cardinall of Auſpurge againſt ſuſpicions. 467
               Pope had no cōſideration with themperour againſt religiō or the liberty of Germany. 468
            
            
               
               Q
               QUene Anne loueth ye goſpell. 113
               Queſtions moued to a dombe ſpirite. 115
               Quene Marie affiaunced to the emperours ſonne. 430
               Queſtions of zuinglius. 39
               Quene of Hungary made regent of flaunders. 101
               Quene of Anabaptiſtes behedid. 133
               Quene Katherine dieth. 137
               Quene Anne dieth lamentably. 140
               Quene of Scottes dieth. 153
               Quene Maries oration to the comons in yelde Hall. 430
            
            
               R
               ROme the ſeat of Antichriſt. 3
               Reweline a diuine. 19
               Reweline dieth. 37
               Reliques of the holy goſt. 45
               Rome is the treaſure houſe of the hole world. 72
               Rome is Sacked. 74
               Religion reformed. 76
               Religiou reformid at Geneua. 76
               Rocheſter and more beheadid. 121
               Rocheſter made cardinal in ye towre. 121
               Rotman a Preacher at Munſter. 127
               Rotman became an Anabaptiſt. 128
               Rotman deſperate. 136
               Reaſons why the proteſt. refuſe the counſell. 149
               Rebellion in Gelderlande. 154
               Rebellion of Gaunt. 168
               Rebellion at Genes againſt the houſe of Aurice. 276
               Robert of a Brince wrote againſt the interim. 322
               Rewardes for promoters. 346
               Reſeruations & graces expectatiue. 365
               Reformation of the papiſte. 390
               Rebellion in duke Moris campe. 40
               Renold Poole Cardinall. 429
               Ridley & Latimer burnt in englād. 454
               Rage of Antichriſt. 125
               Requeſtes of the princes to ye king. 398
            
            
               S
               SIlens of the biſhop of Mentz. 1
               Silueſter prierias his dialogue. 2
               Silueſter prierias themes. 2
               Scripture and the old writers only are to be allowed. 2
               Silueſter prierias his ſecond aunſwer to Luther. 2
               Shiftes of the Popes. 19
               Sute betwixt the buſhoppe and Swiſſers vanquiſhed. 11
               Senate of Straſburg. 48
               Supper of oure Lorde vnder bothe kindes. 18
               Sundry plages in Germany. 83
               Scripture is the touch ſtone of all doctrine. 91
               Spirites in the popiſh kingdome. 115
               Selling of benetices. 119
               St. Geneu
                     〈…〉
                  a the goddes of Paris. 120
               Sedition in Munſter. 131
               Symony raigneth in the Church. 157
               Symony muſt be taken awaye. 181
               Syr Henry Kneuet. 185
               Strife about the Biſſhoprick of Numburge. 186
               Sebaſtian Scertiline a mā of war. 228
               Spedius a blabbe. 240
               Sherteline retyreth. 252
               Siluer mines comon to the Dukes of Saxon. 266
               Scertiline departeth from the prot. 267
               Sedition at Naples for the Spaniſh in quiſition. 291
               So I will and do commaunde. 303
               Sinne againſt the holy goſt. 315
               Straſborough rue the Interim. 326
               Straſburgh writeth letter to themperour. 331
               Skirmiſhes of ye princes with the emperiall. 400
               Syr Richard Moriſme Ambaſſadour of Englande. 403
               Serueto a Spanyarde burnt at Geneua. 428
               Sibylle Ducheſſe of Saxon depar. 431
               Sanſlorian and Carmillus lead to priſon. 453
               Syr Peter Carrow ſir Iohn Chick taken priſoners. 469
               Swiſſes made a legue with the french Kinge. 32
               Solempne buriyng in Fraunce. 114
               Sfortia Duke of Millane dieth. 121
               Supper of the Lord vnder both kindes. 124
               Spoyling and burninges of Marques Albert. 416
            
            
               
               T
               THomas of Aquine Albertus magnus Scolar. 3
               Thomas of Aquine a Saint. eod.
               Thomas of Aquine giueth auctoritie to the Pope. eodem
               Thomas of Aquine died. eodem
               Treaty of warre againſt ye turke. eod.
               The popes letters to ye Duke of ſaxō. 4
               The popes letters to Gabriell Uene. 5
               The vniuerſitie of Wittenberge wryteth for Luther to the Pope. 5
               The well ſpring of pardons. 7
               The Dukes letters to the Card. 8
               The vniuerſitie of Wittēberg writeth for luther to the duke of Saxon. 9
               The pope ſendeth a golden Roſe to the Duke of Saxon. 10
               Themperour Rafe. 13
               The Duke of Saxon refuſeth thēp. 14
               The birth of themperour. 14
               The court of Rome is vncurable. 17
               The part of a true friende. 18
               The ſtory of Rewcline. 20
               The Sacramentes. 24
               The maner of the Coronation. 24
               Thēperour calleth a counſell imper. 25
               The lawe of pope Clement. 25
               The court of Rome an Fraunce. 26
               The Duke of Saxon incenſed againſt Luther. 26
               The Bull of Curſing. 28
               The Conſtancy of Luther. 28
               The pope and the coūſell maie erre. 30
               Treuers & other princes threten lut. 30
               The offence of faith and maners. 31
               The Counſell of Conſtance. 32
               Three Popes depoſid. 32
               Thyrtene townes of Swiſſers in the league 33
               The liberty of the Swiſſes. eodem
               The Maſſe to be aboliſhed. eodem
               Themperour hath war with fraūce. 34
               The death of pope Leo the tenth. eod.
               The Turke taketh Belgrade. eodem
               The Lady Mary aſſured to themper. 35
               The Sectes of Bohemers. 36
               The Pope writeth to the Princes of Germany. 37
               The Watre of Treuers. 38
               The Popes letters to Straſburg. eod.
               The ſtocke of Adrian. eodem
               The diſputation of Zurick. 39
               The requeſt of Adrian to diſpatch Luther. 39
               The ſinne of Rome ſpread ouer all the world. 40
               The meane to let Counſelles. 40
               The anſwere of the Princes. 41
               The maner of a free Counſell. 41
               Two Friers burnt at Bruſſels. 43
               The Ceremonies of diſgreding. eod.
               The death and workes of Hutten. 44
               The aunſwer of Duke George. eodem
               The eating of fleſh. eodem
               The Princes aunſwer to Cāpeius. 46
               The decree of wormes repeted. eodem
               The Pope is well monyed. eodem
               The Swiſſes are aſſendid with them of Zurick. eodem
               The Marchaundiſe of the Clergie. 47
               The aunſwer of them of Zurick. 47
               The decree of Norinberge. 48
               Thomas Moouer a Graye frier. 48
               The lamentation of Luther. 49
               The Golden Roſe ſent to the kynge of England. 50
               Themperour blameth the princes. eod.
               Themperour defendour of the Romiſh Churche. eodem
               The duke of Burbōne beſiegeth Marſelles. eodem
               The beginning of ye Ruſticall war. eod.
               The papiſtes fight for their belly. 51
               To ſerue foreyne Princes is vyle. eod.
               The crafte of Papiſtes. eodem
               The pouerty and bōdage of the Swiſſers. 52
               The Riches & liberty of theſame. 52
               The Comotion of ye vulgare people. 53
               Their Demaundes. 53
               The Duke of Wittenberg attempted Warre. eodem
               The ſlaughter of the Boores. eodem
               The great cruelty of the Boores. eod.
               The warre of ye Boores in Loraine. 54
               The ſlaughter of the Boores. 54
               The cruelty of tharchbiſhop of treu. 54
               The death of Frederick duke of. 56
               The Princes make a power. 56
               The ſlaughter of the Muncerians. 57
               The vnreaſonable laughter of mūc. 57
               The dewty of a good Magiſtrate. 58
               Thautors of rebellion are without excuſe. 58
               
                  
The beſt way to ouerthrow the popes auctoritie. 58
               The practice of the Deuell. 59
               The popiſh kingdome not long. eod.
               The demaundes of the preachers. eod.
               The Boores vſe godly titles. 60
               The ſtate of a Magiſtrate wherin. 61
               The Chriſtian Lawe. eodem
               The Chriſtian profeſſion is hard. eod.
               The nature of veritie. 62
               The craft of the deuill to oppreſſe. eod.
               The aunſwer to ye Boores dema. eod.
               Tythes muſt be payde. eodem
               The falſe title of the Boores. 63
               The rayſer of tumultes. 63
               The part of a wiſe man. 64
               The dutie of a Magiſtrate. eodem
               The ende of tiranny. eodem
               Their can be nothing worſe then. 65
               The popes letters to them of Paris. 66
               The kinges letters for Faber. eodem
               The ſtory of Pruſe. eodem
               The chief point of luthers doctrine. 67
               Thomas woolſey cardinall a butchers Sonne. 68
               The peace taken at Madrice. 68
               Themperours letters. 69
               The Turke inuadeth Hongary. 69
               The beginning of the prot. league. 70
               The popes benefites to themperour. 71
               Themperours aunſwer. 71
               The kingdome of Naples. 72
               The pope and themp
                     •
                  ar two great. 72
               The Pope is a waryour. 72
               Themperour confuteth the French. 73
               The princes letters to themperour. 73
               The beginning of ye Anabaptiſtes. 74
               The French army inuadeth Italy. 74
               The power of Bernes. 75
               The duke of Burbon condemned at. 75
               The prebendes of Conſtance dep. 76
               The victory of the Goſpell. eodem
               The Engliſh & French ambaſſad. eod.
               The French king offreth themp. eodē
               
               Themperours anſwer to ye French. 78
               The Papiſtes forbidden to Preach. 79
               The ambaſſadours of thimperiall chā
                  ber to Straſborow. 79
               The Biſhoppes letters. 79
               The maſſe put down at ſtraſborow. 80
               They of Baſill take armure. 80
               The Maſſe put downe. 80
               The aſſembly of Spires. 80
               The ambaſſadors of Straſborow. 81
               The decree of Spires. 81
               The decree of wormes. 82
               Thoriginall of proteſtantes. 82
               The peace of Cambray. 82
               The Turke beſiegeth Uienna. 83
               The ſweating Sicknes. 83
               Two Clerkes burnt at Collon. 83
               The proteſt. ambaſſadors to thēp. 84
               Themp. aunſwer to ye proteſtantes. 84
               Thambaſſadours appeale. 85
               The honeſty of a Biſhoppe. 85
               The Chābre writeth to Smalcald. 86
               Thēperors Coronation at Bonony 86
               The diuines of the proteſtantes. 86
               The princes yt wold not haue maſſe. 87
               The Duke of Saxons office. eodem
               The turkes victory in Hōgary. eodem
               The turkes cruelty. eodem
               Thābaſſadour of Auſtrich his comp. 88
               Thinges refuſed in religion. 89
               That the Maſſe is a ſacrifice. 89
               The warre of florens. 90
               The pope in league with thēp. eodem
               The Turkes power. eodem
               The proteſtantes were laboured. eodē
               
               The Bohemers borne withall. 91
               Thēp. oration to the proteſtantes. 91
               The Proteſtātes anſwer to themp. 91
               Themperour to the Proteſtantes. 93
               The proteſtantes ſpite no man. 93
               The drone bees deſire to be reſtored. 93
               The anſwer to ye cōfutation of zwin. 94
               The decree of Auſpurge. 95
               The Church oppreſſed with tirāny. 96
               The papiſtes are accuſed of aerag. 96
               The Lantzgraue made a league with Straſborow Zurick and Baſill. 96
               The league of ye proteſt. at ſmalcald. 97
               The pope is a Sayler. 97
               The prot. letters againſt Ferdinādo. 67
               The cauſes of creating king of rom. 98
               The proteſtantes letters to the king of England and Fraunce. 99
               The proteſtantes appellation. 99
               The biſhoppes of Denmark reſiſt. 100
               The lawes permit the inferrour magiſtrate in ſome cauſes to reſiſt the. 100
               Tharchbiſhop of Treuers departeth. 101
               The aunſwere of the French kinge to the proteſtantes. 101
               The amytie of Fraūce & Germany. 101
               The aūſwer of the king of Englād. 102
               
                  
The duke of Saxons doubt of the. 102
               The Palſgraue & tharchbiſhop of. 102
               The Appellation of the Marques. 103
               Therles of Naſſow & Nauenar come to ye Duke of Saxon to intreate. 103
               The interceſſors and proteſtantes. 103
               They of Zurick diſcomfited. 104
               The death of Swinglius. 104
               The death of Decolampadius. 105
               The aſſembly of Regenſpurge. 105
               The dukes of Bauier miſliked the. 106
               The annſwer of the duke to ye int. 107
               The crafte of the Papiſtes. 107
               The number of Proteſtantes. 108
               The aſſembly at Regenſpurg. eodem
               The Turke inuadeth Auſtrich. eodem
               The death of the duke of Saxon. eodem
               The ſlaughter of the turkes. 109
               The pope ſerueth the time. eodem
               The Popes policie. eodem
               The duke of Saxons anſwer eodem
               The proteſtantes anſwer to ye pope. 110
               The coūſell are ſwarued from their. 110
               Themperours part is to defend rel. 111
               The Pope is plaintife defendant &. 111
               The Popes ſnares. eodem
               The Pope ſlieth to the Coūſell. eodem
               The craft of duke George to find of. 112
               The inconſtancy of pope Clement. 113
               The vniuerſitie of paris Sentens. 113
               The death of Cardinall Wolſey. 114
               The tragedy of the graye friers. 114
               The game players carried to paris. 115
               The condemnation of falſe Friers. 115
               The victory of the Lantgraue. 116
               The liberality of the French king. 117
               The Lantgraues letters to thēp. eodē
               
               Themperours aunſwer. eodem
               The puniſhment of the Godly. 118
               The cruelty of Iohn Morine. 118
               The pryce of a Maſſe is ſomtime. 118
               The Pope the old Marchant. 119
               Thieuiſh Marchauntes. 119
               The maner of executiō in Fraunce. 120
               The Lutherians are abhorred. 120
               The Lantgraue is recōciled to Fer. 121
               Thēperours voyage into Barbaria. 121
               The duke of Saxon anſwer to ver. 121
               The proteſt. anſwer to Uergerius. 122
               The Popes craft is eſpied. 122
               Themperour may order Coūſelles. 122
               Themperous letters to ye Iudges. 123
               The anſwer of ye proteſt. to ye frēch. 123
               The dutie of Princes. 124
               The kinges opiniō of matters in. eod.
               The comō places of Melanthon. eod.
               The maſſe mainteneth purgatory. eod.
               The kinges of Fraūce & Nauar ex. 125
               The prot. would make no league. 125
               The oration of Biſhop Foxe ambaſſadour for the king of England. 125
               The ſtate of ye church troubelſome. 125
               The proteſt. league is renewed. 126
               The Erle of Naſſowe hath mitted. 126
               The Goſpell receiued at Auſpurge. 126
               The papiſtes cōfeſſe their ignorāce. 128
               The papiſte for ſake their Citie. eodem
               Thei of Mūſter oppreſſe ye papiſte. eod.
               They Anab. baniſhed the Citie. eod.
               The conſtauncie of Fabricius. 129
               The prophecie inſpired with fury. 130
               The diuition of Germany into prouente. eodem
               The falſed of Iohn Berdan. eodem
               The euyll Iudges. eodem
               The madnes of Knipperdolan. 131
               The Appoſe of munſter. 132
               The preachers of munſter. eodem
               The preachers raked. eodem
               The preachers obſtinacy. eodem
               The king taketh hede to him ſelf. eod.
               The diuition of the world. 133
               The preſente age cōpared to Eſaie. 133
               The craft of an ignoraunt deuill. 134
               The aſſemble at wormes. 135
               The citie warre requered to render. 135
               Two eſcaping betrayed the Citie. 135
               The king is taken. 136
               The king & his fellowes taried ab. 136
               The cruell death of the King. 137
               The popes coūſel to inuade Sauoy. 137
               The houſe of Uicecountes in Lōb. 137
               The Frēch kinges title to Millain. 138
               Themperours oratiō againſt ye French King. 138
               The duke of Florence maried the Emperours baſterd. 138
               The kinges letters to the proteſt. 139
               The king of England requered a conference of learned men. 139
               The proteſtant ſent to themprour. 140
               Themperours letters to the prot. 140
               The death of Frances Dolphin. 141
               The Pope wil refourme the court. 141
               The king of Scottes maried the Frēch Kinges doughter. 141
               
                  
The duke of ſlorener ſlaine by his. 142
               The Swicers ſewe to the king for. 142
               The proteſt. ambaſſadour to thēpe. 143
               The dukes of Sakſones anſwer. 144
               The place of the Counſell. 148
               The proteſt. decree mariyng of mi. 149
               The authoritie of Iudgment in y•. 150
               The crafte of the Pope. 151
               The of ſpring of Cayne. 152
               The proteſt. letter vnto the Frēch. 152
               Terwine beſieged in vaine. 153
               The pope intendid to make Eraſ. 154
               The pope hath a duble office. 155
               The Couls maketh not the Mōcke. 157
               The cardinal of Cappira can abide. 158
               The Coloquie of Eraſmus. eodem
               The duke of Pruſe is outlawed. eod.
               The metyng of the emperor & the. 159
               The biſhop of lige made his graue. 159
               Thomas Becket archbiſhop of cāt. 160
               The Markes of Brandenburg of ye. 161
               The lady Elizabeth ſiſter to the lantzgraue is referred into the league. 162
               The ſecte of the Antinomions. 162
               The citie of Mynden outlawed. 163
               The duke of Brūſwick deſirous of. 163
               The Lantgraue intercepteth the. 163
               The death of Iohn duke of cleane. 164
               The duke of Saxſon wold not giue to Ferdinando the title of the king. 165
               The Cannons comenly called of y•. 167
               The ſixe Articles. eodem
               The lady Anne of Cleaue. eodem
               Thēperour paſſeth through fraūce. 168
               The emperour entreth into Paris. 168
               Themperors & French kings amb. 168
               The ſecrete of the ſenate vttered to. 169
               The treators executed. eodem
               Themp. arriueth in Flaunders. eodem
               The prot. write to ye French king. eod.
               The Lord Cromwell. eodem
               The anſwer of the prot. to Crōwel. 170
               Themp. letters to the proteſtantes. 171
               The proteſt. anſwer to themperour. 171
               The proteſt. comparid to Turkes. 172
               The duke of Cleaue ioyned with. eod.
               The pope warreth vpō ye peruſians. eo.
               The lord Cromwell beheadid. eodem
               The king marieth Katherine Haw. eo.
               The duke of Brunſwick accuſed. eod.
               The aſſembly of Hagenaw. 173
               The decree of Hagenaw. 173
               The death of Iohn vaynode king of. 173
               Three prote. burnt & three papiſtes. 174
               The death of Budey. 174
               The euill that cometh of diſcēſion. 174
               The Turke receyueth the infant of. 175
               The papiſtes ſeke delays. 175
               The admiral of Fraunce condēned. 176
               Themperour goddes Clyent. 177
               The blaſphemie Friere Tecell. 177
               The maner of making this Palle. 178
               Theſe fires were ſet on by the duke. eo.
               The treatie of Regenſpurge. eodem
               The choſen by themp. eodem
               The raſhnes of Eckius. eodem
               The contentes of the boke. 179
               The proteſtauntes letters to the Frēch king for ſuch as were perſecuted. 179
               The Duke of Cleaue goeth priuely. 179
               The duke of Cleaue marieth the. 179
               The Admirall reſtored. 179
               The Cōſtable put out of the Court. 179
               The colloquie of lerned mē at Reg. 180
               The worſe part ouer cometh by ye. 180
               The Popes legate. 181
               The diligence of the prot. in teach. 181
               The diuines of the prot. anſwers. 181
               The princes electours anſwer. 181
               The anſwer of the popiſh princes. 182
               The biſhops are inioyned to ref. eod.
               The preſumptuouſnes of Eckius. eod.
               The proteſtantes confute his lett. 183
               Themperours cōplaint of ye duke. 183
               The princes make interceſſion for. 183
               The oration of the French ambaſſ. 183
               The French ambaſſadors intercep. 183
               The emperours iorney into Barb. 184
               The plague in Germany by the. 185
               The nobilitie of Auſtrich put vp a. 185
               The plages that God ſent to Auſt. 185
               The Turke is the ſcourge of God. 185
               The chiefe article of doctrine is in. 186
               The nobles reiterate theyr ſute. eodem
               The oration of the French ambaſſ. 187
               The policie of the Romaines in eſt. 187
               The concord of England. 187
               The opinion of the popes Ambaſſa. 188
               The Pope ſuſpecteth Germany. 188
               The pope cōpared with ye Turke. 189
               Two mighty tyrannes. eodem
               The turke ſhal not be of ſuch force. eo.
               The laſt acte of the Turke. eodem
               The praier of Luther. 161
               The Markes of piſcare accuſeth the. 191
               The Frēch king proclaymeth war. 192
               
                  
The Duke of Languile & Martin van Roſſen inuade Brabant. 192
               The māner to ſerche out the Luth. 192
               The articles of the Sorboniſtes. 193
               Two Friers preach ye goſpell at Metz. 193
               The duke of Saxon & lantgraue moue war againſt the Duke of Brunſwike who flieth. 193
               The Chaūcelor of Fraunce put in. 194
               The Palſgraue the Goſpell. 195
               The enterprice of fregoſe & Rincō. 195
               The French king is accuſed of ambiſſion. 196
               The preſidentes of the coūſell at Tret. 196
               The Scottes taken at Solymoſſe. eod.
               The king of ſcottes dieth. eod.
               The Duke of Saxon and Lantzgraue refuſe the iudgment of ye chāber. 197
               The duke of Cleaue recouereth Dure. 197
               The kinges oration to them of Rochell. eodem
               The Clemency of king Fraunce. eod.
               The aſſembly of Nurremberge. eodē
               
               The treatye of Norunberge. 198
               The Turkes increaſe by the loſſe of Chriſtians. 198
               The decree of Norunberge. 199
               The duke of cleaue refuſeth truce. eod.
               The death of ye biſhop of Auſpurge. eo.
               The duke of Sauoye frend to thep. 200
               The death and prayſe of William Bellay. 200
               The prayſe of Clement Marot. 201
               The Archbiſhop of Collon calleth a cō
                  uocation. eodem
               The Biſhops boke of reformatiō. eod.
               The proteſtaūtes ambaſſadour to thē
                  peror. 203
               Themperors viage againſt the duke of Cleaue. eodem
               They of Hyldeſſeme are accuſed to the Emperour. eodem
               The Popes to ye clergie of Collon. eod.
               The French king fortifieth landerſey. 204
               The Turkes nauie arriueth in the. eo.
               The Caſtell of Nice beſieged. eodem
               Two cities full of Relicques. eodem
               The duke of Cleaue craueth pardō. 205
               The duke condicions to him imp. eod.
               The doughter of Nauarris ſent to. 205
               The preachers of ye goſpell thruſt. eod.
               The ſiege is leued at Nice. eodem
               The yonge Quene of Scottes affiaunced to king Edward. eodem
               The duke of Cleaue renounceth y•. 206
               The departure of the French men. 206
               Three Eclipſes of the moone. eod.
               The cauſes of the Turkes proſpe. 207
               The proteſtātes oratiō to the emp. eo.
               The duke of Brunſwick accuſeth. eod.
               The French ambaſſador to ye aſſe. eod.
               The French herau
                     •
                  t euill receyued. 208
               The ambaſſadors retorne by night. eo.
               The Popes aunſwer. eodem
               The meane to heale the comon. eodē
               
               The Princes letters to the ſwiſſes. 209
               The proteſtantes accuſeth duke of. eod.
               The tenure of his letters. eodem
               The duke of Brunſwicke contemneth his owne religion. eodem
               The French victory at Carignaue. 210
               The duke of ſanoye accuſeth the. eod.
               The ſwiſſes aunſwer the Princes. eod.
               The Engliſh Nauie inuadeth ſcot. eod.
               The oration of the French ambaſ. 211
               The duke of Saxon is ſet through. 211
               The ſtates of thempire decree a
                     〈…〉
                  . 212
               Themperours gen
                     •
                  elnes to ye lantz. 212
               The Duchye of Brunſewicke com. 212
               Thamperours Iorny into fraunce. 212
               The king beſieged Bollognie. 213
               The death of the Prince Orenge. 213
               The feare & ſlight of the Pariſians. 213
               The conditions of the peace. 214
               The towne of Pery was burnt. 214
               Three moſt mighty enimies of Fraūce that is themperour, the Germaynes and the kyng of England. 214
               The enemies of the Romiſh church. 215
               The pope cannot abide no ſuper. eod.
               Thēperour is ye popes eldeſt ſonne. eo.
               The creation of Cardinalles. eodem
               The Clergie of Collon to the arch. 216
               The clergie appeale 
                     •
                  o the pope &. 216
               The articles of Lonaine. 217
               The proteſtauntes make aunſwer. 218
               The counſell trent vnlawfull. eodem
               The deuiſe of the popiſh princes. eodē
               
               Their be in the Frēch prouince a people called valdois. 219
               The Cardinall of fournon. 219
               The Meridol
                     •
                  ns flie into ye woodes. 219
               
                  
The Swiſſes intreate for the valdois. 220
               The confeſſion of the valdois doctrine. 221
               The death of Lewis duke of bauier. eo.
               Thēperours ambaſſadour to the king of Poole. eodem
               The kinges anſwer to thēperour. eod.
               The wilde Beaſt. 222
               The ignorance of Grimian. eodem
               The death of Fraunces Duke of Loraine. eodem
               The birth of Charles ſonne to kynge Philip. 223
               The Duke of Brunſewicke getteth mony of the French king. 223
               Themperours taketh truce with the Turke. eodem
               The clergie and vniuerſitie of Collon agaynſt theyr Archebiſhop. eodem
               Themperour citeth the Archbiſh. eod.
               The decree of Auſpurg. 224
               The warre of Fraunce & Englād. eod.
               The proteſtantes ſende Ambaſſadours into Fraunce and England. eod.
               The death of the duke of Orelaūce. eo.
               The armie of ye duke of brunſwick. eo.
               The lantz. goeth againſt him. eodem
               The vanitie of the Duke of Brunſwicke. 225
               The death of ye Cardinal of Mentz. 226
               The Lantzgraues letters to thēp. eod.
               Themperour to the Lantzgraues. eod.
               The Palſegraue ordeneth miniſters in his Churches. 227
               The proteſtantes accuſed of conſpi. 228
               The lātzgraues letters to Nauius. 229
               The colloquie of the learned menne at Regenſpurg. 229
               The colloquie diſſolued. 230
               The popes Legates in the counſell of Trent. eodem
               The beginning of the Counſell. 231
               The warning of Eſoras & Nehem. 231
               The ſeconde ſeſſion of the Synode. 231
               The quiet departure of Luther. 232
               The inuincible conſtaunce of Luth. 232
               The victory & conqueſt of the word. 233
               The traytorous minde of Alphōſe. 234
               The murtherer killeth Daze. 235
               Thēperours letter for a paracide. eod.
               Themperour viſiteth the Lantzgraues doughter. eodem
               The Lantzgraue cometh to themp. eo.
               The Lantzgraue ſpake vnto thēp. 236
               The boke of reformatiō at Collon. 236
               The archbuſhoppe of Collon is accoū
                  ted vnlearned. 237
               The diuines are ſtubburne and ob. 238
               Themperour ought to coūſell the pope to his dutie. 239
               The ende of the Scripture. eodem
               The beſt thinges pleaſe feweſt. eod.
               The minde of the Paulſgraue. eodem
               The Lantzgraue is arbittor betwixt the duke of Saxon & duke moris. eod.
               Themperour thāketh lantzgraue. eod.
               The thirde ſeſſiō in the Sinode at. 240
               The popes letters to the Buſhoppe of Sedune & Chur & certaine Abb. eod.
               The Archbuſhoppe of Collon excomunicated by the pope. eodem
               Thēperour cometh to Reuſpurg. 241
               The murther of Diaze vnpuniſhed. 241
               The brute of warre againſt ye prot. eo.
               The falſhode of Marques Albert and Iohn Brandenburge. eodem
               The Lantzgraue is circumſpect. eod.
               Themperours letters to the Cities of the proteſtauntes. 242
               Themperours Crafte. eodem
               The oration of the Frenche Amb. 243
               The French kinges requeſt. 243
               The pope tiraunt. 244
               The clergie abuſed ye church goods. eo.
               The good will of the proteſtaūts. eod.
               Themperour had ſecrete talke with duke Moris. 245
               Themperours ambaſſadour to ye. eod.
               The cities of wirtēberg put on ar. eod.
               The oratiō of Balthazar to ye ſold. eod.
               The proteſtauntes letters to the Uenetians. 246
               The Churche goodes in Spaine to be imployde. 246
               The cardinal Scotlande ſlaine. 246
               The teares of the Crocodile. 247
               The pope attempteth the matter. 247
               The Paulſgraue axeth the cauſe of. 247
               The Paulſgraue ſeketh to recōſile the proteſtaunte to themperours. 248
               The duke of Saxō letters to thēp. eod.
               Themperour periured. eodem
               The authors of this warre. eodem
               Themperours letters to the Archebuſſhoppe of Cellon. 248
               
                  
Themperours policie. 249
               The Cardinal of Auſpurg the fire brād of this warre. 249
               The Iudges of the Chamber bee Papiſtes. 250
               The league betwixte the three houſes, Saxon Brandenburg and Heſſe. 250
               Thintent of the Papiſtes. 251
               The Popes bull agaynſte the Proteſtauntes. 251
               The diligence of the Proteſtantes in leuyng theyr armye. 251
               The Lantzgraue ſente his ſonne to Strauſburge. 251
               The fyrſte enterpriſe to the Proteſtauntes. 251
               The Caſtell of Erenburge. 251
               Themperoures power. 252
               The Duke of Saxon & Lantzgraue are out lawed by Themperoure. 252
               The popes letters to the Swyſſes. 257
               The pope bringeth themperour into hatred. 254
               The nūber of the fathers at trent. 254
               The king of Swetia receiueth the. 254
               Thēperours letters to dukemoris. 254
               The proteſtauntes letters to the Duke of Bauer. 255
               The Swyſſes aūſwer to the Prote. 255
               The death of Diazius vnpuniſhed. 256
               The Proteſtantes proclaime warre againſt Themperour. 256
               The craftines of themperour. 256
               The Articles of the vniuerſitie of Louayne. 257
               Themperour woulde not receiue the proteſtantes. 257
               The table of preſcription. 257
               The popes armie cometh to thēpe. 257
               The Captains of the ſaid armie. 257
               The captains of thēperours armie. 257
               The princes of ye proteſtaūtes cāpe. 257
               The lātzgraue rideth forth to eſpie. 258
               The Spaniardes inuade the proteſtāts Captayne. 258
               The Erle of Bure leadeth an Army to Themperoure. 259
               The cauſe of the proteſtāts miſeri. 259
               The Swiſſes aunſwer to thēpe. eodē
               
               Themperour to the Swiſſes is a goſpeller. eodem
               The proteſtāts one againſt an other. eo
               The proteſtāts ſēd to ye bohemers. 260
               The pope hireth mē to poiſō other. eo.
               The emperours craft toward ye pro. 261
               The emperorsdecrees made for fear. eo
               The diſſimulation of themperour. eo
               The Duke of Brunſwick a bitter enemye to the Proteſtantes. 262
               The Frēch ambaſſador diſſuadeth the Emperour for his warre. eodem
               Thēperour will conquer Germany. eo
               The rable of the papiſtes. 263
               Themperour pretended this warre long before. eodem
               The decres of wormes was the trompet of this warre. 264
               The cuſtom of thempire in aſſēbles. eo
               The proteſtauntes remoue there. eo.
               The proteſtauntes write to the Swifſers goſpellers. 265
               Their aunſwer to the proteſt. eodem
               Themperours and the proteſtauntes Campes nere together. eodem
               The Duke of Alba taūteth ye lantz. 266
               The vnreaſonable requeſt of Duke. eo
               Thēperour winneth the riuer of. 267
               The lantzgraue aunſwereth the ſtates of duke Moris. 268
               The crueltie wrought by the per. eodē
               
               The proteſtauntes benefites to Duke Moris. eodem
               The proteſtaūtes letters to ye cities. eo
               The horſe men of hongary are comonly called Huſſares. 269
               The duke of Saxōs requeſt to his. eod.
               The electours countrie inuade. 27
               The Bohemers ſlip a waye. eodem
               Tharchebiſhop of Collon appealeth from the Pope. 271
               The vnlucky ſucceſſe of the proteſtaū
                  tes warre. eodem
               The perill of proteſtauntes. 272
               The duke of Saxon exacteth many papiſtes. eodem
               The Emperours letters to the duke of Wirtemberg. eodem
               The dukes letters of ſubmiſſion to themperour. 273
               The Paulſgraue aſketh pardon of themperour. eodem
               They of Frankforth render therle of Bure. eodem
               The Electours letrers to the ſtates of Duke maurice. 274
               The Calamiſſi of Saxoni. 274
               
                  
The king of Denmarke aided not. 275
               The cities of proteſtants ſend am. 276
               Themperor wil hear no mention. eod.
               The duke of Saxon beſiegeth Lip. eod.
               The death of Henry the eight. 277
               The Duke of Somerſet. 278
               They of Auſpurge make theyr. eodem
               Thelector of Brandenburge in. eodem
               Thomas Cranmar primate of. eodem
               Thelector of Saxons letters to. eodem
               The death of Nauius. 279
               Themperor leuieth a new armyeodem
               The league of Bohemers. eodem
               The winning of Roclice. eodem
               The duke of Wirſemberge cra. 208
               The ſeuenth ſeſſion at Trent. eodem
               They of Straſburge compound. 281
               The duke of Saxon ſendeth an. 282
               The Bohemers letters to the. eodem
               The notable library of king Fran. eo.
               The kinges knowledge. eodem
               The death of two kings was hap. eo.
               The ouerthrow of themperors. eodem
               Two executed at Frankfurt. eodem
               The Lantzgraues purgation. eodem
               Themperors Iourny againſt the. 284
               Themperors celerity in ouerta. eodem
               Themperor fighteth a battel with. eo.
               The duke taken ſighting. eodem
               The condempned to loſe his head. 285
               The burial or king Fraunces. 286
               The Lantzgraues ſonne in law. 287
               The ſchole which was fallen in. eodem
               The treatiſe of Urmes. 288
               The Lantzgraue commeth to. eodem
               The Lantzgraue kneleth to. eodem
               Themperors anſwer. eodem
               The Lantzgraue is driuen into. eodem
               The Lantzgraue captiue. 289
               The nombre of great gunnes takē. 29
               The Bohemers ſubdued by fre. eodem
               The Cardinals of France ſent. eodem
               The Coronation of the French. 291
               The twelues Peres of Fraunce. eodem
               Themperor exacteth in Germany. 292
               They of Maidenburge outlawed. eod.
               Themperor moueth the Swiſſes. eod.
               The churches new halowed. eodem
               This was an armed aſſembly. 293
               The Pope a Negromancier. eodem
               The hatred of the Citezens to 294
               The monſtrous luſtes of hin. eodem
               The counſel of Trent. eodem
               The Proteſtantes intiſed or ſea. 299
               Themperor anſwer to the ſtates. 290
               The conditions wherby the Lantz. eo.
               Thanſwer of duke Maurice. eodem
               Themperor requyreth the wry. eodem
               Thoration of the Cardinall of. eodem
               Thoration of the biſhop of Renes. 297
               The French king contendeth. eodem
               The Popes letters to his Legate. eod.
               The Pope to Mendoza thempe. 298
               The popes letters to the biſhops. eod.
               The pope is ignorant of al things. eod.
               The pope is a watchman. eodem
               The conſtancy of the Romiſh. eodem
               Themperors ambaſſador ſent to. eodē
               
               The Popes Legate to themperors. eo.
               Themperors ambaſſador to the. eodem
               The malapertnes of the legate. 299
               The letters of proteſtation. eodem
               Themperors carefulnes for the. 300
               Thauthors of remouing the coun. 300
               The beginning of thordre of. 301
               The victory of king Coſriure. eodem
               The war of Emperors and kinges of
               Pole againſt this ordre of Knights. 302
               Thoration of the Marques. 303
               The duke of Muſcouia. eodem
               The prince of Lituanis, made. eodem
               The people rebel. 304
               The conditions of peace betwixte the
               king of Pole and the knightes. eodem
               The commotion in Boheme for ye doctrine of Ihon Huſſe. 305
               The Popes anſwer to Mendoza. eodem
               The war finiſhed by the Popes ar. eodē
               
               Themperors praiſe, ſet ye pope afire. eo.
               The fathers muſt be prouided for. 307
               The Pope may be weake & neg. eodem
               The authors of thinterim. 308
               The connſel of England wryte. eodem
               The gouernor of Scotland. eodem
               The Britains expulſed by the. 309
               The pictes by the Scottes, eodem
               Two waies to finiſh warre. eodem
               The ceremony wherby duke Mau. 310
               The Marques of Brandenburge. 312
               The contentes of thinterim. eodem
               Two ſacrifices of Chriſt after theſe. eo.
               Thelectors vary in opinion. 313.
               The craft of the archbiſhop of Mentz in approuing of thinterim. 314
               The Conſtancy of the duke of. 315
               The labor and pearil of Bren. eodem
               
                  
The playnes and godlines of Brentius. 315
               The fearefulneſſe of the Duke of wittemberge. eodem
               The conſtacie of the duke of Saxo. eod.
               The Dukes godly minde. 316
               The cruelty ſhewed is Duke of Saxon priſoner. eodem
               The 
                     ••
                  ſtmate minde of wincheſter. 317
               The Eccleſiaſticall reformation of the Emperour. eodem
               The Trēblable miſteris of the Maſſe. 317
               The Excomunication. eodem
               The meanes made that Strauſburge ſhoulde receiue therin. eodem
               Theyr Aunſwer. eodem
               The Emperour will not diſcharge his Souldiours. 319
               The promes of a lawfull Counſell repented. 320
               The decree of the Uenetians. eodem
               The wiſdom of the Uenetians in matters of religion. eodem
               The ſtory of Lewes Auila of the Germains warre. 322
               The Duke of Saxon beloued of all menne. eodem
               Thei of Counſtaūce writte to themperour. eodem
               Thēperour maketh newe Senatours. 323
               Thēperours abrogates faternities. 323
               The Spaniardes go to Couſtaūce. eod.
               The Conſtaunce aſſaulted. eodem
               Themperour delited in the Frenche tonge. eodem
               The letter of Strauſburge to the emperour. 324
               The Conſtancie of the miniſters. 325
               The Duke of Saxon and the Lātgraue led awaye priſoners. 325
               The reformation of the Chamb. 326
               They of Conſtaunce geue them ſelues to the houſe of Auſtrich. 326
               The ſlaughter yt was at Burdour. 327
               The abhominable filthines of an archbuſhoppe. 329
               The inheritor of Scotland led into Fraunce. 330
               They of Madenburge are made a praye for their godlines. 331
               Trouble in Englande. eodem
               The Admirall of england beheaded. 331
               Thomas Crammer a furtherer of learning and Codlines. 331
               The duke of Swaybrig plaine trouth. 332
               The Interim confuted by them of Bubeck and others. 333
               The force of Hohwater. eodem
               The popes legates to themperour. 334
               The Pope graunted licence to eate fleſhe. 335
               The Archbiſhop of Metz to the counſellors of the Lantgraue. eodem
               The Godly aūſwer of ye preachers. eod.
               The king commaundeth to go on preſeſſion. eodem
               The French king ſtealeth fortes. 337
               The Senate of Strauſburge do compound with their Biſhop. eodem
               The perill of feare of them of Maydenburge. eodem
               The Purgation of them of Maydenburge. eodem
               The cauſe why them of Maydenburge cannot gette their pardon. eodem
               The ſayng of goodnes the. 338
               They betray the trouth that hold it in Silence. eodem
               The mōſtruous lechery of the pope. 339
               The Popes rauening. eodem
               The Pope ſiſter a whore made her brother a Cardinall. eodem
               The mayſeres of ceremonis. 340
               The cuſtody of the conclaue. eodem
               The orders of the Cardinall. eodem
               The maner to chuſe the pope. 341
               The factions of the Cardinall. eodem
               The cauſe why pole was not pope. eod.
               The yeare of Iubiley. eodem
               The protectour of England. 343
               The Frenche kinges proclamation againſt Lutheranes. eodem
               The opening of the Golden gate. eod.
               Themperiours letters to the ſtates of thempyre. 344
               The cleargye of Strauſburge renueth their miniſters. 345
               The talcke of faith is forbidden. 346
               The death of the cardinall of Loraine. 347
               The Archbuſhop of Collon entreth the City with Pompe. 347
               The Proteſtation of the Duke Moris

againſt the Counſell. 348
               The knauery of Spanierdes. eodem
               The death of Granuellan. eodem
               The taking of the Ciue of Africa. eod.
               The ouerthrow of the Maiden Burgians. 349
               The princes letters to them of Mayden burge. 349
               The Proclamation for religion mutigated. 349
               The anſwer of ye Maydenburgians. 350
               The death of viriche Duke of Wiriēb. 351
               The cauſes that the decree is not obſerued. eodem
               They repare to trent before condemned. 352
               Themperours Proclamation agaynſt them of Maydenburge. eodem
               The Lantgraues Sonnes ſue for theyr father. eodem
               The Lantzgraues purpoſe of ſliyng bewrayed. eodem
               The iſſuyng out & victory of the Maydenburgians. 353
               The duke of Megelb. takē priſoner. 353
               They of Maydenburge are moued to render. eodem
               The Actes agaynſt the Clergy. 354
               The ſlaughter of the Citizens. 355
               The anſwer of the Citizens. 356
               The prayſe of great Otto. 358
               The duke of Pruiſſe addicte to Oū. 359
               The decree of Auſpurge. 359
               The death of Bucer. 360
               The pope accuſeth Octauian far. 360
               The counſell at Trent is ſolde. 361
               The warre of Parma betwixt themperour and the French king. eodem
               The Frenche Kinges excuſe to the Pope. eodem
               The fierſe minde of the Pope. 362
               The confeſſion of duke Moris by Melanthon. eodem.
               The humanity of the Duke of Wittemberge towarde Brentius. eodem
               The burnt child the fire dreades. 363
               The Conſtancy of the Prelates. 363
               The Preachers exiled. 364
               The French king warieth vpon themperour. 364
               The Counſell renued at Trent. 365
               The French kinges letters to the. 365
               The Some of Mony that is caried to Rome. 366
               The vniuerſitie of paris appeleth from the Pope. eodem
               The arrogantie of Pope Boniface againſt the king of Fraunce. eodem
               Twelue archbiſhoprikes in fraūce. eod.
               Theames geuen to the diumes. 367
               The order of ſpeaking. eodem
               The maner of making the Articles of the faith. eodem
               The maner of making the decrees. eod.
               The holy goſt at the popes cōmaundement. 368
               The Frenche kinges writing againſt the Pope. eodem
               The wiked luſtes of the Pope. eodem
               The cauſe of diſſentiō betwixt the pope and themperour. 369
               The ſafe counded of the fathers at. 370
               The Marques of Brandenburge mocketh the Counſell. eodem
               The duke of ſomerſet apprehēded. eod.
               The Counſell writeth to the Frenche king. 371
               The Frēch king diſſwadeth ye Swiſſes from the Counſell. eodem
               The land of Wittenburge deliuered of Spanyerdes. eodem
               The ambaſſadour of Wittenburge to the Counſell. 372
               The pacification of Maydenburge. eod.
               The noble ſame and conſtancy of Maydenburge. eodem
               The Pope created xiii. Cardinalles. 373
               The amba. of wittēberg deliuered. 374
               The amb. of Duke Mauri
                     〈…〉
                  he Marques of Brandenb. to themper. 374
               Their oration. 375
               The Lantzgraue kept priſoner againſt the league. 375
               The Lantzgraue biddē to Supper and kept priſoner. 376
               The names of the Princes that intreat for the Lantzgraue. 377
               The Lantzgraues Sonne cometh to Duke Morice. 377
               The rayling of Cropper. 378
               Themperours letters to the Buſhoppe electors. 378
               Their is craft in daubing. 379
               The ambaſſador of duke Maurice come to the Counſell. 380
               
                  
The Duke of Somerſet beheaded. 381
               The ſaufeconduct altered. 382
               The fraukeſpeache of Duke Maurice Ambaſſadour to the fathers. 383
               Thambaſſador of the prot. deluded. idē
               
               The diuines come to Norinberge. 384
               The bitterneſſe of Frere Pelarge againſt the Proteſtantes. eodem
               The diuines of Wittenburge. 386
               Thābaſſodours of Straſburg det. 387
               The blaſphemio of a gray Frere. 388
               The requeſtes of the Proteſtauntes diuines. eodem.
               The Fathers flie from Trent. 389
               The anſwere of the Proteſtantes Ambaſſadour. eodem
               The churche cannot erre. 390
               The Counſell of Baſell purer then Trent. eodem
               The laſt ſeſſion of the Counſell. eodem
               The French Kynge hath peace with the Pope. eodem
               Thende of the counſell of Trent. eodē
               
               The death of the Popes Legate eodem
               The ſeconde cauſe of warre. 392
               The Lantzgraue deteined priſoner againſt fidelitie. eodem
               The thirde cauſe. eodem
               The heauie burthens of Germany. 393
               The ſtorie of Lewes Auila, of the Proteſtauntes warre. eodem
               The Frenche kynges letters. 394
               The armes of libertie. 395
               The prince of Salerne reuolteth from the Emperour. 396
               The Frēche king ſubdneth Lorain eod
               The cardinall betraied the cites. eodē.
               The pledges of Fraūce & German. 397
               The coūtry of Oto Hēry recouered. 
                     •
                  dē
               
               The Iudges of the chamb. flie. eodem
               The Coneſtable chideth with theim of Straſburge. 398
               The kinges anſwer to the princes. 399
               The ſute of the Suiſes to the king eodē
               
               Thēperour flieth awaie by night. 400
               The duke of Saxon ſet at libertie. eodē
               
               The Emperours ſtuffe ſpoiled. eodem
               The Princes reſtore the miniſters of the churche. eodem
               The Marques Albertus armie. 401
               The Frenche kyng deſtroieth the Emperours countrie. 403
               The aſſemble at paſſaue. eodem
               The cōplaint of the princes elector. 403
               The affinitie of Frenchmen and. 404
               The libertie of Germanie reſtored by the power of Fraunce. 405
               The waie opened for the Prince of Spaine to be Emperour. eodem
               The princes aunſwere his oraciō. eodē
               
               The houſe of Lucenburg. 406
               The battaile of Creſſie. eodem
               The Frenche kynges aunſwere to the interceſſours. 407
               Themp. letters to thinterceſſours. 408
               Their aunſwere to themperour. eodē
               
               The Ambaſſadours commentaries intercepted. 409
               The aunſwere of Strauſburge 410
               The death of Bernard Archebiſhop of Colon. 412
               The duke of Saxon goeth home to his owne houſe. eodem
               The Emperour goeth with his armie toward Loraine. 413
               Thēperorentreth into Straſburg eod.
               The ſpoyle of the ſouldiours. eodem
               The death of Caſpar Hedio and Andrewe Oſiander. eodem
               The Emperour beſiegeth Metz. eodem
               The batterie of Metz. 414
               The Duke of Brunſwik driuen out of his countrie. eodem
               The duke of Guiſe defended Metz. eod.
               The Frenche kinges writyng againſt the Emperour. 415
               The Emperours letters of aunſwere to Marques Albert. eodem
               The armes of Electourſhip. eodem
               The Cardinall Lenoncourtes ambicion. eodem
               The father and the ſonnes contend for inheritaunce. 417
               Terwen raced. eodem
               The Ladie Iane of Suffolke, maried Guilford Dudley. 418
               The Marques maketh war i Sar. eodē.
               The ſpoilyng of Albert. 419
               The complainte of Duke Moris, vpon Marques Albert. eodem
               The marques anſwer to duke Mo. 420
               The Biſhop in his abſence inuade his countrie. 421
               The great crueltie of marques Al. eode
               The death of good kyng Edward. eodē
               
               The vertues of Edward the ſixt eodem
               
                  
The wonders before Duke Maurice death. 422
               The death of Orace Ferneſe. eodem
               The blaſphemie of the lieutenan̄t. 424
               The ladle Iane. eodem
               The lady Mary proclaimed quene eodē
               
               The Duke of Northumberlande condempned. 425
               Thomas Palmer knighte profeſſeth ye doctrine of the Goſpell. eodem
               The conſtancie of the Archebiſhopp of Cantorburſe. eodem
               The biſhops caried to priſon 426
               The Popiſhe religion reſtored in Englande. eodem
               The Turkiſhe naute taketh the Iland of Corſica. 427
               The Frēche king attēpteth Cam. codē
               
               The bloode of Innocentes gainfull to many. 428
               The Duke of Brunſwickes letters to the Duke of Saxon. eodem
               The Duke of Brunſwicke is reconciled to the duke of Saxon. eodem
               The Turke hanged his ſonne Muſtapha. 429
               The Archebiſhop of Cantorburie and others condempned. eodem
               The Godlie lawes of good kynge Edward repealed. 430
               The duke of Norffolke forſaken of his menne. eodem
               The duke of Suffolke. 431
               The Ladie Iane and her huſbande beheaded. eodem
               The duke of Suffolke beheaded eodem
               The godly ende of Ihō Frederick. codē
               
               The godlines of his wife 432
               The Lady Elizabeth committed to the Towre. eodem
               The ſlege of Senes. eodem
               The death of Wiat eodem
               Thaſſemble of Auſpurge. 433
               The death of Char. duke of Sanot 436
               The letters of king Ferdinando to his ſubiectes, of the lordes Supper. eodē
               
               The ſtates make aunſwere to the kinges letters. eodem
               The Abbot of Newſtat accuſed of Hereſte. eodem
               The Frenche kyng inuadeth the Emperours countries. 437
               The Frenche kynges letters. 438
               The Emperour giueth to his ſoonne, the dukedome of Millane. eodem
               The Cardinall giueth the Lordes abſolution. 439
               The Emperours letters againſt Marques Albert. eodem
               Themperiall counſel of Auſpurg. 440
               The miniſters exiled out of Boheme. 442
               The Towne of Caſſell taken by the Frenchmen. 449
               The letters of the princes of Saxon to the Emperour. eodem
               The archbiſhop of Metz dieth. 450
               The death of Pope Iuly the third. eodē
               
               The
                     •
                   of Senes render theim ſelues to themperour. eodem
               The ſecte of Ieſuites. eodem
               The trauaile of Cardinall Poole, to make peace betwene the Emperour and Frenche kyng. eodem
               The Emperours letters to the States of the Empire. 451
               The duke of Alba ſent to Millane eodē
               
               The Emperours mother dieth. eodem
               The Frenche kinges Proclamacion again condēned of thinquiſitors. 452
               The Lucernates require of the Swiſſes, the doctrine of the Goſpell. eodē
               
               The Naute of the Kyng of Denmarke 453
               The Spaniſh Flete intercepted by the Frenche kyng. eodem
               The controuerſie about the lordes ſupper is renued by the Bremers. eodē
               
               The aunſwere of the Parliamente of Paris, by the kynges Proclamacion of Lutherians. 454
               The meting of princes about the Lātzgraues matter. 455
               Themperour Charles giueth the gouernement to his ſonne Philip. eodē
               
               The office of the Archbiſhops. 456
               The aunſwere of the Proteſtantes, to the writyng of the Papiſtes. 457
               The biſhops which chaunge their religion, ſhould l
                     •
                  ſe their promociō. 459
               Theccleſtaſtical lawes ſhal not be exerciſed againſt the Proteſtantes. 461
               The wife of Ihō Frederick dieth. eodē
               
               The ambaſſadours of Auſtrich require of Ferdinando, that true Religion male be permitted vnto them. 462
               
                  
Truce taken betwene the Emperoure and the kyng of Fraunce. 463
               The aunſwere of Ferdinando to the Ambaſſadours of the houſe of Auſtrich. eodem
               The Emperours Sigiſmonde burned Huſſe. eodem
               The Ambaſſadours aunſwere to Ferdinando. 464
               The aunſwere of Ferdinando, eodem
               The biſhop of Treuers dieth. 465
               The Duke of Pruſe profeſſeth the confeſſion of Auſpurge. eodem
               The Archebiſhop of Cantorburie burned for Religion. eodem
               The Pope was diſpleaſed, that peace was graunted to Religion. 466
               The Duke of Areſtat. brake out of priſon. eodem
               The Cardinalle of Auſpurge purgeth hymſelf by writyng. eodem
               The Cardinall of Auſpurge addicte to the olde religion. 468
               The good will of the Cardinall of Auſpurg toward the Duke of Wittenberge. eodem
               The loue of the Cardinall of Auſpurg toward the Germaines. 469
               Twelue burnt at Stratford bow. eodē
               
               The marques of Barden receiueth the Goſpell. eodem
               Themperour goeth into Spaine with bothe his ſiſters. 470
            
            
               VV.
               WHy the Biſſhoppe of Rome is extolde. 3
               Whiche are properlie called Sacramentes. 24
               Who is aucthour of ſingle life. 35
               What nedeth gold in the churche. 47
               What is true confeſſion. eodem
               What thyng Rebellion is. 58
               Wee are all blinde in our owne cauſe. 61
               Who be the aucthours of diſſencion. 81
               Uergecius the Popes ambaſſadour. 86
               Upon what condicions the duke of Saxon will come to the aſſembly. 103
               Warres in Swiſerlande. 104
               Whereof ſprang the diſſencion in Religion. 110
               Wil
                     •
                  e Marchauntes. 120
               Uergecius meſſage to the Duke of Saxon. 121
               Uergecius ſpake with Luther. 122
               Who wrote againſt the Anabaptiſtes. 131
               Uergecius ſent to the Emperour. 138
               Who ought to be at the Counſell. 150
               Why Innocentes be in perill. 151
               Whereof cometh contempt of the clergie. 155
               Who ought to be made biſhop. eodem
               Unlawfull to giue benefices by legacis eodem
               Why Cardinalles wer firſt made. 156
               Uergecius his oracion. 176
               Why the Proteſtantes deſire a Counſell. 177
               What moued Luther to write againſt Papiſtes. eodem
               Willyam Farell. 192
               Warre betwixte England and Scotlande. 196
               William Countie forſaketh the Frēch kyng. 206
               Whether we ſhal knowe eche other in the life to come. 232
               What Counſell the Proteſtauntes deſired. 237
               What profite hath the Emperour out of Germanie. 239
               Ulmes reconciled to the emperour 273
               Unreaſonable tormente, is a perillous matter. 283
               Wittenberg rendered. 286
               Wittenberge a Towne of Electorſhip 287
               Uogelſburge apprehended. 312
               Uogelſburge cōſtancy at his death 312
               Workes of ſuperogacion. 313
               Whileſt the Maſſe is ſet vp in Germanie, it is put doune in England 317
               Uiolence is not to be vſed in Religion but reaſon and truthe. 318
               Who were outlawed by the Emperour. 320
               Who impugned the Interim. 322
               Uergecius vanquiſhed with the truth. 328
               Uergecius repaireth to Mantua, and is put out of the Counſell. 329
               Uergecius Preacheth the Goſpell in Rhetia. eodem
               
                  
What thynges offende many. 353
               Why the Clergie forſake the citee. 356
               Wonders in Saxonie. 360
               Wilie begiled. 379
               Warre in Italie. 48
               Wincheſter made Chaunceler. 425
               Warres renued betwixte the Duke of Brunſwick & marques Albert. 426
               Uercelles ſurpriſed. 429
               Wiat taken and committed to pri. 431
               Uulpian victualed. 452
               Uulpian taken & raced by the Frenche kyng. 453
               Whether peace ſhould be giuen to the religion or no. 455
               Unconſtancie of Clement. 53
               Uictorie of themperialles. eodem
               Winnyng of Munſter 136
               Warres of Geneua againſt the Duke of Sauoy. 137
               Uenecians league with the Emperour. 138
               Uenecians Ambaſſadour to the Turk. 169
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
               ✚ Imprinted at London by Ihon Daie, for Nicholas Englande. M .D. LX.
            
            The. 26. daie of September.
            
               Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
            
            
         
      
   