
      
         
            
            
            THE Depoſition of Don Diego Piementellj, cheefe Maister of one Regiment of the Campe of the King of Spayne, as hee depoſed before, and in the preſence of the chiefeſt Lords of the Counſaile of the Haghe in Holland.
            
               Tranſlated out of Dutch into Engliſh, by F. M.
            
            
               ❧ Printed firſt at Delfe, and nowe reprinted at London by Iohn VVoolfe, Anno. Dom. 1588.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            ¶ The examination and depoſition of Don Diego Piementellj, cheefe maiſter of the Regiment or Tertio of Sicile belonging vnto the Spanish fleete.
            (⸪)
            
               
                  DON Diego de Piementel, borne in 
                  Ʋalle d'Oliua, ſaith: that he is the Marquis of Taneras Brother: and Coſine vnto the Earle of Benauents, of his Mothers ſide, and Nephewe vnto the Earle of Calna, which at this preſent is Vice Roy of Sicile. That his Brother the Marquis, is maried with the Ladie Iohanna of Toledo, Siſter vnto Don Pedro de Toledo, Marquis of 
                  Ʋillafranca, and Duke of Ferdinandina. That his Father was of the Chamber of Don Charles, Prince of Spayne.
            
            Saith that he is a Knight of the order of Saint Iames, and that it is about a yeere agoe, that the King did giue vnto him the Cruſado, whereby hee hoped that the King ſhoulde giue him the benefite of a Commanderie of foure thouſande Duckets a yeere.
            Saith, that hee hath béene Commiſſioner generall of the Cauallerie of Sicile, and Captaine of thréeſcore Launces, and that the benefites and profit which hee reapeth therof, amounteth vnto two hundreth Duckets a month.
            Saith, that he was Gouernour of the ſaid Regiment, about the time of two yeeres, and that he hath had in this Fléete, fifteene companies of that Regiment, and ſeauenteene of another. And that the ſaide Regiment, was of three thouſand and foure hundred men. And that in his Shippe there were thrée companies, to wit, his owne, the companie of the Captaine Martine Daualos, and the companie of the Captaine Marques, amounting together vnto two hundred and thréeſcore men.
            
               Saith, that in his Shippe were thréeſcore Mariners, and fouretéene Gunners.
            That the Pilot was a Portingall, and a man of no ſkill.
            That there were in his Shippe three Engliſh Gentlemen, the one named William Browne, the other Nicholas Raphaell, but the name of the third he knoweth not.
            That the foreſaid Browne was maried in Spayne.
            
            That there were in his Shippe, yet two other Spaniſh Gentlemen, the one called Don Lewes Vanogas, the other Don Rodrigo Veniero, and bothe were of the order of Saint Iames, and that the one had fiue thouſand, and the other one thouſand and fiue hundred Duckets yeerelie incomming.
            Saith, he had ſent them to the Duke of Medina Sidonia for helpe, but that they were not yet come againe.
            That Don Iohn de Velaſco, Sonne to the Earle of Ciernella, was come with him for his owne pleaſure.
            That Don Iohn, the baſtard Sonne of the Admirall of Aragone, hath twentie crownes a month of the King.
            And that Don Iohan de Toledo, Aluaro Garcia, Gouernour of Toledos ſonne, had likewiſe ſo much.
            That the Captaine Alonſo de Vergas, is taken priſoner with him, and likewiſe Don Diego de Cordua, aduenturer. And ſo much had likewiſe Don Lopes de Peres, and N. Cannirio.
            
            Saith, he had a hundred and thirtie crownes a month, and that it was about fiftéene monethes that he departed out of Sicile.
            
            That the Earle of Miranda his Nephew, is Vice Roy of Naples.
            
            That the Earle of Fuentes, Captaine generall of Portugall called Don Pedro Henriques, is his Vncle.
            That Don Pedro de Toledo, Marquis of Villafranca, Generall of the Gallies of Naples, is his Nephew.
            That the Duke of Medina del rioſeco, Admirall of Caillie, is his Vncle. So hee is kindered with the principall

Lords of Spayne.
            
            Saith, that it is about two yéeres paſt, that this Fléete did begin, but that it neuer could be knowne whereupon they would goe, but that it was thought that it might bée for England.
            
            That they did lye the whole Month of May, in the Riuer of Lisborne.
            
            That the Fléete was of the number of 145. Shyppes, of the which 110. were very great and prepared for warre, and that the other were ſomwhat leſſer, ſeruing for all kind of men, & prouiſion, and that among the ſaid Ships, there were 4. Galiaſſes, and yt in each of them were 300. Souldiours, and vpon the principall of them 400.
            That there were eleuen Galions of Portingall.
            
            That hee himſelfe came in one of theſe Galions, the which was not the greateſt but of the ſtrongeſt.
            That there were 19. Galions of Andaloſie, of the which was Captaine general Don Diego flores de Valdes, and that theſe Galions were of the garde of the fléet of India.
            
            That there was yet a great Galion, belonging to the Duke of Florence, wherupon were 600. Portingalles.
            
            That there were 20. Ships of Leuant, to wit, Venetians, Aragonians, & Catalonians, where ouer was Generall Don Pedro de Valdes, with one other, which he knoweth not.
            That the Squadron of the Generall Michaell de Oquendo a Biſcaine, was of 12. Shippes.
            That the Admirall Iohn Martins de Ricaldo, a Biſcaine likewiſe, had vnder him, ten or eleuen Ships.
            That there were about twentie Hulkes, whereuppon Nicholas de Medina did commaund.
            Saith, that there were 4. Gallies, each of them hauing twentie foure ſeates, the which were loſt in a tempeſt before they came on the Coaſtes of England.
            
            That the Duke of Medina Sidonia, was Captaine Generall of the whole Fleete, and Iohan Martines de Recalde Admirall thereof.
            
            
               〈2 pages missing〉
            
            out the loſſe of any of their Ships, and that ſo they departed againe, and did nothing els.
            Saith, that the Engliſh Armie came ye third day againe, and ſhot vpon theirs, & theirs vpon the Engliſh, and that with a great fury, and that the two Armies were ſo néere one another, that they thought there ſhoulde haue béene a battell. That after they had ſhot a certaine time very furiouſly the one againſt the other, that ye two Admirals did ioyne ſo néere together, that they ſhot the one to the other. So that both the Armies drewe néere, euerie one to his Admirall to helpe them, and ſo ioyned togeather in ſuch a ſort, that it ſéemed to be a great ſcarmaſing, continuing a large houre, and ſo departed the ſaid Admiralles the one from the other, the Armies departed likewiſe, euerie one on the ſide of their Admirall.
            Saith, that that ſame day, notwithſtanding that great furie, they loſt none of their Ships, but that they did ſet on fire one of the Engliſh ſhips, but that it was by and by quenched. That the ſame night they caſt their Anckers before Calice, and that he knewe not whether it was on a Tueſday or on a wedneſday, and that yt ſame night about two houres after they had caſt their Anckers, they did ſée eight Engliſh ſhips ful of fire and burning, comming and driuing towards their fléete, the which as it ſéemed were tied together with chaines, for they did driue very cloſe and equally togeather. Wheruppon their Generall & the whole fléete chopping & cutting of their Cables and Anckers, drew towards the depth of the Sea.
            Saith, that they came the next morning againe, and did ancker before Calice, and that they of Calice did come to viſite their Generall the Duke of Medina, and brought to ſell euerie thing for money, as bread, fleſh, paſties, fruits, and other neceſſary things, euery one for his money to be refreſhed therewith.
            Saith, that the Engliſh Armie, was that day ſomewhat more ſeparated from them then ſhee was wont to bee,

but yet ſhee was alwaies in their ſight, & that there were more Ships in it then the ordinarie, for they tolde at one time 23. ſhips more, of the which, there were three verie great, and the other were but meane Ships, but hee cannot tell whether they remained there that night or not.
            Saith, that the next day, the Engliſh fléet came againe to méet with them, and yt they begun very early to ſhoote one againſt another on euery ſide, ye which continued more then foure or fiue houres, and that hee himſelfe with his ſhip, was alwaies one of the next to the Engliſh Fleete, wherby the Engliſh were ſo charged, that they at laſt did ſende two of their Admirals, and two of their principall ſhips, ſo néere vnto him, that he might haue reached with a Picke from his ſhip vnto theirs, and that they ſhot very ſore the one to the other (ſo with Muſkets, as with ſmall ſhots) the ſpace of an houre & more, ſo that he being departed from thē, deſcended downe into his ſhip, to viſit it, and to view the ſame if ſhe was in any danger, wherupon, he founde the danger ſo great, becauſe there was come in ſo much water already, that the Ship begun to ſincke.
            Saith, that he then ſent his Sergiant Maior, towards the ſhip of the Generall, to aduertiſe him, yt his ſhip was in danger of ſincking, deſiring him to prouide thereupon, and to ſend ſome ſpéedy remedy. And that he incontinently after the ſaid Sergiant was gone, (perceiuing that the water increaſed very much in his ſhip) did ſend two Spaniſh Gentlemen againe, to ye ſaide General, to let him vnderſtand yet more earneſtly their great néede and danger wherein they were of periſhing, and to bee drowned altogether, if remedie did not come.
            That the ſaid Sergiant Maior, did returne again vnto him, before the other two might bee vnto the Generalles Ship, and brought with him, a Boate, to ſaue his owne perſon there withall if he would.
            That beſides that, the Duke, did ſend an other Creuell or boate vnto him, to knowe further his deſire and neede,

Whereupon he aunſwered, that hee woulde ſaue all hys men, and that therefore his Excelencie ſhould ſende and prouide wherewithall, or els he would periſh and be caſt away with them all, ſaying it was his duetie and right, that he ſhould be the laſt that ſhould goe and depart out of his Shippe.
            Saith moreouer, that then the Generall did ſette out a ſigne or token, wherby he let them vnderſtand, that they ſhould come ſo neere on boorde as they could.
            That they came ſo néere, that they could ſpeake the one vnto the other, but yet that they did remaine that whole day in the ſelfe ſame ſtate.
            That towards the euening, he ſéeing his ſhip did begin to ſinck, and to ware ſo heauie, that with her full ſatle ſhe was not able to folow ye Generall, he diſcharged two peeces, therby to certifie his great perill, but hee had no aunſwer therupon, neither did his Sergiant Maior, and the other two Gentlemen before named, returne vnto him againe, wherby he was that whole night very deſolate.
            Saith, that he thereupon tooke counſaile with his men, to know what theyr beſt remedie ſhoulde bee for to ſaue themſelues. Whereupon they concluded altogether to goe backwarde, and to trie if they coulde get themſelues into the Hauen of `Dunkerke, and ſo to be helped by the Duke of Parma, and to come by him.
            That thereupon they went to worke, but that his Mariners and Pilot, could not tell where to direct thēſelues, becauſe they had neuer béene in thoſe quarters.
            Saith, that the next day they ſaw lande, & they thought it was Fluſhing, becauſe there came many Fiſher boates out on euerie ſide, that they called vnto them, and deſired them to come on boorde, but that they would not, but fled awaie from them, whereby hee perceiued that the ſame land and Sea, was vnder the enemie. That he then was but at fiue fadames water, and that his ſhip went foure fadames and a halfe deepe.
            
               Saith, that after this, they met with another boate, the which did come ſomwhat néerer, of ye which he required to be brought into any Hauen appertaining vnto the King, and that therupon he departed from him, ſaying, that the Hauen of Dunkerke was right ouer againſt Fluſhing.
            
            That therupon, they went once againe from lande into the Sea, and that they knew not where they were.
            Saith, that the ſame day towardes the euening, they found another boate, the which did aboorde, and promiſed them, that if they would rewarde him, hee woulde bring them into Nieuport, the which was not far from thence, and did appertaine vnto the King, and that they ſhoulde get therein a great deale better then into Dunkerke.
            
            That the ſaid Fiſher went with his boate before theyr ſhip, conducting the ſame, making a faire demonſtration, as though he would haue brought them in a good Hauen.
            That hee ſpake many times with him, ſhewing him a chaine of two hundred Duckets, promiſing vnto him that ſame, and any thing els what he ſhould deſire.
            That the Fiſher ſaid vnto him, that hee would deliuer him into the Hauen, or els he would looſe his head.
            That he required the Fiſherman to come into his ſhip, but that he refuſed it, that he thereupon did fall in ſuſpition of him, and tooke him to be an enemie, although he did conduct him well.
            Saith, that towards the euening, his ſhippe remained ſtill, and could goe no further, and that hee was vpon ſeauen fadames, and did caſt his Ancker, and that the Fiſher came to ſpeake with him, ſaying that he would come the next morning againe to helpe them, but that he wold fiſh that whole night. That he did ancker within their ſight, and remained there about three houres, and afterwards he went his waies.
            That they did looke for him the next morning, but that he did not come.
            Saith, that they pulled vp their Ancker and hoyſed vp

their ſailes for to goe their waies, and that a little after they ſaw thrée ſhips, and by and by two more, ſayling towards them ſtraitly, and that the one did ſet vp a white flag, wherupon he cauſed another to be ſet out of his ſhip, thinking they were friendes, & that they came vnto him in a Boate, willing him to giue himſelfe ouer vnto them.
            Saith, that he anſwered therupon, yt they ſhould depart, or els that his Muſketters would ſhoote at them, but yt he wold not ſuffer it, becauſe they were come vnder his flag.
            That thereupon the fiue ſhips did come neere, and ſhot all vpon him, whereby they did greatly hurt his ſhip, and his men, and killed aboue fortie of them.
            That he had loſt but fiftéene men, for all the ſhottes of the Engliſh Fleete.
            Saith, that he gaue himſelfe ouer for priſoner, vnto the Admiral Ionker Peter vander does, vpon his word, & that therupon he went into his ſhip, with all his men without Armes, and yt ſo they were brought where they be nowe.
            That during all that time, there had béen 50. of his men continually at the pompe, drawing out the water day and night. Saith, that at his departing from the Groyne, hee had thirty & eight great braſſe peeces in his ſhippe, of the which he hath caſt ſeauen or eight into the Sea.
            That he had yet a great deale of Gunpowder, but that it was ſpoiled with ye water, a great deale of Rice, Peaſe, ſalted Porke, Wine, Vinegre, Oyle, and freſh water, whereof the maiſter Stewarde, and the Captaine of hys ſhip, could better tell the quantity then hée himſelfe.
            Saith, that he had no money belonging to the King, but that he had ſixe great cheſts ful of apparell, & linen cloth, ſeruing for his perſon, & for a Table of eight perſons, that he knew not in which ſhips the Kings money might be.
            Saith, that the King did daily pay for euery portion, or eache man, two Reales, and that they had paid the Souldiours with leſſe then halfe a Reall, ſo that the King looſes by euery man, a Reall and more euery day.
            
               That before he was ſeparated from the fléet, they he loſt no ſhips yet, but only ye ſhip of Don Pedro de Valde the which was loſt becauſe it could not folow the others.
            That the Admirall of Oquendo, was ſet on fire, and that they did pierce him through, for to ſincke him, at the entring of the Channell of England.
            
            Saith, that the principall of the Galiaſſes, where ouer Don Pedro de Moncada was Gouernour, did remaine before Calice, vpon the ſande. That hee doth not knowe whether the Dukes of Parma and of Medina, haue had any aduertiſement, the one from the other or not.
            That the deliberation of their Armie was, to ioyne with the Duke of Parma, and then to reſolue and conclude with him, on what ſide they might beſt aboorde, and ſet their men on lande in England.
            
            That they knew very wel, that there were ſome ſhips of warre before Dunkerke, for to hinder and to ſtoppe the Duke of Parma from comming foorth,
            That their meaning was, to ſaile no further then Calice, becauſe they knewe very well, that they could not into Dunkerke, for to helpe the Duke of Parma foorth, for otherwiſe they ſhold not haue departed thence as they did.
            Saith, that he knew not, if the King had commaunded, to land any men in England, before they ſhould haue communicated, and concluded with the ſaid Duke of Parma. But that he well thought that the Kinges pleaſure was not, that they ſhould land but ten thouſand Spanyardes, without any Artillerie and great péeces, whereby theyr throates might be cut incontinent.
            Saith, that on land, no man els ſhould haue commaunded as Generall, beſides the Duke of Parma.
            
            Saith, that they had vnderſtanding, that the Duke of Parma had about 38000. men together, among the which there were 4000. Spaniardes, and 2000. horſemen, ſo that if theſe two Armies might haue ioyned togeather, that it ſhould haue béene the greateſt number of naturall

Spanyards that euer came out of Spayne with any King, or without: and where more men of great quality were.
            Saith, that they could not come to fight with the Engliſh fléete, becauſe their ſhips were light & eaſie to turne, and could turne about foure or fiue times, before theyrs once, but if that they might haue come together, that they were ſure of the victorie, becauſe their ſhippes are very high, and the Engliſh very lowe, and that one Spanyſhe ſhyp, was able to ſpoyle foure or fiue Engliſh ſhips, and that their ſhyps are one Engliſh Elle thicke of Tymber, ſo that no great bollet coulde goe through, except it had béene ſhot off very neere.
            That of all the yron bollets that were ſhotte vpon his ſhip▪ there were not twentie, that were gone through.
            That the vpper part of his ſhip, was ſtrong enough againſt a Muſkets ſhot.
            Saith that they were determined to iuuade the whole Kingdome of Englande, to kéepe the Queenes grace in. pryſon, and to ſerue her, as a Quéene ought to be ſerued, vntill their King ſhoulde haue appointed any other waie with her, and that this was but as he did thinke.
            Saith, that they were aſſured (hauing 50000. men on land) to bring that Kingdome very eaſily vnder their ſubiection, becauſe that the Engliſh nation is vſed to liue verie delicatly, hauing likewiſe no experience of war, & that therfore they ſhold eaſily haue brought them vnder their feete, with their continual trauels & troubles, the which they had not béene able to endure, as their Spaniſh nation would haue doone, the which is vſed to ſuffer hunger, thirſt, hardly to lie, not to ſléepe, and yet neuertheleſſe, alwaies ready to their worke. That they had vnderſtanding, that there were many Catholiques in England, but that they made no account of them, becauſe they knewe very well, that the Quéene had ſo prouided therein, that they were not able to ſtir, neither to come to their helpe, and that likewiſe the moſt part of thē would haue fought

for their natiue Countrey.
            Being aſked, what they had determined to doo, if ſo bee that ye Duke of Parma could not come to their helpe, ſaith: that they neuer thought, (that ye ſaid Duke, hauing a hundred ſhips, ſo great a number of boates and Lighters, and an Armie of about forty thouſand men) ſhold not alwaies haue come out at his owne pleaſure, and that he thought it very ſtrange. that the ſaid Duke hauing ſuch a power, was not come forth. Or at leaſt, to haue ſet forth ſo many of his boates and Muſketters, that they might haue kept his enemies ſo buſie, that in the meane time his ſhyps of warre might haue come forth.
            Being aſked, if they had no intelligence in anie other place or Hauen of the Lowe Countries, or of their neighbour Townes. Saith, that therof was not once ſpoken among them and that their intention & deliberation, was neuer otherwiſe then to land in Englande.
            
            Saith▪ that theſe two Armies, ſo to water as to lande, did ſtand the King euery day in thirty thouſand duckets.
            Being aſked, if there might not be made a good peace betweene Spayne and England, he ſayth no, or very hardly: except it were vpon ſuch condition, that the King might ſo bridle the Queene of England, that ſhe ſhoulde ſtirre no more therafter, and that ſo it were better (as he thought) to haue a ſure peace, then that the King ſhould continuallie keepe ſuch an Armie for to kéepe frée the paſſage of the Indies, as hee hath prepared nowe, for to ſubdue and to ouercome the whole Kingdome of England.
            
            Aſking him, if theyr deliberation was not, that after that they had beene the Maiſters of Englande, that then they would haue come to ſubdue theſe Countries by force of Armes.
            Saith, that thereof was not anie remembring or ſpeaking.
            Saith, that the occaſions which made the King to vndertake theſe wars, were, that it was not conuenient vnto

vnto the King to ſuffer and forbeare, that one Drake, with two or three rotten Ships, ſhoulde come alwayes, and at his pleaſure, to ſpoyle the Hauens of Spayne, and to robbe the beſt Townes thereof, and ſo to hinder the negotiation of the Indies. And that he did thinke with leſſer charge to ſubdue and to inuade England, then yéerelie to entertaine ſuch an Armie as this to defende himſelfe of ſuch inuaſions, and that if ſo bee that this Fléete doth not ſpéede at this time vpon England, that the King doth intende to ſende the ſame there againe againſt next Lent.
            Béeing aſked if he knew not what the Duke of Parma woulde doo, now when he did ſée, that this Armie and his could not ioyne together. Saith, that hee will kéepe his men cloſe together in good Gariſons, and that he will not be ſo bolde to ſeparate them in any wiſe, neither to vndertake with them any other enterpriſe: ſaying he knoweth, that the King is reſolued, to continue and to purſue this warre vpon England.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            Examined in the preſence of my Lordes.
            
               
                  
                     The Preſident Vander Mylen, Preſident of the Prouinciall Counſell of Holland.
                     
                     D. Barneuelt, Aduocat of Hollande.
                     
                     The Lord of 
                           Ʋilliers.
                     
                     And of my Lorde of Famaes, Generall of the Artillerie of the vnited Prouinces.
                  
               
            
            
         
      
   