
      
         
            
            A comfortable treatiſe
vpon the latter
part of the fourth chapiter of the
firſt Epiſtle of Saint PETER, from
the twelfe verſe to the ende.
By O. PIGGE.
            1. Cor. 49.
            ¶I thinke that God hath ſet foorth vs the laſt
Apoſtles, as men appointed to death: for
we are made a gaſing ſtock vnto the world
and to Angels, and to men.
            1. Peter. 4. 15.
            Let none of you ſuffer as a murtherer, or as a
thiefe, or an euill doer, or as a buſibodie in
other mens matters.
            Seene and alowed.
            AT LONDON.
Printed by Robert Walde-graue,
fot Iohn Hariſon the yonger, and
Thomas Man.
1582.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RELIGIOVS AND VERY
worſhipful knightes, Sir ROBERT IERMYN of
Rushbrooke, and Sir IOHN HEIGHAM of Baroe, in
the countie of Suffolke: Grace and peace be multiplied
from God our heauenly Father, and
from our Lord and Sauiour
Ieſus Chriſte.
            
               YOVR worſhips remember, that at
the beginning of the laſt newe yere,
I preſented to you in wrighting, that
which the Lorde a little before, had
giuen me to ſpeake, in two ſhort Sermons
at BURI
                  •
               , adding not muche to that which
was then vttered, as the diligent hearer of me can teſtifie.
The reaſon of my ſo doing I alledged (as the
trueth was:) that I might haue ſomevvhat (according
to the maner of that time) vvherewith to teſtifie the
good affection vvhich of duty I owe vnto you both:
as vvel for the manifold bleſſings, vvhich the church
of God and the common wealth in theſe partes of
Suffolke, enioyeth by your meanes: as for your care
for my particuler ſafetie, and for the great comfort
which by you, from time to time, I haue had ſithence
my comming into this countrie. The Lord regiſter
them in his booke, that they may come into your
good accounts in the day of his ſonne. And becauſe
it pleaſed you then, to giue ſuch liking of the treatiſe,
that both of you deſired to reteine the coppie, and
requeſted the ſame at my hands, vvherof alſo I made
promiſe: the beſt vvay for the performance of this,
I ſuppoſed vvas the putting of it in print: which I was
the rather contented to do, becauſe the matter deliuered
in it, beeing neceſ
                  •
               arie to be taught & beleeued,

I hoped might be profitable and comfortable to
others: vvhich alſo vvas the iudgement of ſome godlie
and learned men that reade it ouer. My purpoſe
when I preached of the text, was to ſturre vp my ſelf
and the hearers, to beare patiently, comfortablie, and
profitablie al afflictions that might fal out for a good
conſcience ſake: my purpoſe in ſending it a broade,
and in making it more common to the churche of
God, is the ſame. The doctrine is neceſſarie to prepare
vs for thoſe times of trouble, which the abuſing
of our peace, the contempt of the goſpell, the euill
handling of the miniſters, & the infinite abhominations
of the land, haue moſt iuſtly deſerued. according
alſo as vve haue theſe many yeares beene vvarned
and threatned, not only by our prophets & teachers,
but alſo by fearefnll ſignes in heauen & earth,
that fortesl vnto vs further euils, vnleſſe in time from
the higheſt to the lovveſt vve repent, take a better
courſe, and turne from our diſobedience. Yea, in reſpect
of the time preſent, this argument is not altogeather
vnneceſſary: for although we haue iuſt cauſe
dayly vpon our knees, to praiſe God for her maieſty,
the moſt honourable of her counſell, and the reſt of
the gouerners in the Churche & common wealth:
by whoſe gracious meanes wee haue good lawes eſtabliſhed
& executed, for the liberty of true religion,
& for the comfort and incouragement of ſuch
as meane well: yet wee ſee howe in euerye
place where the worde is taught: cold proteſtantes,
earthly minded men, papiſtes and Athieſts, ſeeke &
deuiſe all poſſible meanes they can, to hinder the
courſe of the goſpell, and to diſquiet the preachers &
profeſſours, which oppoſe them ſelues againſte their
corruptions, and refuſe to ioyne with them in their
diſorders. A matter too to vſual in theſe euil dayes,

as the faythfull ſeruants of God knowe, and in many
places finde true by miſerable experience If the
preachers in any towne be carefull to do their duty,
what quarrelles doe wicked men pick, to ſtop their
mouths, weary them, and to driue them away? and if
any of the flocke take part with their teachers, and
profeſſe obedience to the trueth, they want no euill
words, frovvning lookes, and hard practiſes againſte
them, from popiſh, vvorldly, & irreligious men. The
practiſes of our country of Suffolke, (to let paſ
                  •
               e other
parts of the lande) witnes this to be true, & cry
alowde for vengeance in the eares of the Lorde of
hoſtes, as your vvorſhips very vvell know. VVe haue
many godly, learned, wiſe, faithful, & painful paſtors,
I ſuppoſe that diuers Counties of the Realme being
put together, can ſcarſe afforde ſo greate a numbe
                  •
               .
They teache the trueth of God, vvith all manner
ſo dutifulnes and holy loialty to her maieſty and the
ſtate, they be carefull to liue vvell to the vttermoſte
of their povver: and the Lorde be thanked, that hath
giuen them ſome good meaſnre of grace, in that behalfe.
They lacke not countenance, comfort, and reliefe,
from the honorable and worſhipful in the commiſſion
of peace for the ſhire, ſo farre as they maye
with a good conſcience, and according to the lawes
of our moſt gracious ſouereigne. VVee prayſe
God therefore, and thinke our ſelues bound to pray
daily for you all. But I pray you, what impes hath Sathan
ſturred vp amongſt vs, almoſt in euery Towne
vvhere the vvorde is preached, to hinder this vvorke
of the Lorde? hath there bene any vvay vnattempted,
to ſhake ſome of the preachers, and in them, no
dout al the reſt? They vvhich ſeeme to make any account
of the teachers, and to profeſſe more holineſſe
then others, (though alas not ſo much as they ſhould

doe) eſcape not the vennom of poiſoned tongues.
The pore people here and there in the country, that
be more carefull then the reſt, to reſort to ſermons,
to heare the vvoorde, learne their dutie, and vvith a
good conſcience to diſcharge ſuch duties as by oth,
are layd vpon them, bee not vvithout their croſſes.
Some (by the malice of naughty inſufficient miniſters,
& other vntovvarde men), to redeeme peace,
glad to leaue the tovvn vvhere they dvvelled: Others
frovvned vpon, for doing othervviſe, then their ſuperſtitious
landlordes doe, & vvould haue them: Others
maliced for indicting, and complaining of papiſts
& other vvicked men, for not reſorting to the
church, not comming to the Communion, and for
miſuſing of the prechers, & ſome moleſted one way,
and ſome another. And this I ſpeak not of any thing
done, by any magiſtrate or gouernour in the church
or common vveale: let no man take me ſo: but by
vvicked papiſtes and godleſſe perſons that be ſcattered
abroade in the counrry, as Goates among the
ſheepe, and darnell among good corne. VVho contrary
to the lavves, peace, Crovvne, & dignity of her
highneſſe and the kingdome, purpoſe and practiſe
mi
                  •
               chife and violence, ſometime couertly, and ſomtimes
openly, againſt ſuche as mean moſt faythfully
to God, and their Counrrye, and deſire to take that
courſe in euersy thing, that might bee acceptable to
him, that ſhall iudge the quick & the dead. VVe haue
good cauſe to pray continually for the long preſeruation
of our renouned princes Elizabeth our gratious
Mother and N
                  ••
               ſſe, vnder the ſhadow of vvhoſe
vvinges (as of the Lorde
                  •
                annointed) by the meanes
of her good lavves and Lie
                  •
               etenauntes, in her
ovvne courte and in the country, there is reliefe for
all the good people of the land, againſt ſuch vexations
of the vvicked. Othervviſe aſſuredly it ſhould go

hard, vvith them, that of all others ought moſt to be
made off: becauſe the deuill vvill not ceaſe to ſturre
vp enemies againſt them. For the inſtruction & comfort
of ſuch as be any vvay troubled for vvel doings,
I confeſſe that I labour ſomvvhat in this litle booke.
Praying the Chriſtian reader, if hee reape any ſmall
good thereby, to giue the praiſe vnto God to whom
only it is due: and to pray for me, that my ſelfe, (according
to my need, either preſent or to come) may
be partaker of the doctrine & comforts herein mentioned.
Concerning your good worſhips to vvhom
I am ſo muche beholden: euen as openly and to the
view of the country, you haue declared your readines
to further me, in my good and lavvfull cauſes, &
(ſo much as in you haue liē) to reſtrain thē that haue
ſoght to vex me vniuſtly & intēded my hurt: ſo haue
I thought my ſelf in duty bound, to giue forth ſome
publike teſtimony of thankfulues to you. In regarde
vvhereof, if it may pleaſe you to accept this my pore
trauell, it is an eſpeciall thing that I deſire. I am bold
to ioine you both in one: becauſe the Lord hath knit
you faſt together, not only by the bond of kindred
& perfect friendſhip: but alſo in care of my good eſtate,
& that vvhich is principall, in an holy deſire to
further true religiō, & to procure the peace, vvelfare,
and proſperity of the prince, and the country vvhere
you dvvel. The Lorde increaſe in you all his graces,
that being zealous according to knovveledge, you
may become yet more glorious inſtruments for the
furthering of his kingdom, & may go forvvard in the
profeſſion of his goſpell euen vnto the ende, to his
immortall prayſe, the ſturring vp of manye other
knightes and gentlemen, to be of this your chriſtian
order, in the true obedience of Gods vvord: & to the
euerlaſting ſaluatiō of your ſouls in the life to come:

vvhich graces in like manner I praye him to povvre
dovvne from heauen, vpon the right vvorſhipful the
Ladies of both your houſes, vpon your children, and
all your company for Ieſus Chriſtes ſake, our only &
omnipotent Sauiour. Amen.
            At London this ſixt day of April. 1582. the day
vvherein the great & fearfull Earthquake vvas tvvo
yeares before: a day to bee called to oure remembraunce,
becauſe, of the greateſt number, ſo rare and
terrible a thing is quite forgotten, and ſo certeine a
forerunner of other iudgements, is not regarded.
            
               Your worships in the Lord
OLIVER PIGGE.
            
         
         
            
            To the Chriſtian Reader,
Grace and peace from God the father by
Ieſus Chriſt, ſealed by the ſpirite of adoption, till
he haue aſſuraunce of euerlaſting life
in him. Amen.
            
               HOwe neceſſary bookes of ſuch like arguments,
as this, (by the godly labour
of our faithful and painful brother, now
published to the profite of many) are, I
need no
                  •
                long to ſtand vpon, and to declare:
as well in reſpect of vs▪ that profeſſe
the goſpell, in theſe breathing dayes, muche forgetting
our ſelues, though we lacke not diuers croſſes to put
vs in remembraunce, and to awaken vs, as in reſpect of
of oure enemies, who of late haue more threatned, and
bluſtered out againſt vs, then in many years before, crying
out of perſecution when they ſuffer not for Chriſt, or for
any his cauſes: but againſt him, laboring thēſelues to death
to ouerthrow his kingdome, (which though they burſt,
they shall neuer (I am ſure) be able to do) & vndermining
his miniſters moſt diſloyally: whom he hath placed in that
higheſt authoritie, to execute his owne iuſt iudgements againſt
them. It is wonder to heare what complaints they
make of perſecution & Tyranny, when for their iuſt deſerts
they receiue the punishment due to their treaſons,
conſpiracies, and rebellions. They laye vs on, and yet
they crye out againſt vs, they complain of perſecution, &
yet them ſelues are the perſecutours, that ſet themſelues
agaynſt the ſeruauntes of the Lorde, in all ages, againſt his
faithful minniſters & againſt al profeſſors, & which is moſt
lamentable againſte the holy trueth of God, yea, againſte

God himſelfe, to whome they owe all duetie and reuerence.
But alacke this is a thing common together with
them and all other heretikes, that when they haue no
truth at all, yet they muſt pretend ſome, and though they
can neuer iuſtifie their cauſe, they muſte at leaſt a
                  ••
               euer it,
as though they poſſeſſed it, and face vs out, to shroud their
idolatrous abhominations and curſſed corruptions that
they maynteine and ſtand for, to their vtter deſtruction.
There cannot be a Traitor nowadayes executed according
to his demerits, (but fauouring their ſuperſtition,
which indeede is alwayes ioined with treaſon, to shake
the ſeate of our gracious ſoueraigne,Auguſt. de Donatiſt. cap. 7. 8. and to ouerthrow any
ſtate elſe whereſoeuer they liue) but by and by, they
take him vp and make him a martir. So did the Donatiſts
as Aug
                  •
               ſtine witneſſeth: to whom we muſt make the ſame
anſwere, that he did to them. They are true martyrs, of
whome the Lord ſayth: Bleſſed are they that ſuffer perſecution
for righteouſneſſe ſake. They muſt not ſu
                  •
               fer for iniquity,
& for the wicked rending of Chriſtian vnity: but
they that ſuffer for righteouſnes, they are the true martyrs
in deede. If therefore they endure any thing at our hands,
they may thanke their owne vnquiet and hamering heads
that like (Moules, are alwaies heauing in their dark pathes
to marre the Lords vineyard) & to ouerthrow the gracious
worke of the Goſpell, which God will haue to proceede,
Maugre their heads, when they haue vſed all their treaſonable
practiſes they can againſt it. Neither shall the perſecution
of Agar, (if it may bee called a perſecution rather
then a correction) be compared to that of Dauid, nor
that of the theeues to our ſauiour Chriſtes, whom though
the ſuffering made one, yet the cauſe did ſeperate. They
crye out of perſecution, and fo
                  •
               ſte out their traiterous
bookes like wildfire, that they might ſet al on fire 
                  ••
               make
a h
                  •
               rly burly, and ſo open ſome way to their further deuiſed
miſchiefe:In their late booke of english perſecution. They alleadge examples of parti
                  •
               ular
iudgments, againſt particuler perſons, ſarced with as many
vntruths, as their books are▪ no
                  •
                with leaues, but almoſt
with lines: when yet they will not ſee that if any offence
haue bene committed on our partes it hath bene in this
that they haue bene to much borne with. For we appeal

to themſelues that haue any modeſty in them, whether euer
prince or ſtate, where the Goſpell onely is profeſſed
and mainteined (as it ought to be) by the lawes of the
lande, did euer ſuffer or beare ſo much with them, as our
gracious prince and ſtate hath done, no doubt of a good
purpoſe to winne them, & to reclaime them to the trueth
howſoeuer nowe they maye learne at length by experi
               
                  •
               nce
to take better heede of them, ſeeing they are incorrigible
and hate to be reformed. Howe long did shee keep
                  •
               
her royall ſword within her ſcabbard, vntouched with
any bloud? Surely till they had like (if God of his gracious
goodnes had not preſerued her maieſtye) to haue ſet her
both beſide ſeate, ſwotd, ſcepter and all: and if their diuelish
practiſes coulde haue taken place by rebellion at
home, or treaſon abroade, to layd her full low, and to haue
brought vs againe vnder the
                  •
               r cruel & vnſupportable yoke
of their Egyptiacall bondage: From the which, the Lorde
for his mercy ſake deliuer vs. If they count it therfore any
perſecution, it is a iuſt perſecution againſt the enemies of
God, againſt the enemies of our ſtate and Country. It is
alſo done in loue, to draw them from iniquitie, to reduce
them from errour, & for the ſafegard of the whole pollitique
body. I will not ſpeake of their perſecutions, & horrible
butcheries from time to time: God shall giue better
opportunity one day and in another place. But I beſeeche
thee (good Chriſtian reader) marke what is deliuered concerning
perſecution in this booke, then thou shalt both
                  •
               
learne what it is, and vpon whoſe backes it is like to light,
if they will be like him who is entred by the ſame gate before
vs. Neither let vs be diſcouraged, though it be in deed
our portion. For it shalbe a token vnto vs of our ſaluation,
but vnto them who are perſecuters of perdition and deſtruction.
The reaſon is becauſe Chriſt the Capitaine & finisher
of our battell is with vs, and hath troade the pathe
before vs, vvith vvhome as long as vvee ſuffer, let the yſſues
be neuer ſo hard, vve can not quaile nor perish. Hee
hath forevvarned vs, to looke for them. They come not
by chaunce but by his appointment. They are for our good
and the cauſe being iuſt and Gods, according to his vvill
and for the holding out of his excellent glory, though
                  •
               
               
vve d
                  •
               e for it vve shal be moſt happy. Our aduerſaries vnderſtand
not th
                  •
               s, and therefore they ſmite they care not
where nor whome, but a time shall come, they shall ſee
whom they haue ſmitten, & tremble before him, for feare
of his iudgements. Be therfore of good comfort, & reioice,
O al the Saints of God, though we paſſe thorow this wretched
vale, in contempt and miſery, in heauines, and ſorrow
with mourning and teares, with lacke of liberty, & commodity,
that many vſurpers enioy: yet a day shall come of
an aboundant harueſt where we shall ſit vpon the ſeates
of glorie & be ſatisfied with it, when we shal be crowned
with immortality, & shall ſee God, euen as he is. The troubles
are short, though they be sharpe, and though they be
many, yet they are light, in compariſon of that eternall
waight of glory. And you that are perſecuters, whome the
Lorde hath not giuen vtterly ouer. Take heede whom you
ſtrike. Thinke not to ouercome him whoſe power is infinite.
God vvill raigne in deſpite of his enemies in the middeſt
of them. Looke vpon your olde predeceſſours what
became of them. VVhere is Decius and Diocleſian, where
is Valerius, Maximinianus and Maximius, where is Lucius,
Iulianus & Aurelius? But you will ſay: theſe were ethnikes
and perſecuted Chriſtians, ſurely ſo do you. You are chriſtians
in name, but you deny the power thereof. You boaſt
of the fa
                  •
               th of your anceſtours, but you deny the faith of
Chriſte. You ſay you vvoulde not haue ſlaine the prophets,
but your handes haue beene the firſt vppon thoſe vvhome
God hath ſtyrred vp and ſente amongſte you? Are
you not ashamed to boaſte of the Truethe, and yet to
to perſecute poore Chriſtians for it? You complayn of our
harde lawes, of the ſeuerity of the punishment of treaſon,
of the iniquitie of our miniſters, of the hard eſtate of your
falſenamed Catholiques that liue amongſt vs: of their infamye
after their death, of the contumelies they ſuffer in
their life, yea when they are taken at their Maſſe how they
are brought forth in their Pageant apparrel, and what reuell
is kept vvith your breaden Idoll: ye complayne of our
priſons, and shevv the hardnes of our Iaylors, at London,
at Yorke & in other places. Myſtreſſe Tomſon. Maſter Dimock
and others are ſtill in your bookes, as though they

had receiued great vvrongs Thus you kick & flyng as vntamed
heifers ye care not where, ſparing neither noble nor
vnnoble, that might once by any occurrent, come to your
intelligence: but al this while you ſpeak not a vvord, to the
proore of it, vvhereupon the proofe lieth. For in reſpect of
the cauſe, yours is falſe & ours true, ours the cauſe of Chriſt
& yours the cauſe of Antichriſte, vvee ſuffer for religion &
you for treaſon. Agayne there is no compariſon betvvixt
that pun
                  •
               shment layd vpon you, for your iuſt offences, and
our perſecution, laide vppon vs not for our ſinnes, but for
righteouſnes ſake. If vve haue layd a finger vpon you, you
haue layd vpon vs an intollerable clog. If vve haue ſcourged
you vvith father
                  •
               y roddes for amendment:, you ha
                  •
               e
vvhipped vs vvith ſcorpions, vtterly to deſtroy vs: if vvee
haue derided your ſuperſt
                  •
               tion & brought out your prieſts,
as they were playing their pageants, that the people might
vvonder at their follies: you haue made vs ſpectacles (as
much as lay in you) both to men and angels, and laſtly vve
haue vvith the trueth, purſued you, to bring you to the
trueth, & ſo to God, but you vvith falſehoode haue perſecuted
vs to bring vs from the trueth to error, and ſo to the
Deuill. You talke of orderly proceeding vvith vs, that we
vvere tried in time paſt by order of Iuſtice, and diſputed
vvithall, that vvee might if vve vvoulde, ſee our ovvne
vveakneſſe &c I pray you in vvhoſe Courtes hath it bene
moſt found, eyther in yours, vvhere all iuſtice vvas peruerted,
or in ours, vvhere the trueth of Gods word guidingal;
they haue beene taught the feare of God, and to doe as
they vvould be done to: VVhere hath beene greater murthers,
by diſordered dealings then amongſt you, vvithout
all colour of lavv & iuſtice, killing them by vvhole multitudes,
and ſometimes ſome of youre ovvne profeſſion for
company, that you mighte enioy their ritches? vvhere hath
priuate men beene more armed, to make diſpatch of princes
that mighte ſtand in your vvay, then amongſt youre
ſelues? Your pope diſpenſing vvith the ſinnes either they
had already, or should aftervvardes commit: Example by
that Caitife, that vppon his pardon vvoulde haue ſlaine
the vvorthy Prince of Orange, had not God miraculouſly
deliuered him? to hovv many ſuch treaſons, by poiſoning

and killing haue ſundry beene ſturred vp vvithout all
pittye amongſt you? Surely it is no maruell, that you
shoulde novve pleade youre innocencie, vvhen all the
vvorlde may knovve your vvicked & traiterous trecheries,
that vvill not vvillingly shut their eyes. But it maye
bee, You thinke by ſome popishe vvitchery, to goe in uiſible,
by hauing ſome of the Popes trumpery aboute you.
But you deceiue youre ſelues, and ſo doth he vvhom you
ſerue. Therefore repent, and turne to him, vvho is able
to ſaue your ſoules, Returne to Ieſus Chriſte that high
paſtour, that ſuffering for trueth vvith him, you maye likevviſe
bee glorified vvith him, othervviſe hovvſoeuer you
byte his heele vvith the Serpent, hee vvill bruſe your head
and in the end triumph ouer you. The Lorde Ieſus ſanctifie
all that are his, euen thoroughout both body, ſoul,
and ſpirite, that vvee may bee kept blameleſſe
vnto his holy comming. Amen. Amen.
the 27. day of this third
moneth.
            
               Thine aſſured in Christe
Iohn Field.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               1. Pet. 4. 12.
               Dearely beloued, think it not strange concerning
the fiery triall, which is among
you, as though ſome strange thing were
come vnto you.
            
            
               IT appeareth by the diſcourſe
of this epiſtle, that ye
Chriſtians to whome Peter
wrote, were at that time in
great perſecution: whereuppon,
after other thinges handled before in
this text, he commeth to giue them inſtructions
touching this matter, how they ſhold
patiently 
                  •
               eare the croſſe, and comfortably
behaue themſelues in the middeſt of their
greateſt afflictions. A point of doctrine not
vnneceſſary for vs at this time. For although
by the great mercye of God, it fareth
not with vs, as it did with the churches
then: Becauſe we liue vnder a gratious
prince that doth cheriſh and mainteine
the trueth. Yet becauſe our ſinnes: be ſuch,

as doe iuſtly diſerue the taking away of he
                  •
               
royall maieſty, and the reſtraint of pure religion,
I ſee no reaſon why the teachers
ſhould be charged not to take a good courſe
in preparing the people before hande to
bear ſuch troubles, whenſoeuer they ſhould
come, no more then our ſauiour Chriſt was
to be challenged. For telling his diſciples
ſo oft of his and their own perſecutions before
they came, & arming of them againſte
the ſame. It is the practiſe of well ordered
common wealthes, in the time of peace to
teach their people the feates of warre. And
each man that hath any care of himſelf and
his country, when all things are moſt quiet,
doth neuertheleſſe prouide ſuch things
in a redineſſe, as may ſtand him in ſteed in
y• time of trouble. Euen ſo is it neceſſary,
that in the peace of the goſpell, we
                  •
                be inſtructed
to bear afflictions for the ſa
                  •
               e: &
when the trueth hath greateſt liberty, we
ſhould continually looke for perſecution, &
therefore, by the precepts and comforts of
the worde, be alwayes prepared to abide
whatſoeuer may fal out. Which conſiderations
haue moued mee at this preſent, to
ſpeake vnto you out of this ſcripture.
            
               
               Thinke it not straunge concerning the
fiery triall: In this firſt verſe, he willeth
the Chriſtians, not to maruell at the perſecution
of the churche (which hee calleth by
the name of fiery triall) as thoughe ſome
ſtrāge thing had happened. The laſt words
ſeeme to bee ſet downe as a reaſon to perſwade
that which he requireth. As though
he ſhould haue ſayde on this wiſ: the trouble
& affliction of the church or any member
thereof, is no ſtraunge thing, and therfore
no reaſon why you ſhoulde maruel at
it. For we maruell at ſuch things onely, as
doe ſeldome come to p
                  •
               ſſe, and after an extraordinary
maner: But if any thing come
to paſſe often and ordinarily, that wee are
not wont to maruell at, although in it ſelfe
it be neuer ſo wonderfull. If we ſhould ſee
a horſe flye in the ayre: if wee ſhoulde ſee
great ſnowes in the middes of ſommer: or
a plentifull harueſt in the middes of winter:
behold iuſt occaſions to make vs wonder,
becauſe theſe things ſeldome or neuer
fall out, and the courſe of nature, the order
ſet downe by God himſelfe ſhoulde bee inuerted.
But to ſee a horſe runne apace vpon
the grounde, to ſee deepe 
                  •
               ſnowes in the

middeſt of winter, and harueſt in Auguſt or
September, doth neuer cauſe wonder
                  •
               ng
or aſtoniſhment, although in deede they be
moſt marueilous works of the Lord. Euen
ſo perſecutions and afflictions for righteouſnes
ſake, beeing the ordinarye portion
which from time to time the ſaints of God
haue receiued in this worlde, there is no
more cauſe why we ſhould be amazed or aſtoniſhed
at that whenſoeuer generally or
particularly it falleth out, then at the ſnow
in the winter, or harueſt in the ſommer. If
we looke vnto the beginning, we ſhall ſee
that Cain perſecuted his own brother Abel:
afterward Iſmael Iſaack, Eſau Iacob. And
when ye viſible church began to be a great
people (I mean ye Iewes:) the Egyptians
firſt, & then al the nations round about, ben
                  •
               
their force againſt them. Among the Iews
hypocrites, and naughty perſons, of the
kings, prieſtes▪ prophets, and people failed
not to hold on the ſame courſe, in offering
all manner of cruelty, to ſuch as truely feared
the Lorde, and zealouſly executed the
functions in them committed, as the hiſtories
of the ſcripture doe playnely witneſſe.
If we looke into the enterteinment of our

ſauiour Chriſte and his apoſtles in their
time, it ſhall appeare to haue bene nothing
better th
                  •
               n the former. And that the like
condition hath bene vpon the church euer
ſithence, it is knowne to ſuch as haue read
the ſtories. In ſo much as that complaint
is moſt true, w
                  •
               ich ſhe maketh in the pſal.
They haue often times afflicted mee from
my youth vp:
               Pſa. 129. 
                     •
                  . that is to ſay, euer ſithence I
had any being vpon the earth, mine enimies
haue not ceaſſed to afflict me, & as it were
to plowe deepe furrowes vpon my backe.
You ſee then what we haue here to learne
in the firſt place, namely not to be troubled
at the perſecutions which may happen to
our ſelues, or any other the members of
Chriſt, For the profeſſion of his truth and
doing of our duety, as though ſome ſtrange
thing were come to paſſe, ſeeing it is the
ordinary courſe, which the wicked worlde
(whoſe works are nought) taking their direction
from their grandfather Caine, hath
from time to time practiſed agaynſte the
church, and the ordinary way, by the which
the Lord from age to age, hath lead all his
children: to the verifiyng of that, which
Paul and Barnabas preached whereſoeuer

               they came:
               Act. 14 22. Through many afflictions wee
must enter into the kingdome of God.
            And this being ſo, It behoueth vs, when
wee firſt ioyne our ſelues to the churche of
God, and enter into the profeſſion of his
trueth, with purpoſe to leade oure liues
according thereunto: to ſitte vs down, according
to the counſel of our ſauiour Chriſt
& to make our account on this wiſe.Luk 14. 27. 28. 31. 32. Surely
I ſee that al fleſh is graſſe, and al things
vnder the ſunne are but vanity. The time
will come when I muſt dye, and God hath
appoynted a day wherein he will iudge all
the worlde.Act. 17. 31. He hath prepared life and bleſſedneſſe
for them that feare him, and vengeance
for them that knoweth him not, nor
obey his goſpell.2. Theſ. 1. 8. I perceiue therefore it is
neceſſary, that I care for the life to come, &
prouide for the ſafety of my ſoul after deth.
If I take the courſe of the world, I run to
eternal deſtruction, If I embrace the word
the only way vnto heauen & eternall life, I
muſt make my ful reckoning of that which
al the faithful profeſſors therof haue taſted
before me, I muſt prepare my backe for
ſtripes, I muſt looke to bee euil ſpoken of,
ieſted vpon, ſcorned at, to loſe the fauour of
thoſe that bee mighty, to be caſt in priſon,

loſe my goodes, yea and my life alſo. For
I ſee this is the eſtate of the true ſeruants
of God in this worlde. Hee that ſhall thus
debate the matter with him ſelfe, and with
an heart careful of his owne ſaluation cal
vpon God for his direction, wil ſoone be reſolued
with Moſes,
               Heb. 11. 25. to chuſe rather afflictitions
with the people of God, then to enioy
the pleaſures of ſi
                  •
               ne here for a ſhort time.
Moreouer when ſtormes ariſe, the windes
b
                  •
               ow, and the floods beare vpon his houſe: yt
is, when troubles and perſecutions come,
he ſhal be able to beare them more patiently,
and with greater comfort, ſith in t
                  •
               ueth
he may ſay, I thought ſo: Loe, it is come to
paſſe as I looked for long ſince. It is a
common ſaying: euils that be thought vppon
before doe hurt leſſe when they come.
Then they pearce vs deeply whē they come
vpon vs at vnwares, and when wee neuer
before ſuſpected any ſuch matter.Math. 16. 24. Therfore
to couclude this poynt, ſith the croſſe is in:
ſeperably ioyned to the profeſſion of the
trueth, let him that wil ſtand with comfort
in the time of his trial, before hand make
his reckoning and looke for no better. It
followeth in the text.
            
               
               Concerning the fiery triall, or triall by fire,
the wordes do beare either. Now the apoſtle
doth on this wiſe, terme the perſecutions
of Gods children.Verſ
                     •
                  . 7. According as hee
doth before in the firſt chapter. The ſpeech
is metaphoricall or borrowed, ſignifying
thus much: As fire trieth the pure golde,
from that which is counterfait and naught,
fining it, & moreouer burneth, waſteth & ſun
dreth yt droſſe & ruſt from yt which is good,
ſo troubles and afflictions for Chriſtes
ſake, doe diſcerne the faythfull Chriſtian
from the hypocrite, and time ſeruer, and
waſteth away the corruption of ſinne that
creepeth and ſtealeth in vppon the faythfull
in their peace and proſperity, making
them more pure and fine to the Lord. For
the firſt, there lurketh ſo great ſelfe loue &
hipocriſie in vs, and there are ſo many deceitfull
corners in our heartes, that it is a
meruelious harde matter, to be vndoubtedly
perſuaded in our conſciences of our integrity
and vprightneſſe to the Lord and
his trueth, while the profeſſion thereof
is commanded by Princes, and hath countenance,
liberty, & profite wayting vpon it.
For then how earneſt ſoeuer wee ſeeme to

be, peraduenture wee loue our ſelues, & not
the Lord, & it is our own eſtimation & preferment
yt we ſeeke, & not the holding forth
of the trueth with a pure conſcience. Then
in deed we know our ſelues, when we haue
bene tried. And if in the middeſt of al temptations,
we continue without fainting and
turning back, we may be bold of our obediēce
yt it is good, yt we be ſuch as haue built
our houſe vpō ye rock,Mat. 7. 24. 25. and yt neither heighth
nor depth,Rom. 8. 38. 39. principalities nor power, life nor
deth, things preſent or things to come, ſhal
be able to ſeperate vs frō the loue of God.
While our ſauiour Chriſte was at liberty,
Peter thought himſelf maruellous ſtout,Mat. 26. 33. he
affirmed very confidently,Ioh. 18. 10. yt he would not
ſhrink frō his maiſter, although all the reſt
ſhould runne away: yea when the officers
came to attach him, he drew out his ſword,
& ſmote of a ſeruaunt of the high prieſt his
ear. But when ye matter came to ye pinch in
deede, we knowe how all his courage was
quailed, & the very ſpeech of a damſell cauſed
him to abiure the ſauiour of ye world, to
whō he had before ſo earneſtly vowed him
ſelf. By him wee may learne to ſuſpect our
ſelues, and our owne weakneſſe, and not
to imagine that wee bee without all feare

of reuolting,Luk. 8. 13 becauſe in the liberty & peace
of the goſpell wee make pro
                  •
               eſſion of the
ſame. The ſandye grounde nouriſheth his
blade, ſo long as the weather continueth
ſeaſonable and calme, which neuertheleſſe
in hot and ſcorching wether, withereth and
is vnprofitable. That onely we approue for
good ground indeed, which in the extremity
of heat, we haue ſeene bring forth the eares
with full corne. Euen ſo, it is nothing in
theſe daies to pro
                  •
               eſſe the true religion, the
ſame being commanded by the lawes, and
countenanced by ſo many good means: but
if for our ſinnes God ſhould take away the
prince, if popery ſhold be eſtabliſhed again,
or a mingle māgle of religiō permitted as
in France: then y• true & faithful profeſſors
ſhold be eaſily diſcerned from the hypocrit
and diſſemvler. When all the enemies of
Dauid were ſubdued round about, and the
whole kingdome of Iudah approued him
for their only and true ſouereigne, ther was
no great trial of the fidelitie of his ſubiects
But when Sheba the ſonne of Bichri blew
the Trumpet and ſayd,1. Sam. 20. 1. 2 we haue no parte
in Dauid, neither haue we inheritaunce in
the ſonne of Ishai, euery man to his tents

O Iſrael. And this drew away great numbers
of the people to make an inſurrection:
Then ſuch as in the middeſt of thoſe rebels
by word or practiſe, teſtified their ſubiection
to Dauid with the hazard of their eſtate,
gaue vndoubted teſtimonies of their fidelity.
We can not ſay for a truth, that al ſuch
be faythfull to her maieſtie, whiche in this
her great proſperity (wherein no enemye
dare quech) ſeemeth ſo to be: they which in
the dayes of Westmerland and Nort humberlaud,
ſtoode vnto her in thoſe partes of
the North agaynſt their Lordes to their
daunger, were faythfull in deede, and the
land might make a good reckoning of thē,
in any other the like occaſion. As therefore
by ſuche meanes as theſe, loyall and true
hearted ſubiectes to their prince be tried: ſo
when troubles and perſecutions ariſe for
the word, they which be ſincere & vpright
in the feare of the Lord, be diſcerned from
the counterfeite, whiche in their profeſſion

                  •
               aue ſought nothing but their aduauntage

                  •
               nd eaſe. And then in deed we haue put the
church of God and our owne conſciences
out of al doubt concerning our entegritye,
when in the middeſt of afflictions for the

goſpell ſake, we haue continued with boldnes
to profeſſe the ſame. We ſee therefore yt
it is not without good cauſe, why perſecutions
be called a fiery trial. Now, euen this
ſhould teach vs, patiently & comfortably to
endure al maner of croſſes, for the trueth &
a good conſcience, ſith yt our holding out in
them, is a certein proofe yt our faith is good
& our obedience ſuch as will go for paimēt
before the Lord. From whēce alſo we may
vndoubtedly perſwade our ſelues, that wee
ſhal not faint when the like or greater dangers
fall out. When we haue a caſe in law
for any landes yt we claime, we are glad to
haue our euidences examined, whether they
be good or no, before we come to the pinch:
& if we haue golde lye by vs, yt we occupy
not, wee are content to haue it tried before
hand, yt we may be ſure it will bee currant,
whenſoeuer occaſion falleth out to vſe it.
Why then be we not glad, of diſgracings,
railings, complaints, loſſe of fauour, impriſonment,
and ſuch like, when they come vnto
vs for doing of our duty & righteouſnes
ſake? ſeeing yt by our ſuffering of them, the
Lord prepareth vs for greater matters, &
our patiēce in theſe is as it were an earneſt

vnto vs, that wee ſhall ſtand when we bee
tried to the vttermoſt. Therfore I conclude
this part,Iac. 1. 2. 3. 4. with that of S. Iames: count it
for great ioy (my brethren) when you fall
into many tentations: knowing yt the triall
of your faith bringeth forth patience. And
let patience haue her perfect work, yt you
may be perfect & entire lacking nothing.
            The ſecond effect of perſecutions, wherevppon
they be compared to a fiery triall, I
ſayd was this. As fire drieth vp al maner of
droſſe in the good golde, ſo they dry vp many
corruptions, that creepe vpon the godly,
in the time of their liberty & peace. For
thus it fareth with the beſt of Gods children,
when they be a litle quiet, & the world
ſeemeth to ſmile vpon them, if they breake
not out, as reſty & pampred horſes, to open
outrage & diſorder, yet at the leaſt ther ſtealeth
vpō them much vanity, worldlines, delight
in things earthly, & negligence (if not
contēpt) of things heauenly. Wherupon ye
loue of the word doth decreaſe in them, and
they become not ſo carefull and zealouſe of
the honour of God as they were before.
The examples of Ioſeph,
               Gen. 41. 51. 
               Dauid, & Ezechias,
               2 Sam. 11.
may ſerue to proue the trueth of this.Iſa. 39.
               
The Lord ſeeing the tickle diſpoſition that
is in all men to this vnrulineſſe, was
wont to meete with the ſame before hande
with mani
                  •
               olde Croſſes, euen in ſuch men
as he made eſpeciall account of. For no
doubt this was one principal end, of the infinite
turmoyles, that Abraham and Iacob
were encombred with, that ſo they mighte
be brought to deſpiſe the earth which is repleniſhed
with ſo many miſeries, ſeeke after
eternity, & zealouſly ſet them ſelues to
ye whereunto the Lorde did cal them. Now
as he mercifully and in great wiſdome did
on this wiſe preuent ſuch diſordered affections,
as were otherwiſe like to haue poſtered
their hearts: ſo dealeth he as gratiouſly
with his children in ſeeking to reclaim thē
by the like meanes when they haue bene ouertaken.
Whereuppon, beſide the inward
afflictions of the minde, he often times ſtirreth
vp agaynſt vs, enemies that ſpeake euil
of vs, & trouble vs for well doing, that ſo
he might fre vs from enemies that be more
daungerous to our ſouls. For although the
ignorant and careleſſe, in all the croſſes
that happen vnto them, doe only regard the
meanes and inſtrumentes whereby they

come, crying out of the iniurie of their oppreſſours,
and clearing of them ſelues as
parties vniuſtly troubled. Yet it is otherwiſe
with the ſeruants of God, that be wiſe
& vnderſtanding, they looke vp to the hand
of the ſmiter,Amos. 3 6. whome they knowe to be the
Lorde himſelfe, whome they ſtraight way
conclude to be righteous and ſo iuſt,2. Sam. 16. 10. as hee
will not puniſhe withoute cauſe, and that
therfore ſomthing is amiſſe in them which
he woulde haue them to ament: althoughe
that be good, commanded of God, and nothing
but their duty for the which they be
perſecuted by their aduerſaries. Whereby
it commeth to paſſe, that they examin them
ſelues and their doinges more ſtreightly, &
finde out many corruptions, which before
were eyther vnknown, or elſe vnregarded,
and therfore would haue proued very dangerous
to their ſoules, if they had not thus
bene rouzed vp to conſider of them. Which
they doe ſo profit
                  •
               bly, that in the ende they
ſay with Dauid, It is good for me (O lord)
that thou broughteſt mee lowe.Pſa. 119. 67. 71 For euen
ſuch troubles cauſe them to doe their duty
better, to bee marueylous circumſpecie of
their wayes, that their enemies may haue

no iuſt matter againſt them, and ſturre vp
in them a great zeale to prayer, ſo as they
do it more often and earneſtly then before.
We ought therefore to be glad, & to thanke
the Lord moſt hartely, whenſoeuer it ſhall
pleaſe him to purge vs on this ſort. Our
veſſels of ſiluer and golde which in time
doe gather ſoyle, we deſire to haue ſcoured:
and the linnen that wee vſe to our tables,
we reioyce to haue often waſhed. And why
then do we not take in good part all maner
of perſecutions? ſeeing they be ſcourgings
and waſhings to our ſoules, whereby the
Lorde mindeth to make vs cleane, from
ſome vntowardnes that is in vs. Verily
this is a greater mercye then any mans
tongue is able to vtter, and the wiſdome of
the Lorde in this behalfe is very wonderfull:
we be entred into an euill courſe ſome
way or other, offenſiue to the maieſtye of
God, and hurtfull vnto our ſelues, In the
mean time God concealeth thoſe diſorders
of oures from men, whiche peraduenture
woulde procure our puniſhmente by their
Lawes, and intending to reclayme vs, &
to bring vs to himſelfe againe, hee ſturreth
vp ſome againſt vs, and to our great honor

cauſeth ſome afflictiō to come vnto vs for
well doing, that was due vnto vs for our
ſinne and diſobedience. O the ritches of his
grace: who is able to conceiue it? Certeinly
the Lord his retiring of Saul from purſuiug
of Dauid,
               1. Sam. 23. 27 28. cauſing the Pailistines to
inuade the lande, was not ſo ioyfull to the
wearied man, as this ſhould be ioifull vnto
vs, when after this manner he ſtoppeth vs
in our euill courſe, and cauſeth vs to retire
from that which is not good. But ynoughe
of this fruite of perſecutions, and the purpoſe
of God in the ſame. It remaineth that
each man in all ſuch troubles ſturre vp his
heart, and pray to God, that he may profite
by them as we haue heard. It followeth.
            
               But reioyce, in as much as you are partakers
of Christes ſufferings, that when his
glory ſhall appear, ye may be glad & reioice.
In this verſe he requireth more then in the
former. There he would haue vs not to bee
aſtoniſhed at our perſecutions for the truth
ſake: here he ſayth that we muſt reioyce &
be glad, when any ſuch thing commeth vnto
vs. And leaſt he ſhoulde ſeeme to call for
any thing, without rendring a reaſon therof,
in this ſentence he deliuereth two arguments

of great force, whereby he laboureth
to perſuade the reioy ſing mentioned. The
firſt is drawen from the example of Chriſt
to whoſe image we ſhould deſire to be conformed,
becauſe we were thereunto predeſtinate:Rom. 8. 29.
the next, is from the rewarde, that
we ſhall haue at ſuch time, as Ieſus Chriſt
ſhall appeare, the ſecond time in glory. For
the firſt: his meaning is, that whenſoeuer
we be afflicted for righteouſneſſe ſake, it is
no otherwiſe with vs, then it was with
Chriſt, our Lorde, our king, our head and
ſauiour before.Math. 20. 22. He was baptiſed with this
baptiſme,Luk. 7. 34. & 11. 15. and he beganne of this cup vnto
vs. If we be rayled vpon,Ioh. 8. 48. hee was charged
to be a glutton, a Samaritane, an enemye
to Ceſar, and to worke by the deuil: If men
deſire to haue vs out of their companies &
countries: ſo was hee dealt with all by the
Gergeſenes.
               Math. 8. 34. If we be put to our ſhiftes, to
flye from place to place for our own ſafety:Math. 14. 13.
he was ſo before vs.Ioh. 10. 39.. If ſome of our friendes
whom we truſt doe betray vs, ſo did Iudas
to our Lord. If we be arraigned before the
indgemente ſeates of princes, if there,
wee bee ſkoffed and mocked at, beaten
with roddes, and condemned to death: was

not this alſo the portion of the ſon of God?
If we be thought the worſt men vppon the
earth, more daungerous and hurtfull to the
common wealth then any others, we know
that Barrabas was preferred before the
Lord of life. This is therefore a certeine
trueth, that Ieſus Chriſte hath gone this
way before us. And Cranmer in thoſe manifold
diſgracings about his diſgrading: ye
man whom Bonner ſcourged in his garden,
and all the martyrs in their torments,
were nothing els but his companions.
Now this ſhoulde be ſufficient to comfort
vs in all our troubles, and to cauſe vs moſt
ioyfully to endure the ſame. It is an olde
ſaying: it is comfort to the wretched, to
haue companions in their miſeries: howe
comfortable then ſhould it be vnto vs, ſeing
Ieſus Chriſt tooke part with vs? When
Vriah,
               2. Sam. 11. 10. 11. by Dauids commandement was ſent
to the court, and by the king himſelfe willed
to goe to his wife to his owne houſe
to take his eaſe: he refuſed it, & choſe rather
to ſleepe at the pallace dore with the reſt of
the kings ſeruants. And being demaunded
the reaſon by Dauid of his ſo doing, he anſwered
that it was vnequall and vncomly

for him to be at reſt in his bedde in the
houſe, when Ioab his Lord lay in the fields.
The valiant & couragious ſouldier thought
it a matter of delight vnto him, to endure
hardnes with his captein, and the greateſt
diſhonour that coulde be, to doe otherwiſe.
How much more ought we to reioyce in all
our extremities? ſeeing in them we do after
a ſort drinke of one cup with Chriſt, and as
it were draw in one yoke with him. It had
beene ſufficient to cheare vs, if Peter had
ſaid as our Lord ſpake before in the goſpel
of Mathew:
               Math. 5. 12. ſo perſecuted they ye prophetes
which were before you. But when he telleth
vs, that perſecution and affliction was
the portion of the ſonne of God, it is an inſtruction
to patience, and a comfort in trouble,
free from all chalenge, exception, and
ſpeaking againſt. If the prince ſhoulde ſay
vnto vs, or any other ſubiect: you muſt do
ſomwhat for me, which the L. Chanceller, &
the reſt of my priuye counſell haue done before
you, ſurely the thing beeing good,
though neuer ſo painfull, we ought to yeeld
vnto it. But if the prince ſhoulde ſay, mine
only ſonne and heire, or mine owne ſelfe
haue borne this brunt already: how coulde

we challenge the prince of any hard meaſure
offered vnto vs? and how beaſtly faint
hearted, and cowardly ſhoulde wee be to refuſe
it? Therefore to end this matter: let vs
be patient in all our afflictions and reioice
in the ſame, ſeeing therin we be partakers
with Ieſus Chriſte the ſonne of God, and
our true ſoueraigne and euerlaſting king.
For as the wood caſt into the bitter waters
at Marah,
               Num. 15. 25. made them ſweet to the children
of Iſrael: ſo Ieſus Chriſte being throwen
into the ſea of afflictions, hath made them
moſt ſweete to ſo many as beleeue in him.
The ſecond reaſon is the recompence promiſed
vnto ſuch, as with Ieſus Chrſte ſuffer
afflictions for a good conſcience. When
his glory ſhall appeare (ſayth the apoſtle)
then shal you reioice, and leap for ioy: For ye
word ſeemeth to ſignifie ſo much. His meaning
is yt the ioy of Gods children ſhall be
perfect then, wheras now by reaſon of our
corruption & mortality, it is mingled with
much heauineſſe and ſorrowe. But we muſt
note, that this ſhalbe at ſuch time, as Chriſt
appeareth agayne in his maieſty. Whiche
glorious manifeſtation of himſelfe, is oppoſed
or ſet againſte, that baſe condition of

his, which he was in here vpon the earth,
in the ſight & iudgement of men. For as he
is nowe in perfect glory, euen in reſpect of
his humanity, although the worlde neither
ſee it, nor beleeue it: ſo when the day commeth,
wherein the father hath appointed
by him to iudge the earth, he ſhall appeare
moſt glorious and excellent as he is, with
millions of Angelles attending vpon him,
ſitting vppon his throue of maieſty,Apoc. 20. 11. ſo as
from his face, the heauen and earth ſhal flye
away, and all the vngodly of the world ſhal
runne into caues,Apoc. 6. 16. to hide them, & ſhall call
for mounteines to fall vpon them, yt ſo (if it
were poſſible) they mighte not come into
his preſence, The apoſtle telleth vs, that
at that time, we ſhall lift vp our heads and
reioyce,Apoc. 7. 17. all teares being for euer wiped away
from our eyes, becauſe after that wee
ſhall neuer more haue any occaſion of ſorrowe.
For ſo we be taught by Sanct Paul
in other places.2. Tim. 2 11. 12 That if wee dye with
Chriſt we ſhall reigne with him, and if we
ſuffer with him: we ſhall reigne with him: &
if we be partakers with him of his ſhame,
we ſhall alſo communicate with him in his
glory. Now this reaſon ſhould be of grea
                  •
               
force with vs. Wee ſee naturall men, ver
                  •
               
               
well contented to endure ſome hardneſſe
and paynes with the Sonnes of mortall
men, that bee of honour and wealth, during
the time of their mynormitye, becauſe
when they come to their landes, they hope
for ſome preferment from them. And to
bee in greate ſtraightes in a ſtraunge
Countrye with the kinges ſonne, who
woulde not be gladde for a time? eſpeciallye
hauing certeynty of their returne into
their owne Lande, and vndoubted promiſe
to be preferred then with the prince. Let
vs therefore reioice in the middeſt of all
our tentations, when Ieſus Chriſt ſhall reſtore
al things, and come agayn to declare
his authority in iudgeing all fleſh: al our
mourning ſhall be turned into ioy, and our
ſhame into honour. The hope of a moſte
bleſſed and happye eſtate at that time,
muſte make vs comfortable in all oure
troubles, inſomuche as in reſpecte of it,
they ſhoulde ſeeme eaſy and nothing vnto
vs.Ephe. 6. 17. And this may bee the reaſon why
hope,1. Theſ. 5. 8. is compared to an Helmet: becauſe
as men hauing a good Helmette
vppon their heades, doe not feele anye
ſmarte by verye greate blowes giuen

there: ſo the hope of eternall life, ſhoulde
cauſe vs not to feele (as it were) the afflictions
of this preſent. We ſee the huſbandman
how he comforteth him ſelfe in all his
paynfull trauell about manuring, tilling,
ſowing, and weeding his grounde, onely
with the hope of recompence a good
while after in the harueſt time. And the
ſouldier ſetteth light by the cold in winter,
the heate in ſomner, his lying vppon the
ground, his hunger, his groſſe diet, and his
woundes, becauſe he hath an eye to the end
of the battel, the victory, the ſpoil, the praiſe
of his capteyne, & the return into his country
with honour. Now what is all the pelfe
of this earth, beeing compared with the
kingdome of God? what is the vic
                  •
               ory againſte
men, in reſpect of the triumph againſt
ſinne and Sathan? and what is the
ſpoile of tents, to the ritches of heauen? and
what is the prayſe of men, to the commendation
of of the Lorde, ſaying vnto vs? O
good and faithful ſeruant enter into the ioy
of thy maſter.Math 25. 21. ſeing therfore al theſe things
ſhall come vnto vs, if we patiently ſuffer
afflictions for wel doing, there is good reaſon
why we ſhould embrace the counſell of

the Apoſtle, and in our greateſt miſeries
reioyce our ſelues in the hope of that glory
that in the worlde to come ſhall be powred
vpon vs. It followeth.
            
               If you be railed vppon in the name of
Christ, &c. By ye name of Chriſt he vnderſtandeth
the doctrine of Chriſt, as S. Paule
in ye ſame ſpeech expoundeth the meaning
of ye holy ghoſt in another place.1. Tim. 6. 1. Where
name and doctrine b
                  •
               ing mentioned, the
latter is ſet downe, as the interpretaion of
the firſt. There is good reaſon of the ſpeach
becauſe as the name of euery thing declareth
what the thing is, ſo the doctrine of
Chriſt doth ſet forth, and as it were painte
him out vnto vs.
            Saint Peter here ſpeaketh of one particular
kinde of perſecution conſiſting in euill
and opprobrious wordes: whiche although
worldly men think no great matter
ſo long as they proceede not to impriſonment,
fire and ſworde: yet the ſpirit of God
in this place giueth it no better title, agreeing
with ſaint Paul in his epiſtle to the
Galathians:
               cap. 4. 29. wheras it is apparāt in ye hiſtory
that Iſaack was but mocked of Iſmael.
               Gen. 21. 9.
If therfore thou wilt not be counted a perſecuter

ſecuter of the church and ſeruants of God,
looke well to thy toung, that it ſpue forth
no taunting nor reprochfull words againſt
the profeſſors of the trueth: if thou doe, the
ſentence againſt them is penned already, &
thou art branded in the cheeke, with the
note of a perſecuter. And how odious this
thing is in the ſight of God, how ſlenderly
ſoeuer thou account of it, may appeare in
the hyſtory that we reade of in the ſeconde
booke of the Kings:cap. 2. 23. 24. Two and forty little
children were miraculouſly deſtrOyed with
Beares, for mocking the Prophet of God,
& calling him baldhead: and thinkeſt thou
to eſcape vengeance if thou be a rayler vpon
the ſeruants of God? the extraordinarye
puniſhment, after ſo ſtrange a manner,
vpon yong children that might ſeeme to
offend rather of wantonneſſe then vpon any
ſet purpoſe, declareth howe the Lorde
miſliketh of the like dealings, by ſuch as be
of riper yeers, whoſe fault muſt needs be ye
greter. The inſtructiō is profitable againſt
the mockers at all times. Now the apoſtle
ſeemeth to ſpeake of this kind of croſſe, rather
then any other, becauſe it doth inſeperably
& alwaies waite vpon the profeſſion
of ye goſpel: inſomuch as in ye greteſt peace

& liberty of the church, it is not free from ye
ſame. For euen in thoſe kingdomes where
the trueth is receiued by the prince, & eſtabliſhed
by lawes, ſo as open tirranie is reſtrained,
yet no man in any calling or conditiō
can walke vprightly before the Lord,
but he offreth himſelfe to harde ſpeaches
checks, taunts, & reproches. The practiſe of
our owne time proueth it, wherin peſtelent
toungs of profeſſed popiſh enimies powre
out their vennom, by giuing ye ſound profeſſors
of religion & the loyall ſubiects to her
maieſtie: ye names of preſciſians, puritans,
hot of the ſpirit, familie of loue, & diſobedient
ſubiects, confounding names, & multiplying
their ſcoffes, not knowing ye good &
faithful proteſtants, are as farre from theſe
hereſies as they are from truth or honeſty:
ſeeing therefore it is a thing yt doth ordinarily
fall out, ye holy ghoſt in this place prouideth
wel for our infirmity, in miniſtring
vnto vs ſo great comfort againſt the ſame.
You are bleſſed (ſaith Peter) if you be rayled
vpon for the name of Chriſt, according
to that ſpeach of our Lord: Bleſſed ſhall
you be when men hate you,Luk. 6. 22. 23. and ſeparate
you, and rayle vpon you, and put out your

                  〈◊〉
                as euil, for the ſonne of mans ſake.

Reioyce and be glad in that day▪ for behold
great is your reward in heauen. A naturall
man whoſe iudgement is corrupt, ſeeth notbleſſednes
in this condition: neither can he
poſſibly conceiue, how we ſhould be happy
in the middeſt of the ſhame and reproches
which happen vnto vs, when we be mocked
and tannted for righteouſnes ſake. Nay, he
is of an opinion clean contrary, imagining
thoſe to be happie of whom all men ſpeake
well, and therefore he laboreth to keepe an
euen hande, and to diſpleaſe neither ſide:
whereas Chriſt ſayth, woe vnto you when
all men ſpeake well of you.
                  
                     •
                  uk. 6. 26. Thus the naturall
man being led by his owne reaſon and
ſenſe, pronounceth them accurſed, whome
the Lord doth bleſſe, & them bleſſed, whom
the Lorde doth curſe. But let it ſuffize vs
that he hath ſpoken it which is holy & true:
let vs patiently wait for the performaunce
of his promiſe. And ſeeing he ſaith, that we
be happy, notwithſtanding all the railings
and ſpeakings againſt of our enemies, let
vs according to the ſayings of the Apoſtle,
through honoure and diſh
                  ••••
               r,2. Cor. 6. 8. thorough
good report and euill rep
                  •••
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                forward, to
finiſh the worke whereunto he hath called
vs. It followeth.
            
               
               For the ſpirite of glory and of God resteth
vpon you: Leſt the Apoſtle ſhould ſeeme to
affirme any thing without good proof, here
h
                  •
               e rendreth a reaſon of that which hee had
ſaide before: namely, that it cannot otherwiſe
be, but ſuch are happie that be railed
vppon for the name of Chriſt, becauſe the
ſpirit of glory & of God reſteth vpon them.
His meaning is, that it is a moſt certeine
euidence and demonſtration, of the ſpirit of
God (which is always accompanied wt glory)
dwelling within vs, when we patiently
indure perſecutions for the words ſake, &
holde on our ſcincere profeſſion notwithſtanding
all the mockings of our enemies.
It may come from fleſhe and blood, and the
corruption of our nature, to pretend zeale
to the trueth in the libertie thereof: but to
continue in the ſtormes and tempeſtes of
afflictions, ſo as no hardnes can remooue
vs from the zeal, which according to knowledge
we beare vnto God, this muſt needes
be ſupernaturall, vpright, and no other but
the fruite of the ſpirite: which beeing the
Lords, he cannot but acknowledge whereſoeuer
he find
                  •
                it: and therefore muſt neceſſarily
be glorious in his ſight, and euerlaſtingly

honored in heauen hereafter, howſoeuer
for the preſent time it appeare vilde
and odious in the eyes of men. Whereupō
ſaint Paul exhorting the Phillippians,
               cap. 1. 28. not to
feare their aduerſaries which oppoſed thē
               ſelues
againſt them, affirmeth conſtantly,
that perſecutions were manifeſt ſignes of
the deſtruction of the wicked from whome
they came, and moſt euident tokens, and as
it were earneſt pence of ye ſaluation of ſuch
againſt whome they were intended: agreeing
with that which is in his later epiſtle
to the Theſſalonians:
               cap. 1. 5. where hauing ſpoken
before of their ſufferings, he ſayth, that it
was a manifeſt declaratiō of the iuſt iudgement
of God, to the end they might be coū
               ted
worthie of his kingdome. The ſenſe of
this place is the ſame with that going before,
although the words ſeeme ſomwhat to
differ. Let vs therfore deſpiſe al ye ſcorns of
ye vngodly, & ſet light by al the mockings of
ye wicked: in our ſhame we be honorable, &
in al confuſion ſuffered for a good cōſcience
we are glorious, for the ſpirit of God & of
glory reſteth vpon vs, & we ſhalbe ſaued if
we cōtinue to ye end. This ſpirit (the apoſtle
ſaith here) is blaſphemed on ye behalfe of ye
wicked, and glorified on the behalfe▪ of the

godly. The meaning of the firſt wordes is,
that the enemies of the Church, deride and
ſcorne the graces of God in his children, &
therefore blaſpheme the ſpirit it ſelfe being
the authour and fountaine of the ſame: as
we ſee deſpight offred to the gift of the
Prince, is worthily deemed villanie to the
Prince himſelfe. We reade that the zeale
of God in our Sauiour Chriſt was termed
frenſie:Mar. 3. 21. Math. 27. 43. and his faith repoſed in his father
ſcorned on this wiſe: he truſted in God, let
him deliuer him now, if he will haue him.
The grace of ſpeaking with diuers toungs
in the apoſtles,Act. 2. 13. was chalenged of drunkennes
with new wine: And Festus ſaid vnto
Paule:
               Act. 26. 24. thou art out of thy wittes, too much
learning hath made thee madde. And in all
times of the afflictions of the Church, we
ſhal ſee not only the profeſſors taunted and
reproched, but alſo the gifts of the ſpirit of
God in them mocked & gibed at: As their
knowledge, their patience, their chaſtitie,
temperance, truſt in God, and watchfulnes
ouer their toungs: In ſo much as we
may finde tirants, that ieſted at the Chriſtians,
becauſe they woulde not ſweare
when there was no neceſſarie cauſe:

Well: they deale with one that is more
then their match, & they ſhall one day feel ye
ſmart of it, ſith their trechery is againſte
the holye Ghoſt euen God himſelfe, when
they ſcorne his graces in the ſaints. wheretas
it is ſaid in this place that the ſame ſpirite
is glorified on the behalfe of the godly,
his meaning is, that we honour the ſpirite
of God, when in all temptations we
continue to profeſſe that which it ſealeth in
our hearts, and thinke it ſufficient comfort
againſt all our troubles, that it teſtifieth to
our hearts, we be the children of God, that
we may call vpon him as a father, and that
we pleaſe him in all our ſufferings▪ To conclude
this verſe, let it not appeare ſtrange
vnto vs, that euill men deſpiſe the grace of
God that is in vs. It we glorifie his ſpirit
as we haue heard, we ſhal hereafter be glorified
with him eternally in the heauens: euen
as our Lorde by his owne example
hath taught vs to praye with comfort:Iohn. 17. 4. I
haue glorified thee vpon the earth, now (O
Father, glorifie me with thy ſelfe. It followeth.
            
               Let no man among you ſuffer as a manſ
                     •
                  eier,
or a thiefe, or an euill doer, or as a buſibody.
               
Hauing ſpoken before of the bleſſednes
of the Chriſtians, that be troubled
for righteouſnes ſake: in this verſe the Apoſtle
calleth vpon vs, to be ſo circumſpect
and wary of all our doinges, that we commit
no euill for the which wee might iuſtly
be puniſhed as malefactors. He rehearſeth
three particular offences: the firſt two be
playne: the third which in engliſh we read a
buſibody, (yt is, ſuch a one as curiouſly buſieth
himſelf in ſuch matters as concern not
his calling, & neglecteth them that belong
to his duty) the learned thinke may as fitly
be interpreted, a man greedy of other
mens goods. The other worde malefactor
or euill doer, may be vnderſtoode of euery
offender whatſoeuer▪ as well thoſe that
tranſgreſſe the lawes of the firſt table in
matters of Religion and the ſeruice of
God, as thoſe that breake the commandements
of the ſecond table, in ſuch thinges
as concerne our duty towarde men: ſo that
vnder theſe. Saint Peter comprehendeth
all manner of ſinne and corruption, hereſie
and idolatry which the word doth forbid &
puniſh,Deu. 13▪ the whol chapt
                     •
                  r. as well as diſordered behauiour of
one man toward another. We muſt therefore

take heede, that as wee profeſſe the
name and goſpell of Chriſt, ſo all our ſufferings
may come for the trueth of that, and
not for any Idolatry, hereſy, ſchiſme, murther,
adultery, whoredome, theft, couetouſneſſe,
going beyond the bounds of our callinges,
or any ſuch other thing. For if wee
be euill ſpoken of, broughte before iudges,
reſtrayned of our liberty, caſt in priſon, and
put to death in th
                  •
               ſe caſes, there is no reaſon
why we ſhoulde reioyce of the matter,
and think our ſelues happy therefore. Our
maſter Chriſte ſpeaking to his diſciples of
this point ſayd:Math. 5. 1
                     •
                  . bleſſed are you, when they
ſpeake al manner of euil of you lying: for
my ſake: Hee ſaith not ſimplye bleſſed are
you when they ſpeake all eui
                  •
               l of you: but
when they lye in ſo doing. And it is an ancient
ſaying of a Father: it is not the puniſhment,
but the goodneſſe of the cauſe
that maketh a Martyr. The papiſtes
therefore in reſp
                  •
               cte of God and his true
church, Heritiques and Schiſmatiques, &
in reſpect of their prince and country high
Traytors, haue no cauſe to boaſt themſelues
of any their ſufferinges, as though
they were perſecuted for righteouſneſſe

ſake: ſith beſides their hereſies and corrupt
opinions concerning religion, for yt which
they be worthy of death, they beare trecherous
and trayterous heartes to their ſouereigne
prince and country, which alſo from
time to time hath bene founde out by their
vnnatural and curſſed attempts. The like
is to bee ſayd of the falſe pretented Family
of loue, & al other heretiks & euil doers:
the vnclean perſon, the oppreſſor, deceiuer,
vſurer, drunkard: the euill miniſter when
he is cryed out againſt, and taunted by the
name of a hireling,Ioh. 10. 12.
a greedy dog that is neuer
ſatiſfied,Iſai. 56. 11. a dumbe dog, a blinde guide, or
an idle paſtor: cannot in trueth▪ applye the
comforts to them here mentioned, ſith they
be iuſtly reproched and puniſhed for their
ſinne: which the Apoſtle doth 
                  •
               orbid vs in
this place. And yet this is not ſo ſpoken,
as though all men were to diſpayre of them
ſelues, which bee any w
                  •
               ie corrected for
their euill doings:Luk. 23. 43. no, we knowe what is
written of the thiefe, y•
               ▪ was crucified with
our Lorde, and how he ſayd vnto him: this
day ſhalt thou be with me in paradiſe. Euen
ſo aſſuredly whatſoeuer the offēces be,
that we be euill ſpoken of for, or otherwiſe

puniſhed by impriſonmēt or deth, yet we be
happy & ſhal be ſaued, if grace be giuen vs
wt the thief, to repent, to hate our ſinne, & to
beleue.Apoc. 14. 13. For this is true for euer: bleſſed are
ye deade yt dye in ye Lord, in what ſort, or for
what cauſe ſoeuer they dy. Therefore, ye mā
yt ſufferreth for Chriſtes ſake, is bleſſed in
reſpect of the goodnes of his cauſe: and 
                  •
               e
that ſuffereth for his ſinne, is bleſſed, if the
Lord by that puniſhment bring him to repentance.
But let vs with all good conſcience
attend vpon this of the apoſtle, to honour
our profeſſion and high calling with
good life, and abſteining from euill. We
ſee how it fareth with the faithful ſeruants
of God, though they walke neuer ſo preſciſely,
yet wicked men will eſpy ſomwhat
to ſpeake euill, to take away their crowne
of ſuffering for well doing. How then ſhall
all our honour iuſtly be turned into ſhame,
and lye in the duſt, if we walke retchleſ
                  •
               ye
and diſſolutely? The exhortation is very
profitable for our time, wherin great numbers
turne the grace of God into wantonneſſe:
and therefore although they profeſſe
the goſpell & true religion of God, yet are
worthily, reproched for their vncleannes,

riot, vſurye, oppreſſion, couetouſneſſe, and
deceite. It followeth.
            
               But if he ſuffer as a christian, let him not
be aſhamed: nay let him▪ glorifie God in this
behalf: In the former verſe, as you hard, he
willed vs to take heede of being puniſhed
for doing euill, becauſe then there is iuſt
matter of humiliation offered vnto vs. In
this ſentēce he returneth to yt which he had
in hād before, namely to comfort vs in al afflictions,
yt happē for ye trueth ſake. If (ſaith
he) any ſuffer as a chriſtian, yt is for ye ſcincere
profeſſiō of Chriſts doctrin, let him neuer
be aſhamed of ye mater, but let him thāk
God in yt behalf. There are two thi
                  •
               gs required
of vs in this verſe: ye one is yt we be
not aſhamed of ye perſecutions yt we eudure
for a good cōſcience: ye other yt we reioyce &
be glad of them. Cōcerning ye firſt: ye euil of yt
which we do, & the vnworthines or baſenes
of ye party for whome we do it, are the only
occaſions yt miniſter iuſt matter of bluſſhing
& ſhame vnto vs. But the truth yt we
profeſſe in the word is ſo pure & excellent:
& the ſonne of God, in whome we beleeue,
and for whoſe ſake wee ſuffer is ſo holy, ſo
glorious, ſo mighty, & worthy of all honor

and ſeruice from vs, that there is no cauſe
why we ſhoulde be aſhamed of the croſſes
which we ſuffer in that behalfe. S Paule
he beleeued this, and therefore in the middeſt
of all the calamities that came vnto
him for doing of his duty,2. Tim. 1. 12. coulde ſay with
confidence. I am not aſhamed. For I know
him wel inough in whom I haue beleeued,
and am fully perſuaded, that hee is able to
keepe that whiche I haue committed vnto
him againſt that day. Let vs be like minded:
and ſith Ieſus Chriſt hath all power
in heauen and earth, ſo as he is able to defend
vs from the rage of our enemies here,
and to keepe our ſaluation ſure from being
hurt by any meanes, let vs neuer bluſh for
anye thing that happeneth vnto vs for
his ſake. Naturall men thinke that moſte
vile and ignominious,2. Sam. 6. 20. whiche in deede is
moſte glorious and beautifull. Michal
thought it the greateſt diſgrace that might
be vnto Dauid, to abaſe himſelfe to daunce
before the Arke of God, gyrded with a linnen
Ephod:21. 22. But Dauid thought no honor
like this, by humbling himſelfe, and being
vilde in the ſight of others, to exalt and ſet
vp the Lord. Euen ſo, they which be carried

onely by ſenſe and reaſon, can ſee n
                  •
               thing
but confuſion in the perſecutiōs of ye ſaints,
when as in deede it is the moſt honourable
thing vnder heauen. In ſo much as neither
Ioſep
                     •
                  ,
               Gen. 41. 42. hauing the kings ring vpon his finger,
arayde in fine linnen, with a chaine of
gold about his necke, and ſet vpon the beſt
Charret of the king ſaue on
                  •
               , and hono
                  •
               r ably
ſaluted of al the people:Heſter. 6. nor Mordecay,
at the kings commaundement moſt gorgiouſly
carried thorough the Citie vpon the
kings horſ, with this proclaimation before
him: thus ſhall it be done to the man whom
the king will honour: were ſo glorious in
the ſighte of their▪ beholders, as the true
Chriſtians are in the eyes of God, when in
the iudgement of man they ſeeme to be couered
with moſt confuſion and ſhame. And
in deede Cranmer, when hee was broughte
forth, and as it were ſet vpon a ſtage, to bee
mocked at by all the people, his Pall pulled
of, his haire cut by a Barber, his ſingers
endes ſcraped, an old gowne put vpon
his backe, and an olde cap vpon his head:
the admirall of Fraunce firſt mained with
a ſhot, then moſt trecherouſly ſlayne in his
chamber, after tumbled out of a windowe,

his head cut of, his corps dragged through
the ſtreates in Paris, & after hanged vpon a
gallows by ye heels: in ye middeſt of al theſe
were more glorious then either Mordecay
or Ioſeph in all their pompe & maieſty. Intſomuch
as theſe neuer vanted ſo much of ye
one, as they no doubt did of the other. Euen
as we finde n
                  •
                ſuch boaſting of any the ſeruants
of God in the ſcripturs, in reſpect of
their outward eſtate were it neuer ſo good:
as we do of S. Paul for his ſufferings: according
to ye which is writtē:Gal. 6. 17. frō henceforth
let no man put me to buſines: for I bear in
my body the markes of ye Lord Ieſus. The
impriſonments, bands, ſcourgings, ſtripes,
ſtonings, & reproches yt he indured, he calleth
the badges of the Lord Ieſus, wherby
he was known to be highly in his fauor, as
a faithful ſeruant of whom he made a ſpecial
account, & therfore is not only not aſhamed,
but alſo after a godly ſort boaſteth of
thē. Therfore let vs not think it any ſhame
vnto vs, whenſoeuer the Lorde ſhall thinke
it good to haue vs tried on this wiſe. It
followeth.
            
               But let him glorifie God in this behalfe:
This is the ſecond thing: we muſt be glad

of our perſecutiōs, & thank God moſt highly,
if he vouchſafe this honor vpon vs. For
in deede this is an eſpeciall token, yt he maketh
ſome reckoning of vs, when as he calleth
vs out, to vndergoe ſome hardnes for
his ſake. As we ſee the prince ſo thinketh of
thoſe men, whome he picketh forth from among
the reſt, to ſend about ſome notable &
moſt famous exploite, whereunto many are
not meete.Act. 5. 41. This made the apoſtles to leape
for ioy, becauſe they were counted worthye
to ſuffer for the name of Chriſte, euen then
when they had beene▪ cruelly beaten: this
ſtu
                  •
               red vp like affections in ſome of them
after in priſon: and this mooued S. Paule
to wrighte to the Phillippians, that they
ſhould eſteeme of their ſufferings, as of an
eſpeciall bleſſing, or mercy of the Lorde
beſtowed vppon them:Phil 1. 29. to you (ſayth hee)
it is giuen for Chriſte, that you ſhoulde
not onely beleeue in him, but alſo ſuffer for
his ſake. Nowe wee haue to thanke God,
not onely in reſpecte of the rewarde, that
ſhall followe oure perſecutions, as wee
haue harde: but eſpe
                  •
               iallye in reſpecte of
the cauſe for the whiche wee ſuffer. And
in deede this offereth more matter of ioy,

then the tongues of men and angells be able
to vtter: that, whereas the beſt of Gods
ſeruants for their lewdnes and euill,Deut. 27. 26. might
iuſtly be defamed,Rom. 6. 23. 1.
brought before gouernours,Ioh. 1. 10.
caſt in priſon and put to death, (for
who can deny this, ſeeing eternall damnation
is due to euery one): The Lord ſhould
conceal and couer all theſe, & in the meane
time giue them ouer, to be puniſhed for his
ſake and for well doing: and that puniſhment
to be recompenſed with eternall happineſſe.
Seing then we be bleſſed if we endure
troubles for righteouſnes ſake, and al
manner of iudgements be due vnto vs for
ſinne, let vs moſte heartily prayſe God (according
to the counſel of the Apoſtle) when
ſoeuer by any means we bee corrected for
well doing. It followeth.
            
               For the time is come wherein iudgement
must begin at God own houſe. By the houſe
of God is vnderſtood his church, & the peotple
that do rightly worſhip him▪ and truely
call vpon his name:1. Tim. 3. 15.
as we may learne by
the firſt epiſtle of S. Paul to T
                     •
                  mothie,
               Heb. 3. 6. and
that whiche is written to the Hebrewes.
The ſpeeche teacheth: that the Churche
of God, ought in euery thing to be ordered

and gouerned by his lawes and ſtatutes:
as it is equall and right, that the houſe of
each man, and al things in the ſame, ſhould
be diſpoſed according to the direction of
the owner and maſter. They which think
or practiſe otherwiſe▪ accuſe the almighty,
either of want of ſkill, that he ſhoulde not
knowe what was beſt: or elſe of wante of
care for his people, in not deliuering that
in his worde, which he knewe moſte expedient
and neceſſary to be eſtabliſhed. But
becauſe it is great blaſphemy, once to imagine
any ſuch thing: they ſhall on day anſwere
for their ſin, which turning al things
vpſide downe, commaund that for the diſcipline
and order of Gods houſe, which he
hath not giuen in charge or elſe forbidden:
and neglect or forbid that, which he moſte
excellently and in great wiſedome hath ſet
downe and appointed. No prince woulde
thinke himſelfe well dealt with, if any ſubiect
or ſubiectes ſhould thus preſume to inuert
the gouernment of his houſe: and will
earthly princes being ſubiectes to the almighty
God, and duſt and aſhes in his preſence,
thinke to eſcape vnpuniſhed, if they
commaund or ſuffer to be commanded any

thing for the orderi
                  •
               ng of the churche the
houſe of god, which he before hath not alowed?
The maſter is of more importance then
the moſt be ware of: & all princes that profeſſe
the religion of Ieſus Chriſt, had need
to looke vnto it. If Moſes for the building
of the Tabernacle of ye Iewes, and for the
ordering of enerye thing apperteining to
that firſt worſhip of God,Exod. 25. 40. had a patern and
lawes ſhewed him by the Lord, which bee
muſt keepe himſelfe vnto, and for his fidelitie
in that behalfe hath his iuſt commendation:Heb. 3. 5.
It is meete that we thinke as magnificentlye
of the chn
                  •
               rhe vnder the goſpell,
that nothing is left for the deuiſing of man,
ſith Ieſus Chriſt as the ſonne of God,Heb. 3. 16. was
faythfull in his fathers houſe by deliuering
the orders for the gouernment of the ſame.
Therefore let not the Lordes remembrancers
keep ſilence,Iſa. 2. 6. nor giue him any reſt, vntil
he repaire the ruines of Hieruſalem.
            Moreouer, this ſpeech teacheth what puritye
of doctrine and manners ought to bee
continually in the churche, and euery particuler
member of it. Euen ſuch as becommeth
the temple and houſe of God, and the
place where the almigty hath his reſidēce,

and doth dwell. We ſee what care there is
in the officers of princes houſes, that no filthines
be in any corner of the Court, to offend
the prince, or the nobles paſſing by: &
for this purpoſe there be writings ſet vp in
euery place. But ther is not the like regard
of the Lords court, to keepe corruption out
of his houſe. We ſee how the church is peſtered,
with euil miniſters, with adulterers,
whoremaſters, ſwearers, prophaners of the
Sabbaoth, mockers of the worde, and the
meſſengers thereof, vſurers, deceiuers, riotous
& contentious perſons. Againſt whom
there is very ſmall diſcipline. Although the
Lorde haue on euery wall ſet vp is billes
forbidding theſe enormities, and commanding
they ſhold be thruſt out of his church,
as vnworthy of any place there, vntill they
haue declared openly their true repentance
Seeing then the people that profeſſe the
true religion of Chriſte, be the church and
houſe of God: it concerneth all thoſe to
whom God hath cōmitted ye 
               
                  •
               ouernment, to
ſee yt it 
                  •
               e kept from the pollution of ſinne:
and each Chriſtian muſt looke to himſelfe,
to poſſes his veſſel in holines & honor,1. Theſ. 4. 4.
               1. Cor. 6. 19. as it
becommeth the temple of the holy ghoſt.
            
               
The apoſtle telleth vs here, that the time
was then come, that the Lord would begin
to puniſh his moſt faythful ſeruaunts: and
therefore we muſt eyther bee contented to
endure afflictions, or elſe not to be acconnted
of the houſholde and Churche of God.
The Lorde in this place is likened vnto a
wiſe and carefull prince, who although hee
haue an eye to the diſorders of the whole
realm and kingdome, yet doth eſpecially regard
to correct ye offēces of his own famili.
Euen ſo God: although in all ages he hath
teſtified his diſpleaſure agaynſt ſinne in all
kind of people and perſons: yet his roddes
and ſcourges haue at all times beene ſo occupied
about the chaſtiſing of his churche,
that in compariſon of it, he hath ſeemed to
ſpare the reſt, and to neglect the tranſgreſſions
                  •
               
of the heathen. Let vs conſider the
temptations, of Abraham, Iacob, Ioſeph. &
Dauid. Had not he moſt wicked of yt time,
greater eaſe and peace then they had in the
greateſt part of their life? ſurely if we know
their ſtories, we muſt confes ſo much. And
if we looke to the whol nation of the Iews,
firſt in Egypt, and then after in the lande of
Canaan: we ſhall finde that the Lorde puniſhed

them alwayes firſt, and that to, ſo
ſharply, as the like vengeance and deſtruction
lightened not vpon any people. As it
is mentioned in Daniel:
               Cap 9 12.
               Cap. 25. 29. And as Ieremie
ſayth: I beginne to plague the City where
my name is called vpō. The reaſon of this
proceeding of the Lorde, is beſt knowne
vnto himſelfe, it ſuffiſeth vs for this
text to be perſwaded of this trueth, whiche
we may vnderſtand by the recordes of the
ſcriptures. Although it mighte bee briefly
ſayde, that hee hath an eſpeciall care of the
ſaluation of his people, and therefore puniſheth
them aboue and before the reſt, to reclaime
them from their ſinnes, that they
ſhoulde not bee damned with the worlde.1. Cor. 11. 3
                     •
                  .
Moreouer, becauſe his mercies towardes
his Churche,Amos. 3. 1. 2. are beyonde all compariſon
more then vnto others: It is equall and
righteous, that it offending, ſhould both be
firſt puniſhed, and more ſeuerely then the
reſt. But as this hath beene the ordinary
courſe of the Lorde toward his Churche,
from the beginning: ſo was it eſpecially
true of the time wherein the Apoſtle writ,
after the manifeſtation of the ſonne of God
in the fleſh. For both then, & euer ſithence,

the Lorde was and continueth ſo ſharpe to
them that truly worſhip him, & be carefull
to pleaſe his ma
                  •
               eſty, (in the meane ſeaſon
ſeeming often times to ſpare the wicked
and vngodly) that in the iudgment of fleſh
and bloud,Iob. 21. 14. 14. it was better with ſuche as ſayd
vnto God: departe from vs, we will none
of thy lawe, what is the almightie that we
ſhould feare him? then with thoſe that ſtood
in awe of his commaundements, and ſette
naught by all the pleaſures, and tormentes
of the worlde, in compariſon of the fauoure
of God, and keeping a good conſcience
beefore him. Conſider the eſtate
of the Apoſtles, and profeſſours
in the Actes. The condition of the
Church hath not amended any thing ſithence,
but as the glorye of it approcheth
neerer & neerer: ſo the warrfare of it vpon
the earth hath increaſed ſharper & ſharper:
The perſecutions, vnder the Romaine emperours,
the Turkes, and laſt in the vſurped
dominions of the Prieſte of Rome,
doe ſufficientlye prooue the truethe of
this matter. Let vs remember what
hardneſſe, Cranmer, Latimer, Ridley,
Hooper, Bradforde, and the reſte, indured

of late yeares with in our owne realm,
when as it was peaceable and quiet, with
all the wicked of the lande. And how hath
it gone more lately with the true Chriſtians,
and faythfull ſeruants of God in our
neighbour countries of Flanders, France,
and Spayue, as their ſtories doe witneſſe:
when as in the meane time, brothels, witches,
adulterers, inceſtuous perſons, murtherers,
blaſphemers, ruffians, and abhominable
Idolaters were vntouched. And
was there euer ſuche a iudgement vnder
heauen, as after that marriage at Pariſe
fel vpon thoſe zealouſe and ſincere profeſſours
of the trueth? S. Paul therefore
ſayth truely, of all faithful Chriſtians, that
if the hope of the life to come were taken away,
of al other men, they were moſt miſerable.
If in this life onely we beleeued in
Chriſt,1. Cor. 15. 19. we were (ſayth he) moſte wretched
of all others. Neither ſpake he this, without
good matter to lead him vnto it. For
whereas the wicked, liue peaceablie in
the worlde (becauſe the worlde loueth it
owne) be free from aduerſity, and in their
proſperity reioyce them ſelues: the faithful
ſeruants of God bee alwayes hated and

perſecuted one waye or other: they no ſooner
creade awry, but the Lord calleth them
agayne into the way, with ſome ſcourge, &
in the middeſt of their greateſt peace, they
be humbled with inward temptations, ſorrow
for ſinnes paſt, griefe for preſent and
dayly falles, doubtes & terrors, ſo as they
alwayes woorke out their ſaluation with
feare & trembling.Phil. 2. 12. Inſomuch as indeed the
moſt wicked were in better caſe then they,
if their fayth, hope, & good conſcience, had
no other recompenſe but in this life. But
the life to come is their comforte, becauſe
they know,
                  
                     •
                   Cor. 5. 1. that if the tabernacle of this
earthly houſe, be put off and diſſolued, they
ſhall haue a building giuen them of God,
that is an houſe not made with handes, but
eternall in the heauens. Therefore let vs
not be diſcomforted in oure troubles, as
though for them wee mighte conclude wee
were forſaken of the Lorde, and did not belong
vnto him. Wee ſee here the apoſtle telleth
vs, that iudgement beginneth at his
owne houſe. It followeth.
            
               If it beginne first with vs, what shall be
the end of them that obey not the Goſpell of
God. We haue heard before of the troubleſome

eſtate of Gods Church & people
vpon the earth, and how the Lorde ſeemeth
to fauor the wicked, becauſe for a time they
floriſh, and be ſpared in their ſinnes. Now,
leaſt the faythfull ſhoulde be deceiued with
the proſperity of the wicked, and imagine
that the Lord would euer beare with them
in their naughtineſſe: here the apoſtle telleth
vs, that they likewiſe muſt haue their
courſe, and that neceſſarily there muſt be a
time wherein they ſhall be plagued. For
thus doth he reaſon from the leſſe vnto the
greater: If God correct them that imbrace
his goſpell, and be careful to doe him faithfull
ſeruice, if he begin firſt to ſcourge ſuch:
is it poſſible that they ſhould eſcape moſte
fearefull vengeance, which be ſworne enemies
to his maieſty: ſuperſtitious, idolatrous,
ignorant, and diſobedient to his wil?
The time certeinly will come (God being
iuſt) when they ſhall bee rewarded ſeuenfolde
into their boſoms.Pſal. 79. 12. Therefore let not
wicked men preſume vpon their ſafety, becauſe
they be ſpared for a time: & let them
not inſult vppon the Seruauntes of God,
becauſe they are afflicted and kept vnder,
when themſelues, enioy the deſire of their

heartes, and often times be the Lordes
roddes, whereby he whippeth his choſen.
For when the Lorde hath worne them to
the ſtumps, aboute the backes of his children,
to their greate good, then muſte
themſelues be throwne into the fire of
deſtruction, becauſe the Lorde hath no
more vſe of them.Iſai. 10. 12. This did Iſaiah the prophet
propheſy to the comfort of the church
in his time: when ſayth he, the Lord hath
acompliſhed all his worke vppon Mount
Sion and Ieruſalem, he will viſite the fruite
of the proud heart of the king of Aſhur. As
though he ſhould haue ſayd: although God
for a time, giue vp his church: to be chaſtiſed
by the king of Aſſiria a wicked man,
ſo as he may ſeeme to haue caſt of his owne
people for euer, and to haue taken the
proude and irreligious Aſſirians in their
ſtead, Yet the time will come, when they
ſhall bee reſtored to their beautye, and the
wicked king with his people broughte to
confuſion and ruine: Euen when the Lord
hath by them, accompliſhed that correction
of his Church, which hee hath determined.
According to that which he ſayth in another
place: Woe to thee that ſpoyleſt,

and waſt not ſpoyled:Iſai. 33. 
                     •
                  . and doeſt wickedlye,
and they did not wickedly againſte
thee: when thou ſhalt ceaſe to ſpoyle, thou
ſhalt bee ſpoyled: when thou ſhalte make
an end of doing wickedly, they ſhall do
wickedly agaynſte thee. With theſe teſtimonyes
agreeth that of Ieremy, which
he propheſied agaynſte the Babilonians, after
that the People of God ſhoulde haue
beene with them in bondage 70. yeares:
I beginne to plague the Cytye (ſaythe
the Lorde) where my name is called vppon,Ier. 25.
and ſhoulde you goe free? You
ſhall not goe quit.
            And howe truelye theſe Propheſies
agaynſte the Aſſirians, and Babylonians
were accomp
                  •
               iſhed, may appeare to
all thoſe that reade the Scriptures of
the olde Teſtament.Gen. 15. 13. 14 To the ſame purpoſe
mighte bee alleadged, that whiche
God long before colde Abraham, concerning
the bondage of Iſrael in Egypt,
their wonderfull deliuerance from thence,
and the deſtruction of Pharaoh and his
people.1. Sam. 31. 4. So it came to paſſe with Saule,
when hee had a long time afflicted Dauid:
               
with Haman when hee had obteyned that
murdering decree againſt the Iewes,1. Mac. 6. & 2. 9. read the chapters.
               Act. 12. and
with Antiochus the tyrants, when for a time
they had blaſphemed the God of heauen, ouerthrowen
his true worſhippe, and killed
his people. Saule ſlewe himſelfe: Haman &
his children were hanged vpō the gallows,
that he had ſet vp for Mordecai: the firſt Antiochus
dyed in great vexatiō of his mind, &
the later ſo eaten with woormes, that his
moſt familiar friends coulde not abide him
for ſtinke.
            Of Henrie the ſecond the father, & Charles
the ninth the ſonne, kings of Fraunce: the
firſt when he had cauſed much blood to bee
ſhed, and lately before had ſaide, that himſelfe
would ſee the burning of a noble Proteſtāt
called Anduburgè, had one of his own
eyes firſt put out by Mountgomerie, after a
wonderfull manner, running with him at a
Iuſting in ſport, and dyed in great wearineſſe
of his life by reaſon of his paine, the
tenth of Auguſt. 1559. The other the ſon,
when hee had brought to paſſe that moſt
ſtrange maſſachre immediatly after the mariage
of his Siſter with the king of Nauarre,
and had ſucked much blood of Gods

ſeruants afterwardes, dyed himſelfe moſt
miſerably ye 30. of Maie, 1574. it is writtē
of him in ye french hiſtories, that he was ſick
of a bloody flixe, and reported for a trueth,
that blood yſſued from diuers partes of his
body wher there were other natural yſſues,
ſo as toſſing and tumbling himſelfe in his
bed moſt fearefully: horribly curſſing, and
blaſpheming the name of God, euen vntill
his laſt gaſpe, which alſo he had vſed to doe
from his childehood, he ſo ended his wretched
life, being at length filled with blood
which he had before inſaciably thirſted after.
Of the Cardinall of Loreine a chiefe
practiſer of miſchiefe againſt Gods church
who as the ſtories witneſſe of him, dyed in
a frenſie, and when the prieſte broughte
oyle to annoynt him after their popiſhe order,
he thruſt his hand into the diſhe, and all
to be ſmeared the face of the prieſt with it.
So he dyed at Auineon. 1574. The like
might be ſaid of Herode, Stephen Gardiner
in Englād, & others. Such ferful ends c
                  •
               me
to diuers bloody perſecuters, as our owne
countriman M. Fox reporteth. And aſſure
your ſelues (O al you wicked of ye earth,) y•
ſame portiō abideth for you, if you turn not

to the Lord. Go to therfore mock on, at the
ſaints of God, ſet your ſelues againſt his
trueth, perſecute his ſeruants, and proceed
in all miſchiefe, and flatter your ſelues becauſe
God ſtayeth to puniſh, & the worlde
ſmileth vpon you: doubt you not but the day
will come when you ſhall pay full dearely
for it. And we that ſuffer, or ſhall ſuffer any
thing at the handes of the vngodly, let vs
not be offended at our ſufferings, and their
proſperity:2. Theſ. 1. 6. 7. For it ſhal be a righteous thing
with God, to recompence trouble to thoſe
that trouble vs, and to our ſelues reſt, if not
in this world, yet at the leaſt, when ye Lord
Ieſus ſhall again ſhew him ſelfe from heauen
with his mighty Angelles.
                  
                     •
                  . Theſ. 1. 8. And ſeeing
the apoſtle ſayth here, that it muſt needes
goe hard with them, that obey not the goſpell,
let vs not content our ſelues, with a
bare and naked profeſſion of the trueth:
but whatſoeuer is taught, and we know, let
vs take heede, that we be obedient thereunto.
It followeth.
            
               And if the righteous be ſcarcely ſaued,
where shall the vngodlye and ſinner appeare?
By the righteous hee vnderſtandeth,
ſuche as bee ſtudious of righteouſneſſe,

and bee carefull to pleaſe God,
althoughe they bee not free from all
ſinne.
            And by ſinners hee meaneth not all
manner of offendoures, but ſuche as
yeelde them ſelues to corruption,Pſal. 1. 1.
               Luk 7. 39.
               Ioh. 9. 31. and delight
in wickedneſſe: according as this
woorde is vſed in other places of the
Scripture. Nowe the purpoſe of the
Apoſtle in this ſentence, is the ſame with
that in the ende of the laſte Verſe: Hee
confidentlye affirmeth, that the wicked
muſte needes bee iudged with extreame
ſeueritye, ſithe the hande of God is often
times heauye vppon them that feare him.
This hardnes for ye righteous muſt not be
vnderſtood, of the laſt iudgement, as ſome
would haue it, as though they ſhould not
there acquite themſ
                  •
               lues without great
difficulty, and be ſaued without much ado.
Noe, we ſee what ſaint Paul writeth touching
this matter:Rom. 8. 33. 34 Who (ſayth he) ſhall
lay any thing to the charge of Gods choſen?
it is God that iuſtifieth who ſhall condemue?
it is Chriſte which is deade, yea
or rather whiche is riſen agayne, who is

alſo at the right hand of God, and maketh
requeſtes alſo for vs. The ſumme of his
ſpeech is, that there ſhall be none to accuſe,
or to pronounce ſentence againſt any of the
elect of God, and therefore their paſſage
into glory at that time ſhall be moſte eaſie.
Whereupon our ſauiour Chriſte willeth
vs, that we looke vp, and lift vp our heads
for ioy,Luk. 11. 28. whenſoeuer there appeare any tokens
of the approching of that day. Which
there were no great cauſe that we ſhoulde
doe, if ſuch hardneſſe were then to be endured
as ſome haue imagined. And howe
ſhould the ſaying of the ſonne of God bee
true?Apoc. 14. 13. bleſſed bee the deade that dye in the
Lorde, and they reſt from their labours: if
newe labours were to be taken in hand at
the laſt iudgement. This difficulty therefore
is to be vnderſtoode of this life, according
alſo as the verb (be ſaued) in the preſent
tenſe doth euidently ſhewe: So as the
Apoſtle his meaning is, that the eſtate of
the godly is ſo troubleſome vpon the earth,
that they enter not into the kingdome of
reſt & glory, except firſt in the worlde, they
haue gone thorough infinite daungers, and
eſcaped as it were a thouſand deathes. Euen

as the Apoſtles preached whereſoeuer
they came, exhorting the diſciples to continue
in the fayth,Act. 14. 22. affirming that they muſt
thorough many afflictions enter into the
kingdome of God:Pſa. 34. 19. and as Dauid ſaythe:
Greate are the troubles of the righteous:
and as S. Paul ſetteth it downe for a principle
vnto Timothie:
               2. Tim. 3. 12. that all ſuche as will
liue godly in Chriſt Ieſus, muſt ſuffer perſecution.
The trueth of this we haue heard
before: and each man which knoweth any
thing of himſelfe, and the Church of God
as hee ought to knowe, doeth vnderſtande
and beleeue it. Nowe this beeing proued
true by continual experience: can the Lord
be iuſt, thus to chaſtiſe and keepe in heauineſſe
his faythful ſeruants? except in time,
moſt fearefull vengeance light vppon the
ſinners:Gen. 18. 25. ſhal not the iudge of all the world
doe right? Yes verily. For this doth certeinely
preach vnto vs, and cryeth as lowd
in our ears as al the teachers in the world,
that there ſhall bee a iudgement,2. Theſ. 1. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. when all
things ſhal be brought in good order: when
the godly ſhal ceaſe from all their ſorrowe,
and the wicked ſhall drinke the full cup of
Gods wrath. Therefore as Ieſus Chriſte

ſaide of himſelfe, ſo may it be ſpoken of all
the children of God for euer: if they do theſe
things to a green tree that is fruitful, what
ſhalbe done to the drie and barren? And if
the righteous be not ſaued but through ſo
many afflictions: howe miſerable muſte
the condition of the ſinner be? If Abraham
reſted not in peace, til he had a great while
wandred as a ſtranger from place to place,
was pinched with famine,Gen 12. 10. 11. & 21. 25. & 22. 
                     •
                  . driuen to denie
his wife, to ſtriue for water, and commaunded
to be a butcher of that ſonne in whome
the hope of his ſaluation reſted? If Iacob
ended not his pilgrimage to paſſe into glory,Gen. 27. 42. & 28. 11.
till firſt hee was conſtrained to flee for
feare of his owne brother: to lye all night
in the broade fielde with a ſtone vnder his
head for a pillowe:Gen. 29. 20. 27 to ſerue ſeuen yeres for
one wife, & ſeuen for another, vnder an vnciuill
and barbarous vncle: to abide manifold
ſtirres & diſcords in his houſe between
his wiues: to bee checked by Labans children:
to be deceiued by their father: to haue
his owne daughter rauiſhed: his ſonnes Simeon
and Leuie,
               Cap. 30. 14. 15. & 31. 1. 41. & 34. 1. 25. to commit moſt horrible
murther: to haue one of his wiues abuſed
by his owne ſonne: his dearling Ioſeph
               
torne in pieces of wilde beaſtes as he was
brought to beleeue:Gen. 35. 12 & 37. 32. and in his olde age to
be vexed with hungre.Gen. 42. 
                     •
                  . O Lord, what ſhal
be the ende of the vngodly? If the Prophets
in their time: If Ieſus Chriſt himſelf
the Lord of glory: & his holy Apoſtles,
indured the diſpleaſure of princes, impriſonments
in myerie dungeons, buffetings,
whippings, ſcornings, ſawing aſunder, crucifying,
ſtoning and beheading, before they
were glorified?Ier. 3
                     •
                  . O howe miſerable ſhall the
portion be of the ſinner? It the moſt famous
witneſſes of Ieſus Chriſte, Hierome of
Prage, Iohn Huſſe, VVickliffe, Cranmer,
Latimer, Hooper, Ridley, Philpot,
Bradforde. the Shatillion of Fraunce, Bucer,
Paulus Fagius and the reſt, entered not
into heauen till they were firſte impriſoned,
mocked, dragged through the ſtreates,
ſcorched, and their fleſhe with fire conſumed
vnto aſſhes: If the laſt two, coulde
not bee glorified in their bodies, till firſt
they were taken vp beeing dead, and their
bones burnt: If ſo ſtraunge a kinde of manacle
was Cuthbearde Simpſons Ladder
into heauen?Acts and 
                     〈◊〉
                   nume
                     •
                  tes. Is any tong able to expreſſe,

or any heart able to conceiue, the height &
depth of the miſeries prepared for the wicked,
and all the enemies of the Church? although
for a time in this worlde, they proſper
and haue peace. If ſuch as haue liued
without all blame before men: or for a time
hauing gone out of the way, doe afterward
vnfeynedly repent, and become as zealous
in Gods matters, as they haue bin forward
in corrupt
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                and declare as great a deteſtation
of 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  ••
               ines in themſelues and others,
as euer they ſhewed liking of the
ſame: yet for all that, in this life indure extreeme
pouertie,Luk. 16. as did Lazarus: be plunged
in the gul
                  •
               e of all outward miſeries as
was Iob, who ſcraped the filth from his bodie
with a po
                  •
               ſherd,Iob. 2. 8. 9. and was euen loathed
of his owne wife: be preſſed with ſuch agonies
of the ſoule, as no tongue can vtter, as
was that Iob, Dauid and others: inſomuch
as they refuſe all comfort of meate, ſpende
many nightes without ſleepe, flee the companie
of men, feare euery thing that they
ſee: the earth leſt it ſhould take them downe
quicke, the heauens leſt they ſhould fall, and
cruſhe them to pieces, and all creatures, becauſe
they ſee nothing but horror in them.

Moreouer be troubled with ſtraunge viſions
and dreames, bee brought merueilous
low in their bodies, their bones weakened,
their fleſhe conſumed, and their eyes ſunke
in their head: that when it is euening, they
ſay, would God it were morning, and when
it is morning, they ſay, would God it were
euening. And that which is the depth of all
miſerie, haue their ſinnes (committed by
them ſince they had any vnderſtanding) at
one time brought to their remembrance, &
all comfort concerning hope of remiſſion ſo
taken away (becauſe they can ſee nothing
in God but an angrie iudge) that in the end
they breake out into theſe moſt lamentable
ſpeeches: woe is me poore caytife that euer
I was born: curſſed be the houre wherein
I was conceiued, and the day wherein I
firſt faw the ſunne:Iob. 7. O that God had made
me a Serpente to licke the duſte vpon the
earth, or a toade to creepe vpon the ground:
ſo ſhuld my miſery haue ended at my death.
But now alaſſe I know it ſhal be mine entrance
tnto eternall paines, hell is my portion,
and there I muſt remaine for euer: I
am moſt ſure of it. Comfort you not me (my
friends) the promiſes of God belong to you

and to his elect: there is no mercie for me:
I haue ſo grieuouſly offended: I feele my
ſelfe deſtitute of all markes of Gods childe:
and I was a reprobate from before the beginning.
If for a time ſuche bee thus caſt
downe, & peraduenture throwne into greater
miſeries then any of theſe reherſed, that
no comforts be able to rayſe vp their tyred
ſoules, but eyther yet wraſtling with ſathan
and diſpaire, or els ouercome by them, bee
preſſed out of al meaſure: And notwithſtanding
all theſe, recouer afterwards, & caſting
away all horror, doubting and ſlauiſh ſea
                  •
               e,
by their fayth mounte aboue the heauens,
where they ſee their Sauiour whome their
ſoule hath longed after, ſitting at the right
hand of God: ſo as they bewayle their former
vnbeliefe, lament thoſe ſpeeches of diſpaire,
be throughly perſwaded of the remiſſion
of all their ſinnes, haue certeine hope
of eternall life, & become ſo comfortable in
Gods promiſes, that by his grace they bee
able to rayſe vp ſuch as doubt and feare: &
finally leaue behinde them vndouted proofs
of the elect of God, that to all ſuch as haue
iudgement and vnderſtanding, they appear
plainely to haue bin ſealed vp vnto eternall

life from the beginning? Can it otherwiſe
be, but that there are vnſpeakable torments
after this life, appointed to ſuch as make a
ſport of ſinne, neuer turne to God, and dye
without repentantaunce: although in this
world they abound with all health, wealth,
and proſperitie? let vs therefore reioyce
in all our afflictions, wherein we take part
with all the ſeruauntes of God: and let vs
not be offended at the proſperity of the vngodly:
the time will come when wee ſhall
haue comforte, & when they ſhalbe tormented:
For ſo doth it ſtande with the trueth &
iuſtice of God, according to that which Abraham
ſayd to the rich man in hell: ſonne
remember that thou in thy lyfe time receyuedſt
thy pleaſures, and likewiſe Lazarus
paines: now therefore is he comforted, &
thou art tormented. If followeth.
            Therefore let them that ſuffer according
to the wil of God: commit their ſoules to him
in wel doing, as vnto a faithful Creator.
            This is the concluſion of the whole treatiſe:
as thoughe hee ſhoulde haue ſayde on
this wiſe: ſith the afflicting of the churche
is no newe thing, ſith it is a meane to trye
the good from the bad, and to make them

better, in whome there is (by the grace of
God) ſome goodnes: ſith in all ſufferings it
is a partaker with Ieſus Chriſt, & ſhall reioyce
with him, when he appeareth againe
in glory: ſith we be happy when we be railed
vpon in the name Chriſte, becauſe the

                  •
               pirite of God & of glory reſteth vpon vs:
ſith we ſuffer not as euill doers, but as chriſtians,
& ſo haue no cauſe to bee aſhamed:
ſith the time is now, wherein the Lord wil
ſcourge his owne houſe: and hereafter will
moſt ſeuerely proceede agaynſt the wicked
although he ſpare them for a time: Let vs
continue in well doing, and committe oure
ſelues to him, that is faithfull, and able
to keepe that, whiche wee truſt him with.
There is yet another cōfort for vs in this
verſe, that we heard not before: and that is
where he telleth vs, that we be not afflicted
by the will and pleaſure of men, but onelye
at the pleaſure & appointment of the Lord.
To proue this point of doctrine, I ſhall not
need to labour much: the truthe of it ſhould
ſoone be granted, if we knew what we ſayd
in this confeſſion: I beleeue in God the father
almighty maker of heauen and earth.
For what is this elſe, but to aſcribe ſuch a

ſouereigne power vnto God, that nothing
is done nor can be done, in heauen, earth, or
hell, but that onely which he determineth &
appointeth? The diuel himſelfe coulde not
ſturre one foote forward,Iob. 1. 12. & 26.
               Luc. 8. 30. 32. to hurt Iob in his
cattel, children, or himſelfe, till the Lorde
from heauen had firſt ſayd, goe: Nay the legion
of Deuils, coulde not touche one of the
Gadarenes ſwine, til the Lorde Ieſus had
firſt giuen them licence. And ſhal we think
that mortall men, (whoſe malice againſte
the hurch is not ſo deadly, nor their power
ſo great) can ſo much as lift vp a finger to
pul a hair frō the faces of any of Gods children,Luk. 127.
till firſt the Lord haue taken order for
the matter? wee be deceiued, & greatly detogate
from the maieſty of the almighty, if
we once imagine any ſuch thing. Whereupon
Nabucadonizer in the middeſt of all
his malice to the Iews the church of God,
is termed the Lordes ſeruaunt:Ier. 25. 9. becauſe in
deede as an hangman or executioner, he did
nothing elſe, but that which hee had determined.
Although the ſinne of the king was
in this behalfe great, becauſe his purpoſe
was not to doe the will of the Lord, but to
ſatiſfie his owne proude and cruell affections.

So is Aſhur.
               Luk. 16. 25. (ye king of Aſſiria) called
the rod of God. And to this purpoſe it is
ſaid in the acts, that Poncius Pilate and the
Iewes,Act. 4. 28. in condemning and crucifying the
ſonne of God, did that which the father before
had appointed. Inſomuch as it may
be truely concluded, that the deuill and all
the wicked of the earth, in their extreameſt
rage againſt the ſaints, do nothing elſe but
the will of God,Iſa. 10. 5. 8. although they know it not,
neither do it to any ſuch intēt, ſith they wholy
oppoſe themſelues againſt his maieſty.
And yet the Lorde muſt not be charged to
be the author of euill: for the ſelf ſame fact,
I mean the troubling of the church, in reſpect
of God, and his purpoſe therein, is
holy, glorious, righteous, full of mercy, and
to the great good of his ſeruaunts: which
neuertheleſſe in reſpect of the inſtruments
by whome God worketh it, is wicked, vniuſt,
full of cruelty, and intended to the hurt
of his children. But inough of this common
place, that the enemies of the faythful,
be nothing els, but the Lords rods, wherewith
he exerciſeth his people: and that of
themſelues they can do no more, then a rod
or a whippe out of the hand of the ſmiter.

Now this teacheth vs not to fear the faces
of the vngodly, nor to be diſmaid at their
threates: the Lorde appointeth them certaine
bondes, beyonde the which they can
not paſſe the bredth of an haire. And this
offreth vnto vs great comfort. For what
childe that is wiſe and hath vnderſtanding,
doeth not reioyſe, in the correction of his
father? ſith being perſwaded of his fatherly
and tender affection, he is out of doubt,
that it is well meant, and ſhall turne to his
good. Seing then the Lord is our Father,
& his compaſſion ouer vs, paſſeth the kindnes
of a mother toward the infant ſucking
vpon her breſt:Iſa. 49. 15. Let vs be comfortable in
all our afflictions, ſith they come from him,
and fall vpon vs according to his will. And
that we maye haue to cheare vs in all our
diſtreſſes, let vs ſerioſly meditate vpon this
one thing: the Lorde ſendeth them. After
which conſideration: it by the teſtimonye
of the ſpirite crying in our hearts (Abba)
father,Gal. 4. 6. & the ſanctification of our liues,
we can perſwade our ſelues, that we be his
children: ye preſent ſmart ſhall not quail vs,Heb. 12. 11.
becauſe of the fruit of righteouſnes following
after:Rom. 8. 28. & it muſt needs turne to our beſt,

becauſe it commeth from our father. Thus
much of theſe words of ye apoſtle: Let ſo many
as bee afflicted according to the will of
God. &c.
            
            His concluſion is, that in all well doing
we commende our ſoules vnto God, that
hath made them. For, as wee haue before
in the time of our peace, declared ſome
rare of pleaſing God, and doing his will: ſo
is it our dueties to continue in our afflictions,
and not for them, to take any libertie
to doe euill. And therefore wee muſt not
murmure againſt the Lorde, as though he
dealte hardly with vs: wee muſte not bee
fainthearted to denie his trueth: we muſte
not be bitter to our enemies in curſſing of
them, and rewarding them as they deale
with vs: but with all patience, weekeneſſe,
gentlenes, courage, forgiuing of our aduerſaries,
and praying for them: conſtantly to
endure whatſoeuer the Lorde will trie vs
with, according to the precepts of the ſcriptures,
& the example of Dauid, Chriſt himſelfe,
Stephen, and the reſt of the holy martyrs,
which bleſſed their perſecuters,Luke. 23. 46.
               Act. 7. 59. 60. and in
the deſtruction of their bodies, committed
their ſpirites into the handes of God: In

whome they beleeued, that he was faithful,
& able to keepe ſafe whatſoeuer was commended
vnto him:2. Tim. 1. 12. whoſe ſteppes if we doe
follow, according to the doctrine of the apoſtle
in this place: then, although our bodies
be turned into duſt,Eccle. 12. 7. whēce they came,
beeing racked by Tyrants, caſt in priſon,
burnt, and the aſhes throwne into riuers:
yet vnto oure ſoules they ſhall offer no
violence, but beeing committed into the
handes of the Lorde, ſhall returne to
him that gaue them, till the daye come
when all our enemyes ſhall bee troaden
vnder oure feete:Apoc. 2. 26. 27
               Apoc. 20. 13. when the earthe and
Sea, rendering theire deade, bodye and
Soule ſhall meete together, to bee crowned
in token of victorye, and with all
the holye Angelles to take full poſſeſſion
of that glorious and immortall kingdome,
which nowe we hope for.Apoc. 14. 4. Where
we ſhall followe the Lambe wherſoeuer
he goeth, and ſing prayſes to him that hath
redeemed vs for euer. Whiche dayes
the Lorde haſten, that wee may be partakers
of that happineſſe, euen for Ieſus
Chriſt his ſake, to whom with ye Father &
the holy ghoſt, three perſons & one true and

euerliuing God, be all prayſe, honour, power,
might and dominion, now and for euermore.
Amen, Amen. Amen.
            Apoc. 17. 14.
            
               Theſe are they, which came out of great
tribulation, & haue waſhed their long robes,
and haue made their long robes white in the
bloud of the Lambe.
               15 Therefore are they in the preſence of
the throne of God, and ſerue him day and
night in his Temple, and he that ſitteth on
the throne, will dwell amomg them.
               16 They shall hunger no more, neither
thirst any more, neither shal the ſunne light
on them, neither any heate.
               17 For the Lambe which is in the middes
of the throne, shall gouerne them, and shall
lead them vnto the liuely founteines of waters,
and God shal wipe away al teares from
their eyes.
            
            
         
      
   