
      
         
            
               
PHILLIS and FLORA.
            The sweete and ciuill contention of two amorous Ladyes.
            Translated out of Latine: by R. S. Esquire.
            
            
               Aut Marti vel Mercurio.
            
            
            Imprinted at London by W. W. for Richarde Iohnes. 1598.
         
         
            
            
            
            THE PRINTER. To the Gentlemen Readers, aswell such as professe to be Mars his Souldiers, as those deuoted to be Mercuries Schollers.
            
               
                  COurtuous Gentlemen, according to my accustomed maner, which is, to acquaint you with any Booke, or matter I print, that beareth some likelihood to be of worth, or might seeme pleasing or acceptable in your fauorable censures: So now, happening vpon a sweete Poeme, contayning, A ciuill contention of two amorous Ladyes (both virgins, and Princesses) The one deuoted, in her loue, to a Souldier; the other affecting a Scholler: And both to mayntaine their choyce, they contende (as women) to commende and reproue eyther others Loue, by the best and soundest reasons they can alleadge, whether the Scholler or the Souldier, were the more allowable by his profession in womens mindes; and aptest & worthiest to be best accepted into Ladyes fauours. Please it you therefore, to reade the Poeme to the ende, then fauourably to censure of their opinions: and the rather with more fauourable iustice, because they were Ladyes. If the matter like you, thanke the Gentleman that translated it, who craueth no other rewarde for his labour: If otherwyse, yet of your wonted curtesies, I pray you to pardon mee the Printer, that procured the same from him to be published: So shall you binde me yours, as I haue been euer, willi
                     ••
                   to please you.
            
            R. Iohnes.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE AMOROVS CONTENTION OF PHILLIS and FLORA:
            
            Translated out of Latine, by R. S. Esquire.
            
            
               IN flowry season of the yeere,
               And when the Firmament was cleere,
               When Tellus Hierbales paynted were
               with issue of dispatent chere.
            
            
               When th'vsher to the morne did rise,
               And driue the darknes from the skyes,
               Sleepe gaue their visuale liberties
               To Phillis and to Floras eyes.
            
            
               To walke these Ladyes liked best,
               For sleepe reiects the wounded brest,
               Who ioyntly to a Meade addrest,
               Their sportance with the place to feast.
            
            
               
                  
Thus made they amorous accesse,
               Both virgins and both Princesces,
               Fayre Phillis wore a liberal tresse,
               But Flora, hirs in Curls did dresse.
            
            
               Nor in their ornamentall grace,
               Nor in behauiour were they bace,
               Their yeeres and mindes in egall place
               Did Youth and his effects embrace.
            
            
               A little yet vnlike they prooue,
               And somewhat hostilely they stroue:
               A Scholler Floras minde did mooue,
               But Phillis likt a Souldiers loue.
            
            
               For stature and fresh bewties flowrs,
               There grew no difference in their dowrs:
               All thinges were free to both their powrs
               Without and in their courtly bowrs.
            
            
               
                  
One Vow they made religiously,
               And were of one societie:
               And onely was their impacie,
               The forme of eithers phantasie.
            
            
               Now did a timely gentle gale,
               A little whisper through the dale,
               Where was a place of festiuale,
               With verdant Grasse adorned all.
            
            
               And in that Meade-prowd-making Grasse,
               A Riuer like to liquid Glasse,
               Did in such sound-full murmure passe,
               That with the same it wanton was.
            
            
               Hardby this Brooke a Pyne had seate,
               With goodly furniture compleate,
               To make the place in state more greate
               And lessen the inflaming heate.
            
            
               
                  
Which was with leaues so bewtifide,
               And spread his Brest so thicke and wide,
               That all the Sunnes estranged pride,
               Sustainde repulse on euery side.
            
            
               Fayre Phillis by the foorde did sit,
               But Flora far remou'd from it,
               The place in all thinges sweete was fit,
               Where Herbage did their seates admit.
            
            
               Thus milde they opposite were set,
               And coulde not their affects forget,
               Loues Arrows and their Bosoms met,
               And both their harts did Passion-fret.
            
            
               "Loue, close and inward shrowds his fires,
               "And infaint words firme sighs enspires,
               "Pale Tinctures change their checks attires
               "But modest shame enoombs their ires.
            
            
               
                  
                  Phillis did Flora sighing take,
               And Flora did requitale make:
               So both together part the stake,
               Till foorth the wound and sicknes brake.
            
            
               In this chang'd speech they long time staide,
               The processe all on Loue they laide,
               Loue in their harts their lookes bewraide,
               At last in laughter Phillis saide:
            
            
               Braue Souldier sayd she, O my Paris,
               In fight, or where so ere he tarries,
               The Souldiers lyfe, lyfes glory carries,
               Onely worth Venus household quarries.
            
            
               While she hir warr-friende did prefer,
               
                  Flora lookt coye and laught at her;
               And did this aduerse speech auer:
               "Thou shouldst haue said, I loue a Begger.
            
            
               
                  
But what doth he my hart embraces?
               A thing create, that all things passes,
               Whom Nature blest with all hir graces,
               O Clerkes, in you Blisse all blisse places.
            
            
               This hard speech Phillis hardly takes, Phillis to Flora.
               
               And thus she Floras pacience crakes:
               Thou lou'st a Man pure loue forsakes,
               That God his godles bellie makes.
            
            
               Rise wretch from this grosse Extasie,
               A Clerke sole Epicure thinke I,
               No Elegance can bewtifie,
               A shapeles lump of Gluttonie.
            
            
               His hart sweete Cupids tents reiects,
               That onely meate and drinke affects:
               O Flora, all mens intelects
               know Souldiers vows, shun those respects.
            
            
               
                  
Meere helpes for neede his minde suffiseth
               Dull sleepe, and surfetts he despiseth,
               Loues Trump his temples exerciseth,
               Cooradge and loue, his life compriseth.
            
            
               Who with like band our loues combineth?
               Euen Natures law thereat repineth,
               My loue in conquests palme-wreths shineth,
               Thine feast deforms, mine fight refineth.
            
            
               
                  Flora hir modest face enrosed, Flora to Phillis.
               
               Whose second smile more fayre disclosed
               At length with moouing voyce she losed,
               What Art in her storde Brest reposed.
            
            
               
                  Phillis, thy fill of speech thou hast,
               Thy witt with pointed wings is grast,
               Yet vrdgest not a trueth so vast,
               That Hemlocks Lillies haue surpast.
            
            
               
                  
Ease louing Clerkes thou holdst for cleere,
               Seruants to sloth, and bellie cheere;
               So Enuie, Honor would enpheere,
               But giue me eare, Ile giue thee answere.
            
            
               So much enioyes this Loue of myne,
               Henere enuies, or hirs, or thyne;
               Housholdstuffe, Honny, Oyle, Corne, wine,
               Coyne, Iewels, Plate, serue his designe.
            
            
               Such pleasing store, haue Clerks by-lying,
               As none can fayne their dignifying:
               There; Loue clasps his glad wings in flying,
               Loue euer firme, Loue neuer dying.
            
            
               Loues stings in him are still sustained,
               Yet is my Clerke nor pinde nor pained:
               Ioy hath no part in him restrained, (fained.
               To whom his loue beares thoughts-vn-
            
            
               
                  
Palled, and leane, is thy Elected, (tected;
               Poore, scarce with Cloths, or skin con-
               His Sinews weake, his Brest dyiected,
               For nothing causde, maks nought effected.
            
            
               Approching Neede is Loues meere hell,
               Souldiers want gyfts to woo Loues well:
               But Clerks giue much, and still heaps swell,
               Their Rents, and Riches so excell.
            
            
               Right-well thou knowst (Phillis replide) Phillis to Flora.
               
               What in both Arts, and lyues abide,
               Likely, and clenly thou hast lide:
               But thus our difference is not tride.
            
            
               When Holy-day the whole world cheeres,
               A Clerke lifes modest figure beares:
               His crowne is heauen, black weeds he weares
               And showes a mind, halfe dround in teares.
            
            
               
                  
None is so poore of sence or eyne,
               To whom a Souldier doth not shyne:
               At ease, like sprightles Beasts liues thyne,
               Helms, & barbd Horse, do weare out myne
            
            
               Mine, low with armes makes Foe-towrs ly
               And when on foote he fight doth try,
               While his fayre Squire his Horse holds by,
               Mine thinks on me, And then they dy.
            
            
               He turns, fight past, and Foes inchased,
               And lookes on me with Helme vnlaced,
               Lifts his strong lyms, & brest strait graced,
               And saies kyss-blesse me, O hart-placed.
            
            
               
                  Flora hir wrath, in pants did spye,
               And many a Dart at hir lets flye; (crye
               Thou canst not make with heauen-reacht Flora to Phillis.
               
               A Camell pierce a needels eye.
            
            
               
                  
False goes for true, for Honny, Gall,
               To make a Clerke, a Souldiers thrall:
               Doth Loue to Souldiers coradge call?
               No, but the neede they toyle withall.
            
            
               Fayre Phillis, would thy Loue were wise,
               No more the trueth to contrarise:
               Hunger and thirst bow Souldiers thies,
               In which Deaths path, and Plutos lies.
            
            
               Sharpe is the wasting bane of Warre,
               The lot is hard, and strayneth farre:
               The lyfe is stooping, doubts doth iarre,
               To get such things as needefull are.
            
            
               Knewst thou the case, thou wouldst not say,
               Shauen haire shamd Clerks, or black aray:
               Worne higher honors to display,
               And that all states they ouersway.
            
            
               
                  
All things should to my Clerke encline,
               whose crowne sustains th' Impereal signe;
               He rules and payes such friendes as thine,
               And Lay must stoope, to men diuine.
            
            
               Thou sayst that sloth, a Clerke disguiseth,
               Who I confesse base workes despiseth;
               But when from cares his free minde riseth,
               Heauens course & Naturs be compriseth.
            
            
               Mine Purple decks, thine Maile bedighteth
               Thine liues in war, mine peace delighteth
               Olde acts of Princes he resighteth,
               All of his friend thinks, seeks, & wrighteth.
            
            
               What Venus can, or Loues wingd lord,
               First knowes my Clerke, and brings me
               Musicke in cares doth mine afford, (word:
               Thine ioyes in rapine and the sword.
            
            
               
                  
Here speech & strife had both their ending,
               
                  Phillis askt iudgment, all suspending:
               Much stir they made, yet ceast contending,
               And sought a Iudge in homewards wen-
               (ding.
            
            
               With Countnances that egale beene,
               With egale Maiestie beseene:
               With egale Voyce, and egale spleene,
               These Virgins ward vppon the Greene.
            
            
               
                  Phillis a white robe bewtifide,
               
                  Flora wore one of two hews dide:
               
                  Phillis vpon a Mule did ride,
               
                  Flora did back a horse of pride.
            
            
               The Mule was that which being create,
               
                  Neptune did feede, and subiugate:
               Which after fayre Adonis fate,
               He Venus sent to cheere hir state.
            
            
               
                  
This she the Queene of Iberine,
               
               
                  Phillis fayre Mother did resigne,
               Since she was giuen to workes diuine,
               Whence Phillis had the Mule in fine.
            
            
               Who of the Trappings asks, and Bit,
               The Mule (though siluer) champing it:
               Know all things were so richly fit,
               As Neptunes honor might admit,
            
            
               Then Phillis no decorid wanted,
               But rich and bewtious, all eyes daunted:
               Nor Floras vertue lesse enchaunted,
               Who on a welthy Palfrey vaunted.
            
            
               (lightnes,
               Tamde with his Raines, won heauen for
               Exceeding fayre, and full of wightnes,
               His Brest Art dectt with diuers brightnes,
               For Ieate blacke mixt, with Swans pure
               (whightnes.
            
            
               
                  
Young and in dainty shape dygested,
               His Lookes with Pride, not Rage inuested:
               His Mayne thin haird, his Neck high crested,
               Small Eare, short Head, and burly Brested.
            
            
               His brode Backe stoopt to this Clerks-loued,
               which with hir pressure nought was moued:
               Strait Legd, large Thighd, & hollow Houed,
               All Natures skill in him was proued.
            
            
               An Iuorie seate on him had place,
               A hoope of Golde did it imbrace,
               Grauen: and the Poitrell did enchace
               A Stone that star-like gaue it grace.
            
            
               Inscription there allurde the eye,
               With many a wondrous misterie:
               Of ancient thinges made noueltie,
               That neuer man did yet descrie.
            
            
               
                  
The God of Rhetoriques nuptiall bowre,
               Adornd with euery heauenly powre,
               The Contract, and the Mariage howre,
               And all the most vnmeasurd dowre.
            
            
               No place was there that figurd nought,
               That could through all the world be sought:
               But more excesse of Meruails wrought,
               Then might inceede a humane thought.
            
            
               The skyll of Mulciber alone,
               Engran'd that admirable Throne:
               VVho looking stedfastly thereon,
               Scarse thought his hand such art had shone.
            
            
               The Trappings wrought he not with ease,
               But all his payne employde to please:
               And left to go in hand with these,
               The Tardge of great Aeacides.
               
            
            
               
                  
A Styrrop for hir feete to presse,
               And Bridle-Bosses he did dresse,
               And added Rains in worths excesse,
               Of his sweete Spowses goulden Tresse.
            
            
               Thus on their famouse Caualrye,
               These Prince-borne Damzels seemd to flye:
               Their soft young cheekebales to the eye,
               Are of the fresh Vermilion dye.
            
            
               So Lillies out of Scarlet peere,
               So Roses of the Vernall yeere,
               So shoote two wanton Starrs yfeere,
               From the eternall burning Spheere.
            
            
               The Child-Gods gracefull Paradise,
               They ioyntly purpose to inuise:
               And louely emulations rise,
               In note of one anothers guise.
            
            
               
                  
                  Phillis to Flora, laughter led,
               And Flora Phillis answered:
               A Merlin Phillis managed,
               A Sparhawlke Flora caried.
            
            
               In little tyme these Ladyes founde,
               A Groue with euery pleasure crounde:
               At whose sweete entrie did resounde,
               A Poorde that flowrd that holy grounde.
            
            
               From thence the sweete-breathd winds conuay,
               Odors from euery Mirtle spray:
               And other flowrs, to whose aray,
               A hundred Harpes and Timbrels play.
            
            
               All pleasurs Studie can inuent,
               The Dames eares instantly present:
               Voyces in all sorts different,
               The foure parts, and the Diapent.
            
            
               
                  
Two tunes that from those Voyces flie,
               With admirable harmonie:
               The Tymbrell, Harpe, and Psalterie,
               Reioyce in rapting symphonie.
            
            
               There did the Vials voyce abounde,
               In Musicke Angellike profounde:
               There did the Phife dispredden rounde,
               his songe in many a variant sounde.
            
            
               All Birdes with tunefull bosoms sing,
               The Blackbird makes the woods to ring:
               The Thrush, the Iay, and she in Spring
               Rues the past Rape of Thraces king.
            
            
               Their shrill notes to the Musicke plying,
               Then all the different Flowrs descrying:
               The Odors in abundance flying,
               Prou'd it the Bowre of Loues soft-lying.
            
            
               
                  
The Virgins something entered here,
               And sprinckled with a little feare:
               Their harts before that helde Loue deare,
               In Cupids flames encreased were.
            
            
               And while each winged Forester,
               Their proper Rumors did prefer:
               Each Virgins minde made waight on her,
               Applauses apt and singuler.
            
            
               Deathles were he coulde there repose,
               Each path his spycie Odor stroes:
               Of Mirh and Synamon there groes,
               And of our blessed Ladyes Rose.
            
            
               Each Tree hath there his seuerall blisse,
               In fruites that neuer season misse:
               Men may conceaue how sweete Loue is,
               By that Celestiall Court of his.
            
            
               
                  
The dauncing companies they see
               Of Young men and of Maydens free:
               Whose Bodyes are as bright in Blee,
               As Starrs illustrate Bodyes bee.
            
            
               In which so meruaylous a guyse,
               Of vnexpected Nouelties:
               These Virgins bosoms through their eyes,
               Were daunted with a quicke surprise.
            
            
               Who stay their Boyall Steads outright,
               And almost from their Seates alight:
               Forgetting their endeuors quight,
               with that proud Rumors sweete affright.
            
            
               But when sad Philomene did straine
               Hir Rape-full-Rauing Brest againe,
               These Ladyes hearing hir complaine,
               were reinflamd in euery vaine.
            
            
               
                  
About the Center of the Spring,
               A secret place is where they sing:
               And vse their supreme worshypping,
               Of Loues neare-darting fiery king.
            
            
               There many a two-shapt companie
               of Faunes, Nimphes, Satyres, meete and plie:
               The Tymbrell, and the Psalterie,
               Before Loues sacred Maiestie.
            
            
               There beare they Goblets, bigg with wine,
               And Coronets of Flowrs combine:
               There Nimphs, and Fauns demy-diuine,
               Doth Bacchus teach to foote it fine.
            
            
               Who keepe true measure with their feete,
               That to the Instruments do fleete:
               But olde Silenus playes not sweete,
               In Consort, but indents the streete.
            
            
               
                  
The Spring-sleepe did his temples lode,
               As on a long-eard Asse he rode:
               Laughters excesse to see him nod,
               Dissolu'd the Bosome of the God.
            
            
               Fresh Cups he euer cals vppon,
               In sounds of imperfection:
               With Age and Bacchus ouergon,
               They stop his voyces Organon.
            
            
               Amongst this gamesome crew is seene,
               The issue of the Cyprian Queene,
               Whose head and shoulders fethered beene,
               And as the starrs his countnance sheene.
            
            
               In his left hand his Bow he bare,
               And by his side his Quiuer ware:
               In powre he sits past all compare,
               And with his Flames the worlde doth dare.
            
            
               
                  
A Scepter in his hand he hild,
               With Chloris natiue flowrs, vntild,
               And Nectars deathles Odors stild,
               From his bright lookes the Sunne did guild.
            
            
               The triple Graces there assist,
               Supporting with their Brests commist:
               And Knees that Tellus bosome kist,
               The Challice of this Amorist.
            
            
               These Ladyes now approached neare,
               And worshipped exempt from feare
               Loues God: who was enuirond there
               with Youth, that honord stiles did beare.
            
            
               Their ioy is superexcellent,
               To see a Court so confluent:
               Whom Cupid seeing, their intent,
               Doth with his greeting interuent.
            
            
               
                  
He askes the cause for which they came:
               They confidently tell the same:
               And he giues prayse to eyther Dame,
               That durst so great a warre proclame.
            
            
               To both he spake to make some pause,
               Vntyll their honorable cause
               Profoundly wayde in euery clause,
               Might be explande with all applause.
            
            
               He was a God which well they know,
               Rehearsall needes it not bestow:
               They light and rest, and playnely show,
               where Loue striues, Loue wil Maister grow.
            
            
               Loue, Lawes and Iudges hath in fee,
               Nature, and vse his Iudges bee:
               To whom his whole Courts censures flee,
               Since past, and things to come, they see.
            
            
               
                  
These do the hart of Iustice trie,
               And show the Courts seueritie:
               In Iudgment, and strong Customs eye,
               The Clerke is first for venerie.
            
            
               Gainst which the Queenes but little stroue,
               Since Loues high voyce did it approue:
               So both to their Abodes remoue:
               But as at first, rest firme in Loue.
            
            
               Explicit Rhithmus Phillidis et Flora.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   