
      
         
            
            
            THE
PRAISE OF
the GOVT,
Or, The GOVTS Apologie.
A Paradox, both pleaſant and profitable.
Written firſt in the Latine tongue, by that famous and
noble Gentleman Bilibaldus Pirckheimerus Councellor vnto
two Emperours, Maximilian the firſt, and
Charles the fift:
And now Engliſhed by William Eſt, Maſter of Arts.
            Omne tulit punctum, qui miſcuit vtile dulci,
Lectorem delectando, pariter
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                monendo.
            Hor. de art. Poet.
            
            LONDON,
Printed by G. P. for Iohn Budge, and are to be ſold at his ſhop in Pauls
Church-yard at the ſigne of the greene Dragon. 1617.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
Worſhipfull Sir BERNARD GRENVILE,
Knight, my very good Patron, ſauing
health in CHRIST IESVS.
(*⁎*)
            
               Right Worſhipfull,
            
            
               THe floriſhing Almond tree,Eccl. 12. ver. 3. 5. hauing
diſplayed her ſiluer colours on my
temples, and brought forth her argent
bloſſomes; the ſtrong men
bowing themſelues, & the Graſhopper
beginning to bee a burthen:
(as that mirror of Wiſedome
aenigmatically deſcribeth old age) might (perhaps) plead a
ſuperſedeas for me, to ſay with the Poet:

                  —Solue ſeneſcentem maturè ſanus equum.Her.
                  
                  Thy horſe with age and toyle opprest,
                  Let looſe betime, to take ſome reſt.
               
            
            This hath enforced mee to retire my ſelfe a little, and to
thinke vpon ſome conuenient recreation, whereby my drooping
ſpirits being refreſhed, I might be able with the more
alacrity to vndergoe the burthen of theſe graue studies,
which my function inceſſantly requireth. In the interim
this little booke chancing into my hands, I peruſed it; and

finding it to containe matter of pleaſure and profite, I
thought it a fit ſubiect for my exerciſe, to employ theſe
tempora ſucciſma, & ſublecundaria (which I could
ſpare or steale from my grauer ſtudies) in the tranſlating
of it into the Engliſh tongue, taking more delight in theſe
ludicris literatijs, then in any other recreations what ſoeuer,
which might yeeld vnto mee leſſe profit or content.
It was firſt penned and publiſhed in the Latine tongue, by
that famous & learned Noble man, Bilibaldus Pirckheimerus,
ſometime Councellor vnto two mighty Emperors,
Maximilian the first, and Charles the fift, and by them
employed in diuers weighty affaires of the Empire, among
forraine Princes, which he managed with great wiſedome
and credit. Hee was for the ſpace of many yeeres peſtered
with the force of Dame Podagras furie, and repented that
he was deluded, or rather befooled by fooliſh Phyſicians,
(to vſe his owne words in his Epiſtle) Quod ſtultus ego
à ſtultis perſuaſus medicis, &c. That as a foole perſwaded
by fooliſh Phyſicians, I abſtained in vaine for the ſpace
of 7. yeeres from the vſe of all wines, and that in my often
trauailes and Ambaſſages, when I was conſtrained to follow
my Souereigne Lord Caeſar Maximilian, and ſometimes
through theſe Countries where the waters were corrupt
and contagious: ſed tandem reſipui; but at last I became
more wiſe, and found more eaſe, &c. What I haue done in
the tranſlation, he that will compare the Latine Copie with
this, may eaſily perceiue: what was ſuperfluous, I haue
pruned: what was vitio Impreſſoris, defectiue, I haue
ſupplyed: ſome things, as little pertinent, I haue changed
for other more agreeable for theſe times, &c.
            If any curious carping Criticke (as that malicious Rufus)

ſhall obiect, that ſuch a ſubiect beſeemeth not my grauity:
let ſuch know, that I herein follow the example of
great learned men: of which, one hath written in the
praiſe of Tyrannie, another of Baldneſſe, another of the
Feuer,
               Dulce eſt errare authoribꝰ illis. and that famous Clarke Eraſmus, of the prayſe
of fooliſhneſſe, and ſhewed therein great accuteneſſe of
wit, and not the leaſt of their learning.
            You ſee here, that men of eminent gifts in all kinde of
literature, haue thought it no diſparagement, Ineptiendo
non inconcinnè nugari, and to haue linked pleaſure and
profit together: for,
            Omne tulit punctum, qui miſcuit vtile dulci.
            For my part,Horat. as a Tranſlator I haue but taught Dame
Podagra to ſpeake Engliſh, and do ſend her abroad in a
new ſuite out of her worky daies clothes, to apologize for her
ſelfe: Humbly ſubmitting both my ſelfe and my labours
to your Worſhips cenſure and good liking, which to me ſhall
be inſtar omnium, as the iudgement of all men.
            
               Oro, clementi aſpicias munuſcula vultu
               Quae luſi nuper, poſtponens ſeria ludis.
            
            And ſo I commit your Worſhip to the Almighties protection,
inceſſantly beſeeching him (from my very heart)
euer to defend and free you from the force of Podagras
diſeaſe.
            
               Your Worſhips in all dutifull
obſeruance, to command,
William Eſt.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE PRAISE OF
THE GOVT,
Or, The GOVTS Apologie.
            
               I Am not ignorant (moſt
reuerend and vpright Iudges)
how difficult a thing
it is,Podagra beginneth her Apologie. and full of hatred to
roote an opinion out of
mens minds, beeing once
conceiued, and now of
long time inueterate, eſpecially
of the Incondite,
rude and vnlearned vulgar,
which are not ſo much led
by reaſon, as carried by a
certaine violence and impetuous rage (which the Greeks
aptly call 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,) to iudge of things. No maruell
then, if wanting diſcretion, without difference,
raſhly they giue ſentence: For how can there proceed any
right iudgement, when Folly captiuates Wiſedome, Raſhneſſe
rules Reaſon, Impotencie of mind caſhires counſell?
Wherefore I greatly reioyce, that now at length time is offered,
and liberty granted me, to anſwer and refell the ſlanders
and obiections of the franticke vulgar ſort, mine enemies,
that (to my griefe) I heare not my ſelfe alwaies traduced,
and be neuer permitted freely to ſpeake for my ſelfe.
            Though it not onely toucheth mee, but as I ſuppoſe, it

concerneth you alſo (O yee Iudges) that none, vpon abare
accuſation only,Si accuſaſſe ſufficiat, quis innocens eſſe poterit? without hearing ſhould bee conuicted and
periſh; For, if it bee ſufficient for euery varlet to accuſe,
what good man then can be innocent, and vncondemned?
Not without cauſe therefore your ſerene aſpect, a ſigne of
clemencie and mildneſſe, and this frequent and renowmed
aſſemblie doth ſo recreate and cheere vp my ſpirits, that I
caſt out of my mind all ſuſpition of feare or partiality. For,
why ſhould I feare, ſeeing my cauſe is to bee heard before
you, whoſe Wiſedome, whoſe Integrity, whoſe Innocency
is ſuch, that I ought not only, not to ſuſpect; but alſo, to
hope for at your hands, whatſoeuer ſhall be iuſt, honeſt and
right, and ſhal be thought worthy of your eſtimation, wiſedome
and credit?
            But before I begin to lay open my cauſe, I ſhall craue ſo
much fauour at your hands (moſt clement Iudges) that with
good leaue and attention you will bee pleaſed to heare mee
to the end, permit me to keepe mine own order of ſpeaking,
and ſuſpend your ſentence vntill I come to the Epilogue and
concluſion of my ſpeech. Againe, if you haue conceiued any
diſpleaſure, hatred, or indignation againſt mee, that ye
put it off, lay it aſide, caſt it away, and haue reſpect not ſo
much to the calumnies of my aduerſaries, or mine own perſon,
as to the equity of my cauſe.Truth cannot finally be ſuppreſſed. And that yee will not
bee offended, if my ſpeech ſhall raſe out, reaſon enfeeble,
truth vanquiſh whatſoeuer ſiniſter opinion, malicious cenſure,
and falſe cauillation they ſhall forge againſt mee.
Truth, for a time may be oppreſſed, (God ſo diſpoſing for
our puniſhment, or tryall) but finally ſuppreſſed it cannot
be. Truth is ſtronger then all falſhood: it is temporis filia, the
daughter of time, and will at length preuaile. Truth is ſimplex
et nuda, ſed efficax et magna, ſimple and naked, but powerfull
and ſtrong: ſplendet cum obſcuratur, vincit cùm opprimitur:
it ſhineth when it is darkned, and ouercommeth when
it is oppreſſed.Aug. ad Chriſtin. It was well ſaid of that Father, that Truth
hath a double effect, it is dulcis & amara, ſweet and bitter;

               quando dulcis eſt, parcit: quando amara, curat: when it is ſweet,
it ſpareth: when it is bitter, it cureth.Ariſt. And as wiſely Ariſtotle:
Eos qui errant, ad pauca respicere: They that do erre, haue
an inſight, but into few things; but that wee bee not
deceiued, euery circumſtance which concerneth any matter,
is diligently to bee looked into and conſidered: which
if it be, I doubt not but truth ſhall be of more validitie with
you, then the malice, enuie and taunts of all men. For, I
truſt plainely to vnfold, that all the blame, and euils, how
many and how great ſoeuer, which light vpon my aduerſaries,
are not ſo much to bee aſcribed vnto mee; as to their
owne licenciouſneſſe, and vices. Secondly, That theſe euils
(if they be euils) are not ſo grieuous, but farre more
tolerable, then either they will or imagine. And thirdly,
that I am the cauſe of much good, and do bring many and
great commodities vnto men.
            Bee you not therefore (O Iudges) bee you not (I ſay)
perturbed in mind, or carried away with paſſions; but quietly
as you haue begun, heare me, I pray you, with patience.
For, if I proue not plainely what I haue promiſed, it lieth
in your power to condemne mee: ſo ſhall you acquit your
ſelues of all partiality and blame; and for my part, if I bee
conuicted, I will contentedly vndergoe whatſoeuer puniſhment
you ſhall inflict vpon me. But, if I make good all that
I haue ſpoken, I deſire, that you will not ſo much reſpect
me, as be mindfull of your place and office, that I may receiue
ſuch vpright ſentence, as the equity of my cauſe by
law and right requireth.
            But before I addreſſe my ſelfe to diſſolue my aduerſaries
obiections, I thinke it fit to anſwere firſt to euill report and
rumor of the people.
            For,Ob. if thou be good (will my enemies ſay) and the cauſe
of ſo much good vnto men, what then is the cauſe that all
men ſo egerly hate,Sol. deteſt and abhorre thee? For, though
Fame doth very often; yet is it not wont alwaies to erre, eſpecially
beeing ſo inueterate, and euery where ſo frequent
in the world.
            
               
And, I againe would aske theſe iolly fellowes, mine
accuſers, Why doe Children hate their Schoole-maſters,
though neuer ſo wiſe and learned? Why doe wicked men
contemne good Lawes? Is it not becauſe the Schoole-maſter
laboureth to furniſh the minds of his Schollers with
good Arts, and diſcipline; that they may hereafter become
the better men? And Lawes are a bridle to curbe the inſolencie
of badde men, to reſtraine them within the limits of
their duty, that they dare not commit what villanie they
would.Epict. 
               Epictetus was wont to ſay: Aegriſernator eſt medieus,
iniuriam paſſi lex. The Phyſicion is a preſeruer of the ſick,
and the refuge for the wronged, is the Law: Except the
Lawes (as Anacharſis once ſaid) may bee compared to the
Spiders webbe,Anacharſis. which catch and inſnare onely the little
weake flies, when the great Drones and ſtrong ones, break
the net and eſcape: a thing much to bee lamented. But to
returne from whence I haue digreſſed: it followeth not that
the Schoole-maſter ſhould be euill, becauſe hee is hated of
Children, neither that the Lawes ſhould be blamed and reiected;
becauſe they are abhord of lewd Luskes, and vaine
Varlets, euen the worſt kind of men; but, wee muſt hold
that children want iudgement, and do cenſure of Diſcipline
and good Inſtitution, as they whoſe Palate is corrupt, and
infected with a feuer, are wont to doe of their meat and
drinke: and vicious men polluted with all filthineſſe, wiſh
that there were no Lawes, that there might bee no hinderance
to with-hold them from running boldly in their execrable
and deſperate courſes. Hee is not therefore to be reputed
euill, which of a multitude; but he that is iuſtly, and
that of good men condemned: neither is he preſently to be
counted a good man, who by many voices is extolled, but
he that deſerueth praiſe from the mouth of honeſt and wiſe
men. And the witneſſe of Conſcience is more comfortable
then the vulgar breath; but herein I reſt ſatisfied with this
ſaying of the Reuerend Seneca:
               De remed. fortuiterum. 
               Malè de me loquuntur, ſed mal
                     •
                  ;
mouerer ſi de me Marcus Cato, ſi Lalius ſapiens, ſi duo Scipienes

ista loquerentur: nunc malis diſplicere, laudari eſt. They
ſpeake euill of me, but they are euill men: if Marcus Cato,
Wiſe Lalius, the two Scipt
                     ••
                  s, ſhould ſpeake this of me, I
ſhould be moued; but to be diſpraiſed of the wicked, is a
praiſe to a man.
            For ſeeing the number of wicked men doth euery where
exceed, none, by their iudgement ſhall be good; for they
will commend none, but ſuch as are like themſelues; but ſo
far off ſhould wiſe men be, from accounting the iudgement
of the inſulſe vulgar ſort, to be of any moment, that in their
eſtimate, they ſhould bee of the beſt men, of whom the
multitude ſpeake worſt, and traduce moſt: as contrariwiſe,
they the vileſt men, and of baſeſt eſteeme, for the moſt part,
whom popular applauſe extolleth to the clouds; as the wiſe
Plato rightly iudged: Whoſo pleaſeth euery humor is worthy
ſuſpition; yea, though he maketh a faire ſhew of Vertue.
            Let mine aduerſaries therefore ceaſe to obiect vnto mee
theſe frantick rumors, and rather blame themſelues, which
are the cauſe of ſuch paine and torments to themſelues,
as worthily they ſuffer; For, they ſo liue, nay, they ſo
drinke, they ſo plunge themſelues in riot, and wallow in
deliciouſneſſe, that they draw, compell, and haſten mee to
come into their company, and to dwell with them euen againſt
my will. For, ſeldome come I of mine owne accord;
but moſt commonly by conſtraint, as enforced, I attend vpon
them. If then, I were the plague of man-kind, (as they
would haue it) I ſhould not afflict certaine men, but all
without difference: but ſo farre am I from hurting all men,
that I willingly decline from many; for I take no pleaſure
in thoſe hard, rough, ruſticke, agreſticke kind of people,
which neuer are at reſt, but alwaies exerciſe their bodie
with hard labours,Genio indulgere. are euer moyling and toyling, which
ſeldome or neuer giue themſelues to pleaſure, which endure
hunger, which are content with a ſlender diet, the Water
often quencheth their thirſt, haue bad cloathing, and worſe

lodging,Whom the Gout flyeth from. fare hard, and lie hard, and can renounce all pleaſures
of the fleſh: I hate, I flie from ſuch.
            But,With whome the Gout loueth to dwell. theſe my gallant accuſers (forſooth) which ſpend
both day and night in riot, whoſe bodies with Idleneſſe are
corrupted, which abhorre labour as the peſtilence, which
eneruate, yea, euirate themſelues with Venus, which ſearch
Land and Sea for dainty Viands, which ſtirre vp gluttonie
with all kind of ſawces, which meaſure the manner of their
drinking, not by neceſſity, but by libidinie, which lie on
Downe beds, and not onely go proudly; but monſtrouſly
apparelled,The Gouts Diet. which feede vpon Oyſters, Ecles, and ſlimie-fiſh,
loue Gooſe, Goſling, and Fenniſh-fowle, freſh Beefe,
and mooriſh Birds, and waſh their throats luſtily with
bowles of Claret wine, drinke healths in halfe pots, and
whole pots, till they haue drunke themſelues out of health,
out of wealth, out of wit, and grace too; forgetting that
Vna ſalus ſanis, nullam potare ſalutem:
               
                  He that in health would long remaine,
                  From drinking healths hee muſt abstaine.
               
Which flow in all delights, which mans wickedneſſe can
deuiſe,Si tarde cupis eſſe ſenex, vta
                     •…
                  s oportet vel modico medice, vel medico medice. Supta cibus tan quam, laedit medicina ſalutem: At ſuptus prodeſt vt modicina cibus. whereby they enfeeble both body and mind, and
many times (though I be very delicate) prouoke mee euen
to loath their riot; yet, thoſe men are wont to lay vpon me
all the blame: forgetting their own liues are moſt corrupt,
contaminated with filthy vices, which is the cauſe of all euill
to themſelues: and when they erre in the whole courſe of
their life, yet (for ſooth) they ceaſe not to accuſe, and traduce
me, but as iuſtly as if a man ſhould fall into the fire, or caſt
himſelf head long into the water, & yet ſhould curſe the fire,
and accuſe the water as cauſe of the danger, which he procured
to himſelfe: but this is the common courteſie of the
world, to ſhake all blame from themſelues, and caſt it vpon
others, that by accuſing others, they might vindicate vnto
themſelues an opinion of goodneſſe, when they are the occaſion
of all miſchiefe. According to the Poet:

                  —Hominum quoque mos est,Mantuanus.
                  
                  Que nos cun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      premunt, alieno imponere tergo.
                  
                     
What vs oppreſſe, and heau packes
                  Wee loue to lay on others backes.
               
            
            And heere iuſt occaſion
                  •…
                is offered me,Vertue the foundation of friendſhip. to exclaim againſt
the ſlippery loue and friendſhip of the world; For, who
would ſuſpect the loue of theſe men, which all their life
long, call for me, inuite me; yea, by their miſgouernment
enforce mee to dwell with them, as if they could not liue
without me? But indeed, in men, in whom is laid no foundation
of Vertue, is no expectation of faith and honeſtie.
            And one of the things (ſaith a Wiſeman) that men think
they haue,Gueuarra. when they haue them not, is many friends; yea,
one faithful friend: for, by my experiēce; if thou wilt beleeue
me, I know not any thing wherein thou maiſt ſooner be deceiued.
And that which one friend doth for another in theſe
daies,Of true friendſhip. is either to excuſe, or hide himſelfe, when there is
neede of him, beeing more ready to lend him his Conſcience,
then his money. And he that will compare the number
that profeſſe friendſhip vnto him, with them that haue
performed the part of true friends; for one faithfull, he ſhal
diſcouer an hundred diſſemblers. Friendſhip, was wont to
extend Vſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
               
               A true ſaying. 
               adaras, as farre as the Altars; but now Vſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ad
crumenas, euen to the purſe and no farther. What is more
common in euery mans mouth, then friendſhip, and what
more rare, and leſſe in vſe? They make a formall ſhew of
ciuility, but what they performe is plaine diuillitie. They
will diſſemble cunningly, promiſe liberally, and performe
niggardly, giue all, and depart with nothing. I am all yours
(ſay they) except body and goods. Surely ſuch is the loue of
my Podagricall friends, ſo ful of contraieties, & oppoſitions,
that it may be called an intricate riddle, which needeth ſom
Delio natatore (as it is in the Prouerb) to diſſolue it.PHILOMISOPHILIAS EICON. As, What
is that which at once, loueth & hateth; flyeth & purſueth; threatneth
& intreateth;
               Difficilis, facilis, incundus, accr
                     •
                  
                  bus es idem. 
               is angry & yet pittieth; would for ſake, & yet wil
not; and in the ſame thing, reioyceth & ſorroweth? The anſwer
is, it is Loue: a right portraiture of my louing friēds: and therfore
one wel aduiſeth to make, if we may, all men our well-willers,
but good men our friends.
            
               
And Plutarch warneth men to take heede how they ſeek
for a ſwarme of friends,Mart. lib. 12. leſt they fall into a Waſpes-neſt of
enemies.
            Verily, I craue not (O ye Iudges) that you ſhould only
credit my words; looke (I pray you) into the conſtitution
of their bodies, their face, skin, colour, aſpect, and going:
and if ye find not all theſe to witneſſe their extreme riot, I
will endure willingly any puniſhment; theſe ſeeme to bee
rather Craſſiani, then Chriſtiani. Yet farre bee it from mee,
that I ſhould cenſure thus ſharply all Plethoricke, and groſſe
bodies; for I know it to be naturall vnto many, which notwithſtanding
keepe themſelues within the bounds of Sobrietie,
and hate all exceſſe. There are alſo many Students
which vſe a Sedentarie life, which are ſo far from ſurfeiting,
that their ſlender Commons will ſcarſe hold body and ſoule
together, and in whoſe Colledges a hungry man may as
ſoone breake his necke, as his faſt; yet ſometime I viſite
them alſo, becauſe they refuſe all exerciſe, and will not
learne this leſſon, Ne quid nimis, but by ouercooling their
feete, and congealing their blood, prepare for mee a reſting
place.
            I am wont alſo to touch ſome, which through ouer-violent
exerciſe, dilate too much the vitall pores, extenuate the
blood and humours, diſtemper the Liuer, cauſing Podagricall
matter to fall downe, which begin my habite within
them. I therefore am not ſo hurtfull, but they themſelues
ineſcate and allure me with their delicacies, retaine mee againſt
my will to come vnto them; they, I ſay peruert all
things, and then conuert all the fault vpon mee. I am preſent,
they wiſh me away: I am abſent, with their vices they
call me againe: in ſickneſſe they ſeeke healthe in health they
make ſickneſſe. Their owne health they neglect, and ceaſe
not to require it of me: they are male factors to themſelues,
and would haue me be their benefactor: they will liue diſſolutely,
and curſe me maliciouſly.
            Conſider therefore, (O yee Iudges) what they deſerue,

whoſe life reproueth them, whoſe forme of body bewraieth,
whom inueterate cuſtome reprehendeth. They neuer
thinke, that they ought to eate and drinke, that they may
liue, and not liue to eate and drinke; they neuer conſider
that only Lurcones and Gulligu
                     •
                  s, are my enemies; for, who
I pray you, ſo bitterly inueigh againſt me, but only Luxurious
men? Who accuſe me of cruelty, but only Luxurious
men? Who crye out to haue mee condemned without anſwere,
but onely Luxurious men? This beeing ſo, (O Iudges)
how dare my aduerſaries to mutter againſt me? How
dare they appeare in your preſence? How dare they to craue
puniſhment to be inflicted vpon me, being Innocent? But
they will ſay, I am their bitter and torturing enemy; What
then? In ſeeking to be reuenged on their enemy, will they
proue themſelues to be moſt rancorous and malicious? Verily;
if I be ſo odious in their ſight, that they thinke I deſerue
no pardon, why then contend they with al their power
to draw me vnto them? Why then do they not ſo frame
their liues, that I may neither haue will, nor power to come
neere them? For; if they would bridle their licencious luſts,
and not ſo want only plunge themſelues in pleaſure, if then,
they did not proue me more milde and gentle vnto them, I
were worthily to bee blamed; but it is hard for him to bee
abſtinent, which knoweth nothing but to follow riot, and
hardly will he proue frugall, which al his life long hath been
accuſtomed to carowſing and quaffing. Let them ſuffer
therefore what they will not auoid, and ſo let them haue
their health as they delight to liue; If ſo greedily they purſue
vaine pleaſures, let them be content to ſuffer paine, the
inſeparable companion of pleaſure.
            The ancient Romans to teach this,Macrob. lib. 1. de ſo
                     ••…
                  . Scipionis. inuented this Fiction;
they fained two goddeſſes, the one called 
                  Ʋolupia, the goddeſſe
of pleaſure, the other called Angeronia, the goddeſſe
of anguiſh and paine,Miſcentur triſtia letis, et mala ſunt vicina bonis. names fitted to their natures: and the
Prieſts of Angeronia did ſerue at the Altar of Volupia, to ſignifie,
that in this life, pleaſure and ſorrow are mixed together:

and the Image of Angeronia (anguiſh and paine) was
alwaies ſet vpon the Altar of Volupia (pleaſure) to teach that
ſorrow is a companion to pleaſure,Plato in Phaedone. and pleaſure to ſorrow.
And when Iupiter (ſaith Plato) could not reconcile pleaſure
and paine, yet hee bound them together with an adamantine
chaine, that though they did euer diſagree, yet they
ſhould bee conſtrayned to dwell together.Ambroſe. S. Ambroſe hath
this proſopopaeia of pleaſure:Pleaſures Proclamation. He ſhall be the chiefeſt with me,
vvho is the vvorſt of all, hee ſhall be mine, vvhich is not his
owne, he that is moſt wicked, ſhall be moſt welcome to me,
I haue in my hand the golden Babyloniſh cup, which inebriateth
the whole earth.
            You ſee now, they greatly erre, which in the gulfe of pleaſure,
ſeeke for health: as contrariwiſe, wiſe men in time of
health, labour to preuent ſicknes, quench pleaſure, ſuppreſſe
their inordinate appetites, which are the cauſe of many diſaſtrous
diſeaſes to the body: but theſe men, when for many
yeeres, by all meanes they allure, intiſe, and prouoke me to
come vnto them, and vvith ſo many delights, can ſcarſe
make me obſequious vnto them, yet they ſtriue to lay all the
fault vpon me, when they are the very cauſe of their owne
miſery. What maruaile then if I take worthy reuenge vpon
them, and for iniuries receiued, handle them more ſharply
then I would? And yet I could name many, which through
in ordinate liuing, being pinched with pouerty, haue againſt
their wills abſtained from delicious meates, and drinks, and
thereby haue recouered their priſtine health: which could
not be, if themſelues, and not I, were not the hatchers of
their owne vvoe. And for my part, ſeeing I giue place vnto
labour, and dare not once touch ſobriety; vvho ſeeth not
my innocency, and the iniquity of mine accuſers? And for
mine owne perſon and deformed forme, which they ſay, reſembleth
barrell-bellied Bacchus, and my gate, like haloing
Vulcane, I am ſo far off from bluſhing, that I rather glory
therein.She is indidifferent to all. For vvhatſoeuer, and howſoeuer I am, I know my
ſelfe to be indifferent, and without parciality to all. I arreſt

Kings, Princes, rich and poore, noble and ignoble; yea the
Popes themſelues cannot eſcape my power: there is no reſpect
of perſons with me; except I be conſtrained to bee a
gheſt rather, with nice and effeminate men, then with ſober
and abſtinent perſons, not only becauſe by their flattering
enticements they ſolicite mee; but becauſe with ſtrong
ropes they drawe me vnto them.
            But here ſome wil obiect,Ob: that I do not onely infeſt theſe
riotous Gully-guts, but oftentimes ſuch as are very ſober
and temperant, are afflicted with my diſeaſe.
            I anſwer,Anſ. If it be ſo, yet is it very ſeldome, and therfore not
to be drawn to a generall rule. What if they take this griefe
from their Parents as an hereditarie euill? What maruaile
then, if their Progenitors bee ſickly, that they procreate an
Off-ſpring like vnto themſelues? You know it is a maxime
in Nature: Simile generari a ſimili: Euery creature begetteth
his like: How then can they charge me with that which is
incident by Nature, or diffuſed into the children by the Parents
default? Seeing they will not affirme, that their noble
deſcent and ſplendor of their riches are deriued from mee,
let them leaue alſo to reproach me with anothers vice: and
if they repute the nobleneſſe and riches of their Anceſtors
to be a credite vnto them, let them not diſdaine to ſucceed
them alſo in their hereditary Maladies; but if they would
leuell their liues by the line of modeſty, they ſhould find me
farre more gentle, then either the deſerts of their Parents,
or peruerſeneſſe of Nature requireth.
            
               Galen,
               Hier. in epiſt. or the learned interpreter of Galen (ſayth Hierom)
writeth, that they, quorum vita & ars ſagina eſt, whoſe whole
life and skill is to cramme their bodies, can neither liue long
nor be healthy.
            Wiſely did Ariſtotle warne,Ariſtotle. that we ſhould behold pleaſures
non venientes, ſed abeuntes, that is, not as fawningly they
come vnto vs, but as they depart from vs: for as they come,
they flatter and ſmile vpon vs, with a falſe ſhew of goodneſſe,
but departing, they leaue behind the ſharpe ſting of

repentance and ſorrow. Like Syrenes they appeare with a
faire face, but drawe after them a horrible taile of a Serpent:
For, alas, who is able to number the iliades of miſeries,
which the ſhort pleaſure, of taſting the forbidden fruit, hath
brought vpon the world?
            But now,A preſeruatiue againſt the Gout. out of the abundance of my good nature, I will
preſcribe vnto mine accuſers a preſeruatiue againſt my ſelfe
(though my Clients haue not deſerued the leaſt kindneſſe at
my hands) out of mine approued Recipes, as by many yeeres
practice I haue tryed to bee of great force, to preuent my
Gouty habite; which is this: Take of Platoes breake-faſt
one dramme;Pythagoras abſtained from eating of fleſh. Plato was very moderate and frugall. Codius a poore man, whoſe fare and lodging was meane. Abſtemius, one that abſtaineth from wine. of Pythagoras dinner two ounces; of Abſtemius
ſupper as much as thou wilt, and quietly take thy reſt
in Codrus Cabine, and vſe vpon this (daily) good actiue exerciſe
of thy body; and then a ſtrawe for Dame Podagra, and
her diſeaſe.
            
               Si ſalutem cupis, aut pauper ſis oportet, aut vt pauper viuas.
               Petrac. de remed.
               If thou deſire health, be a poore man, or liue as a poore man.
            
            Now to the ſecond thing which I promiſed to proue:
Men haue little reaſon to accuſe me of cruelty, for I am not
ſo bitter and auſtere to my people (my impatient Patients)
as to giue them no remiſſion and eaſe of their paine, as many
other diſeaſes are wont to be; which continually, without
intermiſſion, torment and afflict wretched men, as the
Phthiriaſis,
               Phthiriaſis, the lowſie diſeaſe. Mentagra, a pocke or fretting ſcabbe. the Mentagra, the Leproſie, and a number ſuch
like diſeaſes which are rebellious, and refuſe all cure, and neuer
forſake a man but with his life: but I am ſometimes
quiet, I giue ouer, and grant a long pauſe and reſt to my ſubiects;
like a good Husband-man, who is wont to vnyoke
is wearied Oxen, and permitteth them to bee refreſhed
with reſt and good paſture.
            Againe, I am ſo gracious vnto them, knowing them (for
the moſt part) to be of an haughty and proud heart, and to
ſtand much vpon their Generoſitie, I ſatisfie their humour
ſo far, that I become an Heraldeſſe vnto them, and doe blaze

their armes fitted to their nature, and permit them Oneris
cauſa (honoris I would ſay, we Feminines be bad Grammarians)
to make oſtentation openly of their ancient family and
deſcent, which they euer carrie in their faces: and this is the
cauſe that you ſhould ſee their foreheads decked with painted
puſtulls, their noſes adorned with precious pyropes, vpon
their cheekes they beare curious wrought Carbuncles,
and ſuch like Eſcochions, that you may know that their birth
is not baſe and obſcure.
            Beſides, I am not ſo hurtfull as ſome affirme; as it plainly
appeareth by this: That no man is much grieued, when
he heareth his friend to be taken with the Gout, but is rather
merrie; he commeth vnto him, laugheth, ieſteth, hee
preſenteth him with ſome pretie gifts, ſitteth by him, talketh
pleaſantly, and as it were congratulateth with him, as
doe alſo his kinde neighbours, which come daily to viſite
him; which ſurely they would neuer doe, if I were ſo dangerous,
troubleſome and hurtfull, as they pretend; for there
is no man, when he heareth his friend to be affected with any
incurable Maladie, that will laugh, ſport and ieſt, but rather
weepe and be ſad: for how can he be a friend, that laugheth
at the miſery of a friend? and if men laugh at me, they plainly
ſhew, that they think me ont to be the plague of humane
kinde.
            Againe, marke (I beſeech you) my gentle and louing
proceedings with my ſubiects:Note. firſt, before I afflict them,
I warne them, by touching a little their great toe; telling
plainly: If they refraine not from contrary meates, keepe
not a good dyet, but inuite me by their intemperancy, I will
pinch them to the quicke, and (like Proteus) alter my forme
and name: I will poſſeſſe the whole foote only, and then my
name is Podagra; If they will take no warning, but wallow
in their ryot, I will then proceed farther, ſtrike harder, and
come vp to knee, and then I will bee called, Genugra: if
they ſtill giue a deafe eare, and not leaue to prouoke mee,
I will bee the Sciatica in their hippes, then the Chyragra in

their hands; and laſtly, I will whip them indeed, and bee
PANTA PERI PANTON, and poſſeſſe their whole body
ſo, that they ſhall haue little ioy to ſing the Epicures
ſong:

                  Viuite Lurcones, Comedones, viuite ventres.
                  Ye Spend-thrifts, Tospots, Belli-gods, liue ye, be luſtie.
               
            
            This being ſo,Membrifragus Bacchus cum membrifraga Cytheraea, progenerant natam membrifragam Podagram. how can men iuſtly accuſe me, which ſo
louingly warne them, and bid them beware, for hee that is
well warned, is halfe armed? Againe, when I begin (being ſo
often called vpon) to infeſt any body; you ſhal ſee the whole
company of his friends flocking vnto him, not to trouble
him with diſtaſtefull cauills, but to recreate his mind with
pleaſant diſcourſes, & as congerrones lepidiſſimi, ſpend the day
in mirth,In Graec. Epigram. which would neuer be, if I, the cauſer of this pleaſure,
were away.
            By this which I haue ſayd it is manifeſt, that there is no
man of ſo obtuſe and dull conceit, but plainely ſeeth that
mine enemies do not only vniuſtly accuſe me, but alſo ſhew
themſelues to be the bruers of their owne bane, and if there
be any fault in me, it is farre leſſe then they thinke or would
haue it.
            But now for my kind ſlaue M.The couetous wretch. Muck-worme (that I may
not paſſe him ouer without a name) the couetous Caitife,
that Churle, I meane, that cunning Chymiſt, that hath the
skill to conuert euery thing into gold, who hath ſtudied all
his life the blacke Art, to coniure coyne by all meanes into
the circle of his purſe; he will not heare the complaints of
the poore, for he is deafe to the cries of his owne belly, hee
wrinkleth his owne skin, and contracts his owne corps, that
he may keepe me out; hee hath long ſtolne from many, and
now hee is become a plaine Rob-thiefe, and ſtealeth from
himſelfe.
            Now, becauſe this ſlaue keepeth his coine to look on only,
and not to vſe, putteth the beſt metall in his coffer, and the
worſt meate into his mouth, ſo croſſeth pride (which holdeth
the deareſt things the beſt) that he counteth nothing
good for his ſtomake, but what is cheapeſt, and that he may

not diminiſh his ſtock,Nil praeter betas dura
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   rupa vorat. to ſaue charges, denieth wholſom alimēts
to his own body; and feedeth on groſſe fleſh, watriſh
herbes and roots,Alciat. fuſty, muſty, mixed, mity, mouldy meats:
all his exerciſe is to ſit in his Counting-houſe, and to looke
vpon his Nouerints; or in the chimney corner poring in an
Almanacke to preſage a dearth, and in a plentifull yeere
would euen hang himſelf, with ſorrow, were it not for charges
to buy an halter, and is already the diuels Lacky; I will
alſo make him my ſlaue, for his liuer being by ſuch dyet corrupted,
his bloud putrified, infinit crudities increaſed, I will
prepare a ſeate in his ſinewes for me to fit, I will miniſter iuſtice
in his ioints, and ſend him ſpeedily to his blacke maſter
Pluto, to dwell in Acheron for euer; but inough of this: I
haue long abuſed your patience with vnpleaſant diſcourſe,
now to make amends, I wil proceed to a more pleaſing ſubiect,
and ſpeake of the commodities and profit, which I am
wont to cauſe vnto men: only I ſhall requeſt you (ô ye Iudges)
as hitherto yee haue done, to giue an attentiue care to
what I ſhall ſay. I deny not, that to many I ſeeme very troubleſome
and grieuous; but if they would rightly conſider,
they ſhould verily finde many good things, which by my
meanes they enioy, which, were it not through my benefit,
they ſhould want.The commodities of the Gout. How many (I pray you) for my ſake are
honored, to whom no man els would giue the way? for as
ſoone as they ſee me a companion with any, euery man giueth
place, leſt they ſhould throng or hurt me; yea though
they be farre my betters both by age and condition. Many
ride ſtately in Coaches, or are carried on horſe-back, which
were it not for me, might goe on foote. I am willed oftentimes,
euen before Kings and great States to ſit when all other
doe ſtand: yea many times when I ioine my ſelfe with
Noble men (for commonly I neuer depart from ſuch) Princes
themſelues cauſe their ſeruants to bring me a ſtoole, or
chaire, when otherwiſe I might ſtand long inough. Conſider
(ô Iudges) whether theſe things be not of high eſteeme
and requeſt with all men? which all men deſire, which all
men ſeeke for?
            
               
And not only at meetings, but at feaſts alſo I am honoured
before others: for commonly I am placed in the higheſt
roome, and though the table bee furniſhed with variety of
diſhes; yet becauſe all meates are not agreeable to mee,
and likewiſe that it bee not offenſiue to my diſeaſe, one
dainty diſh or other is prouided onely for me of purpoſe;
and all others holding their peace, I only am permitted, and
willed to call for whatſoeuer I thinke fitteſt and conuenient
for my infirmitie; and is not this (I pray you) a great honour?
            But haply ſome froward cauiller may here reply: This
is done not for honour ſake, but in regard of their miſerie.
I anſwere, that men are wont to reſpect not ſo much, why
a thing is done, as the good that commeth thereby; and it
is ſufficient to me, that I am permitted to doe that, which is
not granted to another, and this I repute a great honour:
a poore man conſidereth not ſo much why, or from whence
hee receiueth a benefit, as hee is glad in the preſent fruition
thereof.
            And why ſpeake I of poore men? Doe wee not daily
ſee rich and great men to poſſeſſe whole Fields, Mannors,
Lordſhips, and yet little regard whether by right or
wrong, ſo they may haue and enioy them? And I doubt
not but there are many poore men that would thinke themſelues
happie, if they might exchange their pouertie for this
calamity,Hee ſpeaketh according to their manners in Germanie. and bee freed from labour, and ſuffer no want.
And what, I pray you, is more delicate then thoſe rich
men, with whom I dwell? what more neate then their
furniture? what more elegant then their houſes? If thou
come to viſite them, thou ſhalt find their lodgings, not to
lye ſluttiſh, rude and filthy, as other mens, but all things
are cleane, bright and finely trimmed, and decked like the
Tauernes at a Faire, or as the Temples vpon high feſtiuall
dayes; ſo that thou ſhalt finde many which had rather bee
ſicke with ſuch abundance, then be in health with extreame
pouertie.
            
               
Beſide, their viſiting friends preſent them with whatſoeuer
excellent and elegant thing the vvhole Citie affordeth,
which may either delight the eyes, pleaſe the taſte,
or recreate the care: there ſhall yee ſee things curiouſly
wrought; thither are brought of rathe and firſt fruits, and
what nouelty ſoeuer the ſeaſon of the yeere can produce:
there is to be ſeene whatſoeuer is ſtrange and delectable among
men; there are not wanting ſuch as carrie rumors, and
newes, and with pleaſant tales recreate the minde, and mitigate
griefe; yea, the affaires of Emperours, Kings, States,
Countries, either of peace or warre, are related, deſcanted
vpon, cenſured, decided among themſelues; one telleth
what is done among the Indians, another, among the Italians,
another diſcourſeth of France, Spaine, Germany, &c.
Of all theſe things, by my meanes, men haue intelligence,
though (perhaps) they are ignorant what is done in their
owne houſes;Torqueo. podigra. and thus whiles I detaine men with my buſineſſe,
I oftentimes preſerue them from great dangers.R. Neſcis ſencctutis mo
                     •
                  em? incomitata non venit; magnam ſaepe morbo
                     •
                  um aciem ducit. For,
as long as a man is afflicted with the Gout, they will neither
commit themſelues to the raging Seas, nor expoſe
themſelues in hunting, to the furie of wild Beaſts, they will
not quarrell, fight, or commit murther, they neede not
feare the breaking of their head, through the fall of a ſtone
from an houſe;Petrace. de remed. vtauſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   for. lib. 2. dial. 84. 
               ſed extra teli iactum, but ſafe from all danger,
ſecurely heare the misfortunes of others ſpoken of.
            Againe, do I not free men from the managing of ſtate affaires,
and from the moſt troubleſome buſines of the Court
and of Princes, which without my fauour would perplex
them with perpetuall cares, and ſorrowes? And yet, in the
meane time, I am not wanting and careleſſe (you muſt
thinke) in my domeſticall buſineſſe; but like a good huſband,
I ſtrenuouſly crie vpon my companie; I counſaile, yea
and compell them to apply their worke, looke vnto their
charge for the increaſing of my wealth; which I may the
more eaſily doe, the leſſe I am hindred by walking abroad.
For, though ſometime my feete deny their office, yet it followeth

not, that they ſhould bee altogether vnprofitable to
my Cellars, Store-houſes, and queſtuary Arts; but the more
impotent they are to walke from home, the more apt a great
deale are they to my domeſticall gaines: the maſters eye,
they ſay, maketh his horſe fat: and I by ſitting in my chaire,
or going vpon 3. legges about the houſe, with a Snayles
pace, doe get more wealth, and acquire more riches, then I
poſſibly could by running about,Haec his bina, canes, & aues, ſerui, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   caballi. hawking, hunting, gaming,
riding, company-keeping, and vaine pleaſures: and
thus you ſee in my bands men wex more wealthie, then if
they enioyed their full libertie,Dicuntur dominos ſaepe vorare ſuos. ſo beneficiall I am to my ſeruants,
in making them rich.
            Theſe (ô Iudges) are things not to be contemned:Hounds, hawkes and horſe, ſeruants and whores, oft turne their maſters out of dores. but
you ſhall heare farre greater; for whiles I am thus occupied
about things pertaining to the body, I do not in the meane
time neglect the minde, but haue a ſpeciall care for the culture
and adorning thereof. You are not ignorant, that learning,
and the knowledge of good Arts, are to be preferred
before all riches and honors: for look how much difference
there is betweene a ſtock and a man, ſo much a learned wiſe
man excelleth an vnlearned Dolt. But I am a moſt excellent
Teacher of Arts, and I could name many, which through
my benefit, haue attained to great learning and knowledge
of the tongues: for while they haue nothing els to doe, they
addict themſelues to good litterature, and that they might
not ſuffer their time vainely to ſlip away, they dayly contend
to become more learned: but what ſpeake I of ordinary
learning? am not I moſt expert in inſtituting my ſeruants
in the liberall Sciences, and in all circular knowledge of the
globe? eſpecially in that moſt pleaſant and skilfull Art of
Muſike,Muſike. by whoſe harmony, ſweet Symmetricall meaſures
and modulations, I expell cares, and wonderfully with my
admirable tones of Muſike delight the eares.
            I alſo teach them the Art of Rethorike;Rhethoricke. for I am not ignorant
thereof, as far as is requiſite for vs Females to know:
for as ſoone as a man in taken with the Gout, I preſently

furniſh him with matter of excuſe out of the very bowels of
Rethorike, for they are aſhamed to confeſſe my diſeaſe: one
ſayth, that hee wrung his foot with a ſtrait boot; another,
that hee hurt his toe againſt a ſtone; another ſaith, with a
ſlide hee hath wreſted his ankle; another, that he tooke a
fall: and very ingenious they are to frame excuſes to conceale
their griefe, and blind mens eyes very craftily, and not
only perſwaſiuely after the manner of Rethoricians, but alſo
like Logicians, ſubtilly reaſoning and diſputing, with many
arguments, and al to ſhake off the imputation of my diſeaſe,
which they are aſhamed (forſooth) to acknowledge;
yea, and confirm it by oath too, if you wil not beleeue them,
ſo hateſome is my name vnto them. But to omit theſe inferiour
ſciences, doe not I alſo furniſh with knowledge of the
celeſtiall Orbes?Aſtrologie. as Aſtrologie, a moſt ancient and diuine
Art, the prayſes whereof, if I would, yet I am not able to
vnfold, an Art ſo excellent, that the ancients aſcribe the inuention
thereof to their ſuppoſed gods, and was in old time
in ſuch account, that none but Kings and wiſe men were
thought worthy of the knowledge thereof.
            This Art I teach my ſeruants, and ſo infuſe it into their
bodies,Arithmeticke. that euen the Art of numeration, or Tables, they
perfectly vnderſtand it: not that they are ignorant in Arithmeticke,
which I teach them, when (as I ſaid) they are
ſo much giuen to pecuniarie matters, that being holden in
my bonds, they are more auaricious then when they were
free.
            But marke now (I pray you) a miracle, which wonderfully
commendeth my force and induſtry: to vnderſtand
the motions & change of the heauens, they need no Tables,
Globes, Aſtronomicall inſtruments, or figures; for before
there happen any coniunction, eclipſe, any alteration of
weather, the change, full, quarters of the Moone, or any
dire aſpect of the Planets, I cauſe them to know it, not ſo
much in minde, as in very deede to feele the effects thereof
in their bodies.
            
               
And that, not only in the great and ſplendent lights, they
are ſo perfect, but alſo in the errant ſtars; ſo that the infauſt
aſpects, either of cold Saturne, or raging Mars, or when
they obliquely behold each other;Horoſcope is a diligent marking of the time of the birth of a child. or when the Horoſcope
it ſelfe, or the Moon the gouerneſſe of mans life, ſhall be infected
with their diſaſtrous influences, all this cannot bee
hidden from them. There are none that can more exactly
and certainly foretell of ſtormes, raine, haile, ſnowe, tempeſts,
or any alteration of weather then my ſeruants can, for
they alwaies carrie a Kalender in their bones; yea, they preſage
this two or three dayes before it come: and may they
not (I pray you) through this preſaging of times and ſeaſons
attaine vnto ripe wiſedome, which conſiſteth in theſe
three things?
            
               Corrige praeteritum, rege preſens, cerne futurum
                     •
                  .
               What's past, amend, vſe praeſent well,
               Preſage the future to fore-tell.
            
            Are not theſe great things (ô ye Iudges) and full of admiration?
yet is it alſo no leſſe prayſe-worthy, that I teach my
Podagricall ſeruants,Phyſike. the excellent Art of Phyſike, then
which, ſcarce any thing more ſingular, for the preſeruation
of mankinde, is giuen of God: This I inculcate and beate
into their heads, euen againſt their wils. So that many times
they vnderſtand the vertue of hearbs, flowers, plants, ſeeds,
rootes, trees, gummes, leaues, mineralls, more exactly then
the Phyſicions themſelues: beſides, their knowledge in the
bloud of beaſts, their skinnes, milke, galls, fat, bones,
nerues, and vrine, &c. I inſtruct them to diſcerne what is
cold and what is hot, what is drie and what is moyſt, what
is ſtipticke and what is repulſiue, what is aperitiue, attractiue,
inſtauratiue, and ſolutiue, what in vertue is of the firſt
degree, what of the ſecond, what of the third: and this I
teach them not onely to know, but alſo to practice, in making
pultiſſes, cataplaſmes, baths, repercuſſiues &c. as in all
other things, ſo in this, I make my ſeruant excell not only
in Theoricke, but alſo in the Practick: no maruell then if by

my meanes they know the hiſtories of all Nations, and read
the fables of all Poets, and (which is a note of a generous
mind) when others make a gaine of their profeſſion, I teach
all this freely, without any hire at all. And when other Emperickes
proue practices, by killing a number, my experience
is ſafe and ſecure: hence came this ſaying; Nouo medico nouo
opus est ſepulcreto, a new Phyſician had neede of a new
Church-yard;A pretie tale. and therefore Nicocles affirmed, that ſuch
Phyſicians were the happieſt of all men, and why? Quontam
ſucceſſus eorum ſol videt, errores autem tellus operiret, becauſe
the ſunne ſeeth their good ſucceſſes, but their errors are hid
in the ground,The Kings Euill, or Yellow Iaundiſe, which through the ouerflow
                     •
                  ng of the gall, maketh the skinne looke yellow like gold. that is, in the graue: yet are they ſo inſolent
and proud, that a ſtranger vpon a time comming into a Citie,
and ſeeing a Phyſician ietting in golden chaines, and
rich clothing, asked what Noble man that was? it was anſwered,
that he was no Noble man; but a Phyſician. He replyed,
ô God, what an honeſt Phyſician is this, which taketh
from other bodies the Kings Euill, and putteth it on
his owne body!Hippocrates. But if my ſeruants would follow Hippocrates
counſaile: Cibus, potus, ſomnus, venus, ſint omnia moderata;
Meate, drinke, ſleepe, venus, let all bee with moderation,
perhaps they would little need my phyſike or theirs.
            Theſe things being ſo: yee vnderſtand, as I thinke, (O vpright
Iudges) what great benefits I beſtow vpon mine
accuſers, and alſo how vngratefully, yea, more then barbarouſly
they requite my kindneſſe; but what they haue been
long deuiſing to obiect againſt that which I haue ſayd, I
know well enough: to wit, that all theſe things are not to
be reputed as benefits, but rather as markes of extreme miſerie,
and that I am the bane and miſchiefe of mankinde,
rather then a fautrixe or benefactrixe:A deſcription of beautie. for firſt, for the beauty
of the face, which is wont to chaine all men in the linkes
of the loue thereof, which conſiſteth (as wee Females beſt
know how to deſcribe it) in a large, ſquare, well extended,
and cleere front, eye-browes well ranged, thinne and ſubtill,
the eye well diuided, cheerefull, ſparkling; as for the

colour, I leaue it doubtfull: the noſe leane, the mouth little,
the lips corraline, the chinne ſhort and dimpled, the
cheeks ſomewhat riſing, and in the middle a pleaſant louely
gelaſin,
               Gelaſin, is a little dint, which in laughte, appeareth in the cheekes, counted louely. the eares round and wel compact, the whole countenance
with a liuely tincture of white and vermilion red, facies
roſeo niueo
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   colore miſta placet, this (ſay they) I change
and marre, and exhauſt the bloud, weaken the ſtrength, take
away ſleepe, dimme the ſight, diminiſh alacritie, abandon
ioy, ſport and laughter, incurue the ioynts, fingers, toes,
and infeeble the whole body, and ſtaine and obſcure the
freſh colour: but in this long and idle friuolous obiection,
they ſhew themſelues to bee ſicke in minde; and therefore
iudge rather by this paſſion, then diſcerne by reaſon: theſe
doltiſh men know not, that they attribute vnto mee much
more praiſe then diſgrace among wiſe men, by this their accuſation;
for while I weaken the body, I cure the Soule;
while I afflict the fleſh, I ſtrengthen the Spirit; while I purge
out what is earthly, I bring in what is heauenly; while I diminiſh
what is temporary, I conferre what is eternall.
            No man is ignorant, that the bodie is the polluting priſon
of the Soule, the Soule cannot floriſh except the body
fade and diminiſh; for this groſſe lumpe of the fleſh is an
impediment vnto the Soule, that it cannot mount aloft in
the contemplation of heauenly things, it layeth a thouſand
lets, and caſteth as it were darke clouds, whereby the ſharpneſſe
of the minde is obfuſcate and blinded, that it cannot
ſee nor follow the truth; and with how many cares and
anxieties are men pearced, in procuring the things pertaining
to this mortall body, and vſe of this fraile life? I ſpeak
not of ſuperfluous things, but of things very neceſſarie,
though (as the Poet ſayth:)

                  —minimis rebus contenta quieſcit
                  Natnra, in vitium ſi non dilapſa repugnat.
                  Mans nature with a little thing contented doth remaine,
                  Except it headlong falne to vice, it doth repugne againe.
               
            
            
               
And what is aboue neceſſaries, may be called the ſickneſſes
or maladies of the minde, as pleaſures, opinions, feares,
perturbations, deſires, loue, hatred, &c. which ſeldome or
neuer permitteth the minde to be at reſt, like the violent
force of fire, which cauſeth the water alwaies to boile vp
till it be remoued. For what (I pray you) ſtirreth vp warres,
brawles, murthers, ſeditions, rapines, iniuries; but the fleſh
and the deſire of hauing which is neuer ſatisfied? For wee
ſee now a dayes mony is able to atchiue all things. And all
this the loue of this fraile body compelleth vs to doe, which
is the cauſe, that while we pamper vp the body our thoughts
are farre eſtranged from any care taking of the Soule, and
our mindes diſtracted from prouiding for the life to come;
for our ſenſes are like vnto violent horſes, which without
the reines of reaſon runne away violently with the chariot,
but the ſoule like a waggoner holdeth the bridle; and therfore
as horſes without a guide, ſo the fleſh without reaſon
and rule of the minde runneth haſtily to its owne ruine:
what a ſlauery is it then to ſerue our owne appetite? I remember
a leſſon which I learned long agoe of a learned
Preacher:D. B. That in chooſing a Maſter euery man will ſhun
three ſorts of men; his enemie, his fellow, his ſeruant. Hee
that ſerueth the Diuell, ſerueth his greateſt enemy; he ſerueth
his fellow, who ſerueth the luſt of the fleſh; he ſerueth
his ſeruant, who ſerueth the world; it is a baſe ſeruice to
ſerue the world, for that is to become a ſlaue to our ſeruant:
it is an vncertaine ſeruice to ſerue the fleſh, for it is
ſo fraile, weake and ſickly, that he may looke euery day to
be turned out of dores, and which is worſt of all, it is leaſt
contented when it is moſt ſerued; but to ſerue the diuell, is
the vnthriftieſt ſeruice of all, for the wages hee payeth, is eternall
death.
            Wherefore, wiſe men are wont to ſequeſter themſelues
as farre as they may, from the commerce of the bodie and
worldly affairs, to the end, that the mind may the more freely
bee lifted vp to the contemplation of heauenly things;

and the more a man is auerted from the bodie, the more hee
is conuerted to heauenly meditations, hee abſtaineth from
fleſhly deſires, he ſubdueth his pleaſures, he little eſteemeth
honors riches, nobilitie, fame, and whatſoeuer the world
holdeth moſt precious: he feareth not ignominie, pouertie,
affliction, nor death it ſelfe, and all things which are contrarie
to the fleſh, that hee moſt deſireth. And wiſe men are
wont to meaſure their life not by the number of yeeres, but
by the time they haue liued well.
            I haue read of one Similus, who hauing ſpent the greateſt
part of his life,A Hiſtorie. in the troubleſome employments of the
weale publick, and being now old, retired himſelfe into a
Farme hee had in the Countrie, and gaue himſelfe to prayer
and contemplation; and when hee dyed, commanded this
Epitaph to be ſet vpon his Tombe:
            Hic iacet Similus, cuius at as multorum a
                  ••
               orum fuit, ipſe duntaxat
ſeptem annos vixerit.
            Here lyeth Similus, whoſe age was of many yeeres, but he liued
only ſeuen.
            But whoſo ſerueth his bodily ſences, beſides that hee muſt
needs depart from the path of vertue, he ſhall neuer obtaine
what he deſireth: for being deceiued with the falſe ſhewes
of goodnes, he loſeth the ſubſtance for to catch the ſhadow,
and as the body tooke beginning from the earth, ſo the
ſoule had her originall from heauen, as one ſaith not vnfitly:

                  Immortall ſoule, from heauen God gaue,
                  But bodie fraile, from earth we haue.
               
            
            The body as a ſeruant ſhould be ſubiected vnto the command
of the ſoule; the one is heauenly and immortall, the
other common to vs with the brute beaſts. Nothing therfore
is more excellent then the ſoule, nothing more diuine,
it as farre excelleth the body, as the maſter doth his ſeruant,
as the liuing doth the dead; and as the body maketh earthy
things its full ſcope and marke whereat it only aymeth, ſo
the minde erecteth it ſelfe to heauenly things, as to the proper
end for which it was created. Yee ſee here (O Iudges)

how much more noble the Soule is then the bodie.
            But now will I addreſſe my ſelfe,The prrfite it cauſeth to body and ſoule. to ſhew what a paſſing
excultrix and adorner I am of the minde, and how much I
garniſh the celeſtiall Soule, whiles I extinguiſh the vices of
the bodie; albeit I doe not alwaies hurt the bodie, but am
wont commonly to profit it alſo: for I attenuate ſuperfluous
fatneſſe, I drie vp humours which redound through intemperance,
and conſume them, leſt they ſhould encreaſe to
a huge greatneſſe, and bring no ſmall danger to the whole
bodie. Againe, as Phyſicians affirme, I alſo prolong the life:
for except I did depell and driue down to the feet and ioints
that noxious and pernicious matter, it would doubtleſſe aſſault
the braine, heart, liuer, and ſtomake, and ſoone extinguiſh
the vitall ſpirits: But to omit thoſe things which pertaine
to the body, let vs proceed to mens vices and infirmities,
which I aboue others am very expert to cure; ſo that
in this Art I yeeld to none, whether Philoſopher or Diuine:
for I am not only an impediment and curbe to my ſeruants,
that they runne not headlong in wickedneſſe, but alſo the
vices which through cuſtome are become inueterate, I extirpate
and expell, and cauſe that they ſhall not ſinne vnpuniſhed
and ſcot-free, which if I did not, they would neuer
deſiſt from their wickedneſſe, but ſtil adde ſinne vnto ſinne,
euill vnto euill, til ſinne forſake them.
            Now firſt for this Monſter pride,Pride. which is puppis ac prora,
the very head and taile of all euill, I muſt a little inſiſt vpon
this as I learned of a Preacher.
            
               Gregory (ſayth he) maketh 4. kinds of proud men: 1. The
arrogant proud.
               Mor. lib. 23. cap. 27. 2. The preſumptuous proud. 3. The boaſting
proud. 4. The deſpiſing proud perſon. The firſt attributeth euery
good thing in himſelfe, to himſelfe, and not vnto God.
The ſecond will confeſſe God to be the giuer of all graces,
but vpon their owne merit. The third boaſt of their vertues,
which indeede they haue not. The fourth affecteth a
kinde of ſingularity and puritie, in that he hath, or ſuppoſeth
to haue: Vitia catera in peccatis ſuperbia, etiam in benefactis

timenda, when other ſinnes dye, ſecret pride gets ſtrength
in vs, ex remedijs generat morbos, euen vertue is the matter
of this vice;Aquin. par. 1. quaeſt. 63. Art. 2. though all ſinnes are in the diuell ſecundum reatum,
in reſpect of the guilt, yet only pride and enuie is in
him ſecundum effectum, according to the effect, he is guilty of
all ſinne, for he tempteth to all ſinnes, but pride is his owne
proper ſinne,Bern de Paſſio. his beloued Paragon; his Rimnon, ſaith Bernard,
his Character,
               Dom. cap. 19. ſaith another, it was the firſt ſinne, and it ſhall
be the laſt; for as other ſinnes decreaſe, ſecret pride doth
increaſe: pride is like Coloquintida, which ſpoileth the whole
pot of pottage. Why then art thou proud, ô duſt and aſhes,
whoſe conception is ſinne,Ecc. 10. whoſe life is miſerie, whoſe end
is rottenneſſe and corruption? Initium vitae coecitas, & obliui
                     •
                  
poſsidet, progreſſum labor, dolor exitum, error omnia; et diu viuendo
portant funera ſua.
               Petrarch. Childhood is but fooliſh ſottiſhnes,
youth but a precipitate heate, manhood labour and carking
carefulneſſe, olde age but a bundle of diſeaſes, and all the
reſt error, and the end, extreme paine: Oh then what a folly
is pride?
            
               Si tibi copia, ſi ſapientia, forma
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   detur,
               Sola ſuperbia deſtruit omnia ſi committetur:
               If thou haſt abundance, with wiſedomes redundance,
               and beauties faire grace,
               Yet Pride all diſgraceth, all goodnes debaſeth,
               and Ʋertues deface.
            
            But I make pride and ambition ſtrike their ſayles, and
coole their courage, when my force teacheth them how leſſe
then nothing mans arrogancie is, how vaine is beauty, how
weake the ſtrength of body, how fluid our humours, how
fleeting our wealth, Nobilitie a neſt of nothings, humane
glory but a guſt of wind; I cauſe them to remember that
they are but mortalls, whom pride perſwaded to be Gods
equalls.En
                     •
                  ie. Againe, while I teach the myriades of mans miſeries,
I quench enuy, emulation, detraction, and the impertinent
care of vnneceſſary things. For how can men be curious
in other mens matters, when they haue more then enough

to doe with their owne? I take away malice and
cauils, ſo that my ſeruants deuiſe no cunning, craftie circumuentions
of their neighbours, a thing too common (but
with none but Atheiſts) in theſe dayes. They ſtirre vp no
ſtrife, brawlings, contention among others, which haue enough
and more then enough to do with their owne griefs.
And as for hatred and enuie, my ſeruants are ſo far from this
vile paſſion, that they neither enuie, nor are enuied of others,
(for miſery is no obiect for enuie) and they deſerue rather
comfort and pitie.
            Theſe (ô Iudges) are matters of no ſmall moment, but you
ſhall heare greater.Three things hurtfull to the Gout. There are three things which are moſt
infeſt enemies vnto my vaſſalls, though they daily receiue
them, but vnto me they are very profitable: Gluttony, Venery
and Anger. But I reſpect not ſo much mine owne profite,
as the health of my ſeruants: I warne them diligently to beware
of theſe enemies, and if I finde that they contemne my
warnings, I take reuenge vpon them for their contempt,
and make them for their owne caſe, hereafter be more wary
how they ſet light of my precepts.Gluttony. And as often as by deuouring,
they too much ingurge their guts, and ſuperfluouſly
gully downe wine, I am preſently with them as a ſharp
reuenger, I plague them according to their deſerts, and
counſaile them henceforward not ſo lightly to eſteeme my
heſts: yet am not I ſo agreſticke and ſterne, that I ſhould denie
moderate vſe of meates, or altogether forbid Bacchus
his liquor, but through my benefite they many times feede
more delicately,Venu
                     •
                  . and are wont to drinke more freely; eſpecially,
when they celebrate their ſolemnities with ſalacious
Nymphes. But I deterre them from too much addicting
themſelues to the ſeruile ſeruice of that rude maſter Bacchus,
and from being enthralled with the allurements of wanton
Venus; ſo that my ſeruants dare very ſeldome or neuer commit
adulteries, or whoredomes, I keepe them from vncleanneſſe,
and preſerue mayd and wiſe from their pollutions:
but if they be vnruly, I ſo gripe them, that they ſhall repent

of their exorbitant cauſes, and loath the Femall ſexe: what
greater benefit can their beſt friends confer vpon them, then
to deliuer them from ſo many euils,Anger. and exempt them from
ſo many perils, as are wont to follow Cupid that blind beardleſſe
boy, and Venus a mother worthy ſuch a ſonne? And
now for anger, what ſhould I ſay? It is a vice full of fury
and madneſſe, which is wont to ſend hot and ſharpe cholerick
humors into their ioints, which ſhall inceſſantly pricke
and torment them; but none know better to cure this malady
then my ſelfe; they dare not for their life fall into theſe
paſſions, leſt I preſently torment them, according to their
deſeruings, and make euen their bones to cracke.
            Moreouer, as I expurge the fleſh infected with infinite
vices, ſo I adorn the mind and beautify it with many vertues,
I ſuffer it not to be preſſed downe, but doe eleuate it from
earth to heauen, and ſtirre it vp to prayer and contemplation.
            I thinke it cannot bee vnknowne vnto you, how the
greateſt part of men are inclined, that if fortune alwayes
ſhould fauour them, if their ſweet ſhould neuer be ſeaſoned
with ſowre; if the world ſhould euer ſmile vpon them, they
would alwayes fixe their minds vpon earthly things, they
would regard nothing but backe and belly, and like ſwine
wallow in the puddle of their pleaſures: but the afflictions
which I lay vpon them may be likened vnto the tree, called
Rhamnus, whoſe root, leaues and branches, though (as Phyſicions
ſay) they be exceeding bitter, yet are they very medicinable;
for the ſeede thereof purgeth the body of all
groſſe humours, and the iuice thereof cleereth the ſight.
So afflictions,Aug in Pſal. though to fleſh and bloud they ſeeme auſtere
and bitter, yet are they very healthfull to the Soule, they
purge out the noyſome humor of ſinne, cleere the eyes of
the minde which proſperity blindeth, that wee may truly
know our ſelues, ſee our owne corruption, and become
henceforward more warie how we offend our louing God,
and fly vnto him in al our miſeries; the ſcourge of affliction,

awaketh the drowſie, humbleth the proud, purgeth the penitent,
and crowneth the innocent.
            But I feare I haue too much offended your patience with
my tedious prolixitie: I will therefore conclude with ſetting
downe certaine particulars, to proue what a precious
panacea and all-ſaluing plaiſter I am for the curing of all ſpirituall
infirmities of the ſoule: and firſt for Selfe-loue, the
pernicious daughter of Pride, the fountaine of much euill,
the Lerna malorum, the Sentina and packe of all miſchiefe in
the world. Now for the abating of this vice; what remedy
better then afflictions, which I lay vpon the fleſh? I cauſe
men thereby to know themſelues, that in their beſt eſtate
they are but a dung-hil couered with ſnow, ſubiect to paine,
aches, ſores, rottenneſſe and corruption, we were all taken
out and faſhioned of the ſame lumpe of clay, of the ſame
piece of earth as the pooreſt and baſeſt whom wee ſo deſpiſe;
and ſo I teach men to eſteeme of others as of themſelues,
ſeeing we are all made of the ſame ſubſtance, all ſubiect
to the ſame infirmities, and all haſtening to the ſame end
to become meate for wormes. Why then art thou proud,
O earth and aſhes, ſeeing that in thy moſt floriſhing prime,
thou art but filthy ſlime, a packe of diſeaſes, a ſacke of infirmities,
a Store-houſe of miſeries, thy body but compact of
clay, thy head but a panne of earth, thy whole life beſieged
with a huge army of diſeaſes, and euery one both threatning
to arreſt thee, and able to kill thee? Thus with my
diſeaſe I ſtoope the proudeſt, and make ſelfe-loue to
quaile.
            And for the Viper Enuie that miſerable fretting ſlaue, a
wretch euer ſad and penſiue;Anacharſis. for beſides his owne griefes,
he euer tormenteth himſelfe at another mans felicitie:Senec. I ſay
of him, as Seneca did once; I could wiſh that the eyes of the
enuious were ſo opened, that in euery towne they might
behold all that be in proſperity, that their torments might
be increaſed; for as the ioies of others do increaſe, ſo the
ſorrowes of the enuious doe multiply: we can no way more

vexe the enuious man, then by applying our ſelues to vertue:
for he hath ſo many tormētors to ſcourge him, as his neighbour
hath vertues to commend him. The poiſon of enuy is
far worſe then the poyſon of Serpents; for their poyſon hurteth
others, but not themſelues: but the poyſon of the enuious
hurteth themſelues but not others. Moreouer, the enuious
man imagineth another mans good greater than it is,
thereby to increaſe his owne ſorrow and miſerie.
            To this purpoſe I remember a pretie tale;Note a pretie tale. that certaine
Phyſicions meeting together, there grew a queſtion among
them concerning the chiefeſt medicine for the eies: one ſaid
fennell, another eye-bright, another greene glaſſe, &c. Nay
(ſaith another merily) it is enuie; for that maketh other
mens goods to ſeeme greater then they are, and confirmed
it by this ſaying of the Poet:

                  Fertilior ſeges eſt alieno,OVID. ſemper in agro,
                  
                     Ʋicinum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      pecus grandius vber habet.
                  The neighbours fields are euermore
                  with corne much better ſpedde,
                  Their flockes in milke more plentifull,
                  how euer they be fedde.
               
            
            There is a Fable, but it hath a good Morall, of the enuious
man and the couetous man, they both went together
into Iupiters Temple to pray:Note. 
               Iupiter granted their petitions
vpon this condition, that whatſoeuer the one did craue, the
other ſhould haue the ſame doubled; the enuious man asked
many things, and had them, but the other alwaies had them
doubled; the enuious man ſeeing this, was grieued, and praied
that he might loſe one eye, and then reioiced that his fellow
had loſt both his. See here what a ciabolicall ſinne enuie
is, which careth not to hurt it ſelfe to doe a greater dammage
vnto another.
            But when I come to grapple with this Caytife, I will ſo
perplexe him, and make him ſo wretched, that no man ſhall

enuy him, nor himſelfe haue little luſt to enuy others. I tell
him that he is moſt his owne enemy; for the man whom he
enuieth, may depart from him, but he can neuer depart from
himſelfe: whitherſoeuer he goeth, hee carrieth his enemy
ſtill in his boſome, his aduerſary in his heart, his owne deſtruction
within himſelfe, and thus I ſeeke to cure this malady.
            And for Couetouſnes,Couetouſneſſe. I am like the clubbe of Hercules to
beat it downe: when paines and inceſſant torments enforce
the couetous worldling to confeſſe, and meditate with himſelfe,
that riches are fickle, that the liues of the poſſeſſors are
brittle, that tranſitory riches are but run-awayes, they will
either runne from vs as they did from Iob, or we ſhall be taken
from them, (as the Preacher ſayd) of the couetous
worldly minded;Luc. 12. 20. 
               Thou foole, this night ſhall thy ſoule be taken
from thee.
               Abuc. 2. 3. The couetous man is like hell in the inlarging of
his deſires,Baſil in hom. to containe all; more greedie (ſayth Baſil) then
the very fire which goeth out when the matter faileth: but
Couetouſneſſe is neuer quenched, whoſe deſire burneth as
well when he hath matter, as when he hath none, Hee alwaies
goeth with a three-toothed fleſh-hooke; the one is
called Petax, which deſireth all; the other, Rapax, which
catcheth at all; the third, Tenax, which holdeth faſt all.
Now when the Gout gripeth him, I teach him to meditate
thus with himſelfe: O, what pleaſure can I take in riches
which I haue ſo greedily ſcraped together? I ſee they can
yeeld me no eaſe at all, no, not ſo much as free me from a fit
of feuer: I now take no more pleaſure in them,Qui cupit aut metuit, &c. they no
more delight me, then as the Poet ſayth:

                  —Lippum pictae tabulae,Horat. vt fomenta podagraxs,
                  Auriculas Cytherae, collecta ſorde dolentes.
                  Who couets, or who liues in feare, his goods do him delight,
                  As much as blinde man pleaſure takes in pictures finely dight;
                  Or one that's deafe doth take delight in Muſikes ſiluer ſound;
                  Or as the Gout in foments, when the griefe doth moſt abourd.
               
            
            
               
What ioy take I now in my ſtately houſes, which I haue
built by theft? in my large fields which I haue gotten by deceit?
my curſed ſacriledge, in deuouring Chriſts patrimony,
which will bee like the Eagles feather, to conſume all
that I ſhall leaue to my heire? in my reuenues, for which I
haue damned mine owne ſoule? In my gold and ſiluer,
which I haue heaped together with the ſweat, yea with the
bloud of the poore? what comfort take I in my life it ſelfe
which I haue ſo vnprofitably ſpent, when I made my heapes
my heauen, my gold my god, my lands my life? I ſee now
I haue choſen droſſe for gold, ruſt for ſiluer, loſſe for gaine,
ſhame for honour, toile for reſt, hell for heauen. I ſee now,
all worldly cares are fruſtrate, and fruitleſſe; I wil therfore
aſpire to heauenly treaſure, which is eternall, which no ruſt
can corrupt, no moth fret, no theeues ſteale; in regard wherof
all other things are but dung and droſſe. I will now fixe
my deſires vpon the life to come, where there ſhall bee no
ſickneſſe to afflict me, no maladie to torment mee, no griping
griefes to aſſault me. Thus, where there is any ſparke
of Gods Spirit, I teach men ſeriouſly to meditate; Happy,
and thrice happy they, which haue the grace thus to ſuppreſſe
their inordinate deſires of riches.
            The ambitious man in his ſwelling humour,Ambition. which by all
meanes ſeeketh to aſpire vnto dignities and honour, who
had rather be vulpeculae caput, quàm cauda leonis, the head of a
foxe, then the tayle of a lyon, as the Prouerbe is: when I
viſite him, I cauſe him ſoone to ſtrike his loftie ſayles, I
humble him, and enforce his haughty heart to ſtoop, I make
him to know that he is like a Carbuncle, which is the name
of a precious ſtone, and of a ſwelling ſore or tumor: hee
hath together glittering glorie, and wounding woe, hee liueth
inter malleum & incudem, betwixt the hammer and the
Anuile,Duplici laborat inuidia, inuidetur ei, & inuidet ipſe Senec. in Epiſt. 85. betweene hope and feare: I tell him that honour is
not in honorato, ſed in honorante, not in him which is honoured,
but in the mutable breath of the vulgar people: hee is
ſicke of a two-fold enuie, he enuieth others, and others enuie

him. I cauſe him with Moſes, to chooſe rather to ſuffer
affliction with the people of God, then to enioy the honours
of Pharaohs Court: I make him conſider, that weeping
and gnaſhing of teeth is the reward of the proud, and
the requitall of the honours which the wicked haue in this
life; I cauſe him ſeriouſly to ſay with himſelfe: O why
ſhould I be ſo fooliſh as to ſuffer my ſelfe to be carried away
with the vanities of pleaſures, riches and honours, ſeeing I
finde no contentation in them? I enforce him when he groneth
of the Gout, to crie out: Vanitie of vanities, all is but vanitie;
and thus though I afflict the bodie, I lift vp the Soule,
to the contemplation of heauenly things.
            Now to my deare darlings,Looſe, licentious liucis. thoſe looſe, lewd, licentious,
lecherous, luskiſh Libertines of the carnall Crue, my filthy
ſlaues, a word or two: I can ſtile them with no better titles,
becauſe they alwayes ſolicite, trouble, allure, and vexe me
with their importunate calls, and with their riotous liuing,
euen enforce me to come vnto them:The Pockes. therefore I am ſeldome
abſent in mine owne perſon, or els I ſend my ſiſter, the Lady
Lues of Naples, to enfrenchiſe her ſelfe into their bones,
a farre worſe gheſt then my ſelfe: and betwixt vs two they
are ſo tormented, ſcourged and conſumed, that our abundant
humours, doe quickly put them out of their wanton
humour, or els with feare, paine, and weakneſſe vtterly diſable
them. Yet haue I an eſpeciall regard of their Soules,
for I cauſe them to conſider, that this ſinne ſhall neuer eſcape
Gods reuenging hand, that they are no better then
carnall Epicures, wholly ſold ouer to iniquity, that they are
like Stallions euer neighing after their neighbours wiues,2. Pet. 2. 22.
rather ſwine then men, whoſe delight is altogether to wallow
in the puddle of filthineſſe, that they are like the Centaures,
and Minotaures, whoſe vpper parts reſemble men, but
in the lower parts they are very horſes and bulls. I labour to
bring them to true mortification of the fleſh, as of whoredome,
adulterie, gluttony, drunkenneſſe, reuenge &c. For
what pleaſure can the adulterer take in his fleſhly luſt, if

he would but conſider,Incipit a riſu, curis coalcſcit amaris, Deſin
                     •
                  t in lacrymis improbus iſte furor. Mant. that his euill life doth not onely (as
Gods iuſt plague) fill him full of incurable diſeaſes, but alſo
makes him ſubiect to the eternall curſe, to remaine in perpetuall
torments, that his adulterie is a ſeparation from
Chriſt, and that the bed of his pleaſures ſhall in the end bee
the cabine of his teares, at the day of his death? This ſinne
beginneth with mirth, is continued with cares, and endeth
in torment. Wanton pleaſures begin in luſt, proceed with
ſhame, and end (for the moſt part) with pockes and contagion.
Theſe pleaſures (as I heard our Preacher ſay) are a
deepe pit,Prou. 22. 17. and none, but with whom the Lord is angrie, ſhall fall
into it. And ſo by this meditation I labour to bring them to
repentance, that their ſoules may be ſaued in the day of the
Lord.
            As for my little Lullabies,The vanity of beautie. Miſtris Wag-tayle, the Wanton,
and her fellowes, whoſe floriſhing freſh figure maketh
proud (for faſtus inest pulchris) when the roſe and the lilly
ſtriue in their face for preeminence, whoſe Coraline lippes,
cheerry cheekes, vermillion dye, louely eye, golden haire,
&c. and other endowments of Nature they haue abuſed, to
drawe the looſe Libertines to the gaze, and to catch them
in the ſnare: I will alſo plague theſe for the abuſe of Gods
gifts, in making them nets of the diuell to inſnare vnſtable
ſoules. I taxe not all, who are adorned with the grace of
beauty (for I know many of them ſober, chaſte, and modeſt)
but ſuch as loue not to bee too heauie, and are ſomewhat
* Catholicke;
               Vniuerſall or common. whoſe wanton life hath diffuſed many contagious
humours, through their whole body, and yet haue a
deſire to ſeeme fairer in the eyes of vaine men, with a deceitfull
foppery and painting, then with ſpirituall beauty of
vertues, to ſhine before God and his Angells: whether
their beauty conſiſteth in cleereneſſe of skinne, which is called
Pulchritude, or in neatneſſe of bodie, which is called
Forme; I know how to abate their pride: if they were as
faire as Nereus,
               Nereus. I will ſoone make them as deformed as Therſites,
their faire hue I make pale and wanne,Therſites. when their bodies

are repleniſhed with euill 
                  〈◊〉
               , which wil breed 
                  〈◊〉
                their
bodies ſwellings, tumors, vlcers, gouts, lepries, &c. the reward
of a wicked life, and ſo I will enforce them to confeſſe
with wiſe Salomon, Fauour is deceitfull, and beautie is but vanitie.
            
            Another moſt excellent leſſon I teach my Clients,Friendſhip. and
that is, how to make choyce of a true friend, a thing in theſe
dayes moſt profitable; I tell them, and make them feele,
that they are no faithfull friends, which draw vs to prodigalitie,
riot, drunkenneſſe, as are our pot-companions, carouſers,
health-drinkers, &c. whereby the Soule is polluted,
the body defiled, crudities engendred, and I with my
diſeaſe conſtrained to ſcourge them, and bring them to ruine:
but they are to be reputed out true friends, which counſell
vs to ſobriety, temperance, moderation in eating and
drinking, chaſtity, and ſuch like, whereby health is preſerued,
nature rectified, ſtrength maintained, my malady expelled,
and life prolonged. And here I remember a wiſe inſtruction
deliuered by our Paſtor, for we talkatiue Femails
haue not the worſt memorie; (Oportet mendacem eſſe memorem.)
There is (ſaith hee) a counterfait friend, a time-ſeruing
friend, a falſe-hearted friend.
            
            The counterfait friend goeth alwaies masked, in his 
mouth he hath alwayes Aue, All-haile, God bleſſe you, but
in his heart he hath, Caue, Take heed of me, I will cut thy
throat: ſuch euer giue poyſon in a golden pill, he is totus viſcoſus,
all lime,Reade Ecc. 6 ver. 7, 8, 9, &c. his words are lime, his geſtures lime, his countenance
lime, and all to catch thee as the Fowler doth the
bird, his words are complementall, but his heart deuiſeth
thy downe-fall: all his plots are for his owne profit, and
gloſings for his owne gaine, hee riſeth by thy fall, and getteth
by thy loſſe; a man cannot bee too circumſpect and
heedfully wary of ſuch: Try and truſt, for there are many
lurking holes in mans heart.
            The time-ſeruing friend is like the Cuckoe, or the Swallow,
which in the pleaſant ſpring, and ſummer of thy proſperity,

will take pleaſure in thee, and warme himſelfe at the
ſun-ſhine of thy fortunes;Nullus ad amiſſas ibit amicus opes. but in the winter of aduerſitie,
he will not know thee: no longer a friend, then on the winning
ſide.
            
                The falſe-hearted friend, his policie is to diue into thy
boſome, and ſound the ſecrets of thy heart, that he may vndermine
thee in thy purpoſe, hold thee ſtill in feare, and hurt
thee at his pleaſure:

                  —Scire volunt ſecreta domus,Inuenal. at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      inde timeri.
                  Thy ſecret dealings they would know,
                  That they may keepe thee still in awe.
               
By ſecret policie, and Machiuilian traines, ſeeking to effect
that which they cannot by honeſt meanes, nor violent courſes;
a Herod within, and a Iohn without; a wicked Politician
in a Ruffe of the Preciſian ſett.T. A. 
               Shallow honeſty, is better
then the quick-ſands of ſubtiltie, and plaine dealing is a good plaine
ſong,
               Palling. as one accutely ſaith; this counſell of the Poet in this
caſe is not to be deſpiſed:

                  Let no man know thy ſecret deeds, thy friend haue alwaies ſo,
                  While friendſhip laſt, that thou foreſee, he once may be thy foe.
               
Take heed of ſuch friends, and be not haſtie to entertaine
friendſhip with any: and ſo much for this.
            Now if any will obiect,Ob. that all other diſeaſes can effect
theſe things which I haue ſpoken of, as well as I or better:
That I denie,Anſ. and vtterly deny: For other diſeaſes do quickly,
ſome ſodainly, ſuppreſſe life, or do ſo afflict them that
they haue ſcarce any leiſure to thinke on their Soules health
but it is farre otherwiſe with me, for I know how to extend
my force, and when need requireth, in conuenient time to
remit it againe and giue them eaſe, which other diſeaſes ſeldome
doe.
            Albeit (O Iudges) I could alledge much more for my
ſelfe, yet will I now make an end, when I haue ſhewed by

the example of great men, that my ſocietie is neither ſhamefull,
nor wretched. It is the part of Heroicall and Noble
mindes, indifferently to ſuffer proſperitie and aduerſitie, and
to make a vertue of ineuitable neceſſitie. And to let paſſe
many Potentates of the Earth: that Troian Monarch, Priamus,
admitted me into his golden Palace; Peleus, Bellerophon,
and Oedipus, did not exclude me; Pliſthenes, Protheſilus,
and prudent Vliſſes, receiued mee courteouſly; and
haply (which ſome may wonder at) Achilles himſelfe, though
ſwift of foot, could not auoid my power. Let the Grecians
fable as much as they will, That hee was diſpleaſed for the
taking away of his Paragon; it was I that kept him from
the battaile; I, (I ywis) was that Briſes, which made him
contemne the entreatie of the Grecians. Would not now any
wiſe man chuſe rather to ſuffer ſome hardneſſe, with
thoſe famous Noble Perſonages, then with vile, baſe, and
abiect perſons, to wallow in Swiniſh pleaſures? and rather
labour to adorne his mind with Vertue, then like brute
Beaſts, to become a ſlaue to the belly, and corruptible fleſh?
            
               Mala quae cum multis patimur, leuiora videntur;
               The griefes that we with many beare, the better may ſuſtaine.
            
            Ye haue heard (O Noble Iudges) my iuſt Apologie: now
it remaineth, that I beſeech you to weigh all things in the
ballance of Equitie, and then by your vpright ſentence free
me from theſe malicious calumniations and falſe accuſations,
which my wicked enemies lade me with, when themſelues
are moſt in fault, and inflict vpon them deſerued puniſhment
for their licentious and filthie liuing: ſo ſhall
Truth be honoured, your ſelues for Iuſtice commended,
and my Accuſers reformed, and
my ſelfe bound inceſſantly to pray
vnto the Almightie, that your
Honours bee neuer touched
with my diſeaſe.
            FINIS.
         
      
   