
      
         
            
            
               ❧A Prayer or ſupplycation made vnto God by
a yonge man, that he woulde be mercifull to vs, and not kepe his worde away from
vs, but that the truth maie ſpringe.
            
               Pſalme, C.xix.
               
                  Wherein hath a yonge man O Lorde to reioyce,
                  But in thy worde: therefore put I forth my voyce.
               
            
            
               
                  O Lorde of mercye vs beholde
               The whiche are here in great myſery
               And in doynge thy wyll lorde we are to colde
               Therefore on vs ſhewe ſome pytye
               For mercy vnto thee now do we crye
               That thou in our ſynnes ſuffre vs not to dye.
            
            
               Let vs not be forſaken of thee O lorde
               Although we be wretched and ſynfull
               But thy mercies nowe ſhowe abrode
               And to vs ſynners mooſt wicked be mercyfull
               For mercy vnto thee nowe do we crye
               That thou in our ſynnes ſuffer vs not to dye.
            
            
               Thou dyddeſt thy worde plentyfully ſowe abrode
               Euen vnto vs lorde of tyme very late
               But we were to vnthankfull, all with one accorde
               Therefore thou dyddeſt, o lorde, it away take
               Wherefore nowe for mercye vnto thee we crye
               That thou in oure ſynnes ſuffre vs not to dye.
            
            
               Good lorde be merciful vnto vs we thee praye
               Although deſtruction we haue deſerued
               Let vs haue thy worde agayne, O lorde, to be our ſtay
               That by ſtronge fayth in thee, we maye be ſaued
               For onelye vnto thee continually wyll we crye
               That thou in our ſynnes ſuffer vs not to die.
            
            
               Take away Idolatry, o lord, let that no more vpſpring
               In this, O lorde, thy poore and ſymple lande
               Thou dydſt plague vs lord, in taking away our Kynge
               Wherefore holde ouer vs nowe thy right hande
               And forgeue vs lorde, nowe do we crye
               That in our ſynnes thou ſuffre vs not to dye.
            
            
               Full godly and ryghteouſly dyd he begynne
               For the tyme thou gaueſt hym ſpace
               To ſet forth thy glorie, and puniſhe ſynne
               This was the intente of his grace
               Therefore for the like do we now crye
               That thou in oure ſynnes ſuffer vs not to dye.
            
            
               Images, o lorde, he plucked cleane downe
               And ceremonies that were naughte
               And prieſtes he made leaue Baales crowne
               And thy worde he cauſed to be taught
               For by thy worde all thinge did he trie
               that we in ignoraunce ſhoulde not dye.
            
            
               He was the ſower thy ſeede to ſowe
               As thy Euangeliſtes do playnely wryte
               But ſome of thy ſeede away did goe
               Amonge the harde grounde dyd it lighte
               therfore for forgeuenes now do we crye
               that thou in oure ſynnes ſuffre vs not to die.
            
            
               We are that harde and ſtonye grounde
               Where ſome of thy ſede dyd fall
               Of whiche ſeede ſmall rote is founde
               Sathan almooſte had dryed vp all
               Therefore for mercye now do we crye
               that thou in oure ſynnes ſuffre vs not to die,
            
            
               O Lorde, make vs of that fruytfull grounde
               the whiche doth kepe thy commaundementes
               That great increaſe of godlynes in vs maye be founde
               that we maye ſerue thee with good intentes
               And alwayes for mercye vnto thee to crie
               That we in our ſinnes do neuer die.
            
            
               Ful notable and excellent kinges thou haſt geuen vs
               Kynge Henry the eight of mooſt famous memorie
               Whiche abolyſhed the byſhop of Rome from vs
               And by thi mighty power plucked down much idolatri
               We conſideringe this, for mercye do now crye
               That in our ſinnes thou ſuffre vs not to die.
            
            
               Alſo we were made to go and worſhip a falſe God
               Whiche was a great abhomination and ydolatrye
               But thy commaundementes he ſet forth abrode
               In oure owne natiue ſpeache mooſt truely
               Teachinge vs alwayes on the for to crye
               that we in oure ſinnes lorde, ſhoulde not dye.
            
            
               Euen as Eſechias was vnto Iudae
               So was Kynge Henry vnto Englande
               Vnto this Kynge, o lorde, compare we
               Edwarde the ſyxte whom thou haſt in thy hande
               Which thy word ſet abrode moſt manifeſtlye
               That we in our ſinnes Lorde, ſhoulde not dye.
            
            
               Although that in age he was not ſo hye
               Yet vnto his ſteppes he went very nere
               Vnto the glory of thy bleſſed Maieſtie
               And vnto the ſoule helth of vs his ſubiectes dere
               Therefore vnto thee, o lorde, do we now crye
               that thou in our ſinnes ſuffer vs not to dye
            
            
               His father broke the Pilgrimages going
               to this ſaint and that ſaint, to and fro
               But he, o lorde, at his vp comminge
               Brought doune all as thou doeſt knowe
               For by thy worde he dyd all thinge trie
               That we in our ſinnes ſhoulde not die.
            
            
               He was in age like to that vertuous kinge
               Ioſias, whiche in Hieruſalem dyd raigne
               One and thirtie yeares had he there his beynge
               And executed thy lawe this is very plaine
               But for oure vnthankfulnes, o lorde, truely
               Thou cauſedſt our worthy kinge ſhortly for to die.
            
            
               I hartely beſeche thee, o eternall God
               To kepe and preſerue Elyſabeth our Quene
               That ſhe may thy worde now ſet abrode
               Nowe in her time as before hath bene
               By her godly Father & brother, for which thing we cry
               That we may repent, and not in our ſinnes die,
            
            Finis,
            Quod Iohn Pyttes
         
      
      
         
            Printed at London in Alderſgate ſtrete by William
Herforde. The .xxiii. of Marche. M.D.lix.
         
      
   