
      
         
            
            
            
            
            A Philosophicall Treatise concerning the quietnes of the mind.
            Taken out of the Morall workes written in Greeke, by the most Famous Philosopher, & Historiographer, Plutarch of Cherronea, Counsellor to Tra
                     •••
                  
                the Emperor.
            And translated out of Greeke into French by Iames Amyor Bishop of Auxerre, and great Almoner to the most Christian King of Fraunce Charles the ninth.
            And now turned out of French into English by John Clapham.
            
            Printed by Robert Robinson for Thomas Newman. 1589.
         
         
            
            
            ¶ To my verie good Father Master Luke Clapham contentment of minde in this life, and continuance of ioy in the life to come.
            SIR, after I had finished the translation of this Philosophicall Treatise, (which was my chiefe woorke these long Winter nightes:) I purposed to send the written copy vnto you, not minding then to publish it. Howbeit being since perswaded that it might be beneficiall to others (considering the necessitie of the argument) I haue now made that common to al which

at the first was intended onely to you, wherein whatsoeuer my intention was, I can hardlie excuse my selfe of rashnes in publishing it to the view and censure of the learned, & skilfull in the French tongue (wherof my selfe haue but a tast) who will easilie perceiue my wants, & errors in the translatiō. And yet seeing oftentimes that endeuor supplieth default of sufficiencie, and a good meaning counteruaileth a bad performance: J haue at all aduentures (as you see) stripped this morall treatise out of a rich French attire into a poore English weed, (I would be loth that some French man should take it as an iniurie) thrusting it out to

the eie of the world vnder your patronage, being the first fruites of my labour in this kind, not doubting of your fauourable acceptance thereof, as proceeding from him, that in nature and dutie is most bownd vnto you, and to whom he oweth himselfe and all that hee hath.
            If the paines I haue taken herein may either please or profit the Reader, I shall bee glad: if both, I require no more. Jf neither, yet for the first time, Sit voluisse satis.
            
            And thus in my hartie praiers I commend you with my good Mother to the protection of the Almightie, whom J beseech to send yee manie happie yeares to your ioy

and contentment in this world, and euerlasting peace to your endlesse comfort in his Kingdome. From the Court at Richmond, the 2. of Ianuarie. 1589.
            
            
               Your humble and obedient sonne. Iohn Clapham.
            
         
         
            
            Translator ad Libellum.
            Si quis (parue liber) quum primum viderit hospes
            Forte rogat quiduis? cuius es? vnde venis?
            Jgnotus (dic tu) Dominus me protulit, atqui
            Cum nequeat quod vult, sit bene velle satis.
            Intereà faueátque tibi, Dominóque precare
            Qui me lior a volet, cum meliora valet.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               A Philosophicall treatise, concerning the quietnes of the minde.
            Plutarch to Paccius health, &c.
            I Receaued your letter verie lately, wherin you desire mee to write some thing vnto you cocerning the quietnes of the mind, and with all, touching certaine places of Platoes Timaeus, which seeme needfull of a most diligent exposition. It chaunced at the same time, that Eros our familiar friend had occasion to saile with speede towards Rome, about certaine letters which hee had receiued of the most vertuous gentleman Fundanus: who therein was verie earnest to haue him depart forth with, and to come vnto him. So wanting sufficient time to

emploie in the matter, which you desired, and vnwilling, that he departing from mee, should come vnto you with emptie handes: I haue drawne togither summarily out of notes, and remembrances (which I had long since collected for mine owne priuate vse) certaine sentences touching the tranquillitie of the mind, perswading my self that you haue not required this discourse, to the ende that you might take pleasure in reading a treatise well and eloquentlie written, but onely to serue you at need, knowing verie well, that to get the fauour of great men, and to be reported a good speaker, and as eloquent a pleader of causes in the Pallace, as anie one in Rome: you do not for al this, as Merops the Tragedian, who wearieth & consumeth himselfe with vainglorie to please the humour of the popular sort (which therfore worthily account you happie:) but I doubt not that you keepe wel in memoric the speach which you haue oft times heard me vse, that neither a noblemans shoe healeth the gout in the foot, nor a precious

ring, the crampe in the finger, nor a Diadem, the paine in the head. For how serueth store of wealth, great honors, or credit in Court, to free the minde from trouble, and to make a mans life peaceable, if (That) be not within, which can Reason. vse it vertuouslie, and if it be not alwaies accompanied with contentment, which neuer wisheth that it hath not. And what other thing is That, but onely reason, accustomed & exercised in bridling straightwaies the vnreasonable part of the minde, which easily, and oft times passeth hir bowndes, so that it cannot wander abroad at hir owne pleasure, nor be carried about after hir own appetites. Wherefore as Xenophon doth warne men to be mindfull of the gods, and to worship them, especiallie when they are in prosperitie, to the ende, that in time of necessitie they may be more assured to reclaime them, as hauing bin long before fauourable and frendlie vnto them: So ought wise, and discreete men to make prouision of reasons, which may serue to defend them against passions, so

that hauing them prepared before hand, they may be more auaileable, whē need requireth. For euen as dogges which are fierce by nature do grin and barke at euerie straunge noise they heare, and are not appeased, but with the sownd of that voice which is familiar vnto them, and with which they are acquainted: So is it not an easie matter, to bring back to reason, the wilde wandering passions of the minde, vnlesse we haue a fit, and familiar bridle at hand, that may checke them, as soone as they begin to stirre.
            As for them, which say, that if wee would liue quietlie, we should not deale with manie matters either priuate, or publick: First I say that they would sel vs this tranquillitie too deerlie, which will Idlenes. haue vs buy it with the price of idlenes, which is as much, as if they should warne euery man, as being sicke, euen as Electra doth her brother Orestes.
            
            
               
                  Continue quiet, wretched in thy bed.
               
            
            But this were an ill medicine for the bodie, which to case the paine thereof must take away the feeling: neither is

he a better Phisition for the minde, who to take all disquiet from it, would make it idle, effeminate, forgetfull of all dutie towards friends, kindred and countrey.
            Wee see then it is vntrue that their mindes are setled, and quiet, which entermedle not with manie matters. For if it were so, then must we say, that women liue more contented, and lesse troubled than men, considering that for the most part they stirre not out of the house. But verie true it is, as the Poet Hesiodus saith.
            
               
                  The percing winde, that from the North doth passe.
                  Hurtes not the bodie of the tender Lasse:
               
            
            But greefes, cares, vexations, and discontentments, be it through iealousysuperstition, ambition, or proceeding from vaine opinions, and conceites, that 3 especiall causes of womens discontentment. are almost innumerable, do easilie rush euen into Ladies closets, and bedchambers. And Laertes, which liued solitarilie in the countrie for the space of twentie yeares.
            
               
               
                  Alone with one olde woman that hee had.
                  To dresse his meat he liu'd pensiue & sad.
               
            
            Albeit he separated himselfe far from his countrie, from his house, and kingdome, yet he alwaies carried griefe, and sadnes in his hart, which are euer accompanied with idle discontentment, and pensiue silence.
            Moreouer there are some which say, that not to bee emploied in affaires is oft times cause of displeasure, and the disquiet of a mans minde, As appeareth by the discontented Greeke, whom Homer describeth.
            
               
                  But stout Achilles sprung of Peleus race
                  Being light of foote, and full of diuine grace,
                  Had no delight once from his ships to moue,
                  Or march in battle as did him be houe
                  Amidst the Greekes, or els among the wise
                  To sit in counsell, or to enterprise
                  
                     
Some braue attempt, beseeming his estate,
                  But all alone possest with spite, and hate
                  He did consume himselfe from countrie far,
                  Although hee loued nothing more than war.
               
            
            Wherupon himselfe being passionate and vexed in minde sayth a litle after that.
            
               
                  Hard by my shippes, where doing naught I stoode,
                  A lumpe of Earth vnsit for any good.
               
            
            In so much that Epicurus himselfe is of opinion that a man ought not to continue still, doing nothing, but that euerie man should followe the inclination of his owne nature, as the ambitious, and desirous of Honour to deale with publicke affaires, and to entermeddle with the gouernment of the common wealth, saying that otherwise in doing nothing they should be more troubled, & disquieted, because they could not obtaine

that which they desired. But herein he is of a bad iudgement in calling to the gouernment of the state, not those men, which are most fit for the place, but such as can least giue themselues to case, and rest. Howbeit we ought not to measure or determine the quiet or disquiet of the mind by the great or small number of matters, but by the good or bad handling of them. For (as we haue alreadie said) it is no lesse troblesome, nor lesse offensiue to the minde, to omit that which is good, then commit that which is ill. And as for them which thinke that there is assuredlie a certaine speciall kinde of life without anie discontentment, as some hold the life of labouring me, to be some, the life of yong men to be married, and some the life of Kinges: Menander answereth them sufficientlie in these verses.
            
               
                  O Phania I thought, that men of power,
                  Which haue great store of wealth at euerie hower.
                  
                     
So that they neede not vpon vsury:
                  To borrow, as men doo in penury.
                  Had from all care, & thought beene freed cleane:
                  And had not known what greefe, & paine dooth meane.
                  Or all nights groning, sighing, & vnrest:
                  Turning from side to side, as men opprest.
                  To crie alas, and wish it were their hap:
                  To close their eyes, or take one slumbring nappe.
               
            
            But afterward, looking neerer into their state, and perceauing that the rich liued as much discontented as the poore he saith.
            
               
                  Thus discontentment, in all states beeing rife: No state, or kind of life free from trouble, and disquiet.
                  
                  The sister german, of this human life.
                  Participates with nobles, in the Court:
                  With men of power, of welth, of euery sort.
                  The silly soule, by hir dooth pine away:
                  And euery where, she beares no litle sway.
               
            
            But this is, euen as those that are fearfull, The cause of discontentmet in our selues. and sick vpon the seas, which thinke to ease, and cure them selues in passing, out of a Barke into a Brigandine, and out

of a Brigandine into a Galley: And yet they gaine nothing thereby, for so much as they alwaies carrie with them the humor, and feare, which causeth their sicknes: Euen so alteration in the kindes of life dooth not take away the greefes and vexations, that trouble the quiet of minde; which greefes proceed partlie of want of experience in matters, partly of lacke of good conference, and aduise, & partly of default of knowledg; & discretion to apply our selues to our present estate. This is it, which disquieteth as well the riche, as the poore. This is it, which troubleth as well the married, as the vnmaried. This is the cause, that manie doo flie the pallace, and please please in courtes. And yet for all this, they cannot brooke quietnes, or giue themselues to rest, by reason they desire, and seeke to be a duanced, and to haue great places in Princes courtes, which when they haue once obtained sodainely they become weary of them.
            
               Hard is it to content the man that's sicke. 
               The mind neuer con tented. So saith Ion the Poet: for his wife displeaseth

him. He accuseth the Phisition. Hee is angrie with his bed, some one of his friendes offendeth him, because hee commeth to visite him, another because he commeth not, or being come for that he will needes depart. But afterwardes when the disease decreaseth, and that there commeth an other temperature, & disposition of body: then health returneth againe, which maketh all thinges pleasing, and delightful. So that he, which of late, nay, but yesterdaie refused with loathing, and abhorred egs, fine cheat, & the whitest manchet that might be got: this day falleth to brown houshold bred, with oliues, and water cresses, euen sauourly, and with a good stomacke. Euen Reason changeth affections so the iudgement of reason comming to forme it selfe in mans vnderstanding, bringeth with it the like facility, and the very same chaunge in euery kind of life. They say, that Alexander hauing heard Alexanders ambition. 
               Anaxarchus the Philosopher dispute and maintaine in argument, that there were innumerable worldes, began to weepe: And beeing asked what reason hee had

so to doo, answered saying: haue I not great cause, to weepe, if the number of worlds be infinite, seeing that I cannot yet make my selfe lord of one alone? Crates cō
                  tentment. Wheras Crates hauing for al his wealth but one olde ill-fauored, ragged cloake, and a patched scrippe did nothing al his life long but sport, and laugh, as if he had alwaies beene at a feast. Contrariwise, Agamemnon complained for that he had Agamemnons complaint. such a great world to commaund.
            
               
                  Loe Agamemnon, sonne to Atreus:
                  Vpon whose necke, Iupiter caus'd to bide:
                  The heauy waight, for al the world beside.
               
            
            Whereas Diogenes, when they solde him for a slaue lying all along vpon the Diogenes carelesnes ground, mocked the crier that sold him, and would not rise vp, when hee commaunded him, but sported and iested with him saying. And if thou shouldst sel Socrates pacience. a fish wouldest thou make it rise vp? And Socrates beeing in prison vsed familiar conference in discoursing of matters of 
                  ••
               ilosophie: whereas Phaeton beeing mounted vp to heauen yet wept for despite, that they would not let him rule, &

gouerne the horses, and Chariot of the Phaetons impacience. Sun his father. Euen as the shoe becommeth crooked according to the deformitie of the foote, and not otherwise.
            : So is it the humors of men, which make their liues alike, and conformable to their dispositiōs. For it is not custome (as one would haue it) which maketh a good life pleasant to them, which haue Wisdom, and Temperance causeth a good and pleasant life. chosen it: but wisdome, and temperance are the things, which make our life good and pleasaunt withal. And therefore sith the spring head of all quietnes of minde resteth in our selues, let vs looke vnto it, and diligently cleanse it, to the end, that those chaunces, which shall befall vs in outward thinges, may seeme pleasing, & familiar vnto vs, when wee are well acquainted with them and can make vse of them.
            
               
                  Be not offended, whatsoeuer chaunceth:
                  For at our anger, fortune sports, & daunceth.
                  But he that for all happes, his mind can frame:
                  Vndoubtedly deser
                        •
                     es, a wise mans name.
               
            
            
               
For Plato compareth our life to Table 
               Our life is compared by Plato to Table play. 
               play, wher the Dye must shew the cast and the gamster must content himselfe with his chaunce. Now touching these two points, the euent, and hazard of the Dye are not in our power, but patiently, and moderately to take in good part, whatsoeuer it shall please fortune to send, and to dispose euerie thing in such place, as it may helpe much, if it be good, or hurt litle if it be bad, this is in ourpower to do, & this we ought to do, if we be wise. For fooles, that are slaues Foolish men know not how to vse either prosperity or aduersity. to their affections, which knowe not how to behaue themselues in this human life do presumptuously rush out of their boundes in prosperity, and timerously mure vp themselues in aduersitie. So that they are troubled with both extremities, or (to say more truely) with Goods themselues in both extremities, & principally in that which they call Goods, as Theodorus. those men who being sicke are vnable to endure either heat or cold. Theodorus that for the il opinions he held, was surnamed Atheos, which is without God or (godlesse)
               
vsed to saie that he deliuered his discourses to his Auditors with the right hande, but that they receiued them with the left; euen so simple, and ignorant men which know not how to liue, entertaining oftimes with the left hand, the fortune, which commeth to Error in mistaking fortune. them on the right, commit thereby many grosse, and absurd enormities. But on the contrary part wise men like Bees that suck hunnie out of Time a rough, and dry herb do draw some good, and profitable thing for thēselues euen out of the worst, and most troblesome accidents that befall them. This then is the first point wherein we must bee trained and exercised: as hee which ayming to hit a Dog with a stone misseth the Dog, and striketh his stepmother; and yet Fortune to be applyed by will to euery accident. saith, it falleth not out ill: (euen so may we transfer our fortune by our will, and apply it to that, which she bringeth vnto vs. Diogenes was driuen out of his countrie into exile, yet went it not ill with him, for that his banishment was the first beginning of his study in Philosophy:

               Zeno the Citiei an had once a Zeno. marchants ship, and hauing newes, that it was cast awaic, & that the marchandise, and all were sunck into the bottom of the sea: Fortune (quoth he) thou dost well to make me fit for the long plaine robe, and the study of Philosophy. What letteth vs to follow thē herin? Thou hast bin deposed from some publicke office, or place of autority, which thou hadst in charge. Well, be it so: Thou shalt liue priuately in the coūtry vpon that, which thou hast. Thou did dest make suite to be entertained into the house and seruice of some Prince or noble man. Thou hast had the repulse, well, thou shalt liue at home with thy selfe, and that with lesse paine, and lesse daunger.
            Contrarywise thou art entred into dealings with matters of state, wherein is much paine, and great care. The hot water of the bath doth not so much com fort the wearied lims as Pindarus saith.
            
               
                  The hot bath doth not yeelde so much delight.
                  
                     
Vnto the wearied lims of any wight.
                  As hope of glorie, others to surmount,
                  To liue in wealth, in credit and account.
                  Doth make all trauayle, sweete vnto the minde.
                  Tendure such paines, as Honor hath assind.
               
            
            Art thou fallen into disgrace? or hast thou receiued some priuie back blow by enuy, or ill report? This is a good wind in the Poupe of thy shippe to turne thee straite to the study of learning, and philosophie, as Plato was, whē he had made Plato shipwracke of the good fauour of Dyonisius the tyrant.
            And now it is a meane of no small importaunce The state of great men to be considered by the meaner sort. for the setling of the minde in quiet, to consider the state of great men, and to see if they be mooued, and troubled with the like accidents. As for example. The cause of thy discontentment, is, for that thou canst haue no children by thy wife. Looke how manie Roman Emperors there haue beene, wherof not one left the Empire to his sonne. Art thou greeued because thou art pore?

And which of the Thebans wouldst thou wishe to resemble rather, then Epaminondas? or of the Romans, then Fabritius? Hath one defiled thy wife? Hast thou not red the inscription, which is set vp in the Temple of Apollo at Delphos, vpon an offering, which was there presented?
            
               
                  Agis a crowned King by sea, and land
                  Hath placed me in this Temple, where I stande.
               
            
            And haue you not heard howe Alcibiades 
               Agis honor not empared by his wiues adultery. corrupted Timoea his wife, and howe shee her selfe amongest her women called softelie the child which shee had by him, Alcibiades? But for all this her lewdnesse was no let, that Agis became not the greatest, and most famous man of all Greece in his time. Neither in like manner was the incontinencie of Stilpoes daughter an occasion that hee liued not as ioyfullie, as anie other Philosopher of his time. So that when Metrocles the Cynick cast it in his teeth, hee sayd vnto him, is this my fault or hers? Metrocles
               
aunswered: the faulte is hers, Stilpo not disquieted with his daughters incontinē
                  cy. and the misfortune thine. Stilpo replied againe, howe so? Are not faultes vnhappie casualties? Yea surelie (quoth the other.) Then Stilpo goeth forward. And are not such casualties ill euentes? The other confessed it. And are not ill euentes misfortunes to them, on whō they chaunce to fall? By this sweete, and Philosophicall progression from point to point, hee shewed, and prooued that all his reproch, and malitious speech was nothing else, but a dogs barking.
            Againe on the other side the most part of men are troubled, and disquieted Most part of men troubled with their enemies vices. not onelie with the vices of theyr friends, acquaintance, and kindred, but also with their verie enemies misbehauiour. For ill companie, contention, enuy emulation, and ielousie accompanied with hate and disdaine, defile the minds of those men, which are possessed with these passions, notwithstanding they oft times vexe, and offend the vnwife: as the sodaine falling out of neighbors, the

troublesome conuersation of familiars, the lewdnes of seruants in those things which are cōmited to their charge, with which thing you seeme to be moued, & trobled as much, as with any other matter, doing therein as the phisitions, whō 
               Sophocles describeth.
            
               
                  Washing the choler with like iuyce ywis
                  Of quality, such as the humor is.
               
            
            Fretting, and disquieting your selfe with their passions, and imperfections to small purpose in my opinion, for that those matters, whereof the gouerment is committed to your trust, are not ordinarily handled by entercourse of persons of simple and good behauiour as by fit, and pliable instruments but oftē
               times by rough & crooked tooles: Now No striuing against nature. think not that it is your duety or a thing easy to be done by altering the forme to amend them, but if in vsing them, as beeing borne such as you finde them, euen as Surgeons do, their hooked instruments, wherewith they close the gaping of wounds, you shew your selfe gracious and tractable, as the case requireth,

surely you shall reape not so much displeasure, and discontentment at their lewdnes, as pleasure, and contentment at your own disposition. And thinking that such substitutes, and seruants doe that which is their propertie and nature as Dogs, when they barke, you shal keepe your selfe from heaping vp more greefes, and vexations, which vse to distill into the mindes of pulling, & faintharted men, as into a pit (or low place) that is filled vp with an other mans inconuenience and mishap. For seeing that their are certaine Philosophers, Miserable men to be helped, not lamen ted for. which reproue the pitie and cō
               passion, which some take of miserable, and distressed men, as being a very good thing to helpe them in their misery, and calamity, but not to greeue, or suffer with thē, or once to be moued with thē: And (more then this) seeing that the same Philosophers woulde not that we should be sorie, or disquieted, if we perceiue our selues to offend, or to be giuē to any vice but that wee should correct, and amend it, without greeuing or troubling

our selues otherwise, considering what small reason there is to be sorie, or discontented, for that all those, which haue to doe with vs, and which keepe company with vs are not so honest and vertuous, as they ought to be. But let vs take heede (friend Paccius) that this proceede not so much of the hate of vice in generall, as of the loue of our selues in particular, which maketh vs feare, and dislike the ill dealing of those men, with whom we are conuersant. For sometimes affecting too much the state of gouernmēt & publick affairs desiring and haunting after them more hotely then is fit, or contrarie wise hauing at all no tast of them, or making no account of them this engendreth in vs suspition, both of impatience and discontentment against those persons, which make vs misconceiue and imagin that they haue depriued vs of this commodity or made vs fal into that incōuenience. But he that is accustomed to behaue himselfe temperatelie, and indifferentlie in common affaires, is thereby

more gracious, fit and conformable to deale with men in the world. And therfore let vs againe finde fault, and blame these dealings in matters, and busines? For euen as hee that is sicke of a feuer findeth all things that he taketh displeasing to his tast, and bitter, but when we see others which tasting thereof find thē nothing vnsauory, or vnpleasāt, then we blame no more either the broth or the meate, but onely the disease: Euen so shall we cease to àccuse, and take these matters greeuouslie, or impatiently, whē we shall see other men taking them in hand cheerefullie, & ioyfullie. Wherfore whē any crosse accident shal befall vs against our will it shall bee good for the The remembrance of our good fortune past must coun teruaile our present mishap. surer seating of the mind in quiet not to cast behind vs our good, and fortunate chaunces, but tēpering the one with the other to deface and darken our ill haps, by comparing them with our good. But in opposing the one against the other let vs refresh and comfort our eies, beeing offended with the sight of too liuelie, & glittering colors, by casting them vpon

naturall flowers and the greene grasse.
            And let vs employ our imagination to matters of greefe, and trouble, enforcing it to rest and continue in the meditatiō of our aduerse & sorowful chances, pulling it vp forcibly by the roots (as I may saie) from the remembrance of our good & prosperous haps, wherevnto you may verie fitlie transferre the discourse which in another place was made against the Curious man what is Another treatise written by Plutarch in his Moralls. the cause, O most enuious man, that thine eies are so bright and percing in vewing other mens euills (and so dull, and darkned in beholding, thine owne? And wherefore is it good Sir, that thou lookest so stedfastlie vpon thy mishaps in making them alwaies manifest, and fresh in memorie, and neuer applyest thy thoughts to the good things which thou presetly enioyest, but euen as the Cupping, & scarifying instrumēts which chirurgions vse, do draw vnto thē the corruption, that is in the flesh: euen so dost thou heape vp against thy selfe all the worst that is in thy selfe verie fitly resembling

the marchant of Chium, who selling to other men great store of good wine, went euery where seeking and tasting to get viniger for his own dinner. So ther was a seruant, who being asked what hee left his Master doing, answered; hauing much good hee seeketh that which is ill. Euen so the most part of men superficially passing ouer the good and profitable things, which they haue, do tie themselues to things troblesome, and offensiue. But Aristippus did not so: Aristippus disposition for hee was alwaies disposed to cheere himselfe and to alledge reasons to that end, whensoeuer anie vnlooked for mishap did befall him, placing himselfe in that ballance, which was carried vpward so that one day by casualtie hauing bin dispossessed of a good peece of groūd, he went to one of his familiar friends, who seemed to make most shew to bee greeued and to bee sorie for him, and saide hast not thou onely one litle farme? and haue not I three other goodly plots of ground? The other affirmed that it was so, wherefore then is it not reason to be

sorie with thee rather then with me. For it is a madnes to greeue for that which we haue not, and not to reioyce for that which we haue, but to doe, as little children vse, from whō if a mā take but one of their little toyes, that they play withal, though they haue neuer so many: yet in anger and dispite they cast away and break al the rest, & then howle, & crie a maine. In like case if fortune trouble vs in anie one thing, we make al the fauors that she doth vs in other matters vaine, and vnprofitable, by reason of our complaining, & tormenting our selues. Some man will say vnto mee, what haue wee? Nay, wee ought rather to say, what Euery man hath some thing for which hee ought to be thankfull. haue we not? One man hath honour, another, a faire house, this man a vertuous wife, and that, a faithfull friend. Antipater the Philosopher, borne in the towne of Tharsus drawing neere his ende, and calling to remembraunce the good, and happy turnes, that had chaunced to him in his life, forgat not to place and count amongst the rest, his fortunate voyage in comming from Cilicia to Athens. And

yet we ought not to omit, or let passe euen those things which are common to vs with most, or all men, but to esteeme and make some account of them, as to reioice for that wee liue, that wee are healthfull, and well disposed, that we see the Sun, that there is no warre, that there Common benefits not to be neglected. is no sedition, but that the earth yeeldeth to the plough, that the sea is nauigable without daunger to him that will passe, that it is lawfull to speake, and to bee silent, to deale in matters, The want of good things maketh them more esteemed & desired. and to giue our selues to rest. And hereby wee shall enioie the contentment of minde more assured, if hauing those common benefits aboue recited, wee imagine that wee haue them not, remembring oftentimes howe much health is lamented, and wished for of those that are sicke, and peace of them that are afflicted with warres, and what a happye thing to bee desired it is, for a straunger vnknowne in such a towne to get so great authoritie, & such friendes, and contrariwise what a greefe it is to loose them, after a man hath got

them. Whereby we see that a thing cannot be of great price when we loose it, and of no valewe when we enioy it. For the want of it encreaseth neither the price nor valewe. Neither should wee possesse these things, as matters of great waight in trembling alwaies for feare to loose them, and to be depriued of them, The feare of loosing them taketh away the pleasure of enioying thē. and in the meane while, when wee haue them at will, to forget and set nought by them, as things of small importaunce: but to vse them, while we haue them, & to take pleasure in enioying them, to the ende that if wee chaunce to loose them, we may take the losse more patientlie. But the greatest number of men are of opinion, as Arcesilaus said, that we ought to follow with our eye, and thoroughlie peruse the poems, tables, pictures, and images of other men, to behold, and suruaie them particularlie from point to point, from one end to another; but as for their liues, & behauior wherin there are manie deformities to be seen we glaunce thē ouer in regarding onely the outward shew of honors, aduancement, & other

mensfortunes, as adulterers do vpō other mens wiues in setting nought by their own. And now it is a pointe of great importaunce for the quiet, & contentment of our mindes, that euery man should The consideration of a mans owne selfe and estate very neces sary. consider principallie himselfe, his estate, and condition, or at least to behold them that are aboue him, not as many men do that cōpare themselues with their superiors, as for example the slaues, that are boūd, accoūt thē happy that are vnboūd the vnbound, the freemen: the freemen, the citizens: the meane citizens: the rich burgesses, the riche burgesses, the great Lords, & Princes: the Princes, the Kings the Kings, finallie the Gods, desiring (in The desire of that we haue not taketh awaie the pleasure of the enioying that we haue. a manner) that they were able to thunder, and lighten. And by this meane being alwaies needie, and desirous of that which is aboue them, they neuer enioie the pleasure of that, which is in them (which they haue inpossession.)
            
               
                  I care not for the store of wealth,
                  Which Gyges once possest:
                  My hart was not at any time,
                  With blind de sire opprest.
                  
                     
Nor doo I enuie anie man,
                  Sweete fortunes golden showers:
                  Nor doo I seeke to match my selfe,
                  With the immortall powers.
                  Nor yet doe I affect the Pompe
                  Of Kings, and glory bright:
                  Mine eyes alas imperfect are,
                  Once to behold that light.
               
            
            It was a Thrasian woman that said this. But some other either of Chium, Galatia, or Bythinia, wil not content himself with his allotted part, and portion of honor, credit, and authoritie in his Country amongst his Countrymen, but wil whine and mourne if he beare not the habit of a Senatour or one of the Nobilitie, and if he bee by election aduanced thereunto: then if he be not a Roman Prator, and if he be once a Praetor, then forsooth if he be not Consul, and if he be Consul, then if Defire of aduancement maketh men discontented. hee were not the first proclaimed. And what other thing is this but to heape vp affected and desired occasions of ingratitude against fortune to our owne sorrow, punishment, and affliction. But a wise, sensible, and discrete man if there

bee one amongst so many millions of men which see the Sunne.
            
            
               
                  And which liue by the fruits the earth doth yeelde,
               
            
            That is, either more Honorable, or more wealthy then himselfe, he doth not therefore strait waies withdraw himself from company, weeping, lamenting, and giuing ouer all, but keepeth on his way blessing and thanking Fortune, in that hee liueth more honorably, and more at ease then millions of others. For true it is that at the solemne assembly for the games of Olympus, the gamesters doe not of purpose choose those men to encounter with, of whom they may bee assured to winne the prise; but in the life of man the affaires thereof are so ordered that they giue vs occasion to boast and vaunt our selues, to be aboue many men, and to bee enuied, rather than to enuie others, vnlesse peraduenture some one bee so presumptuous to make himselfe a Paragon, for a Briareus, or a Hercules. When therefore thou shalt haue much esteemed as a great Lorde some man whom

thou shalt see carried to his pallace in a litter betweene mens armes, cast downe thine eies a little, and beholde the same man carried vpon mens shoulders to his long home. And after thou hast admired the happines of the great king Xerxes for passing the strait of Hellespont vpon a bridge of ships, consider also those men which were forced with blowes and stripes to cut & make the mount Athos hollow, and those men whose eares and noses were cut off, when the tempest had scattered & broken the saide bridge of shippes. And withall imagine in thy selse what they thinke and howe blessed they account thy life, & condition in respect of theirs? Socrates (hearing a familiar friend of his say. This towne is maruelouslie deare: The wine of Chium costeth ten crownes, purple cloth thirtie, a measure of honnie fiue groates) taketh him and leadeth him to the shoppes, where Things necessary easely gotten. they solde halfe a pecke of meale for a halfepenie (good cheape:) and then to the place where oliues were sold, a peck for three farthings, (good cheape:) after

that to the Drapery, where they sold apparrell, (a Coat for ten groates) good cheape. You see then (saith hee) something good cheape in the towne. Euen so when wee shall heare some one saie, that our estate is meane and our fortune base for that we are not Consuls or Presidents of Prouinces: We may answere, but by your leaue Sir, our estate is honorable and our life happie in that we begge no almes, nor carrie burthens, nor gette our liuing by flatterie. But notwithstanding, sith for the most part wee are become so foolish that we vse to liue to others, rather than to our selues, and that our nature is corrupted with such a puling Error of conceit by reason of the outward shew maketh men think others estate better then their owne. iealousie, and infected with so great enuie, that it doth not so much reioice at hir owne good, as it repineth at other mens: let vs not onely behold, and mark that which is glorious, glittering and renowmed in those whom we wonder at, and whom wee esteeme so fortunate: but abasing our selues, vnderpeering and discouering a little the counterfeit curtaine, and shadowed vaile of apparance,

and opinion which is spread ouer them, let vs enter into them, and there doubtles shall we find great toile, many griefs, and much vexation. By reason whereof Pittacus pa
                     •
                  ience. 
               Pittacus that man so famous, and renowmed for his valure, wisedome, & iustice, feasting one day certaine of his friendes being strangers: his wife commeth in about the midst of the feast, and being displeased A part of a curst, & madbrain shrew. therewith, ouerturned the table and all that was vppon it. The strangers were all ashamed and abashed thereat; himselfe made no other matter of it but onely said. There is none of vs, that hath not in himselfe some default: But as for me I haue but this onelie point (my wiues headstrong humor) which letteth me from being in all thinges entirelie most happie.
            
               
                  Hee seemes in shew a happie man to be,
                  Whose gate standes ope, himselfe from care not free.
                  Within sits musing all alone, his wife
                  Must master be, or els there will be strife.
                  From noone to night, from night tomorrow still.
                  
                     
Hir tongue runs post, & shee must haue hir will.
                  And yet more crosses fall vnto his share,
                  Poore sillie man opprest with greefe and care.
               
            
            Many such harsh and bitter discontentments are there hid in the hartes of those that are rich, and placed in auctoritie, The pomp of Princes hideth their trobles from the sight of priuate men. yea euen in the mindes of kinges, which the common sort knoweth not, for so much as the pompe and outward shew couereth them.
            
               
                  Lo Atreus son happie without annoy
                  Fulfild with goods, and Fortunes louely boy.
               
            
            All this is but a recital of his outward happines, by reason of the armour, horses, and soldiers, that he had about him. But the lamcntable voice of his passions proceeding from within, doth falsifie that vaine opinion when he saith,

                  
                     For this my life full fraught with miserie
                     Ioue hath reseru'd a wretched destinie.
                  
               
And this other saying:

                  
                     O happie old man blest for thy degree,
                     In mine opinion whosoere thou be,
                     
                        
That being borne of meane and base estate
                     Liu'dst vncouth void of danger, and debate,
                     And free from thoughts aspiring worldly praise,
                     Hast finisht here thy transitorie daies.
                  
               
            
            By such like meditations we may qualifie, and draw somewhat from our continual cries & cōplaints against Fortune, whereby we debase and condemne our owne condition, in praising and commending the state of other men. But there is another matter which hindereth the quiet of the minde, as much as any thing els, which is, when the prickes and spurres of wil, and desire in men are vnmeasurable, and disproportionable to Will their power, as when men set vp greater Mens folly to be blamed rather then their fortune in desiring things aboue their reach and attempting things imposible. sailes than their ships will beare, promising themselues in their reasonles desires, and vaine hopes more, than they ought. And in the end when they see, that they cannot compasse them, then they blame Fortune, and accuse their destinie and not their follie; For neither he which cannot draw an arrow with a plough or course a Hare with an Oxe

may therefore terme himselfe vnhappie. nor he that would take a hart with a smal fish hooke can therefore complaine of his bad fortune as being therein contrarie and against him, but well and worthily should he condemne his own rashnes & follie, that would attempt things impossible. The principal cause of which error, is the foolish, and blinde loue of Selfe loue. our selues, which maketh men desire, the first, and highest places, and to bee wilfull in opinion, and vnmeasurablie wishing all things for themselues, being neuer satisfied, nor contented. For they would bee not onelie rich, & learned, strong, and lusty, pleasant conceited, and minions of Kinges, and gouernours of towns; but also if they haue not the best Hownds, the swiftest Horses, the daintiest quailes, the most coragious cocks for the game that may be had, they cannot be pleased. Dionysius the elder was not Dionysius. content to be the greatest, & most mightie Monarch of his time, but for that hee was not a better poet, then Philoxenus, and could not discourse so well as Plato:
               
he so disdained therat, and was so fiercelie moued against them, that he caused the one to bee cast into the Quarries, where offendors, and bondmen were punished, and sent the other to be sold, as a slaue in the Ile of Aegina. Alexander the great was not of that minde, for being told that Brisson his horse courser, with whome hee ranne a race to see who should get the price of swiftnes, was faint, and failed in his course, he was greeuoustie offended with him. And Non omnia possumus omnes. therefore Homer speaking of Achilles doth wiselie in saying,

                  
                     None of the Greekes could be his paragon.
                  
               
            
            When he adioyneth straight after.
            
               
                  In martiall feates, but as for eloquence
                  Many there are of greater excellence.
               
            
            
               Megabysus a great Prince of Persia 
               Megabysus wēt one day into Apellos shop, where he painted. And when he began to fall in talke of the art of painting, Apelles with his right hand closed his mouth, saying to him. So lōg as thou heldest thy peace, thou didest seeme to bee some goodlie great thing, by reason of thy gold chains,

and karkynets, and thy purple robe, but now there is not the least boy in my shoppe, that grindeth my colors which doth not mocke thee, and laugh at thee hearing thee say thou knowest not what. And notwithstanding some of them thinke that the Stoicke Philosophers doe but sport, and mocke when they heare their saying (which is) that a The stoicks opinion of a wise man wise man in their opinion is not onelie prudent, iust and valiant, but also (as they call him an Oratour, a Captaine, a Poet, a rich man, and (more) a king. And they forsooth would faine haue all those qualities, the want of which makes them pensiue and discontented. And yet amongst the gods one hath power in one thing, and another in another, and therfore one is surnamed Enyalius that is to say Martiall, another Mantous, that is to say Propheticall, another Cerdous, that is to say Gaining by traffick. And Iupiter sendeth Venus to beds, and bride chambers, not to the fielde, as beeing very vnfit for hir to deale with edge tooles. Besides there are some of those qualities which

they affect and desire that cannot meete together (in one Subiect) as the studie, and practise of Eloquence and the Mathematicall sciences require libertie of mind and leisure. Contrariwise credit and authoritie in the common wealth, and the fauour of Princes are not to be obtained without trouble and dealing in publicke affaires, and continuall following the Court: euen as much eating of flesh, and great drinking of wine maketh the bodie strong and lustie, and the mind faint and feeble, and as daily care to heape vp riches, and to keepe them together doth increase our wealth, and contrariwise, the small account and contempt of them is a great meane to drawe vs to the studie of Philosophie, and practise of All things not fit for all men. morall virtue. And therefore all thinges are not fit and conuenient for all men, but we ought following the sentence of A man must first learne to know himselfe. Nature not to be forced. 
               Apollo Pythius, to learne first to knowe our selues, and then to vse our selues, by applying our selues to that whereunto we are borne, and not to force Nature, dragging it by the haires as I may say,

nowe to one imitation of life, anon to another.
            
               
                  The horse is made, for seruice in the field:
                  The Oxe to plough the earth, which fruite dooth yeelde.
                  The Dolphin midst the maine, dooth leape, and skip:
                  Sporting himselfe, in swimming by the ship.
                  The fierce wild bore, which threatneth nought but death.
                  The hardy bound, pursueth on the heath.
               
            
            But he that is disquieted, and troubled, for that he is not at one time both a great Lyon of the mountaine to trust in his strenght, and a litle Dog of Maltha to be dandled in some rich widowes lap, doubtles is a mad and senceles foole. And euen as wise is he, that would resemble Empedocles, Plato, or Democritus, writing of the nature of the world, and of the truth of things, and straitewaies fall a courting, and then creep to some old rich womans bed, as Euphorion did: or quaffe, and carouse with Alexander the great, as Medius did: and hee that is greeued, and discontented because hee

is not so much estemed for his wealth as Ismenias: or for his vertue, as Epaminondas. But the Runners are not displeased because they haue not the Wrestlers crouns but are contented & glad of their own. Sparta is fallen vnto thee, take paine to adorne 
               Make much of thine own. 
               it, as the common prouerb saith, following the saying of, Solon.
            
            
               
                  We would not chaung our good yet nerethelesse,
                  For al the ill (the muck, that they possesse)
                  Vertue continueth firme and of great power,
                  Riches uncertain chāging euery power.
               
            
            
               Straton the naturall Philosopher vnderstanding that his neighbor Menedemus had more auditors & scholers thē he what meruaile is that saith he? sith there are more that would bee washed with The most part of men prefer pleasur and ease before pro fit, and honesty. water, then rubbed with oyle, that is which loue to liue loselie and delicately at there owne pleasure, then hardly, and austerely, as I instrust them. And Aristotle writing to Antipater saith, that Alexander alone, shold glorie not onelie in that he commanded so great a number

of men, but also, and nothing lesse in that he commaunded such men, as had a right belefe, and opinion of the Gods, as they ought to haue. They which in this manner exalte their owne estate, shall neuer enuie the condition of other men. And now wee require not that the vine should bring foorth figs, or the Oliue tree grapes; How bee it if we our selues haue not all the commodities, & aduantages together, but of riche and learned men, Soldiers and Philosophers parasites, and iesters, free men, and citizens, spenders, and sparers, then wee cauill, repine, and become vnthankefull to our selues, and contemne our life as needie, and wanting all thinges necessarie. But further we se, that herein Nature her Natures prouision. selfe dooth warne and teach vs. For as she hath prouided for bruite beastes diuers kindes of foode, and nourishment and hath not ordained that all should deuour flesh, or all liue by graines, and seedes, or that all should eate herbes, & roots: So hath she appointed for men diuers kinds of liuing, as for some to liue by

their Cattel, some by tillage of the ground, some by fowling, and some by fishing. And therefore euery man should That kind of life is to be chosen, which is most agreable to our nature. choose that kinde of life which is most sortable and agreeable to his nature, and let him practise and followe it, and not conuince the Poet Hesiodus of error or insufficiencie in saying,

                  
                     The Potter to the Potter enuie beareth,
                     The Mason to the Mason.
                  
               
            
            For we doe not only enuie those men, which be of the same estate, and behauiour of which wee are: but also there is a certaine iealousie betweene the rich and the learned, the Citizen and the Nobleman, the Aduocate and the Rhetorician, in such sort, that you shall see sometimes, euen Free men nobly borne enuie a Plaier of Comedies, whom they see rewarded with a pleasant Plaudite in the Theater, or dancers, iesters, and base fellowes, whom they know to be welcome, and in great credite in kings and Princes Courts, admiring them so long, that they become euen senselesse, and breathlesse,

in woondering at them and disquieting themselues. But admit it were so, that euery one of vs had in himselfe the treasures of contentment, & discontentment & that the tuns of good & euill were not placed vppon the thresholde of Iupiters dore (as Homer saith) but in the mind of euery man: yet the diuers and variable passions that are in vs woulde make this matter sufficiently known, and manifest: For fooles, and ill aduised men doe neglect and passe ouer the present goodes Care for the time to come deuoureth the pleasure of the time present. and benefites (which they holde in possession) hauing neither discretion to vse them, nor contentment to enioy them, by reason their mindes are so busied and combred with care for the time to come. But wise men doe so firmely retaine the remembrance of thinges alreadie past, Wise men delighted with the remembrance of good turnes past. that they make them fresh in memoric, and reioice thereat, as if they were nowe present. For the present time suffering it selfe to bee apprehended of vs, but onelie by a moment seemeth to fooles not to be ours, and not to pertaine vnto vs. And euen as the Cordmaker

that is painted in the description of hell, wasting and consuming as much green broome cord, as he can wreath & work, vpon an Asse that standeth by him: so the thankelesse and senselesse forgetfulnesse of manie men gathering together, deuouring, Forgetfulnes cause of discontentment. and burying in discontentment all good actions, all practise of vertue, all delightful pastime, all familiar discourse and friendly conuersation, doth not suffer our life to be vniforme and alike (the time past beeing linked to the time present) but conferring and comparing those thinges that were done yesterday, with thinges done this daie, and thinges done this day with things to be done to morrowe, putteth together all that hath beene, with that which yet neuer was, and drowneth it in perpetuall obliuion. They which take out of Philosophers schooles, and disputations all kindes of Analysis, saying that the substance continually ministreth matter, as the spring doth water will make vs at all times beleeue by their Argumentes that wee are not the same wee are indeede, or

that we are not the same this day, which wee were yesterday. But these men through default in that they are not able to keepe in memory thinges past or to comprehende them and rest vpon them, but letting them alwaies run out at large doe make themselues truly and in effect vain, void, and empty euery present day, depending euer of the daie following, as though that which they had or did the yeare passed, or lately, and but yesterday appertained nothing vnto them, or neuer had befallen them. This then is one of those matters which troubleth the equanimitie, and quietnes of the minde, and another thing yet more (which is) that as flies cannot stand and fasten thē
               selues vppon looking glasses that are smooth and slipperie, and contrariwise doe settle themselues vppon such as are rough, vnplaine and engrauen: euen so men flying vppon their smooth, ioyfull, and profperous aduentures doe rest themselues vppon their harde, displeasant, and aduerse mishappes. Or rather as it is reported in the territorie of the

towne of Olynthus touching a place mortall, and deadlie to Beetels, wherevpon it is also called Cantharolethron, for so much as when the Beetels, are Cantharolethron. once entred therein, they can neuer come foorth againe, but winde and turne about so long, till they bee both windlesse, and breathlesse: euen so these men being entred into the remembrance The remembrāce of mishaps engrauen in the harts of men. of their forepassed mishaps, will neuer come foorth thereof, or giue themselues a breathing time, but wast and consume themselues euen to death. Howbeit cōtrariwise we ought to do as he that painteth a table, wherein hee layeth the darke, and sad colours vnderneath, and the fresh and liuelie colours vpon them; for vtterlie to blot out al mischaunces in life, and wholie to deliuer and free our selues from them, it is impossible, for so much as the harmonie The world compounded of con traries. of the worlde is compounded of contraries, and thinges diuerse, euen (as I may say) of a Bowe, and a Harpe. And there is nothing in this humane estate, which is altogether pure, and cleane,

but as in Musicke there are diuers voices, Nothing pure in this life. whereof some be lowd, and shril, some low, and base; and in Grammer there be some letters called vowels, and some mutes, and hee is neither a Grammarian, nor a Musitian which neglecteth the knowledge of the one, and followeth the practise of the other, but hee which can make vse of them al, & tēper them togither according to his art: euen so are the affaires, & state of men hauing counterquarters one with an other, for as much as Euripides saith.
            
               
                  The good is neuer seuered from the ill.
               
            
            But there is (I know not how) a certaine mixture, to the ende that all things being well disposed may prosper, and continue in good order to the generall benefite of life; neither ought wee for some one accident to bee vtterlie discouraged and become carelesse of all, but resembling Musitians in depressing the pointe of our aduerse haps, by calling to minde our prosperous

aduentures, and imbracing alwaies our good fortune with our ill to make a formall composition of life fit, and agreeable to euerie mans nature. For it is not as Menander saith,

                  
                     That euerie man throughout the world so wide.
                     Hath one good Angel which his life doth guide.
                  
               
            
            But rather as Empedocles saith, assoone as euer we are come into the world, two deuils, or destinies lay handes on vs, and direct vs.
            
               
                  First Clothania is the earthly destiny,
                  Heliope viewes the Sunne in maiestie.
                  
                     Eris that euer enui'de humane good
                  Delites to haue her handes painted with blood.
                  
                     Harmonia with hir sweete and smiling face,
                  
                     Calisto faire, Aeschra with hir ill grace.
                  
                     Thoosa swift, Dinaea, which will make
                  The action good that shee doth vndertake.
                  
                     
                     Nemertes faire, and white as any snow:
                  
                     Asaphia fowle, and blacke as any crow.
               
            
            So that our natiuitie receiuing the seedes of all these passions mixt and confused togither, and by this meane our life being vnequall, and not alwaies a like, those men that be wise, & of good iudgement should wish and desire the gods to bestow the best vpon them, & yet dispose themselues to expect the worst, and to make vse of all, taking from euerie one, that which therein is Riches, glorie, autority do most delite them, who least feare pouerty, misery, and disgrace. needlesse, or superfluous. For he which is least carefull for to morrow, shall not onelie more ioyfullie come thereunto, (as Epicurus vsed to say:) but also riches, glorie, auctoritie, and credit do most delight and content them, which least doubt and feare their contraries. For the too ardent desire that men haue of these thinges, impressing in them a too vehement feare to loose them, maketh the pleasure of enioying them feeble and vncertaine, euen as a flame shaked, and carried euerie way with the wind. But hee whom reason fortifieth,

and strengthneth so that he is able without feare, or trembling to say vnto fortune.
            
               
                  Some pleasure maiest thou take, from mee I wot:
                  But not displease me: for I feare thee not.
               
            
            This is the man which most pleasantly, and contentedly enioyeth his present goods in assurance, not fearing the losse of them as though it were a thing intollerable. And, herein wee maie not onelie commend, but also imitate the vertuous disposition of Anaxagoras, 
               Anaxagoras. who vnderstanding his sonne was dead, sayd. I knewe well that Ibegat him a mortall man: and so may we saie when any chaunce, or casuall mishappes befall vs; I knewe well that I had riches; but transitorie, not euerlasting; I knewe well that that they which bestowed this honour vppon mee could take it from mee againe; I knewe well that I had a vertuous

wife, and yet but a woman; and a friend, that was a man, which is (as Plato defineth it) a liuing creature by nature mutable. Such preparatiues, and dispositions of the minde prouided before hand, if peraduenture anie accident shall touche vs contrarie to our will, and not aunswerable to our attempt, The mind must alwaies be prepared for all misfortunes. doe soone take away all greefes, and passions, which cause vs to sighe, and say. I would neuer haue thought it. I looked for another matter. I would neuer haue imagined that such a thing could haue happened. Which are euen like the breaking of the hart, and beating of the pulses, whereby the vitall spirites are distempered, these preparatiues (I saie) doe easilie qualifie and staie euerie furious motion and violent perturbation of impatiencie. Whereupon Carneades, vsed ofte times to saie that in great matters what soeuer hapned contrarie to hope and attempt was easily turned into greefe, and dispaire. The kingdome of Macedonia was but a smal part of the Romā empire;

But king Perseus hauing lost it, bewailed greatlie his fortune, and all the world therefore accounted him most miserable and vnhappie, Contrariwise Paulus AEmilius that had ouercome him, hauing resigned ouer his mightie army cō
               maunding sea, & land, to the charge, & conduct of another was crowned with garlands of flowers, in honour of his victorie and sacrificed to the Gods, being generallie and not vnworthely esteemed the happie man of the world, for as much as the one knewe well, that hee had receaued a power of men, which he was to yeeld vp againe at the end of his terme, the other had lost one, which he looked neuer to loose againe. Homer the Poet sheweth vs, what that is, which befalleth contrarie to hope, and attempt in making Vlisses weep for the death of his dog, and notwithstanding beeing come home, and sitting by his wife that wept, he lamented not, for so much as he was Reason tameth affection. come thether; hauing long before tamed and cut off his affection with the iudgement of reason. And contrariwise we see

how sodainelie, & vnawares against his attempte hee failed in the other accident. But in somme concerning those things, which befall vs contrarie to our Some things offensiue by Natura C
                     ••
                  cell will, some of them greeue, & offend vs by nature, other some, and the most part by conceite, and ill custome doe vexe, and trouble vs, being occasions of discōtentment, which wee nourishe in our selues. And therfore it were not amisse to haue alwaies in readinesse this sentence of Menander.
            
            
               
                  There is no harme, at all befallen thee:
                  Vnlesse thy selfe, fayne a mishap to bee.
               
            
            For (saith he) howe can it pertaine vnto thee if it concerne neither thy bodie, Conceit nor thy minde? As for example, the base estate of thy father, thy wiues adulterie, losse of honour, or preferment: all which inconueniences may befai a man, and yet neither his minde, nor his body be therby anie thing the worse, but both verie well disposed. Nowe against those thinges which naturallie greeue vs, as sickenes, trauailes, the death, and losse of freendes, or children, wee must oppose Nature.
               
another saying of the Poet Euripides.
            
            
               
                  Alas, but what? alas, these mishaps then
                  Are thinges of course, and common to all men.
               
            
            For neither can reason, nor demonstration keepe in Sensualitie, or restrain it so much, when it slideth away, and is carried about after her owne affections, The common necessity of nature more forcible then Reason. &c. as the meditation and remembrance of our common, and naturall necessitie, whereby man as touching his body being a substance mixed, and compounded is laid open to fortune, and turned vpward, as the onely handle of which she can take hold: in the rest beeing alwaies Man in his body subiect to fortune. certaine and assured; (I meane) in that which is the most principal, the noblest, and greatest part in him. Demetrius hauing taken the towne of Megara asked Stilpo the Philosopher, if any thing of his had beene spoiled, or rifled from him? Stilpo answered, I sawe no man which tooke away any thing that was The mind the best part of man is aboue fortunes reach. mine. Euen so when fortune hath ransacked, and robbed vs of all the rest: yet in despite of her we haue some thing in

our selues.
            
               
                  Whereof we can be neither robd, nor spoild,
               
            
            And therfore we ought not so greedily to deuour, & so iniuriously to depresse the nature of man, as though it had nothing in it firme, stable, & of cōtinuance, but cōtrariwise knowing that part wherby wee are subiect to fortune to bee the least worst, being fraile and wormeeaten and that in the better and more worthy part we are Lords, and Maisters (in that part I meane) wherein the best qualities that bee in vs are seated and grounded, is sound iudgement, arts, and sciences, matters of discourse tending to vertue, which are of an incorruptible substance, that cannot bee stollen from vs: we ought (I say) to bee resolued and to shewe our selues inuincible hereafter saying, against fortune as Socrates did against his accusers, in speaking to the Iudges. Amstus and Melitus may cause me to bee put to death but they cannot hurt mee: so fortune may afflict me with sickenes, take away my goods, bring me in disgrace with the Prince and people.

But shee cannot make a vertuous, valiant and courragious man, vitious, cowardlike, baseminded, or enuious, not take from him his disposition, beeing grounded Fortune cannot alter the minde. vppon prudence and discretion, of whose aide and presence, the life of man hath alwaies more neede then the ship on the sea of a Pilot. For the Pilot cannot when hee will asswage the tempest, and appease the violence of the windes, nor get the hauen at all times, when it were needeful, nor stoutly without trembling expect what may happen: howbeit, hee giueth not ouer all dispairing of abilitie to vse his art, but

                  
                     He labours still, the saile beeing pulled downe
                     The mast, while nothing may the windes appease,
                     Is scarcelie seene about the troubled Seas.
                  
               
            
            This done, hee sitteth trembling and shaking for feare. But the disposition of a Continencie, sober diet, exercise preserue health. discrete man, besides that it bringeth lightsomnes, health and quiet to the bodie in preuenting for the most the preparatiues of diseases by continencie, sober diet, exercise and moderate labour: if

yet in outwarde accidents there shoulde be some indisposition caused by fortune it fleeteth ouer it with a light, and swift vessell (as Asclepiades saith) like a ship passing ouer a Rocke that is hidden with the water. But if peraduenture some great inconuenience past all hope shall befall vs, in such sort that the power of man can not compasse or sustaine it; the hauen is at hand, and wee may saue The bodie is a rotten boat wherin the mind saileth. ourselues by swimming out of the bodie as out of a rotten boat, that continually leaketh and taketh water. For it is not desire of life, but feare of death which holdeth fooles so fast tied, and bound to the bodie, which they embrace so straitly as Vlysses in Homer doth the wilde fig tree for feare of falling into the gulph Charybdis that was vnderneath him,

                  
                     Wheras the wind would neither let him staie,
                     Nor suffer him from thence to saile awaie, The nature of the Soule to be knowne and considered.
                     
                  
               
beeing maruellouslie displeased for the one, and astonied with feare of the other. But he which hath albeit but a little knowledge of the nature of the soule, reasoning and considering in himselfe,

that by death this life is changed into a better, or at least not into a worse: surely this resolution auaileth much to the peace and quiet of the minde, and banisheth all feare of death from it. For hee which can behaue himselfe ioyfully, while vertue the princely and proper part of man is in greatest power and force: and again couragiously and stoutly forsake the world, when the aduerse enemie of nature preuaileth and hath the vpper hand, saying.
            
               
                  When my selfe will, God will deliuer me.
               
            
            What can we imagin that may greeue, trouble, and offend him, that is thus affected, and resolued. For hee which can say, Fortune I haue preuented thee. I haue withstood thy comming, I haue stopped thine entrance, this man trusteth not, or planteth his assurance vppon Philosophy is the fortresse of good minds. barres, or boltes, or gates locked with keies, or walles fortifyed with munition, but vpon the sweet sentences of philosophie, and the sownde perswasions of reason, (whereof all men that wil

are capable) which wee ought not to doubt, or distrust, but rather with admiration to loue & esteeme euen with the rauishment of spirit through affection, proouing, and making triall of our selues first in small matters, that wee may the better compasse greater, and not resusing, or casting behind vs the due care and diligence, that are requisite for the good order, and exercise of The mind to be exercised. the minde. And in so dooing men shall not finde so much difficultie herein, as they weene. For the wanton nicenes of the minde betaking it selfe naturally to ease and pleasure, flying backe straight in imagination from troble and sorowe to rest and delight, maketh it tender & vnexercised against delicacie, & greefe. But the mind which is taught by reason, and enuied by custome to endure a conceit of ficknes, banishment, or anie other kind of aduersitie, and enforceth it selfe with reason to fight against these, & such like accidents, shal finde by experience, that there is much deceit, vanitic, and weakenesse in those thinges, which

through error of opinion seeme painfull, grieuous, and fearefull. So that reason sheweth this plainly to him that will thinke hereof, & particularlie consider of euerie one of these. And notwithstanding there are manie which greatly feare this saying of Menander,
               
                  
                     No man can trulie say, what ere he bee
                     This chance could neuer haue befallen mee.
                  
               
            
            Not knowing how much this practise auaileth to the quiet, and contentment of the minde, whereby we may bee able with open eies firmlie to looke against Fortune, making our conceits and imaginations, not idle, or effeminat in thē
               selues, as being nourished onely by a shadow, vnder such kinde of hope, as yeeldeth, & bendeth, whē they are pressed downe by their contraries, & neuer standing stiffe or vnflexible against anie one of them. But we may also obiect & say against Menander, It is true, that no man liuing can say. This shall neuer happen to me. And yet I may saie; As long as I liue I will neuer do this, I will neuer

tell vntruth, I will neuer deceaue, I will neuer falsifie my faith, I will neuer surprise anie man. For this being in our power is no small meane, but a great helpe to the quietnes of the minde. As contrariwise the remorse of conscience (I know that I haue committed such a heinous 
               Remorse of conscience worketh repentance. 
               offence) doth leaue repentance in the soule, which grateth, tormenteth, and bloodieth it selfe, euen as a wound in the flesh. For reason taking away, and wiping out all other greefes, sorrowes, and anguishes doth engender this repē
               tance, which with shame nippeth and byteth, and with horror afflicteth and punisheth it selfe continuallie. Euen as they who being sicke of an ague do either shake for cold or burne with heate, are more greeued and tormented, then they which endure the same passions by outward causes of winters cold, or Sommers heat: so casuall and accidentall mishaps make our griefs more easie, and tolerable, as proceeding from external causes, and from without vs. But when one saith, None other is to bee blamed for
               
               this, my selfe alone am the cause hereof. This is a custome, and kinde of sorrow, & lamentation comming from the bottom of the hart, whē we know our selues guiltie of some publicke crime, wherby the griefe is so much the greater, in that it is conioined with shame, and infamy. And therefore there is neither house nor landes, nor great store of gold & siluer, nor honor and noblenes of blood, nor greatnes of office, and estate, nor the grace and vehemencie of speach, which doth so much lighten, and so sweetlie becalme the life of man, as an vndefiled A pure minde maketh a sweete contented life. conscience, to haue the mind pure, neat, and cleane of all lewd deedes, motions, and deuises, and our names which are the spring from whence al vertuous, and commendable actions do follow, to bee honest, and impolluted, not troubled, or infected with any vice. This is it, which giueth a cheerefull force, and vigor, as it were diuinely inspired with a greatnes and constancie of courage, and with a more ioyfull and assured remembrance, then the hope which Pindarus
               
describethto be the nurse of old age. For euen as the bottels wherein there hath beene frankencense put (as saith Carneades) albeit they be empty yet keepe the sweete sauour therof long after, so good and vertuous actions proceeding from the minde of a wise man, doe alwaies leaue behinde a pleasing and fresh remembrance wherby his ioy and delight being watered doth florish and encrease, and himselfe contemneth those who bemone and diffame this life, as if it were a hell or place of torments and of continuall aboade, where wretched and miserable soules are to be chained and tortured. And herein I cannot but greatlie commend the saying of Diogenes, who vpon a time seeing a certaine stranger in Lacedemon that decked and trimmed himselfe against a feast day, what? (saith he) doth not an honest man thinke, that al daies are feast-daies for him? yea surelie and a great and solemne feast, if he be wise.
            For this world is a most sacred, and What the world is. religious temple, whereinto Man is

brought at his birth to beholde therein the portratures, & images, not wrought and carued with mens hands, but those formes, and figures, which the Diuine mouer hath made sensible to represent vnto vs the formes intelligible, (as Plato faith) hauing in thē the principal impressions of life, and motiē, (that is is saie.) the Sun, the Moone, the Starres, the running streames, casting sweet freshe water out of the bodie of the earth, which continually like a kind mother, yeeldeth and prouideth nourishment for liuing creatures, and plantes. So wee ought to esteeme this life as a profession, and entraunce into a most perfect and vnited religion. And therefore it were conuenient, that it should bee replenished with great tranquitlity and neuer ending ioy not as the common sort doe at this day, in solemnising the feast of Saturne, Bacchus, or Minerna to delight, and sporte themselues with laughter bought with monie, which they giue to dauncers, counterfeites, and stage plaiers, that enforce them to laugh. And now at these

feasts we sit verie mannerly and orderly, not being troubled or disquieted with any thing. For there is no man, that sorroweth, when hee commeth to a meeting of good fellowes, or that lamenteth in beholding the games of Apollo, Pythius, or that fasteth at Saturnes feastes; And notwithstanding we deface the feastes, which God himself hath appointed, and commaunded, in weeping, sighing, and bewailing, or at least wise in painefull cares and continuall discontentmentes. Wee take pleasure in hearing musicall instrmentes, whose sound pleaseth the eare, and we delight in birdes, that sing sweetelie, and willingly behold other liuing creatures pretely sporting, skipping and frisking with iolitie of heart, and contrariwise wee dislike them which houle, whine, and grone, and which loke heauily, ougly, and fearefully; Howe bee it, seeing the whole course of our owne life to be sorrowfull, pensiue, painfull, oppressed with most greeuous passions, most laborious busines, and euer endles cares and thoughts wee will not

giue our selues any rest, comfort, or time of breathing, but (that which is worse) wee are vnwilling to receaue the good counsell, and aduise of our freendes, and kindred, that warne, and exhort vs herevnto, which if we would with patience heare, and in practise followe, we might behaue our selues blamelesse for the time present, with ioy, and pleasure recount the time passed, and boldly without distrust in cheereful and liuely hope attend the time to come.
            FINIS.
            
            
            
            
         
      
   