
      
         
            
            
            A Preſident for Parentes, Teaching the vertuous training vp of Children and holeſome information of yongmen.
Written in greke by the prudent and wiſe Phyloſopher Choeroneus Plutarchus, Tranſlated and partly augmented by Ed. Grant: very profitable to be read of all thoſe that deſire to be Parents of vertuous children. ANNO. 1571.
            
               Seene and allowed according to the Quenes Iniunctions.
            
            ¶ Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman.
            
         
         
            
            
               This little following worke
               a parent doth exhort,
               To trayne his childe in vertuous wayes,
               in good and godly ſort:
               In youth to ſow the ſedes of grace,
               of learning and of skill,
               Within his yong and tender brest,
               to flee and voyde eche yll.
            
         
         
            
            The Tranſlatour vnto children, youth, and parents of Englande.
            
               IF pruning herbs do culture vvant,
               and lacke their tillage due,
               There is no ſightlineſſe in grounde,
               nor pleaſure for to vevve.
               If trees be graft in barren ſoyle,
               and in infertile grounde,
               In ſommer time to yeelde good fruite,
               they are but ſeldome founde:
               So doth a pregnant minde likevviſe
               full ſoone degenerate,
               In entraunce firſt to vitall life,
               and vvandreth from his ſtate,
               Except it be vvell ordered,
               and trayned vp vvith care,
               And furnished vvith godlyneſſe,
               vvith grace and lerning rare.
               For though the earth breedes vvondrous things,
               vvhoſe ſtrength & vigour grene,
               The ſunne and shovvres do increaſe,
               as dayly may be ſene:
               
                  
Yet painfull labour muſt be put,
               and faithfull care to ſuche,
               Leaſt vicious luxuriouſneſſe
               impeache it ouermuche.
               And eke the skill of things alſo,
               therto muſt ioyned be,
               That nature may perfourme hir vvorke
               vvith all integritie.
               VVee ſee hovv vvylde and brutish beaſtes
               their rigour put avvay,
               And hagard natures doo depell,
               and violence doo ſtay:
               Suche force there is in care, and toyle,
               in labour, and in payne,
               In diligent ſedulitie:
               I haue him knovvne certayne,
               VVhiche did degenerate from kynde,
               by ſtudy to depell,
               And paynfull toyle his errours vayne,
               and grovving vices quell.
               Somtyme he that by natures arte,
               to gracious things is prone,
               Is trapped in fonde fanſies ſnare,
               and ſoone is farre begone.
               If culture, and if order due,
               hir cunning doo not trie,
               As it dothe happen vnto fieldes,
               
                  
vnhusbanded vhich lye:
               VVherin vve ſee through negligence
               of ſome rude husbandman,
               That thiſtles and ſuche choaking vveedes,
               'mongs corne grovves novv and than,
               VVhen youth grovves vp to luſtie age,
               vvhen ſtrength begins to grovve,
               And floure of lyfe doth burgen, then
               muſt parents labour shovv,
               And carefull be, vvhen that the myndes
               of their children full deare,
               May bovved bee, vvhen lyke to vvaxe
               their louing ſonnes appeare.
               Therefore O chylde, vſe thou good things,
               that thy pure mynde may haue
               His ornamentes more precious
               than bodies beautie braue.
               For as the membres haue theyr vſe,
               ſo vvorthier than they,
               Thy mynde is to be polyshed
               vvith ſtudious skill full gay.
               Suche riches and ſuche ievvels pure,
               as vvill adorne thy mynde,
               In Plutarchs lore full briefly here,
               thou shalt be ſure to fynde:
               VVhich teacheth thee for to increaſe
               the dovvries of the ſame,
               
                  
And to extirpe the ſpottes by art,
               vvhich do thy body maime.
               And greater things than theſe alſo,
               O childe, thou here shalt lerne,
               VVhat may become thy riper age,
               vvhen thou doſte more diſcerne.
               A fruitfull vvorke and holſome too,
               vvhich no life vvell can lacke,
               That coueteth the bondes of grace,
               and vertue not to ſlacke.
               VVhich vvorke bicauſe in Grekish tong
               good Plutarch firſt did vvright,
               Vnknovvne to many, novve it comes
               in English to thy ſight:
               My ſimple labour in the ſame
               therfore I haue employde,
               That thou mightſt lern therby t'imbrace
               vertue, and vice auoyde.
               That English parents might ſuruey,
               hovv Greekish men vvere tought,
               The vvay to trayne their children vp,
               by Plutarch vvhich vvas vvrought.
               For countreys cauſe I tooke this payne,
               and trauel herein ſpente,
               VVith adding to the ſame my marks,
               vvhich others haue me lent,
               To furniſhe poorely this my payne,
               
                  
adioyned to Plutarchs lore,
               VVhich if it may be fructuous,
               to thee, I aske no more:
               No hier nor no guerdon, I do craue
               for this my payne,
               That parents dere may learne therby,
               and children, is my gayne.
               And to purtray my humble heart
               vnto thoſe gentlemen,
               To vvhom I haue this dedicate,
               this trauell toke my pen.
               Yet ſome I hope vvill vvish me vvell
               for this my good entent,
               VVhen that they ſee and do peruſe
               my labour herein ſpent.
               VVhich if they do they shal procure
               me further for to vvade
               Hereafter in vntroden pathes,
               allure and eke perſvvade.
               And ſome perchaunce of learned ſort,
               vvhen that they do this vevv,
               VVill iudge my labour vvell imployde,
               and vvorthy guerdon devve.
               Suche frendly men do knovv the fruite
               that may hereof enſue,
               If parents do imbrace the ſame,
               and do their ſonnes endue
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               〈1 page missing〉
            
            bée tamed, and accuſtomed to come to the hande of the Falconer, (which ſerue vs in our hauking:) ſo vndoutedly much more, tender age, is and ought to be endued with faythfull precepts, and tilled with holſom leſſons, that in tyme to come, they may be profitable membres in the cōmon weale, and with wiſedome and experience, politikely adminiſter and gouerne the ſame. The men of olde tyme, as they ſuffered not theyr cattle to ſtray without a ſhepeherd or herdeſman, ſo neyther permitted they their children to wander and runne at randon licentiouſly without a guyde, a gouerner, or learned inſtructer. And this was their intent, that their childrens tender yeares myght godly and purely bée broughte vp. Therefore the valiante Philip king of Macedonia, did not ioye ſo muche that a ſonne was borne to him, as Philip king of Macedonia, reioyced that his ſōne Alexander was born in Ariſtotles time. Horatius.
                he reioyced, he was brought to light in Ariſtotles tyme, that princely Philoſopher, that of him he myght be taught & inſtructed, to liue well and bliſſedly. Wyſely and truely hath the Poet Horace ſoong.
            
               Que ſemel est imbuta recens ſeruabit odorem testa di
                     •
                  . &c.
            
            
            
               The veſſell vvill conſerue the taſte
               of lycour very long,
               VVith vvhiche it vvas firſt ſeaſoned,
               and thereof ſmell full ſtrong.
               Euen ſo a chylde, if that he be
               in tender yeares brought vp
               In vertues ſchoole, and nurtred vvell,
               vvill ſmell of vertues cup.
            
            And in ſhewyng the way of this education, it ſhall not be out of the way, nor inexpedient, to begin of the birth, and generation. Therfore, I wold counſell him How a parēt ought too marche him ſelfe, that would haue excellent children. that doth deſire to be the father of a vertuous and honourable childe, not to ioyne himſelfe, with thoſe kinde of women, which are deueſted of the attire of theyr ſhame, and diſfurniſhed of all honeſtie, as baudes and common harlots: for ſuch as of vnhoneſt and vicious parentes bée ingendred, and brought to light, through all their life ſhall not auoyde the inexpugnible reproches taunts, quips, and nipping contumelies of their baſe birth and ignobilitie, but at euery houre be a laughing ſtock & ready gibe, to thoſe that be prone & bent to reprehenſiō, ignominie, rayling, & caſting in the noſe of ſuch obſcure generation.

Truly and wyſely hath the poet ſayde, meritorious of immortall fame.
            
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
            
            
               VVhen parentes do not rightly lay
               a firme foundation,
               Of ſtocke vnſpotted, oft their ſonnes
               ſuſteyne calumniation:
               And proue th'aſſaultes of fortunes threats
               for filthie procreation.
            
            Therfore honeſt and lawfull birthe, is the excellent and beautifull treaſure Honeſt birth is the treaſure of libertie. of the libertie of ſpeache, when none ſhall haue occaſion (what alteration ſo euer happen) once to be ſo bolde, as to obiect any brutall obſcuritie of vnhoneſt generation: which thing they muſt very often conſider, which require the lawfull propagation of children: for thoſe whoſe birth is blemiſhed with ſpot or blot, or taynted with the dye of vnlawfull colour, naturally are wont to be of an abiect mynde, and contemptible courage, as notably the Poet ſayth:
            
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
            
            
            
               That man though he be bolde and ſtoute,
               in courage oft doth quayle,
               VVhen he doth knovve his fathers euils,
               or mothers faulties ſtaile.
            
            As on the contrary parte, they, (which be the children of excellent and illuſtrious parents) be ſtout, bolde, couragious, fearing no thunderbolts of infamie. Wherfore Fame hathe ſounded in hir golden trump, that doughtie Diophantus, ſonne Diophantus. of worthy Themiſtocles, oftē and ſundry times gloried, and vaunted, that all thoſe things which he liked, the Athenians allowed and ratified: for ſayd he, all things which pleaſed me, my mother approued, and what things my mother counſailed, Themiſtocles condemned not: finally what Themiſtocles enacted or appoynted, all the Citie of Athens followed and imbraced. Alſo I iudge the Lacedemonians worthye of perduring praiſe, for the Archidamus was amerced by the Lacedemoniās, bicauſe he eſpouſed a woman of little ſtature. great magnanimitie, & couragious harts, which douted not, nor adreaded to puniſh by the purſe, their king Archidamus, whē he had taken to wife, a woman of very ſmall ſtature, and nothing ſtrongly proporcioned in the liniaments of hir body:

priuily reporting that he minded not that Kings ſhould come of him, but Quéenes, to gouerne their poſteritie. Nowe conſequently that followeth here to purport & to reueale alſo that which our Ancetors neglected not, nor without great care ouerpaſſed. And what is that? they willed and counſailed, that thoſe men, (which for the procreation of children aſſociated them ſelues to the company of women) ſhould either wholly abſtaine from the drinking of Wine, or at leaſt with great moderation ſhould drincke the ſame: for ſuche were wont to glutte them ſelues with the loue of wine, and prone to ebritie, which haue their beginning, and are ingendred of temulent and drunken Parents.
            Herevpon Diogenes, when he ſaw at a certaine time a certayne diſſolute, Diogenes. fooliſhe, and braineleſſe yong man, ſayd:
            
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                
            
            
               Thy father thee begate my childe,
               VVhē Bacchus cups had him beguild.
            
            And as concerning the birth and propagation

of children, let this bréefe counſaile ſuffiſe Nowe wil I ſpeake and declare my opinion of the bringyng vp and education of the ſame. Generally what ſo euer wée were wont to ſpeake of Arts Sciences, and diſciplines, the ſame muſt wée alſo ſpeake of Vertues: for we think that theſe thrée things muſt be concurrent and runne togither, to the perfite and iuſte operation of the ſame. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Three things are required to the attainment of vertue, nature, arte and exerciſe. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Nature, Diſcipline, cuſtome or exerciſe. Out of ech of theſe thrée ſingular and excellent things doe flowe. But if any of theſe faile, and be wanting, Vertue of neceſſitie muſt be imperfect and lame: for nature without diſcipline and erudition, is but a certaine blynde things, and Diſcipline without nature is maynied and diſfigured: and Exerciſe without bothe nature and Diſcipline, is a great imperfection, and a thing of little valuation. For euen as in huſbandrye, and well laboured fieldes, it is eſpecially conuenient and requiſite that the ground be ranke and fertile, & next the huſbandman or laborer cunning and ſkilfull, and laſt, that the ſéedes be good and fructuous:

Semblably, nature is likened vnto the goodneſſe of the earthe, the inſtructor or maſter to the huſbandman, and the precepts and holſome admonitions of artes and ſciences are aſſimiled to the ſeede. Me thincke I dare boldly ſay, and firmly aſſure, that all theſe conioyned togither, were in the liues of thoſe, which are throughe all the world ſole
                  ••
               p
                  •
               ized, as Pythagoras, Socrates and Plato, which haue obtained immortall glorye, and atchieued (through their celeſtial wiſdome and ſurmounting learning) the perpetuitie of neuer dying commēdation. * Who Pythagoras, Socrates, and Plato had all theſe three excellences. commends not Pythagoras, who praiſeth not olde Socrates, who extols not Platoes prudencie? thoſe rare ornaments of natures working. Their vertues conioyned with nature, Arte and exerciſe, be wrapped vp in the ſereclothes of eternitie, and their praiſes are and ſhalbe blaſed through all worldes. ✚ Therefore we muſt needs thincke him farre in Gods fauoure, and replete with felicitie and ſingular benifites, to whome God hathe giuen all theſe three excellencies nature, arte and exerciſe. But if there be any mā
               
which thinketh, that thoſe men which be of baſe birthe, (notwithſtanding endued Vertues recompence the vvāt of nature in obſeure birth. with holeſome inſtitutiō, and trained vp in vertueus exerciſes) are not able to repay and recompence the defect and want of nature, let him perſuade himſelfe that he is much, nay altogither deceiued.
            For as luſkiſhneſſe and ſluggiſhneſſe dothe corrupt, marre and adulterate the goodneſſe of nature, ſo doth learning and diſcipline correct and amend the fall and vitioſitie thereof. Likewiſe very eaſle things do eſcape and flie theſe that pamper themſelues in negligence, and implunge themſelues in the filthie puddles of idleneſſe. And the hardeſt things with Of the 
                     •
                  ore
                     •
                   and power of diligence both in all other things, and alſo in education. diligence, laboure, and ſedulitié be obtained and wonne. If thou turne thy eyes to learne the things which in common vſe are accompliſhed, thou ſhalt ſoone moſte cuidently perceiue, that diligence and laboure are moſte conuincible to the finiſhing and quicke perfiting and abſolution of things. For the ſmall drops of water doe pierce and penetrate the dure rockes and ſlint ſtones, and hard iron and braſſe with the often handling of the craftes

mannes handes, are mollified and ſoftened. But the Carte wheeles bowed and crooked wyth greatforce, can neuer come to theyr olde ſtrayghtneſſe, do what may be done. The crooked & retorted ſtaues of ſtage playes cā by no meanes be ſtraightned. But on the contrary part, a ſupernatural thing may be bettered, by the induſtrie and labor of thoſe things which are according to nature. * There is nothing ſo hie, ſo ſharpe, ſo rigorous, ſo difficile, Labor improbus omnia vincit. which with diligēt ſtudy thou mayſt not obtaine. But if deſire of learning, deſire of diligence be awāting, the moſt eaſieſt things thou ſhalt proue to be moſt hardeſt, and nothing at all thou ſhalt auaile in learning. Euen as a huſbandman, if he loue his huſbandry, ſhall accumulate a great heap of riches, while nothing he ſhall ſo muche eſtéeme, which may call him away from his huſbandry, wherby he cānot execute all things in their time: ſo he which once hath giuen him ſelfe to diligēt ſtudies of the Muſes, and hath taſted of the pleaſantneſſe therof, can by no means be diſioyned or ſeuered from that diligent laboure, but wil perluſtrate and ſearch out the moſt ſecrete ſanctuaries of

the nine prudent ſiſters. Ariſtotle the Ariſtotles induſt
                     〈…〉
                  e and diligenoe in ſ
                     〈…〉
                  
                  clu
                     •
                  g out natures ſ
                     〈…〉
                  . ſplendent lampe of all abſtruſe things, was holden with a ſeruent loue to inneſtigate and find out the obſcurities in nature: and therfore it irked not him, whole xx. yeres, to hear his prudent maſter Plato, and to vſe his aid & helpe to ſearch out natures ſecrets. By that vntired and vnweryed ſtudie, he aſcended the ſort of all learning, and climed to the top of all ſurpaſſing knowledge. Solon, the Sapient 
                  Solon was wont to ſay. Quotidie aliquid addiſcens ſen
                     •
                  ſco. lawe maker among the Athenians, did much reſemble him alſo, whichin his laſt age wold not be vndiligent, or ſlacke his ſtudie. For when his brothers ſon in cō
               potation and drinking, had ſung a certain verſe of Sappho, he was ſo delited therewithall, that he commaunded the yong man his nepkew, to teach him the ſame. Who often wold ſay. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , I daily wax old euer learning ſomthing: the diligence of Diogenes is memorable: Who going to Athens, went to Antiſthenes, of whom he being oftē repelled & driuē away, (for Antiſthenes receyued no ſcholers to teach) would not forſake him. Therefore Antiſthenes accenſed wyth indignation againſt him,

tooke vp a ſtaffe to beat and abādon him: but Diogenes to teſtifie his diligence and good zeale towarde ſtudies, was willing inough to be ſmitten vpon the head, ſaying: beat me as long as thou ſhalt pleaſe, but certainly no ſtaffe thou ſhalt finde ſo harde, with which thou ſhalt beate me away, as long as thou ſayeſt nay thing. ✚ But doe theſe things only ſhew the force and power of diligence? No verely, there be other things innumerous, which moſt manifeſtly declare the ſame. Althoughe a field by nature be good and fertile, notwithſtādingif, it be neglected for dreſſing A fertile fielde for lacke of tillage, waxeth barren. doth wax barren, and how much it naturally is better, ſo much is it made worſe without tillage: and contrariwiſe, if it be foule for lacke of good huſbandry, & ouergrown with wéedes, notwithſtāding, (if it be wel labored & tilled) it wil be plentifull, and abounde in all good frutes, and ſtraightwayes by courſe of time bring forth hir receiued ſéedes & grains. What are trées if they be neglected & had in no Trees if they be neglected, b
                     〈…〉
                   no frutes. culture? do they not grow crooked, and become vnfrutefull? but if they haue their due dreſſing & timely tillage, they burgen

and bloſſome, and timely & aboundantly yeld their frutes. What is the ſtrēgth of the body? is it not dulled, weakned, enfebled, and periſheth with the corruption of luxurious riot, euil vſage & cuſtome? doth not a weake, féeble, & impotēt nature, by exerciſe and laborous induſtrie, atchieue much vigor & ſtrength? what be horſes, if Horſes (if they bee not tamed and broken) be intractable. in time they be well broken & tamed? do they not patiently bear their ſitter, or rider? but thoſe horſes yt be vnbroken, & remain vnbrideled, what be they? are they not wont to be intractable, fierce, ſhreud, curſt, & ſtifnecked? but to what end do we admit & maruell at the adminiſtration of theſe things? Do we not ſée by manifeſt proofe, yt the moſt cruell, terrible, and hideous beaſtes by paine, labor, toile, induſtrie and diligence, become méeke, gētle, and tame? well & prudently anſwered yt 
               Theſſalian, whē he was aſked, who were the moſt quieteſt among the Theſſalonians: euen thoſe (ſaid he) which ceaſe & abſtein frō martial mutinies, and warring weapōs. But what néed I herein vſe ma
               
                  •
               y words? for if any affirme yt cuſtome is 
                  •
               urable, & that vertues by cuſtome & vſe

obtained he alſo durable, ſhall we iudge him to think amiſſe? no. An example concerning theſe things will I recite, & ſo ouerpaſſe it. Lycurgus the worthy lawma ker amōg the Lacedemonian (whoſe ſame & excellent exploites be regiſtred in yt annuals of eternitie) toke once two yong whelps hauing both one dam, and cauſed thē to be brought vp, the one vnlike the other, for the one he made gluttonous, & gour
                  〈…〉
               andiſed with rauenous paūche, the other he accuſtomed to purſue the chaſe, & to finde out by his ſagacitie the footings of wild beaſts. Afterwards, (whē he had congregated in a frequent aſſemble, togither yt 
               Lacedemonians to ſée this ſight) he ſaid to them: To yt attainment of vertue, O ye Lacedemonians, vſe diſcipline, learning & the inſtitution and right framing What vſe cā do in education, is ſhevved bi tvvo vvhelpes borne at one tyme of one damme brought vp & cherished by the ſingular counſayle of 
                     〈…〉
                  rgus. of life is very cōmodious, and much auaileth, which at this time I am entended & minded moſt perſpicuouſly to ſhew you. Then brought he out hys two diuers accuſtomed whelpes, & (cauſing a pot filled with ſoddē ſops or ſwil, and a Hare to be placed in yt mids before the dogs,) vncoupled them, & let them go. The one purſued,

& ran after the Hare, & the other hyed haſtely to the pot. But when the Lacedemonians could not yet diuine nor coniecture what he mēt therby, nor wherfore he brought for the into the midſt of them, thoſe two diuers natured and nourtured dogs: Both theſe (ſayd Licurgus) had one dam, but being wyth vnlike vſe framed and taught, the one (yée ſée) is deſirous to ſwill and glutte and fill his paunche, the other applying the chaſe, and deſirous to hunt, and to follow the footings of wilde beaſtes. Thus much of cuſtome, vſe, diligence and inſtitution: now is occaſion offred to ſpeake ſomwhat of nouriſhing of infantes. In my opinion, it is moſte conuenable and neceſſarie, that mothers noriſhe Mothers vvith theyr ovvne paps ought to nouriſhe then Children. their owne Children, with theyr owne teates and paps: for mothers with great beneuolence & diligence wil cheriſh them, bicauſe wyth a certain intier loue, & mere affection they tender them which they haue born & bred: and loue euen the nailes of their fingers. But nurſſes & foſtring dames doe vſe no true, but fayned & diſſmuled loue: bicauſe for lieu of guerdon & reward, they practiſe their kindnes.

And Dame nature hir ſelf doth euidently declare, that mothers o
                  •
               ght to cheriſh and battle with their owne milke thoſe, which they haue engendred and borne. And for that cauſe, to euery liuing beaſt that brings for the young, hathe nature graunted and giuen, the power to nouriſhe their yong, with their owne milke. And the prouidence of GOD by great wiſdom hath giuen to womē two breſts, that if it ſhould happen, that they at one birth ſhould be deliuered of two twins, they ſhould haue two fountaines of nutriment. Beſides this, mothers are boūd to their children with a greater good wil, and a more affectuous loue, and that not incongruently: for the coniunction in liuing, and bringing vp togither, is cauſe of yt increaſe of beneuolēce: for brute beaſts deuoide of reaſon, (if they be diſioyned and diſſeuered from thoſe, with whome they were brought vp,) they be deſyrous of them. Great care therefore muſte be imployed, and labour beſtowed, that the very mothers them ſelues (as I haue ſayde) with their owne breaſtes and pappes nouriſh and foſter their infants.

But if mothers be with infirmities and If mothers be ſicke, or big vvith other children a nourſe muſt then be choſen that is honeſt & ſober. diſeaſes oppreſſed, and be vnhealthfull (whiche may happen) or haſten to the procreation of other children, then muſt nourſes be receaued and gotten, not of the raſcall rablement or rudeſt ſort, but ſuche as be ſober, honeſt, diſcrete, well conditioned and manered: for euen as it is moſt neceſſarie & expedient to frame and faſhion the limmes and members of children (as ſoone as they be borne) that they growe ſtraight and vncroked: ſo ſemblably is it conuenient and moſt decent (euen from their cradles) to endue their children with good maners, and to frame them vp in ciuill behauiour: for infancie is a flexible thing, and fitte to frame to what thing you pleaſe, and in their tender minds, precepts and diſciplines, with great facilitie are inſtilled: but that that is hardened, is with great labour hardlye molli
                  •
               ted and ſo
                  •
               iened. Euen as ſeales and images be in ſoft waxe inſcupled and engrauen, ſo are diſciplines and eruditions infigured and printed in childrens tender minds. And Plato (who directed all his doings by the

diall of diſcretion, and glaſſe of vnderſtanding, of ſkilful reaſon and learning) ſéemeth to me very diligently and learnedly to admoniſhe and enforme nourſes that they ſing not to their babes and ſuckelings euerye trifling tale, bandye ſong, and olde wiues fabled fanſies, leſt it fortune from their cradles, that they be nouſled in folly, and fraught with corrupt maners. Likewiſe was the paſſing excellent Poet Phocillides wont to giue this exhortation & counſayle.
            
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
            
            
               VVhile children be of tender age,
               they muſt be taught moſt carefully,
               Good vvorks, as grace and vertue ſage,
               vvith vviſdoms lore and honeſty.
            
            And this alſo can not in ſilence be inwrapped, nor worthilye oughte to be pretermitted. Let children haue to aſſociate What company a child ought to vſe & vvhat play fellowes he moſt haue. and accompany them ſuch companions and playfelowes, which be ſeaſoned with goodnes, and endued with vertuous maners, and ſuche as ſpeake their language quickly and readily, leſt they vſing the company of barbarous and vicious acquaintāce be infected, corrupted,

and imbroyned of them: for the diuulgated prouerbe was not without a cauſe vſed:
            
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
            
            
               If thou vvith him that halts doſt dvvel,
               To lerne to halt thou shalt ful vvel.
            
            And after children grow to ſome maturitie of yeres, & be of a riper age, then muſt they be put to ſchole, & deliuered to the gouernment and charge of maſters, Whē a child ought to be put to ſcole, and what maſter he muſt be cō
                  
                  
                     ••
                  ued too. wherin parents muſt be circumſpect and very careful, leſt they yeld & cōmit their children imprudently to the cuſtody of bondſlaues, barbarians, incōſtant, fickle & flingbrained dizards, & vnlettered runnagates: that that many men now a dais folow, is very ridiculous, & meriteth gret blame: for parents of their ſeruants that be frugal, & ſtudious of thriftineſſe, ſome they put to plow and carte, ſome they make mariners: ſome they ſet to marchaundize, ſome they appoynt and conſtitute their ſtewards & rulers of their houſes, and other they make vſurers to fill their bagges: But yf ameng all the crue of their domeſticall ſeruants they finde a vyle and a contemptible

perſon, a blynde idiote, wallowing drunkenneſſe, and prone to lucurious ingurgitation vnprofitable and vnméet
                  •
                for any thing, to him they deliuer & commit their children, without any conſideration & aduiſe: * A great vncarefulneſſe in many parents. ✚ But a ſtudious and honeſt teacher and inſtructour by nature ought to be ſuche a one as was Phaenix 
               Phaenix Achilles maſt. 
               Achilles tutor, a Phaenix in déede for his rare induſtry and diligence: therfore of all the other things which I will ſpeaks off, the greateſt, the moſt neceſſary, and peculiar thing is this, which now I will portray: which is, that parents ſéeke out and chooſe ſuche an inſtructour for their children, which in life is inculpable, in maners vncorrupt, in lerning excellent, by experience long taught, ſober, honeſt, and painefull: for the fountayne & roote of honeſtie and felicitie is good inſtitution, The rote of felicitie is good inſtitution. and learned information: and euen as huſbandmen to their grafts & plants ding in ſtakes and adioyne hedges for the ſafetie therof: ſo fit, learned, ſtudious and experienced ſcholemaſters do 
                  •
               iſtil and plant in the tender yong mind

of their ſcolers, ſalubrious precepts, and holſome admonitions, that they maye burgen, floure, and procéede, as well in good maners, vertue and learning, as in age. But who can now a dayes ſharply enough reprehende, and with condigne tauntes proſcide thoſe parents, whiche (before they haue experiēced and approued what the maſters be) they not once doubt to cōinende and mancipate their children to ignorant, vnlearned, and ſuſpected men of euill life and ſcelerous conuerſation, polluted in the puddles of all filthineſſe, not able almoſt to ſay B to a battledore: Is not this too ridiculeus and worthy blame? If they do it through They are worthye reprehenſiō 
                  
                     •
                  e blam which cōmit their children to rude informers and va fit inſtructors. ignoraunce, it is a very abſurde thing, and altogether intollerable. And what is that, oftentimes when they know by other mens reporte the leudeneſſe and rudeneſſe, ignorance, and peruerſe behauiour of the inſtructours and teachers, notwithſtanding to their credence and charge they commit their children: becauſe they ſuffer themſelues to be won and conquered with the blandiſhing words, and filthy flatterings of thoſe of

whom they be friendly, with a pleaſant chaunting tong intertained & gallantly intreated: but ſuch (which with this fauour gratifie their frends) be likened to that man, which being in body enfebled and diſeaſed, relinquiſheth the aduiſe of a cunning and ſkilful phiſition (by whoſe medicines he might be reſtored to his former health) for frendſhips ſake, and through adulatiō, doth flée to an other, by whom he is brought to the brinck of his bane, and often (through lacke of experience) diſpoyled of his life. Or to him which (at his frends intreaties and allurements) doth prefer a fooliſh ignorant and vnſkilfull ſhipmaſter before a trayned, cunning, & experienced guyder and gouernor of his ſhippe. O god, what deformitie is this? what follie? what dotage? is he worthy to be called a father, which more eſtemeth the fauour of his frends, than he regardeth the good inſtitution of his children? Therfore the old ancient and reuerent philoſopher Crates 
               Crates. with gret dexteritie of wit and wiſdome repleniſhed, oftentimes ſayd very well, that (if it were poſſible) he would aſcend

and clyme the higheſt tower and fort in the citie, to cry out aloude & ſay: O mortal men, whither are ye caried? whither runne ye headlong? to what place do ye precipitate your ſelues? which with all your endeuers, labours, cares, and toyls ſéeke for money, and gape for gayne, but do nothing regard, nor make no accompt of your children, to whom ye leaue theſe rotten riches. And I may reſemble theſe parents to him, who béeing carefull for ſhoes regardeth not his féete: many parents are ſo blinded with the ambicious deſire of gaine and money, and haue ſo alienated and eſtranged their minds from their children, that they beſtow no great coſt vpon them, but chooſe men of no eſtimation, vile & contemptible to be their childrens inſtructors, which are able to teach thē nothing, but diſpiſed and abiect ignorance and errour. * And ſuche they elect for ſpare of money, that are more fitter thēſelues to go to ſcole to be taught than to take ſuch a charge & burden vpon their ſhoulders, as the good inſtructing of others: and ſuch now a dayes be ioly fellowes and the moſte made of, yf they

can chat and tel a pleaſant Engliſh tale, to delight an vnlearned parents eares, they haue all the learning in the worlde and beare the bell, when in very déede they be no body, and haue but a ſhew of learning, runnagates and wanderers from place to place: in the ende diſhoneſting themſelues, and marring the children committed to their charge: for an vnlerned maſter can not make a lerned ſcholer, Qualis praeceptor, talis diſcipulus. 
               Qualis prae
                  
                     ••
                  ptor, talis diſcipulus. If ſuche were vtterly refuſed, and eſtemed as ſhadowes, not able to ſuſtayne any ſuch vocation, nor maynteined with any lucre, then ſhould learned and painfull inſtructours be hadde in more reuerence, and better ſought out than they be. Many ſuche vncarefull parents there be, and too many of ſuch vnfit and brainleſſe teachers, gadders and diſhoneſters of thēſelues and others that be lettred, diligent and induſtrious: ſo that they oftentimes (which in déede be very careful for their childrens erudition) be oft deceaued, and very ofte are in doubt to receyue thoſe, that be able lightly to go away with that burden, when they before

haue taſted of the negligence, ignorance, & folly of other. ✚ 
               Ariſtippus the curteous philoſopher, well broken in the ſchole of ciuill education, not with ſtupiditie, but with great vrbanitie, rebuked & blamed an inſenſate and fooliſh father, depriued of reaſon, vnderſtanding, & cōmon ſenſe. When one aſked him for what ſtipende and rewarde he taught and inſtructed a child: for a thouſand grotes ſaid Ariſtippus. But when the mā ſaid in good ſooth maſter Ariſtippu, your requeſt and crauing is very great (for I can for ſo great a ſumme buy me a bondman.) Verily an ſwered Ariſtippus, thou ſhalt haue two bondmē, both thy ſonne, and him whom thou haſt bought. * Many ſuch inconſiderate parents be in Englande, which had rather giue a thouſand grotes for bondflaues, ſoone paſſing pleaſures & pelting paſtimes, than one grote to the good inſtructour of their child. Nay I feare me, if Ariſtippus wer aliue, & would receiue no child into his ſcole, vnder the number of a thouſande groates, he ſhoulde haue no ſcholers brought to his ſchole: or yf all the trayners vppe of children were

ſo determined too craue, but halfe ſo muche as Ariſtippus did, they ſhoulde haue very fewe auditors: ſo colde and 
                  •
               lacke be parents in rewarding the paynes of paynefull. Ariſtippus When on the cōtrary part, they can in no thing ſo wel beſtow their liberalitie, as vpon them, who haue paynfully deſerued the vttermoſt farthing, of what ſoeuer they receyue of parents, for the erudition of their children. Yf the liberalitie of parents were as great towards Ariſtippus ſect, as it is in trifles & gewgawes, to make their children yong lords before the time, I am perſwaded that ther woulde be many more diligent & paynfull Ariſtippus than there be, & an infinite number of better ſcolers in the circuite of one ſhire, than now in a whole realme: ſo little regarde haue ſome parents to their childrēs erudition. ✚ And to be briefe, is not this a thing full of abſurditie, and worthy reprehenſion, to accuſtome children, to aſſume and take their meate with their right hand, & to rebuke & blame them with great ſeueritie, if they take it with their left hand?

and to haue no care, no remorſe, no regard, to haue thē ſeaſoned with holſome leſſons, & indued with good lerning, vertue & ciuilitie? what happeneth to theſe wonderful parents (if god ſay amen) after they haue noriſhed euilly, & inſtructed negligently their children, I will briefly ſhew. After they come to mans eſtate, and grow to more riper yeares Thoſe childrē whiche be vncarefully brought vp by their parents, liue very viciouſly. of diſcretion, they abhorre the healthful way of liuing, they contemn good order and inſtitution, they deſpiſe al godlines & godlimen, they regard not holſom admonitions, & imbroyne theſelues in the ſink of al filthy voluptuouſneſſe, & ſcurriliti, e & precipitate themſelues into all ſeruile ſenſualitie, & inordinate beaſtlines: then at length it repents thē (when all time is paſt) and then their heartes be frozen with the colde of ſorow, then they gréeue, mourne, and lamente, that they were ſo vncarefull, and ſo recheleſſe in inſtructing their children, and in training them vp in godly feare, vertue & lerning. Netheleſſe, when as they be ſo far ſotted in brutiſhnes, & ſo long

marched vnder pelting pleaſures ſoone battered banner (that by no means they can be amended, and reduced to godlye lyfe) then wayling is their wealth, gréeuance their guerdō, lamēting their liew, mourning their mede, ſorow their ſauſe, and altogether excruciate and torment themſelues for their childrēs ſacinorous miſchiefes: for ſome of them giue vp thē
               ſelues to tryfling flatterers, and parling Paraſites, a ſcelerous and peſtilent kind of varlets, whiche depraue and corrupt all youth, and blaſt towarde yongmen, with the winde of execrable behauiour, filthineſſe & brutalitie: other ſome haunt harlots, and vile noughtie womē, proud, diſdainful, malicious, adorned with ſumtuous apparell, but yet diſgarniſhed of all ſhame, honeſtie, and good manners: other ſome vſe beaſtly bellycheere, and are enrachined in gourmandize and gluttonie, minding nothing but to peſter them ſelues in riote, drunkenneſſe, and ſurfette. And ſome againe imbrue themſelues with freſher euils: they commit abhominatiō, follow adulteries, and

imbrace all kinde of libidinouſe luſtes, moſte horribly, ſoo that they ſticke not to buy only pleaſure with death. Which yf they had béene well nurtred and inſtructed vnder a wiſe maſter, and experienced inſtructor, doubtleſſe they would neuer haue béen in theſe matters immorigerāt and diſobedient to their parents: neither would they haue caſt themſelues into ſuch irremiable gulphs of peremtorie perilles, but would haue ben memorous of Diogenes leſſon and exhortation, Diogenes his admonition to yongmen. which in words ſomewhat importunely but in deede truly, gaue this admonition, ſaying: Enter into ſome brothel houſe or ſtewes, to lerne and vnderſtande that there is a difference betwéene vile and precious things. * Diogenes thought, yf they ſhould enter into this houſe of baudry, to vewe and diſcerne the filthineſſe there practiſed, it would make them eſchue and vtterly abhorre all ſuch vicioſitie. ✚ To be briefe, the thing that now I Of the force & neceſsitie of right inſtitutiō and of the collatiō and proprietie of the goodes of the minde, goodes of the body, & goods of fortune. will relate, I iudge to be pondered rather as an oracle and infallible trueth, than as an admonition. In theſe, the firſt, middlemoſt, and laſt thing is good

and diligent education, lawfull inſtitution, and ſkil of things, bicauſe I know and think theſe to be commodious, and profitable to vertue and felicitie: and al other humane goods be tranſitory, fraile caduke, momentane, perduring a very little time, not worth the labour, payne and toyle, which men beſtow in obtayning & getting them. Nobilitie doutleſſe and the diſcent from noble progeny is a Nobilitie. ſplēdent thing, but ſuch a good as lineally procedeth frō our progenitors. * And without vertue which engendreth nobilitie, there is no reſpect of nobilitie: but if any be vertuous he ſhal eaſily com to no fained & diſſimuled nobilitie (whiche iſſues out of lineal diſcents and proſage) but to true nobilitie, which hath vertue, whoſe rewarde is nobilitie: for with only vertue is true nobility gottē: if any excel & ſurpaſſe in the reſplentēce of noble kinred, & in the mean ſeaſō liue vitiouſly & is deuoyd of all vertue, thou canſt not rightly cal him noble. Turne to the firſt beginnings of nobilitye, and thou ſhalt finde, thoſe to haue gotten the images of vertue their rewarde, which

at home in ciuil adminiſtration, and in warre in ſhocke of ſhield, haue excellently behaued them ſelues, by the ayde of vortue, which doth nobilitate thoſe that be obſcure and baſe of birth. Therefore Phalaris (I remember) in an Epiſtle Phalaris▪
                to Axiochus after this ſorte reaſoneth of Nobilitie: Ego praeter virtutem nullam agnoſ
                     •
                  o Nobilitatem: that is, I beſide vertue knowe no nobilitie. Reliqua vero cuncta fortuna astimo: all the other things I eſtéeme to be in fortunes power. For a man borne of a very low degrée (if he be a vertuous ſcoler) may com to be the moſt nobleſt of kings and other men: and contrariwiſe one born of good parents may ſoone becom euil, and more ignoble than him ſelfe, and the vyleſt of all other. ✚ Men ought therefore to glery of the prayſes of the minde, and not of the nebilitie of their ancetors, blemiſhed and quite extinguiſhed in obſeure peſteritie. Well reaſoned Democratus, and Democratus. rightly thought of nobilitie, which ſayth: Pecudum nobilitas in bono va
                     •
                  do
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   corporis habitu est: hominum autem in bonitate morū: that is, the nobilitie of beaſts is in

the good and valiaunt habite or ſtate of the body: but mannes nobilitie is in the goodneſſe of manners. And Martiall reporteth in this wiſe:
            
               
                  Nobilitas ſola est at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vnua virtus.
               
            
            
               Onely vertue certainelie
               Is ſole and vvhole nobilitie.
            
            Claudian alſo worthilie hath giuen this admonition:
            
               
                  
                     Ʋirtute decet, non ſangui- niti,
               
               
                  Sola perpetua manent, ſubiecta nulli,
               
               
                  mentis at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      animi bona.
               
            
            
               It doth become full decently
               all men in vertue for to ſtay,
               And not to bloud to clyne truely,
               or vnto noble ſtocke full gay:
               For vvhy the only giftes of minde
               ſubiect to nothing do remayne,
               In vigour shall vve dayly finde
               continually, and neuer ſtayne.
            
            Richeſſe in value be great, and in déede Richeſſe. precious things, but yet they be in fortunes power, and hang balanced in fortunes ſkooles: for ſomtime fortune takes them away frō him that inioyeth them, & intrudeth thē vpon him which hoped not for them. * Riches make men dote, and moue them to all euilles, while they ſée

that by the helpe of riches they may obtaine eche thing but vertue. Alexander 
               Riches eaſt Alexander into vile viccs. the great that famous conqueroure, (before he enioyed the Perſian Monarchie, and yet kept himſelf within the narrowe limites of Macedonia) did in his minde conceiue the great workes of vertue, and with excellent manlineſſe, inferred war to the Perſians and atchieued it with no leſſe trāpe of manhoode. But after he had ſubiugated and brought vnder hys dominyon the Perſian Monarchie, & ſuperfluouſly flowed with all riches, as he which had ſubdued Perſia, and almoſt had conquered the whole world, could not corquer nor tame himſelfe, which did precipitate himſelfe hedlongs into vile vices, through the copious affluence of goodes and riches. Who when his riches were few and meane, was relucent, and eſclariſhed with fortitude, temperance, chaſtitie, and clemencie. Aſſoone as he increaſed with the acceſſe of ſo many kingdemes & riches, he douted not to take vppon him vnfit and baſe apparel, vnworthy of ſuch a ſtout Macedoman, and to caſt himſelfe into all kinde of luxurious riot, & in drunkenneſſe

and toſſing of cups, to 
                  •
               lea hys beſt frends, that now it was ſafer for an enimie than a frēd, to be conuerſant with him. So Ninus the yonger, liued more abiect than any ſhameleſſe woman, diſſipating Ninus Iunior. and waſting the goodes, which his father by manlineſſe and fortitude acquired. Therefore the learned lawmaker Lycurgus iudged money (which is the ſtrongeſt inſtrument, and ſtrength moſt Lycurgus cauſed mony to be baniſhed out of Sparta. mightie of riches,) to be relegated and abandoned by him out of Sparta, as the beginning and fruteful mother of all vices. Likewiſe Solon the ſapient ſayde, riches is the mother of ſaturitie, and ſaturitie Solon. engendreth crueltie and violence. With him doeth excellent Euripides aſſent: who ſayeth, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . Riches bréedes Euripides. iniurious contumelie. Hither may Diogenes the Cynike his teſtimonie come, which affirmed, that riches were nothing elſe than the couerings of malice. For the aboundance of ryches is a marke proponed to ſuche as doe their deuoire to cutte Purſſes, to robbe cheſtes, to filtch & pick, as light fingred fellowes, malignant ſeruāts, ſycophants, cauillers,

make ſtrifes, factious and diſſenſious perſonnes, and whych is the moſte greateſt euill of all, they often fall to the lottes of them which be the moſte pernicious and leudeſt lubbers. And riches open the wyndowe (ſayeth Iſocrates) to 
                  •
               l
                  •
               uthfulneſſe and idleneſſe, which two thinges thoſe thinke they haue obtayned, which flowe in the aboundance of riches. For they perſuade them ſelues, that goodes myniſter idleneſſe, and expences (as they doe in déede) to filthie pleaſures. If any abounde in riches, he will not laboure, he neglecteth vertue, he contemneth all honeſt paynes, and cleaues (as a burre) to ſluggiſhneſſe. Such a one was Pirrhus 
               Pirrhus. yt king of Epirus who about to proclaime warre to the Romaines, when Cineas aſked him whye hée would proueke the Romaines with warre? anſwered that he deſired to adiecte Italic to his kingdome. Cineas ſaid againe: if thou ſhalt cenquer Italic, what then wilt thou der O king? Pirrhus anſweared: then will I aſſaye to ſubdue Cicilia. Cineas ſayde agayne. What wilt thou then doe? He aunſwered: I will wallowe then in delytes,

I will turne to my pleaſures, I wil macerate my ſelfe with riot, we will drinke and quaffe, and paſſe away the tyme in pleaſant idleneſſe. Sée howe riches (as ſoone as they come) inuite vs and moue vs to luſkiſhneſſe, ignauie, and idleneſſe. Like wiſe the ſapient old father Socrates ſayd, that riches ſtay al the actiōs of vertue Socrates. and honeſt life: and as long and looſe garments let the bodyes, ſo doe infinite riches harm the ſoules. ✚ Glory is a beutifull thing, and a trickſ
                  •
               e ornament: but Glorie. vnſtable, vnconſtāt, and ſoone is altered. It is but an image yt goeth and commeth ſoone fading away. Beautie is a thing which all deſire to haue, but it dureth a Beautie. very ſmall while. * There is ſo great inconſtancie in beutie, that it can not reſiſt and withſtand olde age. Euen as winter taketh away all the flouring face and ſpringing gréenes of the ſpring tyme and ſommor, ſo doth olde age appropinquating, deſtroy, waſt & adnihilate, al youthful comelyneſſe, and luſty elegancie.
            
               Nereus the faireſt of the Grecians (being now waxen olde) if in a glaſſe he beheld Nereus. his face, he knew not ye ſame brightneſſe

of beutie which in his youth he had. And Helena (that floure of fairneſſe, and Helena. the chéefeſt iewel that euer beautie had) in hir age ſuffered the like deformitie. For whome (being in the floure of hir gréene yéeres) the Grecians and Troyans were turmoyled in their ten yeres war: but when ſhe was old and well ſtroken in yeares, neither ſhepheards nor ſwineherds, muletours nor horſekéepers, wold take vp hoſtilitie to enioy hir. Likewiſe Penelope the chaſt in hir letters (wherin ſhe calleth home hir louing Vliſſes) complaineth, Penelope. ſaying: that hir beautie (being now an olde woman) is by the default of olde age abandoned and polluted. Therfore the fountaine of Romaine eloquence and beautie of Italie, Cicero doth thus reſon Cicero. of the inſtabilitie of the ſame: formae dignitas aut morbo defloreſcit aut vetustate extinguitur. The floure or excellencie of beutie either by diſeaſe decayeth, or with old age defloureth and blemiſheth. Héere may Naſoes teſtimonies come in, who ſayeth:
            
               Ista decens facies longis vitiabitur annis
               Ruga
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   in antiqua fronte ſenilis erit.
            
            
            
               This comely face and beautifull
               long yeres shall vitiate,
               And vvrinckles be in vvithered brovves,
               vvhere beautie vvas of late.
            
            And againe: the ſame Naſo ſayth.
            
               Ouidius.
               
                  Forma bonum fragile est: quantumque accedit ad annos, 
               
               
                  Fit minor, & ſpacio carpitur ipſa ſuo.
               
               
                  Nec ſemper violae, nec ſemper lilia florent:
               
               
                  Et riget amiſſa ſpina relicta roſa.
               
            
            
               Beautie is a goodneſſe fraile,
               and in short time decayes,
               And vvhen it cometh vnto yeres,
               it leſſens and repayres.
               And is conſumed in short ſpace:
               nor Violets alvvay,
               Nor Lillies euer do encreaſe
               and flourish, but decay.
               And vvhen the Roſe is loſt, the thorne
               doth vvax full ſtiffe ſtraightvvay.
            
            Infirmitie, malady, ſickneſſe and diſeaſe, do corrupt the valiant and beauifull conſtitution of the body, as daily experyence ſheweth. Iob the iuſt before he was exulcerated Iob. with ſores, did wonderfully ſurpaſſe in beauties giftes: but after he was excarnificated and tormented with ſtinking

ſores, he loſt all the trimneſſe and braueneſſe of his beautie, as his friendes witneſſed which ſkarcely knewe him to be the ſame he was. If any be entriked in diſeaſe, he feleth the decencie of his beautie periſh, and ſkarſly the ſhape of a man to remain. Therfore Seneca rightly ſaith:
            
               
                  Res est forma fugax: quis ſapiens homo cenfidat fragili.
               
            
            
               Beautie is a fading thing,
               vvhat vviſe man vvill haue truſt therin?
            
            
               Eteocles ſpake thus vnto a certain yōg E
                     •
                  t
                     •
                  cles ſaying to a yōg man boſting in his beautie. man glorying in the fairneſſe of his form and face. Art thou not aſhamed to auaūce & lift vp thy creſts, and to be ſo proud for the gifts of beautie, whoſe vſe is graūted thée, and not proprietie, & that for a very ſmal time. Helth is precious and delectable, Health. Strength. but very mutable. † Bodily ſtrength is worthy emulation, but with diſeaſe & maladies it is defrayed & debilitated, and with old age (as beautie before) is expugnable. In fine, if any truſteth to yt ſtrēgth and vigoure of his body, & proudly reioyſeth therin, he is quite deceiued. * Let the huge Cyclops be exāple, whom ye fortitud of Vliſſes, ſeaſoned wt wiſdome & reaſon,

brought to a miſerable kind of life, while he puld out his eye. Bulyris, Geryon, Cacus, and Milo Crotonia
                     •
                  as may hither be fetched: and the too much preſumption of their ſtrength, vtterly ouerthrewe the Giantes, which aduentured to depell Iupiter out of his Emperiall ſeate. † Howe much is the ſtrength of man inferioure Mans ſtrēgth is much inferioure to the ſtrength of beaſtes. and leſſe than the mightie power, ſtrēgth and hardineſſe of other beaſtes? I meane of Elephants, Bulles, and Lions? In humain̄e things, erudition is only immortall, diuine, and neighbour to diuturnitie. And two things there be moſt peculiar in the nature of man, vnderſtanding and Vnderſtanding and reſon be the two cheefe things in the nature of man. reaſon: Vnderſtāding ruleth reaſon, and reaſon is obſequious and morigerant to vnderſtanding: which no fortune battereth downe nor conquereth: which no obtrectation or ſlaunder taketh away, which no infirmitie infecteth or depraueth which no old withered age doth deuaſtate or deſtroy: For only vnderſtanding in olde age perſeuereth in his vigoure, and is then yonglike. And tyme, (which conſumeth all other things) toold age ioyneth ſcience, and adiecteth great

experience. Neither warre (which after the manner of a ſwift running riuer draweth and chaungeth all things) can euer take away vertue and learning. * Than How precious vertue and lerning be. which, nothing of al other things is more ſplendent or conſtant, as mark now and thou ſhalt learne. For vertue dothe giue vs that glorious light of Nobilitie, wherwith we moſte relucent appéere in all mennes eyes. Neither doth it ſuffer vs or oures, to lurke in ſecrete, or in duſkous dennes, but calles vs out, and makes vs manifeſt. Euen as a towne that is ſituate and built on a high hill, is in all mennes eyes moſt manifeſt and apparant: euen ſo vertue (in whoſe breſt it is enrachined and rooted) ſuffereth not him to lurke and lie in darke dungeons and vnlyghtſome holes, but doth illuſtrate and illuminate him, and ſperpleth his fame and commē
               dations, through all the tracts and coſtes of ye world. What ſo extreeme darkneſſe can oppreſſe and obſcure the fortitude and magnanimitie of king Philips ſonne Alexander the great? Of Iulius Caeſar, renowned Prince, or of other noble and inuictoryous perſonages? What darkeneſſe

ſo obſcure canne obtenebrate the iuſtice of Ariſtides, the integritie of Phocion, the liberalitie and munificence of Cinon, and the moſt abſolute vertue of Socrates? Yea, what portion at leaſt of Vertue (which in any, in all worldes hath ſhyned) hath not bene by the benefit of vertue chalenged and called from the deſtruction of Obliuion? Wherfore vertue is thus notablie deſcribed of Cicero. 
               Virtus ſecū
                  dum Ciceronem. 
               Virtus est affectio a
                     〈…〉
                   constans conuenienſqúe, laudabiles efficiens eos in quibus est: That is, Vertue is a conſtant and conuenient affection of the mind, making them laudable, in whome it is. And vertue by hir ſelfe is laudable: out of which all honeſt willes, ſentences, actiens, and all Out of vertue flow all good actions. ryght reaſon commeth and floweth. All other goodes fade awaye and peryſhe, only Vertue neuer dyeth. It canne not be taken away, neyther wyth ſhyppewracke, nor with fyre it is loſt, neyther wyth the alteration of Tempeſtes nor tymes it is chaunged, wyth which whoſoeuer are indued, they only are riche: they only poſſeſſe thyngs bothe fructuous

and perdurable. And they only are content wyth that they haue. It neuer forſaketh man in olde age: for vertue Virtus ſenectutis viaticum. is the beſt viandrie of olde age, wherby the difficulties thereof are moſte eaſely borne.
            And Cato in Tullie ſayeth (reaſoning of olde age with Scipio and Laelius) thus. Aptiſſima ſunt omnino arma ſenectutis artes exercitationeſque virtutum, quae in omni aetate cult
                     〈…〉
                   cum di
                     •
                   multumque vixeris, mirificos adferunt fructus, non ſolum quia nunquam deſerunt hominem, nec extremo quidem tempore aetatis, quanquam id quidem maximum est: Ʋerum etiam quia conſcientia bene actae vitae, multorumque benefactorum recordatio incundiſſima est.
            
            
               Cato by experience was taught what effect vertue traded, and wher and when it tooke place, being old him ſelfe, and replenyſhed wyth this excellent iewel. Euen as Salte dothe conſerue and kéepe fleſh from corruption and ſtench: ſo only vertue doth defend vs and our myndes, leaſt that we come into the dungcon of corruption and deſtruction.
            
               〈1 page missing〉
            
            
               
thou doſt remember it always, and canſt neuer forget it: but if thou ſhalt eyther heare, read, or doe any thing in thy elder age, the memory therof ſoone vaniſheth away: ſo if in thy yeres of infancie thou ſhalt be put to diſcipline and vertue, thou ſhalt with vſe and cuſtome ſo learne it, that thou mayeſt neuer forget it. For what way any walkes in, when he is yong, the ſame way ſhall he tread when he is olde. But if thy childe, in any other age than childehoode, apply his minde to learning and vertue, perhaps many things may happen in the meane ſeaſon, to auert and turne his minde from it, when not yet it hath ſoundly taken roote in his breſt. Wiſely therefore anſwered Ageſilaus, when he was aſked, Agefilaus. what things chiefly children ſhoulde learne: Thoſe things (ſayde he) that they may vſe, when they are growen to mans eſtate. By the whiche aunſwere he déemed, that in tender yeres the precepts of learning and vertue ſhoulde be planted in childrens breſts, if alwais afterwards they woulde enioy the ſame. Therfore, although (as Plautus ſayth:) Plautus.
               
               Sera nūquam ad bo
                     •
                  os mares via, the way to good maners is neuer to late, yet notwithſtanding, ſith there is but one way to vertue, and that moſte harde and ſtraight (as Heſiodus, and Pythagoras letter purport) if we wil acquire the poſſeſſion In tender yeres muſt vertue and learning be gotten. of vertue and learning, we muſt direct our iorney therto in tender yeres: otherwiſe in elder age we ſhalbe terifted from it by the hardneſſe of the way, and danger of the iorney, whiche thing to too many doth happen. † And as I admoniſh parents to eſtéeme and regarde nothing more than this vertuous and learned bringing vp of their children, ſo again do I exhort them, that they vſe good, vncorrupt, and healthfull education: for children muſt be prohibited and repreſſed, from panegirical exerciſes, & from ſuche eſbatements as contayne prayſe and commendation. For he that pleaſeth a multitude or cōmon ſort of people, doth altogither diſpleaſe and diſcontent them that be wiſe. Of this is the excellent Euripides my witneſſe, whiche ſayth:
            
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
            
            
            
               To ſpeake vnto the common ſort of men
               I haue no vvit, nor knovvledge I at al:
               But cunninger and readier am I then,
               amōg my equals, if they be fevv & ſmal.
            
            They (which wiſemen diſproue and diflike) haue eloquent tongs before the common crue of people: I my ſelfe haue marked and perceiued thoſe (which haue ſtudied, and with tooth and nayle haue labored by the chaunting vpon the cords of their pleaſaunt tong, to augurate the fauour, and to hunt for the vayne cōmendation of the fickle and inconſtant people) to liue very intemperately, & without any ſtay of continencie, wallowing in all vice, and enuoluped with too filthy pleaſures And that (by him that guydes the heuenly ſcepter) not without a cauſe. For if they (by theyr preparation of pleſures for other) ſhall neglect and tranſgreſſe the limittes of honeſtie, they ſhal ſcarſly make more of their owne pleaſures and illecebrous wayes, than that is right, iuſt and holſome. Furthermore what things ſhall we teach for children profitable, or what good thing ſhall wée oxhort them to apply, ſéeing that to ſpeke

and do nothing temerouſly and without conſideration, is a fayre and godly thing, and (according to the prouerbe) rare and 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                faire things are harde and difficile. But inconſiderate talke, and the vſe of ſpeaking without premeditation, is fraught Children muſt not be ſuffered to ſpeake ſodenly and extempore. with inconſtancie, vncarefulneſſe, and lenitie: ſo that they know not neyther where to begin, nor where to relinquiſh or leaue: and (beſides other incommodities and harmes) thoſe, whiche ſodenly, and hande ouer heade (as it were) without all conſideration or thinking vppon matters, ſhall talke and reaſon, do fal into a certaine inunoderation and diſmeaſured futilitie: but a wiſe and aduiſed premeditacion dothe not ſuffer the As vnaduiſed talk harmeth, ſo doth conſiderate talke muche profite. talke and communication to paſſe his reache, nor to tranſgreſſe his limits: vnaduiſed loquacitie hath muche endaungered the blabber out therof, but talke with iudgement ſeaſoned, hath much auayled and profited. * There came once out of Helleſpontus to the Athenian baud Gnathaena the Athenian harlot. 
               Gnathaena, a certayn babbling louer, ſtirred through hir fame, and name, who when among the cuppes he had babbled

out many things, and did ſéeme very importune in his talke, Gnathaena aunſwered: Sayeſt thou, thou camſt out of Hellespontu? then why (ſayth ſhe) knoweſt thou not the chiefe citie there? who (when he ſaide) what is that▪ ſhe anſwered: Sige
                     〈…〉
                  
                And ſo artificially reſtrayned the futilitis of hir louer: for 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                amongs 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . the Greciās ſignifieth ſilence or taciturnitie. And ſo he receiued for a reward of his loquacitie, ſhame. ✚ 
               Pericles 
               Pericles refuſed ſodenly and without premeditation to aunſwere. (as we haue heard reported) when he was called of the people oftentimes to make an oration, he refuſed and would not obey them, ſaying: he was vnprepared, and in no frame, ſo ſodaynly to talke. Semblably, the thundring eloquent orator Demoſthenes, in the adminiſtration Demoſth. of the common weale, Pericles his emulator (when the Athenians called him to counſayle) refuſed to bée preſent, ſaying: he was not readye, nor had premeditated. But peraduenture ſome will inſolentlye obiect, and ſay: This aſſertion hath no authour, it ſéemeth to bée fayned, and counterfayted. But Demoſthenes (in

that his Oration that he made agaynſt Midias) dothe playnely and clearely ſet out before our eyes the fruite and vtilitie of conſideration, of premeditation, and diligence. Therefore (ſayeth he) I tell you O ye Athenians, and I cannot denye, but that I haue déepely conſidered, and with ardent ſtudie perpended and poyſed theſe matters in the ballaunce of premeditation, as it was laufull and moſt expedient for mée: for I were a miſerable man, and worthy of all miſfortune and calamitie, yf I (hauing ſuffered and preſently ſuſtayning ſuche things, whiche haue happened to me) ſhoulde neglect and come vnprepared to ſpeak of the things I ſhould make mention of. But I will not ſpeake altogither to reproue or diſalow this quickneſſe and promptneſſe of ſpeache, or agayne to affirme the exerciſe thereof, as neceſſary, but I thinke it oughte too bée doone moderately, as (in taking a medicine in Phiſike) it is decent and mete. For before hée come to mannes eſtate Two times may bee giuen to talke ſodeynly, and to diſcourſe vpon matters out of hande: I thinke a childe oughte to ſpeake nothing out of hande, whatſoeuer is offred:

but when any hath béen long exerciſed in eloquent ſpeaking, and 
                  •
               ath layd a déepe foundation and roo
                  •
               e in the entrayles of fyne diſcourſing ſpeac
                  •
               e (yf oportunitie and time miniſter occaſion) then is it decent and lawfull to vſe libertie in talk and communication. For euen as they, which of long time haue béene impriſoned, and bound in fetters, although at laſt they be looſed and dimiſ
                  •
               ed, notwithſtanding for the long vſe of the charnes and bondes they can not goe, but halte, and oftentimes fall flat towne vpon the earth: Euen ſo they, that haue bene long time repreſſed, brideled, & reſtrayned to ſpeake (if at any time of a ſodeyn neceſſitie moueth them to talk) neuertheleſſe they conſerue and kepe their wonted order and phraſe of ſpeache. But if ſuch (as haue not paſſed their childhoode) be permitted to be practiſed in the ſodayne facultie of talke, it maketh them (euer after) to be fooles, garrulous, and iangling Of the extremities or vices to be chefely elch
                     •
                  ed in talke. chatters. A fooliſh fonde paynter ſhewed an image to Apelles (prince of paynters) and ſayde, this euen now I paynted. I ſaw and knew it (ſaide Apelles) though

thou hadſt held thy peace, and not ſpoken a word: I perceiue thou didſt paynt it with great feſtination, but I maruell why thou haſt not paynted more of this ſort. As therfore (for now I will come agayne to my talke from whence I am digreſſed) I haue counſeled and exhorted to flée and eſchue a diuerſe & changeable coloured oration, and loftie and tragicall talke: ſo agayn I do alſo perſuade them, to auoyde a thinne exile, and a leane oration: for a ſwelling and turbulent oration lacketh ciuilitie, and a hungry leane oration doth not ſmite nor greatly moue the hearers minds. And as in a body only incolumitie is not laudable, but alſo a firme and luſtie diſpoſition of the body is requiſite: ſo is it likewiſe expedient, that an oracion or talke ſhoulde not be ſickely, weake, and imbecill, but ſtrong, firme, and rigorous: for that, that is ſecure and eaſie, is onely commendable, and doth alone merite prayſe, but that, that is behedged with dangers and with ſtudious labour atcheued, bringeth admiration. Now haue I to ſpeke and to purport, how the mind ought to be affected,

which muſt not be temerous, raſh, and aduenturous, neither cowardous, timorous, ſoone affrighted and abiect: for as What is decent and vndecēt in the affects of the minde. too much confidence & boldneſſe ſhewes foorth an impudent and vnſhamefull minde, ſo doth timiditie & feare drawe and moue the mind into ſeruilitie and bondage. An artificiall thing it is in all things moſt diligently & rightly to enter into the mean way and kéepe it. * A gret vertue it is to vſe moderation and not to bruſt ye liſts of mediocritie. ✚ And to open my opinion more largely, and to touch this education more narowly, The harping of one ſtring only is odious, and the likenes of talk is irkeſome but varietie and change delightſull and pleaſant. firſt I thinke that kinde of talke which is euer like if ſelfe, and neuer variable, to be the moſt certayn token of a bluntiſh brayne, of a dull wit, indocible, and very hard to be taught. Secondarily, I déeme it not fit for any exerciſe, whiche ſoone conceiueth, & not long retayneth. One ſong always, and the iarring and chaunting vpon one onely corde and ſtring, in all things is yrkeſome, tedious, and vnpleaſant to the ears: but varietie and chaungeable tunes (as in all other things innumerous, ſo in thoſe

things which be heerd and ſéen) be moſt delectable, pleaſant & delightfull. * Importunitie is alwayes odious, but to do all things fayre and ſoftly, and in their time, hath great grace. Euen as that Muſitian is moleſtuous to all men, which among the ſelfe ſame men dothe ſing the ſelfe ſame ſong, and ſtil twangeth vpon one ſtring: ſo he that with one onely kinde of ſpeach, harping vppon one onely matter, doth gréeue the ſame men with his importunity loſeth ciuility, breaketh the limits of curteſie, & is thought a very importune felow. One once came vnto Ariſtotle, & blabbed out many things very importunely, ſtill vſing the ſame words. Ariſtotle ſtill held his peace, at laſt, ſayd the prater: perhaps I trouble thée through my garrulitie. No in good ſoouth anſwered Ariſtotle, for I marked not, nor tooke héede what thou ſaydeſt. Semblably yf any go vnto men graue in authoritie, and vſe this inuariable ſpeach, and vnpleaſant tunes, he eſcapes not blame & rebuke, neyther doothe he further his ſute. Not without a cauſe doth Terence 
               Terentius.
               
propoūd vnto vs the example of Demea, whereby he admoniſheth vs not to be moleſtuous to the ſame man concerning the ſelfe ſame thing, with all one kind of ſpech (as Demea was to his brother Mitio) when he with gret indignation was offended withal, ſaying: An toties de eadem re te audiam▪
                ſhal I heare thée ſo oftentimes iangling vpon all one matter? Amongs the other tokens and marks wherwith Theophraſtus deſcribeth an importune talker, he reciteth this; importunit as 
               'heophraus. 
               est occurſus incidentibus molestus. Wherfore it is the part of a wittie and free childe to heare and lerne al the thinges which pertayn to the circle and compaſſe of all learnings: and as it were by the way to ſippe and taſt of eche one of them, ſéeing it is impoſſible, and out of the reache of mans capacitie, to excell, and haue the full perfection of all diſciplines. But in Philoſophie (before all other learnings) a childe muſt moſt diligently labour. Philoſophie, that is the loue of wiſedome (ſo dothe the Gréeke worde ſignifie) aboue the reſt muſte be tilled of a childe, and the frutes it bringeth

foorth muſt be layde vp and houſed in the inwarde barne of a childs heart. And this my opinion and minde, I am purpoſed to approue and declare, by an example or ſimilitude: for euē as it is an excellent & goodly thing, by nauigation to haue paſſed by many goodly and notable regions, and to haue ſayled about many gorgeous cities, but a cōmodious and fructuous thing, to inhabite and be reſiant in the beſt of them all. ✚ So a child that is capable of wit and learning ought to vew many goodly artes, and to runne ouer with the glimſe of his eyes, many beautifull and reſplendent ſciences (impoſſible all to be attayned) and to chooſe one for his reſting place and manſion of abode, which excelleth, and farre ſurmounteth all the reſt. Maruellous wittie and mery is the ſaying of the philoſopher Bion, which ſayde: As the woers The vvittie ſaying of Bion. whiche coulde not enioye Penelope Vlyſſes wyfe, nor reape the floure of hir chaſtitie, ioyned and coupled themſelues with hir handmaides: ſo they which are not able to aſpire to the height and loftie toppe of philoſophie, do ſpend & diſſipate

their time miſerably in other diſciplins of no value or eſtimation. Wherfore among other diſciplins, philoſophie as a princeſſe & chiefe crafts womā ought to Philoſophie is princeſſe among other di
                  
                     ••
                  iplines. be conſtituted and made. For about the cure of the body men haue inuented and found out by ſtudious ſearche, two diſciplines, phiſick, and paleſtricall exerciſe: whereof, the one conſerueth the health of the body, and the other dothe cōrroborate the good diſpoſition and habitude of the ſame. But only philoſophie Philoſophie is 
                     •
                  he curer and 
                     〈…〉
                  medier of the 
                     〈…〉
                  inde. is the preſent phiſick, and redy remedy to recure and heale the maladies, infirmities, griping gréefes, and painefull paſſions of the mind. Out of the entrals of Philoſophie, we are taught to know what things be honeſt and vnhoneſt, iuſt and vniuſt, and in fine, what are to be required and choſen, and again what we ought to eſchue, flée and euitate. It Philoſophy tea 
                     •
                  heth vs hovve 
                     〈…〉
                   behaue our 
                     〈…〉
                  lues tovvarde 
                     〈…〉
                  ll eſtates and 
                     •
                  egrees. teacheth vs how we ought to vſe our ſelues towards god, our parents, elders, lawes, ſtrangers, magiſtrats, and frends, that it behoueth vs to worſhip and feare god, to honor our parents, to reuerence our elders, to obey the laws, to be obediēt to magiſtrats, to loue our

frends, to liue modeſtly with our wiues, with inward affection to imbrace our childrē, to deal iuſty with our ſeruāts, not to be iniurious to them. And to ſpeak of the chefeſt things & moſt pōdrous, neither in proſperitie (when fortune ſmileth on vs with louing looks) to triūph with to much iolitie, to be inſolent with to much mirth: neither in aduerſity (when fortune frouneth with cloudiſh coūtenance) to diſpaire to contriſtate, or to be to heuy & ſorowful: neither in pleaſurs to be diſſolute, neither in anger to be paſſionated, & brutiſhly to be rigorous: which I (amongs al the other things which iſſue out of the ſugry riuers of philoſophie) eſteme and déeme the moſt antike, chéef, & worthieſt thing. To be of a Gentleneſſe the token of a honeſt man. gentle corage fraught with generoſitie in time of floriſhing & fortunate things is yt propertie of a man in dede: to be fortunate without ye grudge of enuy is the ſigne of a moſt quiet, peaceable, & placable man: to reſiſt & ſtruggle agaynſt pleaſures, is the token of a wiſeman, & to cohibite & bridle anger is not in euery mans power. But I iudge them perfite men, which are able to interlarde, and to concorporate the ciuill adimniſtration of the publique weale,

with the ſtudy of wiſedome. And I ſuppoſe They be perfect men which ioyne to the adminiſtration of the cōmon wealth the ſtudie of wiſedom of philoſophie. the ſame to be the eminent enlargers, of two of the greateſt goods. For while to adminiſter and gouerne the common weale they doo the things that appertayne to common vtilitie, and while they be labrous, and vigilante in the ſtudies of good artes, and intentiue in philoſophie, they ben in great tranquilitie and quietneſſe. There be thrée kinds of life, the one is occupied in action Three kinds of lyfe. or doing, the ſeconde in knowledge, the third in oblectation, & in the fruition of pleſurs, of which the laſt kind of life, delicious, voluptuous or gyuen to pleaſures, The lyfe that is led in pleaſures is brutiſh. is beaſtlike, brutyſhe, abiecte vyle, vnworthie the excellencie of man. And the life which in knowledge conſiſteth, if it be diſſeuered or wander from the actiue lyfe, it is vnprofitable & vnfrutful, Contemplatiue life without actiue life is vnprofitable. and the actiue or ciuil life without philoſophie and learning, is rude, ruſtickelyke, vnhandſome, and full of errours. Men muſte therefore laboure, and wyth all theyr myghte they can, proue, aſſayle, and bende their endeuours, bothe ryghtely to

rule the common weal, and do the things which belong to publique commoditie, & (as it is decent) when time and oportunitie ſerueth, to take vnto them the worthie When bokes of Philoſophie muſt be red. workes, & learned volumes of Philoſophie. After this ſort gouerned Pericles the common weale, after this ſorte Archytas Tarentinus, Dion Syracuſanus and Epaminondas the Thebane, which were Platoes ſchollers. And now concerning inſtitution of Children, I thinke I néede ſpeake no more. Beſides theſe, notwithſtanding, I iudge it a moſt profitable The worthy bokes of lerned authors muſt bee bought, kept and red as a treaſure of learning. and neceſſary thing, to be diligent in the acquiring of antique Bookes, and monuments, imitating the manner of huſbādmen: for euen as not the poſſeſſion of many fieldes, but diligent tillage and good huſbādry doth enrich them, ſo not by the poſſeſſion of many bookes, but by the diligent reading, and pure iudgement therof, (as from a fountaine) doe we drawe and acquire the knowledge of things, ſcience, and good litterature. And the olde ſtudents of wiſdome in reading Bookes obſerued this, that thereout they myght gather excellent ſentences, wherewith

they might direct and order their life. And (as Plutarche wytneſſeth in an other Philoſophie in the tyme of the 
                     •
                  ag
                     ••
                   of Greece was contained in ſentē
                  ces for their direction. Booke) at that time, (when the, vij. wiſe men of Grece flouriſhed) all Philoſophie was contained in bréefe & few ſentences, which partly by experience, & partly by reding they acquired, & for the vſe of cō
               mon life ſet forth as theyr profitable ſentences (which yet are extant) doe manyfeſtly ſhew. And what commoditie may come by the reading of them, Lucretius 
               Lucretius. full well knew, ſaying.
            
               
                  Floriferis vt apes in ſaltibus omnia libant,
               
               
                  Sic nos authorum decerpimus aurea dicta,
               
               
                  Aurea perpetua ſemper digniſſima vita.
               
            
            
               As laborous bees in forreſts greene,
               doo ſucke, and floures taſte,
               So vve collecte the golden ſavves
               of authours in tymes paſt:
               The golden ſavves that they haue left,
               behynde in memorie,
               And bookes of fame, vvorthy in deede
               to liue perpetually.
            
            
               Socrates alſo, & other faithfull teachers of Hovv Socrates and other taught children. youth (if they toke children to teache, enforme & learne) they cōpelled thē to lerne by heart, the ſentences of Poets, orators,

and Philoſophers, yt in time to come they might be a great profite to them to leade their life wel, honeſtly & bliſſedly. Moreouer, if any buy & read yt volumes of Philoſophers, & cheefely Plato, ſhall ſée the ſacred ſentēces of Poetes, which (as goodly trim pictures) they ſcattred & ſowed here & there in their bookes. Alexander Macedo, 
               The great care of king Alexandee in reading of Homers workes. yt inuictorius king (amōg ſo many turmoiles, tumults & ſweats in war ſuſtained, almoſt ſurpaſſing the power of mā) neuer neglected the reading of Homers workes, which deſcribeth to kings theyr dueties. He would euer haue it layd togither with his dagger vnder his pillowe. And yt the diligent reding of good authors doth bring a wōderfull profit, Demetrius Phalereus ſufficiētly enough proued, who How Demetrius Phaleri us exhorted king Ptolome to prepare hys bookes. exhorted king Ptolomeus to prepare him ſuch bookes, as intreted of a kingdom and warlike dominion: & to reuolue thē ouer, bicauſe thoſe things in bookes are writtē, of which frēds dare not preſume to admoniſh kings & princes. why ſpeake I not of Alphōlus ye worthy perſenage & famous king of Aragon who (being vexed wt ſickneſſe at the Citie Cap
                     •
                  a, & his Phiſitions

miniſtring many medicines in his greuous Alphonſus was reſtoted to health by the reading of Quintus Curtius. diſeaſe) began to read the Hiſtories of Quintus Curtius, deſcribing the noble geſtes of Alexander the great: with reading wherof, he being delighted (when he had ouercome all the violence of the ſickneſſe, and reſtored to health) Adew (ſayd he) Auycen, adew Hippocrates, adewe Galene and other Phiſitions, liue for euer Quintus Curtius, the reſtorer of my helth. And the ſame king, (when he hard trumpeters and minſtrels iangling, (taking in his handes the famous lucubrations of Tullie:) Be packing, be packing ye Muſitians (ſay de he) for Cicero the freſh fountaine of Romaine elequence is with me, whiche ſpeaketh more ſwete & pleaſante thinges. And the ſame worthy prince at an other time, (whē he heard a king of Spayne ſay, it was not decente for gentlemen and noble men to be learned, lettered and to gaze vpon bookes) is reported to haue exclamed: haec non eſt regis, ſed bou
                     •
                  s vox. This is not the voice of a king but of an Oxe. No leſſe louer of bookes The great loue of Carolus Caeſar to learning. and Monumentes of learning, was Carolus Caeſar the fourth Emperoure of

Rome: for entring into the ſchole of the Prageneians (when he heard the maſters of liberall ſciences diſputing the ſpace of foure houres, & his Guard was offended and ſayde, ſupper tyme is at hande.) It is not ready (ſaide he) for me, for this is my ſupper. This renoumed perſonage and mightie Emperour, preferred the philoſophical diſputations, before moſt delicate banquets. Carolus the fifth, Auguſt, & Ferdinandus Caeſar (which fell into ſuch turbulent times, wherin the great cōfuſion of the monarchie inuaded al orders as Lerning was the cau
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  hat Carolus the fifth, Auguſt and Ferdinandes Caeſar gouerned in moſt pearillous ſeaſons. wel ciuil as ſpiritual) except they had bin inſtructed from their youthe in good letters, they could neuer haue holdē the gouernmet of theyr empire ſo many yeres, with ſo great wiſedome, and fortitude, in ſuch mightie great perils of tempeſtuous times, and impetuous ſeaſons. Wherfore Thales Mileſius, one of the ſages of Grece ſayth, faciem componere non praeclarum eſt, ſea bonarum artium ſtudijs animun excolere longè praeclarius, not to trim, deck and dye the face, is an excellent thing, but to garnyſh & a dorne the minde with good artes is a far more precious & beautifull thing:

who alſo being aſked, who was happie, ſaid: qui corpore ſanus est, animo vero eruditus He yt in body is helthful and whole, and wel inſtructed in his mind with good learning, & giue me leaue once againe to name Alphonſus (ſo oftētimes of me repeated,) who was wont to ſay, yt the dead were very good counſailoures, ſignifying books, wherin he herd thoſe things which he deſired without feare and fauor. Then Alphonſus ſayde that bokes were good counſailors, wherin we learne the things we deſire without fear or fauour. how can it be but moſt neceſſary, to be diligent in getting, and diligent in ſtudying yt monumēts & bokes of worthy authors: out of which ſo many cōmodities, ſo many fruites, ſo many aduiſes, ſo many good coūſails, lerned leſſons, & prudent exhortatiōs may be gathered. And now I think it not expedient to paſſe ouer, and diſpiſe the exerciſes of the body, but moſt conuenient I déeme it, to ſend children to the Childrens bodies muſt be exerciſed, both for the agilitie of the bodye, & conſeruatiō of health. houſes & ſcholes of thoſe that be cunning and expert teachers, yt ſufficiently by labor they may obtain the ſame, & put them in practiſe, both for the agilitie & nimbleneſſe of the body. And alſo to ſtrengthen and corroborate the ſame: for the foundation of good & honeſt old age, is in childrē, the fit diſpoſition, and habitude of the body.

Children therfore, (which are liberally brought vp,) are not ſo diſhoneſtly and vnciuillie to be handled, to be driuē from the exerciſes which childehoode and adoleſcencie, & mannes age ought to be practiſed in, & much auail to the health of the body. While the ſtrēgth of heat accenſed wt mouing, doth more ſtrongly diſgeſt ye 
               Exerciſes be neceſlary for the bodies digeſtion. meat & drinke, and ſendeth liuely & pure bloud, into al the mēbers of the body. * If ye takeſt away moderate exerciſes, ſluggiſh luſkiſhneſſe, drowſineſſe, laſineſſe & filthy idleneſſe ſhall poſſeſſe thy children & ſtriplings: whereby they ſhal be made vnfit to all yt honeſt actiōs of life. Amōgs The exerciſes vſed among the Grecians was cauſe of health, and little ſickeneſle. the old ancient Grecians (while theſe honeſt exerciſes of youth flouriſhed) there was not ſo great ſtore of ſickneſſe & maladies, (as now amongs vs, which folow none, or very few exerciſes, but drunkē
               neſſe, bellychéere, filthie pleaſures, and all intēperancie. So that when we come to that age, wherein we ſhould ſerue our Prince and Countrey, in the offices of The lack of exerciſes at this day is cauſe there be ſo manye diſeaſes. peace or feates of warre, we are hindred with yt gout, for lacke of practiſe, or one diſeaſe or other, which we haue gottē by

intemperancie, while we diſpiſed to haue a regard of our body, in exerciſing it with moderate and cōuentent exerciſes. Euen as therfore in Sommer tyme it is conueuenable to prepare & lay vp thoſe things that be neceſſarie agaynſt winter: ſo in tender youth, it behoueth to prepare and hoorde vp good manners, ryght order of life, and modeſtie as a viandry and neceſſary prouiſion for olde age. And ſo with labors voluntary to exerciſe their bodies, leaſt (their ſtrengthes being exhauſted & If the body be not exerciſed, it will hardly ſuſtaine the toyles in learning. cōſumed) they may afterwards refuſe to abide & ſuſtain the labors & toyles pertaining to the conſeruation of learning. For as the péerleſſe philoſopher Plato affirmeth, ſléepe and labors be aduerſaries to diſciplines: he that accuſtomes himſelfe to voluntarye labours, it ſhal not be greuous to him, to perdure in ye toiles, which men often times muſt abide by reaſon of their office: but he that dothe not exerciſe himſelfe with willing labours, but gyueth himſelfe to be depraued with ſlouthfulneſſe, he ſhal neuer in neceſſary labors with glory perſeuere. But to what ende ſpeake I vpon theſe? and doe not rather

haſten to purport that, which is the moſt peculiar, and chiefeſt thing of all theſe? And that is this, that children be inſtructed It is expedient that children be trayned in martiall practiſes. in practiſes of warre and feats of chiualry: as in handling the ſpeare, caſting of dartes, in iuſtings, bickerings, and hū
               ting of wilde beaſts: for the goods of them which are conquered in battaile, fall to their lottes and guerdons, which be conquerours and winners of the field: but to warre, the diſpoſition and exerciſe of the body priuately practiſed, doeth not auaile, but a weake warriour, and ſillie Souldioure, (if he be trayned vp in martial practiſes, and exerciſes of warre,) penetrateth and ſperpleth the well garniſhed garriſons, and orderly adorned armies of his ennimies: ſo much it auaileth to be exerciſed in theſe practiſes which ye worthy Gréeks knew wel enough, who had commonly in vſe, games of exerciſe, For what vſe the Grecians inuented their games of exerciſe. huntings, leapings, ſkippings, danſings, and other ſuch eſbatemēts, wherwith as with voluntarie exerciſes they ſharpned & exaſperated youth to the true & neceſſary labors of warre, leſt in idleneſſe they ſhould be ſ
                  •
               outhfull, ſpend their time luſkiſhly,

and the goodes of cowardous fluggards (as Demoſthenes ſayth) doth fall to their lots that be laborous. Likewiſe, the renoumed Romains had their games and Why the Romaines founde out their exerciſes. laboures at home, wherewith they indurated & hardened their bodyes, to ſuſtain the true labours in warre, wherby their countrey might be defended, and the territories of their Empire enlarged. But what will ſome ſay and obiect? You promiſed to wryte preceptes and rules, concerning To whome theſe preceptes are wrytten. the education of frée children, but nowe you ſéeme to neglecte the bringing vp of poore and néedy children, and are only determined to giue and ſet forth inſtructions, fit and congruent for rich, and ſuch as are diſcent from noble progenie? Who may thus eaſely be anſwered: truly, I greatly wiſhe and deſire, that theſe my preceptes of education might be conducible and profitable to all in generall: but if there be any hindred through pouertie, and oppreſſed with penurie and indigencie, ſhall not be able to vſe al my admonitions, let them bewaile and deplore their owne miſfortune and calamitie, and not accuſe & inſimilate him that

giueth theſe admonitions and holeſome preceptes. Therefore let the pore and indigent laboure, endeuoure and aſſay (as much as lyeth in them) if they can attain to this chéefeſt and beſt education of children, which we haue made manifeſt. But if ſome ſhal not be able to vſe it, let them practiſe that which is lawfull and p
                  •
               ſſible for them. Theſe things haue I chefely touched, that I might afterwardes anner & interlace other things alſo, which anayle muche to the ryght Inſtitution of Children. I thincke it a thing conuenyent, to drawe and induce Children to Chyldren muſt be induced to ſtudyes and other neceſſarie duetyes, wyth gentleneſ
                     •
                  e, perſuaſion, exhortation, not with force, violence and ſtripes. honeſt ſtudyes, and to doe their dueties, with admonitions, perſuaſions, and gentle intreaties, and not wyth force, violence, ſtripes, beating and bunching. For theſe ſéeme rather more derent for ſeruauntes and bondſlaues, than for ingenious and fréeborne Children. For ſluggiſhe ſeruauntes hardened in idleneſſe adread ſtripes, and with theſe are incyted and dryuen to laboure, partely for the ſmarting gréefes of the ſtripes, and partly for contumelies, reproches and nipping tauntes.

But praiſe and diſpraiſe amongs ingenious children are farre more better and commodious, thā any other chaſtiſemēt. For commendations and prayſes ſtirre and inuite them to honeſt things, and diſcommendations doth call them away, reſtraine and terrifie them from filthie, diſhoneſt, and vicious things. And ſomtime againe diuers wayes they muſt be diſpraiſed and chidden, and ſometime commended, that after they ſhall nothing ſet by chidings and chaffings, ſhame may reſtraine them, and againe be made glad, and reduced from the ſame, with prayſes and commendations: imitating nourſes and mothers, which (after their babes & ſucklings haue cried) giue and offer them the pappe, to ſtill and aſlake their cryes. And heere it behoueth Parents and good fathers to be circumſpect, and diligently take héede, that aboue meaſure they doe not auaunce and extol with praiſes their children, leaſt they become too inſolent, proud, arrogant and headie: For diſmeaſured and too much praiſe, doth infatuate, and make them more fierce and leuder. I haue known certain fathers, which with

too much loue haue loſt and marred their Recreations muſt be giuen to tender age, leaſt beeing tired and weried with labors, it be ouerwhelmed, not able afterwardes to conceiue any good diſciplines. ſonnes. While parents make poſthaſt to haue their children excell, and ſurmount very feſtinely in all things, they lay ſuch burdens vppon their ſhoulders, as they cannot beare nor ſuſtaine: wherwith (being too muche burdened and forefruſhed) they fal down vnder them, when, as (being hindered and ſtopped with other paſſions, moleſtations and gréeues) they are not able rightly to cōceyue diſcipline and learnings lore. * They would haue them learned the firſt day, and perfite men the firſt houre, ſuch too haſtie Parents there be, who (thinking to haue out of hande ſurpaſſing children) make them fooles & dullardes through their hot feſtination. ✚ Euen as yong plants are noriſhed with the ſprinkling of moderate water, but ſuffocated and choked with diſmeaſured liquors poured vpon them: Likewiſe a childes tender yong wit with moderate labors is augmented, but with ſuperfluous paines and immoderate toiles extinguiſhed, ouerwhelmed and drowned. Wherefore ſome recreation, breathing and refreſhing from their continuall labors

muſte be permytted Children, * which baniſheth and dryueth away irkſomneſſe gotten by ſerious toyle, and doth reſtaurate and repaire againe their bodyes and mindes to laboure. For euen as too muche bending breaketh the bow: ſo to bée perpetually addicted to ſeryous things, and neuer to refreſhe and ſolace the mynde wyth honeſte oblectations, cauſeth that mannes mynd can not long endure in earneſt ſtudyes. For this cauſe in olde tyme were ſolempnities Feſtiuall dayes in olde tyme, were inuented for recreation. and Feſtiuall dayes ordayned, that menne béeyng called from laboures, myght take delyghte in ſeruyng GOD: whych delight without all controuerſie is the moſte honeſt of all other. So ſtudentes (leaſt they fall into the deteſtable vice of drunkenneſſe, and contamynate them ſelues wyth filthie pleaſures) had their delightes, muſike and other bodily exerciſes, wherewith theyr mynde (being tired with ſtudy) myght be moſte pleaſantly recreated. ✚ Then Parentes ought to remember (thoſe I meane, which ſo burden their Childrens tender mindes with ſuche too heauie burdens)

that our life conſiſteth of remiſſion, recreation, ſtudie, labour, and paine. And therefore not onely wakings, but ſléeping is founde out, not only warre, but alſo tyme of peace, not ſommer and ſer
                  •
               
               nitie, but wynter, bluſtryng blaſtes, chillie colde and impetuous Tempeſtes, peries and ſtormes: To laborous operations and paynefull buſie woorkes (as I ſayd before) are Holly dayes inuented a remedy. And finally, reſt and ceſſation is the medicine and ſauce of laboure Quies laboris remediū. and wearyneſſe: and that not in lyuing creatures alone, but in things deuoyde of life we by experience proue: for we vnbend our bowes, and let downe and ſlacke the Harpe and luteſtrings, that we may bend them agayne. And generally the body is preſerued wyth emptying and filling agayne, and the mynde wyth remiſſion, recreation and ſtudie.
            And there be ſome Parentes worthy great blame, and deſerue ſeuere reprehenſion, which (after they haue once committed their childrē to the tutele and cuſtodie of the maſter and gouernor) neuer

looke nor trie howe their children han
                  •
                profited, and gone for warde in good litterature, vnfatherly neglecting their dueties: for it behoueth them (a fewe dayes after) to be inquiſitiue, and to make triall Parents after they haue put their children to ſchole, muſt be inquiſitiue hovve they profit. vpon the ſtudies and increaſings of theyr childrens learning, and not to affie their hole hope and truſt in him that teacheth for reward and gaine. In ſo doing, theyr children may euilly (without any profiting, waſte and contriue their precious time, and diſſipate their parents money. For vndoubtedly thoſe maſters would be more diligent and painefull in inſtructing their ſchollers, if they knewe they ſhould render accompt of their inſtitution and progreſſion in good lerning. And certainly that, that of horſes is ſpoken, meriteth no ſmall grace: bicauſe nothing do ſo ſone fattē, and bring into good liking a horſe, as his owners eie. * Some parents I know in England, very careful in thys behalfe, and ſuch in dede be parentes and loue their children interly, which daily enquire and trie their children, thoughe they be wholy perſuaded in the painefull diligence of the Maſter.
            
               
Such muſt néedes haue toward, lerned, and obedient children: and worthy of great cōmendation they be, for the care and trauell they take, in the vertuous inſtruction of their children. But ſome other I haue heard of, that are altogither vncarefull, and nothing regarde the good ſucceſſe of their ſonnes, not once in a whol yere demaunding how his child hath profited. Such parents be not worthy the name of parents, ſince they ſo temerouſly neglect their childrens good education, whom nature hath bounde them, and God commaundeth them to ſeaſon with vertue, and to trayne them vp in feare & godlyneſſe. Nay (the more is the pitie) there be ſome which altogither neglect at all to put thē to ſchole, but permit them diſſolutely, ydelly, and vaynely to contriue and ſpende their time, thinking learning and vertue to be of no value, ſuppoſing good inſtitution to be a thing of nought, ſo that they reſemble their fathers euill wayes: if they learne to ſweare and to rent God in a thouſande morſels, then haue they learnyng enoughe, and then they be their

white ſonnes. What be theſe
                  •
                the wicked parents of vicious children, vnprofitable members, worthy to be extirped out of a chriſtian common weale, and as one ſayd: 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . An infertile maſſe of molde But I leaue ſuch to their owne follies, and turne to my The exer
                     •
                  y ſes of a childes memory muſt not be neglected. purpoſe, wiſhing that there were none ſuch remayning. ✚ Before all things a childs memorie muſt be exerciſed: for memory is (as it were) the buttry or pantry of all good learning: and therfore haue poets, in their poemes fayned and imagined memory to be the mother of the muſes, and nine ſiſters of learning: thereby priuily interpreting & obſcurely reueling, that nothing is better thā fertile, pregnant & redy memory: which all children muſt exerciſe: both they which naturally be endued with the beautiful benefite of the ſame, & alſo thoſe which be obliuious, & enioy a very hard and dul memory: ſo ſhal they corroborate & confirme the affluēce & goodnes of nature, & ſupply alſo the defect & want of the ſame: that they which haue a ready memory, and exerciſe it, may become better than

others, & alſo the weak witted & obliuious childrē may better thēſelues. Excellently hath ye ancient poet Heſiode ſaid:
            
               He
                     •
                  iod 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
            
            
               If to a little thou doſt adde.
               a little, doing oft the ſame,
               At length a heape shall there be had,
               and of a maſſe shal beare the name.
            
            And parents ought to know this, that the remembrance of artes and ſciences dothe not onely to erudition and knowledge of things, but alſo to other practiſes and affayres of life, bring a great light, and is (as it were) a looking glaſſe and perfite example to liue. * Laboure parente to cauſe thy chylde exerciſe his memorye, indeuour thy ſelfe child and ſcholer with care and diligence to holde thoſe things thou ſhalt lerne. For except thou addeſt thy diligence, to lay vp thoſe things (which thou by ſtudie haſt gathered into the precious coffer of thy memory) thou in vayne laboreſt in lerning, ſéeing onely we knowe that, that in memorye we retayne: But yf with

dayly exerciſe thou committeſt to thy memory, the things which by learning thou haſt attayned, doubt not but thou ſhalt be learned. Euen as the huſbandeman in huſbandry is weried, if he ſuffer his corne to periſh in the field, and there to rotte by the violence of tempeſts: ſo vnprofitable is the labour whiche thou takeſt in ſtudies, if thou doſt not practiſe the things thou haſt conceyued, and with dayly meditation fixe them in thy memorie. Once there was one, whiche What chanced to hym that committed nothing to memory paynefullye trauayled at his Booke, and committed nothing to memorie, but to papers and commentaries. I know not what chaunce befell, this loytring lubber, and lerning eater loſt all his bepaynted papers, wherin he had printed all his learning: he bewayled his miſfortune and made his complaynt to Antiſthenes that learned man, who ſpake thus vnto him: Thou oughteſt to haue written theſe in thy minde, and not in papers: for
            
               
                  Tantum ſcimus quantum memoria tenemus.
               
            
            
               So muche vve knovv aſſuredly,
               as vve do holde in memory.
            
            
            
               ✚ It is alſo neceſſary and moſt néedeful, Children muſt be prohibited to ſpeak filthy, and accuſtomed to vſe affabilitie, gentle ſalutation, modeſty, temperance, and ſhamefaſtnes. that children be repelled and admontſhed from filthy ſcurrilitie and leud naughtie communication: for (as Democritus ſaide) talke is a ſhadow of a mannes worke, and ſuch things as man practizeth, ſuch things doth his communication declare and relate. *If we vſe to ſpeake filthily, we much harme and endanger our eſtimation, while all men think vs to be the neighbours and allies of diſhoneſt communication: but yf we abſtayne from ſcurrilitie & vitious talk, there is none but wil beléeue we be honeſt, ſober and diſcrete, yf we vtter thoſe things which lacke diſhoneſt talke, and abſtayne from vitious words, none can blame vs as filthy ſpeakers. But if we pamper our ſelues therin, who is he that will not ſpeake ill of vs, and procide vs with worthy taunts & ignominie? who will ſay, that Tibullus, Catullus Propertius 
               Laſciuious poetes. and Martiall, and other ſuche paultring laſciuious poets, are not taynted with infamy and ſlaunder, bicauſe they delighted rather to exerciſe their poetry, with the compoſition of filthy verſes,

than were memorous of chaſtitie and moderate talk. Not to eſchue (ſaith Muſonius) 
               Muſonius. to ſpeake obſcene and filthy wordes is the fountayne and beginning of euill liuing. And that worthy ſentence of modeſt Menander, (which ſaint Paul Menander. vſeth) ought to be a good leſſon for all parents to learne:
            
               
                  Corrumpunt bonos mores colloquia praua.
               
            
            
               Euill talke and filthy vvhich men haue,
               Good vertuous maners do depraue.
            
            
               ✚ Next muſt parents accuſtome their affabilitie. children, to vſe affabilitie, gentle and curteous ſalutation: for in good maners there is nothing counted ſo odious, as to be churliſh, frowarde in words, and to eſtraunge them ſelues from companye and talke. * If a man in authoritie ſpeke gently and curteouſly vnto euery one, it is almoſt incredible to ſay, how much beneuolence and fauour he amongs all men doth obtayne: but if he proudely diſdayne to ſpeake vnto his inferiours, thinking himſelfe to be polluted (as it were) with their talke, doubtleſſe that man is odible in the peoples fight, and iudged a proud, ſcorneful, diſdaynful, and

hye ſtomacked man. Marcus the Emperour Marcus the Emperour was cōmended for his affabilite. is muche commended, for his affabilitie and curteous behauiour, bicauſe he gaue his right hand to euery one that came vnto him, and gently with great humanitie ſpoke vnto ech mā, although he had clymed the hyeſt degree of dignitie. So likewiſe among the Hebrewes Abſolon, with his curteous affabilitie Abſolon. had moued and drawen almoſt all the Iudaicall people to his ſide, and (yf it had not otherwiſe pleaſed God) had inuaded the ſcepters of the Iſraeticall kingdome. So I know not, what ſwéeteneſſe the tongurs of Caeſar, of Caeſar, Pompey, Sylla for their affabilitie obtened muche fauour Pericles. 
               Pompey, of Sylla, and other noble perſonages hadde, whereby among their citizens they obtayned ſo much fauour, that to them they were moſt gratefull. Pericles alſo vſing this affabilitie (whiche I woulde haue all Parents to teache their children) was muche eſtemed among the Athenians: whiche is bruted to haue made his ſupplication to Iupiter, as often as he came abroade) that he wuld not ſuffer one word to ſlip from his tong amiſſe, wherby he might

incurre the enuy and conflate the hatred of the Athentan people to him ſelfe. What is a more humane thing, than in talke, and affabilitie, that children ſhew themſelues meeke, gentle, faire ſpoken, curteous and kinde to all men? on the contrary part, what is more truculent, beaſtlike, and cruel, than in compariſon of himſelfe to deſpiſe other, and to ſuppoſe himſelfe ſuperior to all: euen as the nightingale with hir ſhrill and ſwéete voyce, deſerueth muche fauour amongs al mē, and the owle with hir deadly and mournefull ſong incurs the hate of eche man, as a birde alienated from the kind of birds: ſo he whiche in company doth exerciſe affabilitie and curteous behauiour, is loued of all men: but he that lyueth after the maner of an owle, and profeſſeth no affabilitie, and kéepes no company (as the owle) he is a moſt vnmanly man, and is recompted not worthy the ſocietie of man. Roboam king Roboam. 
               Salomons ſonne, deuoyde of affabilitie, and deſpoyled of humanitie (bitterly accuſing the Iſraelites with ſharpe words and ſeuere) alienated all the other tribes

from him, beſide Iudaes and Beniamin. But king Cyrus, that puiſaunt prince, bicauſe he ſhewed gentleneſſe and curteous Cyrus was curteous in all his ages. behauiour in his childhoode, adoleſcencie, and all his other ages, felte the wonderfull increaſings of felicitie: therfore ſaith Valerius Maximus, Humanitaus dulcedo etiam efferat
                     •
                   barbarorū ingenia penetrat: toruos
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   & truc
                     •
                   hostium mollit oculos. Viuat nam, prosternit odium hostilem
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ſanguinem hostilibus iniſcet lachrimis. Sée the force of affabilitie, beholde The force of affabilitie and gentle talke. what curteous ſpeache can doo. ✚ Children that by their parents are taught this, ſhall tenderly be loued of them, whoſe company and familiaritie they kéepe and enioy, if they be not ſtifnecked, obſtinate and opinatiue, for it is not onely a famous thing to ouerceme, but to ſuffer himſelfe to be ouercomed, when the victorie little auayleth, but much endomageth and is hurtfull. It is in déede a victorie, whereof commeth Cadmea victoria. more harme than good. Of this haue I Euripides my witneſſe, which ſayth:
            
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
            
            
            
               VVhen tvvo do talke, vvherof the one
               doth rage in anger, than
               The other (vvhich doth not reply)
               is iudgde the vviſer man.
            
            
               Modeſtie. Agayne parents muſt be careful to attyre their children with the wéedes of modeſtie, which bringeth to men beautiful ornaments But whoſoeuer dothe diſſeuer hīſelf therfro, he polluteth himſelf wt all diſhoneſty & ignominious infamy: euē as he which is furniſhed with the ciuilitie of maners, obtaineth amōgs al men great praiſo & commendation: ſo he (that is eſclariſhed with modeſty the beautifulleſt 
                  •
               illament of vertues) is euery wher extolled into the ſayes with many prayſes. Ioſeph yet is bruted and Ioſephs modeſty. blaſed, with fames perpetuall ſounding trumpe, to be the moſt excellent example of modeſtie, bicauſe by no thundring threats, by no heauy manaces, he could be perſuaded, ſo muche as to conſent to the deteſtable allurement of the moſt diſhoneſt Aegiptian woman. Therfore chiefly modeſty doth maruelouſly well become children, & is to them a precious iewel, ad the iewel of our time Eraſmus
               
of Roterodame witneſſeth. And one other 
                  Ʋereeundia virtutū cuſtos. thing there is, which children muſt be trayned vp in, and that is ſhamefaſtnes, which ſullie calleth the keper of al vertues, eſchuing diſhoneſtie, and gayuing prayſe. Euen as a diademe and crowne, doth adorne and beautifie a kings head, ſo doth ſhamefaſtneſſe moſt gayly garniſh a child and yongman. Pamphilus in The ſhamef
                     •
                  
                  
                  
                     ••
                  nes in Pamphilus was a figne of goodneſſe. 
               Terence was aſhamed & bluſhed. Simon (as though al were wel) then ſayd thus: Erubuit, ſaluares, he bluſhed, the matter is in good caſe. And therfore Pithias Ariſtotles daughter (béeing aſked, what colour was moſt beautiful) anſwered: that Pythias Ariſtotelis filia. which through ſhamefaſtneſſe riſeth in ingenious men, and vertuous children. And of this Cicero agayne doth witneſſe with me, ſaying: Sine verecūdia nihil recte agitur, without ſhamfaſtnes nothing is rightly doon, for moderator cupidua
                     •
                  s est pudor, ſhamefaſtnes is the gouernor of deſire. Theſe be the braue arays yt children ought to be clad withal: & ſuch garmēts muſt parēts put on their children. Now wil I purport the things nothing inferior to theſe before, wherin I wold

haue yong men exerciſed: firſt and before al things to fere god, who is the ſéer God muſt be feared. of al things, which knoweth the very ſecret cogitations of the heart, which doth defend the godly, & puniſh the malicious and impious: euen as it is the duetie of a diligent ſcholer to adde all his indeuour and induſtry to his ſtudies & honeſt actions, leſt he offend his maſter thrugh his negligence, and vngracious facts: ſo is it the boūden duetie of a yong man alwais to bend his endeuour to fere god, and iuſtice, leſt through his impietie & reckles ways, he prouoke Gods diſpleaſure and reuenge. Once a frend aſked Demonax, 
               Demonax. and requeſted him to go with him to the temple of Aeſculapius, to pray for his ſons helth, whom a perilous diſeaſe had cruciated. Demonax anſwered: thinkeſt thou that god is ſo deafe that he wil not here vs but in the temple? So alſo ought we all to iudge of the ſight of God, that he is in ech place, & beholdeth ech thing, and nothing ſo far diſtinct that Gods eye can not penetrat. Worthily therfore let yongmen (what euill priuily they be about) dread & feare god, which is always

preſent, & a beholder aſwel of the things be wel done, as the things be euill done. Next muſt they obey their parents, for to them do children owe great honour: Yongmē muſt obey their parents. by their benefite and meane we inioy this light, by thē we are nouriſhed, brought vp, & inſtructed: what things ſoeuer parents haue, at laſt fal to their childrēs hands. It is knowen full wel, and fame wil neuer let it be forgotten, how much reuerence Coriolanus the famous Romane 
               Coriolanue obedient to his mother Veturia. gaue to his mother Veturia, whom when no force could withdraw from the oppugnation of the countrey, the chiding & perſuaſion of his mother Veturia puld him away. So did a daughter noriſh hir mother (condemned and kept in priſon) with hir teats. Whervpō 
               Valerius Maximus aſtoniſhed with this pietie exclameth: Valerius Maximus 
               Quò non penetrat, aut quid non excogitat pietas? quae in carcere ſeruanda genitricis nouā rationē inne
                     ••
                  t-qued eni
                     •
                   tam innſitatū, quid tā inauditū quā matr
                     •
                   vberibus natae alitam eſſe? Whither doth not childiſh loue perce, what doth not pietie excogitate & inuent? which hath found a new way to ſaue hir mother being in

priſon. What thing is ſo inſolent or vnwent, what thing ſo vnherd of, as a mother to be nouriſhed with hir daughters paps. Som wil thīk this againſt nature, vnleſſe it wer the firſt law of nature, to loue our parents. The pietie of Cimon 
               Cimon his pie tie towards Miltiades his father. towards his father is alſo euery where commended, who lingred not nor doubted to put on him his fathers fetters and chaynes, at the left that his father Miltiades might obtayne the honor of his graue. I might alſo recite the pietie of Ioſeph the Hebrue, but who knoweth it not? Thus ought children & yongmen to honor their parents, who be the inſtruments of their life, of whō whatſoeuer we haue, we haue receiued, ſo ſhall they be of al men cōmended, & be iudged vertuous, obediēt, & godly. Next vnto parēts muſt frends be remēbred: for theyexhort Frends muſt be reuerenced. vs to vertue, and diſſuade vs from vice and naughtineſſe, & by al meanes labour to kéepe vs in the limittes of ſhamefaſtneſſe: euen as a good neighbour is to be reuerenced, according to Heſiodus his precept (which ſingeth that we haue gottē honor if we haue gottē a good neibor)

ſo certaynly much more honorably is a No treaſure is more precious than a frend. frend to be intreated, thā the which no poſſeſſion is better, no iewel more precious. Alexander the puiſant Macedonian was not offended yt 
               Hephaeſtion was affected Alexander. with regal honors of Darius niether: but whē ſhe craued pardō for hir error, Alexander alwais coragious, & then fraughted with a regall heart, ſayd: be of good there O womā, whatſoeuer honor thou haft be
                  ••
               owed vpō him, I thīk thou haſt don it to me: for this man (apointing to Hephaeſtiō) (ſaith he) eſt alter ipſe. A frend therfore is a rare treſurs, a deſired name, a mā ſcarce appering, ye refuge of infelicitie, a poſſeſſiō ſcarſly to be found, a receuer of ſecrets, a neuer failing reſt, as Xenophon doth excellētly tech vs. 
                  〈…〉
                Now folows, yt they exerciſe thēſclues Yongmē muſt liue fr
                     •
                  gally, bridle their tong, & repreſle anger, & keepe their hands frō vnlauful pray. to liue quietly, to bride their tong, to repreſſe anger, and to retayne and kéepe in their hands from vnlaufull ſpoyles. Of theſe (of what value eche is) let vs conſider, which with examples I will make manyfeſt, and of the laſt I will firſt beginne. Some men hauing putte their hands to vnlawful prayes, and vniuſt

gayne, haue diſparaged al their glory, and diſparkled all the illuſtrious geſtes of their progenitors and auncetors. As Gylippus the Lacedemonian, who (bicauſe he had looſed & opened the money Gylippus Lacedemonius. bagges, and ſtolne thereout a great ſumme of money) was abandoned his countrey, and repeld from Sparta. Doutleſſe he is a very wiſe man, which doth conquere his anger, and not ſuffer him ſelfe to be ouercome with yre. Socrates (when a certayne temerous hawty fellow, and raſh royſter had ſpurned him with his héele, and thei which were preſent ſéeing it, were ſore offended at him) ſayd, If an aſſe had kicked and winched agaynſt me with his héeles, woulde ye aduiſe me, and counſayle me agayne to ſpurne? Socrates ſurely did it not at all, Socrates. but (when they all purſued him, and called him a héele flinger, and ſpurner) he was choked and ſtrāgled. Ariſtophanes in his comedy, intituled 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                whiche Ariſtophanes. he ſet foorth, when with many contumelious tauntes and reproches he had rent and proſcided the ſame Socrates, and one whiche was preſent reprehending

him ſayd: Doeſt thou not take this in indignation O Socrates? No verely anſwered he, not I. For I am taunted now and bitten with railing words in the Theatre, as in a certaine ſumptuous and gorgeous banquet. Archytas Tarentinus, and Archytas Tarentinus. diuine Plato, appeare to haue done ye lyke things to theſe: for certainly Archytas returning from warre (for about that time he gaue himſelfe to chiualrie) when he had found his grounde vntilled and foule to looke vpon for lacke of good huſbāding, (calling the ſtewarde of his farme vnto him) thou wouldeſt wéepe (ſayd he) onleſſe I were too angry. Plato (being offended Plato. with a gluttonous & proud ſeruaunt) called vnto him Speuſippus his ſiſters ſonne, ſaying to him, goe and whyp me this varlet, for I am accenſed with anger. Hard and difficile theſe be ſome will ſay, and by no meanes imitable. So they be vndoubtedly I cannot deny. Wherfore muſt yongmen do their deuoire (as much as lyeth in them) to vſe theſe examples of this carefull crue of ſurmounting lerned perſonages, as a glaſſe to loke vpon, and as pictures to behold, to qualifie and tē
               per

their vntēperate and raging ir
                  •
               . For although (cōcerning other things) we be not to be reſembled to them, neyther in long experience, vertue, honeſt lyfe, nor learning: Natheleſſe it is our duetie (as muche as we may) to followe their footeſteps, and in theſe things to imitate and counterfait them, as Prophets of ye gods, interpretors of ſacred things, and (as it were) the leaming lampes and flaming firebrandes of wiſedome. To moderate the tong therefore and to kéepe it in, (for of this as I purpoſed, muſt I ſpeake) if any thinke it a ſmall or pernicious thing, he wandreth from the pathe of equitie, and is quite deceyued. For ſilence in due time is wiſdome, and more excellent thā all talke, * and ſometime to holde thy peace doth bring farre more commoditie than to let thy tong go at randon, for perhaps we ſpeake many things which may endamage our ſelues, and ſhortly vtterly vndo vs, but if we kéepe our tong within The tong vntimely 
                     ••
                  lking, oringeth many i
                     ••
                  ommod
                     〈…〉
                  . the wals of our téeth, we ſhall not be endangered. Euen as a Beare, (while ſhe is kept in hole) wil hurt no man, but aſſone as ſhe is let out frō thence, (while ſhe rageth

againſt them ſhe méeteth) doth hurt both hir ſelf & other: ſo ye tong as long as ſhe is impriſoned wtin the fold & hedge of the téeth, it is harmleſſe: but whē ſhe vnaduiſedly leaueth the felde of the téethe, (wherwith ſhe is enuir
                  •
               ned) wil entāgle both hir ſelf & others wt many euils. And for this (as me ſemeth) haue ye mē of old time cōſtituted their ſacred ceremonies, full of myſteries & ſecrecies, yt men being accuſtomed in thoſe diuine myſteries to hold their peace, might wt like fear accuſtom thēſelues faithfully to kepe humane ſecrecie. The religious mōks in old time (I haue herd ſay) wer wōt among other vertues (wherwt but few of thē were indued among ſo populous a rablement) to practiſe ſilence, yt they might lern what & whē they ſhuld ſpeak, leſt peraduēture wt their vnaduiſed temeritie, they might endanger thēſelues in lothſom labirinths, & implūge others in deuouring gulfs. Paulꝰ ye monk by ſurname Simplex, whē he aſked Paulu
                     •
                   Monach
                     ••
                  . whither Chriſt was firſter than the prophets. &c. being cōmaūded to lie vp in ſilēce den his foliſh queſtiō, by yt ſpace of iii. yeres, durſt ſpeak neuer a word to any mā
               ▪ ſo lerned he bi his ſilēce, what things

ought to be ſpoken, and not to be ſpoken. And it is noyſed that Agatho the Abbot, How Agatho learned to hold his peace. putting daily a ſtone in his mouth, lerned to hold his peace, and for the ſpace of thrée yeares obſerued it, leaſt when he would ſpeake, he might not readely: for he had red in Salomons Prouerbes thus: qui cuſtodit os ſuum, custodit animam ſuam: qui autem inconſideratu
                     •
                   est ad loquendum ſentiet mala. 
               ✚ Againe I neuer heard man ſay he repented for kéeping his tong, but Men haue repented ſpeking, but none holding theyr peace. many I haue heard repenting for theyr talking and futilitie of their tongue. Beſides this, it is an eaſie thing for a man to vtter, that he hath kept in, but a difficile thing, nay rather impoſſible, to cal again that he hath ſpoken, and raſhly and vnaduiſedly vttered. I remember I haue heard tell that innumerable, (for the intemperancie of their tongue) haue falne into gréeuous calamities, miſeryes, miſfortunes and diſcomfitures. Of the infinitie of the which, (for exāples ſake) I will recite one or two, relinquiſhyng the reſt. When Philadelphus eſpouſed nuptials wyth his owne ſiſter Arſinoes, and one Solades ſayde theſe wordes: 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . He was inforced Solades for his tongue rotted in pryſon. in priſone, fettered in bondes and chaines, a long time to rotte and pine away, and payd the price for his vntymely loquacitie. For that he might be a laughing ſtocke and ſkorne to many, he long gréeued, lamented, and pitifully bewayled. Alſo Theocritus the Sophiſter ſpoke, Theocritus for his loquacitie was beheaded. and ſuffered things like to theſe, and a great deale more greuous. For when Alexander commaūded the Greekes to prepare them Purple garments, that (whē he returned) he might ſolempniſe the triumphe of the warlike exployts atchéeued againſt the Barbarians and his vaſſalles particularly, and man by man brought in their mony, before (ſayd he) I douted, and now I euidētly perceiue that this is thy purple deathe as Homer ſayeth. From which time Alexander was euer his foe, and enemie. Alſo he gréeuouſly offended and irritated Antigonus king of ye 
               Macedonians, when he caſt his blindneſſe in his noſe. For he commaunded Eutropion his maiſter Cooke (whych was in a certain ordinarie empechemēt) to come vnto him, to giue and take an accompt. And

when ye Cooke had often denounced theſe things to him, I know well (ſaid Theocritus) yt thou art about to ſet me raw before a one eyed king. And ſo to the one, ye is to ye king, he vpbraided his blindneſſe, & to the Cooke he twited his euil cookery. Eutropion therfore ſayd, yu ſhalt léeſe thy head, yt thou maiſt worthely be puniſhed for thy madneſſe & dicacitie. When theſe were told to the king, he ſent thoſe which executed and cut off the hed of Theocritus. A due gained guerdon for the intemperancie of his leudly walking and clattering tong. Notwithſtāding two times there be (as Iſocrates ſayeth) wherin it is There bee two tymes wher
                     ••
                   it is better too ſpeake than to holde thy peace o
                     •
                   knowne things and neceſlarie things. better to ſpeake, than to vſe ſilence. The one is, when occaſion of talk is offered of the things yu knoweſt moſt plainely and perfitly. For to reſon of vnknown things is a diſhoneſt thing: wher on the cōtrary part, it is laudable to ſpeake in time, of ye things thou art perfect in. Gorgias Leontinus came to yt temeritie, that he willed eche man to propoūd the queſtion, which he wold haue canuaſed and diſcuſſed, and that he ſodenly (and ex tempore) wold anſwer to euery poynt. Many he deceyued

in this profeſſiō with his loquacitie. But this proud ſophiſter, and hautie ſoyler of queſtiōs, ſapient Socrates brought to that poynt, (as the dialogue of Plato doth manifeſt, Gorgias Leontin
                     ••
                   was reproched of Socrates for his temeritie. which is intituled Gorgias) that he knew not howe to define an Rhetorica which he profeſſed. The ſame reproch ſuſtained Protagoras, which (in ye dialogue of Plato which is called Protagoras) did make his great vaūt, & too largely promiſed yt he wold ſo frame ye yongmā 
               Hippocrates (if he wer cōmitted to his tuting) ye daily he ſhuld conceiue wōderful increaſings and augmentations of vertue. But whē he was aſked this queſtion, (an virtus doceri poſſet) he had nothing to ſay: but ſoūded many trifeling toyes which made nothing for ye purpoſe. Is not he a laughing ſtock to al men yt reaſons of yt things he knoweth not? now adays many vaunt thēſelues very leudly to be paſſing lerned mē among ye ignorant ſort, & thunder out their boaſtes and gloriations, as though they were painfull ſtudents, and déepely lerned clarks, bolſtring out with chaunting tongs, the names of Greke and Latin authors, to ſéeme in the iudgments of the

vnlearned crewe, the pearleſſe men in theſe dayes: when (if he that is learned aſke) what is this author or that author, whom with their eloquent tongues and magnifical (forſooth) commendation they extoll and lift vp to ye ſkies, or what matter they intreate vpon or diſcourſe, then they be mute and not a worde for a thouſand pounde. Thus many ſhame themſelues, and great is the number of ſuche vnlettered bragging gallants, as experience ſheweth. Therefore very merily & trimly Zeuxis admonyſhed Megabizus 
               Zeuxis almonition to Megabyzus. after this ſort, that he ſhould not raſhly ſpeake of the things he knew not. Megabizus in times paſt entred into Zeuxis ſhoppe, and with great commendations praiſed certain rudely and groſſely painted pictures, with no art nor cunning poliſhed, and blamed and diſlyked others, which were very exquiſitely wrought and finiſhed: at whoſe follie Zeuxis ſeruaunts and boyes laughed, and Zeuxis ſayde: O Megabyzus, while thou holdeſt thy peace, and kéepeſt ſilence, theſe boyes can but maruell at the beholding thy gay garments, coſtly roabes, & thy ſeruaunts

which folowe thy traine, but when thou vttereſt and ſpeakeſt of the things which pertaine to this Arte, thou art a gibe and laughing ſtock vnto them. Beware therfore, and take héed of thy ſelfe by theſe, in whoſe ſight thou doſt praiſe theſe, and repreſſe thy tōg: and furthermore endeuer, that neuer thou raſhely ſpeake of thoſe Artes that thou knoweſt not. The other time is, that thou mayeſt ſpeake, and not kéepe ſilence, when talke of things (neceſſarily to be ſpoken vpon) is miniſtred. For if neceſſitie require thée to ſpeake, to defend either thy ſelfe or thy frendes, it is a diſhoneſt and vndecent thing to bée ſilent. But if no neceſſitie enforce thée to If neceſsitie enforce thee to ſpeake, talke is better than ſilence. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                ſpeake, it is better for thée to holde thy peace. Euen as it is the parte of a good man, to harme or hurt no man: but (if contrary to Gods law and mannes lawe he be iniured of the wycked) laudably taketh vp weapons, and defends himſelfe. Likewiſe is that man accompted good, which ſeldome ſpeaketh, vnleſſe neceſſitie driue him to vſe hys tongue. Zeno the Prince of the Stoikes was called wyth other Philoſophers, (by the Ambaſiadors

of Antigonus ſent to Athens) to a bāket: and when euery one of them wel whittled with Pacchu barrels) boaſted vpon and ſhewed out his learning, Zeno helde his peace. But when the Legates aſked him, what they ſhould declare to Antigonus concerning him? Hoc ipſum dixit quod vide
                     〈…〉
                  s euen this you ſée: for the Zenot' anſwer to the Legates of Antigonus. talke and tong of all other is hardeſt to be moderated and meaſured. Aelchines the ſcholler of Socrates, (being reprehended for his ſilence, ſéeing he had ſo good Aeſchines. and vertudus a maſter as Socrates) ſayd: Nonloqui ſolum a Socrate, ſed etiam 
                     •
                  cere didici, I haue not only lerned of my maſter Socrates to ſpeake, but to holde my pea
                  ••
               . Theſe kinde of talkes of things, which thou knoweſt, and when neceſſity conſtraineth, containeth many commodities, many vtilities, & bringeth great honeſtie. But otherwiſe great incommodities & harmes thou ſhalt reape, if thou tē
               per thy tōg to tattling and vntimely talking. Beſides all theſe things, children muſt be accuſtomed to ſpeake and tell Children muſt be fiamed to ſpeake truthes. truthes, which is the beſt and moſt ſacred thing of all: a ſeruile thing it is, & nothing

decent, for a frée born man to lie & forge: which all men do abhorre and hate. And not in bondmen and ſeruaunts to be permitted. * Great enormities iſſue of thys Of lying flow many miſcheeues. vile vice, and moſt deteſtable wyckedneſſe: from hence come periuries, fra
                  •
               ds, deceits, violation & breaking of promiſſe and faith, and innumerable ſuch horrible vices, which ſow amongs men diſcords, debates, & deadly hatreds. When Demetrius Phalereus was aſked of a certaine Demetrius Phalereus. man, what puniſhment liers were werthy of, he anſwered: vt ne dicentes quidem 
                     •
                  era, digm fide haberen
                     •
                  ur
                     •
                  
                therfore as it is the duetie of iuſtice, to kéepe truthe in déedes, ſayings and tong: ſo is it the part of iniuſtice to lie: Lying greatly diſpleaſeth God, and is odious to the ſocietie of men. Aboue all things Parents muſt be carefull to roote out from their childrens tender breaſtes, this vgly monſter, leaſt it ouerthrowe and quyte depraue all the good qualities, and carefull erudition, which they from theyr infancie and youth haue trayned them in. And neuer more néede than now ought Parentes Lying was neuer more a flote than 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                to looke to this. For it neuer ſo muche

raigned as now. Al children almoſt haue learned to daſh out loud lies, and not one amongs a hundred, but can inuent handſomly, and mainteine cunningly a lye, & with ſuche meanes and wayes, as it is a wonder to beholde: they are as perfite in their Arte, if they be but ſixe yeares olde, as if they had gone twentie yere to ſchole to learne ſome good diſcipline. Where is the fault? in parents that be ſo vncarefull to vertuouſly teach them, and while they be yong, to eradicate ſuch growing euils. The parentes be more to be blamed, for in them is the remedy héereof. There be to many parentes (the more is the pitie) that are delighted in their children, that can handſomely frame a lie: and they thē ſelues ſuche is the peruerſitie of ſome) teach them how to lay ſomtime the foū
               dation therof. They count their children ioly boyes, if they once face a lie, ſweare, ſtare, and tear God with othes. Such vngodly and vngratious parentes, ſhall not be vnpuniſhed for ſuch their informatiō, if they do not in time ſéeke to recure thys pitifal ſore and large vlcer, they cā neuer come to goodneſſe whē in youth they taſt

ſo much of yt lakes of lies and puddles of vntruthes. Neither euer will they be honeſt men, or eſtéemed in honeſt company for the author of lies is the hater of honeſty, Sathan is the authoure of lying. truth, right and goodneſſe. If any féele themſelues giltie héerein, I meane them, let them ſéeke chéefely to abandon ſuch a polluting euill, and infecting ſore, frō the hearts of their children: as for ſuch as be godly, I thinke they knowe the enormities thereof well inough, and are carefull to wéede out ſuche euill ſwelling herbes from their childrens breſtes. ✚ Hitherto Yong men ought no: to liue as they liſt and run at randon, but vnder a gouernor, the viewer of their ſtudies, and honeſt informer of their manners. haue I ſpoken of the good inſtitution, and right bringing vp of children, and of their behauior and decoration: now I thinke it conuenient to turne my talke to yongmen, and giue them ſome preceptes and good leſſons. I haue often perceyned and found Parents to be the authors and only cauſes of naughtyneſſe and peruerſe manners, which for theyr children haue prepared and appoynted maſters, gouernors, tutors, and guides, but haue giuen the bridle at large to their yong men, and ſuffered them to liue as they liſt, and to vagè and runne at their pleaſure: when

contrarywiſe, they ought to haue greater care, and more vigilant reſpect to ſuche, than to theyr children. Who knoweth not that childrens faults and tranſgreſſions Yong men ought more narowly be loked to than children. be ſmall and curable, perpetrated perhappes through the negligence of gouernors, and committed by diſobedience? But the treſpaſſes and offences of yongmen, are oftentimes great, horrible, and The tranſgreſſions of yong men. miſerable, as intemperate gluttonie, and rauening of the bellie, the expilation and robbing of their fathers goodes, cardes, diceplay, banketting, the lawleſſe loue of virgins and women, the pollutings and corruptels of mariages. Wherfore it behoueth to tame, cohibite and repreſſe the mindes of theſe with cares, diligence and ſedulitie. For this age is prone to pleaſures, wanton and vncircumſpect, and néedeth a bridle. Therefore they (whych defendor pamper this age) doe open the window to offēces, and giue them libertie, winking at their wickedneſſe. But wiſe parents ought chéefely at this time, to haue a diligent care of their yongmen, teaching them to be vigilant, modeſt, and ſober with preceptes, leſſons, menaces,

obſeruations, perſuaſions, promiſſes, and with the cōmemoration of thoſe mennes example, which (hauing pitched their tēts in pleaſures field) haue caſt themſelues hedlongs into peremtorie perils, & caſual calamities, and with reherſal of their examples, which with conſtancie, ſufferāce and abſtinencie, haue got them paſſing pure praiſe, gay glory, and conuement commēdation, for their worthineſſe, curteſie, good behauior, courage, and valiance. For theſe two things are as it were) the Principles and incitations of The hope of honor, and fear of puniſhment be the incitations to vertue. vertue, the hope of honor, and the feare of puniſhment. The one, that is the hope of honoure doth incite, and maketh couragious and hilarous to famous feates and excellent ſtudyes: and the other, that is the feare of punyſhment, draweth vs away from perpetrating filthyneſſe, and repelles vs from ſcelerous myſchéeues. And firſt of all they ought to be banyſhed the companie and conuerſation of The acquaintarce and familiantie of wicked perſons is to be elchued. flagitious and naughtie men: for wyth theyr malitious manners and beaſtly behauior, they are embroyned, infected, and tainted.

Thys ſame commaunded prudent Pythagoras by his obſcure and darke ſayings, which muche auaile to the attaynement Pythagora 
                     •
                  nigmata. of vertue. As 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               : that is to ſay, vſe not company with thoſe men, whoſe leudneſſe of manners, may ſpot, blemiſh, diffame, and diſhoneſt thée. Againe, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , paſſe not the ballance, that is, doe nothyng againſt right and equitie. For the ballance in olde time, was accompted a ſigne of equitie, as an other prouerbe witneſſeth, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , iuſter than the ballance, or as true as Stéele. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . That is, flée idleneſſe, eſchue ſlonth, and prouide for things neceſſa
                  •
               y againſt the morow. Again 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , deſire not euery mans frendſhippe, nor put thy ſelfe to euery mannes familiaritie, but chooſe, whome thou maiſt loue. And many ſuche like, as be left to our memorie by prudēt Pythagoras, but I wil turn again to my former talke, from which I haue digreſſed. As I haue ſayd before that Parentes ought to endeuoure them ſelues, and be circumſpect, that theyr children auoyde and flée

all wicked, leude, and vicious company: ſo likewiſe I thinke it moſt méete and conueniēt, they be abandoned from fléering, flanting, and franticke flatterers. As I haue ſpokē it to many parēts ſo now I dout not agayn to confirme it, There is nothing worſe than the cō
                  pany of flatterers, chefly to yongmen that there is no kind of men more pernicious or worſe, whiche more depraueth and ſooner corrupteth tender age, and ſtrangleth youth, than flatterers: whiche euen the fathers themſelues, with their children moſt miſerably infect, and ſearch to the quicke: for olde hoare hearedmen by ſuch gabbing Gnathoes, and pickthanke paraſites, are afflicted and conuerted into luctuous heauineſſe, and their children runne headlong into preſent deſtruction. * Euen as the olde ſerpent turned his blandiments, and ſugry ſweete words, to the perdition and ouerthrow of mankind, (while he deceiued our firſt parents) ſo flatterers with their gallant blandiſhing tong circumuent vs, and throw vs into a thouſande miſeries. ✚ They allure and entice yongmen to delicious pleſure, wherwith ye age is very gretly

delighted. When their fathers exhort them to frugalitie, to modeſty, and to ſobriety, that hagard and ſauage crue of caytife Cteſiphoes, prating Phormioes, and guilefull Getaes, impell them to drunkeanes and ſurfetting. When their The perſuaſion of paraſites. parents moue them to temperance and continency, this raſcall rout inuegle them to laſciuiouſneſſe and inordinate luſtes: when their parents perſuade them too bee ſparing, laborious, and paynefull, this ragmannes roll drawe them from labours, to ydleneſſe, ſlouth, and drouſineſſe, ſaying, that all our life is but a moment of time, and therfore ought they to liue, and not baſely and obſcurely ſpende the ſhort time, defrauding pleaſures: wherfore ought we to care for our fathers threats & many menaces? he doteth through age, he is a neibour to the coffin, and a graue ſpirite, whiche very ſhortly we will lifte vp, and carry out a doores to his funerall farewell. And ſome of theſe makeleſſe marchantes draw them to baddes, & to other mens maried wiues, ſo that they robbe, ſpoyle, and pray vpon their fathers

treaſures, whiche be as a viandry and neceſſary prouiſion for their olde age. O execrable ennemyes too yong men, and wicked graffes, which while they fayne them ſelues hipocritically to bée fréends) they vtter nothing fréely. They gape and wayte vppon riche men, and ſet not a ſtraw by poore perſons, and indigent men: marking what yong men doo, that (when they that Si quis ait aio. Si quis negat, nogo. maynteyne them laughe) they maye laughe alſo, as they whiche doo all things with a fayned and flattering mind. And when they turne them ſelues to the becke and boke of ryche men, by fortune they be frée, but in mynde bondeflaues. And althoughe they haue not beene affected with iniuries, yet notwithſtanding they crye out, and piteouſly playne, that they be wrongfully intreated. And for this purpoſe, leaſt not in vayne, and withoute a cauſe, they ſhoulde be thoughte to be nouriſhed and maynteyned. Marcus tho rough paraſites vvas corrupted.
            
            * Commodus the ſonne of Marcus the Emperour wold neuer haue ſo degenerated frō his fathers vertues, & choſen

a kinde of life more worthy a worſeler or champion, than an Emperour, yf flatterers (whom Conſtantinus the Emperour named rattes and mothes of the palace) had not ſo corrupted him, and ſo haue throwē him headlong into that diſhoneſt life. And therefore This ſaying ſome attribute to Diogenes. 
               Antiſthenes (wel waying the great incommodities that come by flatterers) was wont to ſay: It is farre better to fal amongs rauens than flatterers. For flatterers eate vp, and deuour quicke bodyes, and the rauens dead carkaſſes. ✚ Wherfore if any parents haue a care to haue their children well inſtructed and rightly brought vp, they muſt amoue and baniſh theſe peſtiferous paraſites, helliſh hounds, and miſcheuous monſters, and other vngracious felow ſcholers farre from the company and ſocietie of their children: for theſe are able to euert and vtterly depraue, and coinquinate any méek natures good diſpoſitions & pregnant wits. * Alſo parents muſt modeſtly adorne and decke Parents muſt modeſtly apparell their children. their children, and moue them by their exhortatiō or rather example, to deſpiſe

riot and to much elegancie in apparell. For to gayne glory, and to require renoume by the ſuperfluous elegancie of garments, is a diſhoneſt thing, but to reſpect (in euery thing, and in apparel) decency is a glorious thing, and therby were men wont to be beautified with glories garlands. Euen as to ouerlade himſelfe with to much wine, and to incurre the vice of ebrietie is great filthineſſe to a man: ſo not to obſerue meaſure in furniſhing the body, is ſubiect to crime. One exhorted once Alphonſus 
               The anſwer of Alphōſus to one that exotted hin. to weare gay garments. king of Aragon to wear rial robes, and princely apparel (for in aray he nothing differed from his vaſſals and ſubiects.) But he gaue this worthy aunſwere: Malo moribus & authoritate meos excellere, quàm diademate & purpura, I had lieuer ſurpaſſe my ſubiects in good behauiour, maieſtie, and authoritie, than in crown and purple clothing. So Auguſtus 
               Auguſtus Caeſar hated exceſſe in apparell. 
               Caeſar the renowmed Romane, had in deadly hate the exceſſe of apparell: for this was he accuſtomed moſt grauely to ſay: gallaunt and trimme clothing is the banner of pride, and neſt

or lodging of luxurious laſciuiouſneſſe: and we by experience are taught, that euen in theſe dayes, they that be to curious in aray, and perillous braue fellowes, thinking better of themſelues than any other, gimping in ye ſtréets like gameſters, and manifeſting themſelues to the eyes & looks of people, are counted light perſons, ſpendthriftes, riottous, proud, hautie, fooliſh, impudent, & of wiſe men more euilly thought of, & ſeuerely reprehended: A meane in al things is to be kept, which (whoſoeuer in his degree He that paſſeth the meane paſſeth honeſties bonds. doth paſſe) doth infringe the bonds of honeſty. Diogenes (when he ſaw a yongmā delicately and effeminately appareled) ſayd: Non te pudet, qui peius tibi velis, qua ipſa natura voluit▪ illa ſiquidem te virum eſse voluit, tu vero teipsū ex vestitu mulie
                  
                     •
                  e
                     •
                   facis, Art thou not aſhamed to wiſh worſe to thy ſelfe than nature hir ſelfe would? ſhe would haue thée to be a man, and thou makeſt thy ſelf by thy aray, a woman. Grauely therfore ſaith Marius in Saluſt, Ex parente meo, & ex alijs ſanct
                     •
                  s viris ita accepi, munditias mulieribus, 
                     •
                  iris laborem cōuenire, I haue thus heard

of my father, and of other holy men, that the curious clenlyneſſe and gandy garments are méete for women, and labour for men. Labour and ſtudie muſt yong men be accuſtomed too, not to ſuperfluous apparell, and curious decking of the body: they ought to refuſe no payne, no toyle, no trauell, no iourney to attayne learning, and to haſte to ſuche as may inſtruct them in vertue and lerning, whiche by ſweat and labour muſt be atchieued, or elſe it will neuer be gotten. No iorney ſo long, no way ſo tedious Vertue and learning are by labour obtayned. ought to deterre a yongman, no payne (though it be neuer ſo greeuous) ought to holde him backe, from going to learned maſters, perſuading him ſelfe, that he ſhall ſo remunerate al his toyles ſo tedious and yrkeſome, with more ample commodities, and larger gaynes within a little whyle. He muſt remember that Pythagoras the moſte Pythagoras. perfect worke of wiſedome (from his youthe, entring into a deſire of Philoſophie, and all other good learning and honeſt vertues) went into Aegipt▪
                where being trained in the lerning of yt nation,

ſearching out the commentaries of the prieſts of former age, knew the obſeruations of innumerous worlds: thus he departing vnto the Perſians, gaue him ſelfe to the exact wiſedome of the Magi, to be faſhioned and framed: of whom with great docilitie of minde, he learned the mouings and courſes of the conſtellations, and propriety and effect of euery thing. Then ſayled he to Crete and Lacedemone, (whoſe manners and lawes when he had ſéene and grauen in minde) he went to the games of Olympus Here is example for yongmen to follow that woulde be perfecte men, and in time to come, profitable members in the common weale. And not Pythagoras onely, but diuine Plato, leauing Plato. his owne countrey Athens, and his lerned wiſe maſter Socrates, a place and maſter moſt reſplendent in learning and experience of things, (béeing beautified with abundance of wit, and garniſhed with all good learning and ſw
                  ••
               teneſſe of tongue before) paſſed ouer▪ 
               Aegipt, where he learned of the Prieſts the manyfolde numbers of

Geometry, and the obſeruation of celeſtiall planets, and their influences. And at that time when yong men came flocking to Athens to ſéeke & heare their maſter Plato, he becam a ſcholer of the Aegiptian elders, paſſing the banks inexplicable of Nilus, the huge fields, the danrous dens and mountayns, and bowing circuites of riuers & lakes, no payne called him back, no trauell could abate his gréedy deſire of lerning. Theſe examples ought parents to ſet before their yongmen, to moue them to labour for good lerning, vertue, & honeſty: we read that many noble yongmen, from the furtheſt coaſts of Spayne and France, went once to Rome to Titus Liuius flowing with the ſwéet milky fountaine of eloquence: and now ſhall it yrke yongmen of theſe days to meaſure out, & run ouer a little way and ſhort iorney, to learne the precious precepts of learning, of learned profeſſours? Whiche learning is as it were the ſtaffe to a weake body, and vaindry to olde age. 
                  
                     •
                  ſocrates admoniſhed Iſocrates. 
               Demonicus, to ſpende the voyde tyme and vacant houres that were giuen

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
him in hearing: not in vayne thinges, in ſtudies (whereof alwayes doe procéede the increaſe of learning, and augmentation of vertue) as to heare learned men, to read their lucubrations, not in riot, in wantonneſſe, in trifles and toyes. Plato oftentimes diſputed, and when he ſent away the company of the reaſoners, he alwayes vled to admoniſh them thus: Videte ô adoleſcentes, vt etium in re quapram honesta collocetis, Take héede, O ye yongmen, and beware, that ye contrine and ſpende your leaſured houres in ſome honeſt thing. What can be more honeſt than to heare (if leyſure permit) men reſplendent in arts, and to peruſe the worthy works, and modeſt monuments of ſurpaſſing authors, in al good ſciences: what more diſhoneſt, than to wallow in ydlenes, to ſpend the time in dicing, carding, riot, drunkenneſſe, and other naughtie and pernicious exerciſes. I woulde olde Scipio his words were Scipio. written with golden letters, in the tables of yongmens hearts, who (when he from mortall affayres gayned any leyſure or vacant time, and was intentiue

to lerning) was wont to ſay: Se nunquā minus ot
                     •
                  oſum eſſe, qua cū ot
                     •
                  oſus: nec minus ſolum quā cum ſolus eſſet. So ſhal thei with out any vexation or gret toyle vnderſtād thoſe things, & be perfited in thoſe ſacred ſtiēces, which thoſe lerned authors with vnſpekable labour, toyle, & encombrous payn haue found out. But thoſe yongmē which be diſſolute, & refuſe this inſtitution, ſhall neuer be beautified with ſciences, nor repleniſhed with knowledge of good arts. What a benefite is it to enioy the lucubracions of famous learned men, out of which iſſues profites to vs, & labours redounded to them. Theſe thinges therfore are honeſt & profitable, and (if yongmen & parents be vigilant and laborous but to vew the ſame) wil bring infinite cōmodities, both to themſelues and other. ✚ And thoſe things that now I wil ſpeake vpon, are fraught with humanitie, Children muſt be kept in doing their dune rather with lenity and gerdeneſle, than ſharpneſſe and importunity. & replete with curteous lenity. Neither do I counſel parents to be altother wayward, frowarde, peuiſh, harde, and by nature to ſharp, ſell, and ſeuere: but to winke at certayne faults of your yongmen, and to remitte and pardon

their tranſgreſſions, remembring, that they themſelues were once yong and faultie likewiſe. Euen as Phiſitians do temper bitter drugs and medicines with ſweete and dulcete ſapours, that béeing concorporate and mixed with ſwetenes, and receiued of their pacients, may remedy and recure them: ſo it becōmeth fathers and good parents to mixe the bitter rigour of their rebuks, and bluſtring blaſts of their reprehenſion with méekneſſe and lenitie, and to graunt ſometime vnto the luſtes of their children, and to pardon their offences But yf it pleaſeth not them ſo to doo, fathers may be angry, but ſoone they ought to quell and quenche it: for it is a great deale better for a time to be wrathfull, than long to be angry. For the continuall abyding in anger, and the harde reconcilement of fauour is a great ſigne, and manifeſt token of a minde alienated from children, and hatefull towards them. And alſo it is decent for parents, that they fayne themſelues to conceale ſome of their childrens faults. For the incommodities of ſighte and hearing,

(that is blindneſſe and deafneſſe which Parents muſt ſometime conceale their childrens faults. follow olde age) (as it were) not to ſée certayn things which they ſee their children do, nor to heare certaine things which they heare. Séeing we wincke at, and ſuffer our frendes faultes, what maruell is it yf we tolerate the ſame in our children: & oftentimes we haue not rebuked and reproued our ſeruants rioting and ſurfetting. Yf thou ſometime wouldeſt haue him liue ſparingly and hardly, other ſometime miniſter vnto him coſtes liberally: yf thou haſt bene angry with him at any time, pardon him agayne: yf at any time he had deceyued thée through thy ſeruants, refrayne thy anger, if he ſhall take out of thy field a yoke of oxen, remit him: yf he at any time come exhaling the ſurfet and drunkenneſſe the night before receaued, agnize it not, do as thou kneweſt it not: yf he ſmell of his odoriferous waters, and ſiuet powders, make no wordes of it, knowe it not: and by this way may laſciuious youth, and wanton be tamed, ordered, and reſtrayned. And parents muſt endeuour to prepare them wiues,

which can not reſiſte vayne pleaſures, nor abide bitter rebukes, when they At what time yongmen muſt be giuen to mariage, & what wiues muſt be choſen for thē. heare of their faults. For matrimony is the moſt firme bond, and ſure bridle of laſciuious and wanton youth. And ſuch wiues muſte be matched and coupled with them, which neither in ſtocke nor ſubſtaunce ſurpaſſe them: it is a wiſe part to chooſe a wife that is his equall, like in all reſpects: for they whiche eſpouſe wiues which be better than them ſelues, they are not the huſbands of their wiues, they rule not their wiues, but are made their ſeruants, for their higher bloud and richer dowrie ſake. But to draw to an end, and to leaue off this giuing of precepts, before all other things it is requiſite and moſte neceſſarye, that parents liue an inculpable life, in nothing Parents muſt be a liuely paterne and as a glade of vertues, to their yongmen and children of honeſt life. offending, and do thoſe things only whiche be honeſt, iuſt and lawfull: And to ſhew them ſelues a lyuely and manyfeſt example to their children, that beholding their honeſt and modeſt lyues, as in a glaſſe, may ſhunne the woorks and woords which be diſhoneſt, fylthie and vnlawfull. For parents,

whiche (when they reproue their childrens faultes and vyces) are filed with the ſame vyces themſelues: whiles they accuſe their children, they ſéeme to inſimulate and accuſe themſelues. And they which leading a ſcelerous life, haue no libertie to rebuke their bondeſlaues, much leſſe their children. Moreouer they be the mouers and counſaylers to their children of vicious vices, and foule faultes: for when old men and parents paſſe the pathes of pudicitie, & leape ouer the limits of ſhamefaſtneſſe, there muſt it of neceſſitie be, that the yonger ſorte and their children be moſte impudent. * I would to God there were no ſucke parents in this land, then ſhould there be more vertuous impes than there be. I feare me the number is very great, and the more to be pitied. But godly parents muſt carefully practiſe, and exerciſe all things whatſoeuer apertaine to temperance, & may draw their children to honeſty, and ſobrietie: imitating Euridices, which although ſhe was an 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                born, and moſt barbarous, notwithſtanding

for hir childrens diſcipline and inſtitution in the laſt time of hir age, addicted hir ſelfe wholly to learnyng, and laborouſly trayned in paynefull ſtudies. Whiche Euridices howe intierely ſhe loued hir children, this Epigramm
                  •
                (whiche ſhe dedicated to the muſes) doth manyfeſtly declare:
            
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               Euridices.
            
            
               Euridices the learned dame
               and holy citizen, for loue
               Oflearnings lore, this taske did frame
               vnto the Muſes nynes behoue:
               For vvhen hir children grevv to men,
               and paſſed from their childs eſtate,
               She laboured to learne (as then
               a mother and a ſpouſed mate)
               Good artes, euen for their only cauſe,
               and monuments of fyled ſpeach,
               Of eloquence, and ciuill lavves,
               that she hir children thē might teach.
            
            
               
O that there were many ſuche mothers as Eurydices or but a few like fathers to the zealous minde of this ſurmountyng woman. What mother at this day wold take ſuch paine, what parent wold ſo cō
               ſume hir ſelfe with ſtudie for their childrens erudition, though they loue theyr children well, and deſire to haue them learned, but they ſéeke not the way? No not the father, which were the fitteſt for ſuch a purpoſe. A rare Phaenix was Eurydices, whoſe example if any wold folow, then ſhould they vndoubtedly haue ſuche vertuous ſonnes as Eurydices had. Therfore The epiloge of the tranſlator. to imbrace all theſe our inſtitutions and wholſome preceptes, is rather the work of prayer than of admonition: how be it, it is no ſmall felicitie & induſtrie to follow many of them. Let all true parēts which deſire to bring vp their children vertuouſly) trie and proue how muche it It muche auaileth to imbrace theſe preceptes. auaileth to folow theſe precepts: no hard matter, it paſſeth not yt power nor reache of mā. If they be diligent, if they be careful, if they be vigilant in the good inſtruction of their children, let them imbrace theſe precepts, folow them, practiſe them,

and vndoutedly they ſhall be worthis Parents, and haue vertuous, godly, honeſt, modeſt, diſcrete and painful childrē, endued with all good qualities, and adorned with all ciuil behauior and good conditions, They ſhall haue at laſt the guerdon of theyr trauell, they ſhall haue the hire of their paine, and reward of theyr diligence. When they are olde, and run ouer many a yeare, the vertues which they eſpie in their well inſtructed children, ſhall prolong their dayes, and comfort theyr heartes wyth great delight.
            Héere let Parentes learne to be Parents, Leſſons for Parentes. and in the pruning of their yeares looke diligently to the good education of theyr children. For thoſe children which in the beginning be well nurtered, inſtructed and brought vp, and whoſe foū
               dation of good education is well and vertuouſly layd, ſhall eaſily vnderſtand and folow the other things, which flow from the beginning. But what chylde ſoeuer is not taught to knowe the principles of good inſtitution, ſhalbe ignorant in al the other duties of life, which flow from the beginnings. He that is ſeaſoned with the

wholeſome precepts of adoleſcencie, and after them exerciſeth the courſe of hys lyfe, he ſhall after wardes eaſily vnderſtand and perceyue, what rules may be anornament and furniture to all the folowing ages. Ioſeph in his childehode Ioſeph. and adoleſcencie, was ſo taught the ſcare of God, and ſo geuerned bothe thoſe two ages, according to the feare of God, that when he was well ſtroken in yeares, he alſo knewe what dueties were decent and moſt méete for an olde mannes grauitie. Therefore as his childehode and adoleſcencie, ſo alſo was his olde age famous and paſſing in thoſe dueties, which euery age requireth. Semblably, whoſoeuer ſhall honeſtly direct his youth, ſtall be able to lead the action of his manhode and olde age moſt orderly, decently, and plauſibly. Be which in his youthe ſhall followe temperance, and learne what conuenient meates and potions, and other good exerciſes are to be offered to thys age, ſhall knowe what order of lyuing he ought to vſe when he is a man, and an olde man: and what duetyes he ought to practiſe.

So that parēts in the beginning muſt be careful for this, if they will be parents of good children. Yet not wt ſtanding I know if they do all theſe things and practiſe all theſe fruteful leſſons, yet ſhal they hardly ouercome, and vtterly eradicate the naughtineſſe and prauitie of humane nature. Humane nature is corrupt For our nature by yt fall of our firſt Parentes was ſo depraued and corrupted, and hiddē vnder the vaile of al vices, ſo that it can hardly be made ſound (vices being abandoned) although thou leaueſt nothing vndon, and no wayes & precepts vntride in the good and true education of thy child. But if that fault and crime had not ſo imbroyned and defiled vs (the iſſue of our firſt parentes) and alſo had not oblitterated and obſcured in vs yt foteſteps of vertue, peraduenture we myght haue with greater facilitie bene called againe to the path of vertue, in it to perſeuer. Euen as the Eſopicall fable admonyſheth, The fable of Eſope or the yong man and cat doth reſemble mannes nature. ſo ſtandeth humane ſtate, although there be neuer ſo much labor, trauel and pame exhauſted and conſumed in our education and inſtitution. A certaine Cat (ſayth Eſope) was the only delight of a certayne

yongman: which yongman deſired Venus to change hir into a womā: the goddeſſe pitiyng the deſire of the yongman, conuerted hir into a beutifull woman: with whoſe beuty the yong man accēſed and enflamed, caried hir with him home, and whē they wer ſet togither in a chamber, Venus deſirous to proue whither the cat had altred with hir body hir maners, ſēt a mouſe into the middeſt of the chamber: but ſhe (hauing forgotten thoſe that wer preſent, and hir nuptialles, rifing vp) ranne after the mouſe, deſirous to catch hir & eate hir: ſo man howſoeuer he be trayned vp in vertue, can neuer ſo belche oute the olde poyſon and venim of vices, that (when occaſion is miniſtred and offered) he feleth not the prickings of vices, If a man bee neuer ſo ver
                  
                     •
                  o
                     •
                  ſlye brought vp, yet be not the inſtigations of vice extinguiſhed in him. and is not enflamed to ſyn, of this we may take the Iudaicall people for a manifeſt example, ſo intierly beloued of the Lord, who although they had receiued fathers, lawes grace fauor, a land flowing with milke and honey, and infinite other benefits of the Lorde, and were ſubiect to many puniſhments, could not bée brought to forget their corupt nature, and

aſpire into a new mā, in whō Adam was dead, and Chriſt liued. They always deſired to go againe into Egipt, and (neglecting the worſhipping of the lord) toke againe the moſt vaine ſuperſtitions of the Gentiles. The Bethlemeticall king and Prophet Dauid, although God thought King Dauid fell through natures corraption. and ſpoke of him honorably for his godlineſſe and pietie, notwithſtanding, (although he was excellently brought vp, & inſtructed in gods law) he could not take heed to himſelf, but fel into moſt filthie & deteſtable adultrie, which he impiouſly increſed by the ſlaughter of the ſtout mā 
               Vrias, not deſeruing the ſame. What ſpeake I vpon Dauid? Not Noah (whom Noah committed inceſt God ſpared, when all other almoſt periſhed in the deluge and inundation) could ſo warely walke before the Lord, but he committed inceſt, and not with inceſt alone, but with drnkenneſſe polluted he himſelfe. Samuel in other things a godly Samuell was negligent in the bringing vp of his children, and rebuked of the Lord. and iuſt man, notwithſtanding he could not take heede but fel into yt crime, which to parentes bringeth great reproche and infamie. He was blamed and rebuked bicauſe he inſtructed not his children in

the Artes, erudition, and learning of the countrey. And to come to Prophane examples, what ſhall we ſay of Ariſtotle that péereleſſe Prince of Philoſophers? Ariſtotle. He could not conquere his corrupt nature, (although without all controuerſie he aſcended the top, and ſcaled the fort of Philoſophie) but fell into the moſte filthy loue of a womā, which enforced him like a brute beaſt to take the brydle in hys mouth, and like a horſe to cary a weman vpon his backe. What is filthyer than this, or of a Philoſopher what can be fouler ſpoken. Although ther be ſome, (which otherwiſe expound thys, and referre all things to the nature of things) which would deliuer him from this infamous reproche, vndecent in a Philoſopher. Demoſthenes alſo the Prince of Oratoures, the eloquenteſt man that demoſthenes euer ſpoke wyth Greekiſh tong, (whoſe Orations fraught with fleudes of Elequence, doe declare the ſingular granitie of the man, and ſhewe forth his ſeuere authoritie) could not diſſemble nor conceale the vice of hys corrupt nature. As the receipt of the monie craued by him of

the Miletians to holde his peace, do manifeſtly purtray, who for the greate ſum of money receyued, whē he ſhould make his oration againſt the Miletians cōming to Athens, to craue help, came forth amōg the people (hauing his necke rolled about with wolle) and ſayd 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , ſo that he could not ſpeake againſt the Miletians: then one amongs the people exclamed, that it was not 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , but 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                that Demoſthenes ſuffered. And Demoſthenes himſelfe afterwarde concealed it not, but for a glory aſſigned to himſelfe: for when he aſhed Ariſtodemus the actor of plaies, how much he had takē to play, and Ariſtodemus anſwered a talent: but (ſayth Demoſthenes) I haue taken more for to kepe my tong & holde my peace. Cicero the beautie of Rome, and ornament of Italie no leſſe excellent C
                     〈…〉
                  o. Latin Orator, and famous Philoſopher, (although he was moſt expert in pleding cauſes, and beutified and adorned withal the preceptes of Philoſophie, as one who had traueld through all learned Gréekiſh writers, & exenterated ye bowels of Philoſophie, hindred by his corrupt nature)

could not obey nature, if we beleue Saluſt his inuectiues againſt him: which no mā wil iudge altogither falſe, who ſo euer wt equall minde and right iudgement ſhall read them and iudge of them. The mightie Monarche and puiſſant Prince Alexander the great, had the eximious teacher of youthe, and beſt learned ſcholemaſter Ariſtotle his inſtructor: He although in all his ſayings and déedes (an ambitious Prince you will ſay) did ſet glory before him (as the end) & deteſted infamie. Notwithſtanding, he could not ſo brydle and tame his nature, but ſometime did very filthily, as he may ſée, whoſoeuer conſidereth his luxurious riot, (to which he filthily fel) after he had conquered ye 
               Perſian Prince Darius, and other things alſo, which they impute to him, which hath blaſed forth, and eterniſed (by their writings) his geſtes and worthy exploites. Therfore hath Horace rightly ſaid.
            
               
                  Naturā expellas furca, tamen vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      recurrit.
               
            
            
               If nature thou abandoneſt,
               and doſt vvith forke expell,
               Nath'leſſe it vvill returne againe,
               As Horace doth thee tell.
               
               And as the common prouerbe ſayth,
               that vve by nature haue,
               VVill ſticke by vs, it vvill not thence,
               till vve be layd in graue.
            
            And prudent Pyndarus hath told vs, that neither the ſubtile and craftie Fore, nor ſtrong and cruel Lion, can change their natiue inclination & nature: for although mannes labor may tame a Lion: yet he turnes to his natural feritie & wildneſſe. And a for doth not forget his natiue craft and fraudulēt diſpoſition, although he be made gentle, tame & tractable. Therfore as the ſame Pindarus ſayeth, it is a very hard thing to alter nature. Séeing theſe things be ſo, and that the nature of mā is corrupt, let not parents yet neglect to doe their dueties, but labor with all their power, to preuent the corruption of nature as muche as they may, which muſt only be by good education, holſome precepts & diligent awe, that when their children grow to mannes eſtate, they may be a ioy to their parents, a profit to them ſelues, and great ornaments to the common weale.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            The Tranſlator, of the bringing vp of children, taken partly out of the .xxx. chapter of Ieſus the ſonne of Sirach.
            
               WHo loues his child, in tēder yeres doth labor him to train
               To tread the trace of vertues lore in māners, grace & pain
               Sometime he doth rebuke his faults, and ſometime doth exhort
               Him fatherly and prayſeth him in good and godly ſort,
               He warneth him, and forceth him, to doe thoſe things be due,
               And thoſe things that vndecent be, he willeth to eſchue,
               That when to riper yeres his ſonne and louing child ſhal grow,
               He may then reap the ſedes of groūd, that he in youth did plow,
               Euen the rewardes of al his paine, which is an inward ioy,
               To ſee his childe imbracing grace, with vices ſore annoy.
               What more delite can parent haue, than when he doth eſpie,
               His children following vertues ſteps, and wayes of pietie,
               To be among the nobleſt men, diſcent by lineall line
               Eſtemed, and to beare the bell, in grace becauſe they ſhine?
               Aboundant ioyes do fill the hart of ſuch when at they die,
               When in their ſonnes their vertues rare yplanted they eſpie,
               That though the fates haue loſde the threde of their deſired life,
               Yet may their childrē aid their frends in doutful thing
                     •
                   of ſtrife,
               And may his child a 
                     •
                  ampier leaue, vnto himſelfe and his
               Againſt the ſhot of enuies threats, a bulwarke ſtrong iwi
                     •
                  .
               But whoſoeuer p
                     •
                  mpereth and cockereth ſoc
                     •
                  ſhly
               His ſonne, and neuer ſuffers him to wepe, to mourne nor to crie,
               But when he hath deſerued ſtripes, a thouſand times and moe,
               Doth mainteine him in naughtineſle, and ſtill in vice to goe,
               That man doth beare a ſtonie heart, and iron heart in breſt,
               And hath the name vnworthely of parent ſwete expreſt.
               He that abſteines for to correct, with nipping rod his childe,
               and blameth not the faulties great of youth, with words vnmild,
               
                  
He is a foole, and hates his childe, wiſe Salomon hath tolde,
               And harmes him much, when that he thinks in loue he doth him hold.
               Euen as a wilde vnta
                     ••
                  ed horſe, which hath not f
                     •
                  lt the bit
               Of bridle yet, cannot abide on backe the rider ſit,
               Euen ſo a childe that pampered is, vnder his fathers wing,
               Doth flow in manners vicious, and many a filthy thing,
               And runnes at randon wickedly abandoning all ſhame,
               Vngratiouſly againſt all lawes, he kicks moſt worthy blame,
               Not tractable to vertues trace all precepts doth diſpiſe,
               Diſdainful when he warned is in good and godly wiſe.
               Such doth reiect the holſome 
                     •
                  awes and good monition,
               Of frendly frends with deadly hate and vile obmurmuration,
               And ſo in gulffes of vices vame, implunged do remaine,
               And at the laſt runnes hedlongs downe to ruine all on maine.
               Through fathers foliſh pāpring, through mothers cockring loue
               A world to ſee ſuch fondneſle foule, that parents ſuch doth moue.
               But thou O parent which doſt care, in deede for thy deare childe,
               In tender yeres apt to be r
                     〈…〉
                  d, in pliant youth and milde.
               Laugh not on him pamper him not, giue him no libertie,
               In youthful dayes take hede no wayes thou doſt excuſe his follie
               Leaſt tainted when he growes to yeares wyth vices vicious ſore,
               He may beleue all things be fit and lawful as before.
               Bow downe his necke while he is yong and vſe correction dire,
               While that he is in tender yeares, leaſt when he doth aſpire
               To riper yeares, he ſtubburne waxe, and forceth not all
               So ſhall thy life be meſt
                     •
                  ous, and bitterer than gall,
               So shall he cauſe thee to lament, to mo
                     •
                  tue, to ſob, to crie,
               For to repent thy negligence, in trayning him duelie.
               Teach thou thy child moſt fatherly, inſtruct him ſtil with grace,
               Be diligent in warning him to walk in vertues race,
               Leſt that he ſhame thy hoared hears, and greue thy hart ful ſore,
               Leſt that he cauſe thee teare thy eyes, and cockering deplore.
               
                  
Oh pampring fare doth harme, and hurt a tender minde,
               Imperious words do profite much, with minaces vnkinde.
               Stoppe the beginning carefully, long is it ere the tree
               Be ouerthrowen, that rooted is faſt in the ground we ſee.
               See that he voyde all idleneſle, th'increaſing of all vyce,
               And ſet him to ſome buſie worke, and laborous exerciſe.
               Always ſee that thou holde him in, not ſuffering him to ſtray,
               That when he comes to mature yeres, for parent he may pray.
               Set him to ſchole in tender yeres, commit him to his booke,
               That he may learne good ſciences, as in a glaſle to looke,
               Which common life can no ways want a paſsing pleaſant thing,
               Whiche richeſle paſſe, and treaſures all of Craeſus caytif king.
               To ſchoole commit your tender ſonnes good ſciences to gayne,
               That they may profit countrey ſoyle, if learning they obtayne,
               And be a ioy to parents dere, and glory to their kinde.
               God ſtirre the hearts of parents all to haue ſo good a minde.
            
            Finis.
            
               ꝙ T Grant.
            
         
         
            Faultes eſcaped in printing.
            
               In B. 1. pag. 1. line. 11. for fall reade fault.
               In B. 1. pag. 2. line. 22. for conuincible, reade conuenable.
               In B. 2. 1. pag. 2. line. 6. for playes. reade players.
               In B. 3. pag. 1. line. 15. for admit read admire.
               In C 4. pag. 2. line. 9. for ſangui read ſanguine.
               In C 4. pag. 2. line. 14. for cline reade cliue.
               In D. 2 pag. 1. line. 10. for culta, reade cultae
               In D. 5. pag. 1. line. 27. for 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   reade 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . For 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   reade 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               In G. 1. pag. 1. line. 10. for viuat nam, reade, Vincit iram,
               In G. 2. pag. 2 line. 23. for diſtinct, reade diſiunct.
               In G. 3. pag. 1. line. 21. for ſeruanda, reade ſeruandae.
            
         
         
            
            Ad Lectorem. F. Y.
            
               HEc ego cum vigili legiſſem ſcripta labore
               Impreſſa in libro quae praeeunte vide
                     •
                  ,
               Nil aliquando fui viſus reperire, quod vllo
               Eſſet par illis vtilitate modo.
               Quiſquis enim quanto virtus ſit, quaeris, honore,
               Te
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   lubens eius, participare cupis,
               Hunc legito librū, quae dant haec ſcripta memēto,
               Verſato
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   diu quae meminiſſe voles.
               Haec bene ſcripta leg as, bene qui vis dicere mores,
               Qui pius eſſe voles, haec bene ſcripta legas.
               Virtutis quicun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   tenet praecepta, ſuprema
               Ill'é potest magni ſcandere regna Iouis,
               Est homo qui nouit, qui neſcit moribus vti
               Non homo, ſub ſpecie, ſed fera bruta, viri.
               Vnde feni laudes? Iuueni laus vnde lato
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               
                  Ʋnde fuit Fabio gloria tanta duci?
               Multa viris ſedem virtus elegit in illis,
               Iunctus & ingenua cum grauitate pudor.
               Quod ſi ſint mores & tanto pondere virtus,
               Hic liber exigui ponderis eſſe nequit
               Quod Plutarchus enim Graecis prius, ille Britannis
               Transtulit, & ſcriptis amplificauit opus.
               Deſine propterea Momi ſtirps tota loquacis
               Immeritam verbis rem violare malis
               
                  
Si laudes ceſſent, ceſſent male vulnera hij quae
               
                  Mome tuae, & linguae ſcommata Mome tuae.
               Hoc eteniu
                     •
                   quaecun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   vides inſcripta libello
               Non niſi cum magno ſcripta labore vides.
            
         
         
            AD LECTOREM. L. A.
            
               MOmus abeſto procul, mordaces cedite linguae,
               Cedite mordac
                     •
                  s, Momus abeſto procul.
               Zoilus abſcedat, vacuas latratibus auras
               Impleat, haud istum diruet ore librum.
               Brachia virtutis latiſſima tollere neſeit,
               In vetito virtus tramite tentat iter.
               
                  Traiani praeceptor erat Plutarchus, at illum
               Effigiem viuam principis eſſe liquet.
               
                  Plutarchum hi
                     •
                  c constat quoddā ſcripſiſſe volumen,
               Ad quod Traiani docta iuuenta fuit.
               Quē 
                  Grantus patriae linguae ſtudioſus, et auctor,
               (Quandoquidē pueros poſſe iuuare videt:)
               Ad nos è Graecis in nostros transtulit vſus,
               Diſceret vt mores nostra inuenta bonos.
               Excipiant igitur Grantum, Granti
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
                   libellum,
               Queis virtus, mores, queis bona facta placent.
               Moribus egregijs animo quicun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ſtudebi
                     •
                  ,
               Egregij mores vnde parentur habes.
               Authorem defende libri, defende libellum,
               Grandius et posthaec forte volumen erit.
            
         
         
            
            AD LECTOREM. G. D.
            
               HAec ſtudioſe viri ſtudioſa volumina docti
               Lector habe, pueris non minus apta tuis.
               Tradita ſunt linguae primo haec monimenta Pelaſgae,
               Primus & illorum haud ſordidus author erat,
               Quae nunc in linguam legitis tranſlata paternam
               Non ſine doctrina, & ſedulitate pari.
               Propterea ingentes eius ſpectate labores,
               Qui vos hac linguae commoditate iuuat.
               Tradita qui Graecis aperit praecepta Britannis,
               Qui quo
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , quae fuerant abdita plana facit.
               Huic, qui de vobis meruit bene, gratia detur,
               Nil opera illius gratius eſſe potest.
               Tuta
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   quae vobis traduntur, tuta tenete,
               Ne ſint Zoilea dedecorata manu.
               Quod ſi feceritis, fient magis inde volentes,
               Vt tradaent alij pluria ſcripta viri.
            
         
         
            Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman, dvvelling in Knightrider ſtrete at the ſigne of the Marmayde. ANNO. 1571.
            
         
      
   