
      
         
            
            
            ¶ A poore mannes beneuolence to the afflicted Church.
            
               Actes. 3. a * Golde and ſiluer haue I none ſuch as I haue geue I vnto you
            ¶ Imprinted at London in little Britaine, by Alexander Lacy.
            
            The. 29. of January. 1566.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            ¶ Grace, mercy, and peace, from God the Father, and from our Lorde Jeſus Chriſt, be with all that are afflicted for the teſtimonie of Jeſus Chriſt. Amen.
            
               WElbeloued in our ſauiour Jeſus Chriſt, vnderſtandyng of your great trouble and the greuons perſecutiōs of our brethrē in Chriſt in Spaine and els where, I could not but ſome what accordyng to my dutie, and to the talēt which God hath geuē me, write (although it were but ſmal) truſtyng that it ſhould be to the coumforte of thoſe, that for the truth be in anie place afflicted: vſyng none other order, nor collecting no other Scripture (as a perticuler thyng to treat of) but whollye to refer you, accordyng to your godly vnderſtandyng, to the. 2. 2. Tim. 1 epiſtle of S. Paule to Timothe

where he noteth fyrſt vnto him with what he is indued, that is with an vnfeigned faith, in Timothe is indued with an vnfeined faith. the ſelf ſame faith which dwelt before in his grādmother Lois, and in his mother Eunica. And here S. Paule comforteth not only Timothe, that his grandmother and mother was ſuch: but alſo cōforteth them (if they were then alyue) that they had ſuch a ſonne. Here is alſo to be noted, what coumfort parents and children may haue ech of other (yf they be Godly) but I leaue that to be cōſidered. But to the matter, ſith that he knoweth Paule & Ti mothe, is of one ſpirite, where with he is indued, he willeth him to be ſtedfaſt, for God (ſaith he) hath not geuē vs the ſpirite of feare: but of power, and of loue, and of a ſound mynde. Be not aſhamed of the

teſtimonie of our Lord, neither of me his pryſoner: but be partaker Paule is prſoner in Rome. of the affictions of ye goſpell, accordyng to the power of GOD. That worthy thyng which was cōmitted vnto thee kepe, through the Holy ghoſt.
            *They of Aſia be turned from me, of which ſort are Phigelus and Hermogenes. Thus Paule by a certaine maner diſmaieth Timothe: yet not wtſtandynge he encorageth him againe, and willeth him not only to be ſtedfaſt becauſe he is endued wt the ſpirite and power of God: but alſo to be pacient, though all ſhould depart from him, and he put in priſon: yet though Phtgelus 2. Lim. 2 and and Hermogenes, be The faithful wyl ſticke to one, when the wicked wil forſake him. gone from the preaching of the Goſpel: yet Oneſiphorus wyll viſite thee in priſon, & wyl not

be aſhamed of thy chaynes.
            Wherby Paule doth geue to vnderſtande, though the greatter nūber forſake thee: yet ye faithful in Chriſt wyl not leaue thee And therfore ſaith Paule, looke what thou haſt heard of me by many witneſſes, y• put forth. As who ſhould ſay: yu haſt be ne a diligēt learner, and thou haſt nothing, but yt which is approued by many witneſſes, go foreward ī it, make no ſtay, detract no time, lookyng this way or yt way, be not as a reed ſhakē with ye wynd: but lyke a bould ſoldiour of Jeſus Chriſt, ſuffer aflictions. Therfore I beſech you, you that haue learned in Gods ſcoole, and haue your doctrine approoued by many witneſſes, ſtand ſtedfaſt in it: be pacient. Though your freendes, kinred,

or cuntry men departe from it, Gala. 4. be you feruent, continue you ſtyll, let your light ſo ſhyne before Math. 5 men, that they may glorify your father which is in heauē. Therfore ſaith Paule, I ſuffer al thynges, & for the elects ſake it is, that they might alſo obtaine the ſaluation which is in Chriſt Jeſus, wt eternall glory. For yf (ſaith he) with Chriſt we ſuffer, we ſhal alſo raigne with him. Yf we deny him, he alſo wyl deny vs. Therfore ſaith he, ſtudie to ſhew thy ſelf approued vnto GOD, a workeman that needeth not to be aſhamed. For God reueleth to the faithfull, the wickednes of the time before it come. know that in the laſt daies ſhal come perillous times, for men ſhall be louers of themſelues, couetous, boaſters, proude, curſed ſpeakers, diſobedient to parents, vnthankefull, vnholye,

withoute naturall affections, 2. Tim. 3 truce breakers, falſe accuſers, This is the ſtate of our 
                     ••
                  u
                     •
                  e, we are therfore in a perillous time. intemperate, fyerce, deſpyſers of them which are good, traytours, heady, high mynded, louers of pleaſure more then the louers of God, hauyng a ſhow of godlines, but haue denied ye power thereof. Courne away therfore from ſuch. As Jannes and Jambres wtſtood Moyſes, Exodꝰ. 7 ſo do theſe alſo reſiſt the truth, men of corrupte myndes, reprobate concernyng the faith: but they ſhal preuayle no longer. For their madnes ſhalbe euidēt vnto all men, as theirs was. To trauel in explicating of the matter I need not, for ye words be ſo playne, that it may paſſe without: and therfore I leaue it to your good conſiderations, puttyng you in remembraunce

of that which is written by S. Paule to the Romaines. That Rom. 15. whatſoeuer is writtē, is written for our learnyng, & for our coumfort. But thou Timothe, 2 Tim. 3. thou haſt knowen my doctrine, not in part, but in whole. Fully thou haſt knowen it, my maner of liuyng to my doctrine is not vnknowne vnto thee. My mynd, purpoſe, and wyll, thou kneweſt: my faith thou vnderſtodeſt, my long ſuffryng, loue, and pacience, is not hyd from thee: and alſo my perſecutiōs, and afflictions, which came vn to me at Antioch, at Iconium, and at Liſtra, thou art not ignorant of, which perſecutions I ſuffred: but from them al the Lorde deliuered me. Therfore The Lorde only doeth deliuer from trouble Timothe, yf thou continue in this doctrine which thou haſte

begun: kepe the manner of lyuyng to thy doctrine, as yu haſt had example of me, beyng faith full, beynge readye to beare all greefes, ſhowyng all loue, and vſyng pacience: then be ſure yt the Lorde in perſecutions, wyl Aſpecal comforc. deliuer thee. For this I tel thee of a truth, that al that wil liue godly in Chriſt Jeſus, ſhal ſuffer 2 Tim. 3. perſecutions. And here S. Paule geueth Timothe a watch A watch word to the godly of all ſtates, geuē by S. Paule to Timothe. word, and not to him alone, but to al paſtors and teachers. Not to paſtors & teachers only, but to al people in generall, of what callyng ſoeuer they be of, whether they be high or lowe, rych or poore, oulde or young, Kyng or ſubiect, yf he wyl liue godly in Chriſt Jeſus (ſaith S. Paule) he then muſt ſuffer perſecutions. But here perchaūce

you wyl aſke me how it may be A queſtion. that Kynges ſhould be perſecuted for the teſtimonie of Jeſus Chriſt, and who it is that dare perſecute them for the ſame? But whether Kynges haue ben Aunſwer. perſecuted or no. I referre it to them to tell, which are ſkylfull in ye Chronicles, and who they were that did perſecute them. Paule doth not ſay here, yf ye liue godly in ye godlyneſſe of the Auguſtines, that you ſhall be The godlynes of the papacy, is not perſecuted. perſecuted: or in ye godlynes of the Fraūciſcanes, that you ſhal haue any trouble take holde of you: or yf you liue godly in the godlines of ye Benedicts, or Dominickes and ſuch like, that any hurte ſhall come vnto you. But yf you lyue godly in Chriſt Jeſus (ſaith Paule) you muſt 2. Tim. 3. ſuffer perſecutions. Well ſaith

our Sauiour Chriſt, happy are ye when men reuile you & perſecute The faithful hated. you for my names ſake, for Math. 5 you ſhal not loſe your rewarde. For this I tel you, you ſhall be Math. 24 hated of all men for my names ſake, therfore yf the world hate you: know ye, that it hated me Chriſt was hated. John. 16 before you, but for as much as ye are not of the world, but yt I haue choſen you out of ye world Wherfore the faithful is hated of the world. therfore doth ye world hate you. But be of good chere, I haue ouercome Luke. 12 the worlde: and therfore feare not little flocke, for it The faithful ſhall be rewarded with a kyngdome is your fathers wil to geue you a kingdom. And feare not them that can kyl the body, but feare Math. 5 him that can caſt both body and ſoule into hel fyre, be faithfull Apoc. 2 They ſhalbe 
                     •
                  round with the crowne of euerlaſtyng lyfe. therfore vnto the death, and I wyl geue thee ye crowne of lyfe. Therfore (my beloued) ſith that

we haue ſuch ſwete promiſes of God ye father, in his ſon Chriſt Jeſus: let vs cleaue vnto him, he wyll performe them, he neuer God 
                     ••
                   faithful fayled none that put their truſt in him, as ye prophet Dauid ſaith, I haue called vpon ye Lorde and he hath heard me, I haue truſted in the Lord and he hath holpen me, he therfore often times crieth, as in the. 12. Pſal. 12 pſalme. Help me O God, in the 69. pſalm. Saue me O God, in Pſal. 69 the. 16. pſalme. Preſerue me O Pſal. 16 Pſal. 30 God, in the. 30. pſalme. I haue called vpō the Lord in my trouble, and he hath heard me, and deliuered me. Therfore doe you now with the prophete Dauid in the. 66. pſalme, burſte foorth Pſal. 66 and ſaye: Thou (O God) haſte and doeſt proue vs. Thou alſo, haſt and wylte trye vs, euen as

Siluer is tried. Thou broughteſt vs in to the ſnare, and laidſt trouble vpon our loynes. Thou ſuffredſt men to ryde ouer our heades, we went & go through fyre & water, but we know that yu wylt bryng vs in to a comfortable place. Thus ſaid Chriſt to his diſciples, that where I am, John. 14 there ſhal ye be alſo. Therfore we beſech thee moſt merciful father, to ayd vs wt thy grace, and aſſiſt vs wt thy holy ſpirite, that we mai perfectly learn to know thee to be our creatour, & Jeſus thy ſon to be our only ſauiour, and y• Holy ghoſt to be our only ſanctifier. To theſe three, as to one eternal God, be all honour and glory, now and for euermore. Amen.
            
               ¶Your brother in Chriſt,
Ihon Pits.
            
         
         
            
            ¶To the afflicted Church, in Scotland, Fraunce, Spayne, or any other land.
            
               
                  BE of good chere my brethren all,
               doe not now faint nor quayle:
               But to the Lord doe ye now call,
               leſt that in truth ye fayle.
               For Sathans yre paſſe not a pin,
               though that he rule and rage:
               His power it is to ſmal and thin,
               the truth for to aſſwage.
            
            
               ¶Though Kyngs be ſtrong, and wyne likewiſe
               & womē thought to be:
               Yet Truth (in any maner wyſe) 3. Eſdr. 
                        •
                     
                  
               
               more ſtronger ſhall ye ſée.
               Kynges haue fayled, and alſo wyne,
               and women haue not ſtood:
               Truth hath remaind from time to time
               as proofe we haue full good.
            
            
               Truth was good, & kept ſtyl his place,
               when Woman had a fall:
               Truth was ſtyl Truth & had his grace,
               when Woman was in thrall. Gene. 
                        •
                     
                  
               
               What Truth hath ſaid, ꝑformd it was
               as in all ſtates we ſée,
               Let Woman ſpeake whats cum to pas
               let her tel tale for mée.
            
            
               
               As touching wyne, what ſhal I ſay?
               his force I thinke not great:
               Although the hart he mery make,
               yet is he beſt with meat. Prou. 31.
               
               The empty body doeth not grée,
               with wyne, though it be good:
               Salomon to the ſory (ſaith he)
               geue wyne to chere their mood.
            
            
               ¶ Geue good wyne (Salomon doth ſay)
               then is there that doth fayle:
               In Truth there is no maner way,
               that can make it to quayle.
               For Truth ſhal ſtand both firme & faſt,
               and kéepth his taſt full ſwete, Pſal. 117
               
               When wyne and women ſhal be paſt,
               and kynges layd vnder fete.
            
            
               ¶ With Truth is no compariſon, John. 14
               
               no match with him may be:
               For God and Truth, they be both one,
               vncompared to be.
               Who dwelth ī truth, doth dwel in God
               and God in him lykewyſe: 
                     
                        •
                     . Joh. 4
               
               So, dwel in Truth, & then haue God
               to make thée perfect wyſe.
            
            
               For who againſt the truth doth kicke,
               againſt God kicketh to:
               
                  
Then is he lyke to fall on pricke,
               which wyll make him crie wo.
               When Truth did ſpeake in Noes daies, Gene. 7.
               
               wyllyng them to repent:
               Leſt that they periſht in their waīes,
               they wold not, but felt dent.
            
            
               ¶ Truth to the Zodomites preached Gene. 9.
               
               by Lot, this is certayne:
               Their licenſiouſnes he counſayled,
               that they ſhould not maintayne.
               The Zodomits wold not Truth heare
               but kept their whole deſyre:
               Therfore they paid for that ful deare,
               for burnt they were with fyre.
            
            
               ¶ What got kyng Pharao for hꝭ paine
               when truth he did purſue? Exod. 14.
               
               He and his hoſt were dround certayne,
               as Exodus doth ſhewe.
               
                  Siſara, and Abimelech to,
               of women were both ſlayne: Judi. 4. and. 9.
               
               The booke of Judges declareth ſo,
               which is both true and playne.
            
            
               ¶ Hieroboam, becauſe he wrought
               againſt the well knowne Truth:
               
                  Baaſa to death his ſtocke hath brought,
               and thereon had no ruth.
               What became of quéene Jezabell, 4. Re. 9.
               
               
                  
the Truthes great enemie?
               Dogs did eat her in Jezraell,
               Truth ſayd it ſhould ſo be.
            
            
               ¶ Ahabs houſe, by Iehu was ſlayne, 4. Ke. 10
               
               for that he did conſpyre:
               Gods prophets for to put to payne,
               and geue them death for hyre.
               So read we of Zedechias, 4. Ke. 25
               
               which troubled Jeremie:
               That both his eyes deſtroyed was,
               and he felt miſerie.
            
            
               ¶ What is ſayd of Herode the kyng, Actes. 12
               
               that ſought the Truth to kyll?
               Who was ful of moſt deadly ſtyng,
               to wurke his cruell wyll.
               His kyngly power could not p̄uayle,
               nor helpe him in his néede:
               Whē ſtinking wormes did him aſſayl
                     •
                  
               
               which on his corps did féede.
            
            
               How ſtrong kynges be when God doth ſtryke,
               the ſcripture doth wel ſho:
               In other bookes we haue the lyke,
               we néed not far to go.
               Yf that the kyng wyl néeds reioyce,
               let him reioyce in this:
               That he hath God to heare his voyce,
               to kéepe him from all mis.
            
            
               
               Therfore let kyngs now ſerue ye Lorde Pſalm. 2
               
               and not put Truth to flight:
               But in the ſame for to accorde,
               leſt that they léeſe their might.
               Let them that doe the Truth embrace,
               embrace and kéepe it ſtyll:
               For kynges ſhal not the Truth deface,
               though that it be their wyll.
            
            
               What kings haue doen wt Satans ayd Exodꝰ. 1 Math. 2 Mar. 6. Eath. 14
               
               it is not now vnſhowne,
               What women haue thereto aſſayd,
               it is not much vnknowne.
               What wine ī bākets hath forth ſought,
               many the tale can tell:
               How by yt way Truth hath ben bought
               as time can ſhow full well.
            
            
               ¶ What Jewes ther be ye Truth to by,
               I néed not much to ſay:
               And Judaſſes that traiterouſly,
               ſéeke Truth, him to betray.
               Euen here at hand hard by the dore,
               of both thoſe ſorts there bée:
               Which perſecute Truth euermore,
               that he can not go frée.
            
            
               ¶ Truth to exile hath oft ben brought,
               and driuen from place to place:
               His confuſion hath ben wrought,
               
                  
by them of little grace.
               But yet how Truth preuayled hath,
               and worne the garland gréene:
               This day doth teach that rule and path
               which thought not to be ſéene.
            
            
               ¶ Thus God the Truth p̄ſerued hath,
               and ſet him in thé ſeate:
               For to appoint the perfect path,
               which is both right and feate.
               Walke therfore in Truth ye godly,
               let yll men walke their way:
               To God and Truth do ye now hy,
               and take your ioyfull day.
            
            
               Stand faſt to Truth ſticke to your hold
               feare not the cruell kyng:
               He ſhall not hurt you (be you bold)
               in any maner thyng.
               For God is yours, and you are Gods,
               in God dwell you now ſtyll:
               Although ye haue theſe greuous rods,
               it is not for none yll.
            
            
               For whom the Lorde doth loue be ſure,
               him doth he chaſtice, why?
               Becauſe he wyll haue vs full pure,
               his name to magnifie.
               For tribulation is our parte,
               yf Chriſt we wyll confeſſe:
               
                  
Confeſſe him ſtyll, feare not the ſmart,
               you ſhall haue lyfe eneleſſe.
            
            
               Farewel brethren, be of good chere,
               in Truth haue you your ſtay:
               For God is Truth (your father dere)
               which wyll kéepe you alway.
               Feare not the croſſe, nor yet the payne
               that you a whyle doe ſuffer:
               You ſhall haue heauen for your gayne,
               which lyfe doth laſt for euer.
            
            ¶ FINIS.
         
         
            ¶ THE. 67. PSALME.
            
               
                  Dauid here in this Pſalme doth teach
                  the faithfull for to pray,
                  The Lorde to ſhew his countinaunce
                  that they go not a ſtray.
                  And that his mightie power be knowne,
                  which is of noble fame:
                  That all the nations on the earth,
                  may prayſe his holy name.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     GOD be mercifull vnto vs, Pſal. 67.
               
               thus doth king Dauid write:
               In ye thrée ſcore & ſeuēth pſalme
               he doth the ſame reſite.
               And bleſſe thou vs (ſaith he) O Lorde,
               for that we ſtand in néede:
               The light of thy countinaunce ſhow,
               thy mercy geue with ſpéede.
            
            
               
               That thy right way here on the earth,
               vnto vs may be knowne:
               And thy moſt high and ſauyng helth,
               vnto all natons ſhowne.
               Let the people prayſe thée (O God)
               let all the people ſyng:
               O let the nations on the earth,
               acknowledge thée their kyng.
            
            
               For thou the righteous wylt defend,
               and gouerne euery where:
               And make the wicked on a row,
               of thée to ſtand in feare.
               Let the people prayſe thée G God,
               now let them all thee prayſe:
               In this our moſt troubleſome time,
               and in theſe heauy dayes.
            
            
               Then ſhal the earth her encreaſe bring
               and thou our God ſhalt geue
               Thy only good and great bleſſyng,
               that we with thée may liue.
               God ſhall vs bleſſe for euermore,
               and vs defend from ſin:
               And all the endes of the whole world,
               ſhall ſtand in awe of him.
            
            
               Glorie be to the Father high,
               and to the Son therfore:
               And to the Holy ghoſt which ſpirit,
               kepe vs for euermore.
            
            ¶ FINIS.
         
         
            
            ¶ THE. 100. PSALME.
            
               
                  Dauid in this Pſalme doth exhort,
                  to prayſe the Lorde alwayes:
                  For that he did vs make and port,
                  and guydes vs all our dayes.
               
            
            
               
                  OBe ye ioyfull in the Lorde,
               ſerue ye him all ye landes:
               With gladnes cum, & wt a ſong,
               commit you to his handes.
               The Lorde our God he did vs make,
               of this we may be ſure:
               Not we our ſelues, we are his folke,
               and ſhepe of his paſture.
            
            
               Now let vs go in to his gates,
               with thanks to geue him prayſe,
               In to his court euen for to ſpeake,
               good of his name alwayes.
               For why? the Lorde is gracious,
               his mercy is full ſure:
               His Truth doth euerlaſtyngly,
               for euermore endure.
            
            ¶ FINIS.
         
         
            Chriſt ſpeaketh to the people.
            WHoſoeuer is of the truth, heareth my voyce. John. 18. John. 10. My ſhepe do heare it, and I do know them, and they do folow me, and I geue them euerlaſtyng life. He that hath my precepts & kepeth them, John. 14 he it is that loueth me. If any man loueth me, he wyl kepe my worde, my father wyl loue him, and we ſhal come to him, and dwel with him. Walke John. 12. whyle ye haue lyght, leaſt darkenes ouer whelme

you, he that walketh in darkenes, knoweth not whether he goeth. Whyle ye haue light, beleue in the light: that ye may be chyldrē of light. He that is of God, heareth Gods word: yf any man kepe John. 8 my worde, he ſhall neuer ſee death.
            
               ¶ God to the Prophet, or Preacher.
STand in the courte of the Lordes houſe, and ſpeake vnto al the cities of Juda which come Jere. 26. to worſhip in the Lords houſe, al the wordes that I haue cōmaūded thee to ſpeake, kepe not a word backe. Yf ſo be thei wil harken, & turne euery man from his euyl way, that I may repent mee of the plague which I haue determyned to bryng vpon them becauſe of the wickedneſſe of their workes, and yu ſhalt ſay vnto them: thus faith the Lord. &c
            
               ¶ Moſes, or Preacher, to the people.
YF thou ſhalt obey diligently the voyce of the Lorde thy God, and obſerue & do all his commaundements Deut. 28 which I commaund thee this day, then the Lord thy God wil ſet thee on high aboue al the nations of the earth, and al theſe bleſſynges ſhal come on thee, and ouertake thee: yf thou ſhalt obey the voyce of the Lord thy God. Bleſſed ſhalt thou be in the citie, and bleſſed in the feelde. &c.
            But yf thou wylt not obey the voyce of the Lorde thy God to kepe & to do al his commaundementes and his ordinaūces which I commaund thee this day, then al theſe curſes ſhall come vpon thee, and ouertake thee. Curſed ſhalt thou be in the towne and in the feeld. &c. From the which curſes, the Lorde deliuer vs, and graūt vs to be diligent hearers of his holy worde, and faithfull folowers of the ſame: for his deare ſonnes ſake Jeſus Chriſt, to whom with the Holy ghoſt, three perſons and one God, be al honor & glory for euer. Amen.
            ¶ FINIS.
            
               (ꝙ)
John Pits.
            
            
         
      
   