
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE VVHOLE SERMONS OF That Eloquent DIVINE, of Famous Memory; THOMAS PLAYFERE, Doctor in Diuinitie.
                  GATHERED INTO one vollume, the Titles thereof are named in the next PAGE.
                  
                     LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Matthew Law, and are to be sold at his shop in Pauls Church-yard, at the signe of the Foxe, neere Saint Augustines Gate, 1623.
               
               
                  
                  The names of the Sermons contained in this Booke.
                  
                     1 THe Meane in Mourning.
                     
                     2 The Path-way to Perf
                              •••
                           ion.
                     
                     3 Hearts Delight.
                     
                     4 The Power of Prayer.
                     
                     5 The Sicke-mans Couch.
                     
                     6 Gods Blessing is enough.
                     7 Glory waighes downe the Crosse.
                     
                     8 God be with you.
                     
                     9 Christs wounds our health.
                     
                     10 Say well, doe well.
                     
                     11 The Kings Crowne.
                     
                     12 Good Ground.
                     
                     13 Felicity of the Faithfull.
                     
                     14 Difference betweene the Law 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        Gospell.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  TO THE HONORABLE AND MOST VERTVOVS LADY, THE LADY ELIZABETH CAREY, wife to the thrice noble, Sir GEORGE CAREY, Knight Marshall, &c. all prosperitie and happinesse.
                  
                     MAdame, it is reported, that Demonax hauing his head broken with a stone, and being aduised to complaine to the Proconsull of that iniurie, answered, that he had more need to goe to a Chyrurgian to heale his head, then to a Magistrate to redresse his wrong. I must also confesse, I had rather haue had my head broken, then my Sermon so mangled. For this Sermon hath

beene twice printed already without my procurement or priuitie any manner of way; Yea, to my very great griefe and trouble. Neuerthelesse, I haue thought good to complaine of no man: For in whom the fault resteth, I cannot learne certainely; This I am sure, n
                        ••
                      any whit in my selfe. Clinius a Historiographer, hauing written the story of Virginius, and meeting with him vpon a time, said; If you finde anything amiss
                        •
                      in your story, I pray you pardon it. To whom Virginius answered; what Clinius, dost thou not know I haue done as I did, that such fellowes as thou art might write as you would? And so, it was my part to take such paines as conueniently I could, in furnish
                        •
                     ng and prouiding this Sermon against the appoynted time. But afterward, what others, either by reporting, or printing, would make of it, that was not my fault, that was not in mee either to helpe or hinder. Therefore I haue not gone vnto any Magistrate to complaine; but though it bee one of the greatest iniuries that euer was offered mee, yet because I know not what secret purpose the Lord had in laying this affliction vpon me, I doe most willingly pardon it. Yea euen as Moses, when the first Tables were broken, was content to make a new; in like manner,

finding in the first Editions so many broken-ended sentences, I haue, as it were, gone to a Chirurgian, or rather indeed I haue played the Chirurgian my selfe, and by setting out the Sermon anew, haue salued the matter as well as I could.
                  
                     Diogenes seeing the Citie of Myndus very little and poore, but the gate therof very large and stately, said, You of Myndus, shut your gate, and keepe in your Citie, that it runne not away. After the same sort, the gate (as I may say) and the first entrance into this Sermon, was before very loftie and stately, the Sermon it selfe very simple and poore. Such a stirre they kept in terming it, very vainely, and most fondly, A most Excellent Sermon, as if they would haue cast the house out of the window, or the Citie out of the gate: wherefore I haue made the gate lesser, and the Citie greater: the gate lesser, by entituling it, The Meane in Mourning, which is the very drift indeede, and the right scope of the whole Sermon: and the Citie greater, by adding diuers notes in sundry places of the Sermon, as I haue since thought best. So that if any which heard it preached, bee disposed to reade it, hee shall not, I hope, altogether loose his labour. For though he haue all here

which hee heard then, yet he heard not all then, which hee hath heere. But how it will please God to affect others, I know not; This I w
                        •
                     t well, that many a time and oft I haue beene much moued my selfe with the meditation of some poynts in this Sermon. And now of late, next to God, and to his holy word, I could take comfort in nothing so much, as in reading that which I haue written in the seuenth part, the first Section thereof. Occasioned thereto by the certaine report of the death of my most deare Father, who was well knowne for his place and calling to be as good a man, and as sincere a Christian, as any hath liued in this age. But for conclusion, I humbly desire your Ladishippe, that as I haue dedicated the Path-way to Perfection to my very Honourable good Patron, Sir George Carey: so it would please your Ladishippe, to let this Sermon passe vnder the countenance and credit of your name. For if your Ladishippe will deigne to reade it ouer, then I doubt not but diuers other Ladies and Gentlewomen which haue vertuous and noble mindes, will vouchsafe also to learne thereby, how they ought (with the daughters of Ierusalem) not to weepe for Christ, but to weepe for themselues, especially hauing such a singular

example before their eyes as your Ladishippe is, whom God hath endewed with all ornaments and gifts both of Nature and Grace. From Saint Iohns Colledge in Cambridge the first day of February. 1595.
                  
                  
                     
                        Your Ladiships euer to be commanded Thomas Playfere.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE MEANE IN MOVRNING. The Text.
                  
                     
                        Weepe not for mee, but weepe for your selues.
                        
                           Luke 23.28.
                     
                  
                  
                     RIGHT Honourable, right Worshipfull, and most Christian brethren; foure sorts of people were about Christ, when Christ was about his passion. Of the first sort were executioners, which tormented him. Of the second sort were Iews, which mockt him. Of the third sort were lookers on, which markt him. Of the fourth sort were wel-willers, which lamented

him. Now although it be very likely, that among these his welwillers, diuers godly men wept for him, as S. Iohn the Euangelist, Ioseph of Arimathea, Gamaliel, Nicodemus, and such like, yet it is certaine, both that more women wept then men, and that the women more wept then the men. More women: more weeping. More women wept then men, partly by the permission of men, who though that the womens weeping came rather from weaknes in themselues, then from kindnesse towards Christ: partly by the prouidence of God, who suffered more women to weepe then men, that the women which bewailed Christs death, might condemne the men which procured it. Now the women also more wept thē the men, either of a naturall affection, or else a voluntary disposition. Naturally (saith S. Peter) the woman is the weaker vessell,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Theophylact. in Ioan. 6.20. pag. 571. soone moued to weepe, and subiect to many, either affectionate passions, or else passionate affectiōs. But touching these women, that which was otherwise naturall to them, was here voluntarie in them. For the sinne of a woman was the ruine of man: Therefore these women

willingly wept the more: That though a women did most in the second death of the first Adam; yet these might doe least in the first death of the second Adam. For it was Eue, a woman, which betraied the first Adam with an apple, and caused him to sin; but it was Iudas a man which betraied the second Adam with a kisse, and caused him to die. And indeed you shall generally obserue, that notwithstanding at the first, the woman went before the man in transgression and disobedience; neuerthelesse since, to make amends for that faul
                        •
                     , the blessed virgin Mary, and diuers other women haue farre excelled all men, or at the least-wise, most men, in true deuotion and godlinesse. Wherfore principally Christ here speaketh to the women, because both more women wept then men, and the women also more wept then the men; More women, more weeping; but yet in them hee speaketh (as well as vnto them) indifferently to al his deere friends, both men & women, weepe not for me, but weepe for your selues.
                  
                  In which sentence we may obserue, as many wordes, so many parts. Eight words, eight parts. The first, Weepe

not: The second, But weepe: The third, Weepe not, But weepe. The fourth, For Mee: The fifth, For your selues. The sixth, For mee, For your selues. The seuenth, Weepe not for mee: The eighth, But weepe for your selues. God grant all our hearts may be so affected with the consideration of these excellent matters, as may make most for the increase of our comfort in him, and his glory in vs. And I humbly beseech you also most christian brethren, to do God this honour, and mee this fauour: First that you would not prescribe mee any methode or order, how I should handle this Text, but that you would giue mee leaue to follow mine owne method and order; wherein I perswade my selfe, and I hope also truely, I haue beene directed by the spirit of God. Secondly, that you would not run before me, in your swift conceit, and earnest expectation; but that it would please you to go on along easily all the way with me, till happily at the length, by Gods gracious assistance, and your gentle acceptāce, I come to the end of my Sermon. And then if I haue omitted any thing which you wold haue had

me said, spare me not, but blame mee hardly for it, as you shall thinke best.
                  WEEPE NOT FOR MEE, BVT WEEPE FOR YOVR SELVES.
                  THE first part is, Weepe not. When Iairus, the Ruler of the Synagogue, wept bitterly for the death of his daughter, Christ sayd vnto him, Luke. 8.52. 
                     Weepe not. When Rachel wept, and would not bee comforted, seeing neither her sonne Beniamin, nor almost any true Beniamite left aliue, God sayd vnto her, Ier. 31.16. 
                     Weepe not. When a poore vvidow wept sore for the death of her onely sonne, Christ said vnto her, Luk. 7.13. 
                     weepe not. And so here, Christ seeing many Iairusses, many Rachels, many vvidowes, vveepe for the death of the onely sonne of God, sayth vnto them, weepe not. Forbidding thereby immoderate weeping, vvhich is condemned in nature; in reason; in religion. In nature, the earth vvhen it reioyceth, as in Summer time, then it is couered vvith corne,Psa. 65.12. but vvhen it hath too too forlorne and sorrowfull a countenance, as in the Winter time, then it is fruitlesse and barren. The vvater vvhen it is quiet and calme, bringeth

in all manner of Merchandise, but when the sea stormes & roares too much then the very ships doe howle and cryEsay. 23.1.. The aire looking cleerly & cheerefully, refresheth all things, but weeping too much, that is, rayning too much, as in Noahs flood, it drowns the whole world. The fire being but a little sprinkled with water, burneth more brightly; but being too much ouerwhelmed, it giues neither heat nor light. The eye it selfe (as Anatomists write) 
                        Vide Vesalum, lib. t. cap. 14. & Toletum in 
                              •
                           b. secund. Aristotelis de anima.
                      hath twice as many dry skins, like sluces, to damme vp the course of the teares, as it hath moist humors, like chanels, to let thē flow forth. For it hath six of them, and but three of these. If all the body were an eye, and there were no eares in it, where were then the hearing? If all the eye were a moyst humor, and there were no dry skinnes in it, where were then the seeing? Seeing then too much weeping is, in the earth barrennesse; in the water shipwrack; in the aire an inundation; in the fire coldnes; in the eye blindnes; certainely, if the earth, the water, the aire, the fire, the eye could speak, they would altogether with one consent sing a ioyfull song of fiue

parts, and euery one seuerally say vnto vs, That we must not weepe too much.
                  Now reason seeth yet more, 
                        Ne quid nimis.
                      That too much of a thing is naught; Etiam mel. si nimium, ingratum: Which is translated thus: Pro. 2.5.27. It is not good to eate too much hony. If it be not good eating too much hony; then sure it is not good eating too much wormwood. The Egyptians when they would describe teares, they paint those gems which we call vnions: whervpon Suidas saith, 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Vnions hieroglyphically do signifie the sheding of teares. For as Vnions haue their name in latine, because they are found one by one, & neuer more at once: so teares must be shed easily one by one, and neuer be powred out all at once. Seneca saith, that which we must doe daily, we must doe moderately. Therfore though we cānot quite stop the bloudy issue of our teares, at the least wise we must be sparing, & weep so to day, as we may weep to morrow, & keep some teares alwayes in store, referring 
                        Si non finire lachrymas, at certè reseruare debemus, l
                              •
                           de consolatio, ad Polybium, cap. 13. them to another occasion afterward. For wee reade that Heraclitus, when he had soakt and sowst himself in sorrow all his life long, at length died of a dropsie, and

so (as I may say) drowned himselfe in his owne teares. Yea, Niobe by ouer-much weeping was turned into a stone; euen as Lots wife by looking backe, was turned into salt. It was one of Pythagoras poesies,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . not to eate the heart; which is expounded thus: Pro. 25.20. As a moth fretteth the garment, and a worme eateth the wood; so heauinesse hurteth mans heart. Now if we may not teare the heart of any other thing with our teeth, thē much lesse may we teare our owne heart with our teares. So that euen blinde reason, such as the heathen haue had, doth yet plainly see this; That we must not weep too much.
                  But religion goeth yet further: For when God at the first placed man in the garden of Eden, which is the garden of pleasure, hee did indeede there provide all things for him, which might pleasure him. His wife which was equall to him: all other creatures that were inferiour to him: the hearbs which hee did eate: the flowers that hee did smell: the pearles which he did look vpon: the gold that he did tread vpon: all these serued for his delight and ioy. Afterward when sentence had proceeded against the man, that hee should

haue sorrow about the fruit of the earth: against the woman, that she should haue sorrow about the fruit of her wombe: yet it pleased God to asswage and sweeten these our sorrowes with diuers singular comforts: as first, we haue the holy spirit, who is the onely comforter: Next a good conscience, which is a continuall feast: Then the holy scripture, which is (as it were) another paradise: Lastly, an vnfalued faith, by which we haue peace with GOD. Therefore Athenagoras 
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . t. de Resur mor.
                      saye
                        •
                      well, I count that they haue no spirit, no conscience, no scripture, no faith in them which yeeld to too much griefe. And Hierome yet more vehemently, 
                        Detestande sunt istae lachrymae quae non habent modum.
                      I do from my heart detest all excessiue sorrow, seeing it is a very hell vpon earth, and an entrance euen in this life into that wofull place where there is nothing but weeping and gnashing of teeth. Wherefore immoderate weeping is condemned, in nature, which teacheth all things; in reason, which teacheth all men: in religion, which teacheth all Christians; That wee must not weepe too much. Thus much of weeping too much, which is the first part, WEEPE NOT. WEEPE

NOT FOR MEE, BVT WEEPE. FOR YOVR SELVES.
                  NOW a little of weeping too little, which is the second part. But weepe. They to whom Christ here speaketh, offended in the excesse. Therefore hee beginneth thus, weepe not. But I may well shift the words, and begin thus; But weep. For we offend commonly in the want of weeping, seldome in the excesse. The reason is, because we lacke loue, which being three, fold, towards our selues, towards our neighbour, towards God: the greatest worke of loue towards our selues, is Repentance: towards our neighbour, is Preaching: towards God, is Prayer; And all these require some teares. So that it wee weepe so little, as that we weepe not at all, wee weepe too little: Which we must not doe. For first, touching Repentance one sayes truly, 
                        Hoc ipso sunt maiores tumores, quò minores dolores.
                      The lesser our sorrowes are, the greater are our sins. But on the other side, the heads of dragons are broken in the waters; Psa 74.13. that is, very strong, and vile sinnes are weakened and washt away with teares. That obligation which was against vs Coloss. 2.14., before

it had been fastned to the crosse of Christ, was ingrossed in parchmēt. Now it is but scribled in paper. So that if wee blur it daily with weeping vpon it, our teares will be like aqua fortis to take out the hand-writing quite and cleane, that God shall neither reade nor see our sins. When Alexander had reade a long and tedious Epistle written to him by Antipater, wherein were diuers accusations against his mother Olympias, What, saies he, me thinkes Antipater knoweth not, that one little teare of a mother will easily blot out many Epistles.
                        Ignorare videtur Antipater quòd vna matri
                              •
                            lachryma multas delebit 
                              ••
                           istolas.
                      And certainely the teares not onely of Gods mother, but euen of euery child of God, wil much more easily blot out the memory of many sinnes, though they were before like the sinnes of Iuda, written with a pen of yron, and grauen with the poynt of a Diamond.Ierem. 17.1. Therefore sayth Alcuinus, 
                     
                        Lauandum est cor poenitentia lachrymis.
                      we must wash our hearts in the troubled poole of Bethesda, 
                     Iohn. 5.2. in the troubled teares of repentance. For as in a well, except there be some water in it, we cannot easily see the baggage that lieth in the bottom: so in the depth of the heart without teares we cannot see our

sinnes. Teares make our sins not seene, and seene. Not seene to God, and seene to vs. God not seeing them, forgiues them; and vve seeing them, amend them. Pliny vvriteth, that the teares of vine-branches doe cure the leprosie.
                        l. 23. initio.
                      And so the teares of those vine-branches vvhich are grafted into the true vine, doe cure the leprosie of sinne. S. Austin witnesseth that the Eagle feeling his vvings heauy, plungeth them in a fountaine, and so reneweth his strength:
                        Commen. in Psal. 103. After the same sort a Christian feeling the heauy burthen of his sins, batheth himselfe in a fountaine of teares, and so vvashing off the old man, vvhich is the body of sinne, is made young againe, and lustie as an Eagle. That sinful vvoman, 
                        Luke. 7.44. because shee loued much, therefore shee vvashed Christs feete vvith her teare
                        •
                     . A strange sight. I haue oftentimes seene the heauen vvash the earth; but I neuer before saw the earth vvash the heauen; yet here I see it: An earthly and a sinfull woman washeth the heauenly feet of Christ. But because shee washt Christs feete with her teares, therefore Christ crowned her head with his mercies. The prodigall childe had

no sooner returned home by vveeping crosse (as vve say) and cryed peccani, but straight-wayes he was receiued. Lo yee what force there is in three syllable. 
                        Quantum valent tres syllabae? Ambrosius.
                      For God hearing a sinner in true contrition vtter but this one word of three syllables peccani, I haue sinned, 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         
                        Chrysost. Hom. 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . is so in a manner charmed and inchaunted with it, that he hath no power ouer himselfe, he cannot but grant remission. Saint Peter likewise though he were an old man in years, yet he vvas a very child, & a prodigall child in weeping. And as his faith vvas so great that he lept into a sea of vvaters, to come to Christ; so his repentance vvas so great that he lept into a sea of teares vvhen he vvent from Christ. Hee wept so bitterly (as Clemens Romanus testifieth) that there vvere gutters and furrowes in his face, made vvith those teares vvhich trickled downe his cheekes. And therefore sayes Cyril, 
                     
                        Locum flend
                              •
                            recepit quem negando perdiderat. in Leuiticum. lib. 16. he recouered that place by bevvailing his offence, vvhich he had lost by denying his master. For sayth Nazianzen, 
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . God is more mercifull then man can bee sinnfull if he vvill be sorrowfull. Wherefore vve may see by these examples of the sinfull vvoman; of the prodigall

child: of S. Peter, that weeping doth especially recommend our repentance, that we may purchase our pardon.
                  Touching Preaching, the voyce of a Preacher ought to be the voyce of a cryer, which should not pipe to make the people daunce, but mourne to make them weepe. Hence it is, that in the old law Leuit. 21.20. none that was blinde, or had any blemish in his eye, might serue at the Altar. There are many reasons of this law: Among many, this may be one, because for that impediment in his eye, he could not well shew his inward sorrowing by his outward weeping. And when they offered vp to the Lord their first borne, who was ordinarily in euery family their Priest or their Preacher, they offered also with him, a paire of Turtle doues, or two yong Pigeons; That paire of turtle doues did signifie a paire of mournefull eyes; These two yong Pigeons did signify like wise two weeping eies. And at that offering they prayed for their first born, that afterward he might haue such eyes himselfe. For as Pigeons flye to their windowes, Esay. 60.8. so the sincere Preacher hath no other refuge to flie vnto, but onely to his

windowes, that is to his eyes, which are glazed with teares, when they weepe for the sinnes of the people. Christ Iesus is much delighted in such kinde of eies, saying so often to his Spouse, Thine eyes are Pigeons eyes. The holy Ghost also descending himselfe in the forme of a doue. And the Prophets like doues vpon the waters which are washt with milk, and remaine by the full vessels Cant. 5.12. vsually receiued their prophesies besides riuers. As Ezekiel beside the riuer Cobar, Daniel beside the riuer Tygris, the Baptist beside the riuer Iordan. Yea also they preached their prophesies, not so much with words, as with riuers of teares. The Prophet Dauid was so valiant, that he ouercame a mightie huge Giant, and tare a Beare in peeces, as easily as if it had beene a Kid, and slew a fierce Lion with no other weapon, but only with his naked hands, and diuers other times like a violent whirlwinde bare downe all before him: Yet when hee came to preach, he was so soft-hearted, and so tender-eyed, that he sayd, Mine eyes gush out riuers of water, because men keepe not thy law. O that my head were full of water, saith Ieremie, and mine

eies a fountain of teares. I protest (saith Paul, that for these three yeeres I haue not ceased to warne euery one of you with teares day and night. For indeed, as Austin vvitnesseth, there is more good to be done vvith sighing, then vvith speaking; vvith vveeping then with words. 
                        Plus gemitibus, quàm sermonibus, plus fletu, quam affatū.
                      And Prosper saith, That a Preacher must seeke not his owne praise, but the peoples profit, in sorrowing for their sinnes. And Ierome saith, 
                        Non plausum sed planctum.
                      That the Preacher is most highly commended, not vvhen the people clap 
                        Sint eorum lachrymae tuae landes.
                      their hands, but when they knock their brests. Wherfore as it is an Idoll, and no God, which hath eyes and seeth not: so he his rather an Idoll shepheard, then a godly pastour, vvhich hath eyes & weepeth not more or lesse, one time or other in preaching to the people.
                  Touching Prayer, Saint Iames saith, The prayer of a iust man preuaileth much, if it be feruent, For a feruent prayer commeth from a feruent spirit, which is wholy inspired with that holy spirit who maketh request in vs, and for vs, with sighes and grones which cannot be expressed. As it is in one of the Psalmes, Psal. 147.18. He sendeth

                     forth his word and melteth them, hee breatheth forth his spirit, and the waters flow. Hee sendeth forth his word, and breatheth forth his spirit, when the Holy Ghost moueth vs to pray. Hee melteth them, and the waters flow, when teares trickle downe from our eyes. For as a seething pot runneth ouer: so sayes a holy heart (seething as it were) like a pot, and boyling in feruent prayer, Psal. 42.4. I poure out my soule within mee. According to that of Austin, 
                     
                        Quo quisque sanctior, eo eius in orando 
                              •
                           ictu: vberio
                              •
                           .
                      The more holy and deuout a man is, the more will he be sure to weepe in his prayer. And no maruell that hee doth weepe in praying, which doth pray for weeping. Grant, O Lord, sayes the same Father, that I may haue a fountaine of teares then especially when I offer vp to thee my prayers and supplications. 
                        Da mihi lachrymarum fontem, tum praecipue, cum preces & orationes tibi affero. Manualis cap. 11. For the Oliue tree is most aboundant in fruit when it distilleth. And so a Christian is most plentiful and powerfull in praier when hee weepeth. Hereupon King Dauid saith, I am as a greene Oliue tree in the house of the Lord. And our Sauiour himselfe went often to the mount of Oliues, where he offered vp prayers and supplications, with strong

crying and teares. And therefore he willeth vs also, to haue faith as a graine of mustard-seed. Now mustard-seede hath his name in Greeke, 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . because it makes the eyes weepe. So that he which in praier hath faith as a graine of mustard-seed, hath such a faith as makes his eyes weepe. And then Christ sayes to him, Thou hast wounded my heart with one of thine eyes: If with one then much more with both. For as Synesius testifieth, weeping is more piercing, and more forcible to perswade God, and euen to wound his heart, then all the eloquence, then all the rethorick in the world. 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . And Cyprian saies, When the spirit of man sendeth out sighes in praier, then the spirit of God giues grace. And 
                        Cum spiritus hominis suspirat, spiritus D
                              •
                           i aspirat.
                      
                     Ambrose, God looketh when wee pray, that wee should poure out our teares, that hee might poure out his mercies
                        Expectat lachrymas nostras vt profundat pietatem suam. De poenit l. c. 4.. As for example▪ 
                     Anna, Samuels mother, in the bitternesse of her soule wept sore when she prayed. Looke how salt vapours arise out of the sea, which afterward are turned into pleasant showes: so out of the sea of her sorrowfull soule did arise sobs and sighes, like salt vapours, which immediatly

were turned into a sweet shower of teares. Therefore God heard her prayer, and sent her a sonne. The rather, because this weeping, the more bitter it was to her, the more sweet it was to God. So Iacob wrastled with God, and preuailed against God Gen. 32.28.. But the Prophet Ose sheweth, that his wrestling was by weeping, and his preuailing was by praying Osee 12.4.. So Ezechias being sicke, prayed; praying, turned him toward the wall and wept; and then with weeping, as with gunshot, he battered downe that partition wall of his sinnes, which kept Gods louing countenance from him. Therefore sayes the Lord to him, I haue heard thy Prayer, and thy teares. A strange speech: I haue heard thy prayers, that I vnderstand well enough▪ But, I haue heard thy teares. What should bee the meaning of this, trow you? Haue teares tongues, I maruell, or can they speake, that they may be heard? yea surely I dare be bold to say it. The cloud-cleauing thunder of the Almightie cannot make such a ratling sound, and such a roaring noyse in the eares of man, as our teares doe in the eares of God. Therefore Dauid
                     
both before he had prayed, Psal. 141.1. desiteth God to heare the voyce of his crying, and also after he had praied, Psal. 6.8. thanketh God because hee had heard the voyce of his weeping. For indeed hee himselfe also sayes of himselfe, Psal. 102.10. I mingled my drinke with weeping. And where was this drinke of his, but in that cup of which he sayes in another place. Psal. 116.13. 
                     I will take the cup of saluation (or of praier & thanksgiuing) and call vpon the name of the Lord. So that Dauid mingling his drinke with weeping▪ mingled his prayer with weeping. Wherefore as Elizeus did cast salt into the waters of Iericho, to make them sweet: so must we salt and season our prayers with teares, to make them sauorie and delightsome to God. A man can neuer loue himselfe aright, that doth not sometimes weepe in repentance: nor his neighbour (if he be a Preacher) that doth not sometimes weepe in repentance: nor God, that doth not sometimes weepe in Praier. So that wee must not be like the Stoicks, which were neuer at all moued. Then we shall weepe to little, as is proued in this second part. BVT WEEP. WEEP NOT FOR ME, BVT WEEP

FOR YOVR SELVES.
                  THE third part is next, Weepe not. But weepe. Which noteth, seeing both the excesse and the want are to be eschewed, that therefore the true meane, which wee must keepe in weeping, consisteth in an equall intermingling of these two extremities. Weepe not, But weepe both together, Weepe not, sayes hee. Too much is contrary to nature. But weepe, too little, is contrarie to repentance. Weepe not, too much is contrarie to reason. But weepe, too little is contrarie to Preaching. Weepe not, too much is contrary to religion. But weepe, too little is contrary to prayer. Saint Paul chargeth Timothie to be instant in season and out of season. First in reason, then out of season. Teaching thereby, that vnseasonable opportunitie is better then seasonable importunitie. Yet to keepe a meane in exhorting, that wee must as well vse importunitie sometimes, so it bee in season, as take an opportunitie alwayes, though it be out of season. Euen so saies our Sauiour here weepe not, but

weepe. First weepe not: then, but weepe. Teaching thereby, that not to weepe, is better then to weep; yet to keepe a meane in weeping, that we must, as well sometimes in not weeping, weepe, as alwaies in weeping not weepe. For the Apostle saith, That they which reioyce, must be as though they reioyced not, and they which weep must be as though they wept not. They which reioyce, must be as though they reioyced not; because saith Gregory, 
                     
                        G
                              ••
                           undium huius vitae, vna acerba. In. c. 28. Iobi.
                      All the ioy the godly haue in this life, is as a sowre grape gathered out of time. And Ambrose, 
                     
                        Non solum dolor, sed & laetitia habet suas lachrymas.
                      The children of God, not onely in sorrow, but euen in ioy also sometimes shed teares. They reioyce as though they reioyced not. And they which weepe must be as though they wept not, because, saith Macatius, 
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , Homil. 1. Euen teares are a comfort to the righteous. And Ambrose againe, 
                        Est pijs affec. ib. quaedam etiam flendi voluptas. De obitu Valentiani p. 449. To them that are well affected weeping is a very great delight: They weepe as though they wept not. Wherefore as certaine apples haue a sowrish sweetnesse, and some old wines haue a sweetish sowrnesse: so both our sorrow must bee ioyfull, and our ioy must be sorrowfull. Our sorrow must bee ioyfull; as Christ did weepe vpon Palme-sunday.

Christ did weepe; There is sorrow. Vpon Palm-sunday; There is ioy. And our ioy must be sorrowfull; as the Israelites did eate the sweet Easter lambe with sowre hearbs. The sweet Easter lambe; There is ioy: Weepe not. With sowre hearbes; There is sorrow. But weep. Weepe not. This is a fiery speech, as when S. Iohn sayes, that Christs eyes are as a flame of fire, Reuel. 19.12. that is, subiect now to no weeping. But weepe. This is a watry speech, as when Dauid sayes, I water my couch with my tears. So that if we would reconcile these speeches together, we must reconcile fire and water together. Gregory obserueth, that in the raine-bow there are two colors, red which resembleth fire, and blew which resembleth water. 
                        In arcu eodem color ignis & aquae simul ostenditur: quia ex parte caeruleus, ex parte rubicundus: vt vtriusquae indicij testis sit, vnius videlicet faciendi, & alterius facti. Homil. 8. in Eze.
                      Redde, that we might not weepe, beholding the fire which shall burne when Christ shal iudge the world: and blew, that wee might weepe, beholding the water which did flow when God did drowne the world. Therefore as there be two colours, red and blew in one Raine-bow: So there must be two affections, ioy and sorrow in one heart. This the wisedome of our Ancestors seemeth to insinuate, euen in

the apparrell which they haue apointed to be worne at this solemnity. For the chiefe Magistrates of the Citie this day, weare scarlet gowns, which is a kind of red like fire; but to morrow they weare violet-gowns, which is a kind of blew, like water. Wherefore the colours of the rainebow which we see in your attire, doe admonish you and vs all, that ioy and sorrow haue such an entercourse in this life, that though this day wee weepe not, yet to morrow perhaps we cannot but weepe. This day wee reade Salomons Songs, to morrow peraduenture we may reade leremies Lamentations. Now in Elias his sacrifice, there were not only the colours of fire and water, but euen fire and water indeed 1 Reg. 18.38.. Insomuch as the fire of the Lord consumed and licked vp the water of the Altar. And assuredly our sorrowfull soule will be a most acceptable sacrifice to God, as Elias his sacrifice was, if we haue both the fire of Aetna, and the water of Nylus, so as the ardent fire of faith wel nie consume, & almost burn vp the flowing streame of loue. 
                        In Epiro sac
                              ••
                            fons est frigidus vltra omnes aquas, & spectatae diuersitatis. Nam si in eum ardentem demergas facem, extinguit, si procul ac sine igne admou
                              •
                           as, suopte ingenio inflammat. Solinus Poly. c. 12. 
                     Austin reporteth, that there is a fountain in Epirus which not onely putteth out torches that

are lighted, but also lighteth torches that are put out. 
                        De Ciuitate Dei. lib. 25. c. 3. 
                     Fulgosus likewise reporteth, 
                        Mirum fontem dicere debemus, apud Gratianopolin Gallicam vrbem. Nam quamuis caletes aquas non habeat, tamen simul cum ipsis aquas flammas persaepeemittit. Fulgosus lib. 1. non longè à fine.
                      that there is another fountaine neere Grenoble, a Citie in France, which although it haue not hot waters, as a Bath, yet oftentimes together with bubbles of water, it casteth vp flames of fire. The fountaine of teares that is in our eies must be like these two fountaines. As the Psalmist witnesseth. When my sorrow was stirred (sayes he) my heart was hot within mee, and while I was musing, the fire kindled. 
                     Psal. 30.3. 
                     When my sorrow was stirred. There is the first fountaine, My heart was hot within mee. There is the Torch lighted. And while I was musing. There is the other fountaine. The fire kindled. There is the flame burning. Whereupon one sayes fitly. Our eies must neither be drowned, nor dry 
                        Nec fluant oculi, nec 
                              •
                           icci sint. Seneca.
                     . If they want fire, they will be drowned. If they want water, they will be dry. Wherefore, both weepe not, and but weepe; both fire and water must goe together, that our eyes bee neither drowned nor drye. And this is the right moderation wee must keepe in weeping, as appeareth in this third part, WEEPE NOT, BVT WEEPE

both together. Weepe not for mee, but weepe for your selues.
                  
                  THe fourth part followeth, For Mee. Weepe not too much for my death. For the death of Christ is the death of Death: the death of the Diuell: the life of Himselfe: the life of Man. The reason of all this is his innocencie and righteousnesse, which makes first, that as the life of Christ is the life of Life, so the death of Christ is the death of Death. Put the case how you please, this is a most certaine truth, that the gate of life had neuer bin opened vnto vs, if Christ who is the death of Death, had not by his death ouercome death.
                        Mors mortis morti mortem nisi morte dedisset, coelestis vitae i
                              •
                           nus 
                              •
                           lausa foret.
                      Therefore both before his death he threatneth and challengeth death, saying, Osee 13.14. O death, I will bee thy death: and also after his death, hee derideth and scorneth death, saying, 1 Cor. 15.15. O death thou art but a drone, where is now thy sting? 
                        Sic Iohannes Pistorius Erasmi Roterodami affinis, igni cremandus dixit, O mors vbi est tua victoria?
                      Aske death any of you (I pray) and say, Death, how hast thou lost thy sting? how hast thou lost thy strength? What is the matter that virgins and very children doe now contemne thee, wheras Kings and euen tyrants did before feare

thee? Death (I warrant) will answer you, that the only cause of this is the death of Christ. Euen as a Bee stinging a dead body, takes no hurt, but stinging a liue body many times looseth both sting and life together; in like manner, death so long as it stung mortall men only, which were dead in sin, was neuer a whit the worse: but when it stung Christ once, who is life it selfe, by and by it lost both sting and strength. Therefore as the brasen serpent was so farre from hurting the Israelites, that contrariwise it healed them: after the same sort, death is now so far from hurting any true Israelite, that on the other side, if affliction, as a fiery serpent, sting vs, or if any thing else hurt vs, presently it is helped and redressed by death. Those which will needes play the hob-goblins, or the night-walking spirits (as we call them) all the while they speak vnder a hollow vault, or leape forth with an vgly vizard vpon their faces, they are so terrible, that he which thinks himselfe no small man, may perhaps bee affrighted with them: But if some lusty fellow chance to steppe into one of these, and cudgell him wel-fauouredly, and pull the

vizard from his face, then euery boy laughes him to scorne. So is it in this matter. Death was a terrible bulbeggar; and made euery man afraide of him a great while; but Christ dying, buckled with this bulbeggar, and coniured him (as I may say) out of his hollow vault, when as the dead comming out of the graues, were seene in Ierusalem, and puld the vizard from his face, when as he himselfe rising, left the linnen clothes which were the vizard of death, behinde him. Therefore as that Asse called Cumanus Asin
                           •
                        s, ietting vp and downe in a Lyons skinne, did for a time terrifie his master; but afterwards being descried, did benefit him very much; Semblably death stands now like a silly Asse, hauing his Lyons skin pulled ouer his eares, and is so farre from terrifying any, that it benefits all true Christians, because by it they rest from their labour, and if they be oppressed with troubles or cares, when they come to death they are discharged; death as an Asse doth beare these burthens for them. O blessed, blessed bee our Lord, which hath so disarmed death that it cannot do vs any hurt, no more then a Bee

can which hath no sting; nay rather it doth vs much good, as the brasen serpent did the Israelites: which hath so dismasked death, that it cannot make vs afraid, no more than a scar-bug can which hath no vizard; nay rather as an Asse beareth his masters burthens, so death easeth and refresheth vs. This hath Christ done by his death. Hee that felleth a tree vpon which the Sun shineth, may well cut the tree, but cannot hurt the Sunne. He that poureth water vpon Iron which is red hot, may well quench the heate, but hee cannot hurt the Iron. And so Christ the Sun of righteousnesse did driue away the shadow of death: and as glowing Iron was too hot and too hard a morsell for death to disgest. All the while Adam did eate any other fruit which God gaue him leaue to eate, he was nourished by it: but when he had tasted of the forbidden tree, he perished. Right so, death had free leaue to deuoure any other man, Christ onely excepted, but when it went about to destroy Christ, then it was destroyed it selfe. Those barbarous people called Cannibals, which feed only vpon raw flesh, especially of men, if they happen

to eate a peece of roasted meat, commonly they surfe
                        •
                      of it, and die. Euen so the right Canniball, the onely deuourer of all mankinde, Death I meane, tasting of Christs flesh, and finding it not to be raw (such as it was vsed to eate) but wholsome and heauenly meate indeede, presently tooke a surfet of it, and within three dayes died. For euen as when Iudas had receiued a sop at Christs hand, anon after his bowels gushed out. In like sort, death being so saucie as to snatch a sop (as it were) of Christs flesh, and a little bit of his body, was by and by, like Iudas, choaked and strangled with it, and faine to yeeld it vp againe, when Christ on Easter day reuiued. Death I wisse, had not beene brought vp so daintily before, nor vsed to such manner of meate, but alwayes had rauined either with Mithridates daughters vpon the poyson of sin, or else with Noahs Crow vpon the carrion of corruption. Wherefore now, saith Fulgentius, 
                     
                        Mors Christum gusta
                              •
                           it, sed non deglutiuit.
                      death did indeed taste of Christ, but could not swallow him vp, nor digest him. Contrariwise Christ as soone as euer hee had but a little tasted of death,Heb. 2.9. est-soones hee did deuoure

death, hee did swallovv vp death in victory: And so the death of Christ by reason of his righteousnesse is the death of Death.
                  
                  It is also the death of the Diuell. As the Apostle saith, that by his death he did ouercome not onely death, but him also which had the power of death, the diuell. It is reported that the Libard vseth a strange kinde of policie to kill the Ape. Hee lieth downe vpon the ground, as though he were starke dead; which the Apes seeing, come al together, and in despite skip vp vpon him. This the Libard beareth patiently, till he thinks they haue wearied themselues with their sporting: then suddenly he likewise leapes vp, and catcheth one in his mouth, and in each foote one, which immediatly hee killeth and deuoureth. 
                        Conculcant insultantes ludibrij causa don ec perdalis sentiens illas iam saltando defagitates derepente reuiuiscens aliam dentib. aliam vng
                              •
                           ab. corripit. Eras. Prou. Pardi morten ad simulat.
                      This was Christs policie. He was laid in the dust for dead. The diuell then insulted ouer him, and trampled vpon him. But hee like a liuely Libard, starting vp on Easter day, astonished the souldiers set to keepe him, which were the diuels apes, and made them lie like dead men: Math. cap. 28. verse 7. Euen as he told them before by his Prophet, saying; I will be

to them as a very Lyon, and as a Lybard in the way of Ashur. Osec 13.17. For as blind Sampson by his death killed the Philistims, when they were playing the apes in mocking and mowing at him Iude 16.25.; so Christ by his death destroyed the Diuell. Scalagor writeth, that the Camelion when he espies a serpent taking shade vnder a tree, climbes vp into that tree, and lets downe a threed, breathed out of his mouth as small as a spiders threed, at the end whereof there is a little drop as cleere as any pearle, which falling vpon the serpents head, kils him. 
                        Exore filum demittit araneorum more: in cuius fili extremo, guttula est margaritae splend
                              •
                           re, ea tactus in vertice serpens morit
                              ••
                            ex 196. Christ is this Camelion: he climbes vp into the tree of his crosse, & lets downe a threed of bloud issuing out of his side, like Rahabs red threed hanging out of her window 
                        Signa fidei atque vexilla dominica passionis attollens cocc
                              ••
                            in 
                              •
                           enestra legaun. Ambr. de fide lib. 5. c. 5. & Paulinus Natili. 8. Pu
                              •
                           i
                              •
                           to proprium signauit vellere tectum.
                     , the least drop whereof being so precious and so peerlesse, falling vpon the serpents head, kils him. The wild Bull, of all things cannot abide any red colour. Therefore the hunter for the nonce, standing before a tree, puts on a red garment: whom when the Bull sees, hee runnes at him as hard as he can driue. But the Hunter slipping aside, the Buls hornes sticke fast in the tree. As when Dauid slipped

aside, Sauls speare stucke fast in the wall. 1 Sam. 19.10 Such a hunter is Christ. Christ standing before the tree of his crosse, puts on a red garment dipt and died in his owne bloud, as one that commeth with redde garments from Bozra 
                     Esa. 63.1.: Therefore the Diuell and his Angels, like wilde Buls of Bazan, 
                     Psal. 22.12. run at him. But hee shifting for himselfe, their hornes sticke fast in his crosse. As Abrahams Ram by his hornes stuck fast in the briers Gen. 22.13.. Thus is the Diuell caught and killed. A dragon indeed kils an Elephant; yet so as the Elephant falling down, kils the dragon with him. An Elephant kils Eleazar: yet so as Eleazar falling down kils the Elephant with him 1. Mach. 6.46. And accordingly to this, the Diuell killing Christ, was killed by Christ. Yea as an Elephant is stronger then the dragon, and Eleazar is stronger then the Elephant: so Christ is stronger then them both: For the Elephant doth not liue after he hath killed the Dragon, neither doth Eleazar liue after he hath killed the Elephant: but Christ liueth after he hath destroyed the Diuell. Leauing the Diuel dead, hee is now risen himselfe from the dead: Wherefore as a Lybard killeth the

Ape: and a Chamelion the serpent: and a Hunter the Bull: and an Elephant the dragon: and Eleazar the Elephant himselfe: so Christ the true Eleazar, which signifies the helper of God, hath by his death killed that mischieuous Ape the diuel, that old Serpent the diuel▪ that wild bull the diuell, that great dragon the diuell, that raging Elephant the Diuell. When Mahomet the second of that name besieged Belgrade in Sernia, one of his Captaines at length got vp vpon the wall of the Citie, with banner displaied. A noble Bohemian espying this, ranne to the Captaine, & clapsing him fast about the middle, asked one Capistranus standing beneath, whether it would be any danger of damnation to his soule if he should cast himselfe downe headlong with that dogge (so he termed the Turke) to bee slaine with him? Capistranus answering, that is was no danger at all to his soule, the Bohemian forthwith tumbled himselfe down with the Turke in his armes, and so by his owne death only saued the life of all the Citie. 
                        Zieglerus, l. de illustribus viris Germaniae. cap. 98. Such an exploit was this of Christ. The Diuell like the great Turk, besieged not onely one Citie, but

euen all mankind, Christ alone, like this noble Bohemian, encountred with him. And seeing the case was so, that this dog the Diuel could not be killed stark dead, except Christ died also: therfore he made no reckoning of his life, but gaue himselfe to death for vs, that he onely dying for all the people, by his death our deadly enemy might for euer bee destroyed. For so Origen testifieth, that there were 2. crucified vpō the crosse of Christ: Christ himselfe visibly, with his will, and for a time: The Diuell invisibly, against his will, and for euer. 
                        Homil. 8. in Iosua.
                      Therefore the crosse is that victorious Chariot in the vpper part whereof Christ sitteth as a triumphāt conquerour, and in the lower part of it the diuell is drawne as a captiue, and is made an open spectacle of ignomie, and reproch. D
                        •
                     uers ancient Fathers note the virgin Marie was married, that the diuell might be deceiued. For he knew well enough Christ should be borne of a virgin; but hee neuer suspected blessed Mary was a virgin, considering she was wedded to Ioseph. Therefore he did not lie in wait to destroy the seed of the woman so circumspectly as otherwise hee

would if he had beene aware, or wist any such things. So that the birth of Christ did cosen the diuell; but the death of Christ did conquer the Diuell: And that much more gloriously when the temple of his body was vpon the pinacle of the crosse, then vvhen the body of his crosse vvas vpon the pinacle of the Temple. For when he was vpon the temple, his breath spake better things then Sathan: but when he was vpon the crosse, his bloud spake better things then Abel: and there his breath came from his lungs out of his mouth; but here his bloud came from his heart out of his side: and there hee fought, standing stoutly to it, and withstanding Sathan hee would not in any wise throw downe himselfe, but here hee skirmished, yeelding and humbling himselfe to the death of the Crosse: and there the Diuell ascended vp to him vnto the toppe of an high mountain, and so (as I may say) bad him base at his own goale, but here he himselfe descended down to the diuell into the neathermost hell, and so spoyled principalities and powers, and slew the great Leuiathan in the very bottome of his owne bottomles pit. For

the Diuell, like a greedy rauenous fish, snatching at the bait of Christs body (as Damascene speaketh) was peirced through, and twitcht vp with the hooke of his Deitie. 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Therefore both before Christs passion, Peter tooke money out of a fishes mouth to pay his tribute: and also after Christs passion, the Disciples broiled a fish for him to feede vpon. Whereby we see that Christ, who made a fish pay tribute to Caesar for him, made the Diuell also pay tribute to Death for him: and on the other side, that the Diuel while hee went about to catch this good fish, which is Iesus Christ, Gods sonne the Sauiour (as Methodius and Sibylla proue the letters of 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . seuerally signifie) was himselfe caught, yea also killed by Christ. So that all the while Christ was buried in the graue, the diuell was broyled in hell. Wherefore a
                        •
                      it was bootlesse for Goliah to brandish his speare against Dauid: so it little auailed the Diuell to shake his speare likewise in the hand of the souldier against the heart of Christ. For as Dauid hauing heard Goliah prate and talke his pleasure, when they came to the point, at the first stroke

ouerthrew him: so Christ with that very selfe-same speare which gaue him a little venny in comparison, or (if it be lawfull for me so to speake) but a phillip on the side, which was soone after recured, gaue the diuel a deadly wound in the forehead which with all his pawes hee shall neuer be able to claw off. And againe, as Dauid onely with his sling wrought this feate; so Christ onely by his death, and by the power of his crosse, which is the sling of Dauid, 
                     
                        Sene crux ipsa funda est qua Dauid Goliath borrenoum armis & formidabile visu prostrauit humi. Cyr. Ioh. l. 8.17. did conquer and subdue the diuel. And so the death of Christ, by reason of his righteousnes, is the death of the Diuel. It is on the other side, the life of himselfe. That which was prophesied in the Psalm is here fulfilled in Christ. Psa. 92.12.The iust shal flourish as the Palm-tree. In the Hebrew it is Tamar, which signifies onely a palm-tree. But in the Greeke it is Phoinix, which signifies not only a palme-tree, but also a Phoenix. Which translation proueth two things. First, that Iesus the iust one, did most flourish, when he was most afflicted▪ For the iust shall flourish as the palm-tree. 
                        Chattamar.
                      Now the palm-tree, though it haue many weights at the top, and many snakes at the roote, yet still it sayes, I

am neither oppressed with the weights, nor distressed with the snakes. 
                        Nec premor, nec perimor.
                      And so Christ the true palm-tree, though all the iudgements of God, and all the sinnes of the world, like vnsupportable weights, were laid vpon him: yea though the cursed Iewes stood beneath like venemous snakes, hissing and biting at him, yet hee was neither so oppressed with them, nor so distressed with these, but that euen vpon his crosse he did most flourish, when he was most afflicted: As peny-royal being hung vp in the larder-house, yet buds his yellow flower: and Noahs oliue tree being drowned vnder the water, yet keepes his greene branch: and Aarons rod being clung and dry, yet brings forth ripe almonds: and Moses bramble-bush being set on fire, yet shines, and is not consumed. Secondly, that Iesus the iust one did most liue, when he seemed most to be dead: For the iust shall flourish as the Phoenix.
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Now the Phoenix though sitting in his nest among the hot spices of Arabia he be burnt to ashes, yet still he sayes I die not, but old age dieth in mee. 
                        Moritur me non moriente sen
                              •
                           ctus.
                      And so Christ the true Phoenix, though lying in his graue among the hot spices wherewith

                     Nichodemus emblame him, hee was neuer like to rise from death to life againe; yet he died not, but mortality died in him, and immortalitie so liued in him, that euen in his sepulcher hee did most liue when hee seemed most to be dead. As the Laurell is greenest in the foulest Winter, and the lime is hottest in the coldest water: and the glow-worme shineth brightest when the night is darkest: and the swan singeth sweetest when his death is neerest. 
                        Cantator cygnus funeris ipse sui. Martialis lib. 13. Epigr.
                      
                     Epaminondas being sore wounded in fight, demanded of his souldiers standing by, whether his enemies were ouerthrowne or no: They answered, yea. Then whether his bucklet were whole or no: They answrered also, I. Nay then (sayes hee) all is well: This is not the end of my life, but the beginning of my glory. For now your deare Epaminondas dying thus gloriously, shall rather bee borne againe then buried 
                        Nunc enim vester Epaminondas nascitur, quia sic moritur.
                     . Christ likewise was sore wounded: but his enemies, Death and the Diuell, were ouerthrowne and spoyled. His buckler, which was his God-head, was whole and vntouched: therefore there was no harm done. His death was no death; but an exaltation

vnto greater glory. 
                        Ego si exaltatus fuero. Iohn. 12.32. That noble Eunuch riding in his coach, read in Esay, that Christ was silent before his death, as a lambe before his shearer. He saith, not before the Butcher; but, before the shearer. Insinuating, that death did not kill Christ, but onely sheare him a little: Neither yet had death Christs fleece when he was shorne. For Christ taking to himselfe aspunge full of vineger, Ioh. 19.29. that is, full of our sharpe and sowre sinnes, did giue vs for it, purple wooll full of bloud, Heb. 9.19. that is, ful of his pure and perfect iustice. And indeed the onely liuery which Christ our Lord and Master giueth vs all that are his faithfull seruants, is a coat made of this purple wooll. The Psalmist saith, that God giueth his snow like wooll: But here wee may turne the sentence, and say, that Christ giueth his wooll like snow. For as show couereth the ground when it is ragged and deformed; so Christs wooll, which is his coate without seame, couereth our sinnes, and though they were as crimson, yet maketh them white as snow. And as Gideons fleece when it was moist, the earth was dry; but when it was dry, the earth was

moist: so when Christs fleece was moist, as a greene tree, then were all wee drye, like rotten stickes; but when his fleece was dry, all the blood and water being wrung out of his pretious side, then were we moistened with his grace. Wherefore seeing death had not Christs fleece when he was shorne, but we haue it which beleeue in him, it followeth that neither death was the better, nor Christ the worse. But as a lamb is much more nimble & liuely for shearing; so this shearing of death was a kind of quickning to the lambe of God, and onely a trimming to him before he ascended to his Father, as Ioseph was trimmed and powled before he appeared to Pharaoh. For looke how Adam slept; so Christ died.
                        Dormit Adam, moritur Christus. Prosper.
                      When Adam slept, his side was opened: when Christ died, his side was opened. Adams side being opened, flesh and bone were taken out: Christs side being opened, water and bloud were taken out. Of Adams flesh and bone the woman was built: of Christs water and bloud the Church is built: So that the death of Christ is nothing else but the sleepe of Adam. For 
                        〈◊〉
                      he said of the Damsels death. The Damsell

is not dead, but sleepeth; so hee saith of his owne death, I laid me downe and slept, and rose vp againe, for the Lord sustained me. And in another place, when God the Father saith to his Son, Awake my glory, awake my Lute and Harpe: God the Sonne answeres to his Father, I will awake right early. That vessel which Peter sawe in a traunce, which came down from heauen to the earth, and was knit at the foure corners, and had all maner of beasts in it, did betoken Christ, Christ came downe from heauen to the earth, and his story was knit vp by the foure Euangelists; and hee hath made Iewes and Gentiles, yea all Nations, though they were as bad as beasts before, yet he hath made them all, I say, one in himselfe. Now (saith Cassianus) it is worth the noting, that the Holy Ghost saith not, this vessell was a sheet, but was like a sheet. 
                        Pulchre 
                              •
                           it, Non sint
                              •
                           um, sed Quasi
                              •
                           inteum.
                      A sheet may signifie either sleepe or death: Because there is both a sleeping sheete, and a winding sheete; But neither was Peters vessell a sleepe, though it were like a sheet: neither was Christs body dead, though it were lapt in a sheete. For wee our selues cannot

so properly bee said to liue in our first birth, as in our second birth: and Christs life when he lay in that new wombe, in which neuer any other was conceiued, is nothing to his life, when hee lay in that new tombe; in which neuer any other was buried. Wherefore as Iacob trauelling towards Haram, when he had laid an heape of stones vnder his head, and taken a nap by the way, was much reuiued with it after his tedious iourney: so Christ trauelling towards heauen, when hee had slept a little in that stony sepulchre which was hewn out of a rocke, liued then most princely after his painfull passion. Tell me, when did Ionas liue? In the hatches of the ship, or in the belly of the whale? In the hatches of the shippe? Why? I am sure you will not say so. That was nothing. But to liue in the belly of the Whale when the mariners were in extreme ieopardy and danger vpon the water, and yet Ionas most safe and secure vnder the water, this indeede was somewhat: who euer saw such a wonder? The waters were one while hoisted vp to the highest cloudes, another while hur
                        •
                     ed downe to the nethermost depth, Ionas
                     
himselfe being all this vvhile in the very gulfe of destruction, and yet not one haire the worse. Christs case was the same. As Ionas vvas in the belly of the Whale three daies & three nights: so & so long vvas the sonne of man in the bowels of the earth: Yet he had no more hurt then Ionas had; but liued better vnder the earth then we can vpon the earth, better in death then we can in life. Tel me when did Daniel liue? in the Kings court, or in the Lions denne? In the Kings court? why? there is no great reason for that. Any man might haue liued there. But to liue in the Lions den, vvhen the mouth of the den vvas shut, and the mouths of the Lions open, this indeed was the life of an Angell, & no man. What King could euer make Lions attend and wait vpon him? Yet here you might haue seene vvorthy Daniel sitting in the midst of many hungry Lions, when as the Lions lay downe at his feet couching and crouching before him, and adored their owne prey cast vnto them, vvhich otherwise they vvould haue vvorried, and being beasts, became men in humanity toward this Saint, seeing men became beasts in cruelty

against him. The sa
                        ••
                     e reason was in Christ. His sepulchre was sealed as well as Daniels den: And hee saith also of himselfe in the Psalmes, My soule is among Lions. These Lions were the terrors of death, and the horrors of hell. Yet hee tooke no more hurt then Daniel did. But brake the chaines of death into fitters, and the gates of hell into shiuers, and then most gloriously triumphed. And so the death of Christ, by reason of his righteousnesse, is the life of himselfe.
                  
                  It is lastly the life of man. When Christs speare had opened that way of life which the Cherubins sword had stopt vp; Then said our sauiour to the Theefe, This day shalt thou be with me in Paradise. Adam and Eue both in one day were expelled out of Paradise; Christ & the theefe both in one day were receiued into Paradise; yea, both in one houre of the day: For about Noone, when the winde blew, Adam and Eue were expelled; and so about the sixth houre, that is, about twelue of clock in the day time, Christ and the Theefe were receiued. Christ saying to the Theefe while he did draw him vp to Paradise, Ose. cap. 11. I doe draw

thee with the cords of a man, euen with bands of loue. But the Septuagint translate the Hebrew words 
                        Bechauele Adam.
                      which signifie, with the cords of a man, into those Greeke words 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        ., which signifie, with the destruction of a man. As if CHRIST should say thus to the Theefe: I doe so deerely loue thee, that I am content my selfe to be destroyed, that thou mayest bee saued; my selfe to die, that thou mayest liue. I doe draw thee with the destruction of a man, euen with bands of loue. So that the Theefe who saw his owne wounds, and death in Christs body, did see also Christs sauing health and life in his owne body. As Alcuinus saith, writing vpon the sixth of Iohn; 
                        Assumpsit vitae mortem, vt mors acciperet vitam.
                      When 
                        •
                     he liuing Lord died, then the dying 
                        •
                     heefe liued. Notably saith the Prophet, Lam. 4.21. The breath of our nostrils, Christ the Lord, is taken in our sinnes, to whom we said, wee shall liue in thy shadow. If Christ be the breath of our nostrils, then he is our life: And againe, if wee liue in his shadow, then wee liue in his death; For where there is breath in a shadow; there there is life in death. Now as the ouer-shadowing of the holy Ghost was

the life of Christ: so the ouer-shadowing of Christ, is the life of man. And as Peters shadow gaue health to the sicke: so Christs shadow giues life to the dead: yea a thousand times rather Christs than Peters. For as Elias his spirit was double
                        •
                      vpon Elizeus, because Elias being aliue restored some to life: but Elizeus, as Ierome saith; being dead, raised vp one from the dead:
                        Mortuus mortuum suscitauit.
                      so Peters spirit was doubled vpon Christ, because Peter being aliue, was a physitian to the liuing: but Christ, as Chrysostome saith, being dead, was a Physitian to the dead. 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Or rather indeede in this comparison there is no comparison. But as Peters spirit was a shadow to Christs spirit, so Peters shadow was nothing to Christs death. Ezekias seeing the shadow of the Sunne goe tenne degrees backe in the Diall, was assured by this signe, that he should recouer of his sicknesse. Esa. 38.8. Sick Ezechias may signifie all mankinde, which is sicke by reason of sinne. But this is an vnfallible signe we shall recouer, because the Sunne hath gone ten degrees back in the diall. The Sunne of righteousnes Iesus Christ hath for our sake made himselfe lower by

ma
                        •
                     y degrees in the earth. My father is greater then 
                        •
                     . There hee is gone backe tenne degrees below his Father. Thou hast made him lower then the Angels. There hee is gone backe ten degrees below the Angels. I am a worme, and no man. There he is gone backe ten degrees below men. A liue dogge is better then a dead Lyon Eccle. 9.4.. There he is gone back ten degrees below wormes. For hee was not counted so good as a liue worme, but was buried in the earth as a dead Lyon to be meate for the wormes, if it had bin possible for this holy one to see corruption. But blessed, O blessed be our Lord: Christ being in the forme of God, was buried in the graue, and so was made lower then his Father, nay lower then Angels, nay lower then Men, nay lower then wormes, that we being now no better then wormes, might be crowned in heauen, and so might be made higher then wormes, yea higher then men, yea higher then Angels, yea partakers of the same life and kingdome with Christ. Pliny reporteth, 
                        L. 36. c. 10. that there was a Diall set in Campus Martius, to note the shadowes of the sun, which agreeing

very well at the first, afterwards for thirty yeares together did not agree with the sun. All the time of those thirty, yea three and thirty yeares that Christ liued in his humiliation here vpon earth, you might haue seene such a Diall: In which time the shadow of the Diall did not agree with the shining of the Sun. But thankes be to God, all the better for vs. When the Sunne went backward ten degrees in the diall, then Ezechias went forward fifteene degrees in his life. He liued fifteene yeares longer. And so the going of this Sunne Iesus Christ ten degrees backeward, hath healed all our sicknesse, and set vs a thousand degrees forward, and infinitely aduanced vs by his death to euerlasting life. For Christ is that louing Rachel, which dies her selfe in Childe-birth to bring forth her sonne Beniamin aliue; Christ is that righteous Adam which by the bloudy sweat of his browes hath earned for vs the bread of life; Christ is that iust Noah, which shutting vp himselfe in his Arke, as in a sepulcher, saueth all that come to him aliue: Christ is that tender Pellican, which wounding his owne breast, doth with his bloud restore

againe his yong ones to life. And euen as when many birds are caught in a net, if a Pellican, or any other great bird that is among them, get out, all the rest that are little ones follow after: semblably Christ as a great bird, hauing broken through the net of death, all we escape with him: So that wee may say with the Psalmist, Our soule is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowler, the snare is broken, & we are deliuered. Arnobius vpon these words in the Psalme, Psal. 138. 
                     Despise not the worke of thine owne hands, writeth thus, Wee are the worke of thine owne hands, seeing wee are thy workemanshippe. Eph. 2.10. Ipsius summus sactura conditi in Christo. Quantum ad substantiam fecit quantum ad gratiam condidit. Tertul. aduer. Mar l. 5. non longè à fine.
                      Now because the worke of thy hands was destroyed by the work of our hands, therefore were thy hands nailed to the crosse for our sinnes. That those hands of thine might repaire againe the worke of thy hands by the tree of the crosse, which was destroyed by the tree of concupiscence. Thus farre Arnobius. Whereby we may gather, that the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and euill, is euill, that is death, but the fruit of the tree of life, that is of the crosse of Christ, is life. When Alexander had throwne downe

the walles of Thebes, Phryne a harlot promised that she would at her owne charges repaire them againe, so that the Citizens would suffer this title to bee grauen vpon the gate, Alexander hath throwne them downe, but Phryne hath raised them vp 
                     
                        
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           . Plutar.
                     . The case is quite contrary here: Eue hath ouerthrowne not onely Thebes, but euen all mankinde; Christ hath at his owne cost and charges repaired and built vs vp againe. Therefore wee must graue this title vpon the Crosse of Christ, Eue hath throwne vs downe, but Christ hath raised vs vp. Eues tree of knowledge of good and euill hath throwne vs downe, but Christs tree of life hath raised vs vp. Nay, I will be bold to say yet more. What is that? Marry this. That as far as the tree of life excelleth the tree of knowledge of good and euill, so farre the crosse of Christ excelleth the tree of life. I know well many will muse & maruell much what I meane to say so. And some perhaps will scarce beleeue it is true which I say: Neuerthelesse, most Christian & blessed brethren, make you no doubt of it. For it is not my opinion, or my speech only. They are the

very words of our Sauiour, I came, sayes hee, that men might haue life, 
                     Iohn 10.10. 
                     and that they might haue it more aboundantly. More aboundantly? What is that? That aboundantly wee might haue more life by the Crosse of Christ, then euer wee could haue by the tree of life: that aboundantly we might gaine more by the obedience of Christ in his death, then euer we lost, or could loose by the disobedience of Adam in his life. And therefore though that sinne of Adam was so heinous and so horrible: that it cast the Image of God out of Paradise; that it polluted all the race of mankinde; that it condemned the whole world; that it defaced the very frame of heauen it selfe; yet considering the sequell, how not onely the guilt of this sinne, but euen the very memory of it is now vtterly abolished by the bloud of Christ, S. Gregory is not afraid to say, O happy, happy, happy man was Adam, that euer hee so sinned and transgressed against GOD 
                        O foelix culpa quae talem ac tantum meruit habere redemptorem.
                     : Because by this meanes both hee, and all we haue found such plentifull redemption, such inestimable mercie, such superabundant grace; such felicitie, such eternity,

such life by Christs death. For as honey being found in a dead Lyon, the death of the Lyon was the sustenance of Sampson: so Christs gall is our hony, 
                        Christi fel nostrum mel.
                      and the bitter death of Christ, by reason of his righteousnesse, is the sweete life of man. Thus you see that the death of Christ is the death of Death, the death of the Diuell, the life of Himselfe, the life of Man. And therfore he saies in this fourth part, weepe not too much for my death, For me, Weepe not for me, but weepe for your selues.
                  
                  I Perceiue beloued, I haue beene somewhat long in this part. Therefore I will make more hast in the rest, and doe what I can deuise, that I may not seeme tedious vnto you. Now then to the fifth part. For your selues. Weepe not too little for your owne life: For the life of man is quite contrarie. The life of man is the life of Death, the life of the Diuell, the death of himselfe, the death of Christ. The reason of all this is his iniquitie and sinne. Which euen in Gods deere children, saies Bernard, is cast downe, but not cast out. 
                        De iectum non eiectum.
                      Therefore though sin cannot

sometimes rule ouer vs, because it is cast downe, yet it will alwayes dwell in vs, because it is not cast out: For it is so bred in the bone, that till our bones be with Iosephs bones carried out of Egypt, that is, out of the world, sinne cannot be carried out of our bones. The Irish history telleth vs, that the Citie of Waterford giueth this poesie, Intacta manet, 
                     It continueth vntouched. Because since it was first conquered by King Henry the second, it was neuer yet attainted, no not so much as touched with treason: Also that the Isle of Arren in that country hath such a pure aire, that it was neuer yet infected with the plague. We cannot say thus of the nature of man; that it is either so cleare from treason as that Citie, or else that it is so cleare from infection as that Island is. Nay, our very reason is treason, and our best affection it is no better then an infection, if it bee well sifted in the sight of God. Euagrius recordeth,
                        Li. 5. ca. 15. that the Romans got such a victorie ouer Chosroes, one of the Persian Kings, that this Chosroes made a law, that neuer after any King of Persia should moue warre against the Romans. Wee cannot possibly subdue sinne

in such sort as the Romanes did this Persian King. But doe we what we can doe, sinne will alwaies be a Iebuzite, a false borderer, yea, a ranke traytor, rebelling against the spirit. Which makes the life of man, first to be, sayes Chrysostome, a debt (as it were) owne and due to death 
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                     . For the diuell is the father of sin, and sin is the mother of death. Hereupon Saint Iames saith, that sinne being finished, trauelling in child-birth like a mother bringeth forth death. And Dauid in the ninth Psalme calleth sin the gate of death: Because as a man comes into a house by the gate; so death came into the world by sinne. The corruption of our flesh did not make the soule sinfull; but the sinne of our soule did make the flesh corruptible. Whereupon Lactantius calleth sinne the reliefe or the foode of death 
                        Pabulian mortis.
                     . As a fire goeth out when all the fuell is spent, but burneth as long as that lasteth: so death dieth when sin ceaseth, but where sin eboundeth, there death rageth. The Prophet Abacucke sinning not, death was so farre from him, that hee was able to flie without wings: But King Asa sinning, death was so neere to him, that hee

was not able to stand vpon his feet. Nay, we may see this in one and the selfe-same man. Moses sinning not, death could not meet with him in the bottome of the red sea; but sinning, death did seaze vpon him in the toppe of mount Nebo. So that the life of man by reason of his sinne, is the life of death.
                  
                  It is also the life of the diuell: As Emisenus saith, Each one hath in him as many diuels, a
                        •
                      euils 
                        Tot daemonia quot crimina.
                     : euery seuerall sinne being sufficient to maintaine a seuerall Diuell. The godly finding no ioy in the earth, haue their conuersation in heauen; But Satan finding no ioy in hell, hath his conuersation in the earth. So that the earth is a hell to vs, but a heauen to him. Here he hath his liuing; as it was said at the first, Thou shalt eate the dust of the earth all the dayes of thy life. This dust, saith Macarius, is the diuels diet 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        .. And therefore as a scald Cur waits for a bone, so hee that goes about seeking whom he may deuou
                        •
                     e, watches continually til the godly shake off the dust from their feete, that is, shake off some sinne which they haue gotten by walking in the world, that then hee may licke it vp as one of

those Dogs which did licke vp Iezabels bloud. This is meate and drinke to him. 
                        Dulce diabola peccare not. Hila. Enarra. in p. 118. He loues it alife to see vs sinne, euen as cursed Cham did to see No
                           •
                        hs nakednesse. And as flies are alwaies busie about a sore place, so saith Theophylact, 
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . In cap. Luc. 16. p. 320. That is a sport or pleasure to Sathan, which is a sore or a paine to a man; especially if he be a godly m
                        •
                     n. For this Behemoth, the Diuell, eateth grasse as an oxe 
                     Iob 40.10.. Whereupon Gregory noteth, that a sheepe, or any such other beast will eate any manner of grasse, though it be trampled and stained neuer so much: but an oxe will eate no kind of grasse but that which is greene and fresh. And so the Diuell will be sure to haue his feede of the very finest and best 
                        Esca eius electa. Abacuc. 1.16.: For the Angell of the Lord reioyceth most when one that is a sinner conuerteth. He eateth grasse as a sheepe. But the Angell of Sathan reioiceth most when one that is a conuert sinneth. Hee eateth grasse as an Oxe. If the Diuell cannot keepe a man from liuing long, then hee will hinder him from liuing well. 
                        Aut Imperat mortes, aut impetit mores. Leo.
                      If hee cannot kill him, then hee will corrupt him. And indeede hee takes greater pleasure in corrupting one godly

man, that in killing a hundred wicked. He was more delighted when Dauid slew but Vrias, then when Saul slew himselfe: when Peter did but denie Christ then when Iudas betraied him. So that the life of man, by reason of his sinne, is the delight, yea it is the very life of the Diuell.
                  
                  It is on the other side the death of himselfe. O miserable wretch that I am (saith one) who shall deliuer me from this body of death? The life of the godly is a very body of death. But their death is onely a shadow of death. Thales a Philosopher being demaunded what difference there is betweene life and death, answered, They are all one. Then being asked againe, if he had not rather liue then die, No saith he as before, for they are al one. But Ierome saith farre more excellently, They are not all one. That is not true. For it is one thing to liue in continuall danger of death; another thing to die in continuall assurance of life. 
                        Aliud viuere moriturum, aliud mori victurum.
                      Therefore Ecclesiastes saith, That the day of our death is better then the day of our birth: For when we are borne, we are mortall; but when we are dead, we are immortall; And

we are aliue in the wombe to die in the world; but wee are dead in the graue to liue in heauen. Hence it is that the wicked are merry at their birth-day, as Pharaoh made a feast at his birth-day, when his chiefe Baker was hanged Gen. 40.20.: and Herod likewise made a feast at his birth-day, when Iohn Baptist was beheaded: but they are sorry at their dying day, as Iudas was sorry when hee went about to hang himselfe: and Caine was afraid euery one would kill him that met him. Contrariwise, the godly are sorry at their birth-day, as Iob, Let the day perish wherein I was borne: and Ieremie, Let not the day wherein my mother bare mee, be blessed 
                     Ier. 20.14.: But they are merry at their dying day, as Simeon, Lord, now lettest thou thy seruant depart in peace: and Paul, I desire to be dissolued, and to be with Christ. Therefore we also keepe holy dayes, and celebrate the memory of the Saints, not vpon their birth-daies, but vpon their death-dayes, to shew that these two are not all one, but that the day of our death is better then the day of our birth. For whereas there are 2. waies, the one hauing in it, first a transitory life, and then an eternall death, the other hauing

in it first a transitory death, and then an eternall life: the wicked chuse to liue here for a time, though they die for it hereafter eternally; but the godly chuse to haue their life hid with Christ here, that they may liue with Christ eternally hereafter. Therefore the wicked neuer thinke of death, but the godly thinke of nothing else. As Alexander the Monarch of the world had all other things saue only a sepulchre to bury him in whē he was dead; he neuer thought of that: But Abraham, the heire of the world, had no other possession of his own but only a field which he bought to bury his dead in; he thought of nothing els. We read that Daniel strowed ashes in the tēple to descry the footsteps of Bels Priests, which did eat vp the meat: So did Abraham strow ashes in his memory, saying; I will speake vnto my Lord, though I be but dust and ashes. So doe all the faithfull, remembring they shall one day be turned to dust and ashes. That so seeing and marking the foot-steps of death, how it continually commeth and steales away their strength (as Bels priests did the meat) how it daily eateth vp and wasteth and consumeth their life, they

may be alwayes prepared for it. Our first parents made them garments of figge-leaues: But God misliking that, gaue them garments of skins. Therefore Christ in the Gospell cursed the fig-tree which did beare onely figge leaues to couer our sinne: but commended the Baptist which did weare skins to discouer our mortalitie. For not onely as Austin saith, Our whole life is a disease 
                        Vita morbus.
                     : but also as Bernard saith, our whole life is a death 
                        Vita mors.
                     . The life of man, by reason of his sin is a continuall disease, yea, it is the very death of himselfe.
                  
                  It is lastly, the death of Christ. The Prophet Esay calleth Christ a sinne, or a sacrifice for sinne, 
                        Asham. Esay. 53.10. prefigured by all those sin-offerings of the old law. Because indeed, when Christ was crucified at the first, he was broken for our sins. According to that of Tert
                           •
                        llian, 
                     
                        Propter pec
                           
                              •
                           atum mori 
                              •
                           ecesse habuit Filius Dei. V
                              •
                           de etiam Aug. Medita. ca. 7. vbi doce
                              •
                            h
                              •
                           minem esse causam passionis.
                      Sinne it was which brought the sonne of God to his death. The Iewes were onely instruments and accessaries to it: sinne was the setter and the principall. They cried, Crucifie him in the court of Pilate: but our sinnes cried, Crucifie him in the court of heauen. Now as the death of Christ was not

efficient to saue the wicked: so the sinne of the wicked was not sufficient to condemne Christ. But the Scripture saith of them which either are, or at leastwise seeme to be godly. They say they know God, but by their workes they deny him: and Saul, Saul, why dost thou persecute me? And, They crucifie again vnto themselues the sonne of God, Zachary prophesieth of Christ,Zacha. 13.6. That when one shall say vnto him, What are these wounds in thy hands? Then he shall answere, Thus was I wounded in the house of my friends, that is, in the house of them which ought to haue bin my friends. So that our sins did wound Christs hand
                        •
                      at the first. And now also, not the wicked, which are no part of his body, but wee which are misticall members of his body, and therefore should by good reason be his friends, we I say, doe yet oftentimes by our sinnes deny Christ with Peter: nay we persecute Christ with Paul: nay we crucifie Christ with the Iewes: Yea (if it will please you to heare me) I will say yet more, wee crucifie Christ farre more cruelly then the Iewes did. Then his body was passible and mortall, now it is glorified and immorall:

they knew not what they did: we doe ill enough, yet wee know what we doe well enough: they pearced him with a speare, we pearce him with reproches: they buried him in the earth, wee bury him in obliuion: then hee rose againe the third day; but we so bury Christ, that not once in three daies, no not once in three weekes he ariseth or shineth in our hearts. Nay, that which I am ashamed to speake, though some are not ashamed to doe it, there are in the world which haue no time, not once in three months, not once in three yeares, no not once scarce in their whole life to thinke of Christ, but bury him in the perpetuall forgetfulnesse of their carelesse conscience, as in a barren land, where all good things are forgotten. Wherefore let euery one as soone as he is tempted to any sin, thinke straight-waies that hee sees Christ comming towards him, wrapt vp in white linnen cloathes, as he was buried, with a kercher bound about his head, and crying after a ghastly and fearefull sort, Beware, Take heed what you doe, Detest sinne, abhorre sin: Fie vpon it, A shame light on it It: did once most vilely

and villanously murther mee: but now seeing my wounds are whole againe, do not (I beseech you) do not rubbe and reuiue them with your sinnes to make them bleed afresh: now seeing the scepter of the kingdome of heauen is put into my hand, doe not offer mee a reede againe to mocke mee, now seeing my head is crowned with the pure gold of eternall glory, doe not set a crowne of thornes vpon it againe: now seeing I my selfe am enstalled in the Throne of the right hand of Maiesty, doe not pull mee out of my throne, and throw mee into the graue againe, and with your sinnes seale a mighty great stone vpon mee, to stifle mee, and presse mee, and hold mee down in death. O beloued, good beloued, at his instance be perswaded, by whose bloud you are redeemed. Haue pitty, haue pitty vpon me poore Iesus. Once he voluntarily, yea, euen ioyfully dyed for vs, and if that one death had not been sufficient, he would haue been content then to haue dyed a thousand deaths more. Now he protesteth that the least sinne of any one Christian, doth more vex him euen at the very heart, then all his dolorous

paines vpon the Crosse. Our sinnes are those Soldiers which take him, those tormentors which whippe him, those thornes which gore his head, those nailes which pierce his feete, that speare which sheds his bloud, that crosse which takes away his life. And yet if to grieue him thus continually would doe vs any good, then hee would be most glad to preferre our good, though neuer so little, before his owne griefe, though neuer so great. But it is not so. That one death which he willingly suffered, was for our saluation. These diuers deaths which we with our sins so often put him to against his will, do make for our greater damnatiō. Therfore he beseecheth vs, & I also being prostrate at the very feet of euery one of you heartily in his name exhort you, if wee will haue no pitty on him, yet for the tender loue wee beare to our owne deere soules, that wee would not alwaies keepe him vpon the racke, and euery day vexe the iust Lot with our vnlawfull deedes, that we would not any more shedde his precious bloud, and treade it and trample it vnder our feet. This I assure you (blessed Christians) will bee a

most forcible meanes, not onely to terrifie and fray vs from sinne which wee may commit hereafter, but also to mollifie and melt our hearts for sinne which we haue committed heretofore, if wee consider that the life of man, by reason of his sinne, is the death of Christ. Thus you see that the life of man is the life of Death, the life of the Diuel, the death of himselfe, the death of Christ. And th
                        •
                     refore hee saith in this fifth part. Weepe not too little for your owne life. For your selues, Weepe not for mee, but weepe for your selues.
                  
                  THE sixth part is next, For mee, for your selues. Which noteth, seeing both the excesse and the want are to bee eschewed, that therefore the true mea
                        •
                     e which we must keepe betweene Christ and our selues, consisteth in a certaine qualification of these two extremities. For mee, for your selues, both together. Weepe not too much, saith he
                        •
                     , for my death, which is the death of Death: Weepe not too little for your own life, which is the life of Death. Not too much for my death, which is the death

of the diuell: not too little for your owne life, which is the life of the Diuell. Not too much for my death, which is my life: not too little for your owne life, which is your death. Not to much for my death, which is the life of Man: not too little for your owne life, which is the death of Christ. Saint Paul willeth the Corinthians to approue themselues by honour & dishonour. First, by honour, then by dishonour. Teaching thereby that dishonourable honour, is better then honourable dishonour. Yet to keepe a meane in this matter, that we must as well count it an honour to bee sometimes dishonoured with Christ, as a dishonour to be alwayes honoured without Christ. Euen so sayes our Sauiour here, For mee, for your selues. First, For mee: then for your selues. Teaching thereby, that to reioyce for Christ, is better then to weepe for our selues. Yea; to keepe a meane betwixt both, that we must as well sometimes descend out of Christ into our selues to weepe, as alwayes ascend out of our selues into Christ to reioyce▪ For the Apostle sayes, that wee must reioyce with them that reioyce, and weepe

with them that weepe. If my friend bee alwaies sorrowfull, and neuer ioyfull, hee hath no pleasure by me; if he be alwayes ioyfull, and neuer sorrowfull, I haue no proofe of him; but he is my dearest friend, most delighted in me, best approued by me, that takes such part as I doe, sometimes reioycing, and sometimes weeping, reioycing when I reioyce, and weeping when I weepe. The like is to be seene in this place; For mee, for your selues. If a Christian alwayes thinke of his owne misery, and neuer of Christs mercie, hee will despaire: if he alwayes thinke of Christs mercy, and neuer of his owne misery, he will presume. But hee is the best Christian, so hie, that hee cannot despaire, so low, that he cannot presume, which inclines as well to the one, as the other, sometimes reioycing, and sometimes weeping; reioycing for Christ, and weeping for himselfe. A man cannot weepe too little for Christ, if he presume not: a man cannot weepe too much for himselfe, if he despaire not. But hee may easily despaire that weepes too much for Christ: and he may easily presume, that weepes too little for himselfe. Wherefore

as in a ballance, if there be any ods in the s
                        •
                     ales, wee take out of that which is the heauier, and put it into that which is the lighter, till there be no difference betwixt them: So here wee must wey these matters well, that wee our selues▪ may be iust weight, neither too heauy for our owne misery, not too light for Christs mercy, Thus did Dauid when hee said to God, Hide mee vnder the shadow of thy wings. What are Gods wings? His Mercy and his Iustice. What are the shadow of his wings? Our loue and our feare. Our loue is the shadow of his mercy, which is his right wing: Our feare is the shadow of his Iustice, which is his left wing. Now seeing hee that is hid vnder the right wing onely, may presume because hee hath no feare, and hee that is hid vnder the left wing onely, may despaire, because he hath no loue: therefore sayth Dauid, Hide me, O Lord, vnder the shadow, not of one wing, but of both thy wings. That I may neuer despaire while I alwaies loue thy mercy, and reioyce for Christ; that I may neuer presume while I alwayes feare thy iustice, and weepe for my selfe. A Quaile, the very

same Bird which was the Israelites meate in the wildernesse, as he flies ouer the sea, feeling himselfe begin to be weary, lights by the way into the sea. Then lying at one side, he layes downe one wing vpon the water, and holds vp the other wing towards heauen. Lest hee should presume to take too long a flight at the first, hee we
                        •
                     s one wing: Lest hee should despaire of taking a new flight afterwards, hee keepes the other wing drie. Thus must a Christian man doe. When hee layes downe the wing of feare vpon the water to weepe for himselfe, then hee must hold vp the wing of loue toward heauen to reioyce for Christ. That his two wings may be answerable to Gods two wings. That as God hath two wings, the one of Mercie, the other of Iustice: so hee may haue two wings, the one of ioy for Christ, the other of sorrow for himselfe. Sem & I
                           •
                        pheth, Noahs godly and dutifull children, when they saw their father otherwise then hee should be, went backeward and couered him: They went backeward, that they might not see him themselues; they couered him, that others might not see

him. Christ hanging naked vpon the Crosse, was the shame of men, and the outcast of the people. Therefore wee that are the children of God, must goe backeward, by abhorring them that crucified Christ; and yet wee must couer him and hide him, euen in our very hearts, by remembring and honouring his death and resurrection. Lest wee should presume, wee must goe backeward for feare: and yet lest we should despaire, wee must couer him for loue. That as God hideth vs vnder the shadow of his wings, which are loue and feare, loue the shadow of his mercy, and feare the shadow of his iustice: so we may hide God vnder the shadow of our wings, which are ioy and sorrow, ioy, the shadow of our loue, and sorrow, the shadow of our feare, ioy for Christ, and sorrow for our selues. To this strange kinde of going backeward, the Psalmist alludeth when hee saith to God, Thou hast made my feete like Hindes feete. A Hinde goeth not still forward in one way, but as an auncient father speaketh, hee iumpes crosse out of one way into another 
                        Saltum habet transuersum.
                     . Right so a Christians feete must be like Hindes feet. He must iumpe

crosse, from himselfe to Christ, and then backe againe from Christ to himselfe. Would you see such a Hinde? Then mark how Iob footes it. That he might not despaire, he iumpes crosse from himselfe to Christ, and saith, Chap. 33.9. I am cleane without sinne, I am Innocent, and there is none iniquitie in mee. Heere is the mercy of Christ. But that hee might not presume, hee iumpes backe againe from Christ to himselfe, and saith, Chap. 6.2. O that my griefe were well weighed, and that my miseries were laid together in the balance! Here is the misery of man. Thus must we weigh the mercie of Christ, and the misery of man together in the balance, and besure (as I said before) wee make the scales euen, and when we weigh the reasons why wee should not weepe for Christ, then we must weigh the reasons also why we should weepe for our selues. So wee shall find, for great cause of ioy in Christ, great cause of sorrow in our selues: for greater cause of ioy in Christ, greater cause of sorrow in our selues: for greatest cause of ioy in Christ, greatest cause of sorrow in our selues: for that which is more then all, to make vs ioyfull in

Christ, that which is more then all, to make vs sorrowfull in our selues. The righteousnesse of Christ is the death of Death. Great cause of ioy in Christ. If Debora reioyced when Barack put Sisera to flight, haue not wee as great cause to reioyce, seeing Christ hath put death to flight? The sinne of man is the life of death. Great cause of sorrow in our selues. If Anna wept for her barrennesse, haue not wee as great cause to weepe, seeing wee can conceiue nothing but sorrow, and bring forth iniquity vnto death? The righteousnesse of Christ is the death of the Diuell. Great cause of ioy in Christ. If Iudith reioyced when shee did cut off the head of Holofernes, haue not wee great cause to reioyce, seeing Christ hath cut off the head of the Diuell? The sinne of man is the life of the diuell. Greater cause of sorrow in our selues. If Thamar wept, being defloured by her brother, haue not wee greater cause to weepe; seeing we commit spirituall incest and adultery daily with the diuell? The righteousnesse of Christ is the life of himselfe. Greatest cause of ioy in Christ. If Sara laughed when shee

heard shee should haue a quicke childe in her dead wombe, is not this the greatest cause of laughter which can be vnto vs, that Christ liued in death, and was most free among the dead, and could not see corruption in the graue? The sinne of man is the death of himselfe. Greatest cause of sorrow in our selues. If Agar wept being turned out of Abrahams house, is not this the greatest cause of weeping which can be vnto vs, that our life is no life, because we neuer cease from sinning, while wee are heere pilgrimes and strangers, exiled and banished out of our fathers house in heauen? The righteousnesse of Christ is the life of man. This is more then all to make vs ioyfull in Christ. If Queene Ester did reioyce, as King Iames doth at this day (whom God for his mercies sake euer saue and preserue, and let all the people say Amen) because he deliuered his people from thraldome and destruction, can any thing in the world then make vs more ioyfull then this, that we being cursed in our selues, are blessed in Christ; being embased in our selues, are exalted in Christ; being condemned in

our selues are iustified in Christ, being dead in our selues, are aliue in Christ? The sinne of Man is the death of Christ. This is more then all to make vs sorrowfull in our selues. If the Virgin Mary wept so sore for the death of her Sonne Iesus, as though her tender heart had been stabbed and pierst through with a sharpe sword (as Simeon speaketh.) Can any thing in the world then, make vs more sorrowfull then this, that Christ being blessed in himselfe, was cursed for vs; being exalted in himselfe, was embased for vs; being iustified in himselfe, was condemned for vs; being aliue in himselfe, was dead for vs? O deere brother, blessed Christian, whosoeuer thou art, if thou be too sorrowfull at any time, remember what Christ hath done for thee; how louingly, how kindly, he hath dealt with thee, and thou wilt soone bee glad: if thou be too ioyfull at any time▪ remember what thou hast done against Christ, how vngratefully, how wretchedly thou hast dealt with him, and thou wilt soone be sorry. So shall we neuer suffer shipwracke of faith, either by too much sorrow, as Esau did, who sought

the blessing with teares, weeping for himselfe, not reioycing for Christ: or else by too much ioy, as Herod did, who heard the Baptist gladly, reioycing for Christ, not weeping for himselfe. But euen as a ship, being neither too heauily burthened, nor too lightly balanced, feareth neither waues nor windes, but saileth safely to the hauen: so we being neither too heauy for our owne misery, nor too light for Christs mercy, but ioyning for mee, for your selues both together, shall neither be drowned with the waues of desperation, nor puffed vp with the windes of presumption, but we shall saile safely in the Arke of Noah, vpon the Sea of this world, till wee arriue at the Hauen of all happinesse in Heauen. And this is the right moderation we must keepe betweene Christ and our selues, as appeareth in this sixth part, For mee, for your selues, both together. Weepe not for mee, weepe for your selues.
                  
                  THe seauenth part followeth. Weepe not for me. Wherein we must conside
                        •
                      three vertues that were in Christ. Wisedome,

Benignitie, Magnanimitie. For Wisedome hee saith, Weepe not. For Benignitie, Not you. For Magnanimitie, Not for mee. N
                        •
                     t weepe: Not you: Not for me. Weept not for mee. First for Wisedome, hee saith, Weepe not. Saint Austin hath a very excellent sentence, and it is this; 
                        Crux Christi pendentis, Cathedra fuit d
                              •
                           centis.
                      Christ vpon his Crosse did read vs a Lecture, like a Doctor in his chaire. Indeed in that learned lecture of his, he deliuered vnto vs many notable poynts of wisedome. And one especially wee ha
                        •
                     e here, whereby we are instructed how we should be affected towards the dead. For if we must not weepe immoderately for the death of Christ, then we must not grieue our selues greatly for the death of any Christian. The ancient Italians vsed to mourne for their dead ten moneths: the Egyptians seauentie two dayes; the Ethiopians forty dayes; the antient Germanes, thirty da
                        •
                     es; the Lacedemonians, eleuen dayes 
                        Iohannes Bo
                           
                              •
                           emus de morib. Gen.
                     . But the Athenians and the Romanes, which were in their time counted the wisest men in the world, were much more moderate. For the Athenians had a law giuen them by Solon their law giuer, which did forbid

mourning at burials. The Romanes likewise had a law in their twelue tables which did forbid to make any exclamations or out-cries at funerals 
                        Lessum habere funeris ergo.
                     . Yea, the third Councell holden at Toledo in Spaine, the one & twentieth Canon of the Councell, flatly decreeth, that Christians should be brought to their graues onely with singing and reioycing 
                        Cum cantisis solummado & Psallentium vocib.
                     . Because, quoth the Councell, the Apostle to the Thessalonians, saith; I will not haue you ignorant brethren, concerning them which are asleepe, that you sorrow not, euen as others which haue no hope. Therefore Cutbertus who was Archbishop of Canterbury, long before the Conquest 
                        Floruit regnauit Egberto. An. Dom. 747., at his death, charged that no lamentation should be made for him. And Ierome writeth, that when the dead body of Paul the Eremite was brought forth, holy Anthony did sing Hymnes and Psalmes, according to the Christian 
                        Prolato for as corpore Hymnos & Psalmos de Christiana traditione decantabat. In vita Pauli Ere
                              •
                           i.
                      tradition. And that when Paula a deuout widow was 
                        Pontifices choros Psallentium ducebant. In Epitaphio Paula
                      buried, the Bishoppes did bring her forth with singing. And that when Fabiola was buried, Psalmes were sung, and Haleluiah was chanted out so loud, that it did shake the seeling of the

Church. 
                        Sonabant Psalmi & aurata templorum roboans in sublime quatiebat Haleluia. In Epitaphio Fabiolae. Vide praeterea Sulp
                              •
                           tium 
                              •
                           a vita Martini Areopag. Et Eub. Hie
                           
                              •
                           ar. Eccles. c. 7. I grant indeed wee may sorrow and weepe for the wicked, not onely when they are dead, but euen when they are aliue: But we must sing and reioyce for the godly, not onely when they are aliue, but euen when they are dead. And why? Because they being aliue, are dead: but these being dead, are aliue. According to that saying of the Hebrew Rabbins,
                        Tsaddikim bemotham caym, &c.
                      The godly euen in their death are aliue: but the wicked euen in their life are dead. Therefore Dauid when his sonne Absolon died, whom hee knew to be a wicked man, wept for him, saying, Absolon my sonne, O my sonne Absolon, would to God I had died for thee. But when his yong son died, whom he knew to be an innocent babe, hee was vvell apaid, and arose from the ground, and annoynted his face, and looked cheerefully, and said, I shall goe to him, he cannot returne to me: Whereby hee warranteth that of Fulgentius, who saith, That the godly deceased are not lost for euer, but left for a time 
                        Non amissi, sed praemissi.
                     , not gone away from vs, but sent to God before vs. For if that bee true which Ignatius saith, That life without Christ is death, 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      then this is true

also which I shall say, That death, with, and in Chirst, is life. The deaths of the Saints are no funerals, but triumphs 
                        Exercitia sunt ista non funera. Cypr.
                     : So that in respect of vs which are aliue, it is a very charitable custome, yea it is a very honourable custome to giue mourning cloakes and gownes; but in respect of them that are dead, it is altogether needlesse. For what need wee weare blacke mourning cloakes in signe of sorrow, seeing (as it is in the Reuelation) they weare white long robes in token of triumph? Therefore Chrysostome saith 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        ., It becommeth vs that are Christians, at the death of Christians rather to reioyce as at a triumph, then to weepe as at a tragedy. For, saies Ierome 
                     
                        Desidera
                              •
                           di sunt vt absentes, non deplorandi vt mo
                              •
                           tui.
                     , We may indeed wish for them, because they are not with vs; but we must not weepe for them because they are with God. Loue! grant commands vs. Well, be it so. What then? But yet faith forbids vs to weepe for the dead 
                        Pietas plorare iubet, fides pro defunctis lugere vetat. Isidorus.
                     : And therefore Paulinus saith 
                        Salua fide pietatis officia pendamus, salua pietate f
                              •
                           dei gaudia praeferamus.
                     , Though wee may, notwithstanding our faith, performe to the dead the duties of loue, yet wee must first, notwithstanding our loue, afford to ourselues the comforts of faith. So, if wee shed some

few teares, which run softly like the waters of Silo, no force saies. Ambrose 
                     
                        Erunt non doloris illices, sod indices pietatis.
                     , They will not bewary in vs any want of faith, but onely testifie an aboundance of loue. Thus and no otherwise did Abraham weepe for Sara his wife; Eleazar for Aaron his father; Rebecca for Debora her nurse: Ioseph for Iacob his father: Bethsheba for Vrias her husband: Christ for Lazarus his friend. And here in wonderfull wisedome he teacheth vs how sparing we ought to be in weeping for the death of our godly friends, considering our good hope that are aliue, and their good happe that are dead. As if the very dead body whom some of you perhaps euen at this present so seriously think of, and so much lament for, should now suddenly arise out of the graue, and steppe into the Pulpit and preach, and say vnto you, Weepe not for mee, but weepe for your selues. You indeed as yet remaine in this vale of misery, where you sinne daily and hourely against God, where continually you feele afflictions and punishments due to your sins: where lastly you are depriued of the glory of God, of the society of the Saints, of the ioyes

of heauen. Therefore (if you will) weepe for your selues, but weepe not for me. I am in that state of perfection where I neuer sinne, but alwayes praise and laud the Lord: I am out of the compasse of all calamities, not to be touched with any trouble: I euermore behold the amiable and the louing countenance of Christ: and though I come not very neere him, yet so farre forth I see him, as this sight alone is sufficient to make mee euery way a happy man. Thus would the very dead, if they should rise againe, speake vnto vs. But wee will not any longer disquiet the dead, or disturbe them vvhich so sweetly sleepe in Christ. Certainely, either this that hath been spoken will perswade vs, o
                        •
                      else (as our Sauiour saith) though one should rise from the dead, vvee would not beleeue: For if these ancient and holy Fathers, Fulgentius, Ignatius, Cyprian, Chrysostome, Ierome, Isidore, Paulinus, Ambrosius, should now all arise, they would (I assure you) say no other thing, but euen as you haue heard them speake alreadie in those sentences and allegations which I haue quoted and cited out of them. The

summe of al which is this, That it is great folly and childishnesse to weepe immoderately for the dead, and that it is on the other side a hie point of wisdome to be moderate in this matter; considering our Lord going here to his death, teacheth his friends not to weepe for him, in that he saith, weepe not, weepe not for mee. Thus much for his Wisedome.
                  Now for Benignitie he sayes, Not you. For though the person bee not expressed in the English, yet in the Greeke verbe it is implied. Weepe not, as if it were, Weepe not you. Which Benignitie appeared, in that among all his vntollerable troubles, nothing troubled him so much. as that his friends were troubled for his troubles. And yet (as it should seeme) they of all other had greatest cause thus to bee grieued. All the people wept for Moses death: All Egypt for Iosephs death: all Israel for Ios
                           •
                        
                        as his death: all the Church for Stephens death. But a million of Mosesses, of Iosephs, of Iosiasses, of Stephens, are not comparable to Christ. The women of Troy wept for the death of worthy Hector their valiant Captaine, making this

the foot of their dolefull ditty, wee weepe for Hector 
                     
                        Hectora flemus. Seneca in Troade, actu primo.
                     . How much more then ought these women of Ierusalem to weepe for the death of their captaine Christ? Al the widowes lamented the death of Dorcas, because in her life time shee made them coates and garments: And had not these women then far greater reason to lament the death of Christ, who made euery one of them a wedding garment, wherein he did marry them to himselfe? Yee daughters of Israel, saith Dauid, weepe for Saul, vvho cloathed you vvith Scarlet. How much more then ought these daughters of Ierusalem to vveepe for Christ, vvho clothed euery one of them with Scarlet, and with the royall robe of his righteousnesse, yea and gaue his owne deare selfe vnto them, that they might put on the Lord Iesus? When Christ was borne the night was turned into day, as it was prophesied Psa. 139.12., Then shall the night shine as the day: But when Christ was crucified, the day was turned into night, as it was prophesied Amos. 8.9., Then shall the Sun go downe at noone day. The Sunne therefore wept for Christ. As Hamons face was couered when hee was condemned

to die; so the suns face was couered when Christ was condemned to die. The temple also wept for Christ. As Dauid rent his garment when hee heard of Ionathans death: so the temple rent his vaile when it heard of Christs death. The graues likewise wept for Christ. As the King of Niniue threw vp dust vpon his head whē he and his subiects were appointed to die: so the graues opened, and threw vp dust vpon their heads when Christ vvas appointed to die. The stones lastly vvept for Christ. As Iob cut his haire vvhen he heard of his childrens death: so the stones were cut in peeces, and clouen asunder when they heard of Christs death. As Asse carrying Christ into Ierusalem, the children sung most merrily; Christ carrying his crosse out of Ierusalem, the women wept most mournfully. If those children had held their peace, and not sung (as our Sauiour their protesteth) the very stones would haue s
                        •
                     ng out the praise of Christ. If these women had held their peace, & not cried, the very stones would haue cried for the death of Christ; Or rather indeed as soone as euer these women left weeping, because Christ

bad them, straight wayes the stones fell a weeping before Christ bad them. And what heart of man then could here haue refrained from weeping, though it had been harder then any stone, seeing the hard stones before his eyes thus dissolued and distilled into teares? Yet behold the benignity & louing kindnes of Christ, Christ died, not for the Sunne: not for the Temple: not for the Graues: not for the stones: but for vs men, and for our saluation he died. Yet he suffereth these senseles creatures to weep, and to haue a liuely feeling of his death, though they had no benefit by his death. But being content himselfe to shed his dearest, and his best bloud for vs, yet will not suffer vs in recompence to shed so much as one little teare for him. No, no, sayes he, I will beare all the sorrow, you shall haue only ioy: and though I die and shed my very heart bloud for you, yet you shall not so much as weepe, or shed the least teare for me. Not you, weepe not for me. Thus much for his Benignitie.
                  
                  Lastly, for Magnanimitie he sayes, Not for mee. Strange stoutnesse and courage: Especially in him that was otherwise

so milde, and so meeke a lambe. But here the cause & quarrell being ours, and he fighting for the saluatiō for our soules, there is no rule with him, hee plaies he Lion wheresoeuer he goes. For holding now in his hand the cup of trembling, and being ready to drinke vp the very dregs of it, yet neither his hand nor his heart trembleth. Ennius the Poet, as Tullie testifieth, could say thus much; Let no man weepe for my death 
                     
                        Nemome lachrymis decoret.
                     . And Saint Laurence the Martyr, as Prudentius witnesseth, Doe not weepe for my departure 
                     
                        Desi
                              ••
                           e discessu meo stetum dolentur sundere.
                     . But as Ennius or any other Pagan could neuer come neere Christians in true magnanimitie: So S. Laurence, or any other Christian could neuer come neere Christ. The blessed Apostle S. Paul of any that euer I heard of, commeth neerest to him: going toward Ierusalē, what do you saies he, weeping & breaking my heart, for I am ready not only to be bound, but euen to die also for the name of the Lord Iesus? Euen so saith Christ here, or rather indeed not so, but a thousand times more couragiously, going out of Ierusalem; What doe you (saies he) weeping and breaking my heart; for I am ready,

not onely to bee bound, but euen to die also for the saluation of man? He knew well enough his passion would be a new kind of transfiguration vnto him: For at his transfiguration he was accompanied with his deere Disciples, Peter, Iames, and Iohn: but at his passion Peter denied him, Iames and Iohn forsooke him. And there he was vpon mount Tabor, which smelled sweetly of hearbs and flowers: but here he was vpon mount Caluery, which smelled loathsomly of bones and dead mens sculs. And there his face did shine as the Sun: but here his face was couered, nay it was buffeted and spit vpon. And there his garments were white as the light: but here his garments were parted, nay they were like Iosephs coate, all embrewed in bloud, and he himselfe stript stark naked. And there he was betweene two famous Prophets, Moses and Elias; but here when they thought hee called for Elias to helpe him, Elias would not come, nay he was betweene two theeues, the one at his right hand, the other at his left. And there his Father spake most ioyfully to him from heauen▪ This is my beloued Sonne, in whom only I am pleased;

but here he screeched most lamentably to his Father from the Crosse, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? Yet behold, behold, the Magnanimitie of Christ. Christ knew well enough, before hand, of all this fearefull and horrible passion prepared for him, wherein he was not transfigured, as before, but disfigured, so as neuer was any man. Yet nothing could moue him. This cowardlinesse of his Disciples, this noisomnesse of the place, these diuelish buffets vpon his bare face, these bloudy wounds vpon his naked body, these vile theeues, these hideous screeches, could not one whit daunt his heroicall heart. But euen as a noble Champion hauing already had a legge and an arme slasht off, when all the stage in admiration of his valour and manhood, cries, Saue the Man, saue the man, yet puts out himselfe, and standing vpon one legge; and striking with one arme, fights stil as stoutly as if he had neuer been hurt at all: so Christ hauing bin scorned and scourged already, when the whole theater of heauen and earth wept for him, yea when the powers aboue the heauen came downe, and the dead vnder

the earth rose vp to mone and pitty him, only he himselfe would neither aske any fauour of others, nor yet shew any fauour to himselfe, but was very angry, & called him Sathan that gaue him such counsell; Yea though all the Saints in heauen and earth did bleed at the very heart 
                        Coelum & terra compatiuntur ci. Anselmus inspeculo Euangel. serm. cap. 13. in a manner as much as hee himselfe did vpon the crosse, to see so good a man so shamefully despighted, yet nothing could stay him, but still he went on forward as pleasantly and as cheerefully as to any banket or feast, to this most rufull and dreadfull death. O sweet Iesus, O my deare Lord, forgiue me, I humbly beseech thee for thy mercy sake, forgiue mee this one fault: Thou wilt neither weep thy selfe, nor yet suffer me to weep for thy death, But I am contrariwise affected; Though I do not see thee at this present led as a Lambe to the slaughter, yet onely meditating of thy death so many hundred yeares after, I cannot possibly refraine from weeping. Yea by so much the more do I lament and mourn, by how much the more I see th
                        •
                     e ioyfull & glad. Come forth yee daughters of Sion, saith hee Cant. 3.11., and behold King Salomon
                     
with the crowne wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his marriage, and in the day of the gladnes of his heart. As if he should haue said, Come forth yee daughters of Ierusalem, and behold Iesus Christ with the crowne of thorns, wherewith the Synagogue of the Iewes crowned him in the day of his passion, and in the day of his death vpon the Crosse. He calleth the day of his passion the day of his marriage, and the day of his death vpon the crosse, the day of the gladnesse of his heart. Thus you see in this seuenth part, the Wisedome, the Benignitie, the Magnanimitie of Christ, in that he saith, Not weepe, Not you, Not for me. Weepe not for me. Weepe not for me, but weepe for your selues.
                  
                  THE eighth part, which is the last, now onely remaineth; But weepe for your selues: Wherein wee must consider likewise three vertues that ought to be in vs: Deuotion, Compunction; Compassion. For Deuotion hee sayth, But weepe: For Compunction, But you: For compassion, But for your selues. But weepe; But you; But for your selues.

                     But weepe for your selues. First for Deuotion, hee saith, But weepe. Deuotion generally is a supernaturall dexteritie, wrought by the Holy Ghost, in the heart of a deuout man, whereby hee is made prompt and ready to performe all those duties which appertaine to the seruice of God. As a man may bee said to bee deuout in Preaching, deuout in hearing, deuout in making prayers, deuout in giuing Almes. But here especially by Deuotion; I vnderstand a certaine softnesse and tendernesse of the heart, which oftentimes is resolued into teares, considering the mischiefes and miseries of this world. For if Christ in this place wisheth them of Ierusalem to weepe for themselues, and did himselfe else-where weep for Ierusalem, saying, O Ierusalem, Ierusalem, how often would I, but you would not? How much more then ought wee to weepe for the wretchednesse of this world? They of Ierusalem were carried captiue into Babylon; That captiuitie of Babylon endured seuenty yeeres, or threescore & ten yeares. Now iust so long lasteth our life. As the Psalmist saith; The dayes of our life are

threescore yeeres and ten. So, that by this account, our whole time in this world, is nothing else but the captiuity of Babylon. Therefore we may well say, By the waters of Babylon wee sate downe and wept, when we remembred thee, O Sion. And, My teares haue been my meate day and night, while they said vnto me, Where is now thy God? And, Woe is me that I am constrained to dwell in Meshek, and to haue my habitation among the tents of Kedar. We reade that King Edward the third, hauing the King of Scots and the French King his prisoners here in England both together at one time, held royall iusts in Smithfield: The iusts being ended, hee feasted both the Kings most sumptuously at supper: After supper perceiuing the French King to be sad and pensiue, hee desired him to be merry, as others were. To whom the French King answered, 
                        Quom
                              •
                           do cantabim is canticain terra aliena?
                      How shall wee sing songs in a strange land? If the French King after all this princely pastime, and stately entertainment, tooke it so heauily to heart, that hee was kept prisoner out of his owne countrey; how much more then ought we to mourne for our

captiuity? Especially seeeing neither we haue such welcome in the world as hee had in England, neither yet is England so farre from France, as Heauen is distant from them both. Ierusalem was once finally sacked by Titus and Vespasian, whereas besides an infinite number which were otherwise spoyled, ten hundred thousand men, ten hundred thousand men (I say) were slaine down-right altogether, as Iosephus a Greeke, Writer, and Iosippus an Hebrew Author testifie. But that which happened once to them, happeneth euery day to vs. We die daily 1 Cor. 15.31.. Our whole life is nothing else but such a spoyle and sackage. And among all the miseries of this life, nothing is more miserable then this life it selfe. For euen those things which might be most comfortable vnto vs, as we vse them, do breed vs much sorrow. Learning and knowledge, a great delight: Yet Solomon sayth, Hee that addeth knowledge, addeth sorrow. Wealth and riches, a good complement: Yet Saint Iames saith, Goe to now you rich men, weepe and howle for the miseries which shall come vpon you. So that the onely happinesse

wee can haue in this life, is a deuout and a godly bewailing of our vnhappines. Which made our Sauiour say, Woe be to you that laugh now, for you shall waile and weepe. But on the other side, Blessed are they that mourne now, for they shall bee comforted. Therefore holy Iob desireth God to spare him a little, & let him liue a while longer. Wherfore? That hee might laugh? That hee might be merry? No, 
                        Vi plangam dolorem meum.
                      but saith hee, that I may weepe for my woe and griefe. He thought a man could not haue time enough in this life, though it were neuer so long, to lament and rue the miseries of this life, though it were neuer so short. For if euery creature doe sigh and grone in it self Rom. 8.22.; if the very earth which we tread vnder our feet, do mourne and pine away in sorrow, for the heauy burthen of our sinnes, wherewith it is almost weighed and pressed downe to hell: how much more then ought wee, hauing the first fruits of the spirit, to haue also true deuotion in weeping for our miserable estate in this world▪ according to this, But weepe, but weepe for your selues? Thus much for our Deuotion.
                  
                     Now for Compunction he sayes, But you. The person is implied in the Greeke word, which signifies to weepe as they doe which haue a broken and a contrite heart 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         
                        frango.
                     . Which weeping at the very heart is commanded in the fourth Psalme. For whereas we commonly reade it, be still in your chambers, the Septuagint interpret it, haue compunction in your ahambers. Now the hebrew word vvhich they translate, haue compunction, doth signifie to be prickt to the quicke, till the bloud follow againe
                        Dommu à Damsanguis.
                     ; And by Chambers our Hearts are meant. As when thou praiest, enter into thy chamber, that is, into the silence and secresie of thine heart. So that Haue compunction in your chambers, is as much as if hee should haue said, Bleed you inwardly at the heart; Our teares must not be Crocodiles teares: For as is praying from the teeth outward; so is weeping from the eyes outward. But saith Bernard, wee must be let bloud, and haue a veine opened vvith the launce of compunction 
                     
                        Sci
                              •
                           dat
                              ••
                            & aperitur vena ferre compunctionis. Ber. in serm. p. 123.. And this veine also must not be the liuer veine, or any other veine, but the heart veine onely 
                        Non co
                              •
                           poris, sed cordis. Fulgen.
                     . Whereupon Dauid saith, I roared for the very griefe

of my heart Psal. 38.8.. And againe, My heart droppeth for heauinesse Psal. 119.28.. Not that his heart dropt indeed: But because the teares which hee shed were not drops of water, running from the eyes which may be soone forced with onions or such like, but drops of bloud issuing from the heart, such as Christ did sweats in the Garden. For these (no doubt) are true teares, which are the bloud of a woundead heart 
                        Sanguis vulnerati cordis. Aug. Epist. 199.. So that the heart must first bee rent, and deepely wounded, before the eye can vnfainedly weepe. But in case our sins fall vpon vs like theeues, and wound vs at the very heart, and leaue vs halfe dead; and make vs powre out the bloud of true teares, then by and by will Christ powre in the wine and oyle of gladnes. Therefore saies a good Father, 
                        Malo sentire compunctionem 
                              •
                           uam 
                              ••
                           ire definitionem.
                      I had rather feele the touch of Compunction, then know the truth of a definition. For the heart of a Christian being a while cast downe in sorrow, is soone after raised vp in ioy; and taketh his former compunction not as a punishment, but as a preferment, and is right glad to bee afflicted, because he sees, that as the more the waters did rise, the higher the Arke

was lifted vp; after the same sore the more his sorrowes increase, the higher his heart is lifted vp to God 
                        Cum per fletum mens ad summa rapitur, compunctionis sua p
                              ••
                           n
                              •
                           m gaudens miratur, & 
                              •
                           ibet affligi, quia afflictione sua conspicit se ad alta subleuari.
                     . Whereupon Ierome affirmeth, that this compunction doth supple and soften our hearts, when it pierceth & afflicteth them 
                        Dum pungit vngit.
                     : which we may see plainely in Saint Paul
                           •
                        
                      All the while his heart was hardened and scared with a hot Iron, hee plaid the wilde colt (as I may say) without any remorse or griefe, kicking against the pricks. But when it pleased God to take out of his breast that heart of stone (to vse the Prophets word) and to giue him a heart of flesh for it, then he did not any more kick against the prickes, but onely one stimulus carnis, the angell of Satan was sufficient to bridle him, and tame him, and rule him aright. For euen as a bladder if it be prickt all the wind and emptinesse voideth out of it: 
                        •
                     emblably S. Pauls holy heart being prickt, and bleeding inwardly for his sinnes, was freed of all vanitie and pride, of all conceitednesse and folly. Wherfore as the men of Iudea and Ierusalem were pricked in their hearts 
                        Actes. 2.37.: so must we haue true compunction in bleeding and weeping at the heart, according to this, But

you, But weepe for your selues. Thus much for your Compunction.
                  Lastly, for Compassion, hee sayes, But for your selues. It is good to pitty others, and to wipe away the very teares from their eyes with the spunge of Compassion 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         
                        Chrys.
                     . So sayes Iob 
                     Iob. 30.25., Did I not weepe with him that was in trouble? And was not mine heart in heauinesse for the poore? But yet the greatest Compassion is to shew pittie towards thy selfe. As Ecclesiasticus sayes 
                        Miserere animae tuae placens Deo. ca. 30. v. 23, Haue compassion on thine owne soule, if thou minde to please God. Thus did the Publican. Beeing most desirous to please God, vvhen he did pray to God, he said, Lord bee mercifull vnto mee a sinner. The Pharisee was very sorry for the Publican, and said, Lord, I thanke thee, I am not as this Publican. But the Publican was sorry for himselfe. Euen as the high Priest in the law did offer first for his owne sinnes, and then for the sinnes of the people Heb. 5.3.: after the same fashion this Publican did first offer the sacrifice of prayer for his owne sinnes, and then afterward he praied for others. Therfore he that durst not lift vp his eyes to heauen,

did yet draw downe heauen to his eyes: and did enforce God also to haue compassion on him, because hee had first compassion on himselfe For looke how Peters cock did clap his owne sides with his wings, and wakened himselfe before hee wakened Peter: in like manner thou must smite thine owne breast with the Publican, and clap thine owne sides with the cocke, before thou cry or crow to others. Abrahams seruant did drinke himselfe before hee gaue his Camels drinkeGen. 24.19.: right so the wise man aduiseth thee Prou. 5.15., first for thy selfe: To drinke the waters of thy cisterne, and the riuers in the middest of thine owne well: then for thy Camels, To let thy fountaines flow forth, & thy riuers of water in the streets: Thou must first pledge Christ in his cup, and drinke one hearty draught of teares for thy selfe, and then thou maiest drinke to others afterward. For if thine eye bee single, all thy body is full of light. But if thou haue a beame in thine owne eye, and yet wouldest take a more out of thy brothers eye; all thy body is full of darknes. Whereas the way were first to weepe out, and vvash out that great beame

which is in thine owne eye, that so thine eye being more single, thou mayest see cleerely to take a little more out of thy brothers eye. Otherwise thou shalt bee like those Hagges or Faryes (called in latine La
                           ••
                        ia) which we haue heard of in old time, who (as they say) could see well enough abroad, but when they came home, vsed to put vp their eyes in a boxe. And then Christ will say to thee as he did to one else-where, Goe to thine owne house 
                     
                        Abi in domumtuam. Mar. 5.. Doe not prie into other mens faults abroade, and put vp thine eyes in a boxe when thou art at home; but rather shut thine eyes abroad, and open them at home. Bee not like Crate
                           •
                         Thebanus, who was called a Doore opener 
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         
                        Laerti is.
                     , because he vsed to rush into euery other mans house, and there to find fault with whatsoeuer was a misse: but rather looke to thine owne house, look to thine own hart, weep for thine owne life, weep for thine owne selfe. Many doe turne Christs, sed vos pro vobis, into Virgils sic vos non vobis. They can stumble at a straw and leape ouer a block: They can swallow a Camel, and straine a gnat. Though their owne backes be surcharged, and ouerloaden

with ill-fauoured lumpes of sinne, like Camels bunches, yet their backes are broad enough to beare all that, they neuer feele it, they make no bones of it, they can swallow it downe very vvell without any drinke of teares. But if they see no more then a little gnat sitting vpon their brothers coat, by and by they finde a hole in his coate, they must need
                        •
                      (forsooth) weepe for it, and alwayes vrge it, and presse it very sore, and straine it through their teares. Such are the wicked ignorant Brownists, and other like factious Nouices of this age: They tell vs they weepe daily for the ruine of Sion, and for the desolation of our Church: But our Church answereth them, as shee hath heard her spouse Iesus Christ say in a like case, Weepe not for me, but weepe for your selues. I, sayes our Church, vvas neuer more glorious in this Realme of England heretofore, 
                        Foxus in prima consideratione ad Protestantes praefixa Acti
                              •
                           , & in prima persecutione primitiu
                              •
                            ecclesia. p. 32. neuer am like to bee hereafter, then I am at this day. And there is no one poynt of Doctrine, or Discipline which I maintaine, that hath not beene vvithin this fortie yeares confirmed, and besprinkled, and euen

enamuled with the very bloud of as blessed Saints, our owne deere Countreymen, as holy Martyrs as euer did hold vp innocent hands to God. Therefore Weepe not for mee, but weepe for your selues. You indeede haue departed not onely from this Church, of vvhich you make so slight: but also from the Primitiue Church▪ of vvhich you talke so much. The order of the Primitiue Church is set downe in the Acts 
                        Actorum ca. v. 46.. They continued daily with one accord in the temple, and breaking bread at home, did eate their meat together vvith gladnes and singlenesse of heart. So then in the Primitiue Church they continued daily vvith one accord in the temple: you runne out of the temple, and refuse to pray with vs. In the Primitiue Church they did breake bread at home: you breake peace abroad. In the Primitiue Church they did eate their meat together vvith gladnesse and singlenesse of heart 
                        •
                      you haue turned all singlenesse into singularitie. You (sayes our Church to the Brownistes) You are those Donatists of whom Saint Austen speaketh 
                        Qui nobis etiam orationem dominicam impijs dispretationibus conantur aufert c. epist. 92. ad lanuarium.
                     , who by their impious arguments would take away from vs euen

the Lords prayer. So would the Brownists. You are those Nestorians of vvhom Cassianus speaketh, 
                        Qui quia esse nolunt quod omnes sunt, cupiunt omnes esse quod ipsi volunt. De incarnatione, l. 6. c. 4. vvho because they will not bee as all men are, therefore would haue all men be as they are. So would the Brownists. You are those Sectaries of whom Nazianz
                           •••
                        
                      speaketh 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , Apol. p. 28, vvho make a stirre about matters of no importance, very vnlearnedly, and yet very imprudently. So doe the Brownists. You are those Schismatikes of whom Irenaeus speaketh 
                        Qui propter medicas & quaslibet causas magnum & gloriosum Christi corpus conscindunt. l. 4. c. 62., who for light and trifling quarrels, rent and teare the great and glorious body of Christ. So doe the Brownists. You are those Luciferans of whom Saint Ierome speaketh 
                        Quibus familiare est dicere factum de Ecclesia lupanar. Dialo contra Luciferanos, prope initium.
                     , who make it a common word in their mouthes, to say, That the Church is now become a Stewes. So say the Brownists. You are those heretikes of whom Bernard speaketh 
                        Qui omnes qui de Ecclesia sunt, canes censent & porcos▪ Epist. 65., vvho say, That all wee, or at the least wise the most part of vs, which are of the Church, are no better then dogges, or hogges. So say the Brownists. You are those Audian
                        •
                      of vvhom Epiph
                           ••
                        ius speaketh 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Anchor. p. 475., who being busie-bodies themselues, and Bishops in other mens diocesses, yet think

much that reuerend and learned Bishops should beare rule in their owne diocesse. So doe the Brownists. You are those murmurers against Moses, of vvhom Optatus speaketh,
                        Qui ante funt sepulti quàm m
                              •
                           rtui. Contra 
                              〈◊〉
                           . l. 1. vvho vvere buried before they vvere dead, because they wept for others before they vvept for themselues. So doe the Brownists. But to leaue these now, as they leaue the Church, and to returne to our selues againe: we that are CHRISTS louing friends, and louing friends also to his holy Church, must vveepe for none other so much as for our selues. That so wee may continually practise true Deuotion, true Compunction, true Compassion, according to this, But vveepe, but you, but for your selues. But weepe for your selues. Weepe not for mee, but weepe for your selues.
                  
                  THus haue I gone ouer all the eight parts of this text. Now if I were as happy as Salomon vvas, that I might haue vvhatsoeuer I would aske, I would, I assure you (beloued) desire no greater gift of God at this time, then that vvee might so meditate of that which hath bin

spoken, as our whole life, and all our affections, especially these affections of ioy and sorrow, vvhich rule all the rest, might thereby be ordered and directed aright. For weeping, or not weeping, are things indifferent, simply of themselues neither good nor bad, but thereafter as according to circumstances, and occurrences, they are either vvell or ill vsed. Euen as glorying, or labouring, or fearing, or louing. For glorying it is said, Let not the wise man glory in his wisedom, but let him that glorieth, glory in this, that he knoweth the Lord. For laboring it is said, Labour not for the meat which perisheth, but for the meat which abideth for euer. For fearing, it is said, Feare not him that can kill the body onely, but feare him who is able to destroy both body & soule. For louing it is said, Loue not the vvorld, nor the things of this world. If any man loue the world, the loue of God is not in him. Now then, glory not, but glory, Not in the wisdom of the world, but in the knowledge of God. Labour not, but labour; Not for the meate vvhich perisheth, but for the meat which abideth for euer. Feare not, but feare; Not him that can kill the body

onely, but him that can destroy both body and soule. Loue not, but loue: Not the World, but God. And so here, weep not, but weepe. Not for mee, but for your selues. Weepe not for mee, but weepe for your selues. To weepe is lawful; to weepe without not weeping, is vnlawfull. Not to weepe is lawfull: not to weepe without weeping, is vnlawfull. Againe, To weepe for your selues is lawfull: to weep immoderately for Christ is vnlawful. Not to weep for Christ is lawfull: not to weep moderately for your selues, is vnlawfull. Whereas without any vnlawfulnesse in either, both weeping and not weeping will be lawful. If your weeping be alwaies ioyned with not weeping, and your not weeping be sometimes ioyned vvith weeping: If your vveeping bee for your selues, not for Christ, and your not weeping bee for Christ, not for your selues. Therefore we must marke wel what our Sauiour saith; He saith not thus, weepe not for mee, and weepe not for your selues; That is too much ioy, and too little sorrow. Neither thus; weepe for mee, and weepe for your selues; That is too much sorrow, and too little ioy. Neither thus, weepe not for your

selues, but weepe for 
                           •
                        ee. That is presumptuous desperation. Neither thus; weepe for mee, but weepe for your selues. That is desperate presumption. Onely hee saith thus, Weepe not for mee, but weepe for your selues. As if he should haue said, Weepe not too much, vveepe not too much for my death: vveepe not too much for my death. Nay, weepe little for my death: considering my wisdome, my benignity, my magnanimitie; weepe little for my death. But weepe not too little: but weepe not too little for your own life: but weepe not little for your owne life. Nay weepe much for your owne life: considering your deuotion, your compunction, your compassion: weepe much for your owne life. Weepe little for my death, but weep much for your owne life. Weepe not for me, but weepe for your selues.
                  
                  Wherefore holy brethren, if we haue any teares, now let vs shed them, if wee haue any Psalmes, now let vs sing them. The whole Gospel is nothing else but ioyfull newes, the sum whereof is comprised in that Euangelicall and Angelicall message to the shepheards; I bring you glad tidings of great ioy, which shall bee to all

people. But then Christ was borne in his mothers armes; Now he holdeth vp the Angels, that they fall not, and listeth vp men which are fallen, vvith his owne armes stretched out vpon the crosse. This crosse is the kingdome, that hee carrieth vpon his shoulder Esa. 9.6., vvhich is a greater glory and credit to Christ, then vvas the creation of the vvhole vvorld 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         
                        
                           
                              •
                           ecume. in. c. 2. ad Heb.
                     . For if God had created a thousand worlde, man had defaced them euery one with his sin. But to saue, if it be but one poore soule, and to redeeme it from the pit of hell: this indeed is the omnipotent power of the crosse of Christ. Sweet Sauiour, I humbly embrace and kisse the wounds of thy hands and feet: I esteeme more of thine Hysope, thy Reed, thy Spunge, thy Speare, then of any Princely Diademe: I boast my selfe, and am more proud of thy thornes and nailes, then of all pearles and iewels: I account thy crosse more splendent and glorious then any royall crowne: tush, what talke I of a crowne? then the very golden sunbeams in their greatest beauty & brightnesse. This is that triumph vvhereby Christ caused vs to triumph in himselfe,

and to bee more then Conquerours,2 Cor. 2.4. vvhen as the goodnesse and the sweetnes of Christ, did triumph ouer all impietie and malice 
                        Cum de impietate & malitia suauitas pi
                              •
                           asque triumphauit. Cyp.
                     . And therfore if the women met Dauid playing and singing, Saul hath slaine his thousand, and Dauid his ten thousand; how much more then ought all the son
                        •
                      and daughters of Ierusalem, all Christian men and women, to meet Christ playing vpon the harpe, and singing that new song to the lambe with the foure and twenty elders, Thou art worthy to receiue glory, and honour, and power, because thou wast killed, and yet thou hast killed, and slaine not onely a thousand, or ten thousand, but euen all thine and our enemies, and hast redeemed vs thy friends to God by thy bloud? There is a time to weepe, and a time to laugh, a time to mourne, and a time to daunce Eccle. 3. v. 4.. Why art thou then so heauie, O my soule, and why art thou so disquieted within me? What man? plucke vp a good heart, trust in God, thinke vpon the honourable passion and gladsome resurrection of Christ: And then though thou wert neuer so much afflicted, yet euen in the fiery furnace of affliction, reioyce

with ioy vnspeakeable and glorious. Dance now, not as Herodias did, but as Dauid did. Leape vp in affection as high as heauen, where thou shalt heare one rapt vp to the third heauen, saying to himselfe, God forbid that I should reioyce, reioyce in any thing but in the crosse of Christ: and to vs, Reioyce in the Lord alwaies, and againe, I say, reioyce. And againe, and againe, I say, reioyce, and reioyce alwayes in the Lord. Especially at this time. For if, when the matter was in doubt, and no man almost knew to what passe these troubles would sort in the end, and very few in the Church, no not the Apostles, but only the Virgin Mary did vnderstand and beleeue the resurrection of Christ, yet then our Sauiour said, Weepe not for mee: how much more now ought vvee not to vveepe, but to reioyce, seeing our Lord hath so mightily declared himselfe to be the sonne of God Rom. 1.4:, by raising vp his owne selfe from the dead? And if vvee might not weepe when Iacob went ouer Iordan with nothing but his staffe in his hand Gen. 31.18., then much more now ought wee to lift vp our hearts in great ioy to

God, and say; O Lord we are not worthy of the least of all thy mercies: for our blessed Redeemer went ouer Iordan with nothing but his crosse, which is his Iacobs staffe, 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Damascen. l. 4. cap. 88. vpon his shoulder, but now hee is returned againe with two great troupes. O what a great troupe, what a goodly flocke is here! We with all the Militant Church are one flocke of Christ: And the other flocke is the triumphant Church in Heauen; with whom wee must continually reioyce for the victory and the saluation which Christ hath shewed vs this day: For though on Good Friday towards euening the skie was redde all ouer coloured and distained with the bloud of Christ Math. 16.2., yet laudes bee to our Lord, O praised bee GOD, that was a good signe: this day it is faire weather: The winter is now past: the raine is changed and gone: the flowers appeare in the earth: the time of the singing of birds is come: and the voyce of the Turtle is heard in our Land Cant. 2.11.. And what saith the Turtle? Euen as it is here, Weepe not for mee. Weepe not for mee, but weepe

for your selues: but weepe for your selues. Pindarus reporteth, there was an opinion of the Citie of Rhodes, that gold rained downe vpon it 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Ode. T.
                     . If euer gold did raine downe from heauen vpon any Citie, I thinke it is rather this Citie then Rhodes: not onely for aboundance of gold and worldly riches, wherewith it is replenished, but also much more for infinite spirituall gifts, and golden grace
                        •
                      of God. O London, London, excellent things are spoken of thee, O thou Citie of God! It is spoken of thee, that thou employest a great part of thy wealth to the reliefe of poore Orphans, of poore Souldiers, of poore Schollers. It is spoken of thee, that thou dost reuerence religion, and loue the truth more then any part of this Realme doth besides. It is spoken of thee, that none are more obedient, none more ready then thou art, both with body and goods to defend the state. It is spoken of thee, that thou art so famous in all forraine 
                        •
                     ountries, that as Athens was called the Greece of Greece 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         
                        Athenaeus. l. 5., so London is called the England of England. And wee may almost as well say, that all England

is in London, as that all London is in England. These are excellent things I assure you beloued, excellent things indeed. Wherefore wee which haue receiued so many singular graces of God, should aboue all other be thankefull for them. And not onely one, or some few, but euen all of vs, should bring forth good fruits, answerable to such great mercies. Well, would to God it were so. But certainly it is not so. Certainly all among vs, all are not pure corne, there are many tares: all are not good fishes, there are many bad: all are not wise virgins, there are many foolish: all are not sheepe, there are many goates. Yet to inueigh particularly against the sinnes of, this citie, which should make vs weep for our selues, I thinke it not greatly conuenient at this time. Onely I beseech you that we may trie and examine our selues: that wee may enter into our owne consciences; euery one of vs humbly bowing the knees of his heart, and saying in this sort, O Lord Iesus, how haue I bestowed all those talents of gold which thou hast giuen me? how haue I required thee for all thy kindnesse towards me? what hath

my whole life beene else but a continuall warting against thee? what hath it beene else but a daily renuing of all thy bloudy torments, and of thy whole passion? Ah vile wretch that I am, how often haue I like Iudas himselfe, betraied thee, and sold thee for a little worldly pleasure, or for a little lucre and gaine? how often haue I bound thy hands, and euen most despightfully spit in thy face, by refusing those gifts which thou wouldest haue giuen mee, and by killing the comforts of thy spirit? Woe is me, alacke for pitty, I am that cursed Caine which haue murdered innocent Abel my brother, whose bloud doth now cry out for vengeance against mee, because that bloud by my sinnes onely is polluted, by which the sinnes of all the world besides are purged. For this I will weepe day and night, yea though I had as many eyes in my head, as there are starres in the skie, yet I would weepe them out euery one 
                        In f
                              •
                           ntem scontem atque in fium malumina 
                              •
                           ertam.
                     , to thinke that I should be such an vnworthy wretch, as by my sinnes to crucifie Christ so often, and to put him to so many deaths, who hath beene vnto mee so kind and so louing a Lord. O deere Abel,
                     
deare Abel! O my good brethren, that I could possibly deuise what to say, or what to doe, to obtaine thus much of you, or rather of God for you, that you would weep, though it were neuer so little, for your sinnes. But alas, I can doe no more now, but commit and commend all that hath been spoken to the effectual working of the Holy Ghost in you, and to the faithfull obedience of your good hearts to God. Blessed be God: I am yet very much reuiued (being otherwise almost quite spent with speaking so long) when I looke about me, and behold euery one that is present. For I see no place in this great Auditory, where there are not very many ready to weepe, the water standing in their eyes, and some already weeping right-out, in true remorse and sorrow for their sinnes. You make me remember that which we read in the booke of Iudges, when the Angell of the Lord found fault with the Israelites for their disobedience, they lifted vp their voyces and wept, and called the name of that place Bochim, and offered vp sacrifices there vnto the Lord Iudg. 2.5.. This place also may bee now called Bochim,
                     
that is, the place of weeping, wherein you haue offered vp as many Sacrifices to the Lord, as you haue shed teares for your selues. O what an acceptable Sacrifice to God is this your sorrowfull spirit? I warrant you you shall neuer repent you of this repentance: you shall neuer be sorry for this sorrow. This sorrowfull spirit of yours makes God haue a ioyfull spirit, and greatly pleaseth and delighteth the holy Ghost. Wherefore now that we haue once made the good spirit of God reioyce and take pleasure in vs, let vs not in any case hereafter, let vs not hereafter grieue the same spirit of God, whereby wee are now sealed vp to the day of redemption. The Holy Ghost is grieued when we are not grieued, but if wee be thus grieued for our sinnes, then is the Holy Ghost delighted. Yes such griefe and sorrow will not onely bee to the Holy Ghost a great pleasure and delight, but also it will be to vs the very seed or the interest and loane of euerlasting life c. For looke how a Father pittieth his owne childe, and if he see him crie, doth what hee can to still him, and takes out his handkercher, and wipes the infants

eyes himselfe; after the same fashion God our heauenly Father will with his owne holy finger wipe away all teares from our eyes, and take vs most louingly by the hand, and lead vs out of the house of mourning into the house of mirth. Then though wee haue sowen in teares, yet wee shall reape in ioy 
                        Tum breuibus lachrymis gaudia longa metam. Paulinus.
                     . Yea though wee haue sowen but a very few teares, which God hath in a small bottle, yet we shall reape all the infinite ioyes which God hath in heauen. Then though wee haue wanted wine a little while, yet in the end Christ shall turne all our water into wine, all our sadnesse into gladnesse, all our musing into musicke, all our sighing into singing. Then though wee haue beene a long time married to weeping blear-eyed Leah, yet at length wee shall enioy the loue of cheerful and beautifull Rachel. Then shall Abraham that good mower binde vs vp into sheaues as pure corne, and fill his bosome full with vs, and carry vs into the Lords barne to make a ioyfull haruest in heauen. Then shall wee with the wise virgins hauing store of teares in our eyes, which are as oyle in our lampes, goe out of this vale of

teares, which floweth with woe and weeping, and enter into the celestiall Canaan which floweth with milke and honey. Then shall Christ say vnto vs, not as it is here, Weepe not for mee, but weepe for your selues: But hee shall say; Weepe not for mee, and weepe not for your selues. For that which would bee too much ioy in this life, shall not be ioy enough in the life to come. Therefore hee shall not onely say vnto vs, Weepe not for mee, and weepe not for your selues, but hee shall also say, Reioyce for mee, and reioyce for your selues. Reioyce for mee, because I was once lower then the Angels, but now I am crowned with honour and glory: and reioyce for your selues, because you were once as sheepe going astray, but now you are returned to the shepheard and Bishop of your soule. Reioyce for me, because I am your brother Ioseph, whom once you sold into Egypt, but now all power is giuen me in heauen and in earth: and reioyce for your selues, because you are the true children of Israell, which once dwelt in a land of famine, but now you are brought by triumphant fiery chariots into the land of Goshen, which

is the kingdome of glory. To the which kingdome of glory, and ioy of all hands, ioy for Christ, ioy for our selues, we beseech thee, O good Lord, to bring vs, after the miseries of this wofull and wretched world, not for our owne deserts or merits, but for the most glorious passion, and most ioyfull resurrection of Iesus Christ, to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all honour and glory, power and praise, dignitie and dominion now and euermore, Amen.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE PATH-VVAY To Perfection.
                  A SERMON Preached at Saint MARIES Spittle in London on Wednesday in Easter-weeke, 1593.
                  
                  By THOMAS PLAYFERE, Doctor of Diuinitie.
                  
                     LONDON: Printed by Thomas Snodham for Matthew Law, and are to be sold at his shop in Paules Church-yard, 1623.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE MOST NOBLE AND WORTHY KNIGHT, MY HONORABLE good Patron, Sir GEORGE CARPY, Knight Marshall of her Maiesties most honourable Houshold, and Gouernour of her Ile of Wight; all ioyes, externall, internall, eternall.
                  
                     SIR, as soone as I had preached this Sermon, it pleased the Lord Bishop of London last deceased, both by his Letter, and by word of mouth, to request a Copie of it for the Presse. The like did diuers others also. But in truth I had

beene hitherto continued. And so crauing your honourable acceptance of my faithfull endeauours, I humbly take my leaue, from Saint Iohns Colledge in Cambridge the first day of Februarie, 1595.
                  
                  
                     
                        Your Worships euer, and in all dutie, most bounden, Thomas Playfere.
                  
               
               
                  
                  To the Reader.
                  
                     GEntle Reader, the sentences are so framed, as thou maist reade them without any regard of the Marginall notes, as though they were not set downe at all. Doe therefore herein as thou shalt thinke best. The quotations which are marked without a Parenthesis, as thus, 
                        a 
                        b 
                        c, were all vttered when the Sermon was preached. The rest which are marked with a Parenthesis, as thus, (a) (b) (c) were thought conuenient to bee printed, though not the quotations themselues, but onely the matter contained in them was preached. Farewell.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE PATHVVAY To Perfection. The Text.
                  
                     
                        But one thing, I forget that which is behinde, and endeuour my selfe to that which is before, and follow hard toward the marke, for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Iesus.
                        
                           Philip. 3.14.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     RIght Honourable, right worshipfull, and most Christian and blessed brethren; perfection is all in all. The onely thing in euery thing. But that which is vnperfect, is like either the vntimely birth of a womā, or else the vntimely fruit of a tree; the one dying before it be borne, the other rotting before it be ripe. Therfore it is said of the law, Heb. 7.19. That

it made nothing perfect: but of the Gospell, Ioh. 19.13. that it is most perfect in it selfe. And of the tower of Babel, Luk. 14.30. these men began well to build, yet could not perfect it: but of the frame of the world, Gen. 2.1. thus the heauen and the earth were perfectly finished; yea so perfectly, that euery thing since, which hath had any little resemblance of this perfection, is said to be as perfect as God made the world. Now of all things in the world; man especially is borne, not to die, as an vntimely birth, but to liue: and man liueth not to rot away as vntimely fruit but to flourish for euer. Therefore we that doe not die vnder the law, but liue vnder grace, Rom. 6.14. must not bee like the law, but like the Gospell? and wee which shall not rot away as the Tower of Babel, but flourish for euer, as the building of God, 1 Cor. 3.9. must not be like the tower of Babel, but like the frame of the world, labouring continually to be perfect, as our heauenly Father is perfect Mat. 5.48.. Labour (I say) we must. For as nothing is excellent and easie both together; in like sort perfection, though it be so excellent a thing, that it ought to be much desired, yet it is not so

easie a thing, that it can bee soone attained: Therefore saith the Apostle in the former verse, I do not thinke that I haue yet attained to it. For, saith Bernard 
                     
                        Quomodo proficis, si iam tibi sufficis?
                     , How canst thou possibly be a proficient, if thou thinke thy selfe already sufficient? The Arke of the Couenant was but a Cubite and a halfe high Exod. 21.10.. So likewise the wheeles of the Cauldron were but a Cubite and a halfe high.1 King. 7.32. Now we know that a Cubite and a halfe is an vnperfect measure: which shewes that none in this life are perfectly perfect. The very highest are as the Arke in Moses Tabernacle or as the wheeles in Salomons temple, but a Cubite and a halfe high 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        .: Perfectly vnperfect vvhen they beginne: vnperfectly perfect when they end. Benaiah was honourable among thirtie, but hee attained not to the first three: 2 Sam. 23.23. And so some one man may be as perfect as thirtie, yea as a thousand other men, and yet not attaine to the perfection of the blessed Trinitie, which is the first three. Nay when we haue done the best we can, we are but vnprofitable seruants Luk. 17.10. All our righteousnesse is as a stained cloth Esay. 64.5.. Our greatest strength is confirmed in

weaknesse 2 Cor. 12.9. Wee know but in part, not as we are knowne 1 Cor. 13.12. Wee walke by faith, not by sight 2 Cor. 5.7.. Wee behold as in a Glasse darkely, not face to face 1 Cor. 13.12. So that the most perfect perfection wee can attaine to in this life, is an humble acknowledging of that imperfection which wee haue, 
                        Est quaedam imperfecta perfectio, vt sciat homo se non esse perfectum in hac vita. Primasius in Col. c 1. in fine.
                      and an earnest labouring for that perfection which wee haue not 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Nyssenus 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            in fine.
                     . Wee liue here in that wee hope for life 
                        Spes vitae immortalis est vita vitae mortalis. Aug in. p. 
                        
                           •
                        03: and wee are perfect here in that vvee labour for perfection 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Oecum. in He. c. 6.. Whereofre as Salomon went vp six steps to come to his great-throne of Iuorie 1 Reg. 10.19., so must wee ascend sixe degrees to come to this high toppe of perfection. The first, (Not many things) BVT ONE THING. The second, (I doe not remember, but) I FORGET THAT VVHICH IS BEHINDE. The third, (I stand not stil but) I ENDEVOVR MY SELFE TO THAT VVHICH IS BEFORE. The fourth, (I runne not amisse, but) I FOLLOVV HARD. The fifth, (not beside the mark, but) TOVVARD THE MARKE. The sixth, (Not for any other prize, but) FOR THE PRIZE OF THE HIGH

CALLING OF GOD IN CHRIST IESVS.
                  Touching the first hee saith (Not many things) BVT ONE THING. Gregory hath this sentence 
                        Cum animus diuiditur ad multa, fit minor ad singula.
                     : The minde of a man is like the stone Tirrhenus. That stone, so long as it is whole swimmeth, but being once broken, sinketh. And so the heart of man being once broken, it soone sinketh, and being diuersly distracted, it is easily ouer-whelmed. Zedekias 
                     Ier. 39.5. did well enough so long as hee staied in Ierusalem, signifying the vision of peace, which is one thing: but when hee was carried to Riblah, signifying a multitude which is many things, then were his eies put out. What so neere one as two? And yet wee must not goe so farre from one as two: Seeing it is a very hard matter, and almost vnpossible, that one mind should well heed to diuers things. 
                        Vtres oppositas mens ferat vna duas. Cor. Gallus.
                      
                     Hercules himself could not cope with two aduersaries at once. So that Peter
was vnwise to weare two swordes, at onceLuke. 22.38. Alexander said, the whole world could not hold two Sunnes at once. So that Issacar was an asse to beare two burthens at once Gen. 49.14.. No man sitteth vpon

two seates together. No man writeth with two pennes together. No man hunteth two games together. No man iusteth with two speares together. He that hath two hearts, if he haue a true heart of the one, he will haue a false heart of the other. Therefore saith Saint I
                           ••
                        es 
                     Iam. 1.8., A double-hearted man is vnconstant in all his waies. He that hath two tongues, if he tel truth with the one, he will lie vvith the other: Therefore saith Saint Paul
                     Tim. 3.8.: Deacons, must not be double-tongued. Hee that serues two masters, if he please the one, he will displease the other: therfore saith our Sauiour Luk. 10.13.; No man can serue two maisters. He that walketh two waies, if he go well in the one, he will stumble in the other. Therefore saith Ecclesiasticus: Eccles. 2.13. Woe be to the sinner, vvhich walketh two manner of wayes. Wherefore we must not be like the Philistins, vvhich had two hearts, 1 Sam. 5.2. one heart that cleaued to God, another that cleaued to Dagon: We must not bee like the Iewes, vvhich had two tonguesSopho. 2.1., one tongue that sware by the Lord, another that sware by Malcham: Wee must not bee like the Israelites, vvhich serued two maisters,

                     1 King. 11.5. they halted betwixt two opinions, seruing sometimes God, sometimes Baal: Wee must not bee like Salomon, vvhich walked two waies 1 King. 11:1., his heart was not perfect with God, but sometimes he walked the way of the Lord, sometimes the way of Ashteroth. We must not doe so, I say; we must not follow God & Dagon, God and Malcham, God and Baal, God and Ashteroth, If we would be perfect indeed, we must follow (Not many things, no not so much as two things,) BVT ONE THING.
                  For this ONE thing is the very band of Perfection 
                     
                        Col. 3.4. 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           .
                        
                           Theodor et. grae. Affect. cur. 2.
                     . Hereupon Christ speaking to his Spouse, saith thus Cant. 4.9.; Thou hast wounded my heart vvith one of thine eyes, and with one chaine of thy necke. The Church, I grant, hath many eies. But because as the eies of a maiden looke vnto the hand of her mistresse Psa. 123.2.
                     ▪ so all these eyes wait onely on the Lord, looke onely one way, and so (in a sort) make onely one eye, therefore hee saith, vvith one of thine eyes. So likewise the Church hath many chaines; but because these chains are so linked and intorteled together, that they all make (in a manner) but

one golden chaine of Christian vertues, which is the band of Perfection, and bindeth the Church to Christ, as the necke ioyneth the body to the head: therfore hee saith, with ONE chaine of the neck. This one eye it is, this one chaine it is, which makes Christ in loue vvith his Church, which ouercomes him, and wounds his heart. Thou hast wounded my heart, saith hee, with one of thine eyes, and with one chaine of thy necke. The Spouse of Christ must haue but ONE chaine about her necke. The disciple of Christ must haue but one coate vpon his backe Luke 9.3.. Hee must not be a turne-coate, much lesse a change-coate. Seeing indeede that which Cyprian speakes of Christes coate, may bee as truely said of euery Christians coate; That either it must bee Vnica, or else it cannot bee Tunica, either it must bee one, or none. For as Rebeccaes two twinnes did struggle and vvrastle before they were borne, for hatred and malice, but Elizabeths one childe did spring and skippe before he was borne, for ioy and gladnesse; so he that busies himself about more things then one; shall neuer proue

singular in any thing 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Plato de rep. l. 3., nay hee shall finde that strife and resistance in his head, which Rebecca did in her wombe, but hee that labours and trauailes onely about one thing, shall bring it to good perfection, and bee as well deliuered of it, as Elizabeth was of Iohn Baptist. Hence it is that wee are exhorted, for our heart, Acts. 4.32. to haue one heart, and one soule: for our tongue 1 Cor. 1.10., to speake one and the selfe same thing: for our master, Mat. 13.8. to serue one master in Heauen: for our vvay, Phil. 3.16. to vvalke after one and the selfe same rule. According to that most vvise and worthy vvord: 
                        Cor vnum via vna. My L. Treasurer his word. One heart, one way, Which is also agreeable to the vvord of God, who saith, I vvill giue them one heart, and one way, that they may feare mee for euer, for the vvealth of them and of their children after them Ier. 32.39.. Wherefore let vs not haue many minds, or trouble our selues about many things, but with Mary 
                     Heb. 10.41., minde onely one thing, vvhich is necessary: let vs not haue many tongues, or desire many things, but euery one of vs say vvith Dauid 
                     Psal. 18.1., One thing onely I haue desired of the Lord: let vs not serue many masters

or by many maisters our selues, but as Sophony speaketh Soph. 3.9., with one shoulder serue the Lord our God, and onely worship him: let vs not walke many wayes, or kicke against many pricks Acts. 9.5., or shoot at rouers (as I may say) but with S. Paul in this place, aime onely at one marke, and follow But one thing. This is the first degree to perfection.
                  Touching the second, he saith, (I doe not remēber, but) I FORGET THAT VVHICH IS BEHIND. Truth it is, we may remēber, both that we haue done ill, to amend it, & also that we haue done well, to continue it. For the first, Chrysostome saith, 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Nothing doth so well helpe vs forward in a good course, as the often remembrance of our sins. Whereas in the bitternes of our soules we call to remembrance the dayes of old, which we haue passed away in sin. Whereupon the Psalmist particularly intituleth the eight and thirtieth Psalme a Memorandum, or a Remembrance, because he made it when he called to remembrance his sinne, which he had in former time committed 
                        Cum commissa olim à se delicta memoria repeteret. Euthymius ibidem.
                     . And generally Baruch saith to vs in this sort;

Remember well what you haue done, & as it came in your hearts to turne away from God, so now striue with your selues tenne times more to turne againe vnto him 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Bar. 4.28.. Thus did Paul, remembring hee had once beene a persecutor or, 1 Tim. 1.13. he did repent him of it, and made amends for it, and was afterward ten times more zealous to saue the wicked, then before hee had been to destroy the godly. For the second, another saith; 
                        Quam immensa est latitia de recordatione transactae virtutis? &c. Ber. in festo omnium Sanc. ser. 2. O what heauenly comfort doe they inwardly feele, which are delighted vvith the remembrance of vertue past, with the fruition of ioy present, with the expectation of felicitie to come? This threefold cord of comfort, as it can neuer be broken, so it must alwaies bee drawne forth at length, that Reu. 22.11. he which is iust, may be still more iust; that he which is strong, may be still more strong. Thus did Dauid 
                     1 Sam. 17.36, remembring he had once slain a Beare, he did not repent him of it, but gathered strength and courage by it, and vvas afterward more bold to combat with a mightie Gyant, then before he had beene to deale with an eluish Beare. Therefore as they which leap, the further they go backward

to fetch their runne, they further the leap forward, when they haue runne: so here we may looke back a little, and remember both vvhat we haue done il, to amend it, and also vvhat we haue done vvell to continue it. Otherwise, the remembrance either of vices or vertues, is so farre from putting vs any white forward, that it casteth vs quite backeward. For as Marke the Eremite vvitnesseth, 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . The remembrance of former sinnes is enough to cast him downe altogether, who otherwise might haue had some good hope. Our sins and Elies sonnes are alike: Elie hearing his sonnes vvere slaine, vvhom he himselfe had not chastised and corrected as he ought, fell downe backvvard, and brake his neck 1 Sam. 4.17.: And so all they that remember and hearken after their former sinnes, vvhich they should haue mortified and killed, fall downe backward, and turne away from God. For this is the difference betweene the godly and the vvicked: Both fall; But the godly fall forward vpon their faces, as Abraham did when hee talked vvith God: the vvicked fall backward vpon the ground, as the Iewes did vvhen they

apprehended Christ. Hee that remembers his sinnes, to be sorry for them, as Abraham did, fals forward vpon his face: but he that remembers his sinnes, to reioyce in them, as the Iewes did, falls backward vpon the ground. Wherefore if thou bee vpon a mountaine, looke not backward againe vnto Sodome, as Lots vvife did Gen. 19.27.: if thou be within the Arke, flie not out againe into the world, as Noahs Crow did Gen. 8.7.: If thou be well vvashed, returne not againe to the mire, as the Hogge doth 2 Pet. 2.22.: if thou bee cleane purged, runne not againe to thy filth, as the Dogge doth Pro. 26.11.: If thou be going towards the land of Canaan, thinke not of the Flesh-pots of Egypt Exod. 16.3.: If thou bee marching against the hoast of Midian, drinke not of the waters of Harod Iud. 7.6.: If thou be vpon the house top, come not downe Mar. 13.11.: If thou haue set thy hand to the plough, looke not behinde thee Luke. 9.62.; remember not those vices which are behinde thee. No, nor those vertues neither. For as Gregorie vvriteth 
                        
                           Memoria virtutis fouea mentis.
                        
                        
                           De cura pastorali. par. 4. c. 1.
                     ; The remembrance of former vertues doth many times so besot and inueigle a man, that it makes

him like a blinde Asse fall downe into a ditch. When Orpheus went to fetch his wife Eurydice out of hell, hee had her granted to him, vpon condition that hee should not turne back his eyes to looke vpon her, till hee had brought her into heauen. Yet hauing brought her forward a great way, at length his loue was so excessiue, that hee could not containe any longer, but would neede
                        •
                      h
                        •
                     ue a sight of her. Whereupon forth wi
                        •
                     h be lost both her sight and her selfe, she suddenly againe vanishing away from him, 
                        Flexit amans oculos, & protinus illa relapsa est. Ouid. Met. l. 10. Fab. 1. Memini
                              •
                            & Virgilius Geor. l. 4. in fine.
                      This is a Poeticall fiction; neuerthelesse it serueth very fitly to this purpose, to admonish vs, that if we haue any vertue which is to be loued, as a man is to loue his wife, yet we must not bee so blinde in affection, as to dote too much vpon it, or to fal in admiration of our selues for it, or to be alwayes gazing and wondring at it, lest by too much looking vpon it, and by too well liking of it, and by too often remembring it, we loose it; because indeed hee that remembers his vertues, hath no vertues to remember. Seeing hee wants humilitie, which is the mother-vertue of all vertues. For this is the difference between

the godly & the wicked: Both remember vertues. But the godly remember other mens vertues, the wicked remember their owne vertues. The remē
                     bring their owne vertues; make them ensamples to imitate: these remembring their owne vertues, make them miracles to wonder at: therfore the godly remembring they haue some one or other little vice in them, are humbled, though they haue very many great vertues: But the wicked remembring they haue some one or other little vertue in them are proud, though they haue very many great vices. Wherefore though thou haue conquered Kingdomes, yet crake not of it, as Senacharib did Esay. 37.13.: though thou hast built Babel, yet brag not of it, as Nebuchodonozer did Dan. 4.27.: though thou haue a great people, yet number them not, as Dauid did 2 Sam▪ 14.2.: though thou haue rich treasure, yet shew them not, as Ezechias did 2 Reg. 20.13.: though thou haue slaine a thousand Philistins, yet glory not in it, as Sampson did Iudg. 15.16:: though thou haue built seuen altars, yet vaunt not of it, as Balack did Num. 23.1.: though thou giue almes, yet blow not a trumpet Math. 6.1.: though thou

fast twice a weeke, yet make no wordes of it Luke 18.12., (remember it not but) Forget that which is behind.
                  
                  If thou wilt bee Perfect, 
                     Mat. 1
                           •
                        .22. sell all that thou hast, and follow me, saith our Sauiour. Sell all that thou hast. Or if no man will buy it, giue it. Or if no man will take it, Forget it. Themistocles said, hee had rather learne the Art of forgetfulnesse, then of memory. That is, as I vnderstand it, rather Diuinity, then Philosophy. For Philosophy is an Art of memory, but Diuinity is an Art of forgetfulnes. Therfore the first lesson that Socrates taught his Scholler was, Remember 
                     
                        Reminiscere.
                     . For hee thought that knowledge is nothing else but a calling of those things to remembrance which the minde knew, before it knew the body. But the first lesson that Christ teacheth his Scholler is, Forget. 
                     
                        Obliuiscere.
                      Hearken O daughter (saith hee) and see, Forget thine owne country, and thy fathers house. So that faith is that faire. Helena, which drinkes to vs in a cup of Neponthes, and faith Reu. 21.4., Bee of good cheere there shall bee no more sorrow, neither crying, neither death, neither paine, for the first things are past. And the water of

the word of God is that fountain Lethe, which when wee come to drinke of it, speakes to vs (as it were) in this sort Esay. 43.18.: Remember not the former things, neither regard the things of old. For as they which die cloth, doe not immediately change one contrary into another, but first turne a white into an azure, and then make a puke of it: So we can neuer hold coulour, as a good puke, except first our white be turned into an azure: that is, as Lyrinensis saith 
                        Donec dediscimus bene quod didicimus non bene. c. 15., except first we do well to Forget, that which wee did ill to get, except first we do happily vnlearne, that which wee did vnhappily learne. And like as they which worke in wax, cannot frame any new impression in it, till the old be defaced 
                        
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           .
                        
                           Bas. E. 1. p. 208.
                     : so the image of Caesar, the Prince of this world, the diuell, must first bee defaced, before the image of Christ can bee formed in vs. For this image of Christ (as Clemens testifieth) 
                        
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           .
                        
                           Prot. p. 5.
                      is seene onely in them, which Forget the hill of Helicon, and dwell in mount Syon. Wherefore though thou haue had a bloudy issue twelue yeares, yet thine issue being now stopt, Forget all bloudinesse Marke. 5.25.: though thou haue had a crooked

body eighteene yeares, yet thy body being now straightned, forget all crookednesse Luk. 13.11.: though thou haue had blind eyes, yet thine eyes being now cleered, forget all blindnesse in seeing the truth Marke. 10.5.: though thou haue had deafe eares, yet thine cares being now opened, forget all deafenesse in hearing the word: Mark. 7.34. though thou haue had a dry hand, yet thy hand being now restored, forget all drinesse and niggardlinesse with men Mat. 12.10.: though thou haue had a lame foote, yet thy foote being now recured, forget all limping and haulting with GOD Act. 14.8.: though thou haue beene dead and buried in the graue foure daies, as Lazarus was, yet being now receiued, forget all deadnesse in sin Iohn. 11.39.: though thou haue been possessed and tormented with seuen diuels, as Mary Magdalen was, yet being now deliuered, renounce the deuill and all his workes Luke. 8.2.: and forget all thy wicked workes which are behind thee 
                        
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           .
                        
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , vide, Nas. 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           .
                     : Yea and all thy good workes also. For if thee forget them, then will God remember them. The Patriark Abraham was content for Gods pleasure to sacrifice his sonne Isaac 
                     Gen. 22.16.: But as soone as hee had

done, hee forgets it. Therefore God remembers it, and sets downe euery seuerall circumstance of it. By mine owne selfe haue I sworn (saith the Lord) because thou hast don this thing; There is the general. But what thing? The particular followes; And hast not spared; yea, not thy seruant, but thy sonne; nay, not onely thy sonne, but thine onely sonne: and hast not spared thine onely sonne; therefore I will surely blesse thee. That good woman Luk. 7.42. gaue Christ louing and friendly entertainement. But as soone as she had done she forgets it. Therefore Christ remembers it, and amplifies it from point to point. He turned to the woman and said to Simon. Seest thou this woman? when I came to thy house, thou gauest mee no water for my feet: but shee hath washed my feet with the teares of her eies, and wiped them with the haires of her head. Thou gauest mee no kisse: but she since the time I came in hath not ceased to kisse my feete. My head with oile thou didst not annoint, but shee hath annointed my feet with ointment. Lo yee how true it is which I said before, that if wee remember our good workes, then God

will forget them; but if we forget them, then God will remember them; yea, and he will reward them when we haue forgotten them. If wee wage warre with God,Luke. 14.31. and thinke to ouercome him with ten thousand of our good deeds, then wil he like a puissant Prince, bring forth into the field a huge Army of our sinnes, twenty thousand of our sins against vs, & with twenty thousand of our sins will easily ouerthrow ten thousand of our good deeds, and so finally confound vs. But if on the other side wee can bee content to forget all our good workes, and to strow our best garments, and our most flourishing branches at Christs feete Math. 21.8.; and to cast downe our very crownes before the throne of the Lambe Reu. 4.10., then he will be a right Lambe indeed, he will not fight with vs, but he wil crowne vs with honour & glory. Almighty God appointed his people not to sheare the first borne of the sheepDeut. 15.19.. The first born of the sheep are the best of our good workes; These we must not sheare, nor lay naked and open to the view and knowledge of all men, but forget them, and hide them vnder the fleece of silence, and

keepe them secret to our selues. So Ioseph, whom God did leade as a sheepe Psal. 80.2., hauing a first borne, did not sheare this first borne of the sheepe, but called him Manasses, that is, forgetfulnesse of those things which were behinde, when God had now answered the desires of his heart Eccles. 5.19.. The faithfull speaking to Christ say thus, wee will make for thee borders of gold guilt with siluer 
                        Musenulas aureas vermiculatas argento. Can. 1.10.: This is quite contrary to the fashion of the world. The fashion of the world is to guild siluer with gold, and to put the best side outward. But the faithfull guild gold with siluer, and put the best side inward. So Moses hauing a glorious countenance, did not set it out to the shew, but did forget it, and couered it with a vaile Exod. 34.33.. Now a glorious countenance couered with a vaile, what is it else but a border of gold guilt with siluer? but we, we alas, for the most part, haue such base minds, that we are scarce worth the ground wee goe vpon: Wee doe not guild our borders of gold with siluer, but wee sheare the first borne of our sheepe. We do not cast downe our garments and our branches, and our crownes, before

the throne of the Lambe, but wee warre against God with ten thousand of our good workes. Or rather indeed, which of vs all can muster together so many good workes to fight for him? Nay if we haue done one thing well, or one time well, we think all is well, we 
                        〈◊〉
                      do no more, wee haue done good enough, and oft enough. Yea, if others do not commend vs also, wee doe so wonderfully please our selues in it, that we are ready presently to praise our selues for it. But heere we may all of vs learne true humility 
                        Humilitas animis sublimitas Christiani. L
                              •
                           o.
                     , which is true magnanimity, of S. Paul. Paul had a most noble and most stately heart, higher then the very poles of heauen it selfe. All that euer hee had done hitherto, or could doe, he thinkes too little, nay, he counts it nothing. He was not a whit inferior to the very chiefest Apostles 2 Cor. 12.11., yet hee forgets it. Hee laboured more then they all 1 Cor. 15.10., yet hee forgets it. Hee spake with tongues more then they all 1 Cor. 14 18., yet hee forgets it. Hee had care of all the Churches 2 Cor. 11.28., yet hee forgets it. Hee fought with beasts at Ephesus 1 Cor. 15.32., yet hee forgets it. Hee troad satan, that vile beast, vnder his feet Rom. 16.20. yet

hee forgets it. He spake wisdome among them that are perfect 1 Cor. 2.6. yet he forgets it. He was rapt vp to Paradise into the third heauen, where he first learned that among the Angels, which afterwards hee taught amongst men 2 Cor. 12.4., yet hee forgets it. All this is nothing with him. All this 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     forgets, and saith, I FORGET THAT VVHICH IS BEHIND. This is the second degree to perfection.
                  TOuching the third, he saith (I stand not still) but I ENDEVOVR MY SELFE TO THAT VVHICH IS BEFORE. S. Bernard writing to Haimericus Chancelor of Rome, in his very first salutation, wisheth him 
                        Quae retro sunt obliuisci, & ad ea quae ante sunt Apostolum sequi. Ep. 15. to forget those things which are behind, and to follow the Apostle to those things which are before. Which no man can do, that either stands still, or is idle. Wherefore Hermes saith generally, Nothing in the whole world is altogether idle 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , Dial. 11.: The wise man hath allowed a time for euery thing else, but for idlenesse he hath allowed no time. Moses Arke had rings, & barres within the rings Exod. 24.14., to signifie that it was not made to stand still, but to bee

remoued from place to place. Iacob
                     
                        •
                      ladder had staues Gen. 28.12., vpon which he saw none standing still, but all either ascending or else descending by it. Asend you likewise to the top of the ladder, to heauen, & there you shall heare one say, My Father doth now work, and I work also. Wherupon Basil noteth, that king Dauid hauing first said, Lord who shall dwell in thy tabernable? addes then Psal. 15.2. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        ., Not he that hath wrought righteousnesse heretofore, but he that doth now worke righteousnesse; euen as Christ saith, My father doth now worke, and I worke also. Descend you likewise to the foote of the ladder, to the earth, and there you shall heare that fig-tree accursed which did beare leaues and no fruit. Whereupon Theophylact noteth, that Iohn Baptist hauing first said, The axe is laid to the roote of the Tree, addes then Mar. 3.11. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        ., Not euery tree that hath not brought forth goodfruit heretofore, but euery tree that doth not now bring forth good fruit, shall be cut downe, euen as that fruitlesse fig-tree was cut downe, and cast into the fire. Therefore we must so walk, as God seeing our continuall fruitfulnes may say of vs, I see men walking

like trees Marke. 
                           •
                        .24: Men walke like trees, when as men are neuer idle, but alwaies abounding in the worke of the Lord 1 Cor. 15.58: As the tree of life euery month bringeth forth twelue manner of fruits Reu. 22.2.. For so Christ said vnto him whom hee healed Mark. 2.10., Take vp thy bed and walke. Hee saith not, Take vp thy bed, and stand still, like a stone, but take vp thy bed and walke, like a tree. Otherwise to them whom he found standing still, he said in his wrath, and in his sore displeasure, why stand yee stil all the day idle? why are ye like Moab setled vpon your l
                        •
                     es Ier. 48.11., and not powred from vessell to vessell? we must make account to giue account for euery idle word wee speake Mat 12.36.: And much more then for euery idle houre wee spend. Hee hath called the time against mee, saith Ierusalem Lam. 1.15.: So that for the very time which wee haue contemned, wee shall be condemned: and for euery day, which wee haue spent idely, wee shall be shent seuerely. The Israelites were commanded, not once in a weeke, or once in a moneth, but euery day to gather Manna, except only the sabboth day, Exod. 16.26. To teach them and all vs, that till wee

come to the Sabboth of our euerlasting rest in heauen, we must neuer stand still, but euery day bee doing somewhat. Wherefore Apollos posey was this, Let no day passe without a line 
                        Nulla dies s
                              •
                           . n
                              •
                            linea.
                     : Be sure euery day thou do some good, then draw one line at the least. According to that Esay. 28.10., Line vpon line, line vpon line. And Pythagoras posey was this 
                        Chaeneci ne insideas.
                     , Sit not still vpon the measure of corne. Do not looke to eate, except thou sweare for it. According to that 2 Thes. 3.10., He which will not worke, let him not eate. In my Fathers house, saith Christ, are many mansions Ioh. 14.3.. So that no man may sing his soule a sweet requiem, saying with that cormorant in the Gospell: Soule take thy rest. For in heauen onely, which is in our Fathers house, there are many mansions to rest in. In this world, which is out of our fathers house, there are not many mansions, no not any mansions to rest in, but onely vineyards to worke in. We are come, saith the Authour to the Hebrewes Heb. 12.13., to the spirits of iust and perfect men in heauen. So that no man may sue out for himselfe a Quietus est, saying with the Church of Laodicea, I am rich and haue enough; For in

heauen onely, are the spirits of iust and perfect men, which are rich and haue enough. In this world wee must neuer thinke we are rich, but we must alwaies be poor in spirit: we must neuer think we haue enough, but we must alwaies hunger and thirst after righteousnes. Wherfore if thou haue a talent Luke. 19.20., put it not into a napkin, but into the bancke: if thou light a candle, Marke. 4.21. set it not vnder a bushel, but vpon a candlestick: If thou build a citieMath. 5.14., place it not vnder a dale, but vpon a hill: if thou seeke Christ,Can. 3.1. seek him not in thy bed, but in the gardē. Lie not stil, Sit not still: (stand not still) but endeuour thy selfe to that which is before.
                  Walk before mee and be perfect saith God to Abraham 
                     Gen. 17.1.. As if he should say, if thou wilt bee perfect, then walke before mee, and endeauour thy selfe to that which is before thee. For the Apostle in the other part, speaking of those things which are behind, saith that he doth not only not beare them in body, but not so much as beare them in mind. Here contrariwise, speaking of those things which are before, he saith that he doth not only intend his mind to them, but also extend

his very body towardes them. So that as they which runne in a race, bend forward their brests, & stretch out their armes, to shew that they haue a desire to run faster then possibly their feet can follow them: After the same sort, we which run in this course of Christianity, must cast away euery thing that presseth downe, and sin which cleaueth so fast Heb. 12.1., that we may Endeuour our selues, or (as the Greeke word 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . here signifies) stretch our selues to those things which are before. And like as 
                        
                           •••
                        lus let all the other winds, which might haue bin a troble to him with his friend Vlysses, to be packt vp in a male, and kept onely the western wind for his own vse, to bring him home into his Country: so we must reiect all other things, which may bee as contrary windes to driue vs from the shoare of saluation, and retaine onely that westerne winde of the Spirit of God, whereby we may endeuour our selues to that which is before, and stretch out our sailes, and so come safely to the hauen of heauen. Euery thing, as Austen testifieth, is either a hinderance, or a furtherance 
                        Aut vinculum aut vehiculum. De ciui. Dei. lib. 9. c. 5.: if it be a hinderance, cast it away; if it be a furtherance, then keep it.

For euen as the silke-worme keepes her body spare and empty, and vses to fast two or three daies together, that she may stretch out her selfe the better, & spin her thrid the finer: so we must endeauour to bring vnder our bodies 1 Cor. 9.27., & (as I may say) diet them for the nonce, that we may not any longer weaue the spiders web Esay. 59.5., but with the silk-worm spin a new thrid. The spiders web is vinculum, the silke-wormes thrid vehiculum. And like as the viper perceiuing her old skin to be so stiffe that she cannot easily stretch out her selfe in it, strips it quite off: After the same sort we which are by nature a generation of vipers, must strip off our old skin Coloss. 3.9., and perceiuing we cannot well do our endeuour, and stir our selues in the armour of Saul, we must with Dauid put it off, and put on the armor of light. Whē long war had been between the two houses of Saul and Dauid, at length the house of Saul waxed weaker & weaker, & the house of Dauid waxed strōger & stronger 2 Sam. 3.1.. In like manner, the Spirit must alwaies endeuour it selfe to that which is before, and neuer leaue fighting with the flesh, til the house of Saul, who was a limbe of the diuell,

that is, the flesh, wax weaker and weaker, and the house of Dauid, who was a figure of Christ, that is, the spirit, wax stronger and stronger. Thus the Baptist being 
                        〈◊〉
                      a child, waxed stronger and stronger in Spirit. And yet speaking of Christ and himselfe, he saith thus Iohn. 3.30.; He must increase, I must decrease. But the Baptist was borne of old Elizabeth: Christ was borne of young Mary. Whereby we see, that that which is borne of the old man, which is the flesh, must daily decrease in vs, and grow downward: but that which is born of the new man, which is the spirit, must daily increase in vs, and grow vpward. For so indeed Christ in the beginning of the new world increased in wisedome for his minde, and stature for his body Luke. 2.52.. To teach vs, that if we be liuely members of the same body, then we must in like sort endeuour our selues to that which is before, and increase and multiply 
                        Crescite & multiplicamini, non solum ad corpus, sed etiam ad animum refertur, 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . and grow vp into him who is the head, til we all come to the measure of the age of the fulnesse of Christ: The holy Ghost also in the beginning of the old world, who moued vpō the watersGen. 1.2.. To teach vs that if we be inspired and moued by the same

spirit, then we must in like sort be moued vpon the waters, and passe apace ouer the red sea of this world, that wee may quickly come to the coelestiall Canaan, which is the kingdome of God. We pray indeed that the kingdome of God may come. But the kingdome of God commeth not by obseruation Luk. 17.20., if wee stand still gazing and gaping for it Acts 1.11. Non dormientibus prouenit regnum coelorum, nec oti
                              •
                            disidiaque torpentibus beatitudo aeternitatis ingeritur. Leo de Epiph. ser. 5.. Therefore as Abraham did run from the doore of his Tent, to meete the Angels Gen. 18.2.: So must wee endeauour to runne forward, not only looking for, but also hasting vnto, the comming of the day of God 2 Pet. 3.11. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        ., that we may (if it be possible) meete the Lord in the ayre 2 Thes. 4.17. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        ., with all his holy Angels, if we would haue his kingdome come. Wee pray also that the will of God may be done in earth as it is in heauen. But the will of God wil not be done if we will doe nothing. Therefore as the Cherubins spread out their wings on high, and couer the mercy seat Exod. 37.9.: So must wee spread out our wings, and stretch out, or endeauour our selues, and bee alwayes prest and ready to flie, as it were, to doe the will of God Eze. 1.11. Non solum aquila, sed & bos & leo, & homo volant.
                     , if wee would haue his will done in the earth, as it is in heauen.

When God at the first had made a Paradise vpon earth, he tooke the man & put him into it, to dresse it and keepe itGen. 2.15. Vt operaretur & custodiret illum. Vulgata.
                     . Adam was not enioyned to bestow any bodily labour in dressing it at that time: For this was a part of his punishment afterward: Neither yet had he need to keep it from wilde beasts; For all these were then subiect and obedient vnto him. So that hee dressed and kept it, by keeping those graces which God had giuen him, yea, and endeuouring himself to encrease them continually 
                        Quamuis paradisus operib. ruralibus non egeret, tamen quia primus homo lex posteritatis futurus erat, legitimi etiam in paradiso speciem suscepit laboris. Ambro. de Parod. cap. 4.. Therefore the Apostle beseecheth vs also, that wee receiue not the grace of God in vaine, but that in all things wee approue our selues, as the seruants of God, in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, and so foorth 2 Cor. 6.1.. See yee how many posts and props hee putteth vnder vs, that we may be staied vp and confirmed in the grace of God. How many tooles, as it were, and implements he giueth vs, that wee may not receiue the graces of God in vaine, but that as they are receiued and kept in vs, so they may be daily dressed and bettered by vs. For as Saint Peter witnesseth 2 Pet. 1.8., if these things be and

abound, wee shall neither be idle nor vnfruitfull in the knowledge of Christ. Whereupon Oecumenius obserueth, that the graces of God, as the flowers of a garden, must not onely be kept, but also bee dressed, that they may haue, not onely a being, but also an abounding 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        .. Because a man may haue great good things being in him, and yet he himselfe like a garden, that is kept indeed, but not dressed, altogether idle and vnfruitfull: But if they be both being and abounding in him; if hee endeuour himselfe to goe on further euery day then other, then surely hee is neither idle nor vnfruitfull in the knowledge of Christ. Hereupon Charles the 5. gaue this Embleme 
                        Vlterius.
                     , Stand not still, but goe on further; Vlterius, as God saith to his guest. Superius 
                     Luk. 14.10.. Sit not still, but sit vp higher. So the water riseth vp higher & higher, which Exechiel speakes of Ezek. 47.4.. First to the ankles, then to the knees, thē to the loynes, lastly to the head. So the wheate growes vp riper and riper, which Christ speakes of Mark. 4.28.. First there is the blade, then the eare, then the full corne, lastly commeth the haruest. So must we with the water, rise vp higher & higher, till we come

to the head, which is the Sonne of God, and with the wheat grow vp riper and riper, till wee come to the haruest, which is the end of the world. Alwayes endeauouring our selues to that which is before, and continually singing one of the songs of Zion, that is, one of the Psalmes of degrees 
                        Nomine graduum, significatur ascensio, qua proficientes quique à temporalibus ad aeterna, à terrenis ad coelestia prouchuntur. Prosper. in ti
                              •
                           ulum. Psal. 120, till we see the Lord in Zion, till we see the head in the haruest, the Sonne of God, in the end of the world. Euen as hee did, who saies here, I ENDEVOVR MY SELFE TO THAT WHICH IS BEFORE. This is the third degree of perfection.
                  TOuching the fourth he saith, (I run not amisse) but. I FOLLOVV HARD. A man may run amisse, otherwise then he should, by running either too slowly
                     ▪ or too fast. Now for ouer-much slownesse, Rusticus Diaconus saith, 
                        Turpe est contra ardenter peruersa asserentes, nos pro veritate frig
                              •
                           dio
                              •
                           es inueniri. li. aduersus Acephalos.
                      It is a starke shame for vs to bee cold in maintaining a truth, seeing our aduersaries are so hot in defending a falshood. When the aduersary had sowne tares among the good corne, the Maister said to his seruants; Let both grow together: Hee saith not, Let the tares grow,

and the good corne not grow: but, Let both grow together. If the tares grow so fa
                        ••
                      for the fire, then let the good corne grow as fast for the barne. If the wicked runne so fast to damnation, then let the godly runne so fast to saluation. Yet the Prophets haue euer complained, that the children of this world are much more forward in their kinde then the children of light. Dauid speaking of the children of this world, sayth, They encourage themselues in an ill purpose. But Esay speaking of the children of light, sayth Esay 59.4. 
                     No man calleth for iustice, no man contendeth for the truth. When the time drew neere that our Sauiour should be taken, and carried away to be crucified, onely Iudas that vile Traytor was vigilant and watchfull to bring his mischieuous purpose to passe, but all the other Disciples were fast asleepe. Therefore as Ierusalem sayd to her eye Lam. 3.51., Mine eye hath spoyled my soule: So might these drowsie Disciples haue sayd of their eye, Our eye hath spoyled our soule. And as the Centurion said of his seruant Matth. 8.6., My seruant lyeth at home sicke of the palsie, and is ill troubled:

So might Christ haue said of these his sleepy disciples, My disciples lie at home sicke of the palsie, and are ill troubled. Well said, ill troubled: For 
                        〈◊〉
                      that is diligent to discharge his dutie, and takes paines in his calling as he ought
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     s well troubled 
                        Bene torquetur.
                     : But he that hath the palsie, and is dissolute and negligent, and lyes at home sicke of the lazy disease, is ill troubled 
                        Male tarqu
                              •
                           
                           tur.
                     . Ill troubled, with an euill spirit, with the spirit of slumber; which, as Io
                           •
                        
                      testifies Iob. 40.6., lieth in the couert of the reedes. They that are lazie and lither fellow
                        ••
                     , and haue nothing in them, are here called reedes, in whom the Diuell himselfe lieth and sleepeth securely. But though hee bee well quieted in them, yet (a
                        •
                      I said before) they are ill troubled with him. Ill troubled with him, as those seuenty kings were ill troubled with Ad
                           •
                        
                        nibezec, when hee did cut off the thumbs of their hands and feet. For he that hath the thumbs of his hands cut off, may perhaps do something; but hee is so long about a little, that hee were better sit still and doe nothing, then be so long pidling about nothing: So he that hath the thumbs of his feete cut off, may peraduenture

goe forward, but it is 
                        Testudineus gradus. Plaut.
                      such a snailes pace which he goes, that hee were better stand still & not goe at all forward, then goe so slowly forward. Wherefore we must not goe so slowly forward, as though the thumbs of our hands and feet were cut off, but rather wee must runne as fast as it is to be supposed that mightie man could 2 Sam. 21.10., which had vpon euery hand sixe fingers, and vpon euery foote sixe toes. But yet saith Bernard 
                     
                        Et feruor discretionem erigat, & discretio feruorem dirigat.
                     , As zeale must direct our discretion, that wee runne not too slowly, so discretion must direct our zeale, that we runne not too fast. That wise woman, by whom is meant the Church of Christ, laboureth with the counsell of her hands 
                        Consilio ma
                              ••
                           uum. Pro. 31.13.. Her hands are full of eyes 
                        Oculatae manus. Plautus.
                     : shee hath more fore-sight and wisedome euen in her little finger, then many a man hath in his whole head. Shee laboureth with her hands: there is zeale. Shee laboureth with the counsell of her hands: there is discretion as well as zeale. In Leuiticus they are forbidden to bring any blinde offering to GOD Leuit. 22.22.. All zeale without discretion, is an offering without an eie. All blind zeale, is a blinde offering.

Which God will neuer accept. So that as Minerua is said to put a golden bridle vpon Pegasus, that hee should not flye too fast: in like sort our Minerua, that is, our Christian discretion, must put a golden bridle vpon Pegasus, that is, our earnest zeale Iames 3.3., lest if our zeale bee vnbridled, it makes vs follow too fast. Therefore Octauian the Emperour did beare in his Escucheon, a Crabfish and a Butterflie, with this Motto, 
                        Festina lente.
                      Soft pace goes farre. A Crabfish creepes; That is, soft pace. A Butterflie flies; That goes farre. A Crabfish, a Butterflie, Soft pace goes farre. And Vespatian the Emperour did stampe in his coine, a Dolphin and an anchor, with this Impresa 
                        Sat cito, si sat bene.
                     , Soone enough, if well enough: A Dolphin out-strippes the shippe; That's soone enough: An Anchor staies the shippe▪ That's well enough: A Dolphin and an anchor, Soone enough, if wel enough. For as if the lower spheres in the heauen should not be staid with the contrarie course of the highest sphere in the firmament, they would soone set the whole world on a light fire: so the inferiour affections of the minde, if they bee not

staied with the contrary course of reason, and with the milde motion of the spirit of God, they will soone ouer-heat thee, & ouerthrow all thou goest about. Therefore Chilo giueth vs this precept, not to ouer-heate Iacobs sheepe by driuing them too fast Gen. 33.13., nor to make ouermuch hast in the way. According to that in the Prophet Esay, where it is said 
                        Qui crediderit non festinabit. cap. 28. ver. 16., Hee wh
                           •
                        ch bel
                           •
                        oueth, shall not make haste. The string of an Instrument may bee as well too high, as too low. If it be too low it 
                        •
                     arres, if it be too high it breakes. So the mind of man may bee as well too intent, as too remisse. If it be too remisse, it runs too slowly: if it be too intent, it runs too fast. Wherefore Clemens giueth vs this precept; that wee should not be strained and wrested too high, but set and tuned aright 
                        Non 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , sed 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           . P
                              ••
                           ag. lib. 1. cap. 12.. According to that in the second to the Corinths 
                     
                        Non 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , s
                              •
                           d 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           . 2 Cor. 10.14., where it is said, that we must not ouer-stretch our selues, but stretch out our selues, not run amisse, (either too slowly or too fast) but follow hard.
                  For the way of the righteous Prou. 4.1
                           •
                        ., it glittereth as the light, which shineth more and more vnto the perfect day. It glittereth

as the Sun, which commeth forth as a Bridegrome out of his chamber, and reioyceth as a Gyant to run his course. Indeed the wicked are like a wheele: O my God, make them like a wheele, saith Dauid 
                     Psal. 82.13.. A wheele tilts vp behinde, and shoots downe before. So the wicked are forward to all badnesse, and backward to all goodnes. But the godly are like a Panther. A panther hath foure clawes and no more on each hind-foot; but fiue clawes and no lesse on each fore-foote: so the godly, though they be weake to the world-ward, yet they are strong to Godward. And setting the better foote before (as we say) they follow hard, and run with might and maine most violently to lay hold on the hope which is set before them 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         
                        Cursum corripiunt. Beza. Heb. 6.18.. For there are two sorts of violent men; Of the first sort the Apostle saith 1 Cor. 6.10., No extortioners, or violent men shall inherit the kingdome of Heauen. Of the second sort our Sauiour saith Matth. 11.12., The kingdome of heauen suffereth violence, and violent men lay hold on it. Both are violent men: but both are not violent to men. For they offer violence to men these offer violence to God: therfore they doe

not enter: but these doe enter into the kingdome of heauen. For though God be not content that we should offer violence to men, yet he is well content that wee should offer violence to himself
                        Bona 
                              •
                           iol
                              •
                           ntia qua acquiritur regnum Dei. Vis intrare in regnum coelorum? Esto violentus & improbus. Em. Dominica 3. Aduent. 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        .. And that we should follow hard, and as Pirates or theeues set vpon him (if it be lawfull for me so to speake) and by the force of faith spoile him, and rob him of all his eternall treasures 
                        More latr
                              •
                           
                           num fuis eum spoliare nitimur, cupimus illi auf
                              ••
                           re regnum, thesauros & vitam. Amb. Par. sect. 15.. Therefore calling his Church, he saith Can. 2.13., Arise my loue, my faire one, make haste and come away. He that doth make accoūt to come to God, must make haste to come to God. Hee must vse violence, and follow hard, and come downe quickly with Zacheus, and for speedinesse he must be like a Doe, or a Roe vpon the mountains of Bether
                     ▪ Euen as those beasts in Ezekiel 
                     Ezec. 1.14., did run and returne as lightning: so must euery one who is inlightned with the spirit of God, follow as swiftly as lightning, which doth no sooner flash downe from heauen to the earth, then he must in affection mount vp from the earth to heauen. And like as the Israelites were commanded to 
                        •
                     ate the Passeouer in haste
                     Exod. 1
                           •
                        .1
                           •
                        .: semblably all 
                        〈◊〉
                      which are true Israelites, must gird vp the loines of our minds, and follow hard, and run apace,

and redeeme the time, that both the wrath of God may passe ouer vs, and also the mercie of God may abide with vs. For God among other arguments of his mercy, saith thus Iob 39.16., Who hath giuen wings to the Ostridge? The ostridge neuer flies with his wing, but onely a little lifts vp his body with them when he runs; and in the pinion of each wing he hath a sharp 
                        〈◊〉
                      wherewith he pricks his owne selfe, that he may run the faster. So that God hath giuen wings to the Ostridge, not for the Ostridge, but for vs; that we might therby learne, how we ought by all good meanes to quicken our dull dispositions, that we may follow hard, euen as we see the Ostridge eggeth his owne selfe forward with the flapping of his wings. For they that waite vpon the Lord, shall change their strength, they shal lift vp their wings (not onely as the Ostridge, but also as the Eagle: They shall (I say) lift vp their wings as the Eagle 
                     Esay 40.31.. they shall run and not bee faint, they shall walke and not 
                           〈◊〉
                         weary. Euen as Pindarus writeth, that king Th
                           •
                        rous coursers were such as would neuer be weary of going 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        .: so shall these follow still, and neuer be weary of well

doing. But the most especiall thing to be considered here, is this, that the Prophet saith, They which waite vpon the Lord shall change their strength 
                        Mutabun
                              •
                            fortitudinem.
                     . Hee saith not, they shall loose th
                        •
                     ir strength, that whereas before they were strong, now they shall be weak: but, they shall change their strength) namely, (the vse of their strength) that whereas before they were strong, and did follow hard to serue sin, now they shall be as strong, and shall follow as hard to serue God.Rom. 6.19. For God onely it is, which can melt brasse out of a stone Iob. 28.2.. I wot well there is a stone called Almacrasia, which being molten becommeth brasse. But these words haue a farre more hidden meaning: to wit, that God doth melt brasse out of a stone, when hee taketh the heart of a sinner, which is as hard as a stone, and melting it with the holy Ghost, and with fire, doth afterward make it as tough as brasse. This was seene in the conuersion of Paul. For when Paul was made an Apostate, then a stone was made brasse. He was as hard as any stone, before his conuersion, when he stoned Stephen 
                     Acts 7.58.. Hee was as tough as any brasse after his conuersion, when hee

did follow so hard, that no affliction could separate him from the loue of Christ 
                        Rom. 8.35.. Which thing was prophesied of long before Gen. 49.27.. When the Patriarch Iacob said, Beniamin shall be as a rauening wolfe; in the morning hee shall deuoure the prey, in the euening he shall deuide the spoile: Paul was this Beniamin, because hee was of the Tribe of Beniamin 
                     Phil. 3.5.. Paul was this rauening wolfe, because he breathed out threatning and slaughter against the Disciples, and was euen mad vpon them as a rauening wolfe Act. 9.5.. Paul in the morning deuoured the prey, because in the beginning of his dayes hee wasted & deuoured the Church of God as a prey Gal. 1.13.. Paul in the euening diuided the spoile, because in the latter end of his dayes hee did follow his calling hard, and diuided the Word of God aright 2 Tim. 2.15., of which the Psalmist saith, I reioyce in thy Word more then they which haue found a great spoyle. So that this is no losse of strength, but onely a change of strength. O blessed Beniamin! O holy Apostle! Thou hast now changed thy strength: Yea by changing it thou hast much increased it; for thou wert nothing

so strong before, as thou art now. Nothing so strong before, being a stone, as thou art now, being brasse. Nothing so strong before, being a rauening wolfe, as thou art now, being a meeke lambe. Nothing so strong before in the morning, as thou art now in the euening. Nothing so strong before when thou diddest deuoure the prey, as thou art now, when thou doest deuide the spoyle. When no impediments, no stumbling blockes can stay thee, but thou wilt needes compasse sea and land, but thou wilt needes follow hard, and runne ouer the whole world, to deuide the spoile, among all nations to preach the Gospell, vnto all people. So likewise Baruch was inflamed, as the Hebrew word signifieth 
                        Hekerah. Neh. 3.20., he was (I say) inflamed to fortifie the wall of Ierusalem. In mans body the Arteries running along the veines, and beating vpon them, stirre vp the bloud, and keepe it warme, least otherwise by standing still, it should congeale and waxe cold 
                        Vide Theodor. 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , lib. 1.. After the same manner in Baruch his heart, there were liuely and quicke motions of the holy Ghost, which did blow the coales, and stirre vp the gift of God

in him 2 Tim. 1.6. which did warme his bloud, and make him follow the matter hard, being wholly inflamed with a burning desire to see the Citie of God restored againe to her former glory. So Abraham when the Angels came to him Gen. 18.7., made haste to runne to his tent; and his wife made haste to kneade three measures of fine meale; and his boy made haste to 
                        〈◊〉
                      and dresse a good and tender calfe. Let ye how all are imploied in a godly mans house. Abraham and his wife, man and woman; Abraham and his Boy, old and yong: all make haste, and follow hard. So Dauid did runne the way of Gods commandements. Nay, no ordinary pace would serue him, but he must needs dance before the Arke. Yea, his feete could not hold him, but hee must needes haue wings as a doue: O that I had wings as a Doue, saith hee, then would I flie and be at rest 
                     Psal. 55.4.. He wisheth for wings, not that he might first be at rest, and afterward flie, but that hee might first flie, and afterward be at rest. That hee might first follow hard, and flie vp with the wings of faith into the heauenly paradise, and afterward be at rest, and settle there, in

the tree of eternall life. O that I had wings, that I had wings as a doue (saith he) then would I flie, would I flie, and be at rest. And so must we after the example of Dauid, of Abraham, of Baruch, of Paul, fight for the faith which we haue receiued Iudg. 1.3.: and striue to enter in at the streight gateLuk. 13.24.: and labour for the meat which perisheth notIohn. 6.27.: and study to enter into restHeb. 4.11.. We must I say study: and labour; and striue; and fight; and follow hard. This is the fourth degree to perfection.
                  Touching the fifth he saith (not beside the marke, but) toward the Marke. Austin holdeth, that a man were better run either too slowly, or too fast in the way, then follow hard out of the way. For the harder thou followest out of the way the further thou runnest from the Marke. Hereupon the Apostle, after Following hard, addeth immediately, toward the Marke. Insinuating thereby, that to follow is nothing, but the Marke is the matter. And consequently that hee which is not a skilfull Marke, man, can neuer bee a faithfull follower.

Therefore wee must marke well what MARKE is.
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         
                        Laert. in Dioge. Quod ille ioco id nos serio dicannis.
                     . In one word, it is the crosse of Christ. For Christ hath set vp his crosse as a spell 
                        Hinc dicitur Gospel, quasi Gods spell.
                      or as a marke, for vs to aime at, as a patterne of all perfection, as an euerlasting signe which shall not be taken away Esay. 55.13.. Hence it is that speaking of one who should bee his Disciple, hee saithMar. 8.34. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Basil de spiritu S. cap. 8.; Hee that would come after 
                        〈◊〉
                     , let him take vp his crosse and follow 
                           〈◊〉
                         Let him take vp his crosse, that hee may come the neerer to my crosse; and follow mee, that hee may be directed all the way by me. For thou canst neuer erre, or goe beside the marke, so long as thou walkest in this way 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Centu. 2.
                           •
                        .. Therefore Maximus saith, If thou wouldst finde the way which bringeth vnto life, then seeke it in that way which saith, I am the way the truth, and the life. (x) The way, to them that begin; the truth, to them that proceed; the life, to them that are perfect
                        Via est incipientibus: veritas profici
                              •
                           ntibus: & vita perfectis. Tho à campis in soliloquio animae. cap. 12.. Now the way to this way is the Word; Which S. Peter confirmeth saying 2 Pet. 1.25., The word of the Lord endureth for euer, and this is the word which is preached among you. He avoucheth that the eternal word, is the preached word: meaning thereby

that the onely way to the begotten word is the written word. According to that of the Psalmist Psa. 119.1., Blessed are they which are vpright in the way, and walke in the law of the Lord. So that if thou wouldest be vpright in the way, which is the word of Christ, then thou must walk in the law of the Lord, which is the word of Christ. For the holy scripture is giuen by the inspiration of God, to bee a lanthorne vnto our steps, and a light vnto our paths, that the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect vnto all good workes 2 Tim. 3.17. Wherefore (to define this whole matter in few words) we shall in mine opinion follow hard toward the marke, if we labour earnestly in our seuerall vocations to expresse the vertues of Christ our good Lord
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Basil. pag. 555. which he shewed forth in all the course of his life, & especia
                        •
                     ly in his death vpon the crosse for vs to imitate and follow, by walking faithfully in the way of his Commandements, and squaring all our actions, speeches and thoughts, according to the rule of his word. Euen as on the contrary part, it is very euident, that all they run beside the marke, which doe not propound to themselues to follow

the example of Christ, but either in their doctrine, or in their life, either in their opinions, or in their actions, continually swarue from him. Such 
                        〈◊〉
                      all Atheists, Temporizers, Newters, and 
                        
                           ••••
                        
                        rists. For Atheists runne beside 
                        ••
                     e marke by going too much on the left hand. They do not make Christ a marke to aime at, that they may follow him, but a signe to shoote at that they may blaspheme him Luke. 2.34.. They bend their tongues as bowes, and shoot out their arrowe euen bitter words Psalm. 64.3.. They corrupt others, and speake of wicked blasphemy, their talking is against the most high Psalm. 73.8.. They say vnto God depart from vs, for we desire not the knowledge of thy waies Iob. 21.14. Excede pietas si modo in nostra domo vnquam fuisti. Atreus apud Senecum in Thyeste. Actu. 2.. And no maruell that they speake so impiously which liue so vngodly. Running altogether vpon the left hand, in the broad way of the world, of the flesh, of the deuill. For the world hath a kinde of course 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         Ephes. 2.2., which Athists follow, being past feeling,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Ephes. 6.11. & euen starke dead in their trespasses and sinnes.
                        Parte sinistra Centifidum confindititer. Prud. con. Sym. lib. 1. 
                     The flesh also hath a bypath 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Heb. 3.3., whereby they are seduced and deceiued. Lastly, the deuil hath a method
                        •
                      which is without any methode, and an

order which is contrary to all good order, and a left-handed direction, which bringeth them to finall confusion. Now Temporizers also runne beside the marke by going a bout in a circle. They goe about many things, but bring about nothing Thes. 3.11.. They do all things for the time, but nothing for the truth 
                        Omnia prae tempore, nihil pre veritate. Optatus lib. 1. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Chryso.
                     . They make many a period, but neuer a full pointm. They are alwaies lerning, but neuer come to knowledge 2 Tim. 3.7.. The hedge hog hath two holes in his siege, one toward the south, another toward the North. Now when the Southerne wind blowes, he stops vp that hole, and turnes him northward, When the Northerne wind blowes, hee stops vp that hole likewise, and turnes him againe southward. Such vrchin
                        •
                      are all Temporizers. They beleeue for a time, as long as the warme sunne shines vpon them. But as soone as any storme of persecution ariseth, by and by they haue a starting hole to hide themselues in, they change their Religion, and turne about with the time. For the hearts of such men are as a cart-wheele, and their thoughts are like a rolling axeltree Eccle. 33.5.. Or as a top which alwaies runnes round, and neuer

goes forward vnlesse it bee whipt 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Hesy: verbo 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        .. Or like a mill-horse, which making many steppes, turnes about, and is continually found in the same place 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         
                        Bas. pag. 563.. Or as a dote, which riding vpon his hinges all day long, is neuer a white neerer at night. So likewise Newters run beside the marke, by going forward and backeward in a maze. These do not aske of their Father an egge,Pro. 26.14. but a Scorpion. For an egge would teach them to go onely forward, but a Scorpion doth teach them to goe both forward and backward 
                        Augustin. Ep. 121. cap. 5. & Basil in Ps. 32. initio.
                     . Like the Barnacles, which are both flesh & fish
                        Auibus istis tanquam non carneis viri religiosi ieiuniorum tempore vesci sole
                              •••
                            Giral. Cam. App. cap. 8.. Or the Israelites which speake both Ashdod and Hebrew 
                        Nehem. 13.24.: Or Ianus, which sees both before and behind
                        Ianus bifrons exprimitur, quod in medio constitutus annum incipientem pariter & excedentem spectare videatur. Cyp. lib. de Idol. vanit.
                     : Or Balaan, which doth both blesse and curseNum. 23.25.: Such a Newter among the Romans was Tullie, who could not resolue, whether hee should take Caesars or Pompeyes part
                        Quem fugiam scio, quem sequar nescio.
                     
                     ▪ Among the Grecians was Thytides, who could not determine whether hee should ioyne himselfe with Achilles or Hector
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , Homer Ilia. 5.. Among the Iewes was the Tribe of Ephraim, which was a cake vpon the harth not turn'd Ose. 7.8., baked on the one side, and raw on the other side. Among

the Gentiles was the Church of Lao
                        •
                     icea, which was neither hot nor cold Reuel. 3.15.: neither hot, because it was raw on the one side, nor cold, because it was baked on the other side. So it is with all Newters. Their cake is dough, as we say, and they hold of both sides: as Ambidexters with Ehud 
                     Iudg. 3.15., they play with both hands 
                        Malefaciunt ambabua manibus benefaciendo. Micheas. 7.3.: and as the Sunne in Ezakias time, they goe both forward and backeward Esay. 38.8.. Running vp and downe; in, and out; and yet indeede are neither aboue, nor beneath, neither within, nor without 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , Irenae. l. 1. c. 9.. Panarches riddle was this, how a man and no man, can with a stone and no stone, kill a bird and no bird, sitting vpon a tree and no tree? Athenaeus makes the answere 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Conuiualium lib. 10., That an Eunuch is the man, and a Pumeise is the stone, a Batte is the bird, fennell is the tree. After the same sort a Newter is a very hard riddle. You cannot tell what to make of him. For going forward and backward, he is a Christian & no Christian. Like an Eunuch, which is a man and no man; or a Pumeise, which is a stone and no stone; or a Batte, which is a bird and no bird▪ or Fennell, which is a tree and no tree.

Now Humorists also runne beside the marke, by going too much on the right hand. Therfore Dauid could wish his vtter enemie no greater harme, than that satan might stand at his right hand Psal. 109.6.. Satan stands at a mans left hand, when he draweth him by the arme into the old way of Atheisme. At a mans right hand, when he pulleth him by the elbow into the new-found way of Puritanisme. For so blessed Cranmer sayes, 
                        Initio prologi sui ante magna Biblia.
                      Some lo
                        ••
                      their game by short shooting, some by euer-shooting; some walke too much on the left hād, some too much on the right hand. The first, which shoote short and walke too much on the left hand, are Atheists: these latter, which ouer-shoote themselues, and walke too much on the right hand, are Humorists. Of both which S. Austin writeth this 
                        Cauenda pernities, vel Zizaniorum. pracisorum de vite Domini sarmentorum, Epist. 203.: We must in any case beware and take heed, saies he, of the mischieuous infection, not onely of 
                        •
                     ares, (which are Atheists) but also of those branches that haue cut themselues from the Lords vine, which are Humorists. For as Atalanta ranging out on the right hand to gather those golden Apples which Hippomanes for the nonce

threw forth before her, did lose the wager she ranne for 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Arabius apud N
                              •
                           tatem Comitem Myth. lib. 7. cap. 8.: no otherwise they which are not thankfull to God for the glorious peace and prosperitie of his Church, but run after euery strange deuised discipline, and take vp all prety nouelties as golden Apples, which euery man lets fall, shall without question misse the marke, and lose the garland of glory. Wherefore wee must run, not too much on the left hand, as Atheists doe: not round about the circle, as Temporizers doe: not forward and backward in a maze, as Newters doe: not too much on the right hand, as Humorists doe: (not any other way beside the marke) but toward the marke.
                  
                     Iohn Baptist did goe before Christ to make ready a perfect people for the Lord 
                        Parare domino pleb
                              ••
                            perfectam. Luke 1.17.. Now the summe of Iohns preaching was this, Prepare the way of the Lord, and make his path straight. So that they which walke in a straight path directly toward Christ, are a perfect people for the Lord. Therefore wee which would runne toward the marke, must leaue all Atheisme, all Gentilisme, al prophanenes, all lewdnesse on the left hand,

as Paul did leaue Cyprus on the left hand, when he sailed toward Syria 
                     Acts. 27▪
                     . For thus touching the world, S. Basil telleth vs that wee must forsake all those worldly affections, which may draw vs any way beside the marke of true godlinesse 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , pag. 448.. Touching the flesh, Maximus telleth vs, 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Centuria prima.
                     that when our mind is perfectly freed from fleshly desires, then it goeth on straight without any declining from the marke. Touching the diuell, Macarius telleth vs, That we cannot auoyd that gaping gulfe wherein the powers of darkenesse are ouerwhelmed, except the spirit of Christ be our Pilot, and guide vs in a straight course toward the marke, and in a right line, as it were, to the hauen of rest 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Homil. 44.. For indeede Hymeneus and Alexander wanting this guide, made shipwrack of their faith, and were ouerwhelmed in the gulfe of damnation, being deliuered to the Diuell, that they might learne not to blaspheme 1 Tim. 1.20.. Whereupon Oecumenus saith, That it asketh good Art, and is a point of great cunning for a man to keepe the scope of Christianitie, and to goe right toward the marke of truth 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . in v. 6.. And therfore as Gunners wink

with their left eye, that they may leuell more truely: in semblable sort wee must not behold any vngodlinesse or sinister dealing with our eies, but we must aime directly toward Christ, and either, if it be possible, hit the marke, or at the leastwise with those left-handed Beniamites, come within a haires bredth of it Iudg. 20.16. When Diogenes saw a bungling Archer shoote, he ran as fast as hee could to the marke. The lookers on demanded what he meant in so doing? He answered, to make sure that he might not be hit. For this fellow (sayes hee) meanes neuer to come neere the marke. Thus must we doe: When we see prophane straglers, starting aside like a broken bowe, and roauing a great way wide on the left hand, wee must presently runne to the marke, that not onely wee may keepe our selues safe from the danger of their ill ensample, but also we may giue aime (as it were) to others, by our good ensample, and direct them, that they bee neither wide nor short of the marke 
                        Paulus dicit se instar sagittarij ad propositum, & ad signum i
                              •
                           cula dirigere; ne sagitta ad partem declinans alteram, imperitum ostenda
                              •
                            sagittarium: Hiero. aduer. P. l. 
                        
                           •
                        . initio.
                     . Now for Temporizers, wee know that Iosephs brethren stood so long dallying and delaying, and trifling out the time,

that hauing a iourney to buy corne, they might haue returned twice, before they would go onceGen. 43.10.. Also that Elizeus when Elias called him, went about the bush (as wee say) and would needs goe bid his father and his mother farewell, before he vvould follow the Prophet 1 Kin. 19.20.. Paul did not so, Being called of God▪ he did not stand temporizing, and circling▪ and consulting with flesh and bloud Gal. 1.16., before hee would follow toward the Marke
                     ▪ neither did he fetch a compasse, as hee was constrained to doe when hee arriued at Regium 
                     Act. 21.1., but as hee came with a straight course to Ceus 
                     Act. 21.1., so here straight waies he came to Christ. There is but one place in th
                        •
                      whole Scripture, which may seeme to serue them which serue the time: and that is, where the Apostle exhorteth vs, not to be sloathfull in seruice, but feruent in spirit, seruing the time 
                     Rom. 12.11 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        .. They that by seruing the time, vnderstand, taking all opportunities to do good, expound it neuerthelesse thus, That wee must apply our selues to the time, yet so, as in euery inclination, and turning, we keepe a straight course
                        Sic tamen, vt in qualibet inclinatione rectum cursum teneamus. Calui
                              •
                           . ibid.
                     . But all the Fathers, Origen onely excepted,

doe reade the place otherwise Ierome by name, saith most peremptorily 
                        Illi legant Tempori seruientes, nos legamus, Domino seruientes, Epistola ad Marcel.
                     , Let others reade, seruing the time, I for my part will reade, seruing the Lord. And this reading indeed is much more agreeable to the Text. So that here is nothing said in defence of time-seruers. For they that are such, serue not the Lord Iesus Christ, they are not Christ-seruers, but they serue their owne bellies, and with their glauering & flattering, they seduce the hearts of the simple, and leade them beside the Marke 
                     Rom. 16.18. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        .. Therefore as Fletchers to make their shafts flie steddily, piece them with sugarchest, or hollie, or such like heauy wood; so we must adioine to that aspe or seruice tree, or such other light matter which we are all made of, the sweet sugarchest of the holy Ghost, that wee may not bee vnsteady as arrowes of aspe, nor yet slothfull in seruice, but feruent in spirit, seruing the Lord. Saint Ambrose reporteth, that the Bee being to flie home to her hiue, and fearing lest if she should be taken by the way with the wind, she might perhaps bee blowne about in the aire, counterpoizers her selfe with a little stone, and so flies straight home
                        Apis cum aeris motus susp
                              •
                           ctos habet sapil
                              •
                           s saepe in sublat
                              •
                            per 
                              〈◊〉
                            se lirrat nubila, n
                              •••
                           eus alirum remeg
                              •
                           um praec
                              •
                           pitent fla
                              •
                           ra ventorum. De virg. prop. fol. 3.. This

may teach vs also what we ought to doe. Wee must not be wauering, and carried about with euery blast of doctrine Ephes. 4.14.like a reed shaken in the wind 
                        Vide Foxū in praefatione ante Pandectas locorium communium.
                     : but as the Bee is ballanced with a little stone, so wee must bee built vpon the chiefe corner stone Ephes. 4.20. and grounded vpon a rocke Luke 6.24., and established with grace Heb. 13.9., that howsoeuer the raine fall, or the flouds arise, or the windes blow Mat. 7.25., or what times soeuer come, yet wee may stand fast in the streete which is called straight 
                     Acts. 9.11., alwaies following Christ directly towards the marke. To come now to Newters, they may bee compared to a weauers shuttle Iob. 7.6., which if it go forward one way, presently goes backward againe as much another way
                        •
                     . Or to a Weauer himselfe, such an one as Penelope was, who would doe, and vndoe, weauing that in the day time, which she did vnweaue in the night. But contrariwise saith our Apostle Gal. 2.16., If I build againe the things that I haue destroyed, I make my-selfe a transgressor. As if hee should say, If I weaue and vnweaue, if I build and destroy, I make my selfe a newter, and so consequently runne beside

the marke. For no man doth more transgresse, then he that is doubtfull and vncertaine in religion, one while putting his foot forward, another while pulling it backward againe 
                        Nihil 
                              •
                           urpius dubio & incerto, pedem modo producente. Seneca. ep. 96.. God saith to his people which come to worship him in his temple, That he which entreth in by the way of the North-gate, shall go out by the way of the South-gate, & he that entreth by the way of the South-gate, shall goe forth by the way of the North-gate, he shall not returne by the way of the gate whereby he came, but they shall goe forth ouer against it Ezech. 46▪9.. Thus the wise men which came to worship Christ returned not home the same way they came, but returned home another way Mat. 2.12.. For it was behooufull that beleeuing now in Christ, they should not walke any more in the wayes of their old conuersation, but that taking a new course, they should leaue all their former errors, and go
                        •
                      forward continually toward the Marke 
                        Oportebat enim vt iam in Christum credentes, non per antiquas conuersationis semitas ambularent, sed nouam ingressi viam, à relectis erroribus abstinerent. Leo de Epiphania. ser. 3.. Among those fowles which are counted abhominable, the Sea-m
                        •
                     w, or the Gull is one Leuit. 11.16.. Now this is vncleane, because it liues in both elements, both in the water, and in the earth, swimming

as a fish, and yet flying as a bird
                        Lerus quimal est in v
                              •
                           r
                              •
                            quae viuens, id est aqua & terra, qui sicutauis quidem volat, vt aquatile autem natat. Cui non mal
                              •
                            comparantur hi qui circumcisionem venerantur & Baptisma, ad quos Paulus dicit, si circumcida
                              •
                           ini, Christus vobis nihil prodest. Isychius in Leu. Lib. 3.. And certainely those wise men should haue beene such fooles, and such guls as these are, if they had worshipped both circumcision, which is an earthly rudiment, & also Baptisme, which is administred by water, & by the holy Ghost. For the Holy Ghost saith, if you be circumcised Christ shall profit you nothing. As if hee should say, If you go backward againe to the circumcision of Herod, hauing gone thus far forward to the Baptisme of Christ, you make your selues Newters, and shall neuer come to the Marke. The Iewes were charged not to weare a garment of diuers sorts, as of linnen & woollen togetherDeut. 22.11.. Hath God care of oxen, and hath hee not much more care of Preachers 1 Cor. 9.9.? Hath God care of those garments, wherewith our bodies are couered, & hath hee not much more care of those vertues wherewith our mindes are adorned 1 Pet. 3.3. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                        ▪ 1 Pet. 5.5. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        .? Yes verily, we must so vnderstand it, that by this Iewish Law, we are all charged, not to runne with old clouted shooes vpon our feete Iudg. 95., when our feete should bee new shod with the preparation of the Gospell

of peace Eph. 6.15. not to sow a peece of new cloth into an old garment Mark. 2.21., when old things are now past, and all things are become new 1 Cor. 5.17. In one word, not to haue a linsie-woolsie Religion, or a patcht moath-eaten conscience, but to weare such a faire Cognisance of certainty and constancy vpon our coat, as al men may see, that without any neutralitie, or hypocrisie, wee follow hard toward the marke, and sincerely serue God. Therefore as Theseus being guided by Ariadnes threed, which she tied at the entrance into Dedalus labyrinth, escaped all the danger and errour of it: euen so wee must make Christ the doore; by which wee must enter into the labyrinth of all our affaires, and tie Rahabs threed Iosu. 2.14. at his entrance, and follow it all the way, that so we may be safe, and goe in, and out, and finde pasture Iohn 10.9.. For to goe in and out after this sort, is not to go forward and backward, but to goe only forward. Seeing whether wee goe in by remembrance of Christs mercies, or goe out by consideration of our owne miseries, whether we goe in by faith, or goe out by good workes, whether wee goe in

by life, or goe out by death, alwayes wee finde pasture, that is, heauenly comfort in Christ, alwayes wee goe forward, alwayes wee follow toward the marke. Now for Hum
                           •
                        rists, Saint Paul aduiseth vs to put on the Armour of righteousnes on the right hand, and on the left2 Cor. 6.7.. Marcus Caelius was said to haue a good right hand, but an ill left hand, because hee could plead against a man better then for him. But here it is contrary: for these are armed well enough on the left hand, but they lie open to the Diuell on the right hand. Who like a cunning fencer, doth strike a great deale more fiercely at the right hand then at the left 
                        Ampliori solicitudine vulnerare in nobi
                              •
                            dextram satagit quam sinistram. Ber. qui hab. ser. 7.. Therefore Dauid saith. The Lord vpon the right hand shall wound euen Kings in the day of his wrath 
                     Psal. 110.5.. If Sathan stand at thy right hand, hee shall wound thee: but if the Lord stand at thy right hand, thou shalt wound him, and bruise his head, and breake the hairy scalpe of all the Kings and Princes of darkenes Eph. 6.12.. Wherefore euery Christian must say with the Psalmist Psal. 19.9., I haue set God alwayes before me, (there is the marke) for hee is at my right hand, so that I shall not fall. And againe

                     Psal. 73.23., Thou hast holden me vp by my right hand, thou shalt guide me with thy counsell, (there is toward the marke,) & after that receiue me into glory. S. Bernard writing to one Guido, a Cardinall of Rome, in his very first salutation, wisheth him no greater gift of God, then that hee might haue grace to turne neither to the right hand, nor to the left 
                        Guidoni Bernardus, Non declinare ad dextram nec ad sinistram, Epist. 192.. And a little after in the same Epistle, hee requesteth him that he would learne to know himselfe and not to goe beyond his own mediocrity, but be wise vnto sobriety
                        Seipsum cognosceret, nec egrederetur mensuram suam▪ sed saperet ad sobrietatem. ib.
                     . This lesson the wisest that euer was t
                        •
                     acheth v
                        •
                     
                     Eccles. 7.18., not to bee ouer much iust, neither to make our selues ouer-much wise 
                        Quisquis plus iusto non sapit ille sapit. Martial. l. 16.. For that which is too good, is starke naught: and he that is too wise, is a starke foole; because he is neuer contented with the time present, but needs hee must haue a praeter: And yet no praeter will content him neither, nor an imperfect, no not a perfect, but onely that which is more thē perfect. Now h
                        •
                     e which will needes bee more then perfect shall whether hee will or no, be lesse then imperfect. Hee that seekes to be more wise then hee can be, shall be found to bee lesse wise then hee

should be. And hee that thinkes himselfe seene in all things, shall soone shew himselfe ouer-seene in most things. Because a selfe-conceit of surmised wisedome, will not let him come to happy increase of true wisedome 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Marc.
                     . And certaine it is, that God will not reueale wisdome, but onely to such as walke conti
                        •
                     nually in the way of peace, and doe not at any time, like scattered sheepe, runne too much on the right hand, out of the way of peace, into the way of precisenesse 
                        In via pacis tantum ambulantibus reuelabit, & in nullam praecisionem deuiantibus. Aug. lib. 2. de Bap. contr. Donat. c. 8. & citatur à Bruno d
                              ••
                           b
                              •
                           reticis. li. 4. cap. 4.. Wherefore though it be thy right eye, yet if it offend thee, or cause thee to offend the Church of God by thy running beside the marke, plucke it out hardly, and cast it from thee Mat. 5.30.. For thou knowest that hee which would needes forsooth in all the haste call for fire from heauen Luk. 9.14. had too hot a spirit, and at that time went too much on the right hand, and therefore not with a right foote to the Gospell Galat. 2.4.. But hee that did shaue his head in Cenchrea 
                     Acts 18.18. Paulus Timo
                           
                              •
                           heum circumc
                              •
                           dit, hostias in temp
                              •
                            immolauit cum Aquila & Priscill
                              •
                            caput Corinthi totondit. Wilf
                              •
                           idus apud Bedam histor. l. 5. c. 25., and yeelded to many other ceremonies for peace sake, which otherwise perhaps hee did not greatly allow and like of, as he exhorteth others to doe, so hee did himselfe, make

                     
                        •
                     raight steps for his feete Heb. 12.13., and went directly toward the marke. To returne 
                        •
                     hen now at the length to that which 
                        •
                     re-while I was about to say, it hath bin thought in former time that none could 
                        •
                     e perfect but they which led a solitarie life. Hence it is that so many Writers both old and new haue so largely discoursed of the perfection of that life 
                        Venire ad 
                              •
                           remum summa perfectio est, Caesar Arelatensis, h. 23. p. 143. Vide praeter alios, Laurentium Iustinianum de disciplina, & perfectione monasticae conuersationis, pag. 118.. Yea diuers, not onely inferiors, but euen Princes, and not only of other countries, but euen of this Realme of England 
                        Kynigilsus, Ceolulsus, Eadbertus, Ethelredus, Kenredus, Sigibertus, Offa, Sebbi, Iue.
                     , haue voluntarily relinquished their Crowne, their Scepter, and all their royall roabes, and cloistered vp themselues in Monasteries, that they might liue, as they thought, in a more perfect state. And certes I will not deny, but that such as can well away with this kinde of life, haue many opportunities to serue God, which we haue not 
                        Nihil aliud quicquam erat olim monachi professio, quam priscae liberae
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            vitae meditatio ac piere Christiane. Erasmus in praefation
                              ••
                           nte Hier. Ep.
                     , and haue not many imperfections of the world which we haue 
                        Cellae & Coeli habitatio cogna taesunt. Ber. de vita solit
                              •
                           r.
                     . Yet this is not the onely perfect estate, which tendeth toward the marke. But as diuers haue liued very badly in Monasteries: so many haue liued very blessedly without them. Yea, there is no calling so meane, but if a man

follow Christ in it, hee may well enough according to the measure of grace which it shall please God to giue him, become a perfect man. Let Ioseph be an example for seruants; Iacob for shepheards; Amos for cottagers; Matthew for Farmers; Peter for Fishers; Paul for T
                        •
                     nt-makers; and so forth of the rest 
                        Vide Theod. 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            l. 7. in fine. Et Philo Iudeum 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , p. 593.. For if a man haue the right Marke alwayes before his eyes, he may liue as well in a Citie, as in a sanctuary 
                        Morae 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           . Chrys. ad pop. Antioch. 17. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         
                        vbi supra, hom. 12., as well in a shop as in a cell i, So that no one calling simply of it selfe, doth make a man perfect, but the answere of a good conscience to God 1 Pet 3.21., that is it which maketh a man perfect. Briefly the point is this. What lawfull calling, state, or condition soeuer thou art in, if ouer and besides the plying of thy worldly busines, thou haue a conscionable care euery day to encrease spiritually also, in such a faith as worketh by charity Galath. 5.6., I warrant thee, feare nothing, thou art right enough, and dost goe straight toward the Marke. The superstitious Pagans thought that an Idoll which they termed Vibilia, kept them from erring out of their way 
                        Ab erronibus viarum dea Vibilia liberat. Arnob. aduers. gent. l 4. initio.
                     . But faith is our Vibilia, which will not suffer vs to

wander out of the way, so long as we do all things according to that patterne which was shewed vs in the mount Exo. 25.10.. For Christ with his crosse in mount Caluarie hath gone before vs, and broken the ice already for vs, and left vs an example, that by faith wee might follow his steppes 1 Pet. 2.21., euery one of vs saying vnto him, with holy Iob, My foote hath followed thy steppes, thy way haue I kept, and haue not declined Iob 23.11.. This we shall doe if we walke in the Kings hie-way of charity Num. 21.22 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , Nazianzen p. 19. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , Bas. pag. 129., and keepe the royall way of loue 
                        
                           •
                        am. 2.8.. For we that are Christians goe toward the marke, not by liuing, but by louing: not with our feete, but with our affections. Neither is there any thing which maketh a good or bad life, but a good or a bad loue 
                        Imus enim, non ambulando: non pedibus, sed moribus. Nec faciunt bon
                              •
                           s vel malos mores nisi boni vel mali amores. Aug. Epist. 52.. Therefore he that would bee perfect, must be rich in good workes, and according to the rule of Euangelicall perfection, he must loue, not only his friends in God, but also his foes for God 
                        Amico, in deo, & inimicos propter deum. Prosper. in l. sententiar
                              •
                           m.
                     . Because as that is the hottest fire which warmeth them that are furthest off: so that is the most feruent and perfect loue which forsaketh none though they be neuer so farre off, neither friend nor

foe▪ that may be loued, but embraceth all in him who neuer doth forsake, vnlesse he be forsaken. Now this charity of ou
                        •
                     s ought to bee scarlet twice dyed 
                        Coccus bis tinctus. Exod. 28.6., I meane extended not onely towards men, but also towards God. Which loue of God must make vs contemne the world, and loath our owne selues 
                        Duo amores duas constituunt ciuitates, amor Dei crescens vsque ad contemptum sui, ciuitate Dei. Amor sui vsque ad contemptum Dei, ciuitatem diaboli. Aug.
                     , and mortifie all our inordinate desires, & keepe no proprietie in any thing wee haue, but renounce and resigne our whole will and our whole soule, to the good will and pleasure of God. For indeed so many times we step out of the way as wee desire any thing which is not finally referred to the loue of the Lord 
                        Tot gressus extra viam ponimus, quot peruersis desiderijs à coelestis vitae meditatione separamur. Greg. Mag.
                     . And therfore as a cunning archer will hit, not onely the white, but euen that very blacke in the middest of the marke, which is commonly made in the forme of a heart 
                        Cambyses c
                              ••
                            sily Prexaspis, cor ipsum sua sagitta traiecisset, Dicito mihi, inquit Prexaspes, quemnam noris mortali
                              ••
                           n ita ad destinatum emittere sagittas? Herodotus lib. 3. initio.
                     
                     ▪ semblably a sincere louer of God, must neuer leaue darting and shooting vp to God his most passionate and piercing desires 
                        Iaculatoria desideria. Aug.
                     , till hee hath hit the marke 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Igna. Epist. 13., and with his wounded heart also wounded Gods heart, that the Lord may mercifully, and louingly confesse vnto him and say, Thou hast wounded my

heart, my sister, my spouse Cant. 4.9.. But now as in our charitie to men we must loue not onely our friends, but also our foes; so in our charity to God, wee must loue the Lord, not onely when hee sheweth sensible signes of familiarity and fauour toward vs, but also when hee seemeth to frowne as it were, and to bee offended with vs. Dauid saith in one Psalme Psal. 119.143., trouble and heauinesse hath found mee: but in another Psalme Psal. 116.3., I haue found trouble and heauinesse: Betweene these two speeches there is a great difference; For trouble and heauinesse may finde him which runneth into a corner and hideth himselfe, and would not be found by affliction; But hee findes trouble and heauinesse, who when it is in his owne free choyce whether hee will be afflicted or no, willingly with Moses chuseth to suffer affliction Heb. 11.25., and loueth the Lord most of all, when he laieth some fatherly chastisement and correction vpon him; knowing that as Christ was consecrated and perfected by afflictions Heb. 2.10. & cap. 5.9.: so nothing doth more perfect a Christian, and make him fine gold indeed (as S. Paul also in the very next verse almost before

my text declareth) then the fellowship of his afflictions, and to bee made conformable vnto his death 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                     . For the sweete Lambe of God was in such an extreame agony and anguish, and distresse, and desolation of spirit, that his blessed body was bathed all ouer in a sweate of bloud. To teach vs, that though we haue suffered very much already for the loue of Christ, yet if we be not content to suffer a thousand times more, and euen to endure martyrdome, and to sweat a bloudy sweat for his sake, wee are not of his body 
                        Haec pugna Saluatoris nostri martyrum agones, & cortamina significabat. Ille sud
                              •
                           r sanguineus eorum sanguinem de toto eius corpore (quod est 
                              ••
                           clesia) vtique fundendum manifestebat. Emisse feria 4. post Dom. in palmis. p. 116.. But on the other side, that this is the highest perfection that can be in this life, not onely in prosperity, but also in the greatest aduersity to blesse God, and if it please him, for our further tryall, to take away from vs al comforts both outward and inward, yea, and to bring vs in a manner to the very point of desperation, yea euen then, then also to show an inuincible faith, and onely for the pure and perfect loue which we beare toward his Maiesty, to wrestle with the whole world, and to fight manfully against the powers of hell it selfe, and to braue it out, and triumph ouer all tribulations,

each one of vs saying with Iob 
                     Iob 13.15., Though he kill me, though hee kill me, yet will I 
                        •
                     oue him, and but my trust in him: and with Christ Mat. 26., Father, Father, O my louing father, if it be possible, let this cup pa
                        ••
                     e from me; neuerthelesse not my will, not my will, but thy wil be fulfilled. This is indeed to follow hard toward the Marke. This is the fifth degree to perfection.
                  Touching the sixth he saith (not for any other prize, but) FOR THE PRIZE OF THE HIGH CALLING OF GOD IN CHRIST IESVS. A man were as good shoot at no marke 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Erasm. in prouerbio, Nullo scopo iaculari.
                     , as at a wrong marke. And a man were as good venture for no Prize 
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , Marcus Eremita.
                      as for a wrong Prize. For hee that suffereth martyrdome, (which, as I said euen now, is the highest top of perfection that any mortall creature can reach to in this life), hee, I say, that suffereth martyrdome to this intent, to haue his relikes honoured of all men, or is willing any other way to haue his bloud shed, to this end, to make himselfe famous in the world, followeth hard (I grant) toward the marke, yet hee followeth not for this perfect Prize, but

for popular praise 
                        Si ita martyrium fecerimus quod nostras ab omnibus velimus honorari reliquias & si opinionem vulgi sectantes intrepide sanguinem fuderimus, huic operi non tam pramium quam poena debetur, & perfidie magis tormenta sunt, quam corona victoriae. Amb.
                     . And therefore all that hee suffereth, doth rather torment him for his hypocrisie, then crowne him for his victory. Wherefore it will not be amisse to consider, what ought to be the chiefest end of all our actions, and what is the greatest felicitie that man may attaine by following hard toward the marke, which the Apostle here calleth THE PRIZE OF THE HIGH CALLING OF GOD IN CHRIST IESVS. Varro reporteth, that the ancie
                        ••
                      Philosophers haue held and maintained two hundred threescore and eight seuerall opinions concerning felicitie 
                        Libro de philosophia apud Aug. de ciuit. dei. l. 19. c. 1.. No maruell then though Athens and Rome, and all the braue and gallant witts in the world, could neuer attaine to the true knowledge of perfect blessednesse. For following so many, they could neuer find any, but vanishing away in their own smoakie conceits, when they thought themselues wise men, they proued in the end to be very fooles Rom. 1.22.. Seeing this is the greatest folly that can be, and a misery of all miseries, for a man but once to dreame of so diuers and so contrary felicities; I will touch but a few of them at

this time. And that very briefly. Some therefore define perfect happinesse to be an action of the mind, according to vertue, in a perfect life, But by this perfect life they vnderstand this present life. Whereas the Apostle auoucheth, that the seruants of God haue their fruit in righteousnesse, and their end euerlasting life Rom. 6.22.. Therfore as euerlasting death is the greatest misery, so euerlasting life is the greatest felicity. Which euerlasting life, being the perfect life, is not this present life, nor in this present life, but the life to come, and in the life to come. This is and then is, euerlasting life. Others esteeme worldly honour to be perfect happinesse. But Hilary contrariwise affirmeth 
                        Omnis feculi honor diatoli est negotium. Canone 3. in Matth.
                     , That al the honor of the world is the merchandize of the diuell, not the prize of perfection. And Eucherius also saith, That the honours of the world are the waues of the world 
                        Honores mundi, tumores mundi. Epist. paraene. aecon
                           
                              ••
                           mp m
                              •
                           nd.
                     , which Christ did teach vs to contemne, and tread vnder our feete, when hee himselfe did walke vpon the water Mark. 6.48.. For so the very heathenish Romans did. They had for the difference of their nobility, a little ornament in the forme of a Moone, which they did weare

vpon the shooes 
                        Isidorus calceos lunatos sonatorum vocat, additque Romulum calceos patricios reperisse, 
                              •
                           ssuta luna. Sigonius de Iudi. l. 2. cap. 20.. What did they but thinke all worldly honour very murable, when they did represent it in the forme of a Moone? And what did they but tread it vnder their feete, when they did weare it vpon their shooes? Now wee that are Christians see, and ought to see our calling better then they. How that not many wise men, according to the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called: but that wee must as well by dishonour 2 Cor. 6.13., as by honour, enter into eternall glory. Some others imagine, that carnall pleasure is perfect happinesse. But what saith the Apostle? Meats for the belly, and the belly for meates; but God will destroy both it and them 
                     1 Cor. 6.8.. Meates for the belly. That is true. We doe eate to liue. And the belly for meates. That is false. Wee do not liue to eate. Therefore God will destroy both it and them. Both the belly and the meates of all Epicures, because they thinke their belly is made for meates 
                        Machometus credidit beatitudinem consistere in cibo, potu, delectationibus corporalibus. Iohannes Galensis Anglus. l. de orig. Mach. c. 5., whereas indeede onely meates are made for their belly. Because they thinke they may liue to eate Nihil aliud putant esse vitam nisi vescendi & potandi licentiam. Firmicus in lib. de errore profa. resig., whereas indeed onely they may eate to liue. For the prize of

our high calling is not meat or drinke (or any carnall pleasure) but righteousnesse and peace, and ioy in the Holy Ghost. Others account transitory riches to be perfect happinesse. And certainely, if wee vse our riches well, as diuers worthy Citizens of this City haue done, to the maintenance of learning, to the building of Hospitals, and to other such good purposes, then riches (I grant) are a great helpe to a vertuous minde, and a speciall furtherance to felicity. Otherwise that complaint of Saluianus may take place euen in these our times 
                        Tanta est miseria huius temporis, vt nullus habeat
                              ••
                            magis foelix quam qui est plurimum diues. De guber. lib. 3.. Our times are so miserable (saith hee) that now adaies no man is thought to be more happy then hee that is knowne to bee most wealthy. And that also of Innocentius 
                     
                        Proh pudor, secundum fortunam aestimatur persona quum potius secundum personam aestimanda sit fort
                              •
                           
                           na. Tam honus reputatur quam diues, tam malus quam pauper, cum potius am diues sit reputandus quam 
                              •
                           onus, tam pau
                           
                              •
                           er, quam malus. 
                              •
                           e contem. 
                              ••
                           und. l. 1. c. 16.. Fie for shame (saith hee) now adayes man is esteemed according to his money, whereas rather the money should bee esteemed according to the man. Euery one is reputed worthy, if hee be wealthy, and naught if hee be needy; whereas rather euery one should be reputed wealthy if hee be worthy, and needy if hee bee naught. For questionlesse riches of themselues doe encumber and

entangle the minde, euen as an Ape is tied and teddered to his clogge. Wee reade according to the Greeke translation, that Abraham was very rich. But there is a latine translation which saith, that Abraham was very heauy. And the originall Hebrew Gen. 13.2. Chauedb.
                      indifferently beareth both, which proueth that riches are a heauy burthen, and do many times hinder them very much, which would attaine to blessednesse. Yea, if thou set thy heart vpon them, they will likewise set themselues too vpon thy heart, and lie so heauily vpon thy heart, that they will presse, and wey thee downe with thy heart into hel. Therfore diuers holy men and women heretofore haue voluntarily abandoned their wealth, and preferred pouerty before it, that they might the sooner and the easier come to perfection. For as it is hard for a periwinkle in the sea to swimme, or for a snaile vpon the land to creepe, while they beare their houses vpon their backes 
                        D
                              •
                           n. p
                              •
                           rta.
                     : euen so it is hard for a rich man, that trusteth in his riches, with all his bigge bunches of wealth vpon his backe, to goe through the needles eye Mar. 10.25., and to enter into the Kingdome of heauen. Wherefore

wee must follow hard toward the mark; (not for any action in this life, but) for euerlasting life: (not for any worldly honor, but) for eternall glory: (not for any carnall pleasure, but) for ioy in the holy Ghost: (not for any transitory treasure, but) for the kingdome of heauen: (not for any other prize, but) for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Iesus.
                  
                  This euerlasting life, is the onely perfect life, because it is the Prize: this eternall glory is the onely high honour, because it is of the high Calling: this ioy in the holy Ghost, is the onely godly pleasure, because it is of God: This Kingdome of heauen, is the onely Christian▪ 
                     treasure, because it is in Christ Iesus. This (I say) this euerlasting life, is the onely perfect life, because it is the prize: Which maketh the Marchant-venturer that gets it most absolutely blessed. As th
                        •
                      Psalmist saith Psa. 127.1. speaking of another; blessed art thou that fearest God, and walkest in his waies; For thou shalt eare the labour of thy hand; O well art thou, and happy shalt thou be O well art thou: For thou hast feared God, and walked in his waies; for thou hast followed hard toward the mark; And happy shalt

thou be: For thou shalt eate the labour of thy hands; for thou shalt haue, by the gracious gift of GOD Rom. 6.23., euerlasting life, the onely perfect life, The prize of the high calling of God in CHRIST IESVS. As the Apostle saith 2 Tim. 4.8. speaking of himselfe, I haue finished my course, I haue kept the faith; there is henceforth layd vp for me a crowne of righteousnesse. O well art thou, and happy shalt thou be! O well art thou! For thou hast finished thy course, and kept the faith; for thou hast followed hard toward the marke. And happy shalt thou be: For there is henceforth layd vp for thee the crowne of righteousnesse; for there is henceforth laid vp for thee euerlasting life, the onely perfect life, The prize of the high calling of God in CHRIST IESVS. This eternall glory is the onely high honour, because it is Of the high calling: For all of the visible Church haue a calling. Seeing the Church is nothing else but the company of them which are called 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , Cyril. Hier. suly. 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 18.. Yet all that are called, are not worthy of this calling. Seeing many make excuses, and will not come when they are called Luk. 14.8.. Therefore Saint Peter prayeth

for the dispersed Iewes 1 Pet. 1.10., that the God of all grace, which hath called them to his Eternall Glory, would make them perfect, confirme, strengthen and establish them therin. And S. Paul likewise prayeth for the Thessalonians 2 Thes. 1.11., that God would make them worthy of his calling (to eternall Glory) and perfect all the good pleasure of his goodnesse, & the work of faith in them. Whereby we see that they are the only worthies of the world which are so happy as to haue this High honour, and dignity 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         
                        Dignitatem. Beza. Ioh. 1.12. giuen them, to bee called the sons of God. Which was prefigured in the feeling of the Temple. Where were grauen Palme-trees and Chaines 2 Chro. 3.5.: The Palm-tree is High, the Chaine is Calling. The Palm-tree chaine, the High Calling. For God the Father by his effectuall calling, as by a strong chaine Iohn. 6.44., doth draw his children to Christ. And then standing before the Lambe, they hold Palmes in their hands Reuel. 7.9., which are the ensignes of their honour. So that being drawne vp to the High Palme-tree by the Calling chaine, they are made partakers of eternall glory, the onely high honour, THE PRIZE OF THE HIGH

CALLING OF GOD IN CHRIST IESVS. This ioy in the holy Ghost is the only godly pleasure, because it is of God. Indeed sometimes euen in this life we haue a taste Cant. 8.2. (as it were) of this ioy. As the Israelites had a tast of the grapes and other pleasures of Canaan before they came thither Num. 13.14.. But we cannot enioy the full fruition of it vntill wee come to the presence of GOD, therefore Dauid saith Psal. 36.12., in thy presence is the fulnes of ioy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for euermore. And againe, they shall bee satisfied with the fatnesse of thy house, and thou shalt giue them drinke out of the riuer of thy pleasures
                     Psal. 36.8.. For this fatnesse of the house of God is that meate, and this riuer of the pleasures of God is that drinke, which shall perfectly sati
                        •
                     fie, and fill our hearts with ioy in the holy Ghost. When the Lord shall say to euery one of vs, Enter thou into thy Lords ioy 
                     Math. 25.23.. Not, let thy Lords ioy enter into thee: For it is so great, that it cānot enter into thee, thy heart cannot hold it 
                        Non ergo totum illud gaudium intrahit in gaudentes, sed toti gaudentes intrahunt in gaudium Domini sui. Aug. Manua. c. 36., But, Enter thou into thy Lords ioy. For thou shalt euen bath thy selfe in blessednesse, and swimme in the bottomlesse streame of the sweete pleasure of

God, as a little fish taketh his pastime in the hugh Ocean sea. And looke how he that hath once tasted of the fountain named Clitorius fons, will neuer afterward drink any wine 
                        Clitorio quicun
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            sitim defonte leua
                           
                              •
                           ic, Vina fugit, gaudet
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            meris abstemius vndis. Ouid. Met. 15. In Arcadia. Ciuitas est, non ignota Clitori, in cuius agri
                              •
                            est spelunca profluens aquae, quam qui biberint, fiunt abstemij. Vitruuius l. 8. c. 3. in like sort when thou hast once tasted this pure christall water of life, thou shalt neuer any more relish the wine of the world, but bee perfectly delighted with ioy in the holy Ghost, the onely godly pleasure, The prize of the high calling of God in CHRIST IESVS. This kingdome of heauen is the only Christian treasure, because it is in Christ Iesus. For all treasures which are laid vp in earth may bee stollen with theeues, or corrupted with cankers Math. 6.19.; But this treasure is an enduring substance Heb. 10.34., hoorded vp in heauen, where neither thiefe stealeth, nor canker corrupteth 
                        Veras diuitias illam prorsus immortalem gloriam supernorum
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            bonorum retributionem esse existimamus. Cyp. in Gen. li. 5. in fine
                     . Therfore the kingdome of heauen is likened to a treasure hidden in the field Mat. 13.44.. And the field is CHRIST IESVS 
                        Thesaurus in agro, absconditus Deus est lateus in carne sua. Vigil. co
                              •
                           . Eutyc. l. 3. c. 3., in whom are hidden all the treasures of wisedome and knowledge 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Theophy. in ca. 17. Lucae. pag. 322.. O blessed then, O blessed is the man that findeth this wisedome, and the man that getteth this knowledge Pro. 3.13.. Because the merchandize thereof is better then siluer, and the gaine

thereof is better then gold. It is more precious then pearles, and all things that thou canst desire, are not to be compared vnto it. Yea doubtlesse (sayes one) I thinke all things but losse for the excellent knowledge sake of Christ Iesus my Lord. O wise, O worthy, O holy, O heauenly marchant! Here is a franke chapman indeed, which prizeth the kingdome of heauen accoding to the right worth, and true value of it. Knowing that this Christian treasure was bought & purchased for him, not with corruptible things, as siluer or gold, or such like, but with the most deare and precious bloud of Christ 1 Pet. 1.18.. For whom (sayes he) I haue counted all things losse, and doe iudge thē to be dung, that I may gaine Christ Philip. 3.8. For Christ Iesus onely is the wisdome of his Father; and by him onely we come to the knowledge of God. He is the wisdome of his Father, because hee doth giue vs grace in this life, that we may be wise vnto saluation, and see the Father by faith, and receiue the earnest of our inheritance Ephes. 1.14.. By him we come to the knowledge of God, because he will giue vs glory in the life to come, that we may know as wee are

knowne, and behold God face to face, & receiue not onely the earnest-peny, or the pledge-peny, but also the prize-peny, or the possession
                        •
                     Peny of perfection Math. 20.10.: So that Christ Iesus is the Alpha and the Omega,
                        Denarius perfectionem significat. Beda. quaest. super Exod. c. 37 the beginner & the ender of of our perfection Reu. 1.8., the author and finisher of our faith, who for the ioy that was set before him, endured the crosse, and despised the shame, and is set at the right hand of the throne of God 
                     Heb. 12.2.: He is the author and finisher of our faith, that is, our fore-runner Heb. 6.20., and marke, who, for the ioy which was set before him,, that is, for the kingdome of heauen, the onely Christian treasure, THE PRIZE OF THE HIGH CALLING OF GOD IN CHRIST IESVS: endured the Crosse, and dispised the shame; that's againe, followed hard toward the marke: and is set at the right hand of the throne of God; that's againe, and is now possessed of the kingdome of heauen, the onely Christian treasure, THE PRIZE OF THE HIGH CALLING OF GOD IN CHRIST IESVS. Lo yee, loe ye, whither we are now come. So hie that we can goe no hier. Namely, to the right hand of the throne of God,

Which is, Euerlasting life, Eternall glorie: ioy in the Holy Ghost: the kingdome of Heauen. The prize of the high calling of God in Christ Iesus. For this rich throne of GOD, is that Iuory throne of Salomon, whereof I spake in the beginning: Which is the onely perfect life: the onely high Honour, the onely godly Pleasure, the onely Christian Treasure, The prize of the high calling of God in Christ Iesus. This is the sixt and last degree to perfection.
                  Now then my deere brethren, let vs here (if it please you) pause a while, and seriously consider how Christ prayed for his chosen, that they might be made perfectin one Ioh. 17.23.. That they might bend the whole force of all their actions and affections to this one thing, namely, to the attaining of perfect blessednes, or (if you had rather so cal it) of blessed perfection. And therefore forgetting that which is behinde, and leauing the doctrine of the beginning of Christ Heb. 6.1., let vs endeuour our selues to that which is before, and be led on forward vnto perfection. Yea, let vs follow hard, and runne with patience the race that is set before vs,Heb. 12.1. looking vnto

Iesus, who is our mark, and hath giuen vs an example Ioh. 13.15., That euery one of vs might say vnto him with good Dauid, I haue applied my heart to fulfill thy statutes 
                     Psa. 119.112., for the eternall recompence of reward; For the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Iesus.
                     
                        Legho
                              •
                           am ghecheb
                              •
                           . Heb. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         Septuagint. Propter aeternam retributionem. vulgar. Tell me (beloued) I beseech you, if it will be no great trouble to you, as I trust it will not, tell me, I pray you, wherefore saith the same Dauid
                     Psal. 86.11. Iached leuaui. Chald. Vnicum fac cor meum. Hier.
                     , speaking to God, O knit my heart vnto thee that I may feare thy name, but only to teach vs, that But one thing is the first degree to perfection? For whereas wee vsually reade it▪ O knit my heart vnto thee, that I may feare thy name, the Chaldee Paraphrast, and S. Ierome translate it, O make my heart, but onely one heart, that I may feare thy name. So that a man cannot any way, so much as enter into the feare of Gods name, which is the beginning of all perfection, except first his heart be made one in it selfe, and one in God, that he may principally mind but one thing. Almightie God concerning the East-gate of the Temple saith thus, This gate shall be shut, and shall not bee opened, and no man shall enter by it, because

the Lord God of Israel hath entred by it Ezech. 44.
                           •
                        .: Here-through signifying, that although the heart of a Christian, which is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, may let many things enter into it at other gates yet it must keepe the East-gate, the most illuminat and highest power and part of it, continually shut against al men, yea against all the world, and opened only to one thing, I meane to God, who hath already entred into it, and enlightned it with his spirit. That as at the window of Noahs Arke there entred in no mist, no water, nothing else but one thing onely, which is light Gen. 6.16. 
                           
                              •
                           enestra dicitur Zobar, quia non aliud quam m
                              •
                           ridianam lucem recipit. Et. Esay. 54.12. Sh
                              •
                           moshah, quia solum Solem intromittit.
                     : so at the East-gate, no mist of human errors, no water of worldly cares may enter in, but onely the light of heauen, & a sanctified desire to be fast knit, & perfectly vnited by faith and loue to God. Hence it is, that Moses comming to talke with God vpon the mountaine, was commanded to bring no man with him, but to come vp himselfe alone Exod. 24.18.: Nay moreouer, being vpon the mountaine alone, he was couered & compassed about with a thicke cloud, which made him feare the name of the Lord, and hooded him, as I may say, in such sort, that he

could see nothing but one thing, which was God: And therfore the Psalme saith, O make my heart like Moses heart when he was vpon the mountaine. O make my heart like the window of Noahs Ark, and the East-gate of the Temple: O make my heart but onely one heart, one in it selfe, and one in thee: O knit my heart vnto thee, that I may feare thy name. Tell me, wherefore saith Christ Cant. 7.4., speaking to his Spouse, Thy nose is like the tower of Lebanon, but onely to teach vs that, I forget that which behinde, is the second degree to perfection? For seeing Christ is now risen againe, and ascended vp into heauen, which is the high tower of Lebanon, therefore we which are the Saints of God, must not be like the Idols of the heathen, which haue noses and smel not; but we must haue noses like the Tower of Lebanon 
                        Si verborum faciem consideremus, quid poterit magis dici ridiculum? Ergo spiritualem requirunt intelligentiam. Titelmanus in hunc locum.
                     , which forgeting all earthly things, and leauing them behinde, must smell and seeke those things which are aboue. God appointed Gedeon to dismisse all those of his army which bowed down their knees to drinke, and to retaine onely those which lapped water out of their hands, as a dogge lappeth Iudg. 7.5.:

Because he which drinketh vpō his knees like an Oxe, cannot possibly go forward while he drinketh. But hee which with some of the Polonians 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Clem Alexan. Stro. lib. 1. pag. 110., or with that dogge Diogenes, lappeth water out of his hands, may neuerthelesse go forward while hee lappeth, as an Egyptian dogge doth, while hee lappeth the water of Nilus
                        Aegyptij ca
                           
                              •
                           es è Nilo nunquam nisi currentes lambitant. Solinus. Polyhist. c. 20.. And like as a lusty hound, of a good kind, ordereth his going so wellPro. 38.31. that though he haue run ouer very many fields, and through a thousand thickets already, yet hee neuer remembreth any labour which is behinde, but forgetteth it: and if he chance to lap water in some brook by the way Psa. 110. De torrente in via bibet.
                      yet euen while he lappeth he lifteth vp his head, and still goeth on, and plyeth him forward to his game; so must we do in this pursuit of perfection. Seeing Christ hath now sprinkled all the way betweene heauen & earth with his bloud, & so hath made it a fresh and a liuing way Heb. 10.20. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        ., therefore wee which haue noses, like the tower of Lebanon, must as bloud-hounds trace him by the foote, and run after him in the smell of his ointments Cant. 14. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Septuagint., and hunt hotly vpon this fresh and liuing way, with a fresh &

liuely faith, and though wee haue gone very far, & done a thousand good deeds already, yet wee must alwaies forget that which is behinde, till we haue gotten▪ if not the childrens bread, yet at the leastwise some little crum of mercy, that fals from our Masters Table, some little drop of bloud, that fals from our Lords side, which shall, I assure you, bee sufficient to make vs perfect men in Christ. Tell me, wh
                        •
                     refore was the Altar of Perfume set within the Sanctuary Exod. 36.6., but only to teach vs, that and endeuour my selfe to that which is before, is the third degree to perfection? For euen as that Altar of perfume was placed, not in any common roome, nor any odd corner of the tabernacle, but in the Sanctuary it selfe, somewhat beyond the vaile, close to the golden censer Heb 9.4., very neere the mercy-seat: so a Christian heart, which is a spirituall altar of perfume, and of a sweet sauo
                        •
                     r to God 2 Cor 2.15. must daily endeuour it selfe to that which is before, and still more and more aspire to heauenly things 
                        Beda de tabernaculo l 3. ca. 11., & alwaies neerer and neerer opproach vnto the throne of grace, and continually hier and hier aduance it self to him that is the

highest and holiest of all. Tell me wherefore did the Israelites, when they had pitched in Mithkah, remoue their tents from thence, and pitch in Cashmonah Num. 33.29., but onely to teach vs, that And follow hard is the fourth degree of perfection? For euen as they, as soone as they had pitched in Mithkah, which signifies sweetnes, by and by remoued their tents from thence, and pitched in Cashmonah, which signifies swiftnesse: so we must tioine Mithkah and Cashmonah, sweetnesse & swiftnesse both together 
                        Hieron. Epist. ad Fabiolam, Mansionc. 26.and as soone as we haue pitched in Mithkah, as soone as we haue tasted and seene how sweet the Lord is, presently we must remoue our tents from thence, and pitch in Cashmonah, presently wee must follow hard, and runne not onely sweetly, but also swiftly in this way of peace, which leadeth vnto life. Tell me wherefore saith Christ againe Cant. 4.13., speaking of the praise of his spouse, Thy plants are as an orchard of pomegranats, but onely to teach vs, that toward the marke is the fifth degree of perfection? For a Pomegranat hath many graines within him in his case, and a little round circle or a crowne without him vpon his

head. Now these graines being sweet in tast, and red in colour, are orderly set one by another, and point vp, or as it were, look vp altogether to the crowne. To intimate thus much, that wee which are plants of the Church, as an Orchard of Pomegranates, must grow and goe on still toward the ma
                        •
                     k, not onely when we enioy the sweete taste of pleasant prosperity, but also when wee beare the red colour of bloudy persecution 
                        Meminit malogranatorum quòd rubore granatorum oblectent, & suauitate grat
                              •
                           , sint. Quod ad colorem, ad ardentem ecclesiae charitatem referri potest. Mercerus: Mal
                              •
                            pu
                              ••
                           a sanguineorubent colore, scilicet Martyres. Halgr
                              •
                           nus in cant. l. 7. Idem Beda, & Haim
                              •
                            habent in com. in hunc locum.
                     : and consenting in a kinde of conformity and perfect peace & vnity one with another, we must point vp altogether with the finger of faith to Christ, & looke vp continually with the eie of loue to our head, who by being first crossed, is now come to be crownd with honor & glory. In the arke of the couenant there was the golden pot that had Manna, and Aarons rod that had budded, and the Tables of the testament
                        •
                      and the propitiatory or couering, and a crowne of gold round about it Heb 9.4. Exod. 25.11.: O how notably and maruellously do these things sort and agree together! the Pomegranate and the Arke: the sweete taste, and the pot of Manna: the red colour, and the rod of Aaron: the order

of the graines, and the tables of the testament: the head of the pomegranate, and the couering of the Ark, the crown vpon that head, and the crown about this couering. To insinuate thus much, that we which are like an orchard of Pomegranates, must also bee like the Arke of the couenant, being builded and reared vp stil toward the mark, not onely when our Lord feedeth vs with the sweete Manna of his mercy, but also when he afflicteth vs with the sharp rod of his correctiona
                        •
                     e alwaies keeping the tables of the testament, which are the commandements of perfect loue to God and to our neighbour
                        Gnull
                              •
                           maije malion peccud
                           
                              •
                           aia hak
                              •
                           ri
                              •
                           . monin. Targú. Iuumes tur pleni praeceptis sicut malogranata. Montanus.
                     , that by faith in Christ, who is the couering & the propitiation for our sins, we may obtaine the golden crowne of life. K. Darius vpon a time by chance opening a great pomegranate, and being dema
                        •
                     ded of what he wold wish to haue as many as there were graines in that pomegranate? answered in one word, of Zopyrusses 
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Plut. 
                              〈◊〉
                            Apoth Regum.
                     . Now Zopyrus was a right noble and a valiant Knight, who seein
                        •
                      the king his Maister could hardly surpriz
                        •
                      Babylon, where the traitero
                        •
                      Assyrians were entrenched, bethought

himselfe of a wonderfull strange practise. He went home to his owne house, & caused his seruants to rent his whole body all ouer with scourging him, & to cut off his nose, his lips, and his eares 
                        Domi se verberibus laceraritoto c
                              •
                           rpore iubet, nas
                              •
                           m & labia, & aures sibi praecidi. Iustin. lib. 1. in fine.
                     . Then straight wayes running to Babylon, hee made the Assyrians beleeue that Darius had mis-used him in this sort, because hee had spoken in their behalfe, counselling him to breake vp his siege, & to remoue his Army from assaulting their Citie. They hearing this tale, & the rather thinking it to be true, because they saw him so shamefully disfigured in his body, were perswaded to make him their chiefe captaine. By which meanes he betraied them all, and surrendred both them and their city into his masters hands. O most faithfull louing subiect! O most worthy and couragious heart! One Pomegranet full of such graines, yea euen one graine full of such valour and vertue, is sufficient for a whole country, either to recouer it if it be lost, or to keepe it that it be not lost. O that I could tell where to finde such a man! O that I could tell where to see but one such amongst vs all! I would I assure you, honor the very ground he goes

vpon, & kisse euen the shadow of his feet. Well (beloued) I pray God, I pray God with all my heart, that his sacred maiesty, whom the Lord for his glory sake, alwaies shield and defend, that his sacred maiesty I say, may find very many, yea may see vs all as true to God and him, and to our country, as Zopyrus was to his Prince. That if any time of tryall should come, we may haue so much good will & holy manhood in vs, as to pul our selues vpon the pikes, and ieopard a ioynt, yea venture the martyring and mangling of our whole body, & euen the losing our liues, rather then either forraigne enemies, or homebred rebels should haue their wils of vs: knowing that our life is fraile and mortal, & we may die euery moment; but for a man to doe some notable peece of seruice before hee die, and to sheath his sword in the sides of his enemies, & to kil if it be but one that is a sworne rebell, to his God, to his prince, & to his country, this indeed is a most honourable, and a most glorious thing: this is it which shall be chronicled, and registred, and remembred, yea and rewarded for euer. But to returne to the marke againe. We which

are plants of the Church, like an orchard of Pomegranets, & like the Arke of the couenant, must loue, not onely the head of the Pomegranet, and the couering of the arke; but also the order of the graines, & the tables of the testament: not onely the sweet tast and the pot of Manna; but also the red colour, & the rod of Aaron. It is a miracle, and would amaze any man to consider, how zealous the Christians were in the Primitiue church, how vnsatiably they thirsted after the crowne of martyrdome; what roddes with Zopyrus? what rackings? what wilde beasts? what broilings they endured? How in a manner, if I durst say so, they suffered almost as horrible torments when they died for Christ, as Christ did when he died for thē. Well, well, so great, and so absolute, & so excellent, & so admirable perfection, is not now required at our hands. Yet this by your good leaue & fauor I wil be bold to say, that we can neuer be perfect Christians indeed, and run toward the marke aright, except at the least wise wee haue that in resolution, which they did put in execution. Except, if need require 1 P
                           ••
                         1.6., wee that are faithfull, can finde in our

hearts to do that, and to suffer that, for hatred of the spirituall Babylon, and for loue of our heauenly Lord, which Zopyrus an infidell did & suffered, for hatred of the earthly Babylon, and for loue of a mortall king. Except wee can be content not onely to be white lillies, by liuing purely and patiently in those afflictions and crosses whereof our miserable life is full, which is in some sort a kinde of martyrdome
                        Est quaedam sanguinis effusio, afflictio. Bernard. Non putemus effusionem sanguinis tantum esse Martyriam: Semper martyrium est Caesarius Arelatensis 
                              〈◊〉
                           . 21. Sine f
                              •
                           rro Martyres esse possumus, 
                              •
                           i patientiam in animo veraciter consernemus. Gregor. Omnis piorum vita testimonium reddi
                              •
                            Deo. Cypr. de dupl. martyri
                              •
                           , 
                              •
                           initio vide loc.
                     ; but also to be red roses, by dying constantly and ioyfully for the truth, if the good pleasure of God should so appoint it 1 Pet. 3.17. and by making our garments red in the bloud of grapes Gen. 49.11., which is the most perfect martyrdom, and commeth neerest of all to the Marke 
                     
                        Duplex est species Martyrij vna quando quis pro Christo 
                              •
                           cciditur: alia quando caro pro deo maceratur. Primo dabitur corona de rosis, secunda de lilijs. Hier. Erat an
                           
                              •
                           e ecclesia operibus fratrum candida: nunc facta est in Martyrum cru
                           
                              •
                           re purpurea. Cypr. l. 2. Epist. 6. pag. 44., that so Christ may rightly say to his Church here amongst vs: Thy plants are as an orchard of Pomegranets. Tell me wherefore saith Dauid againe, speaking of the oath of God Psal. 105.10., Hee appointed the same vnto Iacob for a law, and vnto Israel for an euerlasting testament, but onely to teach vs, that for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Iesus, is the sixt and last degree to perfection: for Iacob and Israel are two seuerall names, & yet they

signifie but one singular man. Neuerthelesse in a diuers respect; because Iacob is he that supplanteth, or wrast
                        •
                     eth, Israel is he that seeth or beholdeth God 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , Philo, 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         
                        initio.
                     . Now Iacob supplanting, or wrastling, is a subiect or seruant: Israel seeing, or beholding God, is a friend, or a sonne. This is confirmed by Buruch,
                     Baruch. 3.36 saying, GOD hath found out the way of knowledge, and hath giuen it vnto Iacob his seruant, and vnto Israel his beloued. So that Iacob is onely a faithfull seruant: but Israel is a beloued son. Therfore there is appointed vnto Iacob a law: but vnto Israel an euerlasting testament. Seeing a law
                     
                        Lex Vulg., or a statute
                        K
                              •
                           ab. He., or a decree 
                     
                        G
                              •
                           ezarah, Caldaic., or a precept 
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , Septuagint., properly belongs to Iacob, as subiect or a seruant; but a testament
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , Septuagint., or a couenant
                     
                        Berith. He., or an agreement 
                     
                        
                           
                              ••
                           iam. Ca., or an accord 
                     
                        Pactium Vulgata., properly belongs to Israel, a friend or a sonne. For as long as Iacob wrastleth with many great imperfections & spirituall aduersaries of this life, he must as a faithfull subiect or seruant of God, keepe the law of wrastling appointed vnto him: to wit, that he minde but one thing: and Forget that which is behinde, and endeuour himselfe to that which is before; and follow

hard toward the marke: but when Israell hath once ouercome all his worldly and ghostly enemies,2 Tim. 2.5. and is become a perfect man in Christ, and seeth the Lord in the life to come; then he shall, as a beloued friend, or childe of God, possesse that inheritance which the father hath by his euerlasting testament written with the bloud of Iesus Christ Heb. 13.20., appointed vnto him, to wit, euerlasting life, eternall glory, ioy in the holy Ghost, the kingdome of heauen; The Prize of the high calling God in Christ Iesus. O happy, happy man art thou, and thrice happy man art thou, who whosoeuer thou art, which with Iacob doest wrestle and keepe the law as a faithfull seruant, for no other end but onely this, that with Israell thou maist see and enioy the euerlasting testament, as a beloued sonne. For when wee shall see God, wee shall see; and what shall we see? That which no mortall eye hath seene, that wee shall see. Wee shall see our owne selues sitting and shining at the right hand of the throne of maiesty. We shall see all our deare friends which wee haue not seene this many a day, embracing 
                        ••
                     , and welcomming vs into Christs kingdome.

Wee shall see all the noble army of Martyrs, of Apostles, of Prophets, of Patriarks, shouting day & night, & singing out the praises of the Lord. Wee shall see all the inuincible hoast of Angels, of Archangels, of Principalities, of Dominations, reuerently attending vpon the King of glory. We shal see the King himselfe Christ Iesus, disparkling and displaying those beames of beauty, which are the heauens wonder, and all the Angels blisse. If there were now amongst vs one as faire as euer Absolom was, who would not be glad to behold him? But suppose some one were ten times as faire as Absolom, how then would men looke and gaze vpon him? I, but if another were a hundred times as faire as Absolom, what a matter of admiration would that make? Put the case then some one should now step forth, and shew himselfe a thousand times fairer then euer Absolom was, what wondring, what maruelling would there be amongst vs? how would our eyes be dazled, how would our very mindes bee amazed at this sight! Well, all this is but a counterfeit, but a shadow, in respect of the bright blazing beauty of our spirituall

spouse. For Christ Iesus is ten times fairer, yea a hundred times fairer, yea a thousand times fairer, yea ten hundred thousand times fairer then all the children of men. So that if the whole beauty not onely of all men, but euen of all this inferior globe, were put together in one, yet it would not be any way comparable not onely to Christs glory, but not so much as to the least glorified body in heauē. And yet al this is but the outside of heauen: al this we shal see with our bodily eye. The inside and the insight is much more glorious. For the best glorified body seeing innumerable Saints & Angels more highly exalted then he is, hath his ioy doubled and trebled, and beyond all measure multiplied, when he considereth that he is loued vnspeakably more by all of them, yea by euery one of thē, than hee can be by himself. And therfore again seeing himself so deere vnto them, he for his part likewise as a hot burning cole is set on fire and inflamed with loue, and the more he seeth any other excell him in glory, the more doth hee reioyce, and is gladder of his glory then his owne. But now when hee lifteth vp his eyes to the

glorious Trinitie, and seeth how the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost doe eternally and perfectly loue and like and enioy one another in surpassing sweetnesse and content, then all his affections are swallowed vp in loue, all his spirits are rauisht in delight, all his desires are imparadized in pleasure. Insomuch, as if on the one side were laid the loue of Christ as he is man, and of all the Saints & Angels among themselues, and on the other side, the loue which the least glorified body in heauen beholding the blessed Trinity, breatheth out to God, this loue would without all comparison excell & exceed that as far as light doth darknes, or as heauen doth the earth. Wherefore for man to see God, for Iacob to be called Israel; for him that hath beene a seruant to become a sonne; for him that hath kept the law, to inioy the testament, is the highest degree to perfection, yea it is the very perfection of perfection it selfe. The onely perfect life, the onely high honour: the onely godly pleasure; the onely Christian treasure. The prize of the high calling of God in CHRIST IESVS. Seeing then blessed brethren, seeing wee fight not as

they that beate the aire 
                        
                           •
                         Cor. 9.26., but our reward is so great, so exceeding great in heauen Mat. 5.12., therefore as Iacob wrestled all the night long, and neuer gaue ouer till about the breaking of the day, he was called Israel 
                     Gen. 32.24.: so let vs wrestle all the night long of this life Mat. 13.35., and neuer giue ouer till the day breake, and the shadowes flie away Cant. 4.6. and we come to the maruellous light and sight of God. And like as the same Iacob said to the Angell, I will not let thee goe, except thou blesse meGen. 32.26.: euen so let euery true Israelite say to Christ, I tooke hold of him, and left him notCant. 3.4.. O Lord Iesus, who would leaue thee? or who would let thee goe? Or rather who would not hold thee fast? which strengthenest him that holdeth thee fast, and makest him perseuere that is strengthened; and crownest him that perseuereth, and makest him perfect that is crowned. Therefore I will hold thee fast, & will not let thee go, except thou blesse me, that is, indeed I will neuer let thee goe, because thou dost neuer blesse but only those that alwaies hold thee fast. Hold fast then, and stand fast, good beloued, once againe I say, Hold fast that which you haue, that

no man take your crowne from youReu. 3.11.. Stand fast in that liberty whereby Christ hath made you free, and be not any more entangled with the yoke of bondage Gal. 5.2.. But so run, so run, as yee may attaine1 Cor. 9.24.. As yee may attaine? How 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Nilus in Parane circa med.
                      is that? Mary faithfully, patiently, constantly vnto the end. A shame it would be, & a vile shame for vs, if it should be said of vs, not, you doe runne well, but, you did runne well 
                     Gal. 5.7.. F
                        •
                     e vpon it. Hauing beene hitherto brought vp in skarlet, shall we now imbrace the dung Lam. 4.5.? Shall wee be like those antikes or monsters, which are halfe men and halfe beasts 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , Nyssenus l. 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            Illa actio Chimara est qua initium habet à ratione, finem a sensualitate. Cum igitur s
                              •
                           e agitur, humano capiti ceruicem pictor depingit equinam. Innocen. de 
                              〈◊〉
                           . c. 6. Operare igitur perseueranter ne (vt Horatius ai
                              •
                           ) Desinat in piscem mulier formosa sup
                              •
                           rne. Nebrissensis. Hom. 2. in fine.
                     ? Shall wee be like Nabuchadnezzars image, which had a head of gold, and feete of clay Dan. 3.33.? Shall wee begin in the Spirit, and end in the flesh Gal. 3.3.? God forbid. God for his mercy sake keepe vs from such fearefull falling from him. Nay rather let vs remember, that Ioseph signifieth encreasing, and Arimathea signifieth getting the reward 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Theop. in c. 15. Mar.
                     . To teach vs, that if wee would be like to Ioseph of Arimathea, wee must alwaies increase and goe on till wee get the reward. The other Ioseph also had a coate reaching downe to his feete 
                        Aquila inter pretatus est, 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , id est tunicam talarem: Hier. in Quest. Heb. in Genesin. Ioseph. tyrum ecclesiae praetendens, vesti
                              •
                            suae habitu pers
                              •
                           
                           uerentiam certaminis habere n
                              •
                           s admonet, 
                              〈◊〉
                            longitudo vsque ad talos eui
                              •
                            peruenit. Tanquam diceretur, Antequam iter perficias, noli in vita lacescere. Ausberius in cap. 2. Apocal.
                     : to teach

vs that wee must not haue scarlet about our head, and dung about our feete, not gold about our head, and clay about our feete, but that when we put on the Lord Iesus, we must put on such a scarlet robe of righteousnesse, such a golden garment of grace, such a vesture of a godly & vertuous life, such a coate of holy and heauenly conuersation, as may reach to the feet, as may continue to the end: considering our Sauiour hath said, he that perseuereth vnto the end, shal be saued. And againe, be faithfull vnto death, and I will giue thee the crowne of life. This crowne of life is promised to al those which make a good beginning, but performed onely to those which make a good ending 
                        Non campo capitur, sed fine corona. Pro Sapientia in exitu canitur; Quia laudari penitus ante-actae vitae prudentia non merebitur, nisi bono fine claudatur Saluia. ad eccles. lib. 4.. And they which run in a race, run all, yet one onely, that is, he which holdeth out to the end, receiueth the prize 1 Cor. 9.24. And none are saued, but such as are marked in their fore-heads with the letter 
                        〈◊〉
                     , which is the note of perseuerance, and perfection Eze. 9.6.. And if we would be conformable to the crosse of Christ, the liuely picture of all perfection, we must be like vnto it, not only in the depth of faith, and in the height of hope, and in the bredth

of charity, but also in the length of perseuerance Eph. 3.18.: because all the depth, height, and bredth of the crosse, is nothing without the length: and so all the faith, hope, and charity of a Christian, is to no purpose, without continuance in them euen vnto the end. Wherefore (my good brethren) yet once againe I will say, and then I will say no more. Let vs draw neere vnto God with a true heart in assurance of faith 
                     Heb. 10.22.: and let vs keep the profession of our hope without wauering Verse 23.: and let vs consider one another to prouoke vnto charity & to good worksVerse 24. and so much the more, because we see the breaking of the day draweth neerVerse 25., & the kingdome of heauen is at hand. There is a Greeke word signifying the end of a race, which is deriued of another Greek word signifiing to spur or prick on forward 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , Hesech. verbo 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , Id
                              •
                           m habet Pollux. l. 3. c. 30. & Theodoret. de Proui. l. 9. circa initium, vbi hunc textum recitat.
                     : which proueth, that as they which runne their horse
                        •
                      for a wager, spur hardest at the races end 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         
                        Chrysost.
                     : so seeing our saluation is neerer now then euer it wasRom. 13.11., therefore we must run faster now then euer we did
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         
                        Laert. in Dio.
                     , especially because the very horse and mule and diuers other brute beasts which haue now vnderstanding, though they haue

beene neuer so much wearied and tired before, yet when they come neere home, they will mend their pace 
                        Pecoribus fatigatis quoque velocior domum gradus est. Seneca de tranquil. vit. lib. 1. cap. 1.. And therefore the more to blame should we be, if hauing trauelled thus farre already in the way to perfection, and being come by this time almost to our iournies end, wee should now goe no faster, when indeed we ought if it be possible, to runne much faster to our euerlasting home in heauen. O beloued, all the Saints in heauen think long, yea they think of vs, and they long for vs 
                        Ergo quia omnis coelestis curia expectat nos, & desiderat, desideremus eam quanto possumus desiderio. Vide quaeso Bernar. medit. cap. 6., and they earnestly desire to be perfected with vs, because they certainly know they cannot be perfected without vs Heb. 11.40.: The holy Angels also as they blush, and hold downe their heads when they see vs stumble or trip neuer so little: so on the other side they shout and clap their hands when they see vs runne cheerefully in a good course, and come away apac
                        •
                      to perfection. Lastly, Christ himselfe doth stand waiting for vs, and beckoning to vs, and hartning vs on all the way, being ready to receiue vs, and to embrace vs in the armes of his louing mercy, as soone as euer we come to the end of our race. For euen as a royall king,

when one of his Nobles returnes home, which hath in a forraine country by chiualrie, or feates of Armes, or other like excellent parts, atchieued great renowne to his realme, presently sendeth for him to the court, and in open audience giueth him words of grace, and aduanceth him to high preferments & honors; so Christ our most magnificent King, immediately vpon our arriuall into heauen, out of the forraine country of this world, wil reach forth vnto vs his holy hand, conducting vs to the eternall tabernacles of rest: and as for all the prayers that we haue made, all the teares that wee haue shed, all the almes that we haue giuen, all the other exercises of a Christian life that wee haue performed, though neuer so secretly in this pursuit of perfection, hee will openly reward them, and most gloriously crowne them; when as all the host of Angels shall triumph for our coronation, and the blessed Saints shall thinke themselues more perfect for our perfection, and all the Court of heauen shall applaud our praises, and God himselfe shall say Amen to our felicities. Which that it may so happily come to passe, and that

euery one of vs, which now with Iacob wrestleth vnto the breaking of the day, and constantly keepeth the law appointed vnto him, may in the end with Israel see God, and haue the full fruition of his glory, and enioy the euerlasting testament, which is the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Iesus, grant wee beseech thee: O deare Lord, grant it to vs I say, not for our owne deserts or merits; but for the tender mercies of the same, our sweete Sauiour Christ Iesus, to whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be all honour and glory, power and praise, dignitie and dominion, now and euermore, Amen.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  HEARTS DELIGHT.
                  A SERMON PREACHED at Paules Crosse in London in Easter Terme. 1593.
                  
                  BY THOMAS PLAYFERE Professor of Diuinity for the Lady MARGARET in Cambridge.
                  Printed at London by Iohn Legatt, Printer to the Vniuersitie of Cambridge. 1617.
                  And are to be sold in Paules Church-yard at the Signe of the Foxe by Mathew Lawe.
               
               
                  
                  
                  To the most Victorious, vertuous, and puissant Prince, King IAMES, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, defender of the faith, all earthly and heauenly happines.
                  
                     GLorious, Gratious; It is our Crowne and the highest ioy of our heart, that the Crowne of this kingdome is to bee set vpon your royall head. Otherwise, nothing in the world could haue counteruailed the excese fine sorrowe, that her late Maiestie departing hence left behinde her, but the vncomparable ioy and triumph which your expectation sent before you,
                        Reg. 1.40.
                      & now your princely presence bringeth with you. When Salomon, after his father Dauid, was annointed King, they blewe

the trumpet, and all the people saide, God saue King Salomon, and reioyced with great ioy, so that the earth rang with the sounds of them. Wee haue thought, no trumpets, no proclamations, no bone fires, no bells sufficient, neither haue wee heard the earth onely ring out, but also the heauens redouble and ec
                        •
                     ho backe againe the acclamations and applauses of all men, which haue showted and saide, God saue King Iames. Now also, when your High
                        •
                     es approacheth nearer, the straight charge which hath b
                        ••
                      publikely giuen to the contrary, cannot restraine your people, but that out of all countries and shires, they runne and flocke together, to behold and attend your Maiesty,Tanquam clarum ac beneficium sydus. Sen. de Clemen l. 1. cap. 3.
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      some bright and beautifull starre, which by his diuine sweete influence worketh a general prosperity and peace. For what loyall subiect doth not blesse God, and blesse himselfe that hee liues to see this happie time, which was feared would prooue full of great disorder and trouble, so wisely and wonderfully carried, (God as it were from heauen stretched out his holy hand, and holding the mindes of all men in awe and obedience) as that in it the peaceable vniting of two mighty kingdomes, maketh us 
                        〈◊〉
                      against all our enemies, and all our 
                        〈◊〉
                      c
                        ••
                     
                     temptible to vs? Wherefore at this ti
                        ••
                     , 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     
all your liege people striue to shew the gladnes of their hearts, by tendring such seruices, as are sutable to their possibilitie and performance, I also among the rest haue taken occasion humbly to dedicate vnto your Maiesty such a poore present as I had in a readinesse. Assuring myselfe that as none are more familiar with God, then godly Kings: so no tre
                        •
                     tises can bee more welcome to godly Kings, then such as may draw them into greatest familiaritie with God. And I doubt not but that your Highnes hauing hitherto had your hearts desires giuen you, because you haue delighted in the Lord, will hereafter if it bee possible, much more delight in the Lord, that he may yet giue you more desires of your heart. Nay, I am so farre from doubting of this, that I dare be bold to conclude with the Psalmist,
                  
                     The King shall reioyce in thy strength,
                     
                        Psal. 21.11.
                      
                     O Lord: exceeding glad shall hee bee of thy saluation.
                  
                  
                     Thou hast giuen him his hearts desire: and hast not denied him the request of his lippes.
                  
                  
                     For thou shalt preuent him with the blessings of goodnes▪ & shalt set a crowne of pure gold vpon his head.
                  
                  
                     His honour is great in thy saluation:

glory and great worship shalt thou lay vpon him.
                  
                  
                     For thou shalt giue him euerlasting felicitie: and make him glad with the ioy of thy countenance.
                  
                  
                     And why? because the King putteth his trust in the Lord: and in the mercie of the most high he shall not miscarie.
                  
                  
                     Your Maiesties most humble deuoted, and obedient subiect. THOMAS PLAYFERE.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  THE TEXT.
                  
                     
                        Delight thy selfe in the Lord, & he shall giue thee the desires of the heart.
                        
                           PSAL. 37. VER. 4.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     SAint Iohn saies in one place, Loue not the World, nor the things of this World, if any man loue the World, the loue of God is not in him. So may I say, delight not in the world, nor in the thinges of this world: if any man delight himselfe in the world, hee cannot delight himselfe in the Lord, Therfore sayth Martial an auncient Bishop,
                        Quid ad nos delectatio mund
                              ••
                            Epist ad Tolos. c. 18. What haue wee to doe with the delight of the World? You may call it as you will: pleasure, if you will: pastime, if you will: mirth, if you will, gladnesse if you will: ioy, if you wil: but in Gods Dictionarie it hath no such

name. In the holy Scripture, it in other wise called. It is called Adams goodly apple, which being eaten depriued him of Paradise: Esaus red broth, which being supt vp, bereaued him of his birth-right: Ionathans sweet honey combe, which being but tasted, was like to cost him his life: the whore of Babylons golden cup, which filled her full of all abhominations: the traytour Iudas sugred sop, which made a way for the diuell to enter into him: the prodigall childs wash of 
                        〈◊〉
                     , which he most miserably swilled vp with the swine. This is all the delight of the world called in Gods dictionarie, which is the holy Scripture. It is called Adams apple, Esaus broth, Ionathans combe; Babylons cuppe, Iuda
                           •
                        s sop, the prodigall childs swill. So that all this delight is no delight. Or suppose it were: yet cert
                        •••
                     
                     ly it shall not giue thee the desires of thy heart. Nay, it shall bee so farre from 
                        •••••
                     ding thee those ioyes, which thy 
                        〈◊〉
                      most desireth, that it shal bring th
                        •
                     e those torments which thy heart most abho
                        ••
                     reth. It may, saith Chrysostome, 
                     
                        Voluptate ad tempus fruere affligere in eternum.
                      delight thee perhaps for a while, but 
                        〈…〉
                      torment thee for euer. As any solide body,

though it haue neuer so fayre a colour (as crimson, or carnation, or purple, or skarlet, or violet, or such like) yet alwayes the shadow of it is blacke: so any earthly thing, though it haue neuer so fayre a shew, yet alwaies the shadow of it is black and the delight thou takest in it, shall proue to bee grieuous in the end. Therfore Philo calleth it a sweete bitter thing. As that little booke in the Reuelation, was sweet in the mouth, but bitter in the bellie: so all worldly delight, is a sweet bitter thing, sweet in the beginning, but bitter in the ending. Which they of Ierusalem had experience of. For being giuen to transitorie pleasure, they are Lamē. 3.15 sayde to be made drunken with wormewood. Now we know that drunkennesse is sweete, but wormewood is bitter. And such a sweet bitter thing, such a drunkennesse of wormewood, is all the drunken delight of the world. So that as one said, Ruth 1.10. 
                     Call me not Naomie, but call me Mara, call me not sweet, but call mee bitter: so must we call worldly delight not Naomie, but Mara, because it is nothing so much Naomie, sweete and pleasant at the first, as it is Mara and Amara, bitter & loathsome

at the last. Like to a song of the Syren
                        •
                     , which are mentioned in the Prophecie of Chap. 13. v. 22. 
                     Esay. A Syren is a monster of the sea, the head whereof resembl
                        •••
                      a virgin, but the feete a fish, And such a monster is all worldly delight, the 
                        〈◊〉
                      whereof, the beginning
                        •
                      allureth 
                        〈◊〉
                      amiable virgin, but the feete, the 
                        〈◊〉
                      deuooreth vs as a rauenous fish. T
                        •••
                     
                     fore a
                        •
                      
                     Vlisses s
                        •
                     oo
                        •
                      his eares, and 
                        〈◊〉
                      himselfe to the most of the ship, 
                        〈…〉
                      might not heare the Syrens song: 
                        〈…〉
                      we stoppe our eares, and 
                        〈…〉
                      the voyce of these charming 
                        〈◊〉
                      charm they and sing they neuer 
                        〈…〉
                     
                     ly; yea, we must binde our sel
                        〈…〉
                      mast of the shippe, that is, to the 
                        〈◊〉
                      of Christ,
                        
                           Side Vlysse illo refert fabula quod cum arboris religatio de periculo liberauit quanto magis crutis arbor? &c.
                        
                        
                           Ambr serm. 55.
                      euery one of vs saying 
                        〈◊〉
                      our heauenly Vlysses, God forbid that I should delight in any thing, but is the crosse of Christ, by which the 
                        〈…〉
                      crucified vnto me, and I vnto the 
                        〈◊〉
                      For the world and all worldly 
                        〈…〉
                      likened to a hedgehogge.Esa. 14.23. A 
                        〈…〉
                      hog seemes to bee but a poore 
                        〈…〉
                     
                     ture, not likely to doe any 
                        〈…〉
                      yet indued it is full of bristles or prick
                        •••
                      wherby it may annoy a mā very 
                        〈◊〉
                     .

So worldly delight seeme to bee little or nothing dangerous at the first, yet afterward as with bristles or pricks, it peaceth through the very conscience with vntollerable paines. Therefore wee must deale with this delight, as a man would handle a hedge hogge. The safest way to handle a hedge hogge is to take him by the heele. So must we deale with this delight. As Iacob tooke Esau that rough hedge hogge by the hele: in like sort wee must take worldly delights not by the head, but by the heele, considering not the beginning, but the ending of it, that so wee may neuer be deceiued by it. For though it haue a faire shewe at the first, yet it hath a blacke shadowe at the last: though it be sweet at the first, yet it is bitter at the last: though it bee drunkennes at the first, yet it is worm wood at the last: though it bee Naomie at the first, yet it is Mara at the last: though it bee a song at the first, yet it is a Syrē at the last: though it be a silly hedge hogge at the first, yet it is a sharpe prickle at the last. Wherefore delight not thy selfe in the world, for it shal not giue thee the desires of thy hart: but Delight thy selfe in the Lord, and he shall

giue thee the desires of thy heart.
                  
                  Here is a precept: here is a 
                        〈◊〉
                     . A precept in these words
                        •
                      
                     Delight thy 
                           〈◊〉
                         in the Lord. First, delight, then 
                        〈…〉
                     ly, in the Lord. A promise in these 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     And he shall giue thee, the desires of thy 
                           〈◊〉
                        . First, And hee shall giue thee, then the 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      lastly, of the heart. Delight thy self 
                           〈◊〉
                         Lord, and hee shall giue thee the desires of thy heart.
                  
                  First, Delight. Well saies 
                        〈◊〉
                     , 
                        Spiritus est hilaris et exhi
                           
                              •
                           ararat participes sui.
                      The spirit of God, as it is a cheere
                        ••••
                      thing it selfe, so it maketh all them▪ 
                     
                        ••••
                     
                     full which are partakers of it. Inde
                        •
                     d
                        •
                      the wicked continually mourne and 
                        〈◊〉
                     . There was a great 
                        〈◊〉
                      in Egypt 
                        〈◊〉
                      in euery house among them, the
                        ••
                      wa
                        •
                      some one or other of their first 
                        〈◊〉
                      dead. But the voice of ioy and glad
                        ••
                     sse is in the tabernacles of the righteo
                        ••
                     . Psal. 118.
                           •
                        5 They euermore delight in the Lord▪ I reach Aelianus in. varia histo. l. 3. cap. 14. of one Leonides a captaine, who perceiuing his souldiers left their 
                        〈◊〉
                      vpon the citie wall
                        ••
                     , and did nothing all the day long but 
                        ••
                     affe and 
                        〈…〉
                      houses neere adioyning 
                        〈…〉
                      that the alehouses should 
                        〈…〉
                      from that place where they shood 
                        〈…〉
                     
                     
vp close by the walles. That seeing the souldiers would neuer keep out of them, at the least wise that they might watch as well as drinke in them. So because pleasure we must needes haue, and we cannot be kept from it, God hath appointed that wee should take Delight enough, and yet serue him neuer a whit the lesse. For it is no part of Gods meaning, when thou enterest into his sweete seruice, that thou shouldest abandon all delight, but onely that thou shouldest change the cause of thy delight. That whereas before thou diddest delight in the seruice of sinne, now thou shouldes
                        •
                      
                     delight as much, or rather indeede a thousand times moer, in the seruice of the Lord. It was not Gods will that Isaak should bee sacrificed, but onely the ramme. And so God would haue vs sacrifice onely the ramme, that is, all rammish and rancke delight of the world. But as for Isaack, he must be preserued still, & kept aliue: Isaack in whome Abraham did see the day of Christ and reioyced: Isaack, that is all spirituall laughter, all ghostly ioy, all heauenly delight. For as no man might come into the court of Ashuerus, which was clothed in

sackecloath: Ester. 4 2. so no man may come in to the court of our king, which is clothed in sackecloth, and hath not on the wedding garment of ioy and delight in the Lord. Which is the cause why Christ calleth the assemblies of the faithful, Quires of Camdes 
                        Choros castrorum. Can. 6.12. A quire singes; a Campe fights. How then may these two agree together? Very well in the godly. For the godly, when they fight most stoutly against the enemie, then they sing most merily vnto the Lord. Whereupon Gregorie saith, 
                        Dauid salcantem plus s
                              •
                           upco quam pugnautem. Moral. l. 27. c. 27. I admire king Dauid a great deale more, when I see him in the quire, then when I see him in the campe: when I see him singing as the sweete singer of Israel, thē when I see him fighting as the worthy warriour of Israel. For fighting with others, he did ouercome all others, but singing, and delighting himselfe, he did ouercome himselfe. Euen as his sonne Salomon saies for him, speaking to Christ. Turne away thine eyes from me, for they doe ouercome me, for they wounde my heart: they make me sicke for loue Can. 4.6. When Dauid fought with others, he ouercame others; hee wounded others; he made others sicke, but when

he daunced before the Arke, and delighted himselfe, he was ouercome himselfe, hee was wounded himselfe, hee was sicke himselfe. But feare you nothing. I warrant you this sicknesse will doe him no harme. I will play stil (sayes he) that others may still play vpon me
                        Ludam, inquit vt illud 21 Bonus ludus quo Michol irascitur, & deus delectatur Greg. Mag.
                     . For it is a good sport when God is delighted, though Michol be displeased. So that of Dauids sicknesse we may say, as Christ saide of Lazarus sicknesse. This sicknesse is not vnto death▪ but for the glory of God Ioh. 41.4.. And therefore it is for the glory of God, because it is for the loue of God. For Dauid is sicke no otherwise for loue of the sonne of God, then God is sicke himselfe, for loue of the sonne of Dauid. This is my beloued so
                           ••
                        e (saies he) in whome I am delighted.Math. 17.5. This is my beloued sonne: there he is in loue. In whome I am delighted: there he is sicke for loue. Which is the cause, why he commaundeth vs also to be delighted in his loue Prou. 5.19.. For as a double desire is loues so a double loue is delight. And therfore he sayes not simply, loue him; but be delighted in his loue. Delight thy selfe in the Lord, and he shall giue thee the desires of thy heart. Delight.
                  
                  
                     Then, Thy selfe, I would hate mine owne soule (sayes Bernard) if I found it any where else then in the Lord, and in his loue 
                        Animā meam odio haberem, si eam alibi, quam in domino, & in cius amore inuenirem. De amore dei, c. 3., So that it is not enough for thee to delight, but thou must delight thy selfe, that is thy soule. Saying with the blessed Virgine, My soule doth magnifie the Lord, and my spirit reioyceth in God my Sauiour. Otherwise, as Diues did see Lazarus a farre off lying in Abrahams bosome, beeing himselfe all the while tormented in hell, and hauing not so much as one drop of water to coole his tongue: so, euen in laughing the soule may be sorrowfull Prou. 14 13. The wretched soule of a sinner may see the face a farre off laughing, and lying (as I may say) in Abrahams bosome, beeing it selfe all the while tormented (as it were) in hell, and hauing not so much as one drop of delight to asswage the sorrowes of it. And like as Sampsons lyon had great store of honey in him, but tasted no sweetnesse of it: euen so, if thou reioyce in the face, and not in the heart, 2. Cor. 5.12 thou mayest well perhaps haue great store of honey in thee to delight others▪ but thou canst neuer taste the sweetnesse of it to delight thy selfe. Therefore sayes

the princely Prophet, O taste and see how sweete the Lord is. It is not enough for thee, to see it a farre off, and not haue it, as Diues did; or, to haue it in thee, and not to taste it, as the lyon did: but thou must as well haue it as see it, and as wel tast it as haue it. O taste and see (saies hee) how sweete the Lord is. For so indeede Christ giueth his Church, not onely a sight but also a taste of his sweetnesse. A sight is where he saies thus, 2. Can. 7.12. Wee will rise vp earely, and goe into the vineyard, and see whether the vine haue budded forth the small grapes, and whether the Pomegrannets flourish. There is a sight of the vine. A taste, is where he saies thus, 1. Can. 8.2. I will bring thee into the wineseller, & cause thee to drinke spiced wine, and new wine of the Pomegrannets. There is a taste of the wine. The Church, not onely goes into the vineyard, and sees the wine, but also goes into the wineseller and tasts the wine. But yet thou must goe further then this, before that thou canst come to thy selfe. For there are diuers degrees of tastes.
                        Orus Apollo.
                      The Egyptians in their Hyroglyphickes, when they would describe an vnperfect taste, paint meate in the teeth,

when a more perfect taste, the beginning of the throat. Such an vnperfect tast had the Israelites of the sweetnesse of God. God was most sweet vnto them, when he gaue them quailes to eate. Yet while the meate was but in their teeth, the wrath of God was kindled against them Num. 11.33.. There is the meate in the teeth: an vnperfect taste. But the spouse of Christ hath a more perfect taste of the sweetnesse of God. For likening him to an apple tree, she saies, I delight to sit vnder his shadow, and his fruit is sweete vnto my throate. Can. 2.3. There is the beginning of the throat: a more perfect tast. But notwithstanding all this, thou art not yet come to thy selfe. Therefore this taste must not content thee: because this taste cannot delight thee. For thy delight must not sticke in thy teeth, or in thy throat, 
                        Non est strepitus oris, sed iubilus cordis non sonuS labiorum, sed motuS gaudiorum, concordia voluntatū non consonantia vocum.
                      but as a cordiall thing, it must goe downe to thy very heart. That thou maiest say with the Psalmist. My heart and my flesh (not my flesh onely, but my heart and my flesh) reioyce in the liuing God Psal. 84.3.
                           •
                        
                     . And againe, Praise the Lord, O my soule, and all that is within mee, praise his holy name Psal. 103.11. Now thou art come to thy selfe.
                     
For that which is within thee, is thy selfe, and all that is within thee, is all thy selfe. So that thy selfe, & all thy selfe, is delighted in the Lord, when as that which is within thee, and all that is within thee, prayse his holy name. O how happy art thou when thou knowest this Iubile, this ioyfulnesse 
                        Cum scis iubilationem. Psal. 89 15: when thou hast a secret sense, and an inward feeling of it: when euery motion of thy mind, is an influence of Gods spirit: when thy will & his wo
                        •
                     dplay together, as Isaack and Rebecca did. For then surely thou dost builde to thy selfe desolate places 
                        Greg. Moral. Iob. 3.14.. Desolate places, I say, that all other things may be silent to thy soule: nay that thy very soule may be silent to it selfe: yea that there may be silence in heauen Reu. 8.1. answerable to the silence of thy soule, when thou doest delight thy selfe in the Lord. Delight thy selfe in the Lord, and hee shall giue thee the desires of thy heart. Thy selfe.
                  
                  Lastly, In the Lord. Gregorie sayes thus, 
                        Gustu incircumscripti luminis anima pascitur, & supra se elata ad seipsam relabi dedignitur
                      The mind of man is fed with the infinit light and loue of God, and so being lifted vp far aboue it selfe, doth now disdaine to stoope downe so low as to it

self. And therfore doth not delight it self in it selfe. but delights it selfe in the Lord. Herupon a father saies, O lord grant that I may know 
                        Nouerim me nouerim te.
                      my selfe, and know thee. That knowing my selfe and thee, I may loath my selfe in my selfe, and delight my selfe onely in thee. Truth indeed. O man, so thou oughtest to doe, sayes God. For if thou didst know thy selfe and me, then thou wouldest displease thy selfe, and please mee, But because thou knowest neyther thy selfe, nor me, therefore thou dost please thy selfe, and displease me. But the time shall come, when thou shalt neither please thy selfe nor me. Not me, because thou hast sinned: not thy selfe, because thou shalt bee burned. So that then thou shalt please none, but the Diuell: both because thou hast sinned, as hee did in heauen, and also because thou shalt be burned as he is in hell. Therefore he that delights himselfe in himselfe, delights not himselfe, but onely the Diuell in himselfe. Whereas on the other side, he onely delights himselfe, which not onely delights himselfe, but addes also, In the Lord. and so delights himselfe in vertue, delights himselfe in godlines, delights himselfe

in God himselfe, This Christ signifieth, when speaking of his Spouse hee sayes 
                        Deliciis affluens. innixa super dilectum suum. Can. 8.2. 
                     Who is shee which commeth out of the wildernesse, abounding in delights, leaning vpon her welbeloued? Hee that leanes vpon himselfe, can neuer abound in delights: but hee alone aboundeth in delights, which leaneth vpon his welbeloued. So did S. Paul: I haue laboured more then they all, sayes hee. There he aboundeth in delights. Yet not I, but the grace of God which is in me. There he leaneth vpon his welbeloued. And againe, I can doe all thinges, saies he. There he aboundeth in delights. In him that strengthneth mee. There he leaneth vpon his welbeloued. In one word, when as he sayes. He that would reioyce & glorie, let him reioyce and glorie in the Lord: It is all one, as if hee should haue sayde. Hee that would abound in delights, let him leane vpon his welbeloued, Let him delight himselfe in the Lord. Let the Saints 
                        In latitia letentur. Psal. 68.3. reioyce in ioy. let them delight in delight. He that delights in an earthly thing, delights in vanity, he delights not in delight. But he onely delights in delight, which makes God onely the ground of his delight. According

to that of Prosper,
                     
                        Aeterna exultatio est, quae bon: laetatur aterno.
                      That alone is eternall delight, which is grounded vpon the eternall good. Vpon him that is onely good, and sayth to Moses, 
                     Exod. 33.19. I will in my selfe shew thee all good. Euery thing that is honest, euery thing that is profitable, euery thing that is pleasant, is only to be found 
                        Quare vnum bonum in quo sunt omnia bona & sufficit. Aug. Med.
                      
                     in the Lord. As that Manna Sap. 16.20. had all manner of good tasts in it: so the Lord onely, hath all manner of good things, al manner of true delights in him Therefore the Church, hauing first bestowed the greatest part of Salomons song, altogether in commendation of the beautie and comelinesse of Christ, at length concludeth thus: Thy mouth is as sweet things, and thou art wholly delectable: how faire art thou, & how pleasant art thou, O my loue in pleasures! So that when I seeke my loue, my Lord, then I seeke a delight, and a light that passeth all lights, which no eye hath seene: I seeke a sound and an harmonie that passeth al harmonies, which no eare hath heard: I seeke a sent and asauour that passeth all sauours, which nosense hath smelt: I seeke a rellish and a tast, that passeth al taste▪ which no tongue hath tasted: I

seeke a contentment and a pleasure, that passeth all pleasures, which no body hath felt. Nay, I cannot hold my heart, for my ioy; yea, I cannnot hold my ioy, for my heart; to think that he which is my Lord, is now become my father, and so that he which was offended with me, for my sins sake, is now reconciled to mee, for his sonnes sake. To think, that the high Maiesty of God, will one day raise me out of the dost, and so that I, which am now a poore worme vpon earth, shall hereafter bee a glorious Saint in heauen. This, this makes mee delight my selfe in the Lord, saying, O thou that art the delight of my delight; the life of my life; the soule of my soule; I delight my selfe in thee, I liue onely for thee, I offer my selfe vnto thee, wholly to the wholly▪ one to thee one: onely to thee 
                        Totum toti, vnum vni, vnicum vnico.
                      onely. For suppose now as S. Iohn speaketh, the whole world were full of bookes: and al the creatures in the world were writers: & all the grasse piles vpon the earth were pennes: and all the waters in the sea were yoke; yet, I assure you faithfully, all these bookes, all these writers, all these pennes, all this yoke, would not bee sufficient to describe

the very least pert, either of the goodnes of the Lord in himselfe: or of the louing kindnesse of the Lord, towards thee. Wherefore, Delight thy selfe in the Lord; and he shall giue thee the desires of the heart. Thus much for the precept, in these words, Delight thy selfe in the Lord.
                  
                  The promise followeth. First, And hee shall giue thee. Well saies Leo, Loue is the greatest reward of loue, that either can be, or can be desired 
                        Dilectionis nulla maior expetenda est remuncratio quam ipsa dilectio. Ser. 7. de ieiu.
                      So that though there were no other reward promised thee, for delighting in the Lord, but onely the delight it selfe, it were sufficient. For the benefit is not Gods, but wholly thine God is neuer a whit the better, for thy delighting thy selfe in him. If thou bee righteous, what dost thou giue him; what doth bee receiue at thy hands Iob. 32.7.? Thy delight may perhaps reach to the saints, which are in the earth but it can neuer reach to the Saints which are in heauen: and much lesse can it reach to God, which is the Lord of heauen Psal. 16.2.. Nay, I will say more▪ If thou shouldest giue God whole riuers full of oyle, and whole houses full of gold, for neuer so little a

drop of this delight, it would be nothing. Thy gift wold be nothing to his gift: thy oyle and golde would be nothing to his oyle and gladnes: yet behold the bountifulnesse, and liberalitie of the Lord. He 
                        •
                     ires thee, and giues thee wages, not to doe himselfe good, but to doe thy selfe good. And here he promiseth to reward his owne mercies. as if they were thine owne merits. And as though the benefit were not thine, but wholly his: so hee changeth the words, and for, thou shalt giue him, saies, He shall giue thee. But this he doth, as Augustine testifieth, 
                        Non erroris amoris, sed amoris errore. De ciuit dei. lib. 22. cap. 6. Not by the loue of errour, but by the errour of loue. For the loue of errour, is mans Rhetoricke, it is a figure, which man often vseth, H
                           •
                        manum est errare 
                     It is mans property to erre. But the errour of loue, is Gods Rhetoricke, it is a figure which God often vseth, Diuinum est amare 
                     It is Gods property to loue. Especially it is a diuine thing, to loue so dearely, as God loueth vs. Who, though he do not loue to erre, yet he doth erre for loue. Counting and calling, that which is onely our commodity, his owne commodity. So, Christ is said Can. 2.16. to be fed amongst the lylies. The lylies of the fields, are the milions of the

angels 
                        Lilia agrorū millia angelorum.
                     ; or of al those which lead a pure & an angelicall life. These indeed Christ feedeth. He feedeth them on the greene pastures, and leadeth them forth, by the waters of comfort. Yea, not onely be feedeth them, but also by this figure, the error of loue, he is said to be fed with them. Because though he for his part, haue little neede, I wis, to be feede, yet it is as great a pleasure to him, to feede them, as if hee were fedde himselfe among them
                        Si vidisti quod pasci illi sit pascere, vide esiam nūc ne forte e conuerso nascere sit ei pasci. Barnard. Cant. serm. 71 So likewise he saies, If any man open the doore, I will suppe with him, and be with me
                     Reu. 3.20.. Wee indeede suppe with Christ. Generally, whensoeuer he giues vs grace to feele in our affections, the rauishing ioyes of the spirit. And when he saies, I haue eaten my bonie combe, with my hony, I haue drunken my wine, with my milke: eate you also, O my friends, drinke and make you merry, O my well beloued. But more especially wee suppe with Christ, when hee calls vs to the holy Communion, and biddes vs to the Lords Supper. For then he staies vs with flagons, and comforts vs with Cant. 3.20. apples: with apples and flagons: with bread and wine: with his owne deere body, and his owne pretious

bloud. Thus do wee sup with Christ. B
                        •
                     t how doth Christ suppe with vs? Is it possible? possible, that he which shall neuer hunger or thirst any more? possible that be which is fulnesse it selfe, in whom all the fulnesse of the Godhead bodily dwelleth? Is it possible (I say) that hee should stand without, knocking at the doore, as a begger, to get a meales meat of vs? Yea sure, doubt you not. It is possible enough. By a certaine Figure, (I weene) you call it the errour of loue: that's it: by this figure, the errour of loue) it is a very possible thing: nay, it is a verie easie thing to doe, yea it is a very great pleasure to him to doe it. Behold (saies hee) I stand at the d
                           •
                        re and knocke: if any man beare my voyce and open the dore, I will come in vnto him, & will suppe with him, and hee with me. Well then, how doth Christ suppe with vs? Christ suppes with vs when we entertaine him, as Marie did with the salt teares of repē
                     tance and griefe, and as Lot did with the sweet bread of syncerity and truth. For the salt teares of our repentance, are the onely drinke which Christ will drinke

with vs. And the sweet breade of our syncerity, is the onely bread, which Christ will eate with vs. But what meat hath hee to his breade? I haue a meate (sayes hee) which you know not of. My meat is to doe the will of him that sent mee. In the volume of thy booke it is written of mee, that I should doe thy will, O my God, it is my delight, it is meate and drinke to mee, to doe it. And as it is meate to him, to doe it himselfe, so is it meate to him, to see vs doe it. Then doth hee suppe with vs. And this is the first seruice. But what hath he for a second course? A dish of apples, gathered of the tree of life. For toward the latter end of the supper, when they come to their fruit, a Christian sayes to Christ, 
                        Can. 7.13. Omnia poma vetera & noua Vulgata trans.
                      
                     O my Welbeloued, I haue kept for thee, all manner of apples, both old and new, Contrition, humiliation, denying of thy selfe, mortification of the old man: these are olde apples, Sobriety, innocency, holines of life, viuification of the new man: these are new apples. And when a Christian feasts, and feedes Christ with such diuers & dainty fruits of righteousnesse, then he saies to him, O my welbeloued, I haue kept

for thee all manner of apples, both old and new. But what musick hath he now? We must needs haue some musicke. Christ cannot sup without musicke. Drinke & bread, & meate, & apples, wil make him but a slender supper, except we mend it all the better with musicke. This must be the very best part of the supper. For a consort of musitians at a banquet, is as a signet of Carbuncle set in gold, and as the signet of an E
                           •
                        rod, well trimmed with gold: so is the melodie of 
                           •
                        usicke in a pleasant 
                     
                        Ecclesiasticus cap. 32. vers. 5. 
                     banquet. Therefore when Christ suppes with vs, we must be sure he haue musicke. We must welcome him, and cheare him vp, with Psalmes, and hymnes, and spirituall songes, singing with a grace, & making melodie in our hearts to God. Thus doth Christ sup with vs.Col. 3.16. But now to return to the main point againe, from which wee haue a little digressed, a
                        •
                      elsewhere, by the errour of loue Christ is said to be fedde among the lylies, whereas indeed onely he feedeth the lylies, & to sup with vs, wheras indeed only we sup with him: so here, by the same figure, he is said to reap cōmodity by thy delight, wheras indeed only the cōmodity is thine, all the commodity, al the benefit, is onely thine.

Yet (to see the admirable loue of God) he sayes not, Thou shalt giue him, but, He shall giue thee. Delight thy selfe in the Lord & he shall giue thee desires of the heart, and hee shall giue thee.
                  
                  Then. The desires. He that loues to desire God, 
                        Qui amas de
                              •
                           iderare, desiderat amare. De amore Dei▪ c, 3. vide Gregorium. Moral l. 18. c. 28. (sayes Bernard) must also desire to loue God, Then he shall haue neither saciety, nor yet anxiety. Neyther saciety, because he loues to desire: nor yet anxiety, because he desires to loue. Thus doth the Church. Let him kisse mee (sayes shee) Cant. 1.1. 
                     with the kisses of his mouth. Let him not smite me but kisse me: not once, but oftē: not with the kisses of his feet, but of his mouth: not of any of his Prophets mouthes, but of his own mouth: Let him kisse me with the kisses of his mouth. Here are many desires. Here indeed shee loues to desire Psa. 119.20 Concupiuit defiderare. Ps. 119.20. But it followeth, For thy loue, is better then wine. The person is suddenly changed. Before, it was more strangely in the third person, Let him, &, his mouth. Now it is more familiarly, in the second person, For thy loue. For thy loue is better then wine: Here is but one loue. Here onely she desires to loue. For as the curtaines of the tabernacle were coupled and tyed

together with taches and strings, so that one curtaine did draw another, and all the curtaines did draw together, to couer nothing else, but the tabernacle Exod. 26.6.: after the same sort, the desires of the godly, are coupled and tyed together, so that one desire drawes another, and all their desires draw together, to make them couet nothing else, but God. And euen as Iacob when hee held the Angel in his armes, stood vpon one foote, and halted vpon the other foote: Gen. 32.31 so he that embraceth God, can doe nothing with that halting foote, which before carried him to the desire of the world, but standeth onely vpon that sound foote, which now carrieth him wholly to the desire of God. And like as all the streetes of Ierusalem sing Halleluiah: Tob. 13.18. so all the desires of them that are delighted in God, are referred to God. There are many streetes in Ierusalem; yet there is but one Halleluia, which is sung in all those streetes. In like sorte, there are many desires in a godly man; yet there is but one thing, God onely, which is desired in all these desires. For, these desires, as the kisses of Christ, come all from one loue: these desires, as the

curtaines of the tabernable, are all tyed together with one string: these desires, as the goings of Iacob, stand all vpon one foote: these desires, as the streets of Ierusalem, sing all one Halleluia. So that if thou look into his desires, that delighteth in the Lord, thou shalt see no iniquitie, no contradiction in them. But if thou looke into his desires, that delighteth in sinne, thou shalt say with the Psalmist, I see iniquitie,
                     Psal. 55.10. 
                     and contradiction in the citie. For as Manasses was against Ephraim, and Ephraim, against Manasses, and both of them against Esa. 9.21. 
                     Iuda: so the desires of the wicked, are contrarie to God, & to themselues. All their desires are contrarie to all Gods desires. Manasses and Ephraim, are both against Iuda. There's iniquitie. Some of their desires, are contrarie to other some of their desires. Manasses is against Ephraim, and Ephraim is against Manasses. There's contradiction. Therefore the desires of the wicked, beeing so contrary to God, and to themselues, their desires are not giuen to them, but they are giuen to their desires Rom. 1.24. Because, though they loue to desire God, yet they doe not desire to loue God. Though they care

not how much God doth for them: yet they care not how little they do for God. But as for the godly, they are not giuen to their desires, but their desires are giuen to them. Because not onely, they loue to desire God, but also, they desire to loue God, And so all their desires, beeing as it were, but one desire, all agreeing in one God, when they haue God, they haue all their desires giuen thē in God 
                        Domine, ante 
                              ••
                           omne deside rium meum. Psal. 38..10 Nam vltima perfectio ipsius anima deus est, & centrum locusque naturalis omnium desideriorum eius.
                     . So the three childrē, being mē of desires, 
                        Viri desideriorum Dan. 9 23. had their desires giuen them. They desired to bee deliuered from the furnace. This desire was giuen them, when as God walked with them in the fierie furnace Dan. 3.25. So Moses being a man of God, had his desires giuē him. He desired to see Gods face, This desire was giuen him, when as Christ talked with him, face to face 
                        Mark. 9.4.. So Iohn beeing a friend of God, had his desires giuen him. He desired to see Christs glory. This desire was giuen him, whē as Christ said, He that loues me, shall be loued of me, & I will manifestly shew mine own self vnto him
                     Ioh 14.21., (so Lazarus being Gods little begger 
                        M
                              •
                           ndicus. dei. Greg.
                     , (as I may say) had his desires giuē him. He desired to be relieued, not so much with the meate of the earthly Diues, as with the

mercy of that heauenly Diues, which is so rich in mercie. This desire was giuen him, when as the Patriarch speaking of him to the glutton said. Now is hee comforted, and thou art tormented Luk. 16.25. And so, whosoeuer thou art: if thou be a man of desires, as the three children were: if thou bee a man of God, as Moses was: if thou bee a friend of God, as Iohn was: if thou be a begger of God, as Lazarus was, he shall giue thee all that thou canst beg, or desire. For, to speake no more of those three children, these three men, which I named last vnto you; Moses, the man of God: Iohn the friend of God: Lazarus, the begger of God: did lie in three bosomes. In Moses bosome: in Christs bosome: in Abrahams bosome. Moses hand, did lie in Moses bosome Exod. 4.6. Saint Iohn did lie in Christs bosome: Lazarus, did lie in Abrahams bosome: Moses bosome, is lawe. Christs bosome, is Gospel: Abrahams bosome, is glory. Therefore, feare must driue thee out of Moses bosome: faith must keepe thee in Christs bosome: felicitie must bring thee to Abrahams bosome. For first, thou must with Moses, put thy hand into Moses bosome, and there

seeing how full of leprosie thy hand is, & how wicked all thine owne handy works are, thou must abhorre thy selfe, in thy selfe. Afterward, thou must with Iohn co
                        ••
                     ey not thy hand only, but thy whole body, and thy soule also, into Christs bosome, & there seeing how thou art cleansed from the leprosie of thy sinne, & freely iustified by faith in Christ, thou must delight thy selfe in the Lord. Then, thou must bee carried into Abrahams bosome. and there, both louing to desire God, and desiring to loue God, hee shall giue thee thy desires. First, I say, lye in Moses bosome, and abhorre thy selfe in thy selfe: afterward, lye in Christs bosome, and delight thy selfe in the Lord: then thou shalt lye in Abrahams bosome, (O blessed bosome! O sweet bosome.) And he shall giue thee, thy desires. Delight thy selfe in the Lord, and hee shall giue thee the desires of thy heart. The desires.
                  
                  Lastly, Of thy heart. Thy heart here, is all one with thy selfe before. As if the words had stood thus, Delight thy self in the Lord, and hee shall giue thee the desires of thy selfe: or else thus, Delight

thy heart in the Lord, and hee shall giue thee the desires of thy hart. To the point then, Augustine sayes thus, 
                        Fecistinos domine ad te & ideo inquietum est cor nostrum, donec 
                              〈◊〉
                            veniamus ad te
                      O Lord, thou hast made vs for thine owne selfe, and therefore our heart is euer vnquiet, while it is from thee, neuer at quiet, vntill it come to thee. A Bul which is bayted at the ring, as soone as euer he gets any little breathing, turnes him straitwayes toward that place, by which he was brought in▪ imagining, that by how much the more he is nearer to the stall, by so much the more he shall bee further from the stake. In like manner, a faithfull heart beeing baited and towsed in this world with many dogs Psal. 22.16. which come about it, alwaies hath an eye to that place, from which it came, and is neuer quiet till it returne to him from whom it was fet at the 
                        Querula penitus & errabunda est, donec ad cum, a quo originaliter exi
                              •
                           t triumphali virtute reuertatur
                      first. He that lets downe a bucket to draw water out of a Well, as long as the bucket is vnder the water, though it be neuer so ful he may get it vp easily; but when hee begins to draw the bucket cleare out of the water, then with all his strength hee can scarse get it vp; yea, many times the bucket when it is at the verie highest, breakes the yron chaine, and violently fals backe

againe. After the same sorte, a Christian heart so long as it is in him who is a Well of life, is filled with delight, & with great ioy drinketh in the water of comfort, out of the fountaine of Esa. 12.3. saluation; but being once haled and pulled from God, it draweth backe, & as much as it can possibly resisteth, and is neuer quiet, till it bee in him again, who is the center of the 
                        Via moris i
                              •
                            deum tanquam in ce
                              ••
                           t
                              •
                           m proprium mouetur, vt in i
                              •
                           
                           so summe deletur.
                      soule. For as the needles point in the mari
                        •
                     ers compasse, neuer stands still, till it come right against the north pole: so the heart of the wise men, neuer stood still, till they come right against the starre which appeared in the Math. 2.9. East; and the verie starre it selfe, neuer stood still, till it came right against the other starre, which shined more brightly in the manger, then the Sunne did in heauen. Wherefore our harts do alwaies erre, they are Planets 
                        St
                              •
                           lle
                              •
                           erraticae. ude 13., & wandring starres, before they come to Christ; but thē onely they are stars of the firmament, the true seed of Abraham, whē they are firmly Psal. 57.8 fixed, & setled in God. The Prophet Ionas, all the while he fledde frō God, in what a case was he? one while he was turmoiled in the storms of the tē
                     pest: another while he was sowsed in the

waues of the Sea: another while hee was boyled in the bowels of the Whale. But as soone as he returned to God, by & by he was cast vp safe vpon the sea shore: and then he said to his soule, My soule returne vnto thy rest, because the Lord hath restored thy selfe vnto thee 
                        Quia dominus reddidit te tibi. Psal. 119.7. Because whereas before, thou hadst lost thy selfe: lost thy selfe in the tempest: lost thy selfe in the sea: lost thy selfe in the Whale: now the Lord hath restored thy vnto thee. Wherefore the heart of man hath lost all rest: nay, it hath lost it selfe, before it be cast vpon the Sea shore; before it be cast vpon God: but when once it delighteth in the Lord, when once it findeth God, then it findeth it selfe, then it returneth vnto rest. Nicaula Queene of Saba, could neuer bee quiet in her owne country, till shee came to Salomon: but when she saw his glory, and heard his wisdome, then her heart fayled her, she had enough, she could desire to see and heare no more. And so the heart of a Christian, can neuer be quiet in the straunge Country of this world, till it come to Christ, which is the true Salomon, the Prince of Peace: when it comes once to Christ, then it

saies thus to God, Lord now lettest thou thy seruant depart in peace, because mine eies haue seene the prince, because mine eyes haue seene thy saluation. Euen as one good heart saies for all, O Lord, how amiable are thy dwellings? Salomon had goodly buildings, but they were nothing to thy dwellings. My soule fainteth, and faileth for them Concupis
                           •
                        it, deficit. Psal. 84.2.. It fainteth before I see them: and it faileth when I haue seene them; then I am quiet enough, then I can desire to see no more. For like as Noahs doue could finde no rest for the sole of her foote, all the while she was flickering ouer the floud, till shee returned to the arke with an oliue branch in her mouth: so the heart of a christian, which is the turtle doue of Christ, can finde no rest all the while it is houering ouer the waters of this world, till it haue siluer wings as a doue, and with the oliue branch of faith, flie to the true Noah, which signifieth rest, till Iesus Christ put forth his holy hand out of the arke, and taking this heart into his hand, receiue it to himselfe. Euen as one good heart saies for all, I will not climbe vp into my bed, nor suffer mine eies to sleepe, nor mine eieliddes to slumber,

nor the temples of my head to take their rest, vntill I finde a tabernacle for the Lord, an habitation for the mightie God ofPsal. 132.4. 
                     Iacob. Vntill I finde, that my heart is not in mine owne-hand, but in Gods hand: vntill I finde, that God dwelleth in me, and I in him: vntill I finde, that my soule is a tabernacle for the Lord, and my heart is an habitation for the God of Iacob, I cannot rest, saies hee. But when I finde this once: when I come to Noah in the arke: when I delight my selfe in the Lord; then will I climbe vp into my bedde, and suffer mine eyes to sleepe, and mine eye-lids to slumber, and the temples of my head to take their rest. But whats the reason of all this? I am somwhat bold to aske, because I wold be glad to know: whats the reason I say, that the bull can neuer bee quiet, till hee come to the staule; that the bucket can neuer bee quiet, till it come to the water; that the needle can neuer be quiet, till it come to the north pole; that Ionas can neuer bee quiet, till he come to the sea shore; that Nicaula can neuer be quiet, till shee come to Salomon; that Noahs doue, can neuer bee quiet, till it come to the arke; that

mans heart, can neuer be quiet, til it come to God? The reason of it is this. When God created heauen and earth, hee rested not in the heauen, or in any heauenly thing, not in the earth, or in any earthly thing, but onely in man, which is both. A heauenly thing for his soule, & an earthly thing for his bodie. As soone as hee had made man, he kept a sabboth, and rested. Euen so the heart of man, res
                        •
                     eth not in the earth, or in any earthly thing, not in the heauen, or in any heauenly thing, but onely in God, which is Lord of both. Lord of heauen and earth: Lord of soule and body. As soone as it commeth to God, & delighteth in him, it keepeth holy-day, & resteth. Gods hart neuer resteth till it come to man: mans heart neuer resteth til it come to God. For as God sayes to man, My sonne giue me thy heart Prou. 23, 26: so man sayes to God, my Lord giue me thy self. For euen as the heart desireth the water-brookes: so longeth my heart, my soule, after thee, ô God. Therefore, ô God, giue me thy selfe. Shew me thy selfe, and it sufficeth Ioh. 14.8. mee. For thou onely, O Lord, art indeed, as thou art called in Hebrew Shaddai, al-sufficient, yea, more then

sufficient. Thy very grace is sufficient for 2. Cor. 12.9 me. But thou, O Lord, doest giue both grace and Psal. 84.12. glory. Therefore whome haue I in heauen, but thee? and whome haue I in earth, but Psal. 73.24. thee? Thou only giuest grace in earth: so that I haue none in earth but thee, And thou onely giuest glorie in heauen: so that I haue none in heauen but thee. O what a sweet friend is this? What a sweete friend is God, our good friend, which onely feedeth and filleth the 
                        Dulcis ille amicus qui animam nutrit. Nilus.
                      
                     heart? Hee onelie feedeth it in earth, & filleth it in heauen: feedeth it with grace, and filleth it 
                        Satiabor cum apparuerit gloria tua. Psal. 
                           •
                        7.16, glory. For euerie thing hath a kinde of foode proper vnto it. Offer a Lyon grasse, hee will neuer eate it: offer him flesh, hee will eate it. Why so? Because that is vnnaturall, that is naturall to him. So offer the heart of a Christian, which is couragious and bold as a Prou. 18.1 lyon, offer it all the glorie of the world; which is as the flower of Esa. 40.6. grasse, it is neuer a whit the better. Offer it Christ, who sayes, My flesh is meate indeed, then it is satisfied. Therefore one sayes, The Lyons want and suffer hunger, but they that feare the Lord, want no manner of thing that is good. The Lyons: such Lyons as

haue no grace, but grasse onely to feede vpon, they want and suffer hunger. Hungrie & thirsty, their soule fainteth in Psal. 107.5. them. But they that feare the Lord: such Lyons as by faith feed vpon the flesh of Christ, delight in the Lord, feede vpon God, they are fat and well liking, they want no maner of thing that is good. For as the people sitting vpon the grasse, and feeding vpon the breade, were all Mark. 6.39. satisfied: so these Lyons are all satisfied, because sitting vpon the grasse of the world, yea not onely sitting vpon it, but also treading vpon it, & trampling it vnder their feete, they feede onely vpon the bread of life. For these Lyons can easily conceiue that if at that time fiue loaues being blessed by our Lord, did satisfie fiue thousand, then much more our blessed Lord himselfe, can satisfie euery heart. which hungreth and thirsteth for him. Therefore these Lions saue the very fragments of this feast, & keepe them in their hearts as in baskets, knowing that all the grasse of the world, cannot doe them halfe so much good, as the very least crumme of Christs comfort. For so onely on sayes among the rest; My soule refuseth,

comfort: But when I remember God, I am 
                     Psal. 77.4. Memor fu
                              •
                            Dei, & delectatus sum.
                      
                     delighted. As if he should say, I haue a Lyons heart in me; my soule refuseth to feed vpon the grasse of the world; it goes against my stomacke: I cannot brooke it, I cannot digest it, thats but a cold cōfort My soule refuseth all such comfort. But when I remember God I am delighted. Though I cannot see presētly before me; yet if I doe but remember him; if I doe but meditate of him; if I do but think of him, if I do but dream of him; I am 
                        Annon toties comfortaris quoties recordaris Aug.
                      delighted: though I cannot haue a whole loafe▪ yet I can get but a fragmēt: if I cā get but a shine▪ if I can get but a morsel: If I can get but any little crum of comfort, that fals from the table of the Lord; my heart is sufficiently refreshed and fed. But as God onely feedeth the heart: so God only filleth the heart. For the heart of man, as for the manner of dyet, it is like the heart of a lion: so for the bignes of it, it is like the hart of the Ibus. Oris Apollo writeth, that the Egyptians, when they would describe the heart, paint that bird, which they cal Ibis. Because they thinke that no creature, for proportion of the body, hath so great a heart, as the Ibis hath. But mee thinkes,

they might better paint a man. Because no creature, no not the Ibis it selfe hath so great a heart as a man hath. For the eie is neuer filled with seeing, nor the eare with hearing, and much lesse, the heart with desiring. But euen as the Poets fain, that the fiftie daughters of king Da
                        
                           ••••
                        
                      killing their husbands, are enioyned for their punishment in hel, to fill a tunne with water, that is boared full of holes, which though they labour neuer so much about it, yet they can neuer bring to passe 
                        Vide prouerbium, Danaidum dolium apud Erasm.
                     : semblably,Eccles. 1.8 he that would go about to fill his heart, with worldly delights, were as good p
                        •
                     ure water into a sine, as we say, for any pleasure hee shall haue, after all his labour and paines. Salomon hauing had a long time tryall of all transitorie pleasures, at length frankly confessed, that they were so farre from beeing a contentation to his heart, that they were a very great vexation to his spirite. Nay Alexander, though he had conquered the whole world, yet still he saide with the King of Spaine, Non suffic
                           ••
                         orbis: 
                     All the whole worlde is not enough for me. yea in the ende, hee grew to be very male content, & found himselfe greatlie grieued, because there were not for sooth,

many more worlds for him to conquere. By which example of Salomon and Alexander,) though otherwise a heathen.) it doth plainely appeare, that if it had pleased God to haue created as many worlds, as there are creatures in this one worlde, (which he might haue don with the least word of his mouth) yet this infinite number of worldes, which should haue beene created, could not haue filled the verie least heart, of any one man, without the Creator himselfe. This Orontius an excellent Mathematitian sheweth, who describing the whole world in the forme of an heart, leaueth many voyde spaces in his hart, which he cannot fill vp with the world. For as a circle, can neuer fill a triangle, but alwaies there wil be three emptie corners in the Triangle vnfilled, if there be nothing else to fil it, but the circle: so the round world, which is a circle can neuer fill the heart of man, which is a triangle, made according to the image of the Trinity, but alwayes there wil be som e
                        •
                     pty corners, in the triangle of the heart vnfilled, if there be nothing else to fill it: but the circle of the World▪ Onely the glorious trinity, filleth the triangle of

the heart, and filleth euery corner of it, and filleth euery corner of it fuller, then it can possibly 
                        Anima nostrae ita facta est capax maiestatis tuae, quod a te solo & a nullo alio possit impleri Cum autem habet te, plenum est desiderium eius, & iam nihil aliud quod desideret vlte, ius restat. August. l. Soliloq. cap. 30. holde. For, suppose al mightie God should nowe worke a miracle, and giue some one man a hearte, as large, and as huge, not onely as all the hearts of all the men, that euer were, are, or shall bee, but also as all the affections of all the angels, and heauenly powers aboue; yea I will say that, which shall bee yet much more maruellous, if this one heart were so greate, that it could at one instant. actually containe in it, more corporall and spirituall things, then are in all the deepes beneath, in the vallies, in the mountaines, and in all the heauens aboue: yet as true as God is in heauen, this so large, and so huge a heart, could not be able to holde the very least part of the perfection of God; but if one droppe of his deitie and glory, were powred into it by and by it would burst in a hundreth pieces, and fly a sunder, as an olde vessel, filled with new Behold the heauens and the heauens of heauens are not able to contai
                           •
                        e thee. 1. Reg. 8.27. wine. O what a wonderfull strange thing is this? what shal we deuise to say of it? Tenne thousand worlds, cannot fill one heart: and yet tenne thousand hearts, cannot hold one God. Therfore,

as much as one heart, is too good and too great, for ten thousand worlds: so much is one God, too good and too great, for ten thousand 
                        Deus maior est corde nostro. 1 Ioh. 3.30. hearts. So fully doth the Lord, & nothing but the Lord, feede, and fill thy soule, and giue thee all, nay more then all, thy heart can desire. Wherefore, Delight thy selfe in the Lord, and hee shall giue thee the desires of thy heart. Thus much for the promise, in these wordes, And hee shall giue thee the desires of thy heart,
                  
                  Now then, deare brother, Delight: and not delight onely; but Thy selfe, also: and not thy selfe onely; but, In the Lord, also: Delight thy selfe in the Lord: and againe I say, Delight: and againe I say, Thy selfe: and againe I say, In the Lord. Delight thy selfe in the Lord. O remember, for the loue of God, remember this worthy sentence of an auncient father, 
                        Omnis creatura vil
                              •
                           scat. vt creator in corde dulcescat
                      
                     Let all creatures seeme vile vnto thee, saies hee, that onely thy creatour may seeme sweete vnto thee. Armenia, a noble lady, beeing bidden to king Cyrus wedding, went thither with her husband. At night, when they were returned home, her husband asked her, how

she liked the Bridegroome, whether shee thought him to be a fayre and beautifull prince or no? Truth, sayes shee, I know not. For all the while I was forth, I cast mine eyes vpon none other, but vpon thy selfe▪ So basely did this noble lady esteem of king Cyrus beauty, who was the Monarch of the world▪ in respect of that entire good will & affection, she bare to her husband, which was so great, that her eies could neuer be from him. And so must we set God alwayes before our eyes, and n
                        ••
                      once looke aside, or bee enamoured with any gaud of worldly glory, but despise euery blaze of beauty whatsoeuer, th
                        •
                     t may draw vs from beholding our heauenly husband, and delighting only in him, which is fayrer then the children of men. Saint Paul being rapt vp to the third heauen knows not, whether it were with the bodie, or without the body. And because we should marke it well once, he 
                        〈◊〉
                      it downe twice. That he was rapt vp to the third Heauen, he is sure, that hee 
                        •
                     eard words which no man can vtter, he 
                        〈◊〉
                      sure, that hee was exceeding delighted in the Lord, he is sore. But whither his body were with him or no, he knows not.

So much did he forget and neglect, euen his owne body, which is so neere, and so deare a thing, in comparison of that incomparable delight, which then he tooke in the Lord. S. Peter, seeing but a glimpse of Christs glory vpon Mount Tabor, stood so astonished and amazed with it, that hee was in a sort besides himselfe, whan he was at that time beside Christ. Master, sayes he, i
                        〈…〉
                     ood for vs to be here. As if he should 
                        〈…〉
                     e sayd, Now farewell Galilie, and all my goods: farewell fellow Disciples, and all my friends, farewell wife, and al the world: so I may inioy this heauenly sight, and bee continually thus delighted in the Lord. Holy Ignati
                           ••
                        , going to his Martyrdom, was so strangely rauished with this delight, that he burst out into these words. Nay, come fires, come beasts, come breaking of all my bones, come racking of my whole body, come all the torments of the Diuel together vpon mee: come what can come, in the whole earth, or in hell, either, so that I may enioy Iesus Christ, & may be continually delighted in the Lord. And so must thou (deare brother) insult ouer all creatures, and exsult only in thy 
                        〈◊〉
                     .

Thou must contemne all beautie, as Armenta did: yea thine owne bodie, as Paul did: yea all the world as Peter did: yea thy very life, as Ignatius did: and bee content to doe any thing, though it were to bee torne and pulled in a thousand peeces: or for a time, if it were possible, to suffer all the paines which the fiends and furies of hel can inflict vpon thee, so as in the end, thou maiest delight 
                     
                        ••
                     ther the Lord in thy selfe, or thy self 
                           〈…〉
                         Lord. Then, then He shall giue thee: and not; He shall giue thee onely, but The desires also: and not The desires onely, but Of thy heart, also. Then he shall giue thee the desires of thy heart. And againe I say, He shall giue thee: and againe I say, The desires: and againe I say, Of thy heart. Then he shall giue thee the desires of thy heart. Then, though thou hast a long time plaied the vnthrift, and wasted all the goods in the world: yet if with the lost childe, thou returne home againe, to thy fathers house, he shall grant the
                        •
                      thy hearts desire, and receiue thee with minstrelsie & dauncing, and all manner of festiuall ioy, & that plenty of bread, which nourisheth euery hired seruant in his house, shall much more feede thee,

which art his louing childe, vnto euerlasting life. Then, though all the leekes and onyons of Egypt, which is the world, haue failed thee: yet, if with Israel, thou depend onely vpon God, he shall distill the dewe of his grace, into thy heart, and lay aside a chosen raine for thee, and cause thee to drinke of the sweete christal streames of his pleasure, and giue thee to eate of that hidden & heauenly Manna, which no man knoweth, but he that receiueth it. Then, though all the clothes and couerings in the world, cannot keep thee warme; yet, if with Dauid, thou be a man according to Gods owne heart, he shall send thee that misticall Abishag, which shall comfort thy heart, and make thee hot and feruent in spirit, which shall renue thy strength and make thee young againe, and lus
                        •
                     y as an Eagle. Then, though thou haue a long time lost thy labour, in seruing Laban, which is the world: yet if with Iacob thou returne home againe to thy fathers house, God shall meete the by the way, and as the Prophet Osey speaketh, he shall allure thee as thy paramour, and leade thee into the wildernes, and there speak according

to thine owne heart, friendly, & louingly vnto thee. And euen as louers, are oftentimes disposed for the nonce, to take a fall one of another, the stronger of the weaker: so God shall wrestle a fall with thee, as he did with Iacob, and yeelde so much in loue to thee, as that he shal suffer thee to giue him the fall: and to preuaile against him. Iesus: what exceeding loue is this? why we are not euen nowe, in the name of God, inflamed with the loue of God: and wholly rauished with delight in the Lord? At least wise I maruell, what a mischiefe many base minded worldlings meane, that they had rather feed vpō the huskes of hogges, then the bread of man? that they had rather eate, the onyons of Egipt, then the Manna of heauen? that they had rather lie a cold, frozzen & shiuring in sin, then be reuiued and cherished by Abishag: that they had rather take vnsupportable paine, to serue Laban, then take vnspeakeable pleasure, to serue God? By vpō it: what a vile folly is this? what a starke madnes is this? what is this els, but to be euen bodily tormēted, wheras they might be most spiritually delighted? what is this els, both to goe out of one hel, into

another hell, wheras they might goe out of one heauen into another heauen? For why do you (beloued) why doe you tell me so much, of I know not what? of a worme, that neuer dieth? of a fire, that neuer is quenched? of a lake, that burneth with Brimstone? of weeping, & gnashing of teeth? Thus I tel you (good christians) and I tell you truely, and God in heauen heares what I say, though you heare me not; I tell you as loud as euer I can; that, to serue sinne so slauishly: to please the diuell so wretchedly: to delight in the world so brutishly, as many men doe: this is worse then all wormes: worse then all fires: worse then all lakes: worse then all weeping: worse then hell it selfe. Whereas, on the other side, to serue God, to please God, to delight in God, to reioyce and solace thy soule in the Lord, which hath alwaies giuen thee, and will alwaies giue thee, the desires of thy heart; this is better then all treasures: better thed all crownes: better then all kingdomes: better then al immortalitie: better then heauen it selfe. This, this it is, which shall bring thee, out of one paradise, into another paradise. Out of one paradise in this

life, where thou dost ioyfully, and cheerefully serue God, into another paradise in the life to come, where thou shalt be honourably and royally serued of God. Out of one paradise in this life, where thou doest comfort thy heart, and delight thy selfe i
                           •
                         the Lord, into another paradise in the life to come, where he shal blesse thee, and he shall giue thee the desires of thy heart; Through the tender mercies of Iesus Christ, to whome with the father, and the holy Ghost, bee all honour and glorie, power and praise, dignity and dominion, now and euermore. Amen.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE POVVER OF PRAIER.
                  A SERMON PREACHED in the Cathedrall Church of Exeter in August, 1596. BY THOMAS PLAYFERE Professor of Diuinity for the Lady MARGARET in Cambridge.
                  Printed at London by Iohn Legatt, Printer to the Vniuersitie of Cambridge. 1617.
               
               
                  
                  
                  To the Queenes most Excellent Maiesty.
                  
                     REligion, dread and deare Soueraigne,Gloriosa in deum pietas honorihus regiis immobile est fundamentum Cyrillus ad Theodos. derecta fide. is an vnmoueable foundation of highest authority and honour. O then how blessed are all wee? how sure and vnmoueable is our peace and ioy? God hauing blessed vs with a King, who in religion and learning excelleth all aliue, and his Maiesty with a Queene in due proportion answerable to himselfe. Wherefore as it is our duty to ioyne both in our dayly prayers: so neyther would I separate you in my humble endeauours. For the present felicitie and glorie of this Realme, resteth wholly in his Maiesty, but the future hope to haue these infinite blessings continued vpon vs and all our posterity, euen vnto the worlds end, ariseth from you both, in respect of that most happie royall issue you haue had already, and which

if it please God you may hereafter. Which as it will be our greatest securitie and comfort: so that it may bee no danger to your Maiesties health, especially that which your Highnesse now goeth withall, we shall continually and importunately pray and beseech at Gods hands. And what the power of Prayer is, this short sermon which I presume to offer vnot your sacred Maiestie, doth in some sort shewe.
                  
                     Your Maiesties most deuoted, and obedient subiect, Thomas Playfere.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  THE POWER OF Prayer. THE TEXT.
                  
                     
                        Aske, and it shall be giuen you: seeke, and you shall finde: knocke, and it shall bee opened v
                              •
                           to you.
                        
                           Math. 7.7.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     BEfore I come to the particular intreaty of this text, it will not be amisse, as I take it, generally to obserue some few things. Our Sauiour, saies not here, as to one Aske thou, seeke thou, knocke thou: but as to many, Aske, Se
                           •
                        ke, knocke. For it is, Our father; though it be, I beleeue. A sparke of fire, in the fire,

keepes fire; by it selfe, of it selfe goes out. A droppe of water in the sea, is safe; being alone, is soone dryed vp. Euen so, in priuate prayer, that small sparke of zeale which is in vs, may quickely bee put out, and that little droppe of deuotion, which is in vs, may quickly bee dried vp: but in publike praier, it is not so. Whereupon Daniel 
                     2.17. requesteth his Companions, Sidrach, Misach and Abednago, to pray with him. Yea, Ioel 
                     1.14. aduiseth them, to gather a solemne assembly, and to cal the elders, & all the inhabitants of the land, into the house of the Lord, to offer vp prayers vnto God. A three-fold cord, is not easily broken Eccles. 4.12. Now what is praier else, but a cord, wherewith we bind Gods hands, when he is ready to smite vs for our sinnes? Euen as Esay complaining to God, 64.7. There is none that calleth vpon thy name, none that riseth vp to take hold of thee, to hold thy hands, and bind them fast with the cord of praier. But if a two-fold cord, or a three-fold cord, cannot easily be broken, wheras two or three of Daniels companions are gathered together in the name of Christ, then much more a hundred fold cord, or a thousand-fold

cord, cannot easily be broken, when as not onely two or three of vs, haue agreed vpon a petition in earth, but euen Ioels solemne assembly, such a solemne assembly as here is, many hundreds, yea many thousands of the faithfull, are gathered togither in the house of the Lord, to offer vp praier vnto God. Such a strong cord of praier, as this is, so wel twisted by so many, must needes most forcibly draw downe from heauen, infinit graces for vs. And therefore our Sauiour saies here, not as to one, but as to many, Aske, seeke, knocke. So likewise it is not said here▪ as in the time present, that by and by we obtaine the thing we pray for; but as in the time to come. And it shall bee giuen you, and you shall finde, and it shal be opened vnto you. For as Laban kept Iacob a long while from his youngest daughter, whome he loued best, that his loue might be more increased continually: so God oftentimes holdeth vs a while in suspēce, that he may the more sharpen our appetite, and inflame our 
                        Vt accendantur desideria. Martial Epist. ad Tol
                              •
                           st. Quo anobis auidius, desideratur eo de nobis suauius laetatur.
                      desire. Because, saies Gregory. The more earnestly hee is desired of vs, the more sweetely he is delighted in
                        ••
                      vs. Wherefore, as a marchant

being about to put money into a bagge, & perceyuing the bagge will scarce hold all the money, first stretches out the bag, before hee put in the money: after the same sort, in this case, dealeth God with vs. God knowing that those blessings, wherewith vpon our prayers he purposes to inrich vs, are so great, that our hearts as yet are not capable of them, stayes a while, till afterwards when our hearts are more inlarged, and stretched out like a wide bagge, we may then receyue them, when we are fitter for them. Whereupon the princely Prophet sayes, Lord, I cry vnto thee in the day of time, & thou hearest not, also in the night time, & yet this is not to be thought folly in Psal. 22.2. Ita Septuagint. interpretantur.
                      me, Some perhaps would thinke it a great point of folly, for a man to cal and cry vnto him, who stops his eares, and seemes not to heare. Neuerthelesse, this folly of the faithfull, is wiser then all the wisedome of the world. For we know wel enough, that howsoeuer God seeme at the first, not to heare, yet. The Lord is a sure refuge in due time, in 
                     Psal. 9.9. 
                     affliction. First, in due time
                     ▪ then in affliction. Because, for the most part, in helping vs, God rather respects

the due time, then the affliction. So that although, as soone as we pray, he doe not alway presently free vs from affliction, yet if we can be content to wait a while. tarry the Lords leisure, in his due time, he will surely releeue vs, And therefore it is saide here, not as in the time present but as in the time to come, And it shall be giuen you, and you shall finde, and it shall be opened vnto you.
                  
                  Now then in this whole sentence, two principal parts would be considered. The first, what we in our praier must performe to God. The second, what God for our praier will performe to vs. What wee in our praier must performe to God, is in these words, Aske, seeke, knocke. Aske, with the mouth, seeke with the heart, knock with the hand. What God for our praier will performe to vs, is in these wordes, And it shall be giuen you, & you shall finde, & it shall be opened vnto you, And it shall be giuen you, that is for temporall things: and you shall finde, that is for spiritual things: & it shalbe opened vnto you, that is for eternall things, Aske, seeke, knocke, & it shall be giuen you, & you shall finde, and it shall bee opened vnto

you. First we must aske with the mouth
                        •
                      
                     Ioakim the virgin Maries father, going to the wildernesse to pray, saide thus. Prayer shall bee my meate and 
                     
                        Cibus pohis
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            mihi erit oratio
                      
                     drinke. Wherby it is euident, that as meate and drinke, the naturall food of the bodie, must goe in at the mouth: so on the other side, prayer, the spirituall food of the soule, must goe out of the mouth. Which is the reason, why Pythagoras willed his schollers to pray aloud 
                        Sonora v
                              ••••
                            pret ari.
                     . Not that hee thought that God could not otherwise heare, but to teach vs, as Clemens notethStrol. 4. that as our dealing with men must bee as in the sight of God: so our prayer to God, must bee as in the hearing of men. Ezechias king of the Iewes, witnesseth of himselfe, that praying in his sickenes, hee chattered like a young swallow Esa 38.14.. Now we know by that prouerb, which forbiddeth to keepe swallowes vnder the same roofe where we keepe our selues, that no birde is so troublsome for chattering, as the swallow is. His meaning then was this: that as a yong swallow openeth her mouth, and neuer leaues yawning vnto the dam, til shee be satisfied, so he opened his mouth, and as the Prophet Esay saies 62.6. kept no silence,

neuer left asking, gaue the Lord no rest, vntill he had mercy vpon him. Bala
                           •
                        ck king of the Moabites, speaketh thus Num. 22.4 Shall this multitude licke vp all that are round about vs, as a calfe licketh vp the grasse of the field? Now we know that a calfe licketh vp the grasse of the fielde with his mouth. The thing thē which he feared, was this: least the Israelites should licke vp, that is, ouercome and destroy him▪ and all his, with the asking of theyr mouthes, with their prayers to God, which are called Osc. 14.2 the calues of the lips, euen as a calfe licketh vp the grasse of the field. The Church wisheth the southerne wind would blow, that her spices might flow forth Cant. 4.16.. The southerne wind, is the milde & comfortable spirite of God. The spices are the prayers, the sweet odours of the Saints. So that we wish the Southerne winde would blow vpon vs that our spices may flow forth, when as we wish the holy Ghost would worke vpon vs, that our praiers might flow forth. That as God breatheth in his Spirit into vs, by the inspiration of grace: so wee might breath out our spirit vnto God, by the inspiration of prayer. According to

that of the Prophet, Ps. 119.131 
                     I opened my mouth and drew in breath, I drew in breath, theres inspiration, I opened my mouth, theres respiration. So that they which neuer open their mouthes to aske, are dumbe fishes, which haue liues, and breath not, or else dead Idols, which haue mouthes and speake not, Whereas in truth, euery one that hath an eare to heare, ought to 
                        •
                     eare, & so euery one that hath a mouth to speake ought to speake. Speake vnto the rocke, sayes God to Moses 
                     Num. 20.8., when the children of Israel wanted water in the wildernesse, And after the same maner, when wee want the water of comfort in the wildernesse of this world, we must aske it of God, we must speake for it vnto the rocke Christ Iesus. For it was his onely request he made to his Spouse, when 
                        •
                     e tooke his very last farewell of her vpon earth. Let mee heare thy voyce Can. 8.13.. As if Christ should say thus to his church: my dearest, now I am ready to ascend vp vnto my Father. Howbeit in the meane while, I will not leaue you comfortlesse. But though I shal bee absent from you in body, yet I will be present with you in spirit, alwayes beholding your order of

seruice and hearing your praier vnto me. Therefore let vs not hereafter be strange one to another, but let tokens of louing kindnesse passe continually betwixt vs, I will send downe to you my spirite like tongues of fire. Send you vp to me your prayer, like pillars of smoake. And in case you want any thing at any time, do no more, but let me heare your voice, let me by a prayer, as by a letter from you vnderstand it, and 
                        •
                     ou shall haue it. Aske, and it shall be giuen you.
                  Yet it is not enough for vs, to aske with the mouth: we must also seeke with the heart. For seeking with the heart, hath oftentimes preuailed, without the asking of the mouth. But asking with the mouth, could neuer yet obtaine any thing of God, without the seeking of the heart. Therfore Hierom findeth himselfe greatly grieued, that now and then in praier time his mouth & his mind went not both together, My mind, saies he 
                        
                           Aut per porticus deambulo, aut do fanor
                                 •
                               cogito. In dialog. aduersus Lucifer.
                        
                        
                           Ipso intempore, quo 
                                 •
                              leuare mentem paramus inserris manibus, cogitation
                                 •
                               bus ad terrena plerum que dei
                                 •
                              cn
                                 ••
                              ur Amb de 
                                 •
                              uga 
                                 •
                              icuti c. 1. citante August. contra Sul. l. 2.
                      is wādring or walking in this or that galery, or else telling or counting this or that sum of money, or diuers other waies misled & s
                        •
                     duced. This is satās subtilty, to be then most

busie in tempting of vs when we are most busie in praying to God. As when two goe to law one with another, the plantife will doe what he can to hinder the defendant, that the Iudge may not heare what he is able to say in his owne cause: in like sort the Diuell, the common plantife, the common accuser of 
                        〈◊〉
                      mankind, when hee seeth vs vpon our knees, pleading for our selues by prayer, and seeking fauour and pitty of God, the iudge of all, then doth hee most interrupt and disturbe vs. And euen as the Furies are described to haue snakes & serpents vpon their heads, instead of hayre: so Sathan distracts 
                        〈◊〉
                      mindes, and makes vs like furies, putting pestilent and noysome cogitations into our heads, in stead of deuout and holy affections. Which is the cause why Iob 
                     Iob. 1.20before he fell downe vpon the ground to pray, did shaue his head, did shaue and cut off al idle & earthly thoughts, which are nothing else but snakes and serpents, suggested by that old Serpent the Diuell. For blessed Iob knew right well, it was vnpossible God should heare him, if hee heard not himselfe. No, no, sayes God, I will neuer heare such a people, because

this people drawes neere to me with their mouthes, & honour me with their lippes, but their hearts are farre from Esa. 29.13. mee. What then saies the Apostle? I will pray with my breath, or with my mouth: yea, and I will pray also with my vnderstanding, or with my 1. Cor. 14.15 heart. Seeing indeede fi
                        •
                     e wordes, thoug
                        •
                      they were no more, comming from a well disposed and a faithfull heart, are a thousand times better, then ten thousand wordes, which are neuer at all vttered, but muttered onely and mumbled vp in the mouth. Gods promise to his people is this, You Deut. 4.29.shall seeke me, and you shall finde mee, because you shall seeke mee with your whole 
                        •
                     eart. Gods performance of his promise is this, Iere. 29.13. You haue sought mee, and you haue found me, because you haue sought mee with your whole heart. Therefore when thou seekest, se
                           •
                        ke with thy heart; when thou praiest enter into thy chamber. Thy lippes are but the chamber dore. So that, when thou hast opened the dore of thy lips, then thou must enter into the very chamber of thy heart. That thy praier may not bee an emptie or a windie praier, puft or blowne from the

lungs, or from the lippes: but a hearty & a pithy praier, a sacrifice which hath marrow and 
                        Medullatum sacricifium. Psal. 66.15 fatnes such a Sacrifice as Dauid offered, when as hauing first saide, My heart hath sailed 
                     Psal. 4.
                     mee. I haue lost my heart: anon after he saies, I haue now, O Lord, found my heart againe to pray vnto thee 
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            cormicum. 1. Sam 7.27.. Salomon deckt and garnished his temple, before he praied in it: and so before thou praiest, prepare thy Ecclesiasticus, 18.21 heart. Be sure thou finde and furnish thy heart, which is the true temple of him, who is greater then Salomon. And as that woman that sought her groat, swept ouer all the whole house; so when thou seekest any thing of God, sweepe ouer the whole house of thy Psal. 11.1. heart▪ say with Mana
                           ••
                        es, O Lord, I bow vnto thee, the knees of my heart: seeing thou hast saide, Seeke ye my face, thy face, O Lord, doe I seeke: yea, I doe seeke thee with my whole, heart, seeing thou hast said, seeke, and you shal find.
                  Yet it is not enough for vs to s
                        •
                     ek with the heart: we must also knocke with the hand. For he that was borne blind, could notwithstāding both see & say, that God heareth not sinners; but that euery one

which calleth vpon the name of the Lord, must depart from iniquity. So that it is to little purpose, for a man to seeke, though with neuer so faithfull a heart, except also hee knocke with a righteous hand. The Heretikes called Euchitae, professed to doe nothing else but pray. Because the Apostle exhorteth vs to pray continually. But they did not consider that to pray alwaies, is to serue God alwaies. And that a godly life knocks aloud, and is a perpetuall praier to God. So that professing to pray, and to do nothing els, in effect they did nothing lesse. Seeing as Theodoret reporteth of them. They did 
                        Vt plurim
                              ••
                            dormiunt.
                     nothing for the most part, but sleepe. Whereas in Basils iudgement, a praier should bee filled, 
                        Non syllabis sed factis & operibus.
                      not with syllables, or good words, so much, as with good works Which none can doe: who either with these Heretikes, doe nothing at all, or els no good thing at al, but only that which is ill with others. When you shall multiply your prayers vnto me, saies, God Esa. 1.15., I will not heare you, because your hands are full of blood. If a subiect should offer vp a supplication, hauing his hands im
                     
                        •
                     r
                        •
                     ed in the blood of the Kings sonne,

tell me, I pray you, what thinke you? how would the King take it? would hee grant him his request, trowe you? or rather would hee not be most wrathfully incensed, and enraged against him? And euen so doth God take it at our hands▪ when we knock
                           •
                        
                      with bloody & vncleane hands, presuming still to pray, and yet continually crucifying the sonne of God by our sins. Therfore say the godlie, Let vs lift vp our harts with our hands Lam. 3.41.. They say not Let vs lift vp our hearts alone: but let vs lift vp our hearts with our hands. Let vs not only seek with our harts, but also knock with our hands: yea euen with innocent hands. And another: Psal. 141.3 Let my praier be directed vnto thee as incense: and let the lifting vp of my hands, be an euening sacrifice vnto thee. And yet another: I will that men pray euery where, lifting vp pure hands 1. Tim. 2.8.. For as the precious stone diacletes, though it haue very many excellent soueraignties in it, yet it looseth them all, if it bee put in a dead mans mouth, so prayer, which is the only pearle and iewell of a Christian, though it haue very manie rare vertues in it, yet it loseth them euery one, if it be put into a mans

mouth, or into a mans heart eyther, that is dead in sinne, and doth not knock with a pure hand. Hence it is that the Church is sayd to be perfumed with frankinsence and myrre. Cant. 3.6. By frankinsence is meant a burning feruency of affection, when as an enflamed heart seeketh. By myrre is ment, mortification and dying vnto sin, when as an vndefiled hand knocketh. As when the Church sayes,Cant. 5.5. My handes droppe downe myrre, & my fingers pure myrr 
                        •
                     e vpon the handles of the barre. This is that holy perfume of the tabernacle which God appointed to bee made of pure myrre and frankinsence, of each like waight. 
                     Exod. 30.34Note that, Of each like waight. But we for the most part marre it in the making. For we put into this perfume of praier whole pounds of frankinsence, but not a dramme, nay scarce so much as one graine of myrre. Wee put into it much frankinsence, much pretence of faith, much shew of seeking with the heart, but little myrre, little true mortification, litle holines of life, little sound knocking with the hand. Nay, that which is most lamentable, or rather most detestable of all. some are not ashamed in stead of this

pure myrre,: to put in the verie drugges, and the dregges of their vile sinnes: which is the cause why manie a mans praier is so lothsome, and so odious to God. Whereas if we would make this perfume, as it should bee made, according to Gods prescription, and put in as much of the myrre as of the frankinsence, of each like waight, then I assure you, no pomander which is made of Amber and Muske, would bee so pleasant in the 
                        ••
                     osthrils of God, as this Perfume of Prayer. wherewith the Church it perfumed, which is made of Frankinsence and Myrre. Of frankinsence, is a heart that seeketh, and myrre, in a hand that knocketh. When Moses prayed in mount Oreb, Exod. 17.5. his handes were holden vp by Vr and Aaron. Yea they did not only hold vp his hands, but also they held his rod in his hands. Now the rod of Moses was a figure of the crosse of Christ. Whereby we are taught, that wee must not knocke with our owne hands, but with Moses rodde in our hands, not trusting to bee heard for the workes of our owne hands, for our own merits, but for Christs mercies. For this rodde of Moses is the

crosse of Christ, the key of Dauid, the key wherewith Elias 
                     Iam. 5.17 
                     knockt, or rather indeede he stood not without, knocking like a stranger, but with this key of praier, hee lockt and vnlockt heauen at his pleasure. Among them that haue beene borne of women, there hath not risen vp a greater then Iohn Baptist. Not a greater. True, Onely the first Iohn Baptist, Elias was as great, as the second Elias Iohn Baptist. For both of them came in one and the selfe same spirit, in one and the selfe same power. No maruel then though Elias, being such a holy man, one while by turning the key one way, did lock vp the whole heauen, another while by turning the same key of prayer as much another way, in the turning of a hand, did vnlocke all the doores and windowes of heauen, and set them wide open. Why do ye maruel at this? Euen we, we our selues I say, shall bee able to doe as much as euer Elias did, if wee come in the spirit & power of Elias, as Iohn Baptist did. If we haue such a spirite in our heart to seeke and such a power in our hand to knocke it shall likewise be opened vnto vs. For Christ hath sayd here, Knocke, and it shall

be opened vnto you. Thus much for the first part, what wee in our prayers must performe to God, in these words, Aske, seeke, knocke.
                  
                  The second part followeth, what God for our prayer will performe to vs, And it shall be giuen you. That's for temporall things. In another place it is sayd, Giue, and it shall be giuen you. Here, Aske, and it shall be giuen you, So that it is all one with God. We may get as much of him by asking, as by giuing. By asking, that which wee haue not, as by giuing that which we haue. Yet S. Iames sayes, 4.3. you aske, and it is not giuen you. But the reason followes, Because you aske amisse: For you aske temporall things to consume them vpon your lusts. Now though this be the end which thou intendest, yet thou darest not confesse so much with thy mouth. Therefore then perhappes, thou maiest aske and misse, when at thoudest aske amisse. When as, sayes Barnard, 
                     
                        Aut prater verbum petis aut propter verbum non petis.
                      eyther thou dost aske from the written word, or else thou dost not aske for the begotten word. Seeing euery thing which we aske, as it must be assured and

warranted to vs by the Scripture, which is the written word; so it must be countenanced and commended to God by Christ, which is the begotten word. Now both these words, written and begotten, presuppose a mouth. Which if they bee in thy mouth, then Gods promise is plaine, Open thy mouth, and I will fill it. Aske of me, and I will giue thee, the heathen for thine inheritance. For the eyes of the Lord, are vpon the righteous, and his eares are in their 
                        Aures eius in precibus eorum. Ps. 34 
                           •
                        6. praiers. Hee saies not, their praiers are in his eares, but his eares are in their praiers, To signifie, that though our praiers be so weake, that they cannot pierce through the cloudes, and much lesse enter into the eares of the Lord of Hoastes, yet that hee will bowe downe, & incline his eares vnto our praiers. So that though our praiers cannot bee in his eares, yet his eares shall bee in our praiers. A captaine of the hoast of Israel being cut off by the time, before hee could cut off all his enemies, spake to the sonne, saying, Sunne, stand thou still. This was a temporall thing, euen time it selfe which hee praied for. But there was neuer seene such a day, neither before nor since

wherein the Lord obeyed the voice of a man Ios. 10.14. His praiers were not in the eares of the Lord. They went vp to the sunne, and no further. Yet the eares of the Lord were in his praiers. For the Scripture saies not that the sunne obeyed, but that the Lord obeyed the voice of a man. To signifie, that not onely God himselfe will yeeld vnto vs, but also if the sunne, or any other of his creatures, should refuse to giue vs our asking, yet that hee will command and compell them also, with himselfe to serue vs. And what man then will not obey the voice of the Lord, seeing the Lord will obey the voice of a man? Pharaoh, being plagued with frogs, got the man of God to pray for him, And the Lord did according to the word of Moses 
                     Exod. 8.13. And the Lord obeyed the voice of a man. Moses did according to the word of the Lord. That is plaine. The Lord did according to the word of Moses. That is strange. Yet thus it is. And this it shewes; that if Moses will doe according to the word of the Lord, the Lord will doe according to the word of Moses. If wee will keepe his precepts, he wil fulfil our praiers. Hee will fulfill the desires of

them that feare him, hee also will heare their crie, and will helpe them. I haue cried, saies the Psalmist, because thou hast heard me Psal. 17.6.. One would think he should haue said contrariwise. Thou hast heard me, because I haue cried. Yet he saies, I haue cried, because thou hast heard mee. To shew, that crying, doth not alwaies goe before hearing, with God, as it doth with vs: but that God will not only heare our crie, but also heare vs before we crie, and will helpe vs. And that which is most admirable of all, though it were a thing which once he purposed neuer to giue vs, yet if we aske it, he will reuerse & repeale his owne sentence to pleasure vs. God once repented him, that hee had made man, and said, I will destroy man whom I haue made, from the face of the earth, yet when Noah had built an altar and praied to God Gen. 8.22. The Lord smelled a fauour of rest, and said in his heart, I will not henceforth curse the earth any more for mans cause. God once was so displeased with his people, that he said flatly 
                        No
                              •
                            addam vltra vt liberim vos.
                      I tel you truly I will deliuer you no more. Yet whē they asked a deliuerer of him, his verie soule was grieued within him, for the misery of

Israel, and he gaue them Iephte to deliuer them from their enemies Iudg. 10.16.. God once sent Nathan with this message to Dauid. As the Lord liueth, the man that hath done this thing shall surely die, yet when Dauid had asked forgiuenesse, and saide Haue mercy vpon me, O Lord, after thy great goodnesse & according to the multitude of thy mercies, doe away mine offences; God sent the same prophet with a contrarie message 2. Sam. 12.13.. The Lord hath taken away thy sinne, & thou shalt not die. God once sent Esay with this message to Ezechias, Set thy house in order, for thou shalt die, and not liue, yet when Ezechias had turned him toward the wal, and wept, and praied, & said, O Lord remember howe I haue walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart; God sent the same prophet with a contrarie message, 2. Reg. 20
                           •
                        6. Thus saith the Lord, I haue heard thy praiers and thy te
                        ••••
                      and now behold thou shalt liue and not die. Then did the king reioy
                        •
                      in thy strength O Lord, exceeding glad was hee of thy saluation. For thou didst graunt him his owne desire, and didst not deny him the request of his lips. Hee

asked life of thee, and thou gauest him a longer life, euen fifteene yeeres longer. As also here thou doest promise vs, both for this life, and for all temporall things concerning this, yea though it bee a thing, which once thou hadst purposed neuer to giue vs, Aske, and it shall be giuen you.
                  
                  Yea, not onely God will giue you temporall things, but also you shall find spirituall things. Yet the Church sayes, Can. 3.1. I sought him whome my soule loued: I sought him, and I found him not. But the reason goes before, because shee fought him in her bed: she sought him not with her heart. My soule looeth him, sayes she: yet at that time her heart loued her bed better. Therefore sayes Augustine 
                     
                        Quarite quod quaritis, sed non vbi quaritis.
                      
                     Seeks what you seeke, but seeke not where you seeke. Seeke Christ: thats a good what. Seeke what you seeke. But seeke him not in bed. That is an il where. But seeke not where you seeke. Moses found Christ, not in a soft bed, but in a bramble bush. So that the bed is no fitte place to finde him in, who had not where to rest himselfe. But go into the garden among the humble bushes, and there you shall finde

him not sleeping, but sweating droppes of blood for your redemption, and calling you to him,Math. 11.29. Come vnto mee all you that labour, (not you that lye a bed, and are secure, but you that labour) and are heauy laden, and I will refresh you. Take my yoke vpon you, and you shall finde rest for your soules. If you seeke rest with your hearts, with your soules, you shall find rest for your soules, and that rest also, which is not to be found in the bed of pleasure, but in the yoke of Christ. If thou seekest for this spirituall rest, as for siluer, and search for it, as for treasures,Prou. 2.5. then shalt thou vnderstand the feare of the Lord, & find the knowledge of God. Therefore seeke the Lord, not in the bed of sensuality, but where he may be found. And seeke the Lord while hee may bee found Esay. 55.6. Or rather indeed, though not in what place soeuer, yet at what time so euer wee sinners seeke, we shall be sure to finde him, that sayes, I am found of them that sought mee not Esa. 65.1.. So that no 
                        〈◊〉
                      seeking God, shall returne with a Non o
                           •
                        t inuentus: but we that haue erred and 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     ed like lost sheepe, shall find him, or 
                        •••
                     ther we shall bee found of him before

we seeke him. And that which is most wonderfull of all, we shall not onely finde oftentimes before wee seeke, but also we shall finde much more then wee seeke. That good Centurion 
                     Math. 8.8. sought only one word, Dis verbu
                           〈…〉
                        , sayes he, but he found more. Christ vttered not onely one word whereby his seruant was healed. But also very many words, wherein hee gaue him selfe a most singular praise and commendation for his faith. Dymas the thiefe on the right hand Luk. 23.42. sought onely to bee re
                     
                        ••
                     mb
                        •
                     ed when Christ should come into his kingdome, but he found more. What takest thou of beeing remembred, sayes Christ, as though thou shouldest be farre 
                        ••
                     mme out of my sight? Tush man, I will doe more for the
                        •
                      then so? Thou hast not onely bee remembred, but thou shalt be with me. And why saies thou whē I come into my kingdome? as though it would be a long while first? This very day shalt thou be with me in my kingdom: this day thou shalt be with mee in Paradise. That needy man in the GospelLuk. 11 19 sought onely to borrow three loaues, but he foūd more. God his good friend, bad him welcom at midnight, and did not only lend him, but

frankely and freely giue him, not onely three loaues, but as many as he needed, Hee gaue him as many as he needed. 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      
                     2. Cro. 1.1. sought onely wisedome, but he found more. Seeing he sought first the kingdom of God, and the righteousnesse thereof, all other things besides, were added vnto him. Wherefore if any man want wisdome, or any such spirituall thing, let him with S
                           •
                        lomon seeke it for God, and hee shal finde it. Yea we shall finde infinitely about measure, more then we seeke, or can deuise to seeke of him that saies, Seeke, and ye shall find.
                  
                  Yea, not onely you shall finde spirituall things, but also it shal be opened vnto you, that
                        •
                      for eternall things▪ yet we read that some began to knocke, saying, Luc. 12.24
                     Lord, Lord, open vnto vs, and it was not opened vnto them. But the reason is euident elsewhere. Because they did not knock with their hands. They had, I grant Lampes in their hāds, but they had not oyle, in their lampes. So that all their knocking 
                        〈◊〉
                      but as a sounding brasse, or as a tinckling cimball. Whereas if wee would knocke
                        •
                      purpose indeed, the way w
                        •
                     re, as Christ teacheth vs elsewhere, not to crie, Lo
                        •
                     d,

Lord, but by setting to our hands, to doe and worke the will of our heauenly father. Loe yea, saies Chrysologus,
                     
                        En quam negare nollet, qui sibi etiam neganti, qualiter extorqueretur ostendit.
                      howe loath our good Lord is to deny vs any thing, seeing though hee were neuer so much disposed to keepe vs out, yet here he teacheth vs away, how we may breake open the dores, and presse in vpon him, and get the kingdom of heauen whether he will or no, by the violence and force of faith from him. For there is a great difference betweene Di
                           •
                        es and God, though there be a great agreement betweene Lazarus and vs. Lazarus 
                     Luk. 16 20. was a beggar full of sores: so are we all by nature beggars, standing without, and knocking at the doore. Yea, his body was not so full of sores, as our soule is of sinnes. Lazarus desired to be relieued with the crummes of bread, which fell from the rich mans board: so haue we all needs, God wote, to be refreshed with the crums of mercy, which fall from our masters table, yet in one respect we are better then Lazarus. Is that it was his hard happe, to knocke it the doore of a cruell, a wretched, a miserable caitiffe, who could see no time to 
                        〈◊〉
                      vnto him. But we knocke at the dore

of a most kind, a most liberall, a most mercifull father, who as soone as he heareth, vs rapping with a liuely faith, which worketh by charitie, hath no power to keepe vs out any longer: but presently he openeth vnto vs. And euen a
                        •
                      S. Peter,
                     Act. 3.2. when he saw that lame cripple lying vpon the ground, crauing an almes at the beautifull gate of the temple, said vnto him, Siluer and gold haue none, but such as I haue, health, and recouerie I giue thee: so Christ, when he seeth vs lying prostrate, groueling on the ground b
                        •
                     
                     fore him, & knocking for an almes at the beautifull gate of his holy temple, by and by openeth vnto vs, and giues vs not siluer or gold, or any such corruptible thing, but health and saluation to our soules and all the inestimable riches of his glorie▪ & all the eternall treasures of his kingdome. O that some of you would a litle 
                        •
                     rie whether this be true which I say or no! that you would boūce as hard as euer you can at this beautifull gate, & say with the Psalmist Psal. 44.23. Arise, arise, O Lord, why sleepest thou? I warrāt you, you should heare him answer you in another Psalm.Psal. 12.5. Now for the pitifull cōplaint of the pore, I wil arise▪
                     
saith the Lord; I will sleepe no longer, I will arise and open vnto them. So it was opened to the poore Luk. 18.13. Publican. He went vp to the temple to pray, and when hee came thither, hee knocked his breast and said, Lord, be mercifull vnto me a sinner. Therefore the dore of mercie was opened vnto him, and he went home, euen into heauen his long home, more iustified in the sight of God, then that other which iustified himselfe. So was it opened to S. Steuen 
                     Act. 7.56. He was brought out to be stoned. But when hee came forth, the very stones could not knocke him so hard, as his praier knockt heauen gate, when as he said, Lord Iesus let me in, Lord Iesus receiue my spirit. Therefore the gate was opened vnto him. Hee saw the heauen opened, and Iesus standing at the right hand of God, where hee within a while after, should sit himselfe. So was it opened to King Psal. 118.19. 
                     Dauid. He knockt very imperiously, not like a petitioner, but like a cōmander. Lift vp your heads, ô ye gates, & be ye lift vp ye euerlasting doores, that the King of glory may come in. Open vnto mee the gate of the righteous, that I may enter in & praise the Lord. And whē
                     
the gate was opened, as hee was entring in, he pointed to it, and said, This is the gate of the righteous, the lust shall enter 
                        •
                     nto it. So it was opened to S. Paul: 
                     Act. 16.26. He was cast downe into the very lowest dungeon. All the chaines of darknes, and euen hell it selfe, could not haue held him faster, then that dungeon did, yet at midnight, when he praied and knockt, suddenly all the prison dores flew open
                     ▪ yea al the dores of the heauen likewise stood open, and that which is most maruellous of all, they stood so wide open, that not onely S. Paul himselfe went in, but also Stephana
                           •
                        
                      the iayler, and his whole houshold, whome hee at that time conuerted and baptized, did enter in with him, So that all, all eternall things are ours, & nothing nothing can preuaile against vs, if wee knocke as we ought. Not the brasen gates of hell to shut vs in, nor the golden gates of heauen to shut vs out. For Christ hath saide here, Knocke, and it shall be opened vnto you. Thus much for the second part, what God for one praier will performe to vs in these words, And it shall be giuen you, and you shall finde, and it shall be opened vnto you,
                  
                  
                     Now then my deare brethren, giue me leaue, I beseech you, to speake vnto you, me, I say, that am the seruant of God, and your seruant for God, as Naaman the Sytians seruants sayd vnto him. Father, say they, if the Prophet had commaundeth thee a great thing, wouldst thou not haue done it? how much more, then when hee sayeth vnto thee, Wash and bee cleane? Brethren, I say, if he that is more then a Prophet, had commaunded you a great thing, would you not haue done it? how much more then when hee sayeth vnto you, Wash and be cleane, Aske, and it shall bee giuen you? Hee desires to be des
                        ••
                     ed. And he hath not his owne will, except we haue ours. But we may haue what we will for asking, God doth ask no more of vs, but onely that we would vouchsafe to aske him. Doe no more sayes he, but aske and haue: Doe no more bu
                        •
                      seeke, and finde: Do no more but knocke, and enter in. O how easily, and yet how powerfully doth prayer worke? It ouer commeth all Beastes, The Leuiathan. the strength of all Gods creatures, was so subdued by prayer, that whereas otherwise he might haue beene a gulfe to swallowe

vp Ionas quicke, and for euer to deuo
                        ••
                      him, hee 
                        〈…〉
                      shippe to saue him. It ouercommeth all men▪ 
                     Iacob giueth Ioseph one portion aboue hi
                        •
                      brethren, which 
                        〈◊〉
                      of the 
                        〈◊〉
                     , by his sword and by his bow, but the Chalde
                        •
                      Paraphrast translates it. By 
                           〈…〉
                        , and by my supplica
                           ••••
                        . Which translati
                        ••
                      proueth, that prayer is the sword, and supplication is 
                        〈◊〉
                      bowe of a Christian, wherewith he subdueth all his enemies. It ouercommeth the Diuell himselfe. Prayer and fasting are the chiefest 
                        〈◊〉
                      to cast him out: If we resist him by praier, he will flie from vs. Yea the most silly beast in all the forrest, is not so much affrighted and amazed, when a lyon ro
                        •
                     
                     reth, as this cowardly beast the diuell is diu
                        •
                     t
                        •
                     d and terrified, when a Christian prayeth. What shall I say more? It ouercommeth him that cannot be ouercome, making the Virgins sonne stoupe downe, and c
                        •
                     ndiscend vnto vs. I pray thee let mee goe sayes he, to one that wrastled with him all the night long by praier. If thou wilt bee a suter to God, God wil be 
                        •
                      suter to thee. If thou wilt pray vnto God God will pray vnto thee. I pray thee sayes

he, let me goe. But what doth Israell answere? I will not let thee go, except thou blesse me. No will? It is not belike now as God will, but as man wil. God is taken captiue by prayer, and become a prisoner to man, and stands at his curtesie, who sayes, I will not let thee goe, except thou blesse me. And that which is more then all this, if more may be, praier ouercommeth God; not onely being well pleased▪ as he was with Israel, when any child may deale with him, but also being displeased as he was with the Israelites, whē no man may come neere him, whē his wrath burneth as fire, ween he thunders from heauen and teares the cloudes in peeces, and cleanes the rockes asunder, and shakes s
                        ••
                     d & sea together, and makes the whole earth in a trembling fitte of feare, flie away from him. Yet if some Moses doe but stand vp in the gap and pray, all this omnipotent power shall come to nothing: God shall not be able though he be neuer so angry, to enter vpon the breach, but praier shall haue the victorie, and get the cōquest of him. Wherfore beloued, once againe I say, let vs alwayes intrench our selues within this inuincible bulwarke of

praier. Our whole life alas, as wee haue made it by sinne, is most miserable. There is no man aliue, if hee had known before hee was borne, what miseries would haue befallen him in this life, but would haue wished I warrant you, with all his heart, that which was the Wombe of his birth, had beene the tombe for his buriall. But in all the calamities of this life, our onely comfort is prayer. In al
                        •
                      the afflictions of this life, our onely fortresse is praier. Prayer, whereby wee 
                        〈◊〉
                      oftentimes in spirite with the Apostle, rapt vp into the third heauen, where wee that are otherwise but Wormes, walke with the Angels, and euen continually talke with God. Hence it is, that holie men and women in former times, could neuer haue enough of thi
                        •
                      exercise. Nazianzene in his Epitaph for his sister Gorgonia writeth, that shee was so giuen to praier, 
                        Vt genua terre contreuerint
                      that her knees seemed to cleaue to the earth, and to grow to the very ground, by reason of continuance in prayer. Gregorie in his Dialogues writeth, that his aunt Trasilla beeing dead, was found to haue her elbowes as hard as horne. Which hardnesse she got by leaning

to a deske, at which shee vsed to pray, Eusebius in his historie writeth, that lawes the brother of our Lord, had knees as hard as camels knees, benummed and bereaued of all sense and feeling, by reason of continuall kneeling in praier. Hierom in the life of Paul the Eremite, writeth, that he was found dead, kneeling vpon his knees, holding vp his hands, lifting vp his eies
                        Etiam cadauer mortui officioso gestu precabatur.
                     . So that the very dead corps seemed yet to liue and by a kinde of religious gesture to pray still vnto God. O how happy and how blessed, was that soule without the body, when as that body without the soule was so deuout. O that wee may bee, that wee may bee likewise, so happie and so blessed as this holy man was, that wee may depart hence, in such sort as he did, that is, in such sort as Christ did, who died in praier, saying, Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit, that our Lord when he commeth, may finde vs so doing, that when wee shall lie vpon our death-bed, gasping for breath, readie to giue vp the ghost, then the precious soule of euery one of vs, redeemed with the precious blood of Christ, may passe away in a

prayer, in a secret and sweete praier, may passe I say, out of Adams body, into Abrahams, bosome; Through the tender mercies of Iesus Christ, to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all honour and glory, power and praise, dignity and dominion, now and euermore. Amen.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  THE SICK-MANS COVCH.
                  A SERMON PREACHED before the most noble Prince HENRIE at Greenewich, Mar. 12. An. 1604.
                  BY THOMAS PLAYFERE Professor of Diuinity for the Lady MARGARET in Cambridge.
                  Printed at London by Iohn Legatt, Printer to the Vniuersitie of Cambridge. 1617.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE RIGHT Honourable my very good Lord, Sir Edward Denny, Knight Baron of Waltham, grace and peace.
                  
                     
                        
                           RIght Honourable, beeing appointed to preach the last La
                              ••
                           , I deliuered so much as filled vp the ordinary time of an houre: but that was scarce halfe this Sermon. I vttered no more, to auoid the offence of the hearer; I write 
                              ••
                            lesse, to procure the profit of the reader. For as tediousnes without regard of due time, especially in so high a presence, soonest offendeth: so f
                              •
                           l
                              •
                           es, where the reader may peruse more or lesse at his pleasure and leisure, best of all edifieth. Therefore I thought good in publishing this Sermon rather to inlarge it to the comprehension I had conceiued and meditated in my minde, then to scans it according to that strict compasse of time which I was 
                              ••
                           ed to in the pulpit. For by this meanes all that will

vouchsafe to looke into it, may make their profit thereby. They fi
                              •••
                           h were present by vttering the whole, whereas they heard but halfe: they which were absent, by hauing the preachers meaning, though they bee vnacquainted with his affection. And yet perhaps it may please God to blesse this poore exercise to diuers heauenly minded men in such sort, as they may take occasion by some things here inti
                              •••
                           ted, not onely to conceiue 
                              •
                           ore then they find di
                              •
                           rectly specified, but also to 
                              •
                           e 
                              •
                           ore di
                              ••••
                           ely inspired & sweetly affected, thē it pleased God in vouchsafe 
                              〈◊〉
                            of his grac
                              •
                            either at the preaching or 
                              〈◊〉
                            of us. Howsoeuer, seeing this discourse exhorteth principally to repen
                              •••
                           nts and patience in the time of sicknes, & to a preparation of our selues by a good life vnto a happie death, which is a doctrine most necessarie in this great mortality, that hath lately bin, and is yet feared: especially also for that the great
                              ••
                            part of it. I neuer preached any where, but onely penned in my study, I thought my selfe so farre bound in duty to this blessed Church wherein wee liue, as not to hide it in a napkin, but according to the Apostles rule, if I haue found comfort my selfe by some medita
                              •
                           tions here opened, then to comfort them that are afflicted by the same comfort wherewith

                           
                              〈◊〉
                            our selues haue bin comforted of God. And bethinking wee of one vnder whose protection it might passe in publicke, I thought best to make bold with your Lordship. For though all sorts peraduenture may bee fitted with some thing or other in this pla
                              •••
                            sermon, which they may make vse of, yet those I am sure will conne me most thanke for my well meaning endeauour, which haue had most experience and triall of Gods louing mercies in this kind. Now your good Lordship hauing bin deliuered more then once or twice from dangerous sickenesse, 
                              〈◊〉
                            learned such patience, such meekenesse, such vnfeined repentance, such true mortification: such assurance of Gods loue, such confidence in Christ, such other good vertues of a right sanctified spirit, by this fatherly visitation of the Lord which is not wanting, euen oftentimes to his dearest childrē, as you could neuer haue learned, at least wise in the same measure, in health. Besides, I haue bin so especially beholding to your honour, euen since you were first of S. Iohns colledge, that I could not satisfy my selfe with the inward duty and thankfulnesse towards you which I haue euer faithfully laid vp in my breast, except I also shewed the same by some such outward testimony, as might cleare mee to you and the world of vngratefulnes.

Wherefore I doe so presume to dedicate this small labour to your good acceptance, as withall I heartily desire all those that shall receiue edification thereby, to pray together with me for the continuance of your Lordships good health and well s
                              •••
                           , that long you may euen in this world enioy this your 
                              〈◊〉
                            honourable addition, and all 
                              ••
                           her good gifts of God, and fauours of our gratious Soueraign
                              •
                            to the benefit of this Church, and 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           wealth.
                        
                           From Cambridge the 28. of 
                                    〈◊〉
                                 , 1605.
                              
                           
                           
                              Your Lordships euer to command, Thomas Playfore.
                        
                     
                  
                  The quotations in the margent with figures, were, or should haue bin, deliuered at the preaching: the rest with letters, are only for the printing.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  THE SICKE Mans Couch.
                  
                     
                        PSAL. 6. VER. 6.
                     
                     
                        I water my Couch with my teares.
                     
                  
                  
                     NOthing is more delightsome then the seruice of God, and loue of Vertue: nothing more full of griefe & sorrow, then sinne, Gods commaundements are not heauie 1. Ioh. 5.3 yea, his yoke is easie, and his burden light Mat. 11.30.. On the other side, how deepely sinne woundeth the very conscience, the Heathen Orator confesseth, saying, I will not buy repentance so deare 
                        Non emam tanti paenitere Demosth.
                     . Agreeable to that of the Apostle, What fruite haue you of those things, whereof you are now ashamed?

For the end of those thinges is death Rom. 6.21. Looke how the Israelites 
                        ••
                     
                     ried themselues in clay and bricke, without any profite or reward, nay when they had done their very best, they were by Pharaos Taskemasters well beaten for theyr painesExod. 5.14.
                     ▪ E
                        •••
                      so the world, the flesh, the diuell, as rigorous taskemasters incite men to sinne, but all the reward they yeeld them, is onely mortall & immortall griefe. And as the sea roareth & foameth, and neuer is at rest Esa. 57.20, after the same sort, the wicked are like the raging sea, foaming out their 
                        〈…〉
                      shame Epist. Iud. 13, and neuer rest, till hauing made shipwracke of faith 1 Tim. 6.9., they bee drowned in perdition and destruction. They which worship the beast, haue no rest day nor night Reu. 14.11.. Now what beast so cruell as sin? which not only killeth the body, as a beast doth but slayeth the soule Sap. 1.11., yea, it destroyeth both body and soule in hell Math. 10.20. Therefore this indeed is the beast, which depriueth all those that serue it▪ of liberty and rest. Of whome the Prophet Ieremie writeth thus; Ier. 9.5. They haue taught their tongues to speake lyes, and they take great paines so doe wickedly.
                  
                     This, holy King Dauid had good experience of. Namely, that in sinne, there is nothing but sorrowes and paines, For lying here sicke in his bed Hereupon I entitle this Sermon. The sicke mans Couch., and feeling this same sicknesse to bee a stroke of gods heauy hand for his offence, hee cries God heartily mercy and sayes. Haue mercie vpon me, O Lord, for I am weake: O Lord heale me, for my bones are vexed. My soule also is sore troubled, but Lord how long wilt thou delay? Now that his soule is sore troubled, he proueth in this present verse; I am wearie of my groanings, euery night I wash my bed, & water my couch with my teares. The soule must needes be sore troubled, which is so grieuously tormented. Especially in the wordes of my Text, by three notable amplifications, he sheweth how serious and syncere his repentance is. First, saies he, Not onely I wash, but also I water: secondly, Not onely my bed, but also my Couch: thirdly, not only with my groanings, but also with my teares. I water my couch with my teares.
                  
                  These will be very godly and ghostly meditations. The rather, in this time of Lent. Onely the worst, I doubt, will bee

mine. For that hauing discoursed at large of this doctrine elsewhereIn the sermon intituled The meane in mourning., I can not now cull out the choisest matter, 
                        〈◊〉
                      must bee faine to gather together such fragments as were then left. I water my couch with my teares.
                  
                  The first amplification is in this word, I water. Not onely I wash, but also I water. The faithfull sheepe of the great Shepheard, goe vp from the washing place euery one bringing forth twinnes, and 
                        〈◊〉
                      barren among them Cant. 4.2.. For so I 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      sheepe hauing conceiued at the watering troughes, brought forth strong & 
                        〈◊〉
                      coloured lambes Gen. 30.38.. Dauid likewise who before had erred and strayed like a lost sheepe Ps. 119. vlt., making here his bed a washing place, by so much the lesse is barren in obedience, by how much the more hee is fruitfull in repentance. In Salo
                           •••
                        
                      temple stood ten Caldrons of brasse to wash the flesh of those beasts which were to be sacrificed on the Altar 1. Reg. 7.38. Sal
                           ••••
                        s Father, maketh a water of his teares, a caldron of his bed, an Altar of his heart, a sacrifice, not of the flesh of vnreasonable beasts, but of his owne body, a liuing sacrifice, which is his reasonable seruing

of God Rom. 12.1.. Now the Hebrew word 
                        Askeh.
                      here vsed, signifies properly, To cause to swimme, which is more, then simply to wash. And thus the Geneua translation readeth it, I cause my bedde euery night to swimme. So that as the Priests vsed to swimme in the molten Sea 1. Reg. 7.27., that they might bee pure and cleane, against they performed the holy rites and seruices of the temple: in like manner the princely prophet washeth his bedde, yea hee swimmeth in his bedde, or rather hee causeth his bedde to swimme in teares, as in a sea of griefe and penitent sorrow, for his sin. Neither were this so much to bee wondered at, but that he frames the amplification thus; Not onely I wash, but also I water. Watering in Scripture is attributed to sundry things. The holy Ghost watereth. Except a man bee borne againe of water, and of the holy Ghost Iohn 3.5. because the holy Ghost purgeth & cleanseth like water. The word watereth. Paul planteth, Apollo watereth, but God giues the increase 1. Cor. 3.6.. Baptisme watereth. Which was prefigured in the water of Noahs flood 1. Pet. 3.21., and more plainely in the water that came out of Christs side Ioh. 19.34. Repentance

watereth. As in this place, I water my couch with my teares▪ Out of Eden went a riuer to water the gardenGen. 2.10. but Dauids eyes gush out many riuers of water Ps. 119.130, to water his couch with his teares. As in Sicilia there is a fountaine called Fons Solis, out of which at mid day when the sunne is nearest, floweth colde water, at midnight when the Sunne is farthest of, floweth hot water 
                        Pomponius Mela.
                     : so the Patriarch Dauids head is full of water
                     Ierem. 9.7. and his eyes a fountaine of teares, who when hee enioied his health, as the warm sun shine, was colde in confessing his sinnes, but being now visited with sicknesse, his reines chastising him in the night season Psalm. 16.7., is so sore troubled and withall so hotte and so feruent, that euery night hee washeth his bedde, & watereth, nay euen melteth his couch with teares. For this Hebrewe word 
                        Amseh
                     , is diuersely translated also as well as the other. The best learned interpretors
                        Bucerus Tremellius, & alii
                      translate it Liquefacio, I melt. And then the meaning is, I water my Couch so thoroughly, that I make it melt with my teares. We see yee and snow swim a while in the water, but anon after they melt

away: right so the holy kings heart in middest of his breast is euen as melting waxePsal. 22.14., yea his very couch beeing rensed and steeped in teares, melteth away as snowe before the sunne. Neither yet doth hee thinke himselfe cleane enough for all this, but still bewailing his offence, hee saies with blessed Iob,
                     Iob. 9.30. Though I wash my selfe with snow water, and purge my hands most cleane, yet shalt thou pl
                        ••
                     ge mee in the pitte, and mine owne 
                        ••
                     o
                        •
                     ths shall make me filthie.
                  Hence wee may learne two special points for our instruction. One is, that our repentance must bee continuall. For the Psalmist hauing said before, 
                        Laboraui in gemitu meo
                      I haue been weary of my gronings, addes hereat the last, 
                        Stratum meum rigabo vulg.
                      
                     I will water my couch with my teares. I haue bin weary; and, I will be weary. or, I haue watered, and I will water: implyes a perpetuity of repentance. Wee read it commonly in the Psalme thus: The mouth of all wickednesse shall be stoppedPsal. 107 42.. Which is true, first in this life: where seeing before their eyes so many examples of Gods prouidence & protection ouer his children, if they will not praise him, yet they shall be

forced will they nill they, at least wise to hold their peace, and not blaspheme him. Then at the day of iudgement. For that guest, who when the king asked him, why he wanted a wedding garment, was altogether speachlesMat. 22.12., though hee be 
                        〈◊〉
                      one, yet is a patterne of all, and sheweth what a pitifull case all the wicked shal be in at that day, when their mouthes shall be stopped, hauing not a word to say for themselues. But it might as wel out of the originall bee translated thus; 
                        Kaphcizah. Hebr. 
                              •
                           heassemath. Chald. Omnis iniquitas contrahitos. suum Muscul. Oppilabit: in margine, Oppilauit Vulg.
                     . The mouth of all wickednes is stopped. For foolish men are plagued for their offences, and because of their iniquitiesVers. 17.. Because they rebell against the words of the Lord, and lightly regard the councell of the most highVers. 11.. Therefore many times their fruitfull land maketh hee barren for the wickednes of them that dwel therin. Vers. 34. Yet so foolish are they, that they will not once open their mouth to confesse, either their owne wickednesse, or Gods goodnes. Their mouthes are so stopped, that they will neither cry to the Lord in their trouble, that so they may be deliuered from their distresse, nor yet when they are deliuered, praise the Lord for

his goodnesse, and declare the wonders that hee doth for the children of men. The stopping of their mouth then, is a double, both sinne in them, and punishment to them. A double sinne, because they open it not, to crie vnto the Lord for deliuerance, or to reioyce in the Lord, and to praise him after deliuerance. A double punishment, because for their not praysing God, their mouthes shall be so stopt that yet they shall not blaspheme him, and for their not dispraysing themselues, and confessing their sinnes, and repenting, and crying to God for pardon, they shall haue nothing, though they would neuer so faine, at the last to say for themselues. Whereby we see that wicked mens mouthes shall be stopped, because they haue bin stopped. Seeing if they had bin open in this life to accuse their owne selues for their sinnes, then they should be open also at the day of iudgement, being excused by the Lord. But, because they haue bin stopt here to couer theyr sinne, therefore they shall be stopt hereafter to discouer theyr shame. Now if the wicked shall haue hard happe hereafter, when their mouthes shall be stopped, because

they haue hard hearts here, where their mouthes haue been stopped: then consequently the godly must at no time stop, eyther their mouthes from confessing, or their eyes from bewailing their sinnes, Tertullian 
                     
                        Dr Poeni. tenteā. In fine
                      sayeth of himselfe that hee is 
                        Omnium notarum peccator
                      a notorious sinner 
                        Et nulli rei nisi poenitentiae natus.
                      and borne for nothing but for repentance, he that is Omnium notarum peccatur, soyled with euery sinne, must be O
                           〈…〉
                        
                        rum poenitens, assoyled euery houre of his sinne. And he that is borne for nothing but for repentance, must practise repentance as long as he liues in this world, into which he is borne. Not sayes Hilary, 
                     In Psa. 135. Quod peccandum semper sit, confitendum.
                     , as though wee should continually sinne, that we might continually repe
                        •
                     t 
                        Sed quia peccati veteris & antiqui vtilis sit inde fessa confessio.
                     , but because it is very behoofefull for vs, that that sinne, which we know well is already released by the Lord, should yet still be confessed by vs. For by this meanes, the merites of Christ are continually imputed vnto vs, which wee by our sins had iustly deserued to bee depriued of: & moreouer, though in some sort we be sure of pardon already, yet the daily exercise of true repentance maketh our vocation and election more & more

sure vnto vs 2. Pet. 1.10,. In this sense the Psalmist sayes againe Psal. 22.5. Notu
                              •
                            faciam non absc
                              ••
                           di.
                     , I will acknowledge my sinne, and mine iniquity. I haue not hid, I haue not stopt my mouth, and I will not stop my mouth: I haue not hidde mine iniquity, and I will not hide mine iniquity; a continuall repentance. As it is here also, I haue bin weary, and I wil be wearie, I haue watered, and I will water: I water my couch with my teares.
                  
                  The other point which we may hence learne, is this, That our repentance must alwayes be ioyned with a purpose of new obedience. I haue him wearie of my groanings, saies hee, that he is sure of, and that that is past. But though he haue bin wearie, yet indeed he is not wearie, seeing he purposeth twice as much as hee hath performed. For, for one performance Laborans, that is past, here are two purposes. Lanab
                           •
                        , and Rigab
                           •
                        , that are to come. I haue done it already, sayes he, so, so, but if I liue longer, I will doe it oftner, and better. I will wash my bed, and I will water my couch with my teares. So that the greatest righteousnesse of the saints in this life, consisteth rather in a dayly deploring of their sinnes, and in a faithfull purpose to

amend, then in any eminent and absolute perfection 
                        Nostrae iustitia tanta est in hac vita, vt potius Peccatorū remissione constet, quam perfectione virtutum, August. de Ciuit Dei. l. 19. c. 27.. Not that we ought to serue God by halfes as it were, with purposes and intents, but that hereby the vnperfitnes of our obedience may appeare, which though it be as much as wee can doe, considering the weaknes of our abilitie, yet it is not halfe so much as wee ought to doe, considering the excellencie of Gods law. Wherefore I shew now, not what should be, but what is, because the best obedience of ours that is, is not so much as the least part of that which should be. Harken I pray you attentiuely to that which S. Paul writethRom. 7.19
                     ▪ To will is present with me: but I finde no meanes to performe that which is good. For the good which I would doe, that do I not: but the euill which I would not doe, that doe I. Now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that doe it, but sinne that dwelleth in me. Where the Apostle plainely distinguisheth betweene these two, to will good, and to performe good. And the one he sayth is present with him but the other he can no where find. Now if so chosen a vessellAct. 9.15, will much more good, then he can performe, than questionlesse

wee that are farre inferiour, please God, rather by a willing purpose to doe good, then by any full performance of that which we purpose. Againe, whereas he sayes▪ If I do that I would not, it is no more I that doe it, but sinne that dwelleth in mee; he meaneth not to excuse or extenuat his fault any way, but to shew that the principall scope and intent of his heart is to serue the law of God, howsoeuer contrarie to his intent by the violence of his flesh, hee be drawne to serue sinne. And therefore he sayes, The good which I would, that doe I not: but the euill which I would not, that doe I. Insinuating hereby, that the regenerate man being not wholly flesh, nor wholly spirit, but partly flesh, and partly spirit, as hee is spirit would do that good, which as he is flesh hee doth not, and as he is flesh doth that euill, which as hee is spirit, he would not. Which makes him also say Act. 24.16 
                     Studee, I studie, or I endeauour my selfe to ha
                        •
                     e alway a cleare conscience, towarde God and man. Hee speaketh not of his Apostleship▪ in which he was immediately inspired, and continually directed by the spirit. For touching that hee saies elsewhere

                     
                        Nihil mihi conscius sū.
                     . I am guiltie to my selfe of nothing 1. Cor. 44.. But out of the compasse of his Apostolicall calling, hee dares not warrant that hee hath a cleare conscience euery manner of way, but onelie that he studieth or endeuoureth to haue a cleare conscience, So his fellow Disciple Ba
                           •
                        
                        nabas exhorteth them of Antioch, that with purpose of heart, they would cleaue vnto the Lord Act. 11.23. For as long as wee liue in this Tabernacle, sinne cleaueth so fast to vs Heb. 12.1, that wee can not constantly cleaue vnto the Lord 1 Cor. 7.35. Notwithstanding at least wise in purpose of heart it is good for vs to shake off all sinne, & onelie to hold vs fast vnto God Psalm. 73.28. But this our Prophet, euen in one Psalms, to wit, the hundred and nineteenth, affoordeth vs manie pregnant Testimonies to this truth. Verse 112 I haue applyed my heart to fulfill thy statutes alwaies, euen vnto the end. Though he cannot fulfill Gods law as well as he would, yet as hard as he possiblie can he plies it, and applies his hart to it Verse 57.. O Lord thou art my portion, I haue determined to keepe thy wordes. Marke yee this. He cannot say, hee hath euer kept the word of God in deed, but

yet because his hearts desire is earnestly bent that way, hee saies; I haue determined to keepe thy wordes. 106. ver▪
                      I haue sworne and am steadfastly resolued, to keepe thy righteous iudgements. O louing heart to God. O loathing heart to his sinnes. O zealous, O fiery wordes. I haue sworne, and am stedfastly resolued to keepe thy righteous iudgements. Iuraus & Sta
                        
                           •••
                        . This iuror hauing sworne himselfe to Gods statutes to keepe them, yet is the fore man of the quest to giue in a verdit against his owne selfe, that he hath not kept them. So that Dauids Statu
                           •
                        
                      is all one with Pauls stude
                           •
                        , and therfore though wee may perhaps, and alas, do daily (God forgiue vs) transgresse these righteous iudgements, yet our holy oath, our solemne vow, our assured promise, our stedfast resolution, is, I hope, I am sure ought to bee, to the contrary. For after our first conuersion and vnfained repentance, as wee can neuer satisfie God, so we must neuer satisfie our selues. Seeing the best thing that is in vs, is no great performance of any good, God wot, but

only a ready will to doe good: a studious endeauour to haue a cleare conscience: a purpose of the heart to cleaue vnto the Lord: an applying of the heart, to fulfill Gods statutes: a setled determination to keepe Gods words: a steadfast resolution to keep▪ Gods righteous iudgements. As we may see in this place. Lab
                           •
                        r
                           ••
                        is, I haue bin weary of my groanings. That is true. I but I purpose to doe much more hereafter. Lauabo and Rigab
                           •
                        . I will wash my bed, and I will water my couch. I water my couch with my teares.
                  
                  The second amplification is in this word, my couch. Not onely my bed, but also my couch. The bed is a place of rest. Especially that florishing bed
                     
                        Floridus lectulus. Cant. 1.15., where in the heauenly husband giueth his well-beloued sleepe Psal. 12.7.3 Yet as the darkenesse is no darkenes to God, but day and night are both alike to himPsal. 137.12 so the bed is no bed to Dauid, but it and out of it, to him are all one. Therefore hee may well complaine with poore afflicted Iob
                     Iob. 7.15; when I say, my couch shall relieue mee, and my bedde shall bring comfort in my meditation, then fearedst thou mee with dreames, and astonished me with visions.

Now the fearefullest vision of all, which most astonishes him, and holds his eies wakingPsal. 88.9., and enforce him to wash his bed with his teares, is the horrible sight and grieuous remembrance of his sinnes. Neuerthelesse the amplification is much enlarged by that he saies, not onely my bed, but also my couch. For there is as I take it, a double difference betweene these two. First, a bedde to sleepe in by night: a couch is to sleepe vpon in the day time. As Mephihosheth at noone in the heate of the day slept vpon a couch, 
                     2. Sam. 4.5. And Dauid in the afternone rose from sleeping on his couch
                     2. Sam. 12.2, when he first saw V
                           ••
                        ahs wife. Then againe, a bed is standing and higher: a Couch is like a pallet, either vpon the bare flower, or els very neare it. As in Salomons bed chamber, Cant. 3.10. the bedde was of golde, the couch whereby he stept vp to his bed, of purple, 
                        Reclinatorium aureum, Ascensus purpureus.
                     
                     Dauid also saith, Psal. 132. I will not climbe vp into the bed of my couch
                     
                        Non ascendam in lectum strati mei
                      as much to say as, into that bed, to which I ascend by a pallet or couch. So that his soule no question was sore troubled, whenas lying sicke in bed he wept so aboundantly, that with his teares, not onely hee wash his

bed wherein he himselfe lay, but watred his couch also, which couch lay beneath or beside his bed. That pretious oyntment was sure very liquid, which did runne downe from Aarons head to the skirts of his garments. Psal. 133.2. That current of teares was very swift, which streaming from Marie Magdalens face, was sufficient to wash Christs feet Luk. 7 38. That bloody sweate was very painfull,Luk. 22.44. which bathed our Lords body all ouer, and besides trickled downe 
                        Descendentes in terram.
                      to the ground. Axa requested her father Caleb to giue her a blessing. For saith shee, thou hast giuen mee the south countrey, giue mee also springs of water. And he gaue her Ios. 15.19 Irriguum sup
                              •
                           
                           rius, & irriguum inferius.
                      the springs aboue, and the springs beneath. This same blessing and gift Dauid likewise had here obtained of God. For his washt bed was a spring aboue, and his watred couch a spring beneath. Euen as the ointment, vpon Aarons head was a spring aboue, vpon the skirts of his garments a spring beneath: and the teares, vpon Maries fact were a spring aboue, vpon Christs 
                        〈◊〉
                      a spring beneath: and the sweate, vpon our Lords bodie was a spring aboue, vpon the ground a spring beneath. So here,

I say, is, irriguum supirius, & irriguum inferius, a spring aboue, and a spring beneath: I wash my bed, and water my couch with my teares.
                  
                  Hence wee may learne one very excellent good lesson. That we ought in the same kinde and sort as we haue sinned, if it bee possible, to make some part of amends for our sin. Dauid had hainously transgressed against God vpon his couch, where hee committed adulterie. Therefore that in the selfe same place, where before hee had bin ouercome by the diuell, he might erect an eternall monument of his victorie and triumph ouer the diuill, he saies here; I water my couch with my teares. In the very same couch God is as highly now honored, as he was before offended. Because Dauid did before pollute it by adulterie, but now he doth sanctifie it by repentance. So the Israelites Exod. 35, 23.), once pluckt off their earings to make a golden calfe; but anon after, repenting them, they offered their earings to the building of the temple. And so with the same Iewels, wherewith they did erect Idolatrie, now they maintaine Gods seruice. Zacheus 
                     Luk 19.8 beeing a Publican, no

doubt got much of his goods by plaine bribery and extortion: but long after, here stored all againe fourefold, and sp
                        •
                     nt of his wealth very frankly & boun
                     
                        •
                     ifully, to giue Christ a friendly welcome, and kinde entertainement in his house. That sinnefull woman Luk. 7.38. of whome I spake euen nowe, neuer tooke halfe so much delight in entising her louers with her beautifull lockes, as now shee is glad with all her heart to wipe the very 
                        〈◊〉
                      of our Sauiour with them. A worthy example of this we haue in 
                        〈…〉
                     . Archbishop Cranmer See Master Fox his book of Martyrs. of blessed memory, could neuer satisfie his conscience after his recantation, till hee had 
                        〈◊〉
                      that hand to ashe
                        •
                      which subscribed. And so hee tooke a holy reuenge of himselfe, as Saint Paul willeth vs 2. Cor. 7.11 by suffering i
                        •
                      a manner two martyrdomes, one after the other. One, which he put himselfe to, by burning first his right hand: the other, which the Papists put him to, by burning afterward his whole body. And so that constant and faithfull right hand of his neuer so much dishonoured God by his subscription with inke to the bil, as he did honour God by his inscription with

bloud in the fire. The Apostles wordes are generall,Rom. 6.10. As you haue giuen your members seruants to vncleannes to commit iniquity, so now giue your members seruants vnto righteousnes in holines. Euen as the Israelites gaue their Iewels, & Zacheus gaue his goods, and Marie gaue her hayre: and Cranmer gaue his hand. Yet we read 
                        Euseb. histo. Eccles. 6. c. 8. that Origen made himselfe an Eunuch: Democrites put out his own eyes: Crates cast his money into the sea: Thracius cut downe all his vines. Dauid did not so. Hee kept the same Couch still, and onely changde his mind. As for Origen, strange it is, that peruerting so many other places by Allegories, onely he should peruert one place, by not admitting an Allegorie. For our Lord commanding to cut off the foote, or any part of the body which offendeth vs Marke 9.47, doth not meane wee should cut it off with a knife, but with a holy and a mortified life. Therefore Origen was iustly punished by vsing too little diligence, where there was great need, because he vsed too great diligence where there was litle need 
                        Ita eu
                              •
                           uit, vt cum aliquid vbi non oporte
                              •
                            ad hibetur, illi
                              •
                            vbi oportet neg ligatur. Tertul. libro de Poenniten initio.
                     . How much better did Ioseph, 
                     Gen. 39.10.who being assaulted by Putiphars wife, did not

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
any waie maime himselfe, but still kept his body vndefiled as the temple of the holy ghost: And so pleased God, as well then in chast single life, as in chast matrimonie afterwards. What should I say of Democritus, who was blinded before hee was blinde? Tertullian writeth thus of him, 
                        In Apolog c. 45. Democritus excoecando seipsum incontinentiam emē
                           datione profitetur.
                      
                     Democritus putting out his owne eyes, doth by that verie remedie which hee vseth against incontinencie, professe the greatest incontinencie of all. 
                        At Christianus saluis oculis faminā videt, animo aduersus libidi nes coecus est.
                      But a Christian neede not put out his eyes for feare of seeing a woman: for howsoeuer his bodilie eye see, yet still his hart is blinde against all vnlawfull desires. Here Tertullian vseth two very pithie and graue reasons. One is this; The putting out of the eyes is not a bridle to restraine incontinencie, but rather to marke to descrie it. For hee that doth so, in a manner openly confesseth, concupiscence so raigneth in him Rom. 6.12. that hee can by no kinde of meanes resist it, but by a violent boaring out of his owne eyes. The other is this, The fault is not in the eye, but in the heart. Therefore to put out the eye, is to make cleane but the outside of the platterLuk. 11▪39.. For if

the affection of the heart bee well ordered, the sight of the eye need not be feared. Iust L
                           •
                        t euery day seeing the vnlawfull deedes of the Sodomites 2. Pet. 2.8 was grieued with it, but not endaungered by it. For he said no doubt with holy Iob, 
                     Iob. 31.1. I haue made a couenant with mine eies, not to looke vpon a maide. Now Crates T
                           •
                        ebanu
                           •
                        
                      was not well aduised neyther, who did cast his money into the sea, saying, 
                        Ego merga vos, ne ipse mergar a vobis
                      Nay sore I will drowne you first in the sea, rather then you should drowne me in couetousnesse and care. Lactantius reasoneth with him thus, 
                        Institut. l. 3. c. 23. Si tantus pecuni
                              •
                            contemptus est, fac illam beneficium, fac humanitatem, largire pauperibus.
                      If thou contemn money so much, then do good with it, shew thy liberalitie by it, bestow it on the poor. 
                        Potest hoc quod perditurus es multi, succurrere, nefame, aut sut, aut auditate moriantur.
                      This money that thou art rea
                        •
                     e to cast into the sea, might releeue a great many, that they perish not, by hunger or thirst, or nakednesse. The sum of his argument is this: Fuery Crates must not looke to bee Polyc
                           •
                        ates. Or so happilie to get his money again, as he got his ring againe. Therfore, that man cares not for money, not which flinges it away, but which spendes it well: not which imploies it to no vse, but which imploies it to a good vse: not which

casts it into the waters, where he is neuer to see it againe, but which casts it vnto the waters 
                        Super aquas. Eccles. 11.1., where the poore shall finde it. For so Abraham being very rich, layde out his substance for the most parte in hospitality. Hee vsed to sitte at his tent doore vnder the oke of Mambre, iust about dinner time Genes. 18.1., to see what strangers passed by, that he might bring them in with him to his table. Thus must we (most Honourable, and blessed Christian brethren) thus must we, I say, make vs friends of the vnrighteous Mam
                        •••
                     , Luk. 16.9. that euery way wee may glori
                        •••
                      God, with our soules, with our bodies, with our substance, and goods. Lastly, Thracius, of whom Aulus Gellius writeth, 
                        Noctium Attico, l. 19 c. 13. Homo miser vites suas sibi omnes detruncat.
                      was for any thing that I can see, euen at that time most of all drunken, when he cut down all his Vines, least he should be drunken. For hee that so foolishly did cut downe all his owne vines, by the same reason, if all the Vines in the World had bin his owne, would haue cut them all downe. Howbeit, if euery thing must bee taken away that may bee abused, then away with the name of God, away with the word of God, away with all good thinges

that are. Therefore we can not allow this deuise of Thracius, but we must disallow S. Pauls aduice to Timothie 
                     1 Tim 6.23 Modico vino vtere Vulg.
                     , Vse a little wine for thy stomackes sake, & thine often infirmities. For if all vines were cut downe, where should Timothie get a little 
                        •
                     ined. Wherefore hee holdeth a good meane betweene two extremities. To be drunken is one extremitie: to cut downe all the vines, is another extremitie. But T
                           ••••
                        hie keeping the right meane, vseth vine, least all the vines should bee cut
                        •
                      d
                        ••
                     ne, and yet but a little wine, lest he 
                        •••
                     uld bee drunken. Hee vseth wine to helpe his infirmitie, and yet but a little 
                        •
                     ine to anoide super fluitie. And he put a 
                        
                           ••
                        dicum before the vi
                           ••
                        m, the little before the wine, as S. Barnard noteth 
                        Omnes nimirum ex quo monachi sumus, infirmum stomachum habemus, & iam necessarium Apostoli de vtendo vino consilium merito non neglegimus: modico tame
                              •
                            quod ille praemisit nescio cur praetermisso. In Apologia ad Guliclmum Abbatem, versus finem. Acfi diceret, v
                              •••
                           m Apostolus admittit, monaechus immittit: modicum, Apostolus pramittit, mona
                              •
                           bus pratermittit.
                     . Because of two extremities, drunkennes and drynes, that he knows to be the greater; this to be the lesser. Therefore hee is not so desirous to drinke wine, that his stomack may be strengthned, as hee is carefull to drinke but a little wine, least his heade should bee weakened. To conclude then Dauid dealeth not so with his Couch, as Origen did with his body: as Democritus did with his eyes: as Crates did with his

money, as Thracius did with his vi
                        •
                     era
                        ••
                      such matter, but contrariwise: E
                        •
                     en as Ioseph with that same body did raise vp himselfe a holy seed, wherewith other
                        •
                      commit vncleannes: and L
                           •
                        t, with th
                        •
                     se same eyes did lament the sinnes of his people, wherewith others allure, and 
                        〈◊〉
                      allured to lightnesse: and 
                        〈…〉
                      that same money did entertain stranger, wherewith others are cast away, when they haue cast it away about 
                        〈◊〉
                      and Timothie with those same 
                        〈…〉
                      helpe his disgestion, wherewith 
                        〈◊〉
                      ouerwhelm their nature: so Dauid in the very same couch, wherein many commit folly, and wherein once hee himselfe also had bin as much ouerseene as any other, doth now offer vp the sacrifice of his sorrowfull soule, and contrite spirit to God so that he cuts not off any member from his body, but praies that he himselfe (a
                        •
                      he had well deserued) might not bee cut off, as a dead member from the body of Christ: he puts not out his own eyes, 
                        〈◊〉
                      almost weepes them out: he drow
                        •••
                      his couch in the sea, but in his teares: he auoides drunkennesse, not by cutting down all his vines, but by taking the 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     
of saluation, and calling vpon the name of the Lord Psal. 16.13. and drinking vp this cup full of Vinum Angelorum
                     
                        rest lachryma pingue hoiocau stum, virtutum mater culparū lauacrum, Angelorum vinū Ioba. Climacus.
                     , the teares of which he saies here, I water my couch with my teares.
                  
                  The third and last amplification is in the last word, with my teares. Not onely with my gronings, but also with my teares. The Church militant here on earth is resembled, to a turtle. The voice of the turtle is heard in our land. Cantic. 2.12. Because
                        Turtur gemit, non canit.
                      the voice of the turtle is nor cheerefull or merry, but groaning or mourning, Now in sacryficing the turtleLeuit. 1.15, among many other ceremonies, the Priest was appointed to wring the heade of it backeward. Dauid also, cleapeth himselfe a turtle when he saies. O deliuer not the soule of thy turtle doue into the hands of the enemies. And hee is sacrificed by hauing his heade wrung backeward as it were, when as looking backward to his former sinnes, hee groaneth, and is weary of his groanings. But yet the amplification r
                        •
                     nnes in a farre higher stile, for that hee saies. Not onely with my groanings, but also with my teares. Augustus Caesar was much delighted in the companie of

learned men. Especially of two famous Poets which liued in his time. Virgil and Horace. Of the which, Virgil was so much giuen to groaning and sighing, that commonly hee was called Suspirabund
                           ••
                        
                     : and Horace was borne bleare eyed. Therefore vpon a time Augustus sitting in the middest betweene Virgil and Horace, and one that might bee bolde asking him what hee did: marie saies hee, 
                        Sedeo inter suspiria & lachrymas.
                      I sit heere betweene groanings and teares. Our Augustus, King Dauid I meane sitteth not betweene groanings and teares, but lieth sicke in his bed, very 
                        〈◊〉
                      troubled and euen almost ouerwhelmed with them both. For as that little cloude like a mans hand, which Eliz
                           •
                        us sawe, brought with it at length a great shower 1 Reg. 18, 44.: insemblable wise, those groanings of his, as a cloude, or as a thunder, did giue warning in a manner, that anone after would follow a dreery shower of teares. And as the sea sends foorth floods which water the whole earth Eccles. 1.7.: so the swee
                        ••
                      singer of Israel otherwise, but here also the pitifulst weeper in the world, his contrition beeing greate like the sea Lam. 2.13., makes a floode as I may say, and 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     
his couch with his teares. Saint Austin 
                     
                        Conf
                              •
                           ss. l. 8. cap. 12. warranteth both these comparisons of a shower of teares, and of a stoude of teares. The first in these wordes; 
                        Vbi alta consideratio congessit totam miseriam meam in conspectu cordis mei,
                      VVhen I deepely considered with my selfe the miserable estate wherein I stood, 
                        Ob
                              •
                           iria est procella ingens fercus ingentem imbrem lachrymarum,
                     there arose in my heart a tempestuous storme, bringing with it a mighty shower of teares. There is a shower of 
                        〈◊〉
                     . The second in these wordes, 
                        Egosub quadam firi arbore straui me, & dimisi habenas lachrymis.
                      Then I layde mee downe flat groueling vpon the ground vnder a certaine fig tree and did let mine eyes weepe, and sparenot, euen their f
                        ••
                     , as much as they would 
                        Et prortiperunt flumina oculorum meorum.
                      & presētly gushed forth whole flood
                        •
                      of teares. Here is a floud of teares.
                        Perque sin
                              ••
                            lachryma fluminis instar eunt.
                     
                  
                  Hence we may gather two very profitable notes, worthy of our remembrance. The first is, That euerie new act of sin must be bewayled by a new act of repentance. Not that it is possible for vs to reckon vp, or euen so much as to remember all and euery of our sinnes, but that hauing heartily repented of those or of that sinne which most daungerously hath wasted and almost destroyed our conscience, then we ought at the last to say with the Psalmist, Psal. 29.12. VVho can tell

how oft hee offendeth? O clense thou me from my secret sinnes. This same holy Prophet, euen when he was in the state of grace, defiled himselfe with an other mans wife. Yet he slept not ouer long in this sinne, but being awaked by the Prophet Nathan, and more throughly by this sickenes which was Gods messenger vnto him, he renewed his repentance, & watered his couch with his teares. So 
                        〈◊〉
                      we. For it is nothing but a slander which the Church of Rome casteth vpon 
                        〈◊〉
                     , that forsooth wee should teach a man whose persō is iustified by faith in Christ committing some foule act, is neuer a whit the worse for it. Nay, our doctrine is this, That such an one hath hurt himselfe two wayes. In respect of his owne guiltinesse and in respect of Gods righteousnesse. For the first; though God for his part doe not breake off the purpose of adoption, and adiudge him to wrath, and therefore he is not guiltie of condemnation for sinne; yet he is simply guiltie of sin, & hath grieuouslie wounded his own conscience. For the second, though God againe hath pardoned al the sins of his elect, euen those that are to come, by his

decree by his promise, by the valew and price of his sonnes merites, yet absolutely and actually hee doth not apply this pardon to the apprehension and feeling of the sinners faith, till hee recouer himselfe, and renew his repentance. Many this we teach, that God 
                        〈◊〉
                      his chosen children so by Faith and Repentance, that it is 
                        ••
                     possible any of them should die in finall impenitencie. But that sweet sanctifying Spirit
                        •
                      which dwelleth in them, is still busie like a bee as we say, and neue
                        •
                      lea
                        •
                     eth 
                        ••
                     inging them, and stirring them vp to repentance, and working them like waxe (as it were) till 
                        〈◊〉
                      much as it was before grieued 
                        〈◊〉
                      they
                        •
                     r 
                        ••
                     ersion by sinne, so much 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     ee after delighted for their conuersion by amendement of life. Therefore as they all neede not to doubte a whit of their saluation, who after they haue fallen a sleep in sinne, awake betimes, and water their couch with their teares: so I assure you (Holy Brethren) their case is dangerous and desperate, nay, they are in a cursed case, which wil not be awaked, but lye stil sleeping and snoring in sin. Seeing no pardon can be procured, but where repentance is

renewed. For God doth not giue vs rules to keepe, and breake them himselfe. Now his rule is this,Luk. 17.4. Though thy brother sin against thee seauen times in a day, & seauen times in a day turne againe to thee, saying, It repenteth 
                        〈◊〉
                     , tho
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      forgiue him. Therefore as I am bo
                        ••
                     d
                        •
                      to forgiue my brother in de
                        •
                     d, though hee do
                        •
                      not 
                        ••
                     ke me forgiuenes, but I am not bound to goe to him, and tell him, I forgiue him, except he first come to 
                        〈◊〉
                      and tell me. He repents; but if he doe 
                        〈◊〉
                      then am I bo
                        •
                     nd also to tell him I forgiue him: so the Lord though in the gracious degree of his fatherly adoption he haue sealed vp the remission of all our sinnes, yet he doth not open the bagge & shew
                        •
                      the treasures of his mercie 
                        〈…〉
                     ward in it till he see vs become new 
                        〈◊〉
                     . For then he hath bound himselfe by his lo
                        •
                     ing promise, and hath giuen vs his word, that he will forgiue vs our sinne. At what time soeuer a sinner repenteth saith 
                        •
                     e,Ezec. 18.21, and watereth his Couch with his teares, I will remember his iniquities no more. Naaman the Syrian was willed 
                        〈◊〉
                      wash himselfe seauen times in 
                        〈◊〉
                     , 2. Reg. 5.10.. VVhy seuen times? was not 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     
time enough? Yes surely. For him it was enough, but not for vs. For that was done rather for our example, then for his benefite. Seeing his malady was onely a leprosie: but our soule is leprous with sinne. And therefore if hee for one leprosie washt himselfe seauen times, how much more ought wee euery time we sin to be sorry for it, and if wee doe not wash our selues seauen times for one sinne, yet at the least wise to wash our selues seauen times for seauen sinnes, seeing the most iust of vs all, as Salomon witnesseth Prou. 24.16 may seauen times fall in one day? Or rather many men in the world haue not onely seauen deadly sinnes, but euen seauen diuels in them Luk. 8.2. which they can no waies wash out, but by bitter weeping and watering their couch with their teares. To the angel of Ephesus thus
                        •
                      saith the spirit Reu. 2.5., Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and doe the first workes, or else I will remooue thy candle sticke out of his place. So that if wee let our sinne stand still, our candle-sticke shall be remoued: but if we would haue our candle sticke stand still, our sinne must be remoued. We must repent

and doe the first workes, not those which wee must repent of, but those which wee are fallen from. Wonderfull are the words of the Apostle; God hath committed the worde of reconciliation vnto vs, therefore wee are Christs embassado
                        •
                     rs, and God entreating you as it were by vs, wee beseech you in the name of Christ, that you would be recōciled to God2 Cor. 5.20. What, may some man say, were not the Corinthians reconciled alreadie? wherefore then is the Apostle so earnest about nothing? I but they doe not vnderstand the Apostle which make this obiection. Hee knew wel enough they were reconciled before. But he knew as well, the best of vs all can not stande in Gods fauour one minute of an hower without a good mediatour. For since our first reconciliation to God, we haue so often offended his maiestie, that if wee doe not plie him with humble supplications, and daily petitions, and hearty repentance, and vnfained teares, he and wee cannot possibly bee friends. And therefore the Apostle calles vpon the Corinthians so earnestly, and cries to them, and saies, Take heede, Feare God, Offend him not,

Yee can gette nothing by falling out with him. But in case you haue beene ouertaken with any sinne Gal. 6.1., ye haue an aduocate with the father 1 Ioh. 2.1, Fly vnto him for succour, If you be wise, bee reconciled to God as soone as you can, God entreateth you: (O mercifull Lord, doest thou sue & seeke to vs? and is there any thing in the world that wee can pleasure thee in? can our goodnesse reach vnto thee Psalm. 16.2.? and doest thou entreat vs? yee saies hee,) God entreateth you, and we his ambassadours in the name of Iesus Christ beseech you, that you would be reconciled to God. Be reconciled 
                        •
                     o God, and though you haue offended him neuer so much, hee will bee reconciled to you. Assure your selues, you may lay your life of it, hee will presently turne vnto you, if you in true repentance will turne vnto him, and water your couch with your teares. For so this our Prophet did no sooner confesse his fault, but Nathan proclaimed his pardon2. Sam. 12 13.. Whereupon hee himselfe also hath these wordesPsal. 32.5., I saide I will confesse my wickednesse vnto the Lord, & thou forgauest the iniquity of my sin, As the Lionesse hauing bin false to the

Lyon, by going to a Libard; and the Storke cōforting with any other besides her owne mate, wash themselues before they dare returnē home▪ in like manner the prophet here, before he can be reconciled to God, after this great breach by adulterie and murther2 Sam. 11.4. and 15., is faine to wash his bed, and to water his couch with his teares. But here a question may arise: If the faithfull be subiect, neither to eternal condemnation when they doe sinne, not yet to final impenetency when they haue sinned, what neede they at all, either auoide sinne, for which they shall not be condemned, or else hasten their repentance, of which they shall not bee depriued? This question consisteth of two parts. The one touching condemnation: the other touching impenitency. To the former part I say as before. Though there be sin in them, yet there is no condemnation to them, which are in Christ Iesus. Rom 8.1. But how? this is no thankes to them that sin, thereby making themselues guilty of sin, & as much as in them lieth subiect also to condemnation for the same: but onely to God, who wrappeth vp all the sinnes of his children in

the bowels of his deare sonne, that they appeare not in his sight to condemne them, either in this world, or in the world to come. As Shew went backwarde, and couered his fathers nakednes Gen. 9.23so God casteth our sinnes behind his backe, and doth not impute them to vs. Howbeit though condemnation neede not be feared, yet there are reasons enough besides to perswade all those to hate sinne, that loue God, One is, because God doth vsually withdraw the outward signs of his 
                        •••
                     our from them which forget their duty towards him. The whole booke of Iob is proofe sufficient. Especially, in one place Iob. 7.20. he saith, I haue sinned, what shall I do vnto thee, O thou preseruer of men? why hast thou set me as a marke against thee, so that I am a burden to my selfe? And Dauid 
                     Psal. 44.24.. Why standest thou so farre off, O Lord, and hidest thy selfe in the needfull time of trouble? For as Ioseph made himselfe strange to his Brethren, and spake vnto them roughly Gen. 42.7.3, though he loued them wel enough: euen so the Lord, though he take not his mercie from his children, yet hee chastiseth their iniquities with rods, and their sinnes

with scourges Psal. 89.33. An other is, because the faithfull sinning loose the inwarde feeling of Gods fauour. As Iob testifieth in these wordes; Thou writest bitter thinges against mee, and thou wilt consume me with the sinnes of my youthIob. 13, 26 And Dauid, O giue mee the comfort of thy helpe ag
                        •
                     ine, and establish mee with thy free spirit Psal. 51.12,. Hee wanted not Gods helpe nor his spirit, but yet he was so discouraged and cast down in his own conscience, that hee felt not the comfortable taste of Gods helpe, nor the blessed freedome of his spirit. And euen so generally, the godly sinning, though they quench not the Spirite altogether 1 Thes. 5 19 yet by grieuing it, they felt such a desolation in their soules, as if they were quite cast out of fauour with God. To the latter part of this question I aunswere, that the sinnes of the godly are therefore with repentance, because the graces of God are without repentance Rom. 11.29. And as it is vnpossible that they which sinn▪ in despight of the spirit, should bee renewed by repentance Heb. 6.6., so it is vnpossible that they should not bee renewed by repentance which sinne of infirmity, as all the

faithfull doe. For though the flesh haue the vpper hand, one while enforcing thē to sinne, yet the spirit will get the masterie another while, making them heartilie sorrie for their sinne. Neuerthelesse, great reason is it they should not abuse the patience of God, mouing them to repentance Rom. 2.4., but rather that they should ins
                        •
                     antly stir vp this gift of God in them2 Tim. 1.6. to which they are sure at lēgth the course & motion of Gods spirit will bring them. For first, what a horrible thing is it, either for God to withdraw his fatherly and fauourable countenance from vs, or for vs, to haue a hell as it were in our owne consciences, both which as I haue alreadie shewed, doe necessarily follow sinne? Besides, seeing all the good wee get by sin, is repentance and griefe, farre better it is to beginne by times to repent, and so forthwith to enioy the comfortable feeling of Gods mercifull pardon, then by deferring our repentance, still to bee tormented with the horrour of our guiltie conscience. Moreouer, the ende is not a barre against the meanes, but rather a great furtherer, and setter of them on forward. We being therefore sure we shall

repent at the last, ought neuer a whit the lesse to vse the meanes as soone as we can by ceasing to doe ill, and learning to doe well Esa. 1.17. Euen as S. Paul though he knew certainely hee should not perish in that shipwracke, yet he vsed the best meanes hee could to saue his life Acts 27.44.. Lastly, this is one maine difference betweene the wicked and the godly, that they hauing theyr consciences feared with a 
                        〈◊〉
                      yron 1. Tim. 4.2., and being past feeling Eph 4.19. g
                        ••
                      on still in sinning without any sen
                        ••
                      of sinne 
                        C
                              •
                           nsuetudo peccandi tollit sensum peccati. Aug.
                     : but these, hauing their senses exercised to discerne betweene good and euill Heb. 5.14., neuer rest if they bee hurt with the sting of sinne, till they bee estsoone
                        •
                      salued and healed by Gods mercy. For as the Swallow perceyuing himselfe almost blinde, presently seeketh out the herbe Chelidonia Celandine. and the Hart feeling himselfe shot with an arrow sticking in him, forthwith runneth to the herbe Dictamus Dittany.: right so doe the godly. Take Ezechias for an example of a Swallowe. All that is in mine house haue they seene, there is nothing among my treasures that I haue not shewed them 2. Reg. 20.15.. There he is blinde. For the more treasures

the King of Babels ambassadours sawe, the more was Ezechias blinded with ambition in shewing them. Like a Crane or a Swallowe, so did I chatter, I did mourne as a done. I shall walke weakely all my yeares in the bitternesse of my souleEsa. 38. i 4. i 5. Here is the Chelidonia. For this bitternesse of his soule, doth cure the blindnes of his soule. Take Iob for an example of a Hart. The arrowes of the almighty are in mee, the venome whereof doth drinke vp my spirit, and the terrors of God fight against meIob. 6.4.. There hee is shot. For if he had not bin stroken before with the arrowes of his owne wickednes, he should neuer haue binne stroken thus with the arrowes of Gods correction, I abhorre my selfe and repent in dust and ashesIob. 42.6.. Here is the Dictamus. For this abhorring of himselfe is a recouering of himselfe: and the sooner hee repents in dust & ashes, the sooner is hee freed from all his sinnes, & from al the punishments due to the same. But now some man may further obiect and say. He is not yet fully satisfied for this latter part, because talke as long as wee will, all these inconueniences which come, as hath bin declared, by

perseuering in sinne, are either no bridle at all, or else not so strong a bridle to restraine men from sinne, as if they bee perswaded, they may by sinning quite & cleane loose all iustifying grace, and so may be finally impenitent when they dy. But hee which will put foorth this doubt must remember that the children of God are led by the spirit of GodRom. 8.14.. And the spirit though not in the same degree, yet in the same sort worketh in all those that haue beene, are, or shall be sanctified 2. Cor. 4.13. Euudem spiritum.
                     . Who as they serue God not for any se
                        •
                     
                     uile feare of loosing their faith, or of dying in impenitency, or such like, but only for pure loue of his maiesty: so they can neither will nor choose, but beeing bitten with sin, they must needes in their soules & consciences feele the smart of it. Therfore S. Paul saith, The flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and these are contrary one to the other, so that yee cannot doe the same thinges that yee would Gal. 5.17.. For if the faithfull would doe Gods will in earth as it is in heauen, and serue him as obediently, and as perfectly as the good angels doe, they can not, because still in them the flesh

lus
                        •
                     eth against the spirit: and so againe, if they would sinne with full consent, or with an obstinate purpose to continue in sinne, as the euill angel
                        •
                      doe, they cannot doe this neither, because still in them the spirit lusteth against the flesh. Which spirit though it may for a time bee shutte vp as it were, yet it will finde meanes well enough at length to shew it selfe. Thus Elibu saith. The spirit within me compelleth me. Behold my bellieis as wine which hath no vent, and like the new bottles that burst. Therefore will I speake, that I may take breath Iob. 3
                           •
                        .19. As Elibu then kept silence some while euen from good wordes, though it were paine and griefe to him: but at the last the fire kindling and his heart beeing hotte within him, spake with his tongue Psal. 39.3.: so the spirit of God in all the elect of God, is like wine put into a bottle, which will haue a vent to spurge out, or els it will burst the bottle, or like fire rakte vp in embers, which will haue a passage to burne out, or els it wil consume the whole house1. Ioh. 2.9.. And therefore Saint Iohn likewise saith; Whosoeuer is borne of God doth not sinne: for his seede remaineth

in him, neither can he sinne, because hee is borne of God. Marke yee this well. The Apostle thinketh it not enough to say, Hee doth not sinne: but addeth moreouer, He cannot sinne. What is that? To witte, presumptuously without feare, hee doth not sinne: and desperately without remorse he can not sinne, He can not sin, I say, presumptuously, as Pharaoh did desperately, as Caine did, malitiously, as Iudas did blasphemously, as Iudas did. He cannot, hee cannot sinne thus. Why so, Because the seede of God remaineth still in him. And what is the seede of God? It is the spirit of God, of which S. Paul saide euen now. The spirit lusteth against the flesh, and these are contrary one to the other, so that ye cannot do the same thing that yee would. Yee doe not sinne, nay yee cannot sinne as the flesh would haue you, ye cannot doe the same things that ye would: but yee doe, nay ye can not choose but doe manie times as the seede of God remaining in you, and as the spirit of God lusting in you, would haue you. So that this is a legall kinde of preaching to say. Take heede you sinne not: yee may happen so to loose your

faith: to loose all the iustifying grace which God hath giuen vs▪ to be for euer excluded out of the Kingdome of heauen. This is to be sayde to vassals, to drudges, to slaues, not to sonnes. To sons this may bee better sayde Heb. 12.5 vobis vt filijs
                      Take heed yee sinne not: God hath adopted you & giuen you the earnest of his spirite 2 Cor. 5.5,: Therefore grieue not this sweete spirite, whereby yee are sealed vp to the day of redemption Eph. 4.30. If yee be louing children indeed, though there were no hel to feare, no heauen to hope for, no torments to dread, no rewards to expect, yet wee will obey your good father, & be the sorrow-fullest Creatures in the world if you haue but once displeased him, onely for the meere loue yee beate towards him, and for the vnspeakeable loue hee hath shewed towardes you 
                        Diligenti deū sufficit ei placere quem diligit, quam nulla maior expeteuda est rem
                              ••
                           etatio quom ipsa dilectio. Leo Magnus Serm. 7 de Ieiunio.
                     . For if he gaue his onely begotten sonne to die for you whē ye were his enemies Rom. 5.10, now you are sons and such deare sonnes in his dearest SonneEph. 1.6., what duty will you denie him? what loyaltie will you grudge him? what heartie thankefulnesse, and good will is there which you will not afford him? what faithful honour and seruice is there

which you will not yeeld him? In one word, (ye holie ones of God, I speake now to you all, beloued) he which stands much vpon this obiection, hath no faith, no repentance, no iustifying grace at all, in him. For the faithfull will neuer make that liberty which Christ hath purchased for them with his precious bloud, a cloake to couer their wickednesse1. Pet. 2.19, but rather a spurre to incite them to godlinesse Luk. 1.74 Liberamur, vt seruiam
                              •
                           s ei.
                     , Neyther will they at any time reason thus Rom. 6.15., VVe will sinne, because wee are not vnder the Law, but vnder grace: nor yet thus, Rom. 6.2. We will continue in sinne, that grace may abound: but alwaies thus;Rom. 6.11. By that wee are deade to sinne, wee gather that wee are aliue to God: or else thus;Tit. 2.11. The grace of God hath appeared, teaching vs to deny, vngodlines and worldlie lusts. Thus you see then howe the regenerate man, euerie new acte of sinne must be bewailed by a new acte of Repentance. For God wil not forgiue me, except I repeut, no more then I am bound to tell my brother, I forgiue him, except hee tell me. He repents. Naaman must wash himselfe seauen times, before he can bee cleane: the

Angell of Ephesus must rise from his fall, and doe the first workes, or else his Candlesticke shall bee remoued: the Church of Corinth though it bee neuer so Holie, yet by sinne violating Gods loue must oftentimes bee reconciled anew: euen king Dauid in this place, though he were a man according to Gods own heart, yet before Nathan would absolue him, he was faine to crie Pecc
                           •••
                        , and before God would forgiue him, he was faine to confesse his wickednes, and to water his couch with his teares.
                  
                  The second note is, That a great act of sinne must be bewailed with a greate acte of Repentance. I meane not, that anie paine or griefe of ours, can make satisfaction for the least of our sinnes, or that one contrition can be any cause of remission, but onelie that where sinne hath abounded, there sorrowe shol
                        •
                     d abound also, that Grace may superabound at the last 5. Rom. 10. The Schoolmen shewe heere, that great griefe may bee considered two waies. According to a▪ mans appretiation, and according to his intension 
                        Vide Bellar. de P
                              ••
                           itentia libro. 2▪ 
                        
                           •
                        .11. As the Patriarke Iacob in his intension did lament

his sonne Ioseph, whom he thought to be dead, more pittifully, then he did any sin that we read ofGen. 37.34., but in the appretiation or estimation which hee had of the 
                        •
                     aynousnesse of sinne, certainly he would rather haue lost tenne sonnes, then once haue sinned against God. Therfore, howsoeuer in intention sorrow for sinne bee none of the greatest, yet in appretiation they would euer haue it excessiue. But we neede not borrow such vncoth wordes of the Schoolemen to expresse our meaning, if we can tel how to vse those words which we haue of our owne. For if wee looke narrowly into this place, wee shall see that the Prophet Dauid is both waies in the highest degree sorrowfull. First, by how much the more dearely he esteemed Gods loue and friendshippe, then the health of his body, by so much the more is hee grieued, that that is violated then that this is endangered. And yet againe, how intensiuelie and bitterlie he bewaileth not so much the sicknesse of his bodie, as the cause thereof the sinne of his soule, appeareth in that he tris
                        •
                     eth not, but washeth his bed, and water
                        •••
                      his couch with his teares. VVe reade of

three that Christ raised from death, 
                        
                           •
                        a
                           •
                        
                        rus daughter: the widowes sonne and Lazarus
                     
                        De tota hanc Alegoria, vide Aug. ser. 44 de Verbis Domini & Tract. 49. in Iohannem. Erasm
                              •
                           m etiam in concion
                              •
                            de Miserecordia dei & Fe
                              •
                           rum in Iohan c 11. Hanc approbat & Cal vinus in Luc, verse 11. his verbis Scimus inu
                              •
                           uem 
                              〈◊〉
                            quem Christus a morte suscitauit, speciem esse spiritualis vita quam nobis restituit.
                     . For raising vp of Iairus daughterMat. 38. & deinceps
                      many weeping and wailing greatly for her, he came to the house, and went in where shee lay: and suffered but a very few to goe in with him, and tooke her by the hand: and said vnto her Maiden arise: and straight way shee arose and walked: & charge was giuen, that this should not bee tolde abro
                        •
                     de. Fos raising vp the widowes sonne Ioh. 11.33 et deincep.
                     , much people of the citie weeping with his mother for him, who was now caried out of the gate to be buried▪ he went and touched the coffin: and said, Young man arise: and he that was dead sat vp, and began to speake, and he deliuered him to his mother, and the rumor hereof went forth through out all Iudea. For raysing vp Lazarus 
                     Luc 7.12 et deincep.
                     , when he saw M
                           •
                        ry weepe, and the Iewes also weepe which came with her, he groaned in the spirit: he was troubled in himselfe, he, vnderstanding he had bin dead and buried foure daies, wept for him, hee groned againe, he came to the graue, hee caused the graue stone to be taken away, hee lifted vp his eies to his father, hee

prayed very feruently: hee cryed with a lowed voice, Lazarus, come foorth: then hee that was dead came foorth, bound hand and foote with hands, and his face was bound with a napkin and Iesus saide vnto them, Loose him and let him goe. Now these three sorts of corses, are three sorts of sinners
                        Ista tria genera mortu
                           
                              •
                           rum sunt tria genera peccatorum 
                              •
                           ug. ser.
                     , Iayrus daughter, lying dead in her fathers house resembleth them that sinne by inward consent: the widowes sonne, being carried out of the gate of the citie, them that sinne by outward act:
                        de verbis Domini.
                      
                     Lazarus, hauing beene dead and buried foure daies, them that sinne by continuall custome
                        Resuscitauit filium. Archisy 
                              •
                           agogi ad huc in domo iacentem resuscitauit iuuen
                              •
                           m filium viduae extra portam ciuitatis elatū res
                              •
                           scitauit Lazarum sepultum quatri duanum Au. Tractatu. 49. in Iohan,
                     . The first, was dead but one houres the second, but one day▪ the third foure daies; The young maiden lay in a bed: the young man, in a coffin
                        •
                      
                     Lazarus, in a graue. For the first, Christ touched her hand: for the second, he touched the coffin: for the third, he touched nothing. Before their raysing vp; because the maiden figured those that sinne, not so much in acte as in consent, hee touched her hand which had beene 
                        〈◊〉
                      great instrument of any acte: because the young man had sinne in a
                        ••
                     ,

but not in custome, into which he might haue fallen if he had liued longer, he touched the coffin which kept him from custome: because Lazarus smelled hauing beene dead now foure daies, the, first day by conceiuing sinne, the second by consenting to sinne, the third by acting sinne, the fourth by continuing in sin
                        Prima est quasi 
                              〈◊〉
                            delec
                              •
                           ati
                              ••
                           is 
                              〈…〉
                            Aug. serm. 44., Christ touched him not at all. At the raising of the first, few were present, and they were charged also to make no words of it, that the maiden might be lesse shamed, which had sinned for the most part but in consent: at the raising of the second, much people of the citie were present, and the thing was noised abroad farre and neare, that the young man might be more ashamed, which had sinned also in acte at the raising of the third a huge number of Iewes were present, which saw his face bound with a napkin, to testifie the extreame confusion and shame that couered his face, and they 
                        〈◊〉
                      him themselues and let him 
                        〈◊〉
                     , beeing eye-witnesses of his seruitude and slauerie which had sinned so 
                        〈◊〉
                      by custome. After their raising vp: 
                        〈◊〉
                      daughter strait-way arose & walked

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
because for her that had stept aside but by consenting to sinne, it was easie to recouer and to arise, and forthwith to walk in the way of Gods commaundements: the widowes son sat vp, began to sp
                        •••
                     e, was deliuered to his mother, because for him that had actually committed sinne, it was a harder matter to recouer; and therefore by little and little hee came to it 
                        Residet enim qui peccare des
                              ••
                           e
                              ••
                            
                           
                              •
                           rigit se ad 
                              〈…〉
                           lioris: 
                              〈◊〉
                           , qui 
                              〈◊〉
                            suam 
                              〈…〉
                            dei misericordiam 
                              〈…〉
                            tri qui p
                              •
                           eactis remediis restituitur Ecclesiae Ecommunioni. rase. vbi supra
                     ; first sitting vp, by raising vp himselfe to a purpose of amendement, 
                        〈◊〉
                      beginning to speake, by confessing his owne misery and acknowledging Gods mercy▪ Lastly, being deliuered to his mother, by returning to the bosome of the holy Church, and enioying the remission of his sinnes: Lazarus came foorth bound hande and foote with b
                        ••
                     d
                        ••
                     , because for him that had a stone laide vpon him
                        Moles illaimposita sepulchro, ipsa est vis dura consu etudinis, quam premitur anima nec resurge re, nec respirare permittur. Aug ser. 44., and had made his heart as hard a graue stone, or as a nether milstone by making a custome, and as it were a trade of sinne, it was a matter vnpossible to 
                        〈◊〉
                      thinking to recouer onely the omnipotent power of Christ coulde bringe 
                        〈◊〉
                      foorth bound hand and foote, and breake these handes asunder, and restore 
                        〈◊〉
                      againe to the liberty of the so
                        ••••
                      of God.

For you must knowe 
                        Ex Epiphanio Catalogo dogmatum Manuhai.
                      that thirtie yeares old he was when he was raised vp, and thirty yeares more hee liued after he had beene raysed vp: So that halfe his life he spent in sinne. the other halfe in repentance of sinne. But I haue a litle forgot myselfe. Yet it will be no great faulte (Right Honourable, and beloued in our Lord,) if it will please you to pardon it. I should haue obserued to you in the first place; how Christ was earnestly requested to raise vp the first Mark. 5.23., but raysed vp the two last of his owne accord Luk. 7.13. Ioh. 11.11., and contrariwise, how for the two first their friends onely weptMar. 5.38. & Luk. 7.13., but for the last, besides his sisters and friends, Christ also wept exceedingly Ioh. 11.35.. These are verie important matters, and properly belonging to the point in hand. For seeing the young maiden by sinning in consent had lesse offended Christ, he would not haue troubled himselfe about her, but vpon intreatie of others: but the two last the one an actuall, the other a customable sinner, which were in a more dangerous estate, he came to, being brought by the 
                        •
                     owel
                        •
                      onely of his owne mercie, & raised them vp: on the other side, the two

first hauing sinned, the one in thought, the other in deed, did not so much m
                        ••
                     e Christ as Lazarus, which was growne to a custome in sinning both wayes, and therefore for them he was content their friends onelie should weepe, but for this last he wept and troubled his owne selfe very much. So that the first h
                        ••
                      neyther restored of his owne accord, nor yet wept for her: the second, hee restored of his owne accord, but wept not for him: the thirde 
                        〈◊〉
                      both restored of his 
                        〈◊〉
                      accord, and also wept for him. VVhy 
                        〈◊〉
                      The reason is this: The young 
                        〈◊〉
                      sinne, the lesse it hazarded her owne soule, the lesse it grieued Christ
                        •
                      So
                        •
                     le, and so the lesse he had 
                        〈◊〉
                     , eyther to cure it, or to rue it; the young 
                        〈◊〉
                      sinne being neither so small as the Mayd
                        ••
                     , nor so great as Lazaruses, Christ raised him vp of his owne accord, because hee was more then a sinner in thought, and yet wept not for him because he was lesse then a sinner in custome: Lazarus 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , the more rank & deadlie it was, the more did it require the skill and loue of 
                        〈◊〉
                      Physitian, as by his passion could 
                        〈◊〉
                      it, & by his compassion would mo
                        •••
                      it.

Where we must obserue with Saint Augustine, that our blessed Sauiour did not take on thus grieuously for himselfe so much, or for Lazarus, as for vs. Hee groaned in the spirit, he was troubled in himselfe, he wept, hee groaned againe. hee lifted vp his eyes, he praied feruently, hee cryed with a loud voyece. So that here be might well haue said with Dauid; I am wearie of my groanings: and I water my Couch with my teares. But wherefore did he groane thus, weepe thus, cry thus, pray thus, lift vp his eyes thus, lift vp his voice thus? Saint Augustine telleth vs 
                        Quare fleuit Christus, nisi qui
                              •
                            flere hominem docuit? Aug. Tr. 49. Wherfore, saye
                        •
                      he, did Christ weep, but to teach vs to weepe
                        Quare fremuit, & turba uit seipsum, nisi quia fides h
                              •
                           minis sibi merito displicentis fre
                              •
                           ere quodammodo debetin accusatine malorū operum, vt vi
                           
                              •
                           lenti
                              •
                            poe
                              •
                           it
                              •
                           udi cedat consuetudo peccandi, Aug. ibid.
                     ? Wherefore did he groane and trouble himselfe, but because▪ he faith of a Christian displeasing himselfe in his sinnes, should after a sorte groane in accusing himselfe for his sins, and so at length the obstinate custom of his sinning, might yeeld and giue place to the violent force of his repenting? and a little before; VVhat is the cause, saies he, that Christ troubled himselfe 
                        Quid est turbat seipsum Christus nisi vt signific
                              •
                           t tibi qu
                              ••
                           odo turbaritu debeas, cum tantam m
                              •
                           le peccatigra
                              •
                           aris & premeris.
                     , but to signifie vnto thee, how thou oughtest to bee troubled when thou art pressed & oppressed with a dead weight

of sinnes 
                        Attendist
                              •
                            enim te vidisti te reum compu tasti tibi, illud feci & pepercit mihideus, illud commisi & distulit me, euā
                           gelium audiui & contempsi, baptizatus sū & iterum ad cadem reuolutus sum, quid facio, quo co, vnde cuado? Quum ista dicis, iam fremit Christus, quia fides fremit. In voce frementis appar
                              •
                           t spes resurgentis, Si ipsa fides est 
                              •
                           itus, ibi est Christus fremens. Si fides in nobis Christus in nobis.
                     ? For thou hast examined thy selfe, thou hast found thy selfe guiltie thou hast reasoned thus with thy selfe, I haue done such or such a thing, & God hath all this while spared me, I haue committed such or such a sinne, and hee hath still borne with mee; I haue heard the word of God, and yet I haue careleslie contemned it; I haue beene baptized & had my sinnes washt away, and yet I haue returned to them againe: what d
                        •
                     el
                        •
                      whether goe
                        •
                     ? what will be the end of this? when thou sayest thus, then Christ groaneth, because thy faith gro
                        •
                     eth. By the voyce of thy groaning may be gathe
                        •
                     red good hope of thy rising. If this faith bee in thee, Christ groaneth in thee. If saith be in vs, Christ is in vs. Thus farre S. Augustine. In conclusiō then, If Christ winking at lesser sinnes. or at least not so much lamēting them, did out of al measure bewayle Lazarus case, betokening those that haue beene long dead in trespasses & sins, though it pertayned not directly to himselfe: how much more good Lord, ought I, which am a far more hainous sinner then euer Lazarus was, 
                        〈◊〉
                      my sinnes, mine owne sinnes I say, for

number are more then the hayres of my head Psal. 40.30, and for greatnesse haue reached vp to heauenEzra. 9.6., so neuer to leaue groa
                     
                        •
                     ing, and weeping, and crying, and praying for the pardon of them, that I may truely saie with the Psalmist, I am wearie of my groaning
                        •
                     : and, I water my couch with my teares. The olde testament doth shew this as plainlie as the new. For in the lawe, the greatnes of the sinne was estima
                     
                        •
                     ed according to the condition of the 
                        ••••
                     er. The priuate mans sinne was litle: 
                        〈◊〉
                      princes sinne great: all the peoples 
                        〈◊〉
                      greater: the priestes sinne greatest of all. Therefore for each of these was ordained a seuerall sacrificeLeuit. 4.. For the priuate man and the prince, a goate. But for him a shee goateVers. 28.: for this is a hee-goate Vers. 23. Nowe the male is compted a greater sacrifice, considering the perfection of the sexe. For all the people, and the priest, a young bullocke, But for all the people, the elders onely did put their hands vpon the head of the bullockeVers. 15.: the priest did put his owne hand vpon 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     Vers. 4, Now as a young bullocke is a greater sacrifice then a goate: so the priest doth vndergoe a greater pennance and

more open shame then al the people. Besides, of al these, their offence that 
                        〈◊〉
                      ignorantly, was accoūted not so 
                        〈…〉
                      theirs that sinned wilfully. And there
                        •••
                      they were to offer a ram worth. 2 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     Leu. 5.15.; but these a ram of what price the 
                        〈◊〉
                      would appoi
                        •
                     t Leu. 27.12., according to the measure and estimation of the sinne Leu. 6.6. Iuxt
                              •
                            astimati 
                              ••
                           em mensuramque peccati
                     , 
                        〈◊〉
                      then, thogh Leuiticall priests & 
                        〈◊〉
                      are ceased, yet we that are made 
                        〈◊〉
                      priests and kings with Christ Reuel. 5.1., 
                        〈…〉
                      it were, enioine our own selues 
                        〈◊〉
                     , & according to the qualitie of our 
                        〈◊〉
                      measure the sacrifice of our bro
                        •
                     ē & 
                        〈◊〉
                      trite hart which we offer vnto God. If we had neuer sinned but of ignorance, 
                        〈◊〉
                      euerie one of vs should be bound to 
                        〈◊〉
                      a ram of 2. sh
                        •••
                     ls. And what is this 
                        〈…〉
                      2. shekels? It is 
                        〈◊〉
                      mine own self, a po
                        •••
                      sinner 
                        Non habeo nisi mi
                              •
                           utaduo im
                              •
                            minutissima, corpus & animam, vel p
                              •
                           tius vnum minutu
                              ••
                            voluntatem me
                           
                              •••
                            & 
                              〈◊〉
                            dabo ill
                              ••
                            ad volu
                              •
                           tatem, illius qui tantus tantillum tantis beneficiis praeu
                              •
                           ni
                              •
                           , qui t
                              •
                           t
                              •
                            se totum me compara
                              •
                           it? Ber
                              •
                            serm. de Quadruplici Debito. p. 100., that hauing nothing to offer but the widowes. 
                        •
                     . mites, nay a great 
                        〈◊〉
                      les then 2. mites, I mean my bodie & my soule: or rather I haue but onlie one 
                        〈◊〉
                      to offer, only my good wil, which I 
                        〈◊〉
                      henceforth conforme to his wil, wh
                        •
                      being rich, bec
                        •
                     me poore for me, and 
                        〈◊〉
                      his bodie & soule to redeem my bodie & soule from death. But now seing 
                        〈…〉
                     
                     
almost as often sinned wilfully, as either of ignorance or infirmitie, what manner of men ought we to be in humbling our selues vnder Gods mightie hand1. Pet. 5.6., in iudging & condemning our selues1 Cor. 11.31, in repenting as hartely as wee sinned haynously, in washing our bed, & watring our couch wi
                           •
                        h our teares? Euen this our Prophet sheweth also very good euidēce for this same doctrine els where. Haue mercy vpon me, O Lord, saies he, after thy great goodnes, & according to the multitude of thy mercies doe away mine offences. Wash me throughly frō my wickednes, & cleanse me frō my sinPsal. 52.2.. The goodnes of God is alwaies like it selfe, neither great nor little but absolutely infinite. Therfore it is neuer a whitthe greater for our coūting it not little nor neuer a whit the lesse for our coūting is not great: but though wee count it great yet it is stil as litle as it should be, & though we count it little yet it is still as great as it can bee. So that the Psalmist in tearming Gods goodnes great, setteth foorth the greatnesse, rather of his owne badnes, then of Gods goodnes confessing his owne sinne indeede to bee great, and so consequently Gods goodnesse likewise to bee great,

but yet in this respect only, not because it can take any encrease of greatnes into it selfe; but because it can giue increase of gladnes to him, who for a great sin, is almost ouerwhelmed with as great a griefe. The same may be saide of Gods mercies that they are neither many nor fewe, but as his goodnes is incōprehensible, so his mercies are innumerable. Neuerthelesse the Prophet sticks not to say; According to the multitude of thy mercies, do away mine offences. As if hee should haue said, According to thy mercies, doe away the multitude of mine offences. The multitude then, to speake properly, is not of Gods mercies, but of mine offēces, & yet seeing the mercies of God are as many as all mine offences, nay a great manie mo
                        •
                     e then all the offences of al the world, therfore hee mentions a multitude of Gods mercies. Because nothing can asswage the multitude of sorrowes which arise in my heartPsal. 94.19., for the multitude of my offences, but the multitude of Gods mercies. The multitude of mine offences 
                        〈◊〉
                      king indeede, as on Gods behalfe a multitude of mercies, so on my behalfe multitude of teares. And therfore he 
                        〈…〉
                     
                     
wash me throughly, or as it is in the latin translation
                        Amplius laua me.
                     , wash me yet more. Wash me and wash me: and yet more, againe & againe, wash me throughly from my wickednes, & cleanse me from my sin. For euen as a vessel that hath bin tainted with poison or some infections liquor, will not be cleane with once washing, but must be often scalded, & throughly washed, before it will be sweet, so hauing heretofore possessed my vessell in impuritie 1 Thes. 4.4. though I now wash me with niter, and take m
                        •
                     e much I sope, yet mine own vncleannes is 
                        ••
                     ill marked before thee Ier. 2.22., onely thou O Lord canst wash me throughlie, who 
                        •
                     n grieued throughlie, because I haue beene throughlie defiled. And indeed though I cannot wash my selfe throughlie, yet I am sure thou hast washt me thoroughlie, because I haue repented me thoroughlie. I haue mingled my drinke with weepingPsal. 102.10, and my teares haue bin my meate day & night Psal. 42.4.; nay Euerie night I wash my bed, and water my Couch with my teares. It is a cleare case then, that a great act of sin must be bewailed with a great act of repentance. For the raising of Laza
                        
                           ••
                        s, which hath been dead foure daies

requireth the greatest growing and 
                        •••
                     
                     ping the greater sinne, as of the Priest or volūtary, or such like, requireth the greater sacrifice: if I haue cōmitted great wickednes▪ except I shew great repentance I cannot obtaine great mercie if I haue bin throughly defiled, except I be throughly washed, I cannot be throughly 
                        〈◊〉
                     , And therefore the holy Prophet, that 
                        •
                     e may obtaine great mercy, & that he 
                        •
                     ay be throughlie washed, saith here; E
                        ••
                     rie night I wash my bed, and water my co
                        •
                     ch with my teares,
                  To returne then where I left, and so 
                        〈◊〉
                      make an end, S. Austins two comp
                        •
                     risons of 
                        〈…〉
                      of teares, and of a floude of teares, may seeme to some verie incredible▪ & much more these three amplifications of the Prophet Dauid. Especially if we read these words, as I haue noted they are in the Hebrew; Euerie night I cause my bed to swim, and I melt my couch with my teares. But howsoeuer they may seeme to be, they are I graunt very hyperbolicall: yet so as the meaning of them is plain 
                        ••
                     
                     ough. As if he should haue said, I do
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      indeed cause my bed to swim in show
                        •••
                      of teares, neither doe I melt my Couch with floudes of teares: but yet if euer anie

man had done so, or if it were possible any man could do so; then my repentance is so great, & my tears so aboundant, 
                        〈◊〉
                      I thinke verily whosoeuer is one, I 
                        〈◊〉
                      be an other, which should cause my b
                        •
                     d to swim, & my couch to melt seeing 
                        •
                      Eue
                     
                        •
                     i
                        •
                      night I wash my bed, & water my couch with my teares. Therefore they which can gather no good mea
                        •
                     ing out of these words, do consider, neither how 
                        ••••
                     efull the wrath & indignatiō of God is, 
                        〈…〉
                      how horrible is the sense of sin. 
                        〈…〉
                     
                     
                        Relata adse magnitudine a
                              •
                           is alicui quā quidam
                              •
                            eques Romanus dum vixit celauerat culcitram emi cubicularem in cius anxime sic hi iussit.
                     , of whome I spake before, hearing of them talk in hi
                        •
                      court what a huge sum of money a certaine Knight in 
                        〈◊〉
                      owed at his death, 
                        〈◊〉
                      that all his good
                        •
                      were to be solde to make payment
                        •
                      of his debts, cōmaunded the master of 
                        〈◊〉
                      wardrobe to buy for him that 
                        •
                     ed, wherein this knight vsed to lie. For (sais he 
                        Et praeceptum murātibus hanc rationem reddidit, Habenda est ad s
                              •
                           mmum culcitra, in qua, ille cum ca
                              ••
                           um deberes, dormire p
                              •
                           tuit. Macrob. Satur. l. 2. c. 4 if I cannot sleepe soundly in that bed wherin he could sleepe that owed so much, thē surelie I shal sleepe in none. If this famous Emperor thought it a matter almost vnpossible for him to sleepe quietly in his bed which was so deepely in debt, what would he haue said, If Christ who was born in his time, had bin bred in his hart, Gal. 4.19. I meane, if hee had seene by the light

of God
                        •
                      word, that no debts are comparable to sins? And therefore if that po
                        ••
                      Knight could hardly sleepe in his b
                        •
                     dde, then that seruāt which o
                        •
                     eth his m
                        •
                     ste
                        •
                      ten thousand 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     Math. 18.24. (as alas which of vs all, beloued, if we remember our 
                        〈◊〉
                      well, is not guiltie of so many sinnes?) ca
                        •
                      hardly take any rest. This, if the Emperour had knowne, hee would rather 
                        〈◊〉
                      bought Dauids couch, that he might 
                        〈◊〉
                      haue slept for bewailing his sinnes, then this banckrupts bed that hee might haue slept, notwithstanding all his ca
                        •
                     es. For these, these, euen our sinnes, these are the debts which so trouble and to
                        •
                     m
                        ••
                      the soule, that a man 
                        〈◊〉
                      better haue 
                        〈◊〉
                      common wealthes in his head, ye
                        •
                     : the ca
                        •
                     es of all the wo
                        •
                     ld in his head, th
                        ••
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      disquieted & distracted with the 
                        〈…〉
                      Christians, if we be in good health. Let vs be thankfull to God 
                        〈◊〉
                      it, & let vs account it a special blessing with out which all worldly blessings are 
                        〈◊〉
                      thing, & let vs vse it as all other good 
                        〈◊〉
                      of God to his glory, & the good of 
                        〈◊〉
                      other. If contrariwise it please the Lord 
                        〈◊〉
                      any time to visite vs with sicknesse, 
                        〈…〉
                      not in this case despaire neither. But 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     
whatsoeuer other causes we may coceine let vs ingēiouslie acknowledge one cause of our sicknes to be our sinnes. For if we would preuent the iudgemēts of god by timelie repentāce, & iudge our selues, we should not be iudged of the Lord. But because men wil not whē they are in health thinke of him that giueth health, therefore oftentimes they are sick, & now and then also fal asleepe1. Cor. 11.30. For euen as ma
                     
                        ••
                     facters which wil not by gentle means confesse their heinous crimes, are by racking or such like tortures enforced to cō
                     fesse: so when grieuous sinners can see no time to repent, God in his iustice, or rather indeede in his great mercie, doth as it were racke them, vpō their couch with sicknesse, & bodily pains, that they may be constrained to confesse their sinnes, & so, may be freede of two sickenesses, their bodies sickenes, and their soules sicknes both at once. O happie, happie men are they, which when they are yong, remember their Creator before they be old Eccles. 12.1: & when they are in health confesse their sins, & forsake thē before they be sickProu. 28.13.. And yet, good louing brother, if thou happen to be sick, be not in any case, as I

said before, be not altogither discouraged by it. But in the next place, remēber that thy sickenes is nothing els, but Gods fatherly visitation to do thee good, & especially to mooue thee to repentance. Listen a little Harken I say. Doest thou not heare him rapping aloud, and knocking hard at the dore of thy hard hart, & saying to thee, whosoeuer thou art, Maiden arise; Young man arise; Lazarus arise and come forth. Awake therfore, awake, thou that sleepest Eph. 5.14., and stand vp from death, & Christ shall giue thee life. Say with the spirituall spouse: In my bed by night sought him whome my soule louethCant 3.1.
                     ▪ Saie with this our Prophet; Did I not remember thee vpon my bed, & meditate of thee in the night seasonPsal. 63.7,
                     ▪ Looke not still to haue pillowes sowed vnder 
                        〈◊〉
                      elbowes, neither bolster vp thy selfe an
                        ••
                      longer in thy sinnesEzec. 13.18. Lie not vpon thy beds of 
                        ••
                     orie, neither stretch thy selfe vpō thy couchAmos. 6.4.: but euery night 
                        〈◊〉
                      thy bed, & water thy couch with thy teares
                           •
                        
                     
                     ▪ Behold, saies thy heauenly husband Reuel. 3.20. I stand at the dore and knocke, if anie 
                        〈◊〉
                      heare my voice and open the dore, 
                        〈◊〉
                      come in vnto him, & wil s
                        •
                     p with 
                        〈◊〉
                      & be with me. And againCant. 2.5., Opē 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      my sister, my loue▪ my doue, mine vndefiled,

for my head is full of dewe, and my locks with the drops of the night. Wherfore seeing Christ knockes so loud at the dore of my heart for repentance, knocke thou as loud at the dore of his mercy for pardon: seeing he would so fain haue thee turn vnto him & heare his voice, be thou as willing to cal vpō his name that he may heare thy voice: seeing he is so forward to sup with thee by receiuing thy prayers, be thou as desirous to sup with him by obtaining the benefit of his passiō, euen the remission of thy sinnes. And as he saies to thy soule; Open vnto mee, my sister, my loue, my doue, mine vndefiled: so be thou bold by faith to turn the same words vpō him again, & say, Open vnto me my brother, my loue, my doue, mine vndefiled, for my head i
                        •
                     ful of de
                        •
                     , & my locks with the drops of the night. And why is my head f
                        •
                     ll of dewe, and my locks with the drop
                        •
                      of the night? Because euery night, I wash my bed, & water my couch &c. Then, deare christian brother, then thy sicknes shall not be vnto death, but for the glory of god Iob. 11.4. For God will turn all thy bed in thy sicknes Psal. 41.3.. And so wheras before it was a bedde of sicknes, hee will turne it into a bed of health: whereas a bed of paine and

griefe, into a bed of rest & cōfort: wheras a bed of teares & repēntance, into a bed of ioifull deliuerāce. Remēber thy selfe wel. At least wise as well as thou canst, & well enough, what happened to Iob, who was sick, & sore all his body ouer, & had not 
                        •
                      couch neither to lie on, but was 
                        •
                     ain to lie on a dunghil? Did not al this turne to his great good, when as the Lord did blesse his latter end much more then his beginning Iob. 42.10.? What happened to Ez
                           •
                        chi
                           ••
                        , who had sētence of death gon out against him
                        •
                      Did not he lying sick in his bed turn him toward the wal & weep, & got the sētēce of death reuersed, & 15 yeares more added to his life Esa. 38.6. What hapned to the mā sick of a palsey, who was let down through the 
                        •
                     yling bed and al in the midst 
                        〈◊〉
                      Iesus? Did not Christ with one 
                        〈…〉
                      instant heale him, so that he tooke vp his bed & departed to his own house praising godLuk. 5.25.? what hapned to the man which had bin sicke 38. yeares and was not able to steppe downe into the poole? Did not Christ saying but; Rise, take vp thy bed, & walk; cure him so, that presently he was made whole, & tooke vp his bed, & walkedIoh. 58 & 9? What hapned to E
                           •
                        c
                           •
                        s, who was sick of the palsey, as one of these two that

that I spake of last, & had kept his bed S. yeares, as the other of them? Did not S. Peter saying but thus vnto him, Eneas, Iesus Christ maketh thee whole, arise and trusse vp thy couch, so restores him, that immediately he arose Act. 9.33.34? What hapned to S. Paul who was pressed out of measure passing strength, so that hee altogether doubted euen of life? Did not the Lord whē he had receiued the sentēce of death in himself, deliuer him frō this great danger2 Cor. 
                           •
                        .8.9? What hapned to S. Pauls fellow-souldier Epaphroditus, who was sick, & no doubt sicke very neare vnto death? Did not the Lord shew mercy on him, & giue him health againe, to the great ioy of the Philippians, and generall good of all the Church?Phil. 2.27 what hapned to holy Dauid in this place, who saith of himselfe; O Lord, I am weak, my bones are vexed, my soule also is sore troubled, I am wearie of my groanings, euerie night I wash my bed, & water my couch with my teares? Did not the Lord finding him in this miserable pickle & plight, deliuer his soule from death, his eies from teares, & his feet from fallingPsal. 116.
                           •
                        .? So that in thankefull & ioifull maner hee triumpheth & saith, the Lord hath heard

the voyce of my weeping: the Lord hath heard my petitiō: the Lord wil receiue my praier. Euen as S. Paul sayth; He hath deliuered vs from so great a death
                        •
                      & doth deliuer vs: in whom also we trust that yet hee will deliuer vs 2. Cor. 1.10, O faithful, & deare louing Lord? He hath deliuered, he doth deliuer, he will deliuer. He neuer yet hath forsaken, he neuer doth forsake, he neuer will forsake, those that put their trust in him. For tel me, my good brother, if thou canst tell any thing, tell me, did Christ so miraculously restore Iob, restore Ezachas, restore the man sick of the palsey, restore the bedred man, restore E
                           ••
                        as, restore S. Paul, restore Epaphroditus, restore king Dauid to their former health & can he not restore thee? Did hee restore the most of these, whē he was crucified vpon earth, and can he not restore thee now 
                        •
                     e is crowned in heauen: Is his arme now shorter, and his power lesser, then it was then? where I maruell, where is the Centuriōs faith? Christ said then, I haue not foūd so great faith in all Israel Math. 8.10.
                     ▪ now if he were among vs, he might say▪ I haue not foūd so great faith in all the world. The Centurion beleeued though Christ came not vnder the roof of his house, but spake

the word only, his seruant might be healed wel enough: & dost thou think Christ cannot heale thee, except he come in person, & stand by thy bed side, & take thee by the hand, & rayse thee vp? For shame away with such infidelitie. This is a thousād times worse then all the sicknes of thy body. Nay rather assure thy selfe, if God say but the word, thou shalt soon recouer & haue thy health better then euer thou h
                        •
                     dst, & liue many happy & ioyfull daies after. Therefore mind thou onely that which belongeth to thee: that which belongeth to God, meddle not with it, but leaue it wholy vnto him. It is thy part to bewaile thy former sins, & in bewayling them, to water thy couch with thy teares, to cry to the Lord for mercy & forgiuenes to resolue with thy selfe stedfastly hereafter, if it please God to giue thee thy health againe, to lead a new life, This belongs to thee, & therfore this thou must meditate of, & imploy thy self about day & night: but whether thou shalt recouer or not recouer, that belongeth to God. That rests altogether in Gods pleasur & wil. if thou dost recouer thou hast thy desire. Or rather perhaps not thy desire. Seeing the holiest and best men of all incline neither

this way not that way, but wholly resign themselues, as in all other things, so especially in this case to Gods will
                        Non mea, sed tua voluntas fiat.
                     . Or if they determinately desire any thing, it is for the most part to be dissolued, & to be with Christ Phil. 1.
                           •
                        2 30, but suppose thou des
                        ••
                     e to recouer, and recouer indeed. Then as thou obtainest thy desire: so the
                        •
                      must performe thy promise, the promise thou madest when thy body was grieued with sicknesse and paine, when thy soule was oppressed with heauines, whē thou 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         redst thy couch with thy tears. And what was that promise? Namely, as I saide before, that if it pleased God to giue thee health againe, thou wouldest loue him more sincerely, serue him more obedientlie, tēder his glory more dearelie, follow thy calling more faithfully, then thou hast done. If thou hast offended him with pride, to humble thy selfe hereafter: if with dissolutenes to be sober hereafter: if with couetousnesse, to bee liberall hereafter: if with conuersing with the vngodly, to abandō their company hereafter, & to say as it is in the Psalme: Depart from me yee workers of iniquity, for the Lord hath heard the voice of my weeping. This if thou conscionablie & cōstantlie perform

then in a good houre (as we say) and in a happy time thou didst recouer. But suppose thou desire to recouer, & yet, neither thy selfe see any likelihood, nor God se
                        •
                      it good thou shouldst recouer. Thē harty repentance and watering thy couch with thy teares is most of all necessary. That the feare of death may not affright thee, but beeing truly penitent at thy departure, thou maiest be sure to depart in peaceLuk. 2.29. And so God granting not thy wil, but his wil, may indeed grant both thy wil, & his wil. Thy will, which is not simply to recouer, but cōditionally if God wil: & his wil which is not to haue thee lie languishing any longer in this warfare, but to triumph for euer in heauē.
                        Aliquando sancti non recipiendo quod petunt magis exaudiuntur, quam exandirentur si illud reciperent. Plus enim n
                              ••
                            recipiendo beatus Paulus exa
                              •
                           ditus est, quam si illud recepisset pro quo (sicut ipse ais) ter do minum rogaue rat. Exauditus est igitur, ne exaudiretur. Non enim nisi bonum Apostolus quarebat, quamuis illud non bonum sibi esse non intellig
                              •
                           bat Extuditus est igi
                           
                              •
                           ur recipiendo 
                              ••
                           num ne exa
                              •
                           
                           diretur recipiendo non bonū. Qui enim sibi bonū non quarit dum se sib▪ bonum quarere 
                              •
                           utat si id recipiat quod qua
                           
                              •
                           it, non exauditur: si non recipit, exauditur. Deus igitur qui non aliud nisi quaretis affectū considerat, bonū eicreddit quissebonum quarere credit, etiam si sibi non sit bonum quod quarit, Emisse hom inlilanqs maioribus. p. 138. O blessed teares are these, which are recompensed with such high happines, & such inestimable commodities. As namely, freedome from all sins, past, present, & to come: deliuerance from all the miseries and trouble of this wofull world: consūmation of holines, of humblenes, of purity, of deuotion, of al o
                        •
                     ther christian vertues, which were but be
                        •
                     gun & vnperfect in this life: putting away of all corruption & mortality, & putting on the royall robe of immortality and

blisse. For that which hapned to Christ shall happen to thee also, because by faith thou art not only in soule, but euē in body vnseparably vnited and ioyned vnto him, being by vertue of this misticall vnion made bone of his bone, & flesh of his flesh. Therefore as he, from that agonie, wherin he praied with strong crying and teares, from that crosse wherein hee commended his spirit into his fathers handes, from that graue wherin death for a time seemed to insult & to trample vpon him rose vp againe, & ascended farre aboue all heauens, and now sitteth at the right hād of glory, so thy soule shall certainely be in the hand of God, & thy very body also, after it hath a while rested from watering thy couch with thy teares, & from all other labors of this life shal be raised vp againe, & caught vp in the clouds & shal togither with thy soule for euer raign with Christ in the life to come. Which God grant to vs al for the same our blessed Sauiour Iesus Christs sake, to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all honour and glory, power and praise, dignitie and dominion, now and euermore. Amen.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  NINE SERMONS PREACHED By that eloquent Diuine of famous memorie, TH. PLAYFERE Doctor in DIVINITIE.
                  
                     PROV. 10.7.
                     The memoriall of the iust shall be blessed: but the name of the wicked shall rotte.
                  
                  Printed by CANTRELL LEGGE, Printer to the Vniuersitie of CAMBRIDGE. 1621.
               
               
                  
                  
                  To Sir REYNALD ARGAL Knight.
                  
                     RIGHT Worshipfull and my especiall good friend: How desirous I haue been to answer some part of your worthie curtesies, at least by laying them open to the world, this small remembrance may testifie for me: and how vnable I am to equall deseruings, the same remembrance testifieth against mee, whether I will or no; beeing borrowed from the monuments of a dead man, the onely glorie of his times while he liued. But it was fit that a farre greater gift then mine owne should aspire to bee the instrument of your honour: and the testimonie of the dead, I tooke to be meeter euen in this

regard, because that is as vnsuspected, a
                        •
                      your kindnesse toward my 
                        〈◊〉
                      beene 
                        〈…〉
                      no further disturbing the harmonie of your best thoughts, as you are wont to account it, diminishing the reward which is laid vp for you in heauen, by vntimely blazing merits vpon earth, I commit this depositum to your sauour and Patronage, my selfe also, and my endeavours: resting alwaies at
                  
                     Your Worships disposition. D. C.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  To the Reader.
                  
                     WHAT a losse the Church of God had by the death of D. Playfere, I had rather the opinion of the world should determine, then my slender pen attempt to expresse. If euer those combinations of Vertue and Learning, of Knowledge and Vtterance, of Wit and Memorie, of Reading and Vse, of Holesome and delightfull, of Schoole and Pulpit, of Olde and New, or in one word to say, of Nature and Industry, of humane felicitie and heauenly grace, concurred to make a Scribe perfect and absolute to the kingdome of God, we may not be so much our owne back-friends (though wee detract not from the fortune of places

further off) nay we may not so impeach the honour of the giuer, nor disparage the worth of our friend departed, as to doubt but this was principally manifested in M. Playfere.
                  
                  Who because he was but lent the world for a time, nay because he was redemanded sooner then his time, (if it were lawfull to controll the heauenly wisedome with that word Sooner,
                     
                        Phil. 1.
                              •
                           4.
                      but I mean in regard of the Churches vse, and that same propter vo
                           •
                        , which made the Apostle to demurre) I say since he was to be returned backe againe to his Maker, and ouer-ripe perfection not to conti
                        •••
                      ouerlong, it had bin to be wished, he had left behinde him some more monuments of his trauailes, as wel comfortable to the suruiuers, as honourable to himselfe. Which whether he in his discretion, and because he had so resolued, was nice to doe, after the example of them that would write nothing, though very able, or was then a doing most wh
                        ••
                      God cal'd him, I cannot say. This which the good Reader will be loath perhaps to heare, I may not conceale, that these are the lost of all his labours which are like to be divulged. Into so small a compasse is that spirit 
                        〈◊〉
                      ranged,
                        Cornel. apud Propet. l. 4. 
                              •
                           
                           leg. 12.
                      as to be as she sayes,

                        En sum quod digit is quinque leuatur 
                              〈◊〉
                           ,
                     
                     
or indeede not so much as a iust handfull, which lately was not confinable within bounds too great for me to speake of.
                  But the summe is this: (For I lift not to defend his method of preaching against the Methods masters of our age, who me thinks should knowe either that of the Apostle, Diuersitas donorum est, sed vnus spiritus: or that of the Prophet, Laudate eum in 
                           •
                        uba, laudate in cithara; or if nothing will please them but what they do themselues, we must be faine to say as Crassus did to Scevola, Omnium igitur conciones tu conficies vnus, omnes ad te sub tempus veniemus, &c.) I say the summe is this: that is the Sunne-light is pleasantest toward the set, and the skilfull eare finds most store of musicke in the close: so this Sun, this Swan, this sweet singer of Israel, (for what lesser tearmes can our loue affoard him? if any bring were we will not refuse them) his last monuments, and his last labours, that the world may euer hope for, shall finde we trust the dearer intertainement.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  A SERMON PREACHED at Winsor before the Kings Maiestie, the 11. day of Septem. 1604.
                  
                     
                        
                           MATTH. 4.4.
                        
                        Man liueth not by bread onely, but by euery word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.
                     
                  
                  
                     CHRIST our SAVIOVR came into the world, to dissolue the workes of the Deuill. Now how throughly hee would afterward destroy the deuill, and all his workes, he gaue a cast, as it were, in this his first encounter. Wherein we

may note, what great difference there is betweene the first Adam, and the second. The first Adam was in Paradise, a place of all abundance and pleasure: the second Adam in the desart, a place of all scarcitie and want. The first was full, and so the lesse needed to eate the forbidden fruit: the second fasting, and so the easilier drawne to make himselfe meate. Yet the first, though he were in Paradise, and full, when his wife intised him to eate the apple, tooke it, and ate it: but the second, though he were in the desart, and fasting a long time, when the deuill enticed him to turne stones into bread, would not yeeld to him, but said, Man liueth not by bread onely, but by euery word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.
                  
                  Howbeit as Christ herein was contrary to Adam; so he agreeth very well with Iob. Holy Iob was vpon a dunghill: Christ was in the desart. Iob had fasted seauen dayes, and seauen nights: Christ had fasted fortie dayes and fortie nights. Iob when his wife enticed him to curse God and die, would not▪ but said; Thou speakest like a 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     
woman: Christ when the tempter enticed him, not to curse God and die, but to distrust God rather then he should die, would not, but said, Man liueth not by bread onely, but by euerie word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.
                  
                  Where, before we goe any further, it will not be amisse to assoyle one question, Why our blessed Sauiour at his mothers request turned water into wine, and yet at the deuills request would not turne stones into bread? But the answer is easie enough. This beginning of miracles, saies S. Iohn, did Iesus at Cana in Galile, and his Disciples beleeued in him. Two ends therefore did hee propound to himselfe in working that miracle. The encrease of his owne glorie, and his disciples faith. Now here, neither of these two ends could be attained: For how should hee not haue disgraced his glorie, if hee had shewed any vaine glorie? If thou bee the Sonne of God, sayes the Tempter, commaund that these stones bee made bread. So that his temptation tended onely to this end, to make the Sonne of God vain-glorious. Againe, how could

we haue beene perswaded by him, if he had beene perswaded by the deuill? For he might haue seemed to haue done this miracle not onely by the deuils appointment, but by his power. The summe is this therefore, To conuert any poore soule vnto God, or to make a sonne of God, he would haue done it; vaine-gloriously to shew himselfe the Sonne of God, he would not doe it; but said, Man liueth not by bread onely, but by euery word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.
                  
                  The word man is very materiall: As if hee should haue said Any ordinarie man liueth not by the bread; but by the power, & strength, and as the Prophet calleth it, the staffe of bread, which God giueth it. Now if he that is but a bare man, liueth rather by the blessing of God, then by the bread; much lesse need I presume vpon vnlawfull meanes, that am both man and God. Againe, wee must obserue, that by The word which proceedeth out of the mouth of God, we are not to vnderstand the written will or word of God, but the secret counsell and decree of God, in preseruing

and sustaining his creatures: For example, if the word haue gone out of Gods mouth, and if God haue set it downe, and said it, that I shall liue as well without bread, as with bread, so it shall be. Or if God in his prouidence haue prouided, that a stone shal nourish mee as well as bread, then I shall not need to distrust his goodnesse, or to vse vnlawfull meanes for my releife. For, Man liueth not by bread onely, but by euery word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.
                  
                  There are two places of Scripture, which are fit Commentaries vpon this text.cap 9. v. 2
                           •
                        . The first is written in Ecclesiastes: I returned, saies Salomon, and I sawe vnder the sunne, that the race is not to the swift: not the battell to the strong: nor yet bread to the wise: nor also riches to men of vnderstanding: neither yet fauour to men of knowledge.
                  First, saith the Preacher, The race is not to the swift.2. Sam. 2.1
                           •
                        . 
                     Asahel was a
                        •
                      swift of foot as a roebuck, yet Abner met with him, smote him vnder the fift rib, & slew him. So that the swiftest that is, may sometimes bee ouertaken. It is not in

him that willeth,Rom 9.16. or in him that runneth, but in God that sheweth mercie, Nec currentis, Nec volentis, saies S. Paul: but a noble man giues it for his word, Nec vol
                           ••
                        tis, nec volantis: It is not in him that willeth, or in him that runneth, yea though hee can runne as fast as a bird can flie; but in God that sheweth mercie. Therefore man getteth not the race by swiftnes onely, but by the mercy of God: Man liueth not by bread onely, but by euery word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.
                  
                  Secondly, saith the Preacher, The battell is not to the strong. Golia
                           •
                        
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      a mightie strong gyant: His height w
                        ••
                      sixe cubits,1. Sam. 17.5. and a hand breadth: he had an helmet of brasse vpon his head, and a brigandine vpon his bodie: and the weight of his brigandine was fiue thousand shekels of brasse. He had bootes of brasse vpon his legs: & a sheild of brasse vpon his shoulders. And the shaft of his speare was like a weauers beame: and his speare head weighed sixe hundred shekels of yron: & one bearing a she
                        •••
                      went before him. Wherefore 
                        〈◊〉
                      you is all this furniture so particularly

set downe? Wherefore, say you? Many to shew, how great strength, the Lord if the word haue proceeded out of his mouth, can ouercome with weakenesse. For so little Dauid confesseth;ver. 45. Thou commest to me, saith he, with a sword, and with a speare, and with a sheild, but I come to thee in the name of the Lord of hosts. This name of the Lord of hosts, this mightie word proceeding out of Gods mouth, stroke the stroke. Euen as holy Dauid humbly confesseth, saying, We got not the victorie by our owne sword,Psal. 4
                           •
                        .9. neither was it our arme that did saue vs: but thy right hand, O Lord, and thine arme, and the light of thy countenance, because thou hadst a fauour vnto vs. So that man getteth not the battel by strength onely, but by the fauour of God: Man liueth not by bread onely, but by euery word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.
                  
                  Thirdly, saith the Preacher, Bread is not to the wise. One would thinke him but a simple wise man, that cannot by his wisdome prouide himselfe bread, that is, sufficient maintenance for his estate. Yet thus is falleth out oftentimes.

The prodigall child was wise enough:Luk. 15.17. Beeing but the yonger brother, he handled the matter so, as that he got of his father an equall portion of goods with the elder brother. But what came all his wisdome to in the ende? Forsooth as length he was driuen to such shifts, that for want of bread he was faine to eate husks with the hogges. And then hee said, How many hired seruants in my fathers house haue bread enough, and I starue here for hunger? Thus falleth it out many times with thē, that are wise to follow their owne pleasures, and not to serue God. But with the seruants of God it is not so. Therefore saith the Princely Prophet, I haue beene young, and now am old: yet did I neuer see the righteous forsaken, nor their seed begging their bread. So that man getteth not bread by wisdome onely, and when he hath gotten bread, Man liueth not by bread onely, but by euery word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.
                  
                  Fourthly, saith the preacher, Riches are not to men of vnderstanding. That rich man in the Gospell wanted 
                        〈◊〉
                      greatly any vnderstanding. Wh
                        ••
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     
had so much riches,Luk. 12.10. that he could not tell what to doe with them, he resolued to pull downe his olde barnes which were too little, and to build bigger. But what saide the answer of God? Thou foole, this night shal they take away thy foule from thee, and then, whose shall thy goods be? Wherfore be that thoght himselfe of great vnderstanding before, is here declared to bee foole, and a poore foole also, hauing not so much as his soule left to helpe him. The losse whereof can not be recompenced and counteruailed with winning the whole world. A mans life then doth not consist in the aboundance of those things which he possesseth. But the louing kindnesse of the Lord is better then riches,Psal. 63.4. Prou. 10. better then liuing, yea better then life it selfe. For in God onely we liue: And only the blessing of God maketh a man rich. Whereupon we may conclude, that man getteth not riches by vnderstanding only, but by the blessing of God: Man liueth not by bread onely, but by euery word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.
                  Lastly, saith the Preacher, Fauour is

not to men of knowledge. It seemeth that a man of knowledge and learning should obtaine fauour and acceptance, wheresoeuer he becommeth. But it is not so. Oftentimes, either he getteth none, or else he looseth that which he hath gotten. Haman a man of great knowledge,Ester 7.10. and authoritie, and fauour with his Prince. Yet because he abused this fauour to the oppression of Gods people, and of true religion, therefore he lost it. And that mischeife which he imagined against others, lighted vpon his owne pate. Indeede when God hath appointed any one to be a notable instrument of his glorie, either in Church or Common-wealth, then sodainly the Lord giueth him extraordinary fauour. So he gaue Ioseph fauour with King Pharao: so he gauē Mardocheus fauour with King Assuerus. For fauour and promotion commeth neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the North, nor from the South, but God i
                        •
                      is which setteth vp one, and casteth downe an other. He, as the blessed Virgin singeth in her Magnificat,Luk 52. casteth downe the mighty from their se
                        ••
                     s, and

exalteth the humble and meeke. Wherfore man getteth not fauour by knowledge onely, but by the fauour of God. Man liueth not by bread onely, but by euery word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.
                  This doctrine teacheth vs, that if we haue gotten the race, gotten the battel, gotten bread, gotten riches, gotten fauour, we should not ascribe these things to our owne sacrifices, to our owne strength, to our owne wisedome, to our own vnderstanding, to our own knowledge, but to the grace of God, and the blessed word proceeding out of his mouth. Thus the Prophet exhorteth, saying, Let not he wise man glorie in his wisedome, nor the strong man in his strength, but let him that gloried glory in this, that he knoweth the Lord. Now no man knoweth the Lord, but hee which knoweth that all good successe he hath in any thing, commeth of the Lord. And thus much for the first place of Scripture, which is a commentarie vpon this text. Man liueth not by bread onely, but by euery word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.
                  
                     The second place of Scripture is written in the Prophet Hagge.
                     cap. 1.6. Ye haue so wen much, and bring in little: ye eat, but you haue not enough: ye drinke, but ye are not filled: ye cloth you, but ye are not warme: and he that earneth wages, putteth the wages into a broken bagge.
                  First, saith the Prophet, Ye haue sowed much, and bring in little. Almightie God for the sin of the people makes many times the heauens brasse, and the earth iron. So that neither the heauens droppeth downe seasonable showres, neither doth the earth bring forth her encrease. When one came to a 
                        •
                     e
                        ••
                     e of twenty measures, there were but te
                        •
                     , saith this our Prophet:cap. 2.17. when one came to the winepresse for to drawe out fifty vessels out of the presse, there were but twentie. This is to sowe much, and bring in little, to look for twenty measures, and finde but tenne: to looke for fiftie vessels, and find but twentie. On the other side, holy Isaac sowing in the land of King Abimeleck,Gen. 26.12. gained euery yeare an hundred fold: so mightily sait
                        •
                      the Scripture, did the Lord blesse 
                        〈◊〉
                     . For except the Lord build the 
                        〈◊〉
                     ,

they labour but in vaine that build it: and except the Lord till the field and sow the seede, they labour but in vaine that sowe it. Paul planteth, Apollo watereth, but God giueth the encrease: which is true not onely in the spirituall watering of the word, but also in naturall planting and sowing seede. So that man bringeth not much in by sowing onely, but by the encrease which God giueth. Man liueth not by bread onely, but by euery word which proceedeth out of the mouth of God.
                  Secondly, saith the Prophet, Ye eate, but ye haue not inough. Many there are which want for no eating▪ but like that rich glutton fare deliciously euery day: yet it is smally seene by them. But as those seuen leane kine hauing deuoured the seuen far,Gen. 42.21. were neuer a whit the fuller; so these. Wheras holy Daniel hauing nothing to eat but poore pulse, nothing to drinke but cold water, looked more cheerefully and beautifully, then any of the children which did eate of the portion of the kings meate. And that the Eunuch saw well enough,Dan. 1.15. and confessed at the tenne daies ends. Therefore a

little thing which the righteous inioyeth,Psal. 37.
                           •
                        6. is better then great riches of the wicked.Prou. 15.16. Better is a little with the feare of the Lord, then great treasure & trouble therewith.Prou. 17.1. Better is a dry morsell if peace be with it, then a house full of sacrifices with si
                        •
                     ife. Better is a dinner of greene hearbes where loue is,Prou. 15.17. then a stawled oxe and hatred therewith. In conclusion then, Man hath not enough by eating onely, but by the peace and loue of God. Man liueth not by bread onely, but by euery word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.
                  Thirdly saith the Prophet, Ye drink▪ but ye are not filled. Many consume, & as we say, drinke down their whole patrimony. Like the horseleach they euer say, Giue, giue: like the man in the Gospell, that had the dropsie, they drinke still, and the more they drinke the more they list. Committing in the meane season two sinnes, forsaking God the fountaine of liuing waters, & digging to themselues pittes that can hold no waters.Ier. 2.13. On the other side, Elias, when as the Angel brought him a cake ba
                        ••
                      on the harth, and a pot of water, was

so fully satisfied with these, that hee went in the strength of this meate and drinke forty daies vnto Oreb the mount of God.1. Reg. 19.6. Could such a small pittance of bread and water of it selfe sustaine him so long? No marrie. What was the matter then? The word that proceeded out of Gods mouth had appointed so, that one cruse of water should suffice him all that time. Whereby we see, that man is not filled with drinking onely: Man liueth not by bread onely, but by euery word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.
                  Fourthly,Commentar. in c. Reg. 1. saith the Prophet, Yea cloth you, but you are not warme. Peter Martyr sheweth, that clothing doth keepe the bodie warme two waies: By keeping in the naturall heat of the bodie: and by keeping out the accidentall cold of the ayre. Now though this be the propertie of cloathing, yet God as it pleaseth him, can suspend the effect of it. Whereupon he saith, I will take a way my corne in the time thereof, and my wine in the season thereof,Hos. 2.9. and I wil deliuer my wooll and my flaxe. Signifying, that euen when the corne is

come to the ripenesse, and the wine now readie to be drunken, God will depriue them of it. But especially we must marke that he sai's, I will deli
                        •
                     es my wooll and my flaxe:Liberabo lanam meam, &c linum meum. whereby 
                        〈◊〉
                      teacheth vs, that God hath as it we
                        ••
                      if I may so say, bound all his creat
                        ••••
                      prentises to vs, to preserue vs, and serue vs, if we serue him. But in case we serue him not, then the creatures are deliuered, and are bound no more to serue vs. The wool and the flax contrary to their nature will not serue our turne, if we contrarie to grace rebell against God. Whereas Iohn Baptist hauing a garment of Camels haire, and a girdle of leather about his loynes, was well enough. This leather serued him to as good vse as flaxe, and the Camels haire kept him as warme as wool. Man therefore is not warme by cloathing onely, but by vertue of God annexed to the clothing. Man liueth not by bread onely, but by euery word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.
                  Lastly, saith the Prophet, Hee that earneth wages, putteth the wages 
                        〈◊〉
                      a broken bagge. We see in the world

many men haue great fees, great offices, great reuenues, and yet can scarse keep themselues out of debt. Other some, haue but very small wages, and yet 
                        •
                     aintaine themselues well inough, and 
                        •
                     elpe their poore friends also. Onely the word that proceedeth out of Gods mouth, makes this difference. As we may see in Iudas. Who indeed earned wages, but seeing it was the wages of vnrighteousnesse, therefore it run out of the bagge as fast as it was put in: For first, when he had it he could not hold it in his hands, but brought it backe againe, saying,Matth. 27.5. I haue sinned in betraying innocent blood. Then himselfe went and made away himselfe, and that which is feareful but once to name or mention, all his bowells gushed out: There is a broken bagge. But the Patriarch Iacob, earning wages verie hardly, to wit, seruing fourteene yeares for his vncles daughters, and sixe years for his lambs, in all twentie yeares, in the ende filled his bagge full. And though Laban changed his wages ten times, yet he could not one time change that blessing of god, which was alwaies

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
vpon him. And though he allotted his nephew only the spotted lambs, which commonly were verie fewe to his wages, yet the word proceeding so out of Gods mouth, this prooued an infinite gaine vnto him. Wherupon the blessed Patriarke humbleth himselfe in tru
                        •
                      humility and thankfulnesse to God,Gen. 3
                           •
                        .10. and saith, O Lord, I am not worthie of the least of al thy mercies: for with my staffe came I ouer this Iordan, but now doe I returne with two troups. O that we had such good soules, such thankefull hearts in vs, as that euery one of vs would in like sort confesse and acknowledge his owne vnworthinesse, and the wonderfull worth and wealth of Gods mercie. O Lord, sai's he, I am not worthy of the least, or I am lesser then the least of all thy mercies. He makes no mention of his owne paines and trauailes, though they had beene very great in that long seruice, but onely of the mercies of God. These were the only cause that his bagge was so full. Wherefore man filleth not his bagge by earning wages onely, but by the mercies of God, Man liueth not by bread onely, but by euery

word which proceedeth out of the mouth of God.
                  This teacheth vs, that whether we sow, or eate, or drinke, or cloath vs, or earne wages, we must do all to the glo
                     
                        •
                     ie of God. And all we doe to the glorie of God, when we referre the glory of all we doe to God. Not sacrificing to our own yarne, as the Prophet speaketh, or kissing our owne hand: but kissing the sonne, and offring vp to him only the sacrifices of praise and thanksgiuing at whose hand we receiue all good things. For it is not our painfull sowing that giues vs a plentifull crop: not our eating that feedeth vs: not our drinking that satisfieth vs: not our clothes that warme vs: not our earning wages that filleth our bagge: but the good word that proceedeth out of Gods mouth, which blessed all these things vnto vs. Therefore as we must not begin any of these without gracesaying, so must we not end any of them without thanksgiuing. And thus much for the second place of Scripture, which is a commentarie vpon the text: Man liueth not by bread onely, but by euery

word which proceedeth out of the mouth of God.
                  To make good vse then of all that hath beene spoken, I shall desire you to obserue foure points. First, that God can worke great matters with small meanes. Thus saith our Lord; When I brake the fiue lo
                        ••
                     es among fiue thousands,Mat. 
                           •
                        .
                           ••
                        . how many baskets full of broken meate tooke ye vp? they said vnto him, Twelue. And when I brake seauen among fowre thousand, how many baskets of the leauings of broken meate tooke ye vp? and they said, Seauen. Certainely there is no reason in the world that seauen loaues should satisfie fowre thousand; and much lesse, that fiue loaues fiue thousand. But Christ hauing giuen thanks and blessed the bread, did that by the might of the word proceeding out of his mouth, which by the naturall power and condition of the bread could neuer haue beene done. Therefore also he repeateth it, and questioneth with his disciples about it. That by their confession and report, all the Church afterwards might bele
                        ••
                     e, that God can worke great matters with

small means, & that Man liueth not by bread onely, but by euery word which proceedeth out of the mouth of God.
                  Secondly, that God can work strong matters with weake meanes. What a strong violent matter is it, to pull the soule of any one sinner out of the bottome of hell, and out of the 
                        •
                     awes of destruction? yet this God doth. But how doth he it? This strong matter, howe doth he worke it? By the weakest means that may be. Wee haue this treasure, saith the Apostle,2. Cor 6.7. in earthen vessells, that the excellēcy of that power might be of God, and not of vs. O marueilous words, That the excellencie of that power might be of God, and not of vs. For if Angels were sent to preach vnto vs, it might be thought, that the conuersion of sinners consisted in the excellencie of the Angels ministrie, not in the power of Gods word. Now simple and sinnefull men, such as our selues are, no better then earthen vessels, bringing such a treasure vnto vs, the excellencie of this worke must needs be wholly ascribed to God. And as it is in spirituall foode, so it is in corporall. It is not the

teacher, but the doctrine taught: or ra
                     
                        •
                     her not the doctrine 
                        •
                     ar
                        •
                     ly taught neither, but the diuine operation of Gods spirit working with the word which cō
                     uerteth the soule. And so it is not the bread onely, but the blessing of Gods grace vpon the bread which sustaineth our life. Thus God can worke strong matters with weake meanes; and Ma
                        •
                      liueth not by bread onely, but by euery word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.
                  Thirdly, that God can worke some matters with no meanes. When King Asa sawe himselfe ouer pressed with the multitude of his enemies,2. Chr. 14.11. he praied th
                        ••
                      to God: O Lord, it is all one with thee, to saue with many, or with no power. If he had said with many, or with a small power, it would haue beene plaine. But with many, or with no power, is verie wonderfull. Or rather it is no wonder at all, seeing it is spoken of God, with whom it is a very ordinary matter to saue, not onely as well with a small or a weak power, as with a great or a strong power, but also as well with no power, as with some power. It is a good carpenter,

who hauing crooked and rough timber put into his hands, can hew it and make it fit for the building. Onely the creator of all it is which can worke, hauing no matter at all to worke vpon. The ordinarie meanes for plants and hearbs to growe by, is raine: Yet God prouided for Adam plants and herbes before euer it had rained.Gen. 2.5. The vsuall meanes for light is the sunne. Howbeit God created light before he made the sunne.Gen. 1.3. Light the first day, the sunne the fourth day. We see then that God is tied to no meanes. God can saue with no power, as wel as with some power: God can giue vs hearbs with no raine, as wel as with some raine: God can giue vs light without any sunne, as well as with the sunne: God can feede vs if it please him, as well with no bread as with bread. Therefore God can worke some matters with no meanes; and so Man liueth not by bread onely, but by euery word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.
                  Fourthly, that God can worke othersome matters with contrarie meanes. He can not onely shewe vs light without

any sunne,1. Cor. 4.6. but also bring light out of darkenesse. So our Sauiour, when hee went about to cure him that was borne blind,Iohn 9.6. tempered spittle and clay, and put it vpon his eyes. This plaister seemes more likely to put out his eyes which sees, then to cure his eyes who is blind. Yet this is the power of the word proceeding out of Gods mouth. So the Prophet Elizeus,2. Reg. 4.40. when colloquintida was put into the pot, by casting in a little meale into it, made of tanke poyson a wholesome broth. So, when the Israelites wanted bread in the desert, God sent them Manna from heauen; & Moses said vnto them, This is the bread which the Lord hath giuen you to eate.Exod. 16.25. Many things here were contrary to nature. One thing especially, that the dew which made the manna, fell in the morning, whereas other dew vseth to fall in the euening, and ascend in the morning. Therefore Moses putteth Israel in mind of this strange miracle afterward;Deut. 8.3. God made thee hungry, and fed thee with Mann
                        •
                     , saith hee, which thou knewest not, neither did thy fathers knowe it, that hee might teach them that man liueth

not by bread onely, but by euery word that proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lord, doth a man liue. Christs answer then to the tempter is, as if hee should haue said; I want now bread in the desart, as long agoe the Israelites wanted it. But God by his word prouided for them. Therefore I need not incroach vpon vnlawfull meanes, but depending still vpon his prouidence, I shal neuer want. For God can worke great matters with small meanes, strong matters with weake meanes, many matters with no meanes, and some matters with contrary means. So that Man liueth not by bread onely, but by euery word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.
                  And yet this is no doctrine of idlenesse and securitie neither. As we must not by diffidence or distrust in God, vse vnlawfull meanes: so we must not by presuming vpon God, neglect lawfull meanes. That we be not too distrustfull we are sent to the lillie; and yet that we be not too negligent, we are sent to the ant. S. Paul knewe right well,Act. 
                           •
                        7. neither he nor any of his company should bee cast away in that shipwracke; yet for

all that, he did not lay him downe vpon a pillowe and sleepe, but hee vsed all good meanes for the safety of the companie. Hee cast out the wheat and the tackling of the ship: he loosed the r
                        •
                     dder bands, and hoysed vp the main saile. And when the ship was splitted, he perswaded some by bords, and other by other peices of the ship to swim safe to land.Then was a fire in Winsor towne. The more to blame were they yesternight, which when they might 
                        •••
                     e done good, stood by still and looked on. As though it were a disparagement, or rather it were not a very honourable part for any to help in a common daunger? Or as though the fire which was kindled by negligence, should haue beene extinguished with negligence also. Yea, rather the Lord did by this fire, chastise the negligence of some, that he might stirre vp the diligence of all. No lesse blame worthie was the whole towne, which standing so neere the royal presence of the Kings Maiestie and the Queenes Maiestie, yet was vtterly vnprouided of all helpe in this case. No buckets, no hookes, no ladders, no axes, could be gotten; 
                        •
                     o

carpenters could bee heard of, which might haue done most good at such a time. So that if the mightie and mercifull word proceeding out of the mouth of God, had not helped in necessity and time of neede, suddainly caulming and stilling the wind, euen at that very instant, which had beene busie all the day before, no question it had growne to a farre greater dammage and danger. But I am ill aduised to meddle with these things. I make no doubt but order will be taken, though I hold my peace, that hereafter the towne for all such casualties be better prouided. Therefo
                        •
                     e here I ende. God for his mercie sake grant, that neither by too much presuming confidence we may neglect the lawfull meanes; nor yet by too much distrusting diffidence wee may vse vnlawfull meanes; but that depending vpon thy prouidence, O Lord, we may diligently follow the workes of our calling, and so continually receiue a blessing from thee thorough Iesus Christ: to whome with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be all praise, and glorie, now and euermore. Amen.
                  FINIS.
               
               
                  
                  A SERMON PREACHED at Hampton Court before the Kings Maiestie, the 23. day of Septem. 1604.
                  
                     
                        
                           2. COR. 4.17.
                        
                        The momentarie lightnes of our affliction, worketh vs a surpassing exceeding eternall waight of glory.
                     
                  
                  
                     2. Pet. 3.
                     SAint Peter foretelleth that some should peruer
                        •
                      S. Pauls Epistles to their owne d
                        ••
                     na
                        •
                     ion. Such are they of the Church of Rome. Among other places of S. Pauls Epistles, they doe notably peruert this. For out of

that the Apostle saith, Affliction worketh glory; they endeauour to conclude, that the patience of the Saints, and other their vertues, merit euerlasting life. But first the word, To worke, is very generall, and signifieth not onely causes properly so named, but also any antecedent, though it be but an adiunct, or an accident. Againe, the Apostles words elsewhere are these:Rom. 8.18. I suppose that the afflictions of this life, are not worthy of the glorie which shall be reuealed. Wherefore they might haue done well, to choose some indifferent construction which would haue reconciled both these places together, rather then to embrace such an exposition of the one, as doth iustle, nay quite thrust out the other. S. Bernard doth thus, saying,Via regni. non causa regnandi. that good workes, are not any cause meriting a kingdome, but onely a way directing to a kingdome. For seeing they are no cause, neither haue any correspondence, or proportion in them in respect of the glorie to come, therefore the Apostle saith, The afflictions of this life are not worthy the glory that will be reuealed. And yet againe, because

the possessing of our soules in patience, is a way directly tending to the saluation both of our soules & bodies, therefore hee saith, The momentarie lightnesse of our afflicton worketh vs a surpassing exceeding eternall weight of glory. To which our Sauiour subscribeth in these words, The gate is straight, and the way narrowe which leadeth vnto life. This straightnesse therefore and narrownesse of affliction, is not a cause which deserueth, but a gate or a way which leadeth vnto l
                        ••
                     e. So in an other place we haue, that by many tribulations wee must enter into the kingdome of heauen. Not by many tribulations, no nor by any tribulations, we must merit heauen, but by many tribulations as by a gate or way, wee must enter into the kingdome of heauen. And in this sense S. Paul sayes, The momentarie lightnesse of our affliction worketh vs a surpassing exceeding eternall waight of glory.
                  But now though this sentence doe not confirme any Popish error, yet it doth excellently comfort any distressed and afflicted. For it exhorteth vs to be

patient in all afflictions, and that for foure reasons. The two first drawn from the nature of our affliction, the two last from the nature of that glorie which shal be the reward of our affliction. The first is, because our affliction is momentarie: the second because our affliction is light: the third, because our glorie shall be eternall, yea surpassing eternal: the fourth, because our glorie shall bee weightie, exceeding waightie. And therefore hee saith, The momentarie lightnesse of our affliction, worketh vs a surpassing exceeding eternall waight of glorie.
                  I need not here make any Apologie for my selfe, not yet render any reason, why I discourse of pouertie, before the rich; of affliction, before those that are euery way flourishing.Mv L. Almner, Bishop Wa
                           ••
                        on vpon these words; The poore man
                           •
                         dayes are alwayes euill. Prou. 1
                           •
                        .15. This point was cleared so reuerently and so learnedly of late in this high presence, that I am sure it must needes bee yet well remembred. Certainely though ye haue not beene afflicted heretofore, neither are at this time, yet beeing men, yet may be hereafter. Wherefore it is not amisse, that we all learne the doctrine

of patience in tribulation. Partly that we may be more thankefull to God, if hitherto we haue not beene afflicted and plagued like other men: Partly that if any time of affliction happen hereafter, as any greife, any losse, any sicknes, or such like, we may be prepared aforehand, and as it were armed with patience to endure it. For the momentarie lightnesse of our affliction, worketh vs a surpassing exceeding eternall w
                        •
                     ight of glory.
                  First, our affliction is momentary 
                        〈◊〉
                      sai's Eucherius.Nihil est magnum re, quod breue tempore Nothing is of great 
                        •
                     mportance, which is of small cōtinuance. Now our whole life is very short. What is our life,Iam 4.14. saith S. Iames? It is a vapour which for a time appeareth, but anon after vanisheth away. Therefore saith the Prophet,Psal. 56.
                           •
                        . O Lord, thou knowest my life, as it is in the Septuagint: but as it is in the Hebrewe, Thou knowest my flitting. And therefore seeing our whole life is but a vapour, or a flitting, certenly our afflictions which are all comprised within the compasse of this life, must needes be much more momentary. All affliction, as the Apostle writeth,Heb. 12.11.
                     
for the presēt seemeth not to be ioyous but greiuous; but afterward it bringeth forth the quiet fruits of righteousnesse to them that are exercised thereby. He saith not that affliction is, but that it seemeth to be. So that affliction seemeth to be one thing, and is indeede an other. It seemeth to be greiuous, it is indeed ioyous: it seemeth to be troublesome, it is indeede comfortable: it seemeth to be long and tedious, it is indeede momentary and short. Euen as God himselfe determineth this matter; for a moment,Esa 54 8. saith he, in mine anger, for a little season haue I hid my face from you; but in euerlasting mercy will I turne vnto you againe. That we should not doubt of this doctrine, he redoubles the promise, for a moment, for little season.Psal. 30.6. Therefore the Princely Prophet say's plainly. Heauines may endure for a night, but ioy commeth in the morning. As the two Angels then that came to Lot log'd with him for a night,Gen. 19.2. and when they had dispatch't their errand, went away in the morning: so afflictions, which are the Angels or the messengers of God. God

sendeth afflictions to doe an errand vnto vs, to tell vs, we forget God, we forget our selues, wee are too proud, too selfe conceited, and such like: and when they haue said as they were bod, then presently they are gone. Whereupon we read, that the spirit of life returned into the two witnesses which had beene slaine by the beast,Reu 11.11. after three dayes and an halfe. Why after three dayes and an halfe? To teach vs, that affliction and persecution may perhaps tyranize ouer vs three dayes and an halfe, but they shall not fill vp the whole sowre dayes.Matth. 24.22. For the elects sake those dayes shall be shortened. Agreeable to that which Iohn Baptist begunne his preaching with, Repent; for the kingdome of heauen is at hand.Matth. 3.2. Repent, that's a matter of mortification and 
                        •
                     ffliction to the flesh. For the kingdom of heauen is at hand, That's a matter of comfort and ioy.Reuel. 22.
                           •
                        2. So our Sauiour, Behold I come quickly, and my reward with mee: if Christ will come quickly, then affliction will be gone quickly. Thus momentarie is our affliction: For our whole life is short, much more then the afflictions

of this life: affliction is greiuous but for the present: heauines endureth but for a night: persecution lasteth but three dayes and an halfe: the kingdome of heauen is at hand, therefore deliuerance is at hand: Christ will o
                        •
                      the quickly, therefore affliction will be gone quickly. Wherefore seeing our affliction is so momentarie, let vs be patient in affliction: For the momentarie lightnesse of our affliction worketh vs a surpassing exceeding eternall waight of glory.
                  Secondly, our affliction is light. Almighty God setting forth his owne excellencie, saith, Who hath measured the heauens with his span,Esa. 40.12. and the waters with his fist? By the heauens are meant the diuine blessings of God; by the waters, afflictions & woes. Those he measureth with his span, which is a longer measure: these with his fist, which is a shorter measure. So that the Lord is as I may say a rhetoritian, verie plentifull and copious in his blessings; he measureth them with his spanne: But he is a logitian, more short and sparing in his afflictions,Psal. 75.9. these he measureth with his fist. For in the hand of the Lord there

is a cuppe, the wine is redde, and full mixt, he powreth out of the same: as for the dregges thereof, the wicked of the earth doe drinke them vp. First, we drinke not this cup onely full of redde wine, that 
                        〈◊〉
                      of the wrath and indignation of God, but mixt with diners comforts otherwise. Then besides we meddle not with the dregges. Vpon the vngodly he shal raigne snares, fire, & brimstone, storme, and tempest, this shall be their portion to drinke. We drinke only a little of the vppermost. And therefore he saith, God powreth out of the same. That after we haue suffered a 
                        
                           ••
                        
                        dicum, as S. Peter speaketh,1. Pet. 5.20. we may then enter into glorie. According to King Dauid his prayer, Comfort vs, O Lord, now for the time wherein thou hast afflicted vs, and for the daies wherin we haue seene euill. Hierome noteth, that hauing first said wherein thou hast afflicted vs; he expounds it after by these words,Psal. 90.15. wherein we haue seene euill. Therefore that which Acteon wished,Velle
                           •
                        que videre, non etia
                           •
                         sentire. Ouid. that he might see only his 
                        •
                     ounds hunting, and not feele it, that happeneth indeede to vs. Our affliction is, not

a feeling of euill neare at hand, but onely a feeling of it a farre off. A
                        •
                      the Persian Kings children in their minority, if they had committed a fault, were not corrected themselues, but onely sawe some of meaner birth chastised before them: so God teacheth vs to take heed, rather by other mens, then by our owne harmes. And looke how Abraham laid nothing but wood vpon his sonne Isaac, carrying the knife and the fire himselfe: after the same sort dealeth our heauenly father with vs. He laieth vpon vs wood without a knife. The Phisitian saith, that is the best exercise which is ad ruborem, non ad sudor
                           •
                        m, refreshing the spirits and stirring vp the blood a little, but not putting a man into any great sweat. But the Diuine may say, that is the best affliction, which is ad sudorem, non ad sanguinem. Therefore God laieth vpon vs wood ad sudorē, to make vs sweat,Gen. 3.19. In the sweat of thy browes shalt thou eat thy bread; not a knife ad sanguinem,
                     Heb. 12.4. to make vs bleed, Ye haue not yet resisted vnto blood. God laieth vpon vs wood without fire. Now wood without fire, is not greatly dangerous.

Or say he lay vpon vs both wood and fire: yet the voice of the Lord deuideth the flame of fire. For in the flame of fire naturally there is heate and light. But notwithstanding the omnipotent voice of the Lord deuideth these, one from the other. As the cursed in hell shew, and the elect vpon earth. I am tormented in the flame, saith Diues. Theres heat but no light. Contrariwise the three children in the furnace shined as Angels for light, but were so farre from heat, that no one haire of their 
                        •
                     ead, or of their apparell perished. When Moses saw a bush burning and not consumed, he saide, I will goe, and see this great vision. A great vision indeede. There was a flame of fire. Els how was the bush burning? There was light. Els how did Moses see it? There was no heat.Exod. 3.2. Els how was not the bush consumed? Yet in euery faithfull one afflicted you may see this great vision. The voice of the Lord in his affliction, as in the flame of fire,Psal. 97.11. diuideth the heat from the light. So that he is not consumed by the heat, (nay rather his infirmities and carnall concupiscences are consumed

thereby) but onely illuminated by the light. According to that, Onely vexation giueth vnderstanding. And in an other place, Light is sprung vp to the righteous, and ioy to them that are true of heart. Thus ye see how tenderly our deare father dealeth with vs, He laieth either no fire at all vpon vs, or else no burning fire for heat, but onely a blasing fire for light. To make short. Many hands (as we say) make light worke. Now wee haue many comparteners and fellowes which make the labour of our affliction light. First, all creatures sigh and grone with vs;Rom 8.22. Then, all the faithfull beare one an others burthens,Gal. 6. and so fulfill the lawe of God. Thirdly, the good Angels haue a charge giuen them of vs,Psal. 91.11. that we hurt not our foot at any time against a stone. Next,Psal. 55.23. God the father biddeth vs cast our burthen vpon him, and promiseth to nourish vs. Fiftly, the holy Ghost helpeth our infirmities,Rom. 8.19. and helpeth them euen when we are readie to be oppressed by them. Lastly, God the sonne setteth to his hand likewise, and saith,Matth. 11.10. Come vnto me all ye that labour

and are heauie loaden, and I will refresh you: take my yoake vpon you; for my yoake is easie, and my burthen is light. As if he should haue said, To drawe in the yoake without me, would be a hard matter; and to beare the burthen without me, would be aboue our strength: but if you come to me, if you drawe and beare with me, I will refresh you; For my yoake is easie, and my burthen is light. Thus light is our affliction. For God measureth to vs the water with his fist, which is the shorter measure: he causeth vs to drink of the cup on otherwise but as it is mixt with many comforts: he maketh vs not swallow vp the lees of it, but onely a little modicum of the vppermost: he laieth affliction vpon vs, which is rather a seeing, then a feeling of euill: he laieth wood vpon vs to exercise vs, but neither a knife to cut vs not yet fire to burne vs. Lastly, we haue many fellowes in our affliction which make it light. All creatures: all the faithfull: all the good angels: God the father: God the holy Ghost: God the Sonne, who saith, My yoake is easie▪ and my burden is light. Wherefore seeing

our affliction is so many waies light, we must be patient in all affliction; For the momentarie lightnesse of our affliction worketh vs a surpassing exceeding eternall waight of glorie.
                  Thirdly, our glorie is eternall, yea, surpassing eternal. The glorie we looke for is called a kingdome. Of which the Princely Prophet saith thus;Psal. 145.13. Thy kingdome is an euerlasting kingdome, and thy dominion endureth throughout all ages.Origen in Can 42. Whereupon Origen noteth, that as there is a holy, and a holy of holyes; as a saboth, and a saboth of saboths; as a heauen, and a heauen of heauens; as a song, and a song of songs: so there is an age, and an age of ages. And againe, as that which is not onely a holy, but also a holy of holies, is the holiest place of all; as that which is not onely a saboth, but also a saboth of saboths, is the perfectest rest of all; as that which is not onely a heauen, but also a heauen of heauens, is the highest heauen of all; as that which is not onely a song, but also a song of songs, is the excellentest song of all: so that which is not onely an age, but also an age of ages, and especially,

as the Psalmist speaketh, an age of all ages, is the most infinite eternitie of all. Which seeing it is attributed to the kingdome of Christ, beeing likewise the kingdome of all true Christians, it followeth that our glorie is surpassing eternall. Whereupon Prosper noteth, that that which Virgil writeth of Augustus Caesar,
                     De promiss & praedict. He hath giuen vs an Empire without ende;Imperium 
                           •
                        ine fine dedit. may much more fitly be applyed to Christ. For though Augustus raigned very long, aboue fiftie yeares, yet at length his gouernment as all other earthly kingdomes, was determined. But of our heauenly King only the angel Gabriel said most truely, Of his kingdome there shall be no end.Luk. 1.53. Of his kingdome there shall be no end. Now this glorie is as well called a crowne, as a kingdome. And this crowne,2. Pet. 1.14. as S. Peter saith, is vndefiled, which neuer fadeth away. The Greeke words which S. Peter vseth,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . are Latine words also: and they are not onely appellatiues, beeing the epithites of th
                        ••
                      crowne, but also propers, the one the proper name of a stone, the other of a flower.Isidorus Etimolog. l. 16. c. 4. For Isidore writeth there is a precious stone called Amiantus, which

though it be neuer so much soyled, yet it can neuer at all bee blemished. And beeing cast into the fire, it is taken out still more bright and cleane. Also Clemens writeth, that there is a flower called Amarantus,
                     Alexandrin. Pedagog. l. 1. c. 8. which beeing a long time hung vp in the house, yet still is fresh and greene. To both which, the stone and the flower, the Apostle, as I am verily perswaded, alludeth in this place. As if hee should haue said, The crowne which yee shall receiue, shall be studded with the stone Amiantus, which cannot be defiled; and it shall be garnished with the flower Amarantus, which alwayes is fresh and neuer fades away: ye shall receiue a crowne vndefiled, and that neuer fades away. Which as Beda noteth, was in
                        •
                     inuated in the crowne round about the Arke of the Testament. For in a circle there is neither beginning nor ending. Or rather euery where there is a beginning, euery where an ending; and so no where any beginning or ending. To shew that the patient also shall haue a crowne set vpon their head per circuitum, running round in a circle, and neuer comming

to any end of eternitie. Well, our glorie is called also a treasure. Three kind of treasures there are: A treasure in hel: a treasure in earth: a treasure in heauen. That in hell is a treasure of torments: that in earth is a treasure of snow: that in heauen is a treasure of eternitie. For the first,Iam. 51.3. S. Iames sayes; Go to now you rich men, weepe and howle for the miseries that shall come vpon you; your riches are corrupt, and your garments are moath-eaten: your gold and siluer is cankred, and the rust of them shall bee a witnesse against you, and shall eate your flesh as it were fire: Yee haue heaped vp treasure for the last dayes. Here's a treasure in hell. Which to be a treasure of torments the Apostle prooueth, saying,Rom. 2.5. Thou after thy hardnesse, and heart that cannot repent, treasurest vnto thy selfe wrath against the day of wrath. A treasure of wrath and of torments. From which God for the deare blood of his Sonne sake deliuer vs euery one. The second is a treasure in earth. Of which our Sauiour saith;Matth. 6.19. Lay not vp treasures for your selues vpon earth, where the moath and canker corrupt,

and where theeues dig through and steale. And this is a treasure of snowe. For S. Gregorie vpon those words of Iob;Qui ingreditur in thesauros ninis. Who entreth into the treasures of snowe; she weth that earthly treasures are treasures of snow. You see little children what paines they take to rake and scrape snowe together to make a snowe-ball: right so, they that scrape together the treasure of this world, haue but a snowe-ball of it; as soone as the sunne shineth, and God breatheth vpon it, and so entreth into it, by and by it comes to nothing. The third, is a treasure in heauen. Concerning which our Sauiour saith,Mark. 10.20. Lay vp for your selues treasures in heauen, where are bagges that neuer waxe old. Now this is a treasure of eternitie. And therefore the Christians of the Primitiue Church, suffered with ioy the spoyling of their goods,Heb 10.24. knowing that they had in heauen a better, and a more enduring substance. They contemned all treasures of snow in respect of this substance. For they haue no substance, neither are simply good, though they bee called goods, but melt away as snowe:

this is a better, and a more enduring substance; yea most enduring, a surpassing eternall waight of glorie. Thus ye see how eternall our glorie is. It is a kingdome: a crowne: a treasure. And this kingdome is an euerlasting kingdome: this crowne is an incorruptible crowne: this treasure is an eternall treasure. And therefore seeing our glorie is so surpassing eternall, we must be patient in all affliction. For the momentarie lightnesse of our affliction, worketh vs a surpassing exceeding eternall waight of glorie.
                  Fourthly, our glorie is waightie, yea exceeding waightie. The glorie to come, by some resemblances is shewed to be eternall, by other to be waightie. First, to this purpose it is compared to wine. Touching which our Sauiour saith,Mark. 14.15. Hereafter will I not drinke with you of the fruite of the vine, till I drinke it newe with you in my fathers kingdome. Now how waightie this wine shalbe, appeareth in that the spies bringing clusters of grapes out of Canaan, carried them vpon a poale on their shoulders.Numb. 13.24. To shewe, in the celestiall

Canaan what waightie glorie there shall be. So when our Lord turned water into wine, he commanded to fill the vessels to the toppe. These vessels topfull of wine,Ioh 27. doe signifie at the marriage of the Lamb, that the patient shall haue a full reward:1 Ioh. 8. pressed downe, shaken together, running ouer. So that euerie one of them may say, My cuppe doth ouerflowe.Psal. 13. Againe our glorie is compared to a peny. Now in a peny we consider fowre things. The image: the superscription: the sound: the waight. So our Sauiour when they shewed him a peny, asked whose image and superscription it was. First, then for the image, Christ shall change our vile bodies,Phil. 3.21. that they may be like the glorious bodie of his Sonne: that as wee haue borne the image of the earthly, so we may beare the image of the heauenly. For the superscriptiō, our Sauiour saith; To him that ouercommeth will I giue a white stone,Reuel. 2.17. and in it a name written, which no man knoweth but he that receiueth it. As a Prince seeing his name vpon a peice of coine, knoweth it is of his owne mint: so euery patient Christian

seeing his owne name in this white stone, which is a token of honour, knoweth it properly belongeth to himselfe. For the sound, the Psal
                        •
                     ist saith, Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they shall alwayes praise thee. This shal be the sound of the peny continually, the praise of God. As the foure and twentie Elders, neuer ceased day, nor night,Reuel. 1.8. to sing, Holy, holy, holy, to him that is, and was, and is to come. Fourthly, for the waight, the shekel of the Sanctuarie was twise as waighty as the common shekel: in like manner our glorie shall be as the shekel of the Sanctuarie, exceeding massie and waightie. But what speake I of wine? What of a peny? God himselfe shall be our glory. According to that;Psal. 3.3. Thou art my glorie and the lifter vp of my head. As if hee should haue said, Affliction would make me cast downe my countenance, and hold downe my head like a bulrush 
                        ••
                      but the remembrance of this that tho
                        •
                      art my glory, makes me lift vp my head. So say's God to Abraham;Gen. 15.1. Feare not Abraham, I am thy buckler, and thy exceeding great reward. I am thy burkler

to latch those blowes which affliction would lay vpon thee: and thy exceeding great reward, blessing thee with exceeding waighty glory. For they that shall enioy this glorie, shall see God. Agreeable to that of our Lord;Matth. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in spirit, for they shall see God. And how shall they see God? Not standing behind the lattisse, or looking out of a window,2. Cor. 13.12. that is darkly and obscurely, but face to face, talking with him familiarly as one friend doth to an other. O ioy aboue all ioyes! O glorie that passeth all vnderstanding! when we see the amiable and gracious countenance of our Lord reconciled to vs by Christ. Doubtlesse if the Queene of Saba thought her selfe happie, for hearing the wisedome of Salomon, and seeing the riches of his house, and the order of his seruants: then much more shall we be happy, when we shall see the glory, and heare the wisedome of the Father, not as the preachers shewe it out of the word, but as our owne eies shall behold it in heauen. O how blessed shall we thinke our selues then, that by any paines, by any afflictions we haue

at length attained to such waighty glorie. For this glorie is wine r
                        •••
                     ing ouer; is a pony waighty according to the shekell of the Sanctuarie; is the blessed sight and fruition of God himselfe. Wherefore considering how waightie our glorie is, we must be patient in all affliction. For the momentarie lightnes of our affliction, worketh vs a surpassing exceeding eternal waight of glory.
                  Compare then the affliction on the one side, with the glory on the other side: the shortnes of the affliction, with the eternity of the glory, the lightnes of the affliction, with the waightinesse of the glory. And then be content for an eternall glorie to suffer momentarie affliction: for waightie glory to suffer light affliction. The Stoicks if their greife were either momentary or light, cared for no more: for if it were short, they cared not how heauie it were: againe, if it were light, they cared not how long it were. Our affliction is both momentarie and light. One helpe was sufficient for them: we haue two for 
                        •
                     ayling. A starke shame 
                        •
                     hereless
                        •
                      would be for vs, if heathens & pagans,

hauing fewer meanes then wee haue, should shew greater patience then we shew. But the Scriptures affoard vs yet more forceable inducements. Iacob being in loue with Rachell, serued for her first seuen yeares, and afterward seauen yeares more, in all fourteene; and these many yeares seemed to him but a fewe dayes. O deere Lord, that we had thy grace to loue thy eternall waightie glorie, but as well as many a man hath done a mortall earthly creature. Then 
                        •
                     o doubt many years of afflictiō would seeme to vs but a few dayes: heauy burthens of affliction would seeme to vs very sweet and light. Christ Iesus for the ioy that was set before him, indured the crosse, and despised the shame, and now sitteth at the right hand of the throne of God. Questionlesse, beloued, the crosse of Christ was tedious and long; the shame that he suffred was heauy and vntollerable. Yet this crosse seemed but momentarie to him, and this shame seemed but light vnto him, in comparison of the ioy that was set before him, and of the eternall waightie glory which he hath now attained sitting

at the right hand of the throne of God. To the which plate of honour and worship, we beseech thee▪ O louing Lord, to bring vs, after all the afflictions of this wretched world; not for our owne deserts of merits, but for the merit of that crosse which Christ endured, of that shame which Christ despised. To whom for his crosse, be all praise, for his shame, be all glory; together with the Father, and the holy Ghost, now and euermore, Amen.
                  FINIS.
               
               
                  
                  A SERMON PREACHED before the KINGS Maiesty lying at the Lord SAYES house, called Broughton, besides Banb
                        •
                     ris, the 2
                     ▪ day of Septem. 1604.
                  
                     
                        
                           ROM. 8.31.
                        
                        If God be with vs, who can be against vs?
                     
                  
                  
                     THese words contain a most magnificent and triumphant conclusion arising out of the former discourse. For the Apostle hauing before prooued, that man is iustified only by the free grace and mercy of Christ

without any merit and desert of good workers, at length concludeth in the beginning of this chapter, Therfore there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Iesus: and so likewise here, If God be with vs, who can be against vs?
                  
                     Maximilian the Emperour 
                        •
                     o admired this sentence,Nathan Citraeus in Iteneratio that he caused it to be set in letters of checker worke vpon a table at which he vsed to dine and 
                        〈◊〉
                     , that hauing it so often in his eye, hee might alwaies haue it in minde also: 
                        
                           •
                         Deus pro nobis, quis contranos? If God be with vs, who can be against vs?
                  The truth of it is so apparant, that it hath bin made a common watchword, not of Christians onely, but euen of heathenish souldiers. Out word is Immanuel, that is,Esa. 8.3. by interpretation, God with vs. And some of the auncient Romanes vsed likewise in their wartes this watchword,Vegetius l. 3. c. 3 
                     Nobis
                           •
                        um Deus, God with vs. For indeede, if we be of the colledge and societie of Immanuel, and if God be on our side, we shall be sure to preuaile. If God be with vs, who can be against vs?
                  Damascene saith well according to

the Scripture,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Dama
                           •
                        c
                           •
                        n. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         Cyril. Mierosol. Our God is aboue all Gods. And so likewise Cyrill, The power of our God is aboue all power. Therefore, if that power be on our side which is aboue all power, and that God which is aboue all Gods, nothing can hurt vs; If God be with vs, who can be against vs?
                  
                     S. Austin sheweth out of the verse immediately going before,De verbis Apostoli Ser. 16 Deus pro nobis ve praedestinaret no
                           •
                        . that foure especiall waies God is with vs. God is with vs, in that he hath predestinated vs: God is with vs, in that he hath called vs: God is with vs, in that he hath iustified vs: God is with vs, in that he hath glorified vs. Innocentius the third,In eo m
                           •••
                        n. Apostolerunt, serm
                           •
                        . Hostis conta nos inferior homo. sheweth out of the words consequently following after, that fowre speciall enemies are against vs. The inferiour enemy against vs, is man: the exteriour enemy against vs, is the world; the interiour enemy against vs, is the flesh: the superiour enemy against vs is the Deuil. So that whereas the Apostle sai's here, If God be with vs, who can be against vs? It is all one, as if hee should haue said; If God haue predestinated vs, what can man doe against vs? If God haue

called vs, what can the world do against vs? If God haue iustified vs, what can the flesh doe against vs? If God haue glorified vs, what can the deuill doe against vs? If God be with vs, who can be against vs?
                  The first enemy against vs, is man. Homo homidi lupus.
                     Aut deus, aut damon. And an other prouerbe saith, Either a god or a deuill. For to say nothing, that no time is freed, so place priuiledged, no degree secured, no torment vnpractised, onely this I will touch, that no age is exempted. But the crueltie of man rageth, not only vpon the old after they are buried, but also vpon the young before they are borne. Thus saith the Lord, For three transgressions and for foure, I will not turne vnto Moab, because they digged vp the bones of the king of Edom, and burnt them to lime. The king of Edom was a wicked man, yet God detested so this vnnaturall and barbarous cruelty of the Moabits toward the dead, that for this especially he would not be reconciled to them. The like ensamples haue not wanted in our land, & almost in our time. Tracie two yeares, & Wickliffe
                     
two and fortie yeares after hee was buried, was digged vp. So euen of late they vsed Martin Bucer, and Paulus Phagius in Cambridge, and Peter Martyrs wife in Oxford. Such cruell m
                        •
                     n, if they had as great power ouer these holy Martyrs soules, as they had ouer their bodies, doubtles they would haue puld them out of heauen. For as long as they had a finger, or a fobre, or a bone, or a peice of a bone is the graue, they neuer left mining and digging, till they had rooted it out. So that at the least wise we may say of them with the Psalmist, The dead bodies of thy seruants,Psal. 79.2. O Lord, haue they giuen to bee meate to the foules of the aire, and the flesh of thy Saints to the beasts of the field. Now the crueltie of man against man, as it endeth not when life endeth: so it beginneth before life beginneth. For not onely Esau that cruell and cursed reprobate, strugled and wraf
                        •
                     led with his brother Iacob in their mothers wombe: but also 
                        ••
                     e Ammonites ript vp the women of 
                        •••
                     lead beeing great with child,Amos 1.13. Lamen 
                           •
                        .20. and the Babylonians caused the wom
                        •
                     n of Ierusalem to eate their

owne fruit, and their children of a span long. And not long agoe in the Isle of Garnsey, when a faithful woman (whose name need not here to be rehearsed) while she was burning at the stake,Perotine Massy was deliuered of a goodly man-child, some were so hard-hearted, to fling him back againe into the fire, there to be 
                        ••
                     rthered, as they meant it, but in deede martyred with his mother. O blessed babe! Because there is no roome for him so the inne, as soone as hee is borne, hee is laide in a maunger. Nay, because there is no roome for him in any one corner of all the world, by and by he is baptized with the holy Ghost, and with fire. O blessed, I say againe, blessed babe! Before thou art lapped in swadling clothes, thou art crowned with martyrdome: & before thou fully breathest in the breath of life, thou happily breathest out thine innocent soule 
                        ••
                      God. But 
                        •
                     ie vpon such beastly and cruell murthers. Out vpon such deuillish and fiendish tormentors. These Saints? these Catholikes? who are Soythians, if these be Saints? who are Canibals, if these be Catholikse? which holding

it as an article of their faith, that all children dying without baptisme, are damned, yet wittingly did put this innocent child to death before he was baptized. And therefore as they made the mother suffer the most vntollerable paines of childbirth and martyrdome both together's so, they verily thought and beleeued, they flung the infant also body and soule into an earthly fire, and into hell fire all at once. This is the crueltie of man. He would, if he could, pull some out of heauen after they are buried, and thrust some into hel before they are borne.
                  But God hath predestinated vs. And not only before we were borne,Ephes. 1.4. but also before the world was created, hath chosen vs in Christ. Euen as Christ shall say at the last day, Come ye blessed of my Father,Matth. 25.34. inherit the kingdome of heauen prepared for you before the foundations of the world. For looke how carefully parents prouide for their children,Prim
                           •
                        sius in a Tim. 
                           •
                        . 1. in illa Ante tempora secularia. Arator. Do
                           ••
                         prius tempora dedit. and put them in their will before they are borne: so God giues vs the grace to liue with him, before he giue vs time to liue here. Euen as the Sonne

saith, Feare not little 
                        ••
                     ock: for it is your Fathers will to giue you a kingdome. And the father himselfe, I euen I am he that comfort you: who 
                        〈◊〉
                      thou then that fearest a mortall ma
                        •
                     , who fadeth away as grasse? Therefore euery couragious Christian may comfort his heart in God, and say with the Pr
                        ••••
                     y Prophet, The Lord is my light and my saluation, whome then shall I feare? the Lord is the strength of my life, of whō then shall I be afraid? when the wicked euen mine enemies and my foes, come vpon me to eat vp my flesh, they stumbled and fell. Though an hoast of men were laid against me, yet shall not my heart be afraid, & though there rose vp warre against me, yet wil I put my 
                        〈◊〉
                      in him. I will not be afraid of ten thousand of the people, that haue set themselues against me round about. Yea, though I walke thorough the valley of the shadow of death, yet will I feare no euill: 
                        •
                     or thou, O Lord, art with me, thy rod and thy staffe they comfort me. So that I may boldly say, The Lord is my helper; neither will I feare what 
                        〈◊〉
                      can doe vnto me. The Lord of hoaste

with vs, the God of Iacob is our refuge. And if the Lord of hosts haue predestinated vs vnto life, what can man doe against vs? what before we liue? what while we liue? what after we liue? If God be with vs, who can be against vs?
                  The second enemie against vs is the world. Which assaileth vs as well by aduersitie,Qusd est mundus, nisi agon plenus cetraminum? as by prosperitie. What is the world, saith S. Ambrose, but a race or a course full of trials & troubles? It is a field, wherein is little corne, but much cockle. It is a garden, wherein are few roses, but many thornes. Yet these thornes of aduersitie doe not so much oftentimes endanger vs, as the baites of prosperitie.Mundus peririculosior est blandus quam mol
                           •
                        stu
                           •
                        , & magis cauendus, eunse 
                           •
                        lli
                           ••
                        t diligi, qa
                           •
                        m cum ad monet cogit
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         
                        
                           •
                        ontemni. Epist. 144. The world is more dangerous, saith S. Austin, when it flattereth, then when it threateneth: and is more to be feared, when it allureth vs to loue it, then when it enforceth vs to contemn it. For euen as Iudas by a kisse betrayed his master: so the world is a very Iudas. It meaneth most falsly, when it embraceth most friendly. Wherefore the Apostle saith thus of Demas; Demas hath forsaken vs, and imbraced this present world. So that the immoderate embracing

of this world, is a flat forsaking of Christ and his Gospel. Vnskilful swimmers, when they begin to sinke, if they catch hold of weeds in the bottom.Qui mundum amploctuntur similes sunt illis, qui submerguntur in aquis. Bern. de Adnent, setm. 1. the faster they hold, the surer they are drowned: & in like sort they that shake hands with the world, and embrace the pleasures and prosperitie thereof most greedily, plunge themselues most deeply into destruction.
                  But God hath called vs. And therefore neither aduersitie nor prosperitie can hurt vs. Maruell not, saith our Sa
                        •
                     iour, though the world hate you. It hated me before it hated you. If you were of the world, the world would loue you, but because you are not of the world, but I haue chosen you out of the world, therefore doth the world hate you. Well, as the world hateth vs▪ so we
                        •
                      must hate it againe. As it contemneth vs, so we must contemne it againe. According to that of S. Paul, The world is crucified to me, and I vnto the world. I am crucified to the world, that is, The world contemnes me: the world is crucified to mee, that is, I contemne the world. The world contemnes me, 
                        〈◊〉
                      I

contemne it.Moral. senn. 10. c. 2. Qui nihil habet in mundo quod appetat, nihil est quod de mundo pertimesent Cyprian. Quis ei de secullo metus est, cui in seculo deus tutor est▪
                      For as Gregory sayes, He that hath nothing that he loues in the world, hath nothing to feare of the world. And Cyprian, What neede he to feare the world, who hath God his protector, his tutor, his defendour in the world? He that is of God ouercommeth the world. And this is our victorie whereby we ouercome the world, euen our faith. Whereupon our Sauiour saies, Be of good comfort, I haue ouercome the world: and behold I am with you euen vnto the ende of the world. So that the world, and the trouble we shall haue in the world, shall haue an ende: but the comfort we haue in God, shall haue no end: Behold, I am with you, saith he. And if God be with vs, and haue called vs out of the world, what can the world doe against vs? If God be with vs, who can be against vs?
                  The third enemie against vs, is the flesh.Prou. 30.22. Salomon saith, this is one thing which maketh the earth euen tremble, when a seruant beginneth to beare rule. The flesh is, and ought to be a seruant. Yet it beareth rule in the vnregenerate. Yea it striueth to beare rule, and beginneth

to beare rule, euen in the godly. A mans enemies are they of his owne house. It is mine owne familiar, friend, that lifteth vp his heele against me. This familiar friend was Paul much troubled withal, when be said; I see an other law in my members,Rom. 7. rebelling against my minde, and leading mee captiue vnto death. And Lot, who beeing a iust man, that could not be ouercome with all the sinnes of Sodom, by immoderate drinking of wine fell to follie. And Samson, who otherwise impregnable, yet yeelded to Dalila. Therefore in the 
                        〈◊〉
                      it lieth, which striueth to lay our honour in the dust.
                  But God hath iustified vs. And hauing iustified vs, in some measure also hath begunne to sanctifie vs. So that the flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, in so much as we cannot doe as we would. Not onely the flesh against the spirit: but also the spirit against the flesh. So that we cannot doe as wee would. For if wee would serue god so holily as the angels, we can not, because the flesh insteth against the spirit: againe, if we would

sinne with full consent of will so brutishly as the wicked doe, we cannot, because the spirit lusteth against the flesh. But euen as Cast
                           •
                        r and Pollux liue by turnes, one one day, an other an other, so the flesh and the spirit preuailing. sometimes one, sometimes an other, make mixt actions. So that neither can our good actions iustifie vs, because in them the flesh lusteth against the spirit: nor yet can our ill actions condemn vs, because in thē the spirit lusteth against the flesh. For now that Sara is mortified, her wombe is dead, and it ceaseth to be with her after the manner of women. Now that Iacob hath wrestled with God, his thigh is shrunk vp. Now that Paul is conuerted, he chastiseth his bodie, and bringeth it into subiection. Now that the blessed virgin is freely beloued, she keepeth her selfe within, and knoweth no man. And therefore sai'
                        •
                      the Angel, Haile Mary, freely beloued, the Lord is with thee. But the blessed Virgin fearing, the Angel added; Feare not Mary, for thou hast found 
                        •••
                     our with God. As if he should haue said, Feare not the Angel of the Lord,

seeing the Lord of the Angell is with thee. Thou hast found fauour with God, to haue the fruit of thy flesh, the Sauiour of thy soule. So that if God haue a fauour vnto vs, and haue iustified vs in Christ, what can the flesh doe against vs? The spirit will not let it doe as it would. For if God be with vs, who can be against vs?
                  The fourth enemy against vs is the deuill. And he is the worst enemy of all. Therefore sai's the Apostle, we haue not to fight with flesh and blood, but with principalities and powers, and with the Prince of darknes that rule
                        ••
                      in the ayre. This Prince warreth against vs two waies. By persecutions, and perswasions. For the first, he is described in the Reuelation to ride vpon a blacke and a redde horse. The blacknes of the horse sheweth how terrible the Deuill is, the reddenesse, how bloodie. Neither doth he come single, but seauen of them at once possesse Mary Magdalen.Luk. 8.
                           •
                        . Neither doe they onely fight against vs beeing aliue, but the Deuill fought with Michel the Arkeangel for the 
                        ••
                     
                     cie of Moses when he was dead.Iude. Neither

doe they terribly set vpon vs to get our bodies onely, but our soules also. Especially, they doe this at the day of death, and will doe more dilligently at the day of iudgement. Now their perswasions are yet more dangerous then their threatnings. When they come to vs in the shape not of an vnclean spirit, but of an angel of light. Thus Satan did set vpon the first Adam,Gen. 3. Hath God indeed commanded you not to eate of the tree? He makes a question of it. And, if ye eate, you shall be as Gods knowing good and euill. A faire promise, but a contrarie performance. So he did set vpon the second Adam;Matth. 4. All these things will I giue thee, if thou wilt fall down and worship me. He would hire Christ, and giue him good wages to serue him: which would haue depriued our Sauiour of his eternall glory.
                  But God hath glorified vs. It is not now to be doubted whether Satan shal preuaile against vs or not, but it is most sure he shall not. He hath glorified vs, saith S. Paul. Though the possession of it be to come, yet the assurance of it is past. Euen as our Lord auoucheth in

an other place, Hee that beleeueth in me, hath passed from death to life. Not shall passe, but hath passed. So S. Paul, He hath made vs sit with himselfe in heauenly places aboue. Not hee will make, but he hath. Therefore Chrysostome writeth very resolutely, Onely in one point I am proud,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . and very proud, namely in renouncing, and denying the deuill. Hee is indeede a strong man. But yet a stronger then he hath thrust him out, & spoiled him of all his goods. He is a roaring lyon. But the lyon of the tribe of Iuda, hath ouercome him. Hee is an olde serpent, almost of sixe thousand yeares standing and experience. But Christ the new serpent, prefigured in the brasen serpent, hath been too cunning for him. Therefore though he seeke to winnow Peter as come i
                        •
                      sifted, yet no danger; Christ hath prayed for Peter, that his faith should not faile. Where by the way, we may marke the difference betweene Christ and the tempter. Christ hath his fanne in his hand and fanneth vs; the tempter hath his siue in his hand, and sifteth vs. Now a fanne casteth out the worst, and keepeth

in the best: a fine keepeth in the worst, and casteth out the best. Right so Christ in his trialls purgeth chaffe and corruption out of vs, nourisheth and increaseth his graces in vs. Contrariwise the deuill, if there be any il thing in vs, that he confirmeth, if faith or any good thing else, that he weakeneth. But Christ hath prayed for vs, yea doth still at the right hand of the father make intercession and request for vs, that our faith should not faile. So that all Sathans power, yea the gates of hell shall neuer preuaile against vs. In like manner, S. Paul beeing buffered by the angel of Satan, prayed that he might bee deliuered. The answer of God was, My grace is sufficient for thee. Whether Satan buffet vs, or not buffet vs, still the grace of God shal suffice vs, Much more his glory who hath glorified vs. For God doth giue both grace and glory, and no good thing wil he withold from them that liue a godly life.Pone me iuxtatr, & cuius
                           •
                         is manus pugnet contra me. Therefore euery child of God may triumph with Iob, saying Stand thou beside me, and let any mans hand fight against me. For if God be on our side, what can the Deuill

doe against vs? If God be with vs, who can be against vs?
                  
                     Nazianzen makes a good conclusion, This only is a fearefull thing to feare any thing more then God, Feare God, and feare nothing else:
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      feare not God, and feare euery thing. For in the feare of the Lord is the confidence of courage. Because sai's Gregoria, be that in a chast and filiall feare,Quitimore castro Deo subije
                           •
                        
                        tur, &c. Gregor. is subiected to God, by a hopefull kind of boldnesse is aboue all saue God. But he that feareth not the Lord may be annoyed by any thing. Mice were too strong for the Philistims, and lice for the Egyptians. So that if God be against vs, who can be with vs? But if God be with vs, who can be against vs? Now certainly God is with vs. Doe you doubt of this? Then consider how that all great pot
                        ••
                     rates of the world, who of late were some of them scarse our good freinds, doe now earnestly desire to bee made partakers of our peace. What doe I speake of men? The very heauen, & the elements, and this so seasonable haruest,An. 1604. such as hath not been knowne, if one may take any gesse by these outward things, doe

plainely declare that God is now with vs, & purposeth to power out his blessings and benefits most abundantly vpon vs. Nothing then remaineth, but that as God is with vs, so we labour to be with God. And as S. Peter admonisheth vs, make our election sure by faith and good workes, liuing soberly, vprightly, and godly in this present world. That so we may feare no cruelty of man, no misery of the world, no entisements, of the flesh, no terrors of the deuill, but in all these things may bee more then conquerours, assuring our selues, that if God be with vs, nothing can be against vs. Which that it may be so, God graunt for Iesus Christs sake, to whome with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be all honour and glory, now and euermore, Amen.
                  Blessed are they that heare the word of God, and keepe it.
                  The grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, and the Ioue of God, and the fellowship of the holy Ghost, be with vs, that nothing may be against vs, this day and euermore, Amen.
                  FINIS.
               
               
                  
                  A SERMON PREACHED at the Court at Whitehall. March 10. 1598.
                  
                     
                        
                           IOHN 20.27.
                        
                        After said he to Thomas, Put thy finger here, and see my hands, and put forth thy hand, and put it into my side, and bee not faithlesse, but faithfull.
                     
                  
                  OVr blessed Sauiour Iesus Christ hath his wounds yet to be seene in his body for foure causes. First, to approoue his resurrection: secondly, to appease his Father: thirdly, to confound his enemies: fourthly, to comfort his friends. After said he to Thomas, Put thy finger here, and see my hands, and put forth thy hand, and put it into my side, and be not faithles,

but faithfull.
                  The first cause why Christ hath his wounds yet to be seene in his body, is to approoue his resurrection. When Iacobs children told him, saying, Ioseph is yet aliue, his heart failed, and he beleeued them not, but as soone as he saw the chariots, which were sent for him, by and by his spirit reuiued, and he said, I haue enough,Gen. 4
                           •
                        .28. Ioseph my sonne is yet aliue. In like manner, when the Disciples said to Thomas, we haue seene the Lord, he beleeued them not; but nowe that hee beholdeth Christs glorious wounds, the triumphant tokens of his victorie, and the chariots, as I may say, whereby we are with Elias carried vp into heauen, he confesseth indeede that Christ is risen againe; and that the true Ioseph is yet aliue.Io
                           •
                        . 11.4. Euen as Anna seeing that spaniell cōming homeward, which went forth with her sonne at the first, knew certainely that her sonne Tobias himselfe was not farre off, but followed immediately after: so Thomas, seeing those wounds in Christ which accompanied him to his graue, knew assuredly, that no other body was risen againe,

but onely the very selfe same body of Christ, which was buried. S. Peter, beeing brought out of prison by an Angel, went forth with to the house of Marie,Act. 12.14. where knocking and calling to get in, a maiden named Rhode, before euer she sawe him▪ knewe him by his voice. And although they that were within tolde her she wist not what she said, yet shee still constantly affirmed it was none other but he. Christs rising out of the graue was as strange, as Peters deliuerance out of prison: the rowling away of the stone as strange, as the opening of the yron gate. And 
                        •
                     lbeit Thomas was not so forward as Rhode to know Christ by his voice, when he said, Peace bee vnto you, yet as soone as Christ tooke him by the hand, and shew'd hi
                        ••
                      his side, he made no more doubts, but presently beleeued. For if Pr
                           •
                        tog
                           •••
                        s seeing but a little line drawne in 
                        •
                      table, k
                        •
                     ewe straightwaies it was Ap
                           •
                        lles doing whome he had neuer seene:Plin. lib. 35. c. 10 how much more easily then might Thomas know Christ, seeing not onely one line, but very many lines, yea whole pictures of his passion, and of his r
                        •
                     surrection,

in his head, in his hands, in his side, in his feete? When King Arthurs bodie was taken vp somewhat more then sixe hundred yeares after his death,Stow pag. 61. it was knowne to be his by nothing so much, as by the prints of 
                        •
                     enne seuerall wounds which appeared in his sk
                        •
                     ll. Christ our King, who did ouercome death, could likewise, if it had pleased him, haue quite and cleane defaced and abolished all the markes of death. Neuerthelesse as at his transfiguration he shewed Peter, Iames, and Iohn, the signes of immortalitie in his bodie, which was then mortall; so here contrariwise at his resurrection; he sheweth Thomas the signes of mortalitie in his bodie, which is now immortall. That he and all we might vndoubtedly confesse, that though they perhaps might bee deceiued in King Arthurs bodie, yet we can neuer be deceiued, so long as we beleeue, that the very same body of Christ, which in Golgotha the place of dead mens skuls was wounded from top to toe, and put to death for vs, is now risen again from death to life. Euen as King Alexanders

stagges were knowne a hundred yeares together,Plin. l. 8. c. 32. by those golden collars which by the kings commandement were put about their necks; so much more might Thomas know Christ by his wounds, which were as a comly ornament to his head, and as chaines vnto his necke, we also when we preach the resurrection of Christ, preach no other thing, but that which we haue heard, which we haue seen with our eies, which we haue looked vpon, and our hands haue handled of the word of life. Socrates in his Ecclesiasticall historie writeth, that Athanasius beeing accused by one Ian
                        •••
                      to haue killed Arsenius, and after to haue cut off his hand, that he might vse it to magick and sorcerie, cleared himselfe notably of this slander. Hauing by good happe found out Arsenius, who lay hid for the nonce, hee brought him before the Co
                        •
                     ncel of Tyrus, and there asked his accuser, whether hee euer knew Arsenius or no? He answered, yes. Then Athanasius called him forth, with his hands couered vnder his cloake, and turning vp the one side of his cloak
                        •
                     
                     ▪ shewed them one of his hands. And

when most men surmised,lib. 1. c. 
                           •
                        1. that th' other hand at least wise was cut off, Athanasius without any more ado casteth vp the other side of his cloake, and sheweth the second hand, saying, You see Arsenius hath two hands, now let mine accuser shewe you the place where the third hand was cut-off. Christs case was euen almost the same. Hee was thought by some to be quite dead and gone. But Thomas seeing those very hands of his which were nailed to the crosse, acknowledgeth, that this our brother was dead, and is aliue againe, was lost, and is found.Ios. 2.18. For if the spies that were sent to view Iericho, knewe Rahabs house from all the rest, by a red thread, which hung out of the windowe: how much more easily then might Thomas knowe Christ, especially seeing Rahabs house was a figure of Christs bodie; the windowe a signe of the wound in his side; the red thread a figure of the streame of blood issuing out of that wound? When Vlysses had beene long from home, no man almost at his returne knewe him, yet Euriclea his nurse espying by chance the marke of a wound in

his foote, which he got by hunting the wild boare,Hom. Ody. 9. by and by made him known to his friends. In like manner Thomas, beholding the wounds not of Christs feete onely, but also of his whole body, beleeueth verily, though the wilde boare out of the wood stroke fore at him that he might fall, yet that he hath nowe recouered himselfe, and is risen and returned home againe. Euen as the wisemen knewe Christ was borne, by the starre which appeared in the East,Matth. 2.9. and knewe also where he lay when he was borne, by the standing of that star directly ouer against him: so Thomas, not by one starre, but by many starres, which notwithstanding are more beautifull and bright then all the starres of heauen, knoweth and confesseth that the true sunne of righteousnesse is now risen, and shineth ouer all the earth. Thus these blessed wounds witnesse and approoue the resurrection of Christ. For now Iacob knowes Ioseph by his chariots: Anna knows Tobias by his spaniel: Rhode knowes Peter by his voice: Protogenes knowes Apelles by his line 
                        〈◊〉
                      Arthurs body is knowne by his 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     
King Alexanders stagges are known by their collars: Iannes knowes Arsenius by his hands: the spies knowes Rahabs house by the red thred: Euryclea knows Vlysses by the mark in his foote: the wisemen know Christ is borne by the starre that stands ouer him: Thomas knowes Christ is risen againe by the starres that appeare in him. As if our Sauiour should haue said thus to his Disciple; Thomas, I wo
                        •
                      well what thou saidst, Except I see in his hands the print of the nayles, and put my finger into the print of the nayles, and put my hand into his side▪ I will not beleeue. Well, if this be all, thou shalt haue thy desire. I that suffred the Iewes to peirce my hands and my side, will not denie thee to see and touch them. Come therfore, I giue thee good leaue. Doe as thou saidst, Put thy finger here, and see my hands, and put forth thy hand, and put it into my side, and bee not faithlesse, but faithfull. So much for the first cause, which is to approoue his resurrection.
                  The second cause why Christ hath his wounds yet to be seene in his body,

is to appease his Father. Almighty God was once ready to haue destroyed the Israelites,Psal. 1
                           •
                        0.23. had not Moses his chosen stood before him in the g
                        •
                     ppe. Moses as he was a mediator betweene God and the people, was a singular type of the Messias to come. And standing 
                        〈◊〉
                      gap, he did as it were point to Christ. For when our Sauiours side was wounded, then indeed there was a great gap, and a great breach made, by which all wee that beleeue in him may escape. Therefore Moses his standing before the Lord in the gap, did signifie as S. Bernard noteth,
                        
                           •
                        e 
                           •
                        . 59. in Cant. that Christ making intercession before his Father for vs, should alwaies stand in the gap, & shew how he himselfe was broken vpon the crosse, and as I may say, troden downe for our redemption. That poore creeple also which begged at the beautiful gate of the temple,Act. 3.
                           •
                        . teacheth vs what he continually doth, who when he was rich, became poore for our sakes. The Temple is his body, which after it had beene destroied, was built vp againe in three daies. The beautifull gate of this Temple, is the pretious wound in his side, of

which the Psalmist saies, This is the gate of the righteous, the iust shall enter in by it. Therefore as that poore creeple, lying at the beautifull gate of the temple, was healed by S. Peter; so Christ lying at the beautifull gate of his 
                        〈◊〉
                      body, shewing his most greiuous, 
                        〈◊〉
                      yet most glorious sufferings and torments, appeaseth his fathers wrath, and obtaineth whatsoeuer he intreateth of him. King Ezekias hauing receiued rayling letters from Senacherib, went vp to the temple,Esa 37.1
                           •
                        . and spread the letters before the Lord, and praied, saying, Open thine eyes, O Lord, and see and heare all the words of Senacherib, who hath sent to blaspheme the liuing God. No Ezekias was euer more taunted and reuiled, more scorned and reproached, then he who was counted the shame of men, and the out-cast of the people. Wherefore now he spreadeth forth, and laieth open, not onely the blasphemous words, which were vttered against him, but also the dolorous wounds and gashes which w
                        •
                     re giuen him, that so he may put out the hand-writing that was against vs, and appease his father,

and throughly reconcile him to vs. And looke how king Salomon,1. Reg 8.22. when hee praied for the people, stood before the altar, and stretched out his hands toward heauen: in semblable wise Christ, who is farre greater then Salomon, standeth euermore beside the altar of his crosse, and stretcheth out his beskarred and wounded hands towards the throne of his heauenly father, that hee may mooue him to haue pitie and compassion of his people. Pel
                           •
                        pid
                           •
                        s a noble Grecian, skirmished with the Lacedemonians against the Arcadians, vntill such time as beeing hurt in seaue
                        •
                      places, he fell downe at last for dead. Then presently Epaminondas stepping forth bestrid him, and fought to defend his bodie, he alone against many, till beeing sore cut on his arme with a sword, and thrust into the breast with a pike, he was euen readie to giue ouer. But at that very instant, Agesipolis king of the Lacedemonians came with the other point of the battell in a happy howre,Plutarch. in Pelopida initio. and saued both their liues when they were past all hope. If we would apply this story to our purpose now in

hand, we must make, man like Pelopidas, Christ like Epaminondas, God like Agesipolis. Since the ouerthrow of Adam, who went downe from Ierusalem to Ierico, how euery man hath beene wounded, not onely with Pelopidas in seauen places of his body, but euen in all the parts and powers of his soule, each one knoweth best by experience in himselfe. But Christ hath sheilded vs with his grace, and fought for vs; not till he was with Epaminondas cut on his arme with a sword, and thrust into the breast with a pike; but that which is in a manner all one, till his hands were goared with nayles, and his side thrust thorough with a speare. Wherefore God the father with Agesipolis seeing him in the work of his mediation, fight still for vs, clothed euen now in heauen with a garment dipt in blood, can not be angry either with him, or with vs, but when we are dead in sinne, quickneth vs together in him by whose grace we are saued, and raised vs vp, and maketh vs for his sake sit in the heauenly places aboue. Marcus Seruilius a valiant Romane, who had fought three and

twenty combates of life and death in his owne person, and had alwaies slaine as many of his enemies as challeng'd him man to man; when as the people of Rome resisted Paulus Emilius triumph,Plutarch in Paulo A
                           •
                        melio fine. stood vp and made an oration in his behalfe. In the midst whereof he cast open his gowne, and shewed before them the infinite skarves and cut
                        •
                      he had receiued vpon his breast. The sight of which so preuailed with the people, that they all agreed in one, and graunted Emilius triumph. After the same fashion, Christ hath spoiled 
                        ••••
                     
                     cipalities and powers, and hath made a shew of them openly, and hath triumphed ouer them in his crosse, ye
                        •
                      and yet now beareth about in his bodie the markes and tokens of this triumph, that a finall agreement and attonement being made betweene God and vs, by his onely mediation and meanes: we also may be more then conquerours in him that loueth vs, and may euery one of vs say with Saint Paul, Now thanks be vnto God, which alwaies maketh vs to triumph in Christ. Among other ornaments of the Sanctuarie, there was

a golden censer full of holes, by which the sweete odours fumed forth, when Aaron once a yeare burnt incense therin. No other high Priest doe we acknowledge but Christ the true Aaron,Heb. 
                           •
                        .4. who hath not entred into any Sanctuarie made with hands, but into heauen it selfe. And his golden censer is his own body, which through the wounds that are in it as through chinks or holes, su
                        •
                     eth forth alwaies a pleasing and a sweete 
                        •
                     auour in the nosthrils of his father. The signe of the couenant which God made with Noah was a rainebowe in the cloud. And indeede that is a sure token vnto vs, that the world shall neuer be drowned againe with a generall flood of water,Gen. 9 16. as it was in Noahs time. But the rainebowe which assureth vs we shall neuer be drowned in the pit of euerlasting perdition, is no such thing. Why may some man say, what is it? Mane it is the blood of Christ, which maketh as it w
                        •
                     re, a rainebow in his side. For the other rainebow is but a transitorie signe, which shall passe away with the cloudes and with the world. But this rainebowe, whereof the other

is but a shadow, shall continue for euer in the sight of God, as the author to the Hebrewes sai's, that Christ is entred into heauen, vt appareat nunc vultui Dei pro nobis, to appeare now in the fight of God for vs. Therefore S. Iohn in the Reuelation witnesseth, that he sawe a doore open in heauen, aud a rainebow round about the throne of God. Hee sawe a doore open in heauen, to teach vs that we can haue no accesse vnto the Father, but by Christ, neither yet by Christ simply, but as he is crucified, and hath set open a doore in his side for vs to enter by him. He sawe a rainebowe round about the throne of God, to teach vs that the throne of God would be altogether a throne of iustice, a throne of wrath, a throne of anger and indignation, were it not that the blood of Christ, spinning out as I may say still liuely and freshly in the sight of his father, maketh a rainbowe round about his throne, putteth him in minde of his couenant, appeaseth his displeasure, and so maketh his throne to all vs that loue him,Gen. 30.37. a throne of grace, a throne of compassion, a throne of fauour and mercie

in Christ. We read that Iacob pilled certaine rods, which beeing laid in the watering troughes before the sheepe, made them bring forth such lambes, as afterward fell to his own share. So likewise if we sinne, wee haue an aduocate with the father Iesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sinnes. The marke of the roddes in his wounds laid open in the sight of God, ingendreth and breedeth in him a loue and a liking toward vs, so that he conceiueth well of vs, and seuereth vs as good sheepe from the goates, and in the blood of the lambe is pleased and appeased, and satisfied for our sinnes. This blood is the blood of sprinkling,Heb. 12.24. which speaketh better things then that of Abel. For Abels blood vpon earth cryed out once for vengeance, but Christs blood in heauen cries continually for mercie. One deepe calleth another, because of the noise of the water pipes. Christs woundes are the watering troughs and the water-pipes, by which all graces flowe vnto vs. So that one deepe calleth an other, because of the noise of the water pipes; because the

wounds of Christ make a continuall noise in the eares of his father, and the depth of the extreame misery which he was in vpon earth, calleth for the depth of Gods bottomlesse and infinite mercy in heauen. Thus these holy wounds of Christ pacifie and appease his father. For now Moyses standing in the gappe sues for pardon: the poore creeple lying at the beautifull gate, begg's an almes: Ezechias spreading open his letters, makes his supplication: Salomon stretching out his hands, offers vp his prayer: Epaminondas being wounded, mooues Ag
                        •
                     sipolis to saue Pelopidas: Seruilius discouering his wounds, perswades the people to grant Emilius triumph. Aaron burning incense in his golden censer, perfumeth the whole Sanctuarie: Noah pointing to his rainebowe, putteth God in mind of his promise: Iacob laying forth his roddes, make most of the lambes his owne: Abel holding vp his blood, cals and cries for mercie: Christ shewing his hands and his side appeaseth his father. As if our Sauiour should say thus vnto his Father, O my louing father,

looke vpon the face of thine annointed, looke vpon the hands, looke vpon the side of thine annointed. The hands of thine anointed, how cruelly they are mangled, the side of thine annointed, bow wofully it is wounded. Behold, and see, if there be any sorrowe like to my sorrow. These hands can signifie what exceeding sorrow I haue suffered: this side can shew that I haue humbled my selfe, and haue been obedient vnto death, euen vnto the death of the crosse. Therefore, O my deare father, Put thy finger here, and see my hands; and put forth thy hand, and put it into my side, and as thou art not faithlesse, but faithfull, so be not mercilesse, but mercifull for my sake, and pitifull to thy people. So much for the second cause, which is to appease his Father.
                  The third cause, why Christ hath his wounds yet to be seene in his bodie, is to confound his enemies. When Saint Paul the Apostle before his conuersion persecuted the Church of God, Christ called to him from heauen, and said, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Who art thou Lord, saies Saul? I am,

saies Christ, Iesus of Nazareth, whom thou persecutest. Alluding to the title of his crosse, which was, Iesus of Nazareth, King of the Iewes. At which words, Saul both trembling and astonished, said, Lord, what wilt then haue me do?Act. 22.8. Now if Saul, who repented him afterward of his persecuting Christ, stood so astonished, when he heard but a peice of the title vpon his crosse, how 
                        •
                     he
                        •
                      shall all they bee astonished, how shall they be confounded, which without any repentance or remorse of conscience, persecute Christ continually, when at the latter day, not onely the title written ouer his head, but euen the verie print of the wounds in his hands and side, shall rise vp in iudgement to condemne them? When like as Ioseph said to his brethren, I am Ioseph your brother, whom you sold into Egypt: so Christ shall say vnto them, I am Iesus of Nazareth, whom you persecuted and put to death? Wonderfull indeed is the feare and confusion of a wicked conscience. After that Herod had beheaded Iohn Baptist, he imagined stil he saw and heard that holy head, showting

and crying out against him.Mark. 6.16. Whereupon hearing the fame of Iesus, hee said not as others said, It is Elias, or, It is one of the Prophets: but, It is Iohn, saies he whome I beheaded, he is risen from the dead. Saying, whome I beheaded, hee confesseth not his fault in true repentance, but onely with his owne mouth beareth witnesse of his owne wickednesse. In so much as that may be said to him, which Dauid said to the Amalakite, who brought him newes of Sauls death: Thine owne mouth testifieth against thee, saying, I haue slaine the Lords anointed. Now if the remembrance of this cruell act, so vexed and disquieted Herod day and night, that hee could take no rest for it, but still, thought waking, and dream'd sleeping, Iohn Baptist was risen againe, to be reuenged of him; how then shall they be affrighted, how shall they be confounded, which haue not beheaded Iohn, but crucified Christ, yea and crucifie him continually with their sins, when at the resurrection of all flesh, they shal see him whom they haue peirced, and w
                        •
                     ing their hands, and weep and waile

before him? Scipio appointed his sepulchre to bee so placed, as his image standing vpon it, might looke directly toward Africa, that beeing dead hee might still be a terror to the Carthaginians: after the same sort, the Prophet Esay prophesying of Christ, saith, In that day the roote of Iesse shall stand vp for a signe vnto the people, and euen his sepulchre shall be glorious.Et erat schulchrum eius gloriosum. So that as the bodie of Cadwallo an auncient king of the Brittaines, being embalmed and dressed with sweete confections,Hollinshed. was put into a brasen image, and set vpon a brasen horse ouer Ludgate, for a terrour to the Saxons: in semblable sort he that is called Faithfull and true shall sit vpon a white horse, and out of his mouth shall proceede a sharpe sword, wherewith he shall smite and slay the heathen. The sword wherewith Dauid hackt off Golias head,1. Sam 21.9. after he had wrested it out of his hand, was kept in the Tabernacle, wrapt in a cloath behind the Ephod. Which when Abimelech the Priest brought forth, Dauid said, There is none to that, giue it me. Christ also did conquer death euen with th
                        •
                     se

weapons and armour wherewith death assaul
                        •
                     ed him. And hee keepeth still a memoriall of his conquest in the tabernacle of his body. That as the Philistims were afraid, when they sawe Dauid figh
                        •
                     ing in the field with that sword: so all Christs enemies may bee confounded; when they shall see the signe of the sonne of man appearing in the clouds with power and great glorie. It was a strange miracle that of Aarons rodde which budded. Therfore the Lord said vnto Moses,Numb. 7.10. Bring Aarons rod againe before the testimonie to bee kept for a token to the rebellious children. The bodie of Christ was a greene tree before it was crucified. After being dead, it was clung and drie like Aarons rod. But it budded, when as the third day it rose againe. Therefore it is kept stil for a token to the rebellious children. That as Aaron conuinced the murmuring Israelites, and confirmed the authority of his priesthood by the budding of his rodde, which otherwise was but a dead and a drie thing: so Christ may confound his enemies, when he shall shew such flourishing glorie, such excellent

maiestie in his bodie, which hath yet in it the tokens and the marks of death. It is reported that Zisca, the valiant captaine of the Bohemians, commaunded that after his decease his skinne should be fleed from his bodie to make a drum which they should vse in their battels, affirming that as soone as the Hungarians,Fox Act. or any other their enemies should heare the sound of that drumme, they would not abide, but take their flight. And surely euery battel of the warriour is with noyse, & with tumbling of ga
                        •
                     
                     ments in blood, but this battell, wherein Christ shall tread Satan and all his enemies vnder his feete, shall bee with burning and consuming of fire. So that no drum can be more terrible then the last trumpet shal be, when the Lord Iesus shall shewe himselfe from heauen with his mightie Angels, and shall so come downe with the very same mark
                        •
                      and sears in his skin, as the men of Galilie saw him ascending vp. They which dispatched noble Iulius Caesar in the senate house, did set a good face of the matter a while,Dion. l. 44. till Antonius the next day shew'd his robe in the market place

all bloody, cut and full of holes, as his enemies had left it. Then the people were so incensed and enraged against them, that they made the best of them al glad to hide their heads. The Romanes said, We haue no King, and therefore they slewe Caesar: the Iewes said, We haue no King but Caesar, and therefore they slew Christ. But at the day of iudgment, what shall Christ say? Those mine enemies, which would not that I should raigne ouer them, bring hither, and slay them before me. Then not onely the angels, but all creatures shall be ready to execute vengeance on these murtherers, when they shall see the robe of Christ washt in wine, and his garment in the blood of grapes.Gen. 38.20. When Thamar Iudahs daughter in law was accused for committing folly in Israel, she sent to her father in law, saying, Looke I pray thee whose these are, the signet and the staffe. Iuda by and by knew them, and said, She is more righteous then I. And so shall Christs enemies be enforced to confesse him more righteous then thē
                     selues, yea they shall be quite confounded, when they shall see how they

haue abused him, when they shall see the marks, which their signet and staffe haue made, their signet in his hands, and their staffe in his side. The Prophet Daniel recordeth, that while Balthazar was drinking wine in the golden vessels,Dan. 5.6. which he had taken out of the Temple, there appeared fingers of a mans hand that wrote vpon the w
                        •
                     ll, and the King saw the 
                        〈◊〉
                      of the hand that wrote. Then his co
                        ••
                     tenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so that the 
                        〈◊〉
                      of his 
                        〈◊〉
                      were loosed, and his knees smote one against an other. In this case of Balthazar wee may consider the state of the wicked, what it shalbe at the last day: when they shal see the fingers and the palmes of Christs hands, which they haue so pitifully wounded, writing down their doome, they shall tremble euery ioyn
                        •
                      of them, and be at their wits ends; and they shall say to the mountaines, 
                        •
                     al on vs; and to the rocks, Couer vs, and hide vs from the presence of him that fitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lambe. Thus these victorious wounds of Christ shall confront and

confound his enemies. As Saul was astonished, when he heard Iesus of Nazareth calling to him: as Herod was affrighted when he thought Iohn Baptist was risen againe: as the Carthagineans were troubled, when they sawe Sciplo's sepulchre: as the Saxons were terrified, when they saw Cadwallo's Image: as the Philistims were afraid whē they saw 
                        〈◊〉
                      sword: as the Israelits were appaled, when they sawe Aarons rod: as the Hungarians were daunted, when they saw Zisca's drum: as the Romanes were dasht, when they saw Caesars robe: as Iuda was ashamed when he sawe Thamars signet and staffe: as Balthazar was amazed when hee sawe the hand writing vpon the wall. So shall Christs enemies be confounded, when they shall see his hands and his side. As if our Sauiour should say thus to euery one of his enemies, Thou enemie of all righteousnesse, Many things many times hast thou done against me, and hitherto haue I held my tongue; but now will I reprooue thee, and in before thee the things that thou hast done. Thou art the man, thou art the

man, that didst murther me, and put me to a most shamefull death. Denie it if thou darst.Verendum, n
                           •
                         illan: vocem in iudicio suo ad vasa iniquitatis prolaturus sit, fer digitum tuum hue. Caesar hom. 23. Denie it if thou canst. These are thy marks which are yet to be seene in my hands. This deadly wound is thy doing, which is yet to be seene in my side. Therefore thine owne eyes shall giue euidence, and thine owne conscience shall giue sentence against thee. See now whether I say true or no. Look what thou hast done. Put thy finger here, and see my hands, and put forth thy hand, and put it into my side, and as thou art not faithfull, but faithlesse, so looke for no mercie at my hands, but for shame and euerlasting confusion. So much for the third cause, which is to confound his enemies.
                  The fourth cause, why Christ hath his wounds yet to be seene in his body, is to comfort his friends. Almighty God in the old law appointed cities of refuge, whether they which had sinned vnwillingly might flie and be safe,Num. 35.23. if they staied in any of them till the death of the high Priest. Our high Priest can yet plainly prooue by his hands & side, that once he died for vs. Whether then

should we flie, sinnefull soules; whether should we flie for succour and comfort but to Christ? His wounds only are the cities of refuge, wherein we are safe and secure, according to that of the Psalmist, The high hills are a refuge for the wilde goates, and so are the stony rocks for the conies. O blessed be these high hills, blessed be these stony rocks, which protect & defend vs, yea though we haue willingly sinned, not onely against the furie of man, and the rage of the world, but also against the terrible and dreadfull displeasure of Almighty God. Therefore our Sauiour speakes to his Spouse in this sort,Can. 2.14. My doue thou art in the holes of the rocke, in the secret place of the staires, shew me thy sight, let me heare thy voice. Insinuating, that the Church dares neither be seene nor heard of God, except she be in the holes of the rocke, and in the secret places of the staires. The rocke, is Christ. The staires also and the ladder, whereby Iacob climb's vp to heauen is Christ. So that the doue, which is the Church, lying hid in the holes of this rocke, and in the secret places of these

staires, dreadeth nothing but with great boldnes, why doe I say boldnesse? yea with great ioy, with great comfort, sheweth her selfe to God, and speaketh vnto him. Here the sparrow findeth her a house, and the swallow a nest, where shee may lay her young, euen thine Altar, that is thy wounds, whereby thou didst offer vp thy selfe, as a sacrifice for our sinnes, euen thine altars, O Lord of hosts, my King, and my God. When Elias flying from Achab came to Bee
                        •
                     
                     sheba, he sate downe vnder a iuniper tree, and desired that he might die. A iuniper tree maketh the hoatest coale,Fabiolae Ma
                           •
                        s. 15. and the coolest shadow of any tree. The coale is so hot, that if it be rackt vp in ashes of the same, it continueth vnextinguished by the space of a whole years. Therefore whereas we read in the hundred and twentieth Psalme, With hot burning coales; it is in the Hebrew, as S. Hierom noteth, with Iuniper coales. Which prooueth that Iuniper coales be the most hot burning coales that are. Now the coale is not so hot, but the shadowe is as coole. Insomuch as the only shadow of the Iuniper tree, slaieth

and killeth serpents. Therefore Elias seeking to rest himselfe where he might be safest from serpents, and other daungerr, sat downe vnder a iuniper tree, and desired that hee might die: For hee thought he could neuer with the sparrow finde him a house, and with the swallow make him a nest in a better place, thē where he was ouershadowed with that Iuniper tree, which shadowed out the tree of the Crosse of Christ. Of which the Church sai's, Vnder his shadowe had I delight, and sat downe, and his fruite was sweete vnto my mouth. So that if Simeon holding the child in his armes, desired to die, how much more blessedly then might Elias haue departed now in peace, when as beeing wearied with the world, he was shadowed with the tree of life; and not onely held the child in his armes, but also was held himselfe as a child in the wounded and naked armes of Christ. Notably also doth the storie of Noah declare what singular comfort the faithfull finde in Christs woundes. For onely Noah saued all; onely Christ redeameth all,Gen. 6.16. Noah signified rest: Christ is

our rest and peace. Noah saued all by the wood of the Ark: Christ red
                        •
                     emeth all by the tree of the crosse. Noah was tossed vp and downe vpon the waters: Christ saith to his father, Thou hast brought all thy waues vpon me. Noah saued all by the doore in the side of the arke: Christ redeemeth all by the door
                        •
                      in the side of his bodie. Noah the fortieth day after the decreasing of the flood opened the windowe: Christ the fortieth day after his resurrectiō, ascendeth vp and openeth heauen, Lo ye, how all things agree together. None but Noah, none but Christ: Noahs rest, Christs peace: Noahs arke, Christs crosse: Noahs water, Christs woe: Noahs doore, Christs side: Noahs windowe, Christs kingdome. The Prophet Hose foretelleth, that Ephraim shall flie away like a bird. This is fulfilled not only in Ephraim, but euen in all mankind. All haue gone astray; all haue flowen away from God: as a hau
                        •
                     e which takes a check and giues ouer her pray: wherefore Christ holding out his wounded, and bloody hands, as meat to reclaime vs, calleth vs as it were, and saith. Returne,

returne, O Shulamite, returne; returne,Can. 6 12. that we may behold thee. Prudentius writeth, that when Asclepiades commaunded the tormentors to strike Romanus on the mouth, the meeke martyr answered, I thanke thee, O captaine, that thou hast opened vnto me many mouthes, whereby I may preach my Lord and Sauiour: Tot ecce laudant or a, quot sunt vulnera, Looke howe many wounds I haue, so many mouthes I haue, to praise and laud the Lord. And looke how many wounds Christ hath, so many mouthes he hath to call vs to himselfe, so many lures he hath to make our soule flie for comfort onely vnto him. Manna was a most comfortable meate, which God gaue the Israelites. It was like to coriander seede, and the tost of it was like vnto wafers made with honey.Exod. 16.32. This our holy Sauiour applieth to himselfe. For when the Capernites said, Our fathers did eate Manna in the desert, Iesus answered, Your fathers did eate Manna in the wildernesse, and are dead. I am the liuing bread, which came downe from heauen. Therefore as then there was a golden

pot of Manna kept in the Tabernacle, that the posteritie might see the bread wherewith the Lord fed them, so there is yet a golden pot of Manna kept in heauen,Bernard de amor. dei. c. 2. that the faithfull in all ages may tast and see how sweete the Lord is, which feedeth them with his owne body and blood, the least droppe whereof, though it be as small as a 
                        〈◊〉
                      and or seede, yet it is as sweet as a wafer made with honey. Hard it is to giues reason wherefore Christ, when he came to the citie of Sichar in Samari
                        •
                     , 
                        〈◊〉
                      was Iacobs well, sate downe vpon the well about the sixt houre. But certainly he did this, not so much for himselfe as for vs. That hereby we might learne when the sunne is hotest about the 
                        〈◊〉
                      houre of the day, whē we are most exercised with afflictions, when we are 
                        ••
                     
                     rest grieued for our sins, alwaies to haue recourse vnto Christ, alwaies to see with the King into the wineselles alwaies to sit downe vpon Iacobs well.Ioh. 4.6. Of which the Prophet Zacharie sai
                        •
                     s, In that day there shall be a fountaine opened to the house of Dauid, and to the inhabitants of Ierusalem, for sinne and

for vncleanenesse.In omnibus aduersitatibus n
                           •
                         inueni tam essicax remedium quam vulnera Christi. Manu. 22. Whereupon S. Austin saith verie diuinely, In all aduersities, saies he, I could neuer yet find any remedie so comfortable and so effectuall, as the wounds of Christ. Christ is not vnlike to the poole in Ierusalem,Ioh. 5.1. called Bethesda, hauing fiue porches, which being troubled by an angel, healed any man that went first into it, what soeuer disease he had. Bethesda signifieth the house of effusion or powring out, in which house Christ dwelt when he powred out his blood and his soule for our saluation. Therefore he alone is the angel, which came downe at a certaine season, into the poole, and troubled the water: because when the fulnes of time was come, he came into the world to be troubled himselfe, and to be crucified, that he might heale not onely that one man which had been diseased eight a
                        •
                     d thirtie yeares, but euen all mankinde, with the troubled water and blood which issued out of his side. So that there is nothing so comfortable for sicke and sinnefull men, as to fit in the seates and porches of this poole. Wonderfull are the words of the Prophet

concerning Christ, He shall seede his flocke like a shepheard,Esa. 40.11 he shall gather the lambs with his armes, had 
                        〈◊〉
                      thē in his bosom. Which was profigur'd in the high Priest, who did beare vp with his shoulders a breast pla
                        •
                     e, wherin were the names of the twelue tribes, written in twelue precious stones. That which the shepheard doth with his armes and bosom: that which the high Priest doth with his shoulders & 
                        〈◊〉
                      that doth Christ with his hands and side. He is the good shepheard, which bringeth home the lost 
                        〈◊〉
                      vpon 
                        〈◊〉
                      shoulders. Yea he writeth the 
                        〈◊〉
                      of all his sheepe in his precious wounds, which are the precious stones vpon his breast-plate, that both declare his loue to vs. & also allure vs to loue him. This makes Dauid say in great 
                        〈◊〉
                     , The Lord is my shepheard, ther 
                        〈◊〉
                      can I lacke nothing. He shall feeded 
                        〈◊〉
                      in a greene pasture, and lead men forth beside the waters of comfort. For 
                        〈◊〉
                      henne gathereth her brood vnder her wings: so God gathereth his children together.Deut 30.11. And as an eagle stirreth vp her nest, flotereth ouer her birds, taken

them, and beareth them on her wings: so Christ, carrieth vs vp in his hands to the high places of the earth, and causeth vs to sucke bonie out of the stone, and oyle out of the hard rock. Butheius an excellent painter, painted an eagle carrying Ganimedes into heauen, so nicely and tenderly, that her talents did not 
                        〈◊〉
                      him, but onely beare him vp. And in like sort, Christ beareth vs vp in his hands, that we dash no
                        •
                      our foot against a stone; yea his right hand is vnder our head,quis Dominus supponit ma. num suam. and his le
                        •
                     t hand doth embrace vt, so ther though we should fal, yet we cannot be hurt, because the Lord stayeth and supporteth vs with his hand. Therefore S. Chrysostome giues vs good counsell, not to haue iayes eyes but eagles eyes, that wee may behold these hands of Christ, and see his side in the Sacrament. For indeede as often as we celebrate the memorie of our Lords death, Christ our Sauiour, deliuering the bread and the cuppe by his minister, saith in a sort to euerie faithful receiuer, Put thy finger here, and see my hands, and put forth thy hand, and put it into my side, and be not faithlesse, but

faithfull. But yet we shall not alwaies drinke of this fruit of the vine. The time will come, when we shall drinke a new kinde of wine in Christs kingdome. Wherefore he saies, As often as y
                        •
                      shall eate this bread, and drinke this cup, you shall sh
                        •
                     w the Lords death til he 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Till he come. Declaring hereby, that when he is come, his death shall bee shewed an other way. Namely, by his wounds, which alwaies he sheweth to his 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Euen as we sing in that heauenly Hymne or Psalme, The humble suit of a sinner▪ Whose blo
                        •
                     dy wou
                        •
                     d
                        •
                      are yet to see, though not with mortall eye, yet doe thy Saints behold them all, and so I trust shall I. O how vnspeakeably doe 
                        •
                     he Saints 
                        〈◊〉
                     , how gloriously also shall we triumph! when we shall see Christ in his kingdome, and behold those blessed wounds of his, whereby he hath purchased so many, and so great good things for vs? This is the new wine, which we shall drinke. This is the Eucharist of the Angels: the food of the Elect: the spirit 
                        〈…〉
                      of the Saints. For wheresoeuer the dead bodie is, thither shall the eagles refer.

And we that with eagles wings flie vp by faith into heauen, shall euer resort to this dead bodie, and we shal vnsatiably desire to feede our eyes, and our soules with the sight of Christ, who was once dead, and euen now hath in his bodie those skarres which continue the memorie of his death, that in all eternitie it may neuer be forgotten. Thus these heauenly wounds of Christ delight and comfort his friends. As the cities of refuge, which saue the sinner: as the holes of the rock, which defend the doue; as the shadow of the iuniper tree, which reuiueth the wearied; as the doore of the Arke, which preserueth the world: as the lure of the 
                        •
                     oule, which calleth home the Shulamite: as the pot of Manna, which nourisheth the Israelite: as the well of Iacob, which refresheth the thirstie: as the poole of Bethesda, which healeth the sicke: as the armes of the shepheard, which gather his lambs: as the wings of the eagle, which beare vp her birds. So doe the hands and side of Christ comfort his friends. As if our Sauiour should say thus to euery one of his friends, Can a mother forget her

child, and not haue compassion on the son of her wombe? though they should forget, yet would not I forget thee. Behold, I haue grauen thee vpon the palmes of my hands. Here I haue still in my hands that price of thy redemption, which I paid for thee, so that no man can take thee out of my hands. Yea I haue written and sealed thy saluation in my side. A speare is the penne: my blood is the inke: my body is the p
                        •
                     
                     per. Here thou maist see the bowels of my compassion, thorough the wounds of my passion. Assure thy selfe therfore, assure thy selfe of my loue, of my good will, of my fauour for euer. Make no doubt of it. If thou doubt any thing, Put thy finger here, and see my hands, and put forth thy hand, and put it into my side, and be not faithlesse, but faithful. So much for the fourth cause, which is to comfort his friends.
                  You see then, blessed Christians, you see how these causes of Christs wounds differ one from an other. The first cause, to approoue his resurrection, was, but neither is, nor shall bee. The second cause, to appease his Father was

and is, but shall not be. The third cause, to confound his enemies, neither was, nor is, but shall be. The fourth cause, to comfort his friends, both was, and is, and shall be. So that Christs wounds, did serue, to approoue his resurrection, onely between his resurrection, and his ascension: doe serue to appease his Father, onely between his ascension, and his second comming: shall serue to confound his enemies, onely at the day of iudgement: did, doe, and shall serue, to comfort his friends, for euer. Wherfore though wee be neuer so great sinners, yet let vs neuer despaire of the grace and mercie of Christ. His hands are still stretched out to embrace vs, his side is alwaies open to receiue vs. Therefore let vs creepe low, and come humbly to him, that wee may with the woman in the Gospel, touch but the hemme of his garment; nay that we may with S. Iohn, leane vpon his blessed bosome; yea that we may with S. Thomas in this place, put our fingers into his hands, and our hands into his side. And euen as Constantine the great vsed to kisse that eye of Paphnutius which was boared out in

Maximinus time, and the Iayler in the Acts, washed S. Pauls stripes and vvound
                        •
                     : so let vs kisse the Sonne least he bee angry, and honour his holy vvounds, vvich are the precious 
                        〈◊〉
                      vvherevvith he hath healed vs, and restored vs to euerlasting life. To the vvhich vve beseech thee, O good Lord to bring vs, not for our ovvne deferrs or merits, but for the tender bovvels of Christ Iesus loue and mercie tovvard vs, to vvhom vvith the Father, and the holy Ghost, bee all honour and praise both novv and for euermore, Amen.
                  FINIS.
               
               
                  
                  MATTH. 5. V. 19. He that both doeth and teacheth, the same shall be called great in the kingdome of heauen.
                  
                     BEloued in our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, It is a verie monstrous thing, that any man should haue more tongues then hand
                        •
                     . For God hath giuen vs two hands, and but one tongue, that we might doe much, and say but little. Yet many say so much and do so little, as though they had two tongues, and but one hand: nay, three tongues and neuer a hand. Insomuch as that may be aptly applied to them,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      which Pandulphus said to some in his time: You say much, but you doe little; you say well, but you doe ill: againe, you doe little, but you say much: you doe ill, but you say well. Such as these (which do either worse then they teach, or else lesse then they teach: teaching

others to doe well, and to do much, but doing no whit themselues) may be resembled to diuerse things. To a wherstone, which being blunt it selfe, makes a knife sharpe. To a painter, which being deformed himselfe, makes a picture faire. To a signe, which beeing weather-beaten and hanging without it selfe, directs passengers into the Inne. To a bell, which beeing deafe and hearing not it selfe, calls the people into the Church to heare. To a nightingale▪ which beeing restles and sitting vpon a thorne her selfe, brings others by her singing into a sweete sle
                        •
                     pe. To a goldsmith, which beeing beggerly and hauing not one peice of plate to vse himselfe, hath store for others which he shewes and sells in his shoppe. Lastly, to a ridiculous actor in the citie of Smyrna, which pronouncing; ô coelum, O heauen, pointed with his finger toward the ground: which when Polemo the cheifest man in the place sawe, he could abide to stay no longer, but went from the company in a chase, saying, This 
                        •
                     oole hath made a solecisme with his ha
                        •••
                      hee hath spoken false Latine w
                        •••
                      his

hand. Such are all they, which teach one thing and do another: which teach well, and doe ill. They are like a blunt whe
                        •
                     stone: a deformed painter: a weather-beaten signe: a deafe bell: a restles nightingale: a beggerly goldsmith: a ridiculous actor, which pronounceth the heauen, and pointeth to the earth. But he that sitteth in the heauen, shall laugh all such to scorne, the Lord shall haue them in derision, and hisse them off from the stage. Because howsoeuer they haue the heauen commonly at their tongues ende, yet they haue the earth continually at their fingers ende. So that they speake false Latine with their hand; nay that which is worse, they speake false Diuinitie with their hand. Whereas we might easily auoide all such irregularitie, & make true congruity betweene the tongue and the hand, if we would make this text of holy Scripture, the rule of our whole life. For then, I assure you, we should euery one of vs play our parts so well, that in the end, the tragedie of this wofull life beeing once finished, we should haue an applause and a plaudite of the whole

theatre, not onely of men and Angels, but euen of God himselfe, who doth alwaies behold vs. Wherefore out of these fewe words, let vs obserue these two parts.Diuision. The first negatiue, what must not be: neither Pastor nor people must teach one thing and doe another: That must not be. The second affirmatiue, what must be: both Past
                        •
                     r and people must doe that themselues, which they teach others to doe. That must be. For He that both doth and teacheth, the same, shall be called great in the kingdome of heauen.
                  First, that the Pastor must not teach one thing and doe another, appeareth in the fourth of Leuiticus.Leu. 4.20. Where almighty God appointeth the selfe same sacrifice should be offered for the sinne of the Priest, which is offered for the sinne of the whole people. So that all the people may better sinne, though it be a thousand times, then the Priest may sinne though it be but once. For the people sinning, offend onely by their sinne:Exod. 4. but the Priest sinning offendeth more by his example, then by his sinne. Therefore Moses beeing comm
                        •••
                     ded

by throwing downe his rod,Exod 7. to worke miracles, deliuered it to Aaaon, To signifie, that especially it belongeth to him to doe somewhat himselfe, whose duty is to teach others. Whereupon also our Sauiour giues vs a caueat, to beware of false Prophets, because they say and do not.Matth. 23.3. They say one thing, and doe another. They bind heauie burthens which they tie vpon other mens backes,Luk. 1
                           •
                        .
                           •
                        6. but touch not those burdens themselues, so much as with the least of their fin
                        •
                     ers. So that that which was fondly and falsly said of Christ,Matth. 27.42. He saued others, himselfe he cannot saue: may be fitly & truly said of these▪ They saue others, themselues they cannot saue. Whereas the Apostle making Timothy an example for all ministers to follow, writeth thus to him; Take heed to thy selfe,1. Tim. 
                           •
                        .16. and to doctrine: for in doing so, thou shalt both saue thy selfe, and them that heare th
                        •
                     e. By taking keede to thy doctrine, thou shalt saue them that heare thee: by taking heede to thy selfe, thou shalt saue thy selfe. Otherwise if thou take heede to thy doctrine, and not to thy selfe, thou m
                        ••
                     est well saue others that heare thee,

but thy selfe thou canst not saue. Thou maiest well preach to others, but thou shalt be sure to prooue a cast-away thy selfe.1. Cor. 9.17. For when two pray, if the one blesse, and the other curse, whose prayer will God heare? And is it not then much more dangerous, when out of one and the selfe same mouth commeth both blessing and cursing? When one and the selfe same Minister,Iam. 3.10. teacheth well, whereby the people are blessed, and yet doth ill, whereby he himselfe is accursed? Is it not likely that God will rather respect his cursed doing to p
                        •
                     
                     nish it, then regard his 
                        〈◊〉
                      teaching to praise it? Certainly the Psal
                        •
                     ist puts the matter out of all doubt, where he saies,Psal. 8.2. That God will surely cast away, God will reiect, God will destroy the enemy and the auenger. The enemie and the auenger: Who is he? He that is an enemy to Gods glorie in that he doth ill, and yet would seeme to be an auenger, to be a maintainer, to be a defender of Gods glory, in that he teacheth well, he is the enemy and the auenger. And such an one as this, which is indeede an enemie, and yet would

seeme to bee an auenger, which is indeed a foe, and yet would seeme to be a friend, which doth indeed ill, and yet would seeme to teach well, such an one I say, will God destroy. To the wicked thus saith the Lord. Why doest thou preach my lawes,Psal. 50.16. and take my statutes in thy mouth, whereas thou hatest to be thy selfe reformed by them, and hast cast my words behinde thee? By thine owne mouth,Luk. 19.22. by thine owne confession I will condemne thee, thou naughtie, thou lewd seruant.Iob. 15.6. Thine owne words shall accuse thee, and not I, yea thine owne lips shall beare witn
                        •
                     sse against thee. For why goest thou about to take a little moate out of thy brothers eye,Matth. 7.5. and doest not first cast out that great beame which is in thine owne eye? Why goest thou to other mens houses, and priest into other mens matters,Mark. 5.
                           •
                        6. and doest not first go to thine owne house, and see that all bee well in thine owne heart? What meanest thou to doe? Thou that teachest others, doest thou not teach thy selfe?Rom. 2.
                           •
                        1. Thou that preachest a mā should not steale, dost thou steale? If thou be a preacher, then preach to

thy selfe as well as others. If thou be a Physitian,Luk. 4.13. then cure thy selfe as well as others. Seeing indeed as Hierome writeth, he is too nice and to daintie a Physitian,Deliearus magister est, qui ple
                        
                           •
                        o ventre dispúta
                           •
                         de i
                           •
                        
                        iunio. either for the body or els for the soule, which prescribeth fa
                        ••
                     ing to others, and is sicke of a surfet himselfe. Wherefore the godly Pastor must not prescribe fasting to others and be sicke of a surfe
                        •
                      himselfe: he must not teach one thing and doe an other. For not be that onely teacheth, but He that both doth and teacheth, the same shall be called great in the kingdome of heauen.
                  Now the people also are forbidden to teach one thing and doe an other, as well as the Pastor. For all Christians must imitate the example of Christ. And for Christ S. Iohn tells vs, that he was full of grace and truth.Ioh. 1.14. The fulnesse of his truth, made him teach well: of his grace,1. Pet. 2.22. doe well. Saint Peter likewise, that hee did no sinne, neither was there guile found in his mouth. Many haue no guilt found in their mouthes, which notwithstanding 
                        〈◊〉
                      sinne. But euen as Christ had neither

guile in his teaching, not yet sinne in his doing: so wee that are Christians must neither deceiue others by teaching guilfully, nor yet deceiue our selues by doing sinnefully. For wee knowe that not euery one that saith,Matth. 7.21. Lord, Lord, shall be saued. Neither yet euery one that saith, The Temple of the Lord,
                        Ier. 7.4. the Temple of the Lord, shall be blessed. Seeing oftentimes a man, the nearer he is to the Temple of the Lord, the further hee is from the Lord of the Temple. Therefore as that figtree was accursed, which did beare leaues and no fruit:Mark. 21.14. so shall euery man be accursed which beareth leaues without fruit. I meane a flourish of teaching, without any fruit of doing. Yea such a man being once accursed, shall be euer tormented. For knowing his masters will,Luk. 12 47. nay knowing it so well, that he is able to teach it others also, and yet doing it not himselfe, he shall be beaten with many stripes. Chrysostome saith, that drunken men haue both strings wherewith their tongues are tied,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . so that they can teach nothing well; and also strings wherewith their hands are tied, so that

they can doe nothing well. They are both tongueti'de,Mark. 7.35. and handti'de. But such as knowe their masters wil, and do it not, are worse then drunken men. For though the string of their tongue bee loose, as that stammerers in the Gospell was, so that they can teach wel enough: yet the string of their hand is not loose, their hand is still bound vp in their bosome, as that loyterers in the Prouerbs is,Prou. 26.15. so that they can doe nothing well. Therfore they draw neere to God with their tongues,Ier. 12.1. but are far from him with their reines. Yea they are so farre from comming to him with th
                        •
                     ir hearts, that they neuer come neere him so much as with their hands. But though they haue the smooth tongue of Iacob, which teacheth well;Gen. 27.22. yet they haue the rough hand of Esau, which doth ill. Such doe not touch Christ, but throng Christ. They touch Christ, as the good woman did,Luk. 8 45. which follow him, and come neere vnto him by well doing. They throng Christ, as the rest of the people did, which oppresse and ouerwhelme him with a multitude of words, without any matter or manner of doing; which are

as wells without water,1. Pet. 2.17. or as clouds without raine. Such as the Prophet Ieremie speaketh, doe steale Gods word▪ They haue not onely false and lying tongues,Furantur verba. Ier. 23.30. but also filching and stealing tongues. For teaching well, and doing ill, their teaching doth not become them, it doth not beseeme them, it doth not belong vnto them. It is strange that a man should steale with his tongue: euen as it is strange also, that a man should speake with his hand. Yet as I noted before, that these speak false construction with their hand: so now I note that these steale true construction with their tongue. They steale their words, I say, howsoeuer otherwise they be most true, who as Austin writeth, would seeme to be righteous in that they teach the words of God,Qui boni volunt videri loquendo quae dei sunt, cum mali sint, faciendo quae sua sunt. August. whereas indeed they are vnrighteous, in that they doe the works of the deuill. Wherefore we that are a holy people, must not teach the words of God, and doe the workes of the deuil; we must not teach one thing, and doe an other. For not hee that only teacheth, but Hee that both doth and teacheth, the same shall be called

great in the kingdome of heauen.
                  Thus much for the first part negatiue, what must not be. Neither Pastor nor people, must teach one thing, and doe another. That must not be.
                  The second part affirmatiue followeth, what must be. Both Pastor and people must do that themselues which they teach others to doe. That must be. First, for the Pastor he hath two kind of garments.
                        
                           •
                        xod. 28.4. A brestplate, and an Ephod. The breast-plate shewes that hee must haue science to teach: the Ephod shewes that hee must haue conscience to doe that which hee teach
                        •
                     th. And in the verie breastplate it selfe is written, not onely Vrim, but also Thummim. Vrim signifies light.Exod. 28.30. Thummim signifies perfection. To prooue that the Pastor, must not onely be the light of the world, but also the salt of the earth: not onely a light of direction in his teaching, but also a patterne of perfection in his doing. For euen as the snuffers of the tabernacle were made of pure gold: so Preachers which should purge and dresse,Exod. 25 38. and cleare others that they may burne-out brightly, must be made of

pure gold, that by doing well they may also shine themselues. Hence it is that the Priest hath out of the sacrifices for his share,Num. 8.18. the shake-breast & the right sho
                        •
                     lder. The shake-breast puts him in mind of teaching well: the right shoulder puts him in mind of doing well. That great Prophet Elias is called, The horseman and the Chariot of Israel. A horseman directs the chariot,2 Reg 1.12. and keeps it in the right way: a chariot goes in the right way it selfe. And so a Minister must not onely as a horseman direct others, and set them in the right way, but also as a chariot, he most follow a good course, and walke in the right way himselfe. He must be both the horseman, that teacheth, & the chariot that doth; both the horseman and the chariot of Israel. Therefore he hath vpon the fringes of his vesture pomgrana
                        ••
                     , and bels. Many preachers are full of bells which make a great ringing and gingling,Exod 39.25. but because they haue not pomgranats as well as bels, therefore all the noise that they make is but as sounding brasse or as a tinckling cymball. For the godly 
                        〈◊〉
                      must not only say wel, and sound

out the word of the Lord to others clearely as a bell, but also hee must doe well, and as a pomgranate be fruitfulll himselfe and full of good workes.Exod. 26.37. Euen as the pillers of the Tabernacle were made of Shittim wood, and ouerlaid with pure gold: so preachers (which are called in the Epistle to the Galatians the pillers of the Church) must not onely be ouerlaid outwardly with pure gold, teaching the word of God purely, but also they must doe as they say, and inwardly bee made of Shittim wood, which neuer corrupteth, neuer rotteth, hauing no cor
                        •
                     uption, no rottennes
                        •
                     e in their liues. Hereupon our Lord, speaking to his Prophet saies, Lift vp thy voice as a trumpet. Diuers things there are which sound louder then a trumpet; The sea, the thunder, or such like. Yet he saies not, Lift vp thy voice as the sea▪ or lift vp thy voice as the thunder, but lift vp thy voice as a trumpet.Esa. 58.1. Because a trumpeter when he sounds his trumpet, he windes it with his mouth, and holds it vp with his hands: and so a Preacher, which is a spirituall trumpeter, must not onely by teaching well,

sound forth the word of life with his mouth, but also by doing well hee must support it, & hold it vp with his hands. And then doth he lift vp his voice as a trumpet. Those mysticall beasts in Ezekiel,Ezec. 1.8. which S. Gregorie vnderstandeth to be the Ministers of the Church, had hands vnder their wings. Many Preachers are full of feathers, and can soare aloft in a speculatiue kind of discour
                     
                        •
                     ing: but if you should search for hand
                        •
                      vnder their wings, perhaps you should scarse finde many times so much as halfe a hand amongst them. But the godly Pastor must haue not onely wings of high wisedome and knowledge, but also hands vnder his wings to doe that which he knoweth.Mal. 2.7. For as the Prophet Malachie witnesseth, The Priests lips should keepe knowledge. He saies not, they should babble or vtter knowledge to others, and haue no care to keepe it themselues. But hauing deliuered it to others, they must as well as others obserue and doe it themselues. And then indeede may their lips rightly be said to keepe knowledge. For euen as they which repaired the walls of Ierusalem,

held a sword in one hand, and wrought with the other:Neh. 4.17. so Preachers which by winning soules repaire and build vp the walls of the heauenly Ierusalem, must not onely hold the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God in one hand, but also they must labour with the other hand. Else they shall pull downe and destroy rather then build vp. But if they doe as fast as they say, then they shall build apace, and edifie very much. Therefore Saint Paul exhorteth Timothie to shew himselfe a workeman, which needeth not to be ashamed,2. Tim. 2.15. diuiding the word of God aright▪ Hee must not onely be a word-man, but also a work-man. He must not onely hold a sword in one hand, to diuide the word of God aright, but also labour with the other hand, and DOE his best to shew himselfe a workeman which neede not be asham'd. And the same Apostle exhorteth the same Timothy againe, to shew the true patterne of wholesome words.2. Tim 1.13. Holesome words is sound teaching: the true patterne of holesome words, is well doing. So that he shews the true patterne of wholesome words,

which patternes & samples his teaching by doing, making them both matches & paires, so that (as Marke the Eremite speaketh) a man may easily read all his sermons, and all his exhortations to others, written downe as it were, and expressed in the lines of his own life. And thus must euery faithfull preacher doe. He must haue not only a brest-plate, but also an Ephod; he must haue written in this brest-plate, not onely Vrim, but also Thummim: he must be like the snuffers of the tabernacle, not only purging others, but also made of pure gold himselfe: hee must haue for his share of the sacrifices not onely the shake-brest, but also the right shoulder: he must be as Elias was, not onely the horseman, but also the chariot of Israel: hee must haue vpon the fringes of his vesture, not onely bells, but also pomgranats: hee must be like the pillers of the tabernacle, not only ouerlai'd outwardly with gold, but also inwardly made of Shittim woode: hee must not onely lift vp his voice, but also lift it vp as a trumpet: he must not onely haue wings, but 
                        〈◊〉
                      hands vnder his wings: he must not

onely with his lippes vtter knowledge to others, but also keepe knowledge himselfe: hee must not onely hold a sword in one hand, but also labour with the other hand: he must not onely deuide the word of God aright, but also shewe himselfe a workeman which neede not be ashamed: he must not onely deliuer holesome words, but also shewe the true patterne of holesome words, which is a godly life. The summe is this: The faithfull Pastor must not onely teach well, but also DOE well. He that both doth and teacheth, the same shall be called great in the kingdome of heauen.
                  Now the people likewise are commanded to DOE that themselues, which they teach others to doe, as well as the Pastor.Gen. 23.19. We read that Abraham buried Sarah in the caue of Macpelah, that is in a double sepulchre. Hee that burieth his minde in knowledge onely, without any care of practise, he buries Sarah in a single sepulchre: but he that buries his minde as well in the practise and feeling of religion (which is all in all) as in the knowledge and vnderstanding

of it, he buries Sarah in a double sepulchre. And so must all we doe which are the true children of Abraham. For then with Abraham burying our spirit in a double sepulchre, we shall with Elizeus haue a double spirit. A spirit that as well doeth, as teacheth. God appointed Moses to make a lauer with a base or a foote.Exod. 30.18. Now the word Labium, signifies as well a lippe, as a lauer. So that the lauer which washeth must haue a base, and the lippe which teacheth must haue a foote. Otherwise if teaching doe not stand vpon doing as vpon a foote, then surely it is footelesse, and so consequently it is bootelesse, and altogether vnprofitable.Iob. 31.36. Holy Iob saies thus, Though mine aduersarie should write a booke against me, would not I take it vpon my shoulder, and bind it as 
                        •
                      crowne vnto me? That which he saith of his aduersaries booke, may not altogether vnfitly bee applied to Gods booke, which we must studie, not so much that we may bind it to our head, or beare it in our memorie to teach it, as that we may beare it vpon our shoulders to DOE it. Then shall it be euery

way a crowne vnto vs. Simeon the sonne of Onias was as a faire Oliue tree that is fruitfull,Ecclus. 50.20. and as a Cypres tree, which groweth 
                        •
                     p to the clouds. A Cypres tree is high but barren: an Oliue tree is fruitfull but lowe. So a Christian must, not onely as a Cypres tree reach vp to the clouds, by a high gift in teaching, but also hee must as an oliue tree bring forth the oyle of mercy, and be euery way fruitfull in doing. Then he shall be like Simeon, neither low nor barren. But though he be an oliue, yet he shall be as high as the cypres tree▪ and though he be a cypres, yet he shall be as fruitfull as the oliue tree. Noah is appointed to make a windowe in the toppe of the Arke,Gen. 6.16. and a doore in the side of it; A windowe is for the eye onely to looke out; a doore is for the whole bodie to goe out. And in like manner a godly man, must not haue a windowe for contemplation as Daniel had, who said his praiers thrice a day looking out of his chamber windowe; but also he must haue a doore for action as Abraham had, who entertained his guests about the heat of the day fitting

in his tent doore. At the windowe of contemplation he must meditate and looke to his teaching; at the dore of action hee must goe forth to his doing.Leuit 11.4. Threfore by the olde lawe all those beasts are accounted vnclean that chew the cud, but diuide not the hoofe; which lawe was not made for beasts, but for men. To admonish vs, that all they are vncleane in the sight of God, which chewe the cudde by meditating of his word to teach it, and yet diuide not the hoofe by following the same to doe it. When Gedion went to warre against the Madianites,Iud. 7.6. he sent home againe those souldiers which kneeled down to lappe water, and tooke those only with him, which lapt out of their hands. Because indeede they are not fit to be soldiours in Christs campe, which haue mouthes to say somewhat, but no hands to do any thing. For if they haue no hands to helpe themselues, much lesse to hurt their enemies. And looke how these Souldiers did put their hands to their mouth; in like sort the wise woman putteth her fingers to the distaffe. Now there is a great resemblance

betweene the distaffe and the tongue. For as a thread either longer or shorter is spun off from the distaffe; so from the tongue a speach. Therefore he may be said to put his fingers to the distaffe,Prou. 31.19. which puts his doing to his teaching, and doeth that which hee teacheth. Our Sauiour speaking to his Spouse, saies thus, Let me see thy sight, let me heare thy voice. As if he should say, Let me not onely heare a voice of of thy teaching, but also see a fight of thy doing. Let me see thy sight, let me heare thy voice.Eum eligas magistrum quem magis ad
                           •
                        iteris cum videas, quam cum audias. Whereupon Senec
                        •
                      saies fitly, Be sure thou imitate him aboue all other, whome thou maist admire more when thou seest his sight, then when thou hearest his voice. So Paul wisheth the Philippians to follow those things which they had heard of him,Phil. 4.9. and seene in him. His teaching they had heard of him: his doing they had seene in him.Act. 7.22. So Moses was mightie in words, and in deedes: Not mighty in words, and weake, or no body in deedes: but mighty in both, in words and in deedes,Numb. 7.8. in teaching, and in doing. So Aarons rod brought forth blossomes,

and almonds. Now as almonds are the fruit of blossomes: in like sort doing is the fruit of teaching. So the Baptist was a shining, and a burning light,Ioh 5.
                           •
                        5. He shined in knowledge, which made him able to teach well, hee burned in zeale, which made him willing to doe well. So Dauid saies, Establish me with thy free spirit,Psal 51.12. then shall I teach thy way vnto the wicked. He did not onely teach others the way of God, but also he was established with the free spirit of God to doe well himselfe. So Titus was an example of good workes,Tit. 2.7. and vncorrupt doctrine. Vncorrupt doctrine is teaching well: good workes is doing well. How then was he an example of good workes, and vncorrupt doctrine? Clemens Alexandrinus makes the answer. Teaching as he did, and doing as he taught, he was an example of good workes and vncorrupt doctrine. And so must euery one be which is the sincere seruant of God. He must with Abraham bury Sarah not onely in a sepulchre, but also in a double sepulchre: he must with Moses make him, not onely a lauer, but also

a base: hee must with Iob, not onely bind the book to his head, but also beare it vpon his shoulders: he must with Simeon, not only be a cypres tree, but also an oliue tree; he must with Noah make him not only a window, but also a dore: he must with those cleane beasts, not onely chewe the cudde, but also diuide the hoofe: he must with those valiant Soldiers, not only bow down his knees, but also lift vp his hands to lap water: he must with the wise woman, not only haue a distaffe, but also puts his fingers to it: he must with the Church, not onely let Christ heare his voice, but also let him see his sight: euē as Pauls excellent vertues were not only heard of him, but also seen in him; euē as Moses was mightie, not only in words, but also in deeds: euen as Aarons rod did beare not onely blossoms, but also almonds: euen as Iohn Baptist was a light, not onely shining, but also burning: euē as king Dauid was a prophet, not only teaching others, but also established with grace himself: euen as Titus was an example, not onely of vncorrupt doctrine, but also of good workes. The summe of all is this: The

sincere seruant of God, must not onely teach well, but also DOE well. For He that both doeth and teacheth, the same shall bee called great in the kingdome of heauen.
                  Now then, beloued, let vs blush, and be ashamed, that euen the verie Gentiles should goe before vs in this point. So
                        •
                     iades a heathen man could say thus much, Better done then said. A good thing if thou knowe it, doe it. It is written of Iulius Caesar, that he neuer said to his souldiers, Ite, but Venite: he neuer said, Goe ye yonder, but Come ye hither, I will goe with you; nay, I will go before you. And so saves our heauenly Captaine and conquerour Iesus Christ, not Ite, but Venite, Come vnto me all ye that labour, and learne of me, because I am meeke and humble in heart. Hee saies not, because I talke of my humilitie, but because I am humble, because I shewe the practise of it continually in my selfe. I (saies he) came downe from heauen to earth, I left my Fathers bosome, and tooke a traytors kisse, to teach all men true humilitie. Therefore there is no teacher to me, there is no

master to me: Learne of me, because I am meeke and humble in heart. This kind of instruction both by teaching, and by doing, is that two-edged sword which proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lambe. For tell me I pray you (if it be no trouble to you) tell me, what is the reason thinke you, why so many Preachers in their Churches, so many masters in their families, seeke to redresse abuses, striue against sinnes, and yet preuaile so little, but onely because they fight not with this two-edged sword, but with a backsword: the sword which they fight withall is very sharpe, and cuts deepe on the teaching-side, but it is blunt and hath no edge at all on the doing side. Whereas if we would fight against vngodlines with this two-edged sword, both by teaching and doing, we should soone cut downe sinne in such sort, as it should neuer bee able to stand out against vs. Therefore Dauid beeing readie to reforme many things, among his people, saies in one of the Psalmes,Bonitatem & scientiam doceme. O Lord giue me goodnesse, & knowledge. Goodnes, that I may do well, and Knowledge, that I may teach

well. For I am sure (saies he) that all my teaching without doing, all my knowledge without goodnes, is to no purpose. Therfore, O Lord, giue me goodnes and knowledge. But first goodnes, and then knowledge. Because indeede, one heartfull of goodnesse, is worth an hundred headfulls of knowledge: one handfull of doing, is worth an hundred tongue-fuls of teaching. For what is the hand els, but the very seale of the tongue? So that as a writing is not pleadable by the law of man without seales, no more is a word warrantable by the law of God, without works. And therefore if they which serue the beast, receiue the marke of the beast, not onely in their foreheads, but also in their hands: how much more then ought we which serue the liuing God, to receiue the marke of God, not onely in our foreheads by open professing of him, but also in our hands by faithful practising that which we professe. Therefore it is an vsuall phrase well-nigh in all the Prophets to say, The word of the Lord by the hand of Amos, by the hand of Zacharie, or such like; I know indeede

it is an Hebrewe phrase, where the hand of the Prophet signifieth the ministerie of the Prophet. But yet this phrase may giue vs thus much to vnderstand, that if the Prophets deale so, as euery word of God passed not only thorough their mouthes, but also through their hands, that when we also must so deale in hearing and handling the word of God, as we may bring vnto God, sayes Agapetus, not onely a profering of words, but also an offering of works. Wherefore deare brethren, let your light so shine before men, that they not onely hearing your good words, but also seeing your good works, may glorifie your Father which is in heauen. For then I assure you, if we glorifie our Father which is in heauen, he will glorifie vs his children which are vpon earth, and in the ende make vs great in the kingdome of heauen. O remember therefore that golden saying in the Scripture,Psal. 111.16. The feare of the Lord is the beginning of wisedome, a good vnderstanding haue all they that doe thereafter, the praise of it endureth for euer. A good vnderstanding haue

all they that doe thereafter? Why so? Because an ill vnderstanding haue all they that doe not thereafter. They that haue vnderstanding, and doe not thereafter, that is, according to it, haue an ill vnderstanding. But they that haue vnderstanding, and doe thereafter according to it, haue a good vnderstanding. A good vnderstanding haue all they that doe thereafter: the praise of it endureth for euer. It shall be eternally rewarded. O how richly are the Apostles rewarded, how highly are they nowe honoured in heauen, because when they were vpon earth, they had a good vnderstanding. They had clouen tongues.Act. 2.3. Clouen tongues? What's that? I'le tell you. Doe you not see how our hands are clouen and diuided into fingers; So were the Apostles tongues. They (in a manner, if I may so say) had fingers vpon their tongues, as well as we haue vpon our hands. It was but a word and a worke with them. They had no sooner taught others any good thing (as O Lord what good thing did they not teach vs all) but by and by they were readie to practise it, and to performe

it themselues. Therefore they are alreadie great in the kingdome of heauen, yea, and much more shall be. The twelue Apostles shall sit vpon twelue thrones, iudging the twelue tribes of Israel. And if we can happily obtaine so much grace and goodnesse of God, as that we may haue a care and a conscience as well to doe as to teach, then as sure as God's in heauen, wee likewise shall be great in the kingdome of heauen. We shall be installed with Christ and his Apostles, in the throne of glory, when we shall heare him say vnto vs, Come yee blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdome of heauen prepared for you. For ye haue not onely professed, but practised: ye haue not onely taught well, but wrought well: yee haue not onely said well, but done well, therfore now you shall be great in the kingdom of heauen. To the which kingdome of heauen, we beseech thee, O Lord, to bring vs, euen for Iesus Christs sake. Amen.
                  FINIS.
               
               
                  
                  A SERMON PREACHED before the Kings Maiestie at Draytonin Northhamptonshire. August. 6. 1605.
                  
                     
                        
                           PSAL. 132.18.
                        
                        As for his enemies I shall cloath them with shame; but vpon himselfe shall his Crown flourish.
                     
                  
                  
                     THe Royal Prophet hauing setled himselfe in his kingdome according to his owne desire; and besides hauing after many wandrings to and fro, at length brought backe the Arke againe to Ierusalem; maketh here his most zealous

and deuout prayer to God for the continuance of his fauour both to the Church and Common-wealth committed to his gouernement. Returne, O Lord, to thy resting place, saies hee, thou v. 8. & deinceps. and the Arke of thy strength. Let thy Priests be cloathed with righteousnesse, and let thy Saints sing with ioyfulnesse. For thy seruant Dauids sake turne not away the face of thine anointed. Now that he might apparantly see how neere the Lord is to all them that call vpon him in faithfulnesse and truth, he waiteth not long for an answer, but carries it away with him before he depart: For to Dauids petition, Returne, O Lord, vnto thy resting place, thou, and the arke of thy strength; Gods answer is this, v. 14. & deinceps. This shall be my resting place, here will I dwell, for I haue a delight therein. I will blesse her victualls with increase, and will satisfie her poore with bread. To Dauids petition, Let thy Priests be cloathed with righteousnesse, and let thy Saints sing with ioyfulnesse; Gods answer is this, I will cloath her Priests with saluation, and her Saints shall reioyce and sing. Lastly,

to Dauids petition; For thy seruant Dauids sake turne not away the face of thine annointed: Gods answer is this; There shall I make the horne of Dauid flourish, I, I haue ordained a light for mine annointed. As for his enemies, I shall cloath them with shame: but vpon himselfe shall his crowne flourish. As if he should haue said; Turne away the face of mine annointed? Nay, that will I neuer doe, I will indeede turne away the face of the enemies of mine annointed. Their face shall be couered with confusion, and cloathed with shame: But contrariwise, I haue ordained a light for mine annointed. He euer shall haue a light in his face, and a crowne vpon his head. As for his enemies, I shall cloth them with shame: but vpon himselfe shall his crowne flourish.
                  These words are principally to be vnderstood of Christ. For neuer were any so clothed with shame as his enemies the cursed Iewes which murthered him. There citie was sacked, not one stone of it beeing left vpon another, and they themselues as stubble or chaffe were

scattered ouer the face of the earth. So that they are the very shame of men, and the out-cast of all people. Insomuch as when we would signifie we hate a man deadly, indeede we commonly vse to say, we hate them worse then a Iewe. On the other side, Christ is so exalted now, that all power is giuen him in heauen and earth, yea God hath giuen him a name aboue all names, that at the most sweete and most excellent name of Iesus, euerie knee and euery heart also might doe obeys
                        •
                     nce. And as the Apostle prooueth out of the eight Psalme, the Lord now after all his dolorous paines and torments, hath crowned him with honour and glorie. Neuerthelesse in a secondarie sort, this promise may be applied also to Dauid, who was a notable type of Christ; and so consequently to euery faithfull successor of Dauid, which is Christs vicegerent and lieftenant vpon earth. For yee know what was the the ende of all Dauids enemies: Absolon his disobedient sonne hung vp by the goldy lockes of pride. Achitophel his trayterous Counsellor made

away himselfe. Shemei, a reuiler of him, and a derractor from him, in his gray haires put to shamefull death. The same may be said of the rest. But holy Dauid himselfe could neuer be ouercome. For though many enemies, specially Antiochus Epiphanes, bent all their force, to the very vttermost, to roote out Dauids posteritie, and to destroy Gods people; yet maugre their heads and their hearts, Dauids crowne yet flourished and continued in his stocke, till at the length the sonne of Dauid came into the world; of whom the Angel Gabriel spake to the blessed virgin Marie in this sort; Luk. 1.32. He shall be great, and shall be called the sonne of the most High; and the Lord God shall giue him the throne of his Father Dauid, and he shall be ruler ouer the house of Iacob, and of his kingdome shall be no ende. Now if this Scripture be so notably verified in Dauid, bee hauing faithfully serued in his time, and beeing now by the will of God dead: no reason but that we may vnderstand it also generally of euery holy one of God, which treadeth in Dauids steps,

going in and out before Gods people. As for his enemies, I shall cloath them with shame; but vpon himselfe shall his crowne flourish.
                  Here are two parts. His enemies; himselfe. His enemies, first shall haue shame; secondly shall be cloathed with shame. Himselfe, first shal haue a crown: secondly shal haue a flourishing crown. As for his enemies I shall cloath them with shame; but vpon himselfe shall his crowne flourish.
                  The shame which the Lord God assureth Dauid shall light vpon his enemies, is a very droadfull iudgement against them. Nicetas saies plainely; No punishment so greiuous as shame. And Nazianzene yet more expressely; Better were a man die right out, then still liue in repro
                        •
                     ch and shame. This, diuerse valiant worthies haue shewed to be true, ridding themselues voluntarily of their life, that so they might be rid of their shame. Aiax beeing readie to dispatch himselfe, vsed these as his last words; No greife doth so cut the very heart of a generous and magnanimous man, as shame and reproach.

What should I speake of any more Grecians, or Romanes, as of Brutus, Cassius, Antonius, Cato Vricensis, and such others? In Scripture we haue a plaine proofe. Mighty Sampson, beeing about to pull the whole house vpon his owne head,Iudg. 16.18. saide thus: O Lord God I pray thee strengthen me at this time onely, that I may be at once auenged of the Philistims, for my two eies. Hee desired rather once to die valiantly, then long to liue wretchedly. For as Saint Ambrose writing of Samson, saith, Viuere & mori naturae functic: 
                           •
                        udibrio esse probro ducitur. Epist. yo. For a man to liue, or die, is naturall: but for a man to liue in shame and contempt, and to be made a laughing stocke of his Enemies, is such a matter, as no well bred and noble minded man that hath any courage, or stomacke in him, can euer digest it. Yet the Lord God promiseth Dauid his anointed, that shame shall be the reward of all his enemies; shame I say which is a great deale worse then death it selfe. As for his enemies, saies he, I shall cloath them with shame.
                  Secondly, they shall be clothed with shame. To be cloathed is an Hebrewe

phrase, signifying to haue any thing vnseparably cast vpon one. And it is taken both in the better and in the worser part. As a little before; I cloath her Priests with saluation: that is, I will furnish Syons Priests with such indowments and graces from aboue, which they shall be as it were inuested into; that both by their life and doctrine, they shal still further the saluation both of themselues; and of them which heare them. Contrariwise, in this place I will cloath them with shame; That is, shame shall so vnseparably accompany them, that as wheresoeuer a man goeth, he carrieth his cloathes with him; so wheresoeuer they goe, they shall carrie their shame with them. And that which is strangest of all; they which are ashamed, vse to cloath or couer their shame, and then thinke themselues well enough. But Dauids enemies shall be so shamed, that euen the verie couering of their shame, shall be a discouering of it; and the cloathing or cloaking of their ignominie, shall be nothing else but a girding of it more closely and more vnseparably vnto

them. So the Prophet speaketh elsewhere, Psal. 35.26. Let them be put to confusion and shame together, that reioyce at mine hurt. Let them be cloathed with rebuke and dishonour, that lift vp themselues against me. O Lord God, say Amen to it; let it be euen so, O Lord, Let them be clothed with rebuke and dishonour that lift vp themselues against thine annointed. And againe, Psal. 109.19. Let shame be vnto him as a cloake that he hath vpon him, and as the girdle that he is alwaies girdled withall. And yet againe, vers. 19. Let mine aduersaries be cloathed with shame, and let them couer themselues with their owne confusion as with a cloake.
                  But to leaue the word, and come to the matter. The enemies of Dauid shall be clothed with shame three waies: In their owne conscience; In the world; In the day of iudgement.
                  Touching their owne conscience, S. Austin saies well, Omnis in ordinatus affectus est sibimetipfi poena. All vnordinate desires, as none are more vnordinate then trayterous and rebellious enterprises, carrie in themselues that bane which poysons and punishes them at the last.

Whereupon the Prophet saies, Psal. 57.2. Hide me, O Lord, vnder the shadow of thy wings, vntill iniquitie be ouerpast, as the Septuagint translate it. But wee read it, Vntill this tyrannie be ouerpast. And others transla
                        •
                     e it, Vntill this Calamitie, or this Miserie be ouerpast. Which indifferent acceptation of the Hebrew word, sheweth that nothing doth so tyrannize ouer the conscience, nothing is such a calamitie and misery to the minde, as iniquity and sinne. Iudas after he had betraied his Lord and Master, was so confounded in his owne conscience, that he cryed out and said, Matth. 27.4. I haue sinned, in betraying innocent blood. Proditer Casca, vile traytour: if his blood be innocent, then thy conscience is guilty. And if thou canst confesse thou hast sinned, when it is too late, why diddest thou not take heede of sinning when t'was time? I haue sinned saies he, sinned in betraying innocent blood. A thousand hells could not haue more tormented him, then this desperate sorrowe, and extreame shame wherewith his conscience was cloathed, tearing his bowels

whilst he was aliue, and powring them out when he died.
                  Now as for shame in the world, we reade Gen. 4.5. that God did set a marke vpon Cain the murtherer of the iust Habel; and so consequently the ring-leader of all Dauids enemies. Therefore as when men see a wolfe or a foxe, or any such h
                        •
                     rtfull beast in the forest, they set all their dogs vpon him; so the enemies of the Lords annointed, beeing burnt as it were and branded with the markes of shame, are howted and hunted wheresoeuer they goe. One example at this time shall suffice. Maxentius a wicked rebell against his own Lord the famous Emperour Constantine the great, deuised to haue a bridge made with cockebo
                        •
                     tes chained together ouer a riuer neere Rome, thinking to traine the Emperour that way, and there to drowne them in the riuer. But God so wrought for his chosen seruant, that the enemie himselfe beeing compelled to flie that way, was taken in that pit which he digged for others. And so as Pharaoh was cloathed with shame in the open viewe and fight of all the world, when he and

all his host were drowned in the redde sea, after the same fashion Maxentius was drest,
                  Lastly, touching shame in the day of iudgement, Dauids enemies at that day shall stand before the tribunall 
                        ••
                     ate of Christ, beeing naked in all respec
                        ••
                     else, but onely couered with their owne shame. Then they shall be vexed with horrible feareSapien. 5.2., and cloathed with confusion; whereas the righteous shall bee cloathed with incorruption;2. Cor. 15. yea though in this life with the rich glutton, Luk. 16.19. they haue beene cloathed with purple, and fine linnen, yet then their attire shall be dishonour, and their garment shall bee shame. Thus will the Lord cloath the enemies of his anointed with shame; cloath them in their owne conscience; cloath them in the world, cloath them in the day of iudgement. As for his enemies I shall cloath them with shame; But vpon himselfe shal his crowne flourish.
                  The one halfe of this Sermon is now past, the other shall be as soon dispacht. But vpon him shal his crowne flourish.
                  First, himselfe shall haue a crowne.

Tertullian In libro de corona 
                           •
                        ilitis. reporteth out of Diodorus Siculus, that the first that euer ware a crowne was Iupiter. The soldiers gaue him a royall crowne for a reward of his victorie and triumph ouer the Titans. Hereupon Iupiters Priest Act. 14.13. brought buls and crownes to the gates of Listra, and would there haue sacrificed to Paul. Afterward, when Gods people the Israelites would needs haue a King, as other nations had round about them; then their Kings would needs haue crownes also, as other Kings had round about them. Hence we reade, that Dauid hauing vanquished the King of Rabbath, 1. Chron. 
                           •
                        0.2. tooke the crowne from off his head, and found it the waight of a talent of gold, with precious stones in it; and set it vpon his owne head. Though indeede long before that the 2. Sam. 1.10. Amalakite brought him a crowne, which he tooke from Sauls head when he slew him.
                  So that the thing God promiseth is this: that any crown which king Dauid should get, either by conquest, or by succession, or by any other iust title, should still flourish more and more. Some there are in the world which to

be sure of outward ornaments enough, will needes weare a triple crowne, Others haue beene vnwilling to weare that one which they might. Ca
                           ••
                        tus, that wa
                        •
                      absolute King almost of fi
                        •
                     e kingdomes somewhat before the conquest, vpon a time in his progresse riding neare the Thames, lighted and sat downe before the shoare. Then as it were to try a conclusion, he commanded the water beeing now ready to ari
                        •
                     e againe and to flow, not to come 
                        〈◊〉
                      neerer him. But the water keeping his naturall course, came still vp higher and higher, til it began to wet him. Whereupon turning to his Nobles, which were about him, You call mee (saies he) your King and Master, and so indeede I am; and yet loe yee, I cannot commaund so much as this little streame, but do what I can, that will do still as it list. Whereupon presently he posted to Westminster, and resigned his crowne to the crucifixe there; neither could be euer 
                        〈◊〉
                      this be perswaded to weare it any more. Now as the pride of that man of sinne, which sits vnder the signe of the triple crowne, is too intollerable: so on the

contrarie part, this was too much nicenesse in Canutus. Seeing, it followeth not, because he could not command the sea and the waters, as Christ did, and therefore he might not weare a crown. For neither doth Christ himselfe in heauen weare such a crown as Kings of the earth doe. But the truth is this, that royaltie and maiestie, which is essentiall to God, hee is content to communicate to his holy ones, and to his anointed, by participation and grace. Therefore the Lords anointed, which is as it were his fauourite, may very well do all these three things at once; weare the crowne which God giueth; and yet detest the pride which God abhorreth; and still admire the Maiestie which God inioyeth: So that the Lord promising his seruant Dauid a crowne, promiseth him wealth, wisedome, renowne, dignitie, prosperitie; in one word, all royalties belonging to a crowne. But vpon himselfe shall his crowne flourish.
                  Secondly, he shall haue a flourishing crowne. Flourishing is metaphorically attributed to a crowne. As in the next verse before. There shall I make the

horne of Dauid to flourish. A metaphor taken from those goodly creatures, as stagges, and such like; whose cheifest beauty and strength consisteth in their hornes, especially when they budde and branch abroad. So in these words, But vpon himselfe shall his crowne flourish. A plaine allusion to those flowres which either continually, or else a very long time, keepe fresh and greene. Besids at the first, kings crowns were not made of gold and pearles, as I told you of Dauids crowne, but onely of greene oken leaues, as that of Iupiters, or else of some other branches or flowres, as others. The Lord then meaning that Dauids kingdome should be established for euer, and that his lasting glorie should still growe greene, he maketh this louing promise vnto him; But vpon himselfe shall his crown flourish. How flourishing beautifull flowers are, consider but the Lillie, and you shall soone perceiue. Marke (saies our Sauiour) Matth. 5.24. how the lillies of the field doe growe, they labour not, neither doe they spinne, yee doe I say vnto you, that euen Salomon in all his

royaltie was not cloathed like one of these. Now if God so cloath the flowers of the field, which growe to day, and to morrow are cast into the ouen, how much more shall he cloath Dauids enemies with shame: but vpon himselfe make his crowne flourish? For euen as in Salomons Temple, fiue candlesticks at the right side, and fiue at the left standing before the Oracle, and being made for matter of pure gold, for forme with branches and flowers, did well nigh dazil the eyes of any that entered into the Temple 1 Reg. 7.
                           •
                        9.; so the Lord here giues his word, that the Kings crowne shall euer flourish in the house of our God, disparkling and displaying those rayes of Maiestie: those beames of beautie, which shall amaze the world, and be a wonder as well to Angels as to men. Wherefore, as I said euen nowe of his enemies shame, that it should be threefold: so here I repeat the same againe of his crownes flourishing: His crowne shall flourish in his owne conscience: in the world: in the day of iudgement. Touching his owne conscience, the blessed Apostle

calleth the Philippians his ioy, and a crowne Phil. 4.1.. And to the Thessalonians hee writeth thus, What 1. Thes. 2.19.20 is our hope, or ioy, or crowne of reioycing? Are not euen you it, in the presence of our Lord Iesus Christ at his comming? yes, yee are our glorie and ioy: Now, if this precious vessell of honour reioyced in nothing so much, as in the testimonie of his conscience, that in simplicitie and godly purenesse, and not in fleshly wisedome, but by the grace of God, hee had his conuersation in the world, the power of Gods spirit working still most mightily by his ministerie to the conuersion of the world to Christ: how much more shall the Lords anointed haue his conscience crowned with flourishing ioy, with comfort, with content, with heauenly peace, when he shall remember, that not onely for matters of religion and Gods true seruice, hee hath beene and still is with Saint Paul profitable to the Church; but also is a strong bulwark and a tower of defence to maintaine euen the outward felicitie and prosperitie of Gods people; yea the very particular right,

wealth, life of euery one of them; all this I say, and a 100, things more, when he considereth, what a great and a glorious instrument he hath beene euery way of Gods glory: O Lord God what a heauen shall he haue in his heart? what a sweet paradise of pleasure in his soule? what security? what assurance of Christs loue? what a confident and vndaunted hope of eternall glory? what a flourishing crowne of reioycing shall he haue men in his very conscience? vpon himselfe shall his crowne flourish. Touching the world, our holy Prophet speaking to God, though in the third person, yet of himselfe saies, Thou hast preuented him with liberall blessings, and hast set a crown of pure gold vpon his head. His honour is great in thy salvation, glory and great worship hast thou laid vpon him. Now that crowne which is of gold, yea of pure gold, must needes be very flourishing euen in the viewe and face of the world. Neither is this to be vnderstood of Dauids person onely, but euen of his posterity in all ages to come. How was he himselfe crowned with conquests and victories ouer

his enemies? How was his sonne Salomon crowned with riches, with wisedome, with same & glory i
                        •
                      the whole world? which flourishing of 
                        〈◊〉
                      soone, as of a noble branch, graced in a 
                        •••
                     ner the 
                        •
                     etie roo
                        •
                     e of Dauid himselfe. For, as his worthi
                        •
                      sonne teacheth, Childrens children are the 
                        •
                     ed one of the elders,Prou 17.6. and the glory of the children 
                        •
                     re their fathers. Therefore, as children may 
                        •
                     ustly glorie of the renowne of their fathers vertue and honour: so the excellent father is in a sort crowned with happinesse in this world, when he sees his childrens children like to grow vp and flourish after him. But vpon himselfe shall his crowne flourish. Lastly, touching the day of iudgement then, then shall all the righteous flourish, when as hauing beene faithfull vnto the death, they shall receiue the crowne of life. A crowne as S. Peter calleth it immortall and vndefiled,1. Pet. 1.4. and that fadeth not away. Denying that euer it fadeth away, he affirmeth that it euer flourisheth. I would here be bold, if I might doe it without offence, as I hope I may, to shew you one goodly

cluster of grape
                        •
                      of vhe land of Canaan, a land flowing with milke and honie, whether you are now going, before you enter into it.D. Thomas Bodleius, qui plur
                           •
                        
                        mis & pulcherrimis libris Oxoniensem bibliothecam instruxit. A worthie and ver
                     
                        ••
                     us gentleman▪ whom I neede not name in this place, because, no doubt many ages will name him, and renowne him hereafter, giueth for his armes three crownes with this posey, Quarta perennis erit. As if he should say, these three crownes, which I beare in my coat, are but the difference of my house and gentry, but Quarta perennis erit: the fourth crowne which I look for in heauen shall be euerlasting and immortall. That 
                        •
                     ourth, though it bee but one crowne, yet shall be worth all those three crowns, yea three thousand more such as these are; The fourth shall be eternall. Now, if he, and we that are such a
                        •
                      he no question is, faithfull to God, and loyal to the chosen seruant of God, may well hope for a most flourishing incorruptible crowne of glory, then much more may Dau
                        •
                     d himselfe reioyce in God his Sauiour, and say, Quinta aut sexta perennis erit: The fift, or the fixt shall bee eter
                        •
                     all. This crowne

which God of his grace with his owne right hand and his holy arme 
                        〈…〉
                      vpon mine head, is indeede (thankes and praise hee giuen vote the s
                        •
                     me God) a very flourishing crowne flourishing in mine owne conscience: flourishing in the world, both for my person, and for my posteritie; But it is nothing, in respect of that flourishing crowne which I shall receiue at the day of iudgement. For the Psal. 
                           •
                        .
                           •
                        2. iust shall flourish like a palme tree, and shal grow like 
                        •
                      Cedar in Lebanon. Such as hee planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the courts of our God. And then indeede shall this bountifull promise of God be most fully performed, But vpon himselfe shall his crowne flourish. As for his enemies, I shall cloath them with shame, but vpon himselfe shall his crowne flourish.
                  To drawe then to an 
                        •
                     ode: it may seeme very strange, that Dauid had any enemies. Yet, o
                        ••
                      of these words. As for his enemies, I shall cloath them with shame; it may be well gathered that some he had. What? had Dauid? meeke Dauid? Lord remember Dauid, and all

h
                        ••
                      meekenesse, saies he, in the beginning of this Psalme. He was the kindest, and the meekest man aliue. Ween hee had his mortall foe at a vantage, and at a dead lift, as we say, and might haue nailed him fast to the ground with his speare: he onely did cut off a lap of his garment, to shewe, that when he might haue hurt him, hee would not. Posse, & 
                           •
                        olle, 
                           •
                        obile. Yet this meeke Dauid, patient Dauid, mercifull Dauid, valiant and victorious Dauid, holy Dauid, had enemies. Wherefore you most honourable and blessed seruants of God, you that excell in vertue, if you haue some enemies, thinke not strange of it. For, if you had nothing in you: 
                        〈◊〉
                      feare of God, no reuerēce towards his word, no loue and loyaltie towards your Soueraigne, no for
                        •
                     itude, no temperance, no good thing in you; yee might perhaps walke on long enough, and no man enuie you, no man malig
                        •
                     e you, or malice you. But because God hath inspired you with his principall spirit, and endewed you with speciall great graces aboue your fellowes; therefore 
                        •
                     oth your aduersarie the Deuil, the old

enemie of all goodnes and vertue, who is ready to burst to see you doe so well: he, I say, doth bestirre himselfe, and raise vp enemies against you. But (O blessed be our good Lord) what a wonderfull comfort and incouragement haue all you; what a horrible terrour & affrightment haue all your enemies, in this text? For the holy Ghost saies not, They shall be clothed, or you shall cloth them: but I, euen I shal cloth them with shame. It is impossible, saies he, that you should alwaies be armed at all points, circumspect at all places, vigilant at all times, prouided at all occasions, to preuent the mischieuous practises of your diuillish enemies. No counsell of man, no policie, no wisedome, no wit, can foresee their barbarous vndertakings and complottes, to escape them. But in heauen, in heauen there is an eye, an hand there is in heauen: an eye to desery them, and an hand to persecute and punish them: both an eye and an hand to deliuer you from dannger, and to cloath them with shame. Therefore, saith he, Cast your care vpon mee; let me alone with them, your

perill is my perill, your case my case: Ile pay them that they haue deserued: He take the quarrell into mine owne hands: He trimme them well enough. As for your enemies, I shall cloath them with shame. Remēber I pray you, beloued, though indeede, they haue made themselues worthie neuer to be remembred, or once to be mentioned i
                        •
                      our mouthes any more: yet remember, I say, to their egregious dishonour & reproch, how those are now clothed with shame, who were the first cause of the solemnizing, or as I may say, of the sanctifying of this present day for the day of the weeke, and of yesterday for the day of the moneth, & of the twelue moneth, with so holy an exercise? How odious? how execrable is their very name vnto vs? what true hearted loyall subiect, such as I am sure all are here, doth not detest them, hate them, loath them, as a road, or as a viper, or as some hidious mishapen monster: and curse the very day wherein such a rebellious generation, and such a trayterous blood were borne? Certainly, my good brethren, if the mercie of God, which

is incomprehensible, did not giue them grace, at the l
                        •
                     st gaspe to repe
                        •
                     t, and crie to God for pardon: as they are cloathed with shame in this world, so shall they bee much more in the world to come. And as we hold them for no better then cursed creatures, so shall the Lord at last, say vnto them, Goe ye cursed into euerlasting fire. So let it 
                        〈◊〉
                     , O Lord, euen so to all the enemies of 
                        〈◊〉
                      anointed, either open of secret, so 
                        〈◊〉
                      be to them: As for his enemies, do them, thou, O Lord, thine owne selfe, do them cloath them with shame.
                  
                     But vpon himselfe doth his Crowne flourish.
                  
                  These words, vpon himselfe, either 
                        〈◊〉
                      altogether impertinent and super
                        •••
                     
                     ous, or else they are very important 
                        〈◊〉
                      materiall. For it had beene sufficient to haue said; As for his enemies I shall cloath them with shame 
                        〈◊〉
                      as for hi
                        •
                     
                     selfe, his crowne shall flourish. It is 
                        〈◊〉
                      greatly necessarie, as it should seeme to say, his crowne shall flourish vpon himselfe. Yet the Lord in his gracious 
                        ••
                     
                     swer vnto Dauide praier, thought good to put in this as a supernume
                        •••••
                     
                     
word, ouer and besides the necessitie of the sentence: to teach the good King, and vs all likewise, a very notable lesson. Namely, that he would blesse the crowne, the dignitie, the flourishing estate of his louing ser
                        •
                     ant, not onely in his owne person and his posteritie; in this world, and in the world to come, as I haue shewed alreadie; but also from a lesser 
                        ••
                     ight of glorie, still to a greater and greater. Vpon himselfe, sai
                        •
                     s he, shall his crowne flourish. For not onely is shall be flourishing, as Dauid left it, at the day of his departure to God, but after his dissolution and death: as fast as his bodie corrupteth in the earth, so fast shall his crowne encrease still in heauen. Trust me, truely, I speake i
                        •
                      before the liuing Lord, and this high presence, all the whole Church which shall be edified so saluation, by Dauids blessed and godly gouernement, euen after his death, shal yet suffer his crown neuer to die, but shall continually keep in fresh and greene. Yes, as euery one brought to the building of the 
                        ••
                     bernacle, and to the reedifying of the temple, such as they were able: so I assure you, I

speake now a great word, euerie particular subiect, that is faithfull to God, and to his Prince; as he go
                        ••
                     h on forward to God, by the peace, and by the religion which hee hath enioyed vnder his Prince▪ so he shall still beautifie and decke Dauids crowne; & one shal bring a white rose; an other shall bring a red rose, and adde it to the 
                        〈…〉
                      that so vpon himselfe still his crowne may 
                        •••
                     
                     rish, the white rose and the redde rose, that are in the crowne alreadie, beeing euer made more and more fragrant and flourishing. O Christ, what a crowne is this? And what will it growe to 
                        〈◊〉
                      more in the end? You that are mightie Kings and Potentates vpon earth, haue indeede great cares and continuall busines in your head
                        •
                     ; but yet vouchsase I pray you to 
                        •
                     earken a little, what I shall say vnto you. You watch oftentimes ouer vs, when we are asleep our selues. You care for our peace, when it is not 
                        〈◊〉
                      our power to further it; you procuring good to Sion, and prosperitie to Ierusalem, yet many times enioy the least part of it your selues. But no force▪ Take this still for your comfort. Wee that

cannot all our liues long doe the hundreth part of that good, which you doe euery houre, shall haue nothing so flourishing a crowne as you shal haue. Vpon you, vpon you shall euerlasting peace rest, vpō you shal the glory of Gods maiestie shine, vpon you, vpon you shall your crowne flourish. Which the Lord of his mercy grant, I most humbly beseech him for Iesus Christs sake: that as Dauids crowne euer flourished, till the first comming of Christ; so our gracious Kings crowne may euer flourish, till the second comming of Christ; and then, that afterward for euer his royall Maiestie may be royally crowned with eternall life: thorough the same our deare Sauiour Iesus Christ: To whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, bee all honour and glory, power and praise, dignitie and dominion, now and euermore. Amen.
                  FINIS.
               
               
                  
                  A SERMON PREACHED before the Kings Maiestie that day he entred into Oxford, at Woodstock
                           •
                        , August 27. 1605.
                  
                     
                        
                           LVK. 8.15.
                        
                        But that which fell in good ground, are they which with a good, and a very good heart, heare the word, and keepe it, and bring forth to fruit with patience.
                     
                  
                  
                     IN this Parable of the sower, are 4. grounds mentioned. Whereof three are badde, and onely one good. Namely, they which with a good and a very good heart, heare the word, and keep

it, and bring forth fruite with patience. Almightie God powreth out his benefites no lesse plentiously then continually vpon vs: yet wee can make no requitall: our goodnesse cannot reach to God. The onely thing that we can doe for him, is to loue and honour his word. Whereupon King Dauid thought it a death vnto him,Psal. 132. that beeing banished from his people, he could not go
                        •
                      vp to the house of the Lord, with the voice of ioy and gladnesse, among such as keepe holy day. And on the other side he said; I reioyced when they said vnto me, We will goe vp into the house of the Lord.Esa. 2.3. The Prophet Esay likewise, foretelling what alacri
                        •
                     ie and good will should be in the Gentiles after they were conuerted to Christ, saith thus; It shall be in the last dayes, that many people shall goe and say; Come, and let vs goe vp to the mountaine of the Lord, to the house of the God of Iacob, and he will teach vs his wayes, and we will walke in his pathes. Looke how it is in the health of the body,Chrysost. hom. 4. in Gen. and so it is in the state of the soule. If a man haue a good appetite, and a

stomacke to his meate, t'is a signe he is well in health: in like sort, if a man bee content to follow Christ for the loaues to fil his bellie, and care not for the food of his soule; questionlesse all is not well betweene God and him; but if he haue a longing and a hungring desire of the word, then indeede his heart is vpright in the sight of God. For as S. Au
                        ••
                     e
                        •
                      noteth well;August. tract. 4
                           •
                        . in Iohan. Si sermo meus caperetur, caperet. Nun sie est sermo Dei, & sie esse debet fidelibus sicut pis
                           •
                        i hamus. Tum capit quando capitur. Nec sit captis iniuria: Ad salurem enim, non ad perniciem capiuntur. Heb. 13.17. if the word of God be taken by vs, it will take vs. Seeing the word of God so is, and so ought to be, vnto the faithfull, as a hooke is to fish. Then it takes, when it is taken. Neither are they which are taken hurt by it. For they are not caught to bee kil'd, but to be drawne out of the damnation of this world, and to be translated to the libertie and glorie of the children of God. Wherefore as fishers take most delight in angling, when they see the fish bite quickly and greedily: so if you would put life into your Preachers, which are called fishers of men, that they may preach the word with ioy, not with griefe, you must shewe by your countenance, by your attention, by your reuerence, by all your outward behauiour,

that you desire n
                        •••
                     ng so much as to bite at this sweete baite, that so you may be drawne by the Father to Christ. For they onely are good ground as we haue it here, which with a good, and a very good heart, heare the word, and keepe it, and bring forth fruit with patience.
                  Here are three properties of good ground set downe. All opposite to the three bad grounds mentioned before. First, they that are good ground, heare the word with a good heart; contrarie to the ground on the high wayes side, which when they haue heard, let the deuil take the word out of their hearts, & so they heare not with a good heart. Secondly, they keepe the word with a very good heart; contrarie to the stonie ground, which for a while receiue the word with ioy, but in time of temptation they fall away, and so they keepe not the word with a verie good heart. Thirdly, they bring foorth fruit with patience; contrarie to the thornie ground, which after their departure are choaked with cares, and bring no fruit, and so doe not (as it

is said here that the good ground doth) bring forth fruit with patience. But that which fell in good ground are they, which with a good, and a very good heart, heare the word, and keepe it, and bring forth fruit with patience.
                  The first propertie of the good ground is this, that they heare the word with a good heart. The two Disciples going to Emaus,Luk. 24. when Christ was departed from them, said thus one to another; Did not our hearts burne within vs, when he talked with vs by the way, & opened to vs the Scripture? O Beloued, now you are busied in hearing the word, Christ talketh to you, and you are in the right way to heauen. Therefore that wee may heare with a good heart, we must feele in our hearts that burning of which the Disciples say, Did not our hearts burne within vs, when he talked with vs by the way? For so the Spirituall spouse confesseth of her selfe,Ca
                           •
                        t. 5.4. My beloued put his hand to the hole of the doore, and my heart was affectioned towards him. And againes My soule melted when my beloued spake. Now Christ puts his hand to

the hole of the doore, desiring himselfe to enter, and vs to repent: now our beloued speaketh to vs out of his word. So that we cannot be good ground, except our heart be affectioned, and our soule melt towards him. When the blessed Virgin saluted her cousin Elizabeth,Luk. 1.44. she felt the babe spring in her wombe for ioy. Certainely Beloued, you haue euery one of you a babe in your hearts, euen the child Iesus, which is formed and fashioned in you. This babe we must feele euen to skip & spring in our hearts for ioy, if we would assure our selues that wee be good ground, and heare with a good heart. Neither must we only reioyce, but also feare. Serue the Lord with gladnesse, and reioyce before him with trembling,Psal. 2. saies the Psalmist. We read that when the Almightie vttered his voice,Ezek. 5.24. the foure beasts, whereby are meant the Angels, let fall their wings. Where are then our plumes of pride, our feathers whereby wee flie so high in an opinion of our owne knowledge and wisedome? why are they not all let downe, that we may wholly submit our selues to the Lord, to bee

taught and directed by his word? Remember I pray you what good Cornelius said. I know well there was neuer more reuerent hearing of the word in the Court▪ then at this day, yet that which is very well alreadie must so be commended, as that which may be better and better, be euermore enforced. Therefore as I was about to say, remember what the Captaine Cornelius said to S. Peter, when he was readie to preach vnto him; Now, saies he, are we all here present before the Lord,Act. 10.33. to heare all things that are commaunded thee of God: O that we had this good heart to consider, when we heare a sermon, that we stand not before a man, but coram domino, before the Lord. Th
                        ••
                      we should heare the word, not as the word of man, but as it is indeede the word of God. Then, we should put a difference between other things which perhaps shortly we shall heare, either to recreate the mind or sharpen the wit, or for state and maiestie, or for some other earthly purpose, and betweene this engrafted word, which is able to 
                        〈◊〉
                      our soules. It is strange, what is repo
                        •••
                     d

of Constantine the great in this kinde. Eusebius writeth of him that when diuine seruice was said,De vi
                           •
                        â Constan. lib 
                           •
                        . cap. 17. & cap. 33. he would helpe the minister to begin the prayers, and to read the verses of the Psalmes enterchangeable. And when there was a Sermon, if any place of speciall importance were alleadged, that he would turne his Bible, to imprint the place in his minde the better both by hearing & seeing it, He addeth besides, that the Emperour many times beeing as it were rauished with those things which he heard, rose vp sodainely out of his throne & chaire of estate, and would stand a long while to heare more diligently, and though they which were next him did put him in minde to remember himselfe, yet he heard the word so attentiuely, that he would not heare them. How wonderfully do
                        ••
                      this confound vs, that are farre inferiour euery way, when wee heare and see that Emperours, and mighty Kings and Potentates of the world, shew such a good heart in hearing the word, & we in the meane time haue lumpish and dull spirits & affections, and are neuer a whit mooued? Certainly

ye honourable children of God, now Christ talketh with vs by the way, therefore let our hearts burne within vs: now Christ putteth his hand to the hole of the doore, therefore let ou
                        •
                      hearts be affectioned to word him know our welbeloued speaketh, therefore let our soules melt: now the blessed virgin; yea a greater then the virgin, then 
                        •
                     he virgins Sonne, saluteth vs, and with
                        ••
                      vs all haile out of his word, therefore let the babe spring in our heart fol ioy: now the Almighty vttereth his voice, therefore let our wings fall downe, and let vs wholly submit our selues to be taught of God. Euen as Cornelius the Centurion thought when he heard Peter preach, that he stood not before a man, but before the Lord: and Constantine the Emperour could neuer satis
                        •
                     ie himselfe with reuerent attention of his good heart to the word. Then indeede shall we be good ground as all they are which with a good, and a verie good heart heare the word, and keepe it, and bring forth fruit with patience.
                  The second property of the good ground is this, that they keep the word

with a very good heart. In our English translation it is read thus, with a good and an honest heart.Corde be
                           ••
                         & optimo. Vulga. But I follow the vulgar Latin, which readeth thus; With a good and a very good heart. And I referr
                        •
                      the good heart to hearing, the uery good heart to keeping: As if the words stood thus; Which with a good heart, heare the word, and with a very 
                        •
                     ood heart keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience. To the matter then: It is to no purpose that the seede be sowne▪ except it be couered in the earth. Neither that the word be heard. except it be kept.Psal. 119. Therefore saith the Prophet, In my heart haue I hidde thy word, that I may not sinne against thee. So that to keep the word with a very good heart, is to hide and couer this holy seede in the fallow grounds of our heart, beeing plowed vp by the preaching of the Gospel. Whereupon the kingdom of heauen is likened to a treasure hid in a field. And this very field is a faithfull heart, which keepeth and hideth in it selfe the word, which is the direct way to the kingdome of heauen. According to that of our Sauiour. The

kingdome of heauen is within you.Matth. 13.52. Yea a faithfull heart, not onely is a field wherin is a treasure, but also is itselfe a treasure, wherein are both old and new things. For euerie Scribe which is taught vnto the kingdome of heauen, is like vnto a housholder, which bringeth forth out of his treasure things both new and old. His heart is filled with a treasure of comforts, gathered out of the olde and new Testament.Prou. 13.52. The wife woman, by whome is meant the spouse of Christ, keepes her candle a light all the night long.
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         apperiat Clem. August. de ciuit. dei lib. 21. c. 6. Clemens vnderstandeth this 
                        •
                     ight to be the heart, and he calleth the meditations of holy men, candles that neuer goe out. S. Austin writeth among the Pagans in the temple of Venus, there was a candle which was called, vnextinguishable; whether this be true or no of Venus temple it is vncertaine, only Austins report we haue for it; but without all doubt in euery faithfull hearer and keeper of the word who is the temple of the holy Ghost, there is this candle or light that neuer goes out.Psal. 19. For so we read, that the word of the Lord illuminateth the he
                        ••
                     t:

there's the light. And that this light goes not out at any time appeareth by that which is written else-where: O Lord, how doe I loue thy sta
                        •
                     utes, they are my meditation continuosly?Psal. 129. In the old lawe those creatures onely were accompted cleane, which did chew the end. No otherwise shall we be accōpted vncleane in the sight of God, if we chew not the end as it were, and ruminate, and meditate of those things which we haue heard out of the word. For euen as it is not auaileable to eate, except the meat be inwardly digested and diuided to all the parts of the bodie: so hearing is vnprofitable, vnlesse the word heard be kept in minde and memorie, and shewed and set forth in all the parts of our life. Therefore they of Berraea were esteemed more noble then they of Thessalonica, because they after Paul had preached to them, conferred among themselues, and searched the Scriptures, not onely to see whether the Apostles doctrine were warrantable by the word, but also to confirme their owne memory, and exercise their meditation in the Lawe of

God. Now then ye holy ones of God if we would be good ground indeede, as the Patriarch Iacob 
                        ••
                     ted his sonne Iosephs dreames;Gen. 37.11. so let vs not only 
                        •
                     eare, but also 
                        〈◊〉
                      the word. For this is proper to the child of God, to haue the law of his God in his heart. Not noted in writing tables, or written in tables of stone, but noted & written in the flesh
                        •
                      tables of the heart. And 
                        〈◊〉
                      as the holy virgin kept all those sayings,Luk. 2.1
                           •
                        . & po
                        •
                     
                     dered them in her heart, which 
                        〈◊〉
                      by the Shepheards reported and published abro
                        •
                     d concerning her sonne Iesus▪ in like manner they that are wise will heare, nay they will ponder and keep
                        •
                      those things which they haue heard, that so they may the better vnderstand the louing kindnesse of the Lord. Especially seeing those things which we heare are no dreames, but vnsearchable mysteries of our 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     on: neither are we that publish and preach them, such shepheards as the Angell spake vnto, but we are appointed to watch ouer the flocke which Christ hath bought with his blo
                        •
                     d. Therefore if you would shewe yourselues

to bee good ground, your verie good heart must bee as a field that hath a treasure hid in it: yea it must be as a treasure it selfe, that hath olde and new things hid in it: it must bee as a candle, that neuer goes out: and as a cleane creature that neuer leaues chewing the cudde: euen as Iacob noted his sonnes dreames, and the blessed virgin kept the shepheards sayings, and pondered them in her heart. For they onely are good ground which with a good, and a verie good heart, heare the word, and keepe it, and bring forth fruit with patience.
                  The third propertie of the good ground is this, that they bring foorth fruit with patience. Good ground is like a good tree. For indeede good ground will make a good tree. Now a good tree bringeth forth good fruite. And the blessed man which meditateth day and night in Gods law
                        •
                     ,Psal. 1. is like a tree planted by the waters side, which bringeth forth his fruit in due season. So that it is not enough for the word to goe in at one eare and out at the other, but it must goe in at both eares, by reuerent and religious hearing, and settle

deepely into the heart by faithfull and diligent keeping, and lastly, goe out at both hands, by bringing foorth fruite with patience.Ecclus. 50.16. Simeon the son of Onius was a faire Oliue tree, that is fruitfull, and as a Cypres tree which groweth vp to the cloudes. A cypres tree is high, but barren: an oliue is fruitfull but low. So 
                        •
                      Christian, must not onely as cypres tree, re
                        •
                     th vp to the cloud: by meditation of high mysteries in the word, but also he must as an oliue tree, bring forth fruit with patience. Then he shal be like Simeon, neither low, nor barren. But though he be an oliue, yet he shall be as high as the cypres tree: and though he bee a cypresse yet he shall be as fruitfull as the oliue tree.Gen. 6.16. Noah is commanded to make a windowe in the toppe of the Arke, and a doore in the side of it. A windowe is for the eye to look out, a doore is for the whole bodie to goe out. And in like manner hee that would be good ground, must not onely make him a window for contemplation, as Daniel did, at which hee prayed thrice a day, but also a doore for acti
                        ••
                     , as Abraham did, at which he fat
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     
a day. At the windowe of contemplation be must meditate, with a very good heart to keepe the word: at the doore of action he must go out to bring forth fruite with patience. The Lord also commanded Moses to make a l
                        •
                     uer with a base or with a foote. Now the Latine word Labi
                           ••
                        
                      signifies as well a lip,Exod. 30.38. as sla
                        •
                     er. So that the l
                        ••
                     er which w
                        •
                     sheth 
                        〈…〉
                      a base: and the lip which v
                        •
                     tereth great knowledge, must haue a foot to walke according to it. Otherwise if knowledge doe not stand vpon doing, and vpon fructifying as vpon a foote, then questionles it is footles, & so consequently it is bootlesse, and the 
                        〈◊〉
                      wanting a base is altogether vnprofitable. The Prophet Isaiah is willed to lift vp his voice like a trumpet.Esa. 58.
                           •
                        . Many things sound louder then a trumpet, as the sea, the thunder, and such like. Yet he saies not; Lift vp thy voice as the sea, or lift vp thy voice as the thunder; but lift vp thy voice as a trumpet. Why so? Because a trumpeter when hee sounds his trumpet, he windes it with his mouth, and holds it vp with his hand. And so euery faithfull heart, which is as it were

a spirituall trumpet to sound out the praises of God; must not onely report them with his mouth, but also support them with his hand. And then indeede holding vp the word of life with his hand, and bringing forth the fruit therof with patience, hee shall lift vp his voice like a trumpet. The Patriarch Abraham buried Sarah in the caue of Macpelah,Gen. 23.1
                           •
                        . that is, in a double sepulchre, H
                        •
                      that buries his mind
                        •
                      in knowledge onely, without any care of bringing forth fruit, be buries Sarah in a single sepulchre, as Philo Iuda
                        ••
                      doth alleg
                        •
                     
                     rize vpon his storie; but he that burieth his minde as well in the performance and practise of religion (which is all in all) as in the knowledge and vnderstanding of it, he buries Sarah in a double sepulchre. And so must all we doe, which are the true children of Abraham. For then with Abraham burying our spirit in a double sepulchre, we shal with Elizeus haue a double spirit. A spirit that heareth the word with a verie good heart, and with patience bringeth forth fruite. Neither is this addition (with patience) altogether to be omitted.

For though a man cannot heare the word without patience, nor keepe the word without patience, yet patience is neuer so requisite, as in bringing forth fruit according to the word which wee haue heard, and kept. Wherefore the holy Ghost saith;Heb. 10.36. Ye haue neede of patience, that after yee haue done the will of God, yee may receiue the promise. He saies not, After ye haue heard it with your eare, or kept it with your memorie: but after yee haue done the will of God, and brought forth the fruit thereof, yee may receiue the promise. For wherefore did not the stony ground bring forth fruite, but onely for want of patience. They receiued the word with ioy, and seemed to haue very good hearts for a time; but in time of temptation for want of patience they fel away. Wherefore did not the thornie ground bring forth fruit, but onely for want of patience? After their departure wanting patience to digest their greifes, they were choked with cares, and so brought forth no fruit. Therefore as a good field must endure many a cold frost & snow, and hard weather in the winter time,

before it can yeed a fruitfull croppe in Summer: semblably he that would bee good ground, must possesse his soule in much patience, and continually endure yea euen manfully reiect all the motions of his flesh, all the allurements of the world, all the temptations of the deuill, whereby he may bee hindered from bringing forth the fruit of good life, according to the holy will and word of God. Hee must like a good tree, bring forth good fruite; hee must with Simeon be not onely high as the cypresse, but also fruitfull as the oliue: he must with Noah make him, not onely a windowe for contemplation, but also a doore for action; hee must with Moses, make him a lauer with a base the must with Esay lift vp his voice like a trumpet; he must with Abraham burie Sarah in a double sepulchre: in one word, he must alwaies bring forth fruit with patience. For they onely are good ground, which with a good, and a very good heart, heare the word, and keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience.
                  To conclude then, It is not greatly needefull to exhort you with a good

heart to heare the word. Neuer heretofore such diligent hearing in the Court, as now a dayes. I dare be bold to say it; All the Preachers in England, in very many yeares by all their exhortations, could neuer haue done halfe so much good in this kind, as the onely, holy, and happie example hath done, which we see euery day before our eies. Neither need ye be greatly put in mind to keepe in mind the word heard. Memorie yee haue enough, vnderstanding enough, knowledge enough, learning enough: When you haue heard a Sermon, you can remember and repeat, and carrie away, and keepe much of it. But this, this is the thing which I must call vpon my selfe, and vpon all you to thinke of, to wit, that we bring forth the fruit of the word in patience, in temperance, and in all other vertues of a sanctified life. For that Samaritan woman did not fill her pitcher at the wall, to spill it by the way, but to carrie it home full of water, and there to vse it as occasion serued. Here where the word is preached, is the well of liuing water, flowing forth to eternall life. But this water we must carry away with vs, and

keepe it to wash and purge our consciences, to cleanse our wayes, to water the roots of Gods graces in vs continually, that we may b
                        •
                     ing forth s
                        •••
                      with patience. Rachel also, that other holy woman did not desire the mand
                        ••••
                      so much to hold it in her hand, 
                        〈◊〉
                      to s
                        •
                     ell to it, as to be made 
                        •
                     p
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to bring forth the fruite of her 
                        〈◊〉
                      To teach vs, that wee must not 
                        〈◊〉
                      so much to knowe the word, the
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      may subtilly dispute or discourse o
                        ••••
                      to practise it that wee may shewe the fruite of it in the amendement of our liues. Therefore King Dauid being readie to redresse diuers things among his people, saith in one of the Psalmes▪ O Lord, teach me goodnesse, and knowledge: knowledge, that I may keep thy word; and goodnesse that I may shewe the fruit of it. For I am sure, saies he, that all my keeping without s
                        •
                     nctifying all my knowledge without goodnesse, is to no purpose. Wherefore, O Lord, giue me goodnesse and knowledge. But first goodnesse and then knowledge. Because indeede a little goodnesse, though it bee neuer so small, is better then all

knowledge, though neuer so great. One handfull of goodnesse is worth 
                        •
                     n hundred headfulls of knowledge. For the feare of the Lord is the beginning of wisedome, a good vnderstanding haue all 
                        〈◊〉
                      that doe thereafter, the praise of it endureth for euer. A good vnderstanding haue all they that doe thereafter. 
                        〈…〉
                     ? Because an ill vnderstanding 
                        •
                     oe all they that doe not thereafter. 
                        ••
                     ey that haue vnderstanding, and doe 
                        〈◊〉
                      thereafter, that is, bring not forth fruit according to it, they haue an ill vnderstanding. But they that haue vnderstanding, and doe thereafter, and lead their life according to it, such haue a good vnderstanding. The praise of these shall endure for euer. O how highly shal Christ praise you, how richly shall hee reward you, if you haue a conscionable care to expresse his vertues, and to be transformed as it were into the obedience of his word? Then he shall say vnto you; Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdome of heauen. For ye haue not onely heard my word, and kept it as farre as knowledge goes, but also ye haue practised it, and fructified therby.

I was in prison, and ye visited me; I was harbourles, and ye lodged the▪ I was hungry, and yee gaue me meate. These and such other haue bin the good fruites, which haue followed you
                        •
                      hearing and keeping of my word. Theirfore now yee shall bee praised for your weldoing, and for euer ye shall be blessed for your fruit-bearing. Which God graunt to vs all for Iesus Christ his sake, to whom with the father, and the holy Ghost, be all honour and glory, power and praise, dignity and dominion, now and euermore. Amen.
                  FINIS.
               
               
                  
                  A FVNERALL SERMON Preached in S. MARIES. May 10. 1605.
                  
                     
                        
                           PSAL. 32.7.
                        
                        Surely in the flood of many waters they shall not come neere him.
                     
                  
                  
                     THe principall scope of the Prophet in this place is to prooue, that the righteousnes, and so the blessednes of man, consisteth only in the free forgiuenesse of his sinnes, and gratious imputation of Christs merits. His argument may be framed thus; That which the whole Church and euery godly man

therein hath euer especially praied for in all afflictions and troubles, that is happinesse▪ But for remission of sinnes euery godly man will pray in time of tribulation: Therefore this is the felicity of the faithfull. To confirme this reason more fully he setteth down, first, the circumstances going before the praye
                        •
                     ; For this shall euerie 
                        〈◊〉
                      that is godly make his praier vnto thee in a ti
                        ••
                      when thou maist bee found. Then, the forme of the prayer it selfe; Thou art a place to hide me in, thou shalt preserue mee from trouble, thou shalt compasse me about with songs of deliuerance. Lastly, the effect following the prayer; Surely in the flood of many waters they shall not come neere him.
                  Prayer is the true sacrifice of faith▪ The efficacie whereof is briefly, bu
                        •
                      pithily set downe to the Hebrewes. God I haue spoken else-where 
                        〈…〉
                      largely of this point. Now but a word onely to make a 
                        ••
                     e entrance into this sermon. Take it therefore 
                        〈◊〉
                     . The effects of prayer heretofore haue beene wonderfull. Praier hath set downe 
                        〈◊〉
                     -sto
                        •
                     es from heauen, to ouercome fiue

Kings with their armies. Prayer hath shut vp the windowes of heauen, that it should not raine, and againe hath opened them that the earth might giue her increase. Prayer hath staied the swift course of the sonne, and caused it to go backward fifteene degrees. Prayer hath held Gods hands that hee could not 
                        ••
                     ike when he was readie to plague his people. Prayer without any other helpe or meanes hath throwne downe the strong walles of Iericho. Prayer hath deuided the sea, that the floods thereof could not come neere the Israelites. In this place it deliuereth the faithfull man from all the dangers of the world. Surely in the flood of many waters they shal not come neere him.
                  The summe is this; That no calamities of this world, no troubles of this life, no terrours of death, no guiltinesse of sinne, can be so great, but that a godly man by meanes of his faith and felicitie in Christ shall wade out of them well enough, For howsoeuer other things goe, still he shall haue such a solace in his soule, such a comfort in his conscience, such a heauen in his heart,

knowing himselfe reconciled to God, and iustified by faith, that Surely in the flood of many waters they shall not come neere him.
                  Which, that it may the better appeare, I shall desire you to obserue two things. The daunger: the deliuerance. The danger is in these words; I
                        •
                      the flood of many waters. Where the tribulations that the godly man is subiect to in this life, are likened, First to waters: then to many waters: thirdly, to a flood of many waters; In the flood of many waters. The deliuerance is in these words; Surely they shall not come neere him. Where the deliuerance of the godly man hath three degrees also. First they shall not come neare: secondly him, they shall not come neere him: then Surely, surely they shall not come neere him. Surely in the flood of many waters, they shall not come neere him.
                  First, the afflictions of the faithful are likened to waters. Fire and water haue no mercy we say. But of the two water is the worst. For any fire may be qu
                        •
                     c
                        •
                     
                     ed with water, but the force of water, if

it begins to be violent, cannot by any power of man be resisted. Canutus who was King of England,Polyd. lib. 7. Scotland, Denmarke, Norway, & a great part of Sue
                     
                        •
                     i
                        •
                      all at once, sitting at a low water vpon the Thames shoare, commanded the water not to come neare him. But notwithstanding his commandement, the water returning and flowing againe, as 
                        〈◊〉
                      in Ezekiel which came to the ankles,Ezech. 47.2. then to the knees, and yet higher to the necke, so neuer left rising till it came vp neare him and wet him. Then turning about to his noble men that were there attendant on him, he said, You call me your Soueraigne Lord and Master, and yet I cannot command this little channell of water to keep a loofe off from me. Whereupon he went immediatly to Westminster, and with his owne hands set his Crowne vpon the Crucifix there, and could neuer be perswaded after to weare it vpon his owne head. This experience that Canutus so mightie a King made, doth directly prooue, that no man but God onely can set barres and doores against the water and say;Iob. 38.11. Hitherto shalt tho
                        •
                      come, but

no further, and here shalt thou stay thy proud waues. The afflictions of the righteous therefore beeing 
                        •
                     ere compared to waters, must needes 
                        •
                     e very violent. For thus the Psalmist 
                        ••
                     ith, Thine indignation lyeth hard on me,Psal. 88.8. and thou hast vexed mee with all thy waues. And God himselfe; I will p
                        ••
                     re out my wrath vpon thee, as water. So that the securitie and felicitie of the faithfull man is inuincible. He may be often in daunger of tribulations as of great waues or waters,Hos. 5.10. but they shall neuer ouerwhel
                        •
                     e him; Surely in the flood of many waters they shall not come neere him.
                  But these our tribulations which are waters, are also many waters. Our common prouerb is, Seldome comes sorrow alone. But as waters come rouling and wauing many together: so the miseries of this life.Ezeck. 2.10. The Prophet Ezekiel saw the roule of a booke written within and without, and there was written therein, Lamentations, and singing, and woe. The booke is written within and without, 
                        •
                     o shew that many are the troubles of the righteous, both inward

and outward. And it is two to one if any thing befall vs, it is rather an ill happe, then a good happe. Seeing for one singing, there is in the booke a double sorrowing, lamentations, and woe. Or if it be read as some translate it;Et scriptura in eo erat lamentarionum, lugub
                           •
                        is
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         carmin
                           •
                        s, & vae. Tremel. Lamentations, and mourning, and woe; then it is yet more plaine, that in this world many troubles as many waters come one in the neck
                        •
                      of an other, no earthly ioy, 
                        〈◊〉
                      comfort comming betweene. This the good King greatly complaineth of,Psal. 4
                           •
                        .7. One deepe calleth another, because of the noyse of the water-pipes, all thy floods and stormes haue gone ouer me. And Iob,Iob. 16.14. hee hath giuen me
                        •
                      one wound vpon an other, and hee hath runne vpon me as a gyant. And Saint Paul,Philip. 2.37. though in one place he write, God shewed mercie toward him, that hee should not haue sorrowe vpon sorrow, yet oftentimes elsewhere he speaketh of his owne manifold dangers.2. Cor. 11.26. I suffered thrice shipwracke, saies he; night and day haue I bin in the deepe sea: In iourneying I was often, in perills of waters, in perills of robbers, in perills of mine owne nation, in perills among the Gentiles,

in perills in the citie, in perills in the wildernesse, in perills in the sea, in perills among false brethren. Th
                        •
                     s we see how many waters the godly m
                        •
                     n is subiect to in this life. For one thy hee hath at least two sorrowes, if hee 
                        〈◊〉
                      no more: one deepe calleth an other; one wound bringeth another: hee hath sorrow vpon sorrow; perils vpon perils; Many waters; many dangers: Neuerthelesse, Surely in the flood of many waters, they shall not come neere him.
                  Thirdly, the daungers of this life, are as a flood. The very naming and mentioning of flood must needes 
                        •
                     e very terrible, euer since Noahs flood destroyed the whole world. For euen as a horse or a mule of whome the Prophet a little after speaketh in this Psalm,vers. 9. hauing beene once well lashed with a whip, doth euer after feare, if he heare but the bel which is tied to the whippe: so man since the world was so well s
                        •
                     oured and scourged with a flood, could neuer almost abide either to talke or thinke of it. Now though our whole life be nothing else but a flood of many waters, yet nothing in the world may

more fitly be so called, then our going our of the world. This indeede bringeth with it a flood of many waters, and an Ocean sea of infinite cares. Aristotle writeth, that nothing is so terrible as death, which Antiochus feeling sensibly in himselfe,1. Mac. 6.11. cryeth out thus, Oh into what aduersitie am I come, and into what floods of miserie am I now fallen? He addeth the reason an on after; For I must die with great sorrow in a strange land. What speake I of a wicked tyrant? Holy men often are in great perplexitie at the time of their departure.Hier. in vita 
                           •
                        ius S. Hierō writeth of Hilarion, that beeing ready to giue vp the ghost, he said thus to his soule; Goe forth my soule, why fearest thou? goe forth, why tremblest thou? Thou hast serued Christ almost these threescore and ten yeares, and dost thou now feare death? Christ himselfe also feeling that hee was compassed about with the sorrowes of death, beganne to be afraid, and to be in great heauinesse, and he said moreouer,Mark. 14.33. My soule is very heauie euen to the death. I know well Christ was afraid without sinne, nay, with great comfort. For hee prayeth

thus, Not as I will, but as thou wilt. And againe, Into thy hands I commit my spirit. This then was his comfort, that the Iewes could doe nothing in putting him to death, but as S. Peter testifieth, that onely which his Father bo
                        ••
                      by his counsell and will hath decreed, and by his hand hath ordained. Hilarion also that holy ancient Father, comforteth himselfe with this, that hee had s
                        •••
                     d Christ almost seauentie yeares. O
                        ••••
                      children of God haue had other comforts; and all haue this, that both in life and in death they are happy in Christ. Howbeit seeing many holy Christians, and euen Christ himselfe feared death, it remaineth that death simply and in it selfe considered, is a flood of many waters. But yet the faithfull man euen in death is out of all danger. Surely in the floods of many waters, they shall not come neere him.
                  Thus much for the first part which is the danger; In the flood of many waters. The second part followeth, which is the deliuerance: Surely, they shall not come neere him.
                  First, they shall not come neere.

They, that is, The waters shall not come neere. The holy Church and euerie member thereof is likened to a house built vpon a rocke.Matth. 7.
                           •
                        5. Vpon which though the winds blow, and the floods beate, yet it cannot be throwne downe, because it is built vpon a rocke. So that the floods which shake it, can neuer come neere it to ouerthrowe it. The s
                        •
                     me may be said of the ship couered with waters. It might well floa
                        •
                     e, but it could neuer be drowned. For as soon as the Disciples cryed vpon Christ to saue them,Matth. 8.24. presently there followed a great calme. Therefore Luther when his life was sought of all the world in a manner,Psal. 46.1. translated the Psalme Deus noster refugium, into dumb meeter, and caused it to be sung in all the reformed Churches. God is our hope and strength a very present helpe in trouble. Therefore will we not feare though the earth be mooued, and though the hills be caried into the midst of the sea. Though the waues thereof rage and swell: and though the mounta
                        ••••
                      shake at the tempest of the same. S. Peter the Apostle began to sinke, but he sunke not

right downe. Christ was ready at hand to helpe him. For as soone as he sawe himselfe in present perill and danger, forthwith he cryed, Master, saue me. Saue me,Psal. 69 1. O God for the waters are co
                        ••
                      in euen vnto my soule. I sticke fast in the deepe mire where no ground is;and 16. I am come into deepe waters; so that the floods runne ouer me. Take me out of the mire that I sinke not, and out of the deepe waters. Let not the water 
                        〈◊〉
                      drowne me, neither let the deep swallow me vp: & let not the pit shut 
                        〈◊〉
                      mouth vpon me. S. Paul likewise suffered shipwrack, but lost not by it one haire of his head.Act. 17.34. Wherby we may see the absurdity of the Papists. They would prooue that iustifying grace may bee lost, because some haue made shipwracke of faith. but if we should graunt them that the Apostle speaketh of iustifying not of historicall faith,1. Tim. 1.19. yet we haue the help of a second answer. To wit, that shipwrack is one thing, and drowning an other. Therefore faith which is wrackt is not by and by drowned. For it may happen to suffer shipwracke as S. Paul did, and swimme out safe to the shore. But this 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     
but a touch by the way. Meane season we see how safe and secure the faithfull man is in Christ. He is a house to which the floods may come neere to shake it, but neuer to throwe it downe; he is a ship, which the waues may come neere to tosse it, but neuer to turne it ouer; euen as Saint Peter beganne to sinke, but still kept vp his head: and Saint Paul s
                        •
                     ffered shippewracke, but was not a haire the worse for it. Surely in the flood of many waters, they shall not come neere him.
                  Secondly, him. They shall not come neere him. This word must in no case be omitted. It helpeth vs to answer a verie strong obiection. For it may bee said, Many holy men haue lost their goods, haue suffered great torments in their bodie, haue beene troubled also in minde; how then did not the floods of many waters come neere them? The word Him helpes vs to answer. The verie Philosophers themselues reckoned their goods pertained no more to them, then, be it spoken with reuerence and regard, the parings of their nayles. Zeno hearing newes he had lost all he

had by sea,Rene facis fortuna cum ad pallium nos compellis. said onely thus: Thou hast done verie wel Fortune to leaue me nothing but my cloake▪ An other called Anaxarchus, whom as Nicocre
                        ••
                      the tyrant commanded he should be 
                        〈◊〉
                      to death in a morter, spake thus to the executioner; Beate and bray as long as thou wilt Anaxarchus his bagge or sachell (so he called his owne body) but Anaxarchus thou cansts not touch. Yet these making so smal reckoning of their goods and bodie, set their mind
                        •
                      notwithstanding at a high rate.Mens cuinsque is est quisque. The minde of a man, is himselfe, say they. Hence it is that Iulius Caesar, when Amyclas the Pilot was greatly afraid of the tempest, spake to him thus, What meanest thou to feare base fellow, doest thou not know thou carriest Caesar, with thee? As if he should say,Caesarem ve
                           •
                        is. Caesars bodie may well bee drowned, as any other man
                        •
                      may, but his minde, his magnanimity, his valour, his fortitude, can neuer be drowned. Thus farre w
                        •
                     nt Philosophie: But Diuinitie goeth a degree further. For Philosophy defineth Him, that is a man, by his reason, and the morall vertues of the minde; But Diuinitie

defineth a Christian man by his faith, and his coniunction thereby with Christ. Excellently saith Saint Austin: Whence com's it that the soule dieth?Tract. 49 in Iohan. Vnde mors in animâ 
                           •
                         quia non est fides. Vnde mors in corpore
                           •
                         quia non est ibi anima. Ergo animae tuae anima fides est. Because faith is not in it. Whence that the bodie dieth: Because a soule is not in it. Therefore the soule of thy soule is faith. So that if we would know what is a faithfull man, we must define Him, not by his naturall soule, as he is resonable, but by the soule of his soule, which is his faith. And when we easily answer the obiection, that a flood may come neere a faithfull mans goods▪ neere his bodie, neere his reasonable soule, but to his faith, that is to Him, it can neuer come neere. For if you speake of the life and essence of him, that it is faith, the Prophet also witnesseth,Abacuck. The iust shall liue by faith.Gal. 2.20. And the Apostle, Now I liue not, but Christ liueth in me, but that I liue, I liue by faith in the sonne of God; who loued mee, and gaue himselfe for me. And he that was wiser then all the Philosophers, determineth this point thus; The summe of the matter when yee haue heard all is this;Eccles. 12.23. Feare God, and keepe his commandements;

for this is all of man. All of man, what's that. All of man which will hold out against all floods of many waters: For the goods of man may be gotten away by forged cauillation: the bodie of man may be weakened by sickenesse: the soule of man, and the faculties thereof, as memorie, witte, and such like, may be impaired by age, but faith in Christ, the feare of God, a care to keepe his commaundements, is all of man, which no floods, either in life or in death can ouer-whelme. All of man wherein man ought to imploy himselfe while he is aliue, and without which, man is but vanitie when he is dead, but with which, man both in life and death is most blessed. For if this be the summe of all, then of any thing but this there is no reckoning at all to be made.Matth. 16.18. I haue praied for thee, saith our Sauiour, that thy faith should not faile, and the gates of hell shall not preuaile against thee. For loue is strong as death:Can. 8.7. iealousie is cruell as the graue: the coales thereof are fierie coales, and a vehement flame. Much water cannot quench loue, neither

can the floods drowne it. Euen as Paul also glorieth,Rom. 8. that nothing can separate him from the loue of God which is in Christ Iesus. Wherefore seeing the godly man is so inuincible, that neither the gates of hell, nor the flood-gates of many waters, can preuaile against him; Surely in the flood of many waters, they shall not come neere him.
                  In the last place must be considered the asseueration, Surely. For if both liuing and dying my felicity be most certaine in Christ, and yet I knowe not so much, what comfort can I gather thereby? Now in all aduersities this is my greatest ioy, that the fauour of God which is most constant in it selfe, is fully assured also to me. For, I know that my reedeemer liueth. And if I be iudged, I know I shall be found righteous. And I know whome I haue beleeued, and I am sure. In one word, I am Surely perswaded, that neither life, nor death, nor any thing els can separate vs frō Christ. Nay in all the flood of waters wee shall be more then conquerours.Rom. 8.37. They shall not come neere to conquer vs. But rather

we shall conquer them. Yea that which is strangest of all, Surely we shall be more then conquerers ouer them. Though an hoast of men were laid against me,Psal. 
                           •
                        7.3. yet shall not my heart be afraid: and though there rose vp warre against me, yet will I put my trust in it. Not in him, as it is ill translated in the English, but in it; that is, In the verie warre it selfe, I will not feare. Nay I will be of good hope. Yea Surely in the very warre will I hope and trust. For euen as a building made arch-wise, the more waight is laide vpon it, the more strong still it is: so the more force and strength is brought against me, the greater triumph & victorie I shall haue. Therefore I will not be afraid of tenne thousand of the people,Psal. 3.7. that haue set themselues against me round about. For a thousand of them shall fall at my side, and ten thousand at my right hand, but they shall not come neere mee. The Arke in the flood was not drowned,Gen. 7.18. as other things were, but floated vpon the waters. Yea the higher the waters encreased, the higher Surely for that did the Arke still arise. Likewise the redde

sea did not hinder the Israelites passage,Exod. 14.22. but opened an easie way to them. Yea Surely it was moreouer as a wall to backe them against all their enemies. The words of Saint Iames are verie plaine:Iam. 1.2. My brethren, count it exceeding ioy when you fall into diuers temptations. Tentation of it selfe doth vexe and disquiet a man. But to the godly it is a ioy. As we read els where, That they which are iustified by faith haue peace: nay, haue easie accesse to God, and great ioy in tribulations. But the Apostle adding,Rom. 5. that this ioy is not common or ordinarie, but Surely exceeding ioy, raiseth vp the amplification as high as may be. Whereunto, S. Paul also accordeth; We are afflicted on euery side,2. Cor. 4 9. yet we are not in distresse: in pouertie, but not ouercome of pouertie; wee are persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but we perish not. Here he prooueth directly, that the flood commeth not neere the faithfull. But where is the Surely? It followeth in the same epistle; As dying, and behold we liue: as chastened, and yet not killed:2. Cor. 6.20. as sorrowing, and yet alwaies reioycing: as poore, and

yet making others rich: as hauing nothing, and yet possessing all things. O the securitie and felicitie of the faithfull! For his faith maketh life of death; ioy of sorrowe: riches of pouertie. What shall I say more, or what would you haue me say more? then as the Apostle saies? It makes all things of nothing. As hauing nothing saies he, and yet possessing all things. But the special thing to be noted i
                        •
                      this sentence is, As dying, and behold we liue. For they import, that death is no death, but As it were death, an image, or a shadowe of death: beeing indeede life, and Surely a better life and more immortall then we had here. Therefore he saies, Behold we liue, to shewe that by death the faithfull liue a life wherein there is some great specialty and excellencie worthy indeed to be beholded & regarded. As if he should say; Behold we liue, Behold we liue a more happie life, then euer we liued in our life. Saint Augustin often commēdeth the saying of his master S. Ambrose when he was readie to die. Speaking to Stilico and others about his bed; I haue not liued so

among you,Non ita vixi inter vos. ve me pudea
                           •
                         vinerenet mori time
                           •
                        , quia bonum dominum
                           ••
                        o 
                           〈◊〉
                         Pontius in fine vitae eius. saith he, that I am ashamed to liue longer if it please God: and yet again I am not afraid to die, because we haue a good Lord. He doth not say, Mine owne goodnesse puts me out of feare, but Gods goodnesse. This goodnesse of God makes me quiet in my conscience, and secure in soule, readie to embrace death whensoeuer it commeth. Wherefore, Surely is fitly added. For afflictions as waters doe not ouercome the faithfull. Nay they come not neere him. But contra
                        •
                     iwise the faithfull conquereth afflictions. Yea, Surely hee is in them all more then a conquerour. In warre he is not afraid. Rather he greatly hopeth. And Surely euen in the verie warre he hopeth. The flood of waters commeth not neere to drowne the Arke, but lift it vp. And so much the higher Surely the arke still riseth, as the flood riseth. The sea staieth not the Israelites passage. It is a dry land for them to march on. As a wall moreouer to backe them Surely against all their enemies. Tentation not onely is no matter of sorrowe, but also on the other side of ioy, & Surely of great ioy.

Death is no death, but a life, and Surely such a life, as only of it we may say, Behold we liue. So happie both in life and death is the faithfull man: Surely in the flood of many waters, they shall not come neere him.
                  To conclude then; No calamitie or aduersitie can possibly disseuer that coniunction which faith maketh of euerie godly man with Christ. For feeling the remission of his sinnes assured and sealed vnto him, hee contemneth not onely the workes of the world, and dismaiments of his conscience, but euen the verie feares and terrours of death. This our deare brother M. Edward Liuely, who now resteth in the Lord, lead a life which in a manner was nothing els but a continuall flood of many waters. Neuer out of suits of law, neuer-ceasing disquieters of his study. His goods distrained, and his cattell driuen off his ground, as Iobs was. His deare wife beeing not so well able to beare so great a flood as he, euen for verie sorow presently died. A lamentable and ruefull case. So many children to hang vpon his hand, for which he had neuer

maintenance, neither yet now had stay, his wife being gone. Well, but that sorrowfull time was blowne ouer. He was appointed to be one of the cheifest translators. And as soone as it was knowne how farre in this trauaile hee did more then any of the rest, hee was very well prouided for in respect of liuing. For which my L. his Grace of Canterburie now liuing, is much to bee reuerenced and honoured. But beeing so well to passe both for himselfe, and for his children, sodainely he fell sicke. He was taken with an ague and a squinsey both together. And the more vsual that was, the lesse dangerous was this accompted, but the euent shewes the contrary. For the squinsey beeing both by himselfe and his friends not greatly regarded, within foure dayes tooke away his life. These were many waters, and diuerse tribulations. Besides a thousand more, which I cannot now stand to repeate. Yet he carried himselfe so in life and death, as these waters seemed not once to come neere him. He was professour of the Hebrewe tongue in this Vniuersitie thirtie yeares. (As his father

in law D. Larkyn had been professor of Physicke fiue or sixe and thirtie yeares.) Which tongue, howsoeuer some account of it, yet ought to be preferred before all the rest. For it is the auncientest, the shortest, the plainest of all. A great part of wisedome, as Plato sheweth,In Cratylo. is the knowledge of true Etymologies. These in other tongues are vncertaine, in this taking out of the naturall qualities of euery thing that is named. In so much as when any man hath found out the Hebrewe Etymology, then he neede seeke no further. Besides, all the Scripture written before the birth of Christ, except a fewe chapters of Daniel and Ezra, were written in Hebrewe. And the Rabbins themselues, though they haue no small number of fables and lies in them, yet diuers things they haue notwithstanding fit for the opening of the olde Testament. Therefore though a man cannot reade the Rabbins, yet vnlesse he can vnderstand handsomely well the Hebrewe text; he is compted but a maimed, or as it were but halfe a Diuine, especially in this learned age. Lastly, diuerse learned

men are of opinion, to whome I very willingly assent, that the holy tongue which was spoken in Paradise, shall be eternally vsed in the heauenly Paradise, where the Saints shall euer extoll and praise God. But this worthy Professor deceased, got him great credit, as well by the continuance, as by the holinesse of his profession. For he was not a Professor for one or two yeares, as others are;In Itineratio. Pag. 444. but full thirty yeares together. Nathan Cytraeus writeth, that in Prage an Vniuersitie of Bohemia, where Iohn Hus, and Hierome of Prage professed, that they that haue continued Professours for the space of twentie yeares together, are created Earles and Dukes both together. And therefore their style is to bee called Illustres, whereas they which are singly and simply, but onely either Earles or Dukes, are called Spectabiles. Neither maketh it any matter that they haue no reuenewes, to maintaine Earldomes or Dukedoms. For they haue the title notwithstanding, euen as Suffragans haue of Bishoppes. Our good Brother hauing no such profit or dignitie propounded

vnto him, but contenting himselfe with his stipend, spent halfe his life in this place. For hee was vpon threescore yeares old when he died. He wrote a book of Annotations vpon the first fiue small Prophets, dedicated to that great patron of learning and learned men, Sir Francis Walsingham. Wherin diuerse speeches and phrases of the Prophets are compared with the like, in Poets and Oratours both Greeke and Latine, and many notes neither vnpleasant nor vnprofitable to bee read, are set out of the Rabbins. But in mine opinion he took greatest pains in his Chronologie, which he dedicated to Doctor Iohn Whitgift, the reuerend late Archbishop of Canterbury. This booke indeede is full of hidden learning, and sheweth infinite reading in stories. I asked him within this little while, whether hee had written no more bookes, He told me he had, but printed no more because hee had no time to peruse and perfect them for other businesse. Now by businesse he meant, I weene especially his studie and care to performe well his taske in the translation. Wherein

how excellently he was imployed, all they can witnes who were ioyned with him in that labour. For though they be the verie flower of the Vniuersitie for knowledge of the tongues, yet they will not be ashamed to confesse, that no one man of their companie, if not by other respects, yet at least wise for long experience and exercise in this kinde, was to be compared with him. For indeede he was so desirous that this businesse begunne by the commaundement of our most gracious Soueraigne King Iames, should bee brought to a happie ende; that oftentimes in many mens hearings, hee protested hee had rather die, then be any way negligent herein, Which as some thinke by all likelihood came indeede so to passe. To wit, that too earnest study and paines about the translation, hastened his death, and brought it on sooner. Now as he liued so, in his profession, in his writings, in his translating, as though all the floods of many waters had neuer comn' neare him: euen so also he died. During the short time of his sickenesse, hee carried himselfe, as alwaies before, humbly,

mildly, quietly, constantly. One of his louing friends standing by his bed, and saying; M. Liuely, I pray God you may haue patience, and hope, and especially faith vnto the ende. He lifting vp his hands said heartily and cheerefully, Amen. Little he vsed to speake, and more he could not say, for the paine and impediment of his squinsey. Which though it made a speedie ende of him, as the apoplexy did of the good Emperour Valentinian, yet how could any death be sodaine to him, whose whole life was nothing els but a meditation of death, and whom the Lord whensoeuer he came, might finde doing his dutie? Wherefore no reason wee should lament his departure out of this world. He liued blessedly, he died blessedly in the Lord. Rather, you Reuerend and learned Vniuersitie-men, lament for this, that you haue lost so famous a Professour, and so worthy a writer. Lament you translatours, beeing now depriued of him, who no lesse by his owne merit and desert, then by the priuiledge of his place, was to order and ouersee all your trauailes. Lament you poore orphans,

                     
                        〈◊〉
                      poore children of you, which he left 
                        〈◊〉
                      him, as Christ 
                        〈◊〉
                      left eleuen Disciples bere
                        ••••
                      of your kinde and deare Father, destitute of necessaries for your mai
                        ••
                     enance, to seeke of all helpe and 
                        〈◊〉
                      but onely (as poore folkes vse to speak) such as God, and good friends shal pro
                     
                        •
                     ide. L
                        ••
                     ent, lament all of you, of the To
                        •
                     ne, as well as of the V
                        •••
                     ersitie, because our Schoole hath lost s
                        •
                     ch a singular ornament of this age, because our Churches haue lost such a faithfull and syncere seruant of Christ. Questionlesse, as it should seeme by the taking away of this man, almightie God is greatly angry with vs all for our sinnes. Christ Iesus our Master, as though he meant no more to care for vs, seemeth to lie fast a sleepe in the ship, while we most miserably in the flood of many waters are tormoiled and tossed. Wherfore let vs in time crie aloud, and awake him with our prayers. Or rather indeede he is not a sleepe, but awake alreadie. We haue awaked him, not with our prayers, but with our sinnes. Our sinnes haue cried vp to heauen. And

the Lord beeing awaked, as a gyant comes forth against vs, and as a mighty man refreshed with wine. For not onely those are waters which are in the chanell, or in the sea: but as waters are here vnderstood, euen those fires are waters, those fires I say, which very lately awaked vs at midnight, and affrighted vs at noone day; which raged on the South-side, and anone after on the North-side of the Towne. It was but a fewe mens losse, but it was all mens warning. And what? shall we make nothing of this,The plague, the small pocks, and the squinsey. that one kind of disease deuoureth vp the Townesmen; 
                        •
                     n other the schollers? This is now the tenth course of Schollers, which within this month hath beene brought foorth to buriall, not one of them dying of the plague; whereas heretofore if one or two schollers haue died in a whole year out of all Colledges, it hath beene accounted a great matter. This and such like grieuous iudgements, beloued, doe plainely declare, that the Lord beeing awaked with the cry of our sinnes, is greiuously displeased and offended at vs. Wherefore let vs nowe at the

length in the name of God, rowse vp our selues, and awake out of our deadly sinnes. Let this that our holy brother did so sodainly in a manner fall asleepe, be a loud O yes, as it were to awake vs all. Let euerie one of vs, amend one, iudge one, accuse one, condemne one, that we be not all condemned of the Lord. Let euery one of vs I beseech you crie vp to heauen for mercie, and say 
                        •
                     ith Dauid, I haue sinned and done wickedly. Or with Ionas; Take me, for I know that for my sake this great tempest is vpon you. Then our most mercifull father shall blesse vs all, as he hath done this holy Saint, both in our life and in our death, by the pardoning of our offences, & couering all our sinnes, with the bowels and blood of Christ. And though in this world we be euer subiect to a flood of many waters, yet hee shall drawe vs still out of many waters, as hee did Moses. Surely in the floode of many waters, no more then they did to Ionas, they shall not come neare vs. Neither onely shall we be safe in the flood of death, but also in the flood of the day of iudgement. For

that also is a flood, and a terrible fearefull one too. To wit, not of water, but of fire. As it was in the dayes of Noah: so shall it be at the comming of the son of man. In the first flood they which had not an arke, ranne vp to the toppes of houses, to the toppes of trees, to the toppes of mountaines; because they desired to hold vp their heads aboue the still rising raging water. In the second, they which are not found in Christ, shall say to the mountaines, Fall vpon vs: and to the Caues, Cauer vs, and hide vs from the wrath of the Lambe. Then they shall be glad to creepe into euerie hol
                        •
                      and corner that they may auoide the b
                        •
                     rning of fire. But we that confesse our sinnes, and forsake the same, shall lift our heads to no other mountaine, but to Christ from whom commeth our saluation; we shall desire to be couered with no other rocke, but onely with that out of which came the blood and water of life. For neuer did Noahs flood so clean wash away all wicked men from the face of the earth, as the blood of Christ shall purge vs from all our sinnes, and present vs blamelesse before the face of

our father, onely if we be faithfull vnto death. For then the next thing is felicity, and the crowne of life. Which God for his mercie sake graunt vs all, that as we make no doubt, but this our holy brother now triumpheth with Christ, so all and euery one of vs, after we haue waded through this world as a flood of many waters, may inherit that kingdome of glory, which our louing Lord Iesus hath purchased for vs with his deare blood: to whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all honour and glory, now and for euermore: Amen.
                  FINIS.
               
               
                  
                  A SERMON PREACHED at Whitehall before the KING on Twesday after L
                        •
                      Sunday. 1604.
                  
                     
                        
                           2. COR. 3.18.
                        
                        But all we, with open face, behold as in a glasse the glorie of the Lord, and 
                              〈◊〉
                            transformed into the same image, from glory to glorie, as by the spirit of the Lord.
                     
                  
                  
                     THe old Testament, and the new Testament, in summe and substance, are all one. Christ Iesus the very summe and substance of them both, in himselfe is one and the same yesterday,Heb. 13.
                           •
                        . and to day, and for
                        •
                     
                     uer. Those mysticall wheeles, which Ezekiel

                     Ezek. 1.16. sees in a vision
                        •
                      are one within an other. After the same sort, there is Gospell in the lawe, and there is law in the Gospell. One wheele is within another: one testament is within an other. For neither is the lawe so full of threatnings, but that it hath some comforts in it: neither is the Gospell so full of comforts, but that it hath some threatnings in it. So that the lawe, is nothing else but a threatening gospel; and the gospel, is nothing else, but a comfortable law. The two cherubims, Exod. 
                           •
                        5.
                           ••
                        . which shadow the mercie-seat, haue their faces one toward another. In like manner, the two testaments which shadow out Christ the true mercieseat vnto vs, haue their faces one toward another. For the old Testament looketh forward toward the new, which is come: and the newe testament looketh backeward, toward the old, which is past. Those glorious seraphims Esa. 6.3. which sing, Holy, Holy, Holy, doe call to one another. So the lawe and the Gospel, lauding him alone, which is the holy one of God, doe call to one another. Behold the Lambe of God which taketh away the sinnes of

the world. There the lawe calls to the gospell, when Iohn commends Christ. Among them that haue beene borne of women, there hath not risen a greater, then the Baptist. Here on the other side, the Gospell calls to the lawe, when Christ cōmends Iohn. Whereupon also commending his spouse Can. 4.5., he saies, Thy two breasts are like two young 
                        •
                     oes, that are twins, feeding among the lillies. The two breasts of the Church are the two testaments; out of which we that are the children of the church, s
                        ••
                     k the pure milke of the word of God. These testaments feede among the lillies. Because they treate and discourse especially of Christ, who saies, I am the lilly of the valleyes. These testaments also are like two young roes, that are twins. Because twins, (as we reade of Hippocrates twins) when they goe, they goe together, when they feede, they feede together. And after the same fashion, the two testaments, beeing the two breasts of the Church, goe together, and feede together, like two young roes that are twins, feeding among the lillies. The Prophet Zacharie

                     Zach. 4.12. sees in a vsiion, two oliue trees which thorough two golden pipes, emptie themselues into the golden candlesticke. This golden candlesticke, shining continually, and giuing light to euery one that came into the tabernacle was a figure of that light which lighteneth euery one that commeth into the world. And euen as the light of that candlesticke, was alwaies maintained onely with the oyle, which dropping from the oliue trees, and distilling thorough the golden pipes, was conueyed into it: so, Christ shineth in our hearts, onely by the light of his word, and the two testaments, are, as it were, two golden pipes, flowing forth, and streaming both together, whereby the oyle of all gladnesse and goodnesse is powred into vs. Wherefore, it is manifest, that the old testament and the newe testament, as Ezechiels wheeles, are one within another. Yea moreouer, as those cherubins, they looke one toward an other: as those seraphims, they sing one to an other: as those young roes, they feede both together: as those golden pipes, they flowe forth both together.

And therefore, as there are two cherubims, and yet but one obiect that they both looke vpon, which is the mercie-seate; as there are two seraphims, and yet but one song that they both sing, which is the holy; as there are two roes, and yet but one food that they both feede vpon, which is the lillie: as there are two pipes, and yet but one vessell that they both flow into, which is the golden candlesticke: so, there are two testaments, and yet but one summe and substance of them both, which is Christ. Christ the onely Mercy seat; the onely Holy; the onely Lillie; the onely golden Candlesticke.
                  But now, though these two Testamēts agree together thus in Christ, whom S. Paul calleth,Eph. 1.10. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , the rec
                        •
                     pitulatiō, or the abridgmēt of them both; yet, if it will please you to confides the diuerse dispensation of them, you shall in this whole verse obserue six differences betweene them. And euery difference, is a dignitie. Euery difference of the Gospel from the law, is a dignity of the Gospel aboue the law.
                  The first difference is in these words,

                     But all we. In the time of the olde Testament, very few did behold the glorie of the Lord. When the Law was giuen, onely Moses might come vp to the top of the mount, al the people stood below Which custome continued euen vntill the comming of Christ. For when incense was offered, Luk. 1.10. onely Zachary went into the temple, all the multitude stood without. But suppose more men then Moses or Zachary did at that time behold the glorie of the Lord, yet certainly more nations then the Iewes did not behold it. The Iewes onely were Gods peculiar people. As for the Gentiles, they were suffred to walke in their own wayes. The Lord shewed his word vnto Iacob, his statutes & ordinances vnto Israel. He dealt not so with any other nation, neither had the heathen knowledge of his lawe: which likewise continued euen vntil the comming of Christ. For when a woman of Canaan cryed to our Sauiour, saying, Haue mercy on me; he answered her, I am not sent but to the lost sheepe of the house of Israel. Yea, not onely hee himselfe denyed mercy to the Gentils, but also he charged

his disciples for a time to shewe no mercy vnto them. Goe not into the way of the Gentiles, saies he, Matth. 10.5. and into the cities of the Samaritans enter yee not. But go rather to the lost sheepe of the house of Israel. So that it was but one man onely among all the people, namely Moses, or Zacharie; or, to take it at the very highest, it was but one people onely among all nations, 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     ly the Iewes, or the Israelites, which did in the time of the old Testament behold the glorie of the Lord.
                  
                     But all we, now all we, with open 
                        ••
                     ce behold as in a gl
                        •
                     sse the glorie of the Lord. Then they did sing, Psal. 76.
                     Notus in Iada
                           •
                         deus, In Iewry is God knowne, his name is great in Israel. But now we sing Psal. 117.
                     Landate dominum omnes gentes, O praise the Lord all ye heathen, praise him all ye nations. Then, no vncircumcised stronger might eate the Passeouer, Exod 12 45. onely those might eate it, which were borne in the land. But now, all we that are otherwise strangers from the commonwealth of Israel haue an altar Heb. 1
                           •
                        .10. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Vide Theodor. in Exod. quest. 24. and being circumcised with circūcisio
                        •
                      
                     
                        ••
                     de without hands, we may all of vs eat the

Easter-lambe, which hath beene slaine for vs. Then the name of Christ was as an oyntment kept close in an alabaster box, the sauour whereof perfumed onely a part of the house.Vnguentum effusum. But now, it is as an ointment powred outCan. 1.2. Christi nomen ante eius aduentum in Israel populo quasi in vase aliquo claudebatur, Ambr., the sweete smel whereof perfumeth all the house of God. Then, the doctrin of saluation was preached onely in the secret places of Palestina, which was but a corner of the world. But now, it is as it were, proclaimed vpon the tops of the housesLuk. 12.3., and published ouer all the whole earth. Then, onely the asse vsed to the yoke, the Iew vsed to the yoke of the law, was broght vnto Christ. But now hee hath ridden into Ierusalem, vpon the asses foaleMatth, 21.7., and hee hath made all the Gentiles, which were before like vntaimed colts, tractable & obedient, and seruiceable to himselfe. Then, onely naturall branches which were the Iewes, did by faith take roote downward, and by charity beare fruit vpward. But now, wild branches are grafted into the right oliue tree Rom. 11.17., and all the Gentiles are incorporated into the bodie of Christ.
                  Therefore that is now most true

which our Sauiour saies concerning his Church, Can. 6.8. The Queenes and the concubines haue praysed her. The Queenes are the Iewes, whom Christ of old had espoused to himselfe. The concubines are the Gentiles: which though heretofore they haue runne a whoring after strange gods, as the Prophet speaketh, yet now they are faithfull vnto Christ. So that, not onely the Queenes, but also the Concubines praise the Church, yea all generations doe call her blessed▪ Which is the cause, why Salomon also had three hundred queenes, and 
                        〈◊〉
                      hundred concubines 1. Reg. 11.3.. Not so much to satisfie his owne fancy, at 
                        •
                     o signifie Gods pleasure. Namely, that there should be seuen in the time of the Gospel, to three in the time of the Law, seauen to three, which should loue the true Salomon Christ Iesus. And that, not only three hundred persons among the Iewes, but also seauen hundred nations among the Gentiles, yea all the Nations of the earth, should at length bee ioyned to Christ. Now Salomon, not onely by the multitude of his concubines (and likewise by marrying

Pharaohs daughter) did foreshewe the calling of the Gentiles; but much more 1. Reg. 5.
                           •
                        
                     by requesting Hiram King of Tyrus, to helpe him build the Temple. For none but Israelites did meddle with building the tabernacle; whereas Sidonians, and diuerse other Gentiles, did helpe to build the Temple. Which did mystically insinuate a further thing. To wit, that though the synagogue of the Iewes did consist onely of Israelites, yet the Sydonians, and all other nations, should one day come together, and put to their helping hand, to edifie and build vp the Church of Christ: Euen as the Father of Salomon prophesied of it long before, Psal. 72.10. Vide Ambros. de vocat. gent. lib. 2. c. 1. & Cyril. contr. Iulian. l. 8. The Kings of Tarsis and the Isler shall giue presents, the Kings of Arabia and Saba shall bring gifts. All people shall fall downe before him, all nations shall doe him seruice. We read Numb. 33.9. that the Israelites remooued their tents from Marah, and came to Elim, where they found twelue fountaines of water, and seauentie palme trees. All the while they were in Marah, which signifieth bitternes, they saw no fountaine, no palme tree. But when they

came to Elim, which signifieth rams, then they found twelue fountaines and seauentie palme trees. This iourney of the Israelites did intimate thus much: That the Church of Christ should neuer leaue iourneying on forward, till it came from Marah to Elim. That is, from the Iewes, whose mouthes are full of cursing and bitternes, to the Gentiles, which are the true flocke and sheep sold of Christ. Here, the Church findeth twelue fountaines, and seauenty palme trees, Non dubium quin de d
                           •
                        o decim apostolis sermo sit, de quorum fontibus deriuatae aquae, otius mu
                           •
                        
                        di siccitatem tigant. Hier. Epist. ad Fabiol. M
                           •
                        . twelue Apostles, and seauentie Disciples. Which twelue Apostles, as twelue fountaines, haue flowed more generally ouer the face of all the earth to renewe it, then Noahs flood did to destroy it. And the seauenty Disciples, as seauentie palme trees, haue flourished and spread thēselues ouer all the world, so that, as the Psalmist speaketh, Psal 80.10. The bills are couered with the shadowe of them, and the boughs thereof are like the goodly Cedar trees. Almightie God commaunded Moses to make 12. cakes, which should be set continually vpon the table of shewbread, yet so as they should be changed euery Sabbath

day Leuit. 
                           •
                        4.8.. These twelue cakes did prefigure the twelue Apostles Beda de taber. lib 1. cap. 7., and all those disciples of Christ, which continually shew to his people the bread of life, that is, the word of God. Now these twelue cakes are changed, when as the twelue fountaines, and the seauentie palme trees, are changed into twelue Apostles and seauentie Disciples. That so, Gods promise to his Church may bee fulfilled, which is this, Psal. 15.17. Constitues eos principes super omn
                           •
                        m terram. De Apostolis dictum est. Veique & de nobis, qui loca apostolorum minoribus reuera meritis, sed maioribus consolationibus obtinomus. Arnulfus in set in Conc. Turonens p 65. In steed of thy fathers thou shalt haue children, whome thou maist make Princes in all lands. As if in other words he should haue saide, Thy shewbread shall bee changed. For instead of thy twelue fountaines, and thy seauentie palme trees, thou shalt haue twelue Apostles & seauentie Disciples, whom thou maist make Princes in all lands. To this mysterie of the twelue fountaines, is answerable that which is written of the twelue oxen 2. Chron. 4.4.. The molten sea did stand vpon twelue oxen, whereof three looked toward the North, and three looked toward the West, and three looked toward the South, and three looked toward the East. The great caldron was

called a molten sea, because it did foreshew the depth of the twelue Apostles doctrine, which flowing from them, as from twelue fountaines, did make, as it were, a maine sea. This sea did stand vpon twelue oxen, that is, as Saint Paul doth interpret it 1. Cor. 9.10. Duodecim bones, duodecim Apostoli sunt. Beda de temp. Salom c. 10., vpon twelue Apostles. Which in that they looked fowre waies, East, West, North, and South, they did teach all nationsPotest intelligi quod quatuor facies ro
                           •
                        a habeat, propter hoc quod scriptura sacra per gratiam predicationis extensa in quatour mundi partes innoruit. Gregor in Ezech. Hom.. And in that they looked three and three together, they did represent the blessed Trinitie. Not only teaching all nations, but also in that sea of water baptizing them, in the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost. Wherefore, though the two kine which carried the Arke, wherein were the tables of the Law, went straight, and kept one path, turning neither to the right hand nor to the left 1. Sam. 6.12.
                     ▪ Yet these twelue oxen, which carried the molten sea, signifying the doctrine of the Gospell, went not straight, neither kept one path, but turned into the way of the Gentiles; yea, they looked all manner of waies, East, West, North, and South. And those two kyne stood

still and lowed no more, when they came to the field of Iosua, dwelling in Bethshemesh, that is, in the house of the sunne. To note, that all the ki
                        •
                     e, and calues, and sacrifices, and ceremonies of the old law were to cease, and stand still, when they came to Iesus, which is the true Iosua, dwelling in heauen, which is the true Bethshemesh. But these twelue oxen, were so farre from leauing off, either to goe, or to low, when they came to Christ, that euen then, they went much faster, and lowed much lowder, so that now their sound is gone out into all lands, and their words into the ends of the world; and in them hath God set Bethshemesh, that is, a house or a tabernacle for the sunne. Therefore as the materiall sunne, thorough the twelue signes in the Zodiake, goeth forth from the vttermost parts of the heauen, and runneth about to the end of it againe P
                           •••
                        . 19.
                           •
                        .: in like sort, the spirituall Sonne of righteousnesse, by the twelue Apostles, as by twelue signes, hath beene burne round about the world, that he might be not onely the glorie of his people Israel, but also

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
a light to lighten the Gentiles, and that all, all the ends of the earth might see the saluation of our God. Truth it is, touching the Synagogue of the Iewes, Christ saith, Can. 4.
                           •
                        2. My sister, my spouse is as a garden enclosed, and as a fountaine sealed vp. For as Saint Ierome writeth Terra à Dan vsque Beersabee via c
                           •
                        ntu
                           •
                         sexaginta millium in longum spa
                        
                           •
                        io tenditu
                           •
                         Ep. ad Dard., the whole countrie of Iewrie where the Iewes dwelt, lying betweene Dan and Beersabee, was 
                        •
                     carce a hundred and three-score mile long. So that it might well be likened, to a garden enclosed, and to a fountaine sealed vp. But now, this sealed fountaine hath beene turned into a springing well, since the twelue fountaines haue flowed ouer all the earth: and, this enclosed garden hath beene turned into an open field, since the twelue oxen haue plowed the field of all the whole world. Therefore now Christ saith of himselfe, Can. 2.2 Ego sum flos campi. I am a flower of the feild. And so likewise to his spouse; Can. 7.11. Come my welbeloued, let vs go forth into the field, let vs remaine in the villages. For though before his passion he was apprehended in a gardē, yet at his passion he was crucified without the gateHeb. 13.12.. To signifie, that he would

be, no
                        •
                      only a garden-flower, but also a feild-flower; & that he would remaine, not only for the saluation of the Iewes within the city of Ierusalē, but also for the saluation of the Gentils without the gate of the citie, in all the villages round about. Nabuchadnezzar Dan. 2.35. saw in a vision a stone cut without hands, which became a great mountaine, and filled all the whole earth. This stone cut without hands, is Christ begotten of a pure Virgin, without the companie of man. Who was indeede a verie little stone, or, as I may say, but a sparke at the first. Wherefore the Iewes for his pouertie and humilitie despised and refused him. But now this poore little stone which the builders refused, is become the head-stone in the corner, and it is made a great mountaine, which filleth all the whole earth. According to the prophesie of Esay; cap. 2. v. 2. It shall be in the last daies, that the mountaine of the house of the Lord shall be prepared in the toppe of the mountaines, and shall be exalted aboue the hills, and all nations shall flow vnto it. So that now Christ, which is the head corner stone, may be fitly called

the second Adara. The Greeke letters of which name, as S. Cyprian Oportuit vt ex quatuor cardinibus orbis terrae nomen in te portare
                           •
                         Adam. Tract. de Si
                           •
                        a & Sion. initio. writeth, do seuerally signifie al the quarters of the earth. A 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , the East: 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , the West: A▪ againe, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , the North M. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , the South. According to the promise of God vnto Abraham, Gen. 28.14. Thy seed shalbe as the dust of the earth: (that is, as the first Adam was made of the dust of the earth: so thy seede, which is Christ the second Adam, shall be dispersed as d
                        •
                     st ouer all the earth.) Thy seede shall be as the dust of the earth; and thou shal spread abroad, (as a great mountaine,) to the East, and to the West, and to the North, and to the South; and in thee, and in thy seed, shall all the families of the earth bee blessed. The Iewish Synagogue speaketh in this sort, Ca
                           •
                        . 6.11. Anima meaconcarba
                           •
                        it me, propter quadrigas Aminadab. My soule troubleth me, for the chariots of Aminadab. Aminadab 
                        •
                     ignifieth a willing, or an obedient people. Such are the faithfull Gentiles. Of whom God saith, Psal. 18.44. A people which I haue not knowne shall serue mee. As soone as they heare of me they shall obey me. But the strange children shall dissemble with mee. The strange children

shal faile, and be afraid out of their prisons. Though God haue beene a louing father to the Iewes, yet they dissemble, and are strange children to him. Contrariwise, though God haue not knowne the Gentiles, yet they doe knowe and serue him. Therefore the obstinate Iewes repining and grudging that the Gentiles are called, say euerie one of them, Anima mea conturbaui
                           •
                         me, My soule troubleth me, thorough enuy, malice, blindnes, and disobedience. Because they faile, and are afraid out of their prisons. On the other side, the obedient Gentiles, beeing called to this liberty of the sonnes of God, lie not in any prisons, but ride in the chariots of Amminadab, Because, as soone as they heare of God, they willingly obey him. Which is implied, in that a man of Cyrene, named Simon Matth. 
                           ••
                         
                        
                           •
                        2. Vt talifacto praefignaretu
                           •
                         gen
                           •
                        ium fides. Leo de Pa
                           •
                        . 
                           •
                        o. 
                           ••
                        ., did carrie the crosse of Christ. A man of Cyrene, is a Gentile: Simon signifieth hearing and obeying. Therefore, a man of Cyrene named Simon carrying the crosse, is a faithfull Gentile, which as soone as he heareth of God, doth willingly obey him. For now God hath

perswaded Iapheth to dwell in the tents of Shem Gen. 9 2
                           •
                        .. That is, he hath perswaded the Gentiles comming of Iapheth to embrace that obedience vnto Christ, which the Iewes comming of Shem haue refused. This is the reason, why the Hebrew Scriptures are translated into Greek, and Latine, and all other languages. To shew, that Iapheth doth now dwell in the tents of Shem. And that those oracles, which before were appropriated to the Iewes Rom. 3.2., are now imparted vnto all the Gentiles. So that the prophesie of the Patriarke Iacob is now also fulfilled, who saith, Gen 49.21. Nepthaly shal be as a Hind let loose, giuing goodly words. For Christ did first preach in the land of Nepthaly among the Iews Matth. 4.13.. But seeing the Iewes would not obey him, therefore he hath turned to the Gentiles Act. 13.46.. And so Nepthalie is as a hind let loose, giuing goodly words. Because Christ, who first preached in Nepthalie, is not now any longer in prison among the Iewes; but, as a hind let loose, leaping by the mountaines, and skipping by the hills Can. 2.8., so he hath run swiftly ouer all the worldPsal. 147.15.; and

with his goodly words, with his gratious words, he hath perswaded Iapheth and all the Gentiles, to dwell in the tents of Shem, and to ride in the chariots of Amminadab. These chariots of Amminadab are called in Latine, Quadrigae, because each of them is drawne with foure horses. Which very aptly befitteth the doctrine of the Gospel. For, as Caluin noteth in the Epistle before his Harmonie, God hath of set purpose ordained, that the Gospel should be written by foure Euangelists, that so he might make a triumphant chariot for his sonne Vide
                           •
                        ur consuli
                           •
                         deus quasi triumph
                           •
                        lem curt
                           •
                        m filio suo para
                           ••
                        e, vnde to
                        
                           ••
                         fidelium populo conspieu
                           •
                        s appare at▪ Infine Epistolae.. Which beeing drawne with fowre horses, and running vpon fowre wheels, might quickly passe ouer all the earth, and so shew the glory of the Lord, vnto all his Church. Wherefore, the Church is like a graine of mustard seede Matth. 23.
                           ••
                        ., which is indeede the least of all seedes, but when it is grown, it is the greatest among hearbs, and it is a tree, so that the birds of the aire come and build in the branches thereof. Thus the congregation of Christ riseth from small beginnings, to great proceedings. And though at the first, it was

but a seede, yea but a graine, yet new it is growne to be an hearb, yea to be a tree; where in all the birds of the aireEzec. 17.23., all the faithfull in the world, doe make their neasts.
                  Therefore the church of Christ may be compared also to the Samarit
                        •
                     ns inne Luk. 10.34.. For that inne is called in greeke 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , because it receiueth and lodgeth all strangers that come: So the church lodgeth all pilgrims vpon earth. 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         Theophyl
                           •
                        ct. p. 26
                           •
                        . g
                           •
                        abulum ecelesia est; vnde & in stabulo dominus natus est Emis. Do. 1
                           •
                        
                        ▪ post Pen. In the Synagogue there was not lodging for all. For then it was said, Deut. 23.2. The Ammonites and the Moabites shal not enter into the congregation of the Lord: But now, Christ is borne in an inne Luk. 2.
                           •
                        .. To signifie, that in the Church there is lodging for all. For Christ is the host: the Church the inne: the crosse is the signe. Harken to the Host which is Christ, and you shall heare him say, Come vnto me all you that labour and trauaile, and I will refresh you: I will bring you into the wineseller Can. 
                           •
                        .4., yea I will suppe with you, and you with me Reu 3.10.. Go into the inne which is the Church, and there you shall finde Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and all na
                        •
                     ions

vnder heauen, staied with flagons, and comforted with apples C
                           •
                        n. 2.5.; yea, refreshed and filled with new wine Act. 2.5.. Looke vp to the signe, which is the crosse, and you shall see diuerse things. First, you shall see one crowne of thornes. To shew, that the earth is the Lords, and all that therein is, the round world, and they that dwell therein. For the roundnes of the crowne doth declare the large dominion of him that is crowned. Namely, that his dominion is from the one sea to the other, and from the flood vnto the worlds end Psal. 52.8.. Secondly, you shall see two hands. To shew, that God is, not the God of the Iewes onely, but of the Gentiles also Rom. 3.
                           •
                        9.. For not only one hand, but both his hands, are fast nayled and stretched-out. The one to the one theife, the other to the other theife; the one to the Iewes, the other to the Gentiles, that he may embrace all that loue him. Thirdly, you shall see three tongues. To shew, that Christ, is not the King of the Hebrewes onely, but of the Greci
                        •
                     ns, and the Latins also. For his title, Iesus of Nazareth King of the Iewes, is written in Hebrew, Greeke,

and Latine. That at the most sweet and most excellent name of Iesus euerie knee may bowe, and all tongues may confesse, that Iesus Christ is the Phil. 2.11. Lord. Fourthly, you shall see fowre quarters of the crosse. To shew, by the fowre quarters of the crosse, the fowre quarters of the world. For God is no accepter of persons, but in euery quarter and countrie, he that feareth him, is accepted with him. Therefore also Christs garments Ioh. 16 23. were diuided into fowre parts. Because, out of what quarter or part soeuer we come of all the fowre parts of the world, if we be naked, Christ hath garments to cloath vs, if we bee harbourles, Christ hath roome to lodge vs. Euen as he himselfe saies, All that the Father giueth mee, shall come to mee, and whosoeuer commeth to me, Non eijciam for as, I will not turne him out of doores. Wherefore whether we respect the host; or the hosts inne; or the innes signe; and about the signe it selfe, whether we respect one crown; or two hands; or three tongues; or fower quarters; euery of these doth plainely shew, that now in the Church there is

lodging for all, and so consequently that the Church may bee compared to the Samaritans inne. It may be compared likewise to S
                        •
                     lomons troupe of horses Can. 1.8.. For S
                        •
                     lomons troupe of horses was kept in fowre thousand stables, ten and ten in a stable 2. Chr. 9.1.; so that hee had in his whole troupe fourtie thousand horses1. Reg 4.16.; which were either bought by 1. Reg. 10.28. him, or els
                        •
                      brought to him 2. Chr. 9.24. out of all countries. So the Apostles, as we may reade in the Acts, brought by one sermon 3. thousand soules Act. 2 41., brought by an other sermon fiue thousand soules to ChristAct. 4.4.; and so euery day, out of all countries and kinredsReuel. 7.9., there are added to the Church by infinite and innumerable multitudes Dan. 
                           •
                        .14., such as shall be saued. It may be compared to S. Peters sheeteAct. 10.12.. For in Peters sheete, were all sort of beasts, fowre footed beasts of the earth, and wild beasts, creeping things, and foules of the heauen. So, in the Church there are all manner of men, Circumcised and vncircumcised, Barbarians and Sythians Colloss. 3.1
                           •
                        .. It may be compared to Noahs Arke Gen. 7.14.. For there came to Noah into his Arke all kind of creatures, cleane

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
and vncleane, male and female. So there commeth to Christ into his Church, all manner of men, Iewes and Grecians, bond and free 1. Cor. 12.13.. It may be compared to S. Iames his net Luk. 5.10.. For that ne
                        ••
                     e had corke aboue to make it swimme, and ledde belowe to make it sinke, that it might take all sorts of fishes. So, the Church hath diuerse fishers of men, some that teach slightly and superficially, some againe that teach more deeply and profoundly, that all manner of men may bee taught Ioh. 6.45., and caught Matth. 13.47., and drawne vnto Christ. Lastly, it may bee compared to King Assuerus his feast Est 1.5.. For that feast entertained all kinde of guests, seauen dayes together, in the court of the garden of the Kings Pallace. So, in the Church, the Lord of hosts hath made vnto all manner of men, a feast of fat things, euen a feast of fined wines, to vse the Prophet Esais Esay▪ 
                        
                           •
                        5.6. words, and fat things full of marrow, of wines fined and purified. Before that this 
                        •
                     east was prepared, the oxen and fatlings killed, and euery thing else prouided, all men were not bidden. But nowe that Christ hath bin killed, he keepeth, as I

may say, open house Prou. 9.2., and sendeth his seruants into the high wayesLuk. 14.23., to gather together all that euer they find. Yea his seruants haue not onely bidden all that they could find in the hie-waies, but also they haue crost the seas, and called the very furthermost Esa. 60 9. Ilands of all the world, to behold the glory of the Lord. Blessed. O blessed bee the Lord for his vnspeakable mercies towards this Iland, now far more flourishing then euer it was, in which we liue. For, alas, in the time of the olde Testament, who was there, I pray you, in this whole Monarchie, at least wise that euer wee could read or heare of, which had any true knowledge of God? S. Ierom in the end of his dialogue against the Pelagians, writeth thus, Vsque ad aduentum Christ
                           •
                        , Brittannia fertilis prouincia tyrannorum, & Sto
                           •
                        icae gentes, omnes
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         vsque ad Oceanum per circul
                           ••
                         bar b
                           •
                        rae na
                           •
                        i
                           ••
                        er, Moysen Prophetas
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ignorabunt. Vntill the very comming of Christ, saies he, the Prouince of Brittain, which hath bin oftentimes gouerned by tyrants, and the Scottish people, and all the nations round about the Ocean sea, were vtterly ignorant of Moses and the Prophets. So that then, by the testimonie of S. Ierome, all our religion was superstition: al our church-seruice was, Idolatrie; all our Priests,

were Paynims: all our gods were idols. Then there was in Scotland, the temple of Mars: in Cornewall, the temple of Mercurie: in Bangor in Wales, the temple of Minerua Stow Annal. in vita Morgani.: in Malden in Essex, the temple of Victoria Camden. Brittan in Essexi
                           •
                        
                        ▪
                     ; in Bath, the temple of Apollo: in Leycester, the temple of Ianus: in Yorke, where Peters is now, the temple of Bellona Stow Annal, in vita Bladud & Leiteregnum, & Seue
                           •
                        i imperat.: in London, where Pauls is now, the temple of Diana Iuellus in tractat. de sac
                           •
                        is Scrip pag. 129.. Therefore it is very likely, that they esteemed as highly then of the goddesse Diana in London, as they did in Ephesus Act. 19.28.. And that, as they cryed there, Great is Diana of the Ephesians: so they cried here, 
                        
                           •
                        reat is Diana of the Lō
                        diners. Euen no more then three and fiftie yeares before the incarnation of Christ, when Iulius Caesar came out of France into England, so absurd and senslesse were the people of this Land, that in stead of the true and euerliuing God, they serued these heathenish and abominable idols, Mars, Mercurie, Minerua, Victoria, Apollo, Ianus, Bellona, Diana, & such like. And not long after, to wit, an. Christ. 180. King Lucius being first christened himselfe, forthwith established

religion, in this whol kingdom. But thanks, thankes bee to God, in the time of the newe Testament, three and fiftie yeares after the incarnation of Christ: when Ioseph of Arimathea come out of France into Englād, many in this Realme of blind and ignorant P
                        •
                     gans, became very zealous and sincere Christians. For Saint Philip the Apostle, after hee had preached the Gospel thorough-out all France, at length sent Ioseph of Arimathea hither into England. Who when he had conuerted very many to the faith, died in this Land, and hee that had buried the bodie of Christ, was buried in Glascenburie himselfe Gildas lib. de victor. Aurel. Em.. Also Simon Zelotes an other Apostle, after he had preached the Gospell thoroughout all Mauritania, at length came ouer into England. Who when he had declared likewise to vs the doctrine of Christ crucified, was in the end crucified himselfe, and buried here in Brittaine 
                        Ni
                              •
                           ep l. 2 c. 40. About this time Aristobulus one of the seauentie Disciples, Doroth in synops c. 23. whom Saint Paul mentioneth in his Epistle to the Romans Rom. 16.10., was a reuerend and a renowned Biship in this

Land. Also, Claudia a noble English Ladie Martial. Epigrama
                           •
                        at. lib. 4., whom S. Paul mentioneth in his second Epistle to Timothie 2. Tim. 4.21., was here amongst vs a famous Professour of the faith. Since which time, though the ciuil state hath bin o
                        •
                     ten turn'd vpside downe, by the Romans, by the Saxons, by the Danes, by the Normans; ye
                        •
                      the Gospel of Christ, hath neuer vtterly failed, or bin taken from vs. This the holy Fathers of the church, which haue liued in the ages next-ensuing, doe declare. Tertul
                           •
                        ian, who liued Ann. 200. writeth thus,Aduers 
                           •
                        uda c. 3. Hispaniarum omnes termini, & Galliarum diuersae nation
                           •
                        s, & Brittannorum in a coessa Romanis loca Christo vero subdita. 
                     All the coasts of Spaine, and diuers parts of France, and many places of Brittaine, which the Romanes could neuer subdue with their sword, Christ hath subdued with his word. Origen, who liued Ann. 260. writeth thus, Hom. 4. in Ezech. Qua
                           •
                        do terra Brittanniae ante aduentum Christi in vnius dei consen
                           •••
                         religionem▪ Nunc veroò vniuersa terra cu
                           •
                         l
                           •
                        titia ela
                           •
                        at ad dominum. Did the Ile of Brittaine before the cō
                     ming of Christ euer acknowledge the faith of one God? No. But yet now, all that countrey singeth ioyfully vnto the Lord. Constantine the great, the glorie of all the Emperours, borne here in England, and of English blood, who liued Ann. 306. writeth in an Epistle thus, So
                           •••
                        . l. 2. c. 9. Whatsoeuer custome is of force in all
                     
the Churches of Egypt, Spaine, France, and Brittaine, looke that the same be likewise ratified among you. S. Chrysostome, who liued An. 405. writeth thus, Hom. 
                           •
                        8. in 2. Cor. In all places wheresoeuer you goe into any Church, whether it be of the Mores, or of the Persians, or euen of the verie Iles▪ of Brittaine, you may heare Iohn Baptist preaching. S. Hierome, who liued Ann. 420. writeth thus, Epist. ad 
                           •••
                        
                        g
                           •
                        ium. Anno. 500. Columbanus in Anglia, Palladiu
                           •
                        in Sco
                           •
                        is, Patric
                           •
                        u
                           •
                         in Hib
                           •
                        r
                           •
                        ia floruit. The Frenchmen, the Englishmen, they of Africa, they of Persia, and all barbarous nations, worship one Christ, and obserue one rule of religion. Theodoret, who liued Ann. 450. writeth thus, Aduers. Grae. lib 9. the blessed Apostles haue induced the Englishmen, the Danes, the Saxons, in one word, all people and countries, to embrace the doctrine of Christ. Gregorie the great who liued Ann. 605. writeth thus, Epist l. 
                           •
                        . c. 58. Who can sufficiently expresse, how glad all the faithfull are, for that the Englishmen haue forsaken the darkenesse of their errours, and haue againe receiued, the light of the Gospell. Beda, who liued Ann. 730. writeth thus, Hist. l. 1. c. 1. England at this

present, is inhabited by Englishmen, Brittaines, Scots, Picts, and Romanes, all which, though they speake fiue tongues, yet they professe but one faith. Thus you see, how the Gospel of Christ, hauing beene first planted in this land by Ioseph of Arima
                     
                        •
                     he
                        •
                     , and Simon Zelotes, (in whose time Aristobulus and Claudia, and not long after King Lucius also liued) hath ouer since continued amongst vs; as testifieth, Tertullian, Origen, Constantine the great, Athanasius, Chrysostome, Hierome, Theodoret, Gregorie, Bed
                        •
                     , and many more which might here haue beene Vide praet
                           •
                        r caete
                           •
                        o
                           •
                        , vitam Bernardi l 2 c. 7. & Bernard de confide
                           ••
                        
                        ▪ l. 3. alleadged.
                  Loe yee then, ye blessed and belo
                     
                        •
                     ed of the Lord. Lo yee, and marke it well I beseech you, how farre the new Testament, excelleth the olde. In the time of the old Testament, they did sing onely, Notus in Iudaea deus: but now, we sing also, Lauda
                           •
                        e dominum omnes gentes. Then they that were borne in the Land onely might eate the Passeouer: but now, we that are strangers also, may eate the Easter

lambe. Then the name of Christ was onely, as an oyntment kept in an alabaster box: but now, it is also, as an oyntment powred out. Then the doctrine of Saluation, was onely preached in secret places: but now, it is also preached vpon the tops of houses. Then, the old asse onely, was brought vnto Christ: but now, the young foale also, obedient vnto him. Then naturall branches only, did prosper and flourish: but now, wild branches also, are gra
                        •
                     ted into the oliue tree. Then, the Queenes onely, did praise the Church: but now, the concubines also, do call her blessed. Then, Israelites onely, did build the tabernacle: but now, Sidonians also, doe helpe to build the Temple. Then, they pitched their tents onely in Marah, where was neither fountaine nor palmtree: but now, we pitch in Elim, where there are twelue fountains, and seuentie palme trees. Then, the two kine which carried the Arke, looked onely one way: but now, the twelue oxen which carrie the molten sea, looke euery way, East, West, North, and South. Then, Christ was a flower, growing

onely in the little garden of Iudea: but now, he is a flower, flourishing in the wide field of all the world. Then, Christ was onely a little stone, cut without hands: but now, bee is a great huge mountaine, which filleth all the earth. Then, the Church of Christ was, as it were, in prison, beeing tied and bound onely to one place: but now, it pos
                        •
                     eth ouer all places riding and triumphing in the chariots of Aminadab. Then, the Church of Christ was onely a small graine of mustard-seede: which is lesser then any other seede, but now, it spreadeth abroad as a mightie bigge tree, wherein all the birds of the aire do make their nests. So that, the Church of Christ, now in the time of the new Testament, is like the Samaritans i
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      which lodgeth all passengers: It is 
                        〈◊〉
                      Salomons troupe of hourses, which commeth out of all countries. It is 
                        〈◊〉
                      Saint Peters sheere, which in foul
                        •
                     th, all sort of beasts. It is like Noahs arke, which receiueth all kind of creatures. It is like Saint Iames his net, which catcheth all sort of fishes. All's fish, that comes to this net. It is like King Assu
                        •
                     
                     rus

feast, which entertaineth all kind of guests. To this feast all we that will come are well-come. Not some fewe Iewes onely, But all we: euen all we Brittaines, all we Isay, with open face, behold as in a glasse the glory of the Lord. This is the first difference, betweene the Law and the Gospel, in these words, But all we.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   