
      
         
            
            
            THE POPES PYRAMIDES.
            
               
                  intertwined pyramid of serpents and papal regalia
                  Blaſphemie.
                  Prophanes.
                  Pride.
                  Couetouſnes.
                  Idlenes.
                  Enuie.
                  Cruelty.
                  Hereſie.
                  H
                        •
                     pocriſie.
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
                  Sodomie.
                  Rebellion.
                  Ignorance.
               
            
            
               The fruites of Rome, thou here protractur'd ſeeſt,
               And ſinnes begotten by her Antichriſt;
               
               Who like a Serpent with deſpightfull ire,
               With poyſon arm'd, with eies as red as fire,
               With Triple crowne, and with his horned might,
               In waite lies for, the children of the light:
               Whoſe curſed broode, about their damme within,
               Breathe out the venome of a ſeuerall ſin.
               The chiefe in order, horrid Blaſphemie,
               
               Their parent takes againſt the Deitie,
               
               What is it elſe? when vs he makes beleeue,
               Saluation at his pleaſure he can giue?
               In heauen, in hell, in purgato
                        •
                     y to
               He can doe much, nay more then God can doe;
               
                  Rome's Temples built, for pure Religion,
               Are all prophaned now (ſaith Mantuan,)
               Baſe paraſites her Church-reuenew feedes,
               And ſacred Altars ſerue but Ganimedes:
               
               In Bull, in Pardons, Peters keies are ſold,
               With Chriſt himſelfe, (to who'ule giue moſt) for gold:
               Whiles that Chriſt's flocke, vnto his chardge aſſigned,
               For want of foode, is caſt away and pined,
               Or naked left, as ſeely lambkins be,
               To the world's mercie, or wolues cruelty,
               As Heretiques, Gods children ſhe doth hold,
               And all that are not hem'd within her fold,
               When ſhe her ſelfe, the roote of errour is,
               And hath maintain'd the groſſeſt Hereſies.
               How many Popes doth Platina record,
               Vile Heretiques, did whilome Rowe afford?
               Of whome Monothelites, ſome Arrians were,
               Some others Athe
                        •
                     ſts, one a coniurer:
               Of Holines thus doth ſhe beare a ſhow,
               And with the Churche's title masked goe,
               Depainted outward glorious to the ere,
               When her devotion's but Hypocriſie:
               
               They faſting teach, yet daintyeſt cates doe buy,
               To pleaſe the taſt, and ſerue their gluttony:
               That here againe, ſhould Epicurus liue,
               He would the Palme vnto the Friers giue:
               
                  Sardanapalus, Nero, and the reſt,
               Whoſe very names, you chaſter eares deteſt
               Of Nature ner'e deſerued greater blame,
               Then Rome, for one thing, which I dare not name:
               
                  Rome, thou that Traitors their bad leſſons teacheſt,
               And great'ſt eſtates, t'aduance thy; ride impeacheſt:
               Lo here the picture of thy Tyranny,
               As Paſquill ſent it to our Britany.
               
            
            
               
                  A Pyramis, of Serpents poyſonous broode;
                  (Rome,) here behold, erected is on high
                  Vpon ſeauen hills, where once thy glory ſtood
                  Sad Monument of thy Impietie:
                  Which all the world infecteth, farre and nigh,
                  Like the Cerastes, threatning ſpeedy death,
                  If vnawares we come within her breath.
               
               
                  About whoſe head, in knots, and wreathings ſtrange,
                  Her curſed Impes, on euery ſide doe crall,
                  While ſhe about her horned head doth raunge,
                  With poyſoned ſpite, empeiring ouer all:
                  That Shéepeheard, nor his flocke hereafter ſhall
                  Be (Tyber,) with thy pleaſaunt ſtreames acquainted,
                  
                  Which this foule Serpent with all ſinne hath tainted.
               
               
                  VVhere once good Paſtors Halleluiabs ſang,
                  And ſat, their ſnowy flocks in quiet tending,
                  That all thy bankes with heauenly Muſick rang,
                  The Laurell groues, their friendly ſhadowes lending;
                  But now (alas) thoſe happy daies haue ending,
                  And by thy ſhore, (as Sybill did foretell,)
                  This hatefull broode, of Antichriſt doth dwell.
               
               
                  But loe exalted to the higheſt degree,
                  That Pride, or vaine Ambition could deuiſe;
                  
                     Gods word (a double edged ſword) we ſee
                  Doth deadly wound this Serpent from the skies;
                  That neuer feare him now, if you be wiſe:
                  But pray the Lord, that he his grace would ſend,
                  And in his Truth inſtruct you to the end.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            LONDON Printed in Shoe-lane, at the ſigne of the Faulcon.
         
      
   