
      
         
            
            
            A NEWE TREATISE
OF THE RIGHT RECKONING
OF YEARES, AND AGES
of the World, and mens liues, and of the estate of
the last decaying age thereof, this 1600. yeare of Christ,
(Erroniouslie called a yeare of Iubilee) which is from
the Creation, the 5548. yeare. Conteining sundrie singularities, worthie of observation,
concerning courses of times, and revolutions
of the Heauen, and reformations of Kalendars, and Prognostications:
with a discourse of Prophecies and signes, preceeding the latter
daye, which by manie arguments appeareth now to approch. With a godlie admonition in the end, vpon the words of the Apostle,
to redeeme the time, because the dayes are evill.
            By M. ROBERT PONT, and aged Pastour in the Kirk of Scotland.
            
            The heades are set downe in certaine Propositions, in the Page
following.
            
               LVKE. 17.
               As it was in the dayes of Noe, so shall it be in the dayes of the Sonne of man
            
            EDINBVRGH
PRINTED BY ROBERT WALDE-GRAVE, PRINter
to the Kings Maiestie. Anno 1599. Cum Priuilegio Regio.
         
         
            
            The propositiones and heads to be handled
in this Treatise.
            
               1. THat the most sure reckoning of the ages of the worlde, is by Sabbathes or weekes of yeares, and that they who count without respect thereof, are
in an errour, and that by iust account this 1600. yeare of Christ, is from the
beginning of the world, the 5548. yeare.
               2 That this yeare of Christ, 1600. by right reckoning, is neither a Sabbaticall
yeare, nor yet a yeare of Iubilee: and that the true Iubilee of Christianes
is alreadie accomplished: with detection of the abuse of the counterfaited Iubilees
holden at Rome.
               
               3 That the Iubilee of the Papisticall Romanistes, neither doth rightly counterfaite
the Iewes, neither the Seculare yeares of the auncient Romanes. And of
diverse manners of reckoning the ages of the Worlde, and of mens liues.
               4 That in our time, the signes and revolutiones of the heaven are changed
and remooved from the olde accustomed places: And therefore the vulgare
Prognosticators reckoning, by the olde rules are in an errour.
               5 That the Iulian or Romane Kalendare, might receiue an easier reformation,
and that the late attempted reformation thereof, is not well taken vp, but
giveth occasion of errour in reckoning.
               6 That there is a merveilous sympathie of periodes of times, in reckoning
by seuens, & by Sabbatical yeares, and of the manifold mysteries of the number
of seauen.
               7 That there is an appearant dangerous alteration to fall out this yeare, &
within few yeares hereafter, and of the Prophecies and signes declaring to vs,
the world to be neare an end.
               8 An admonition to all men to prepare themselues, and to redeeme the
time because the dayes are evill.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE RIGHT REVEREND
                  •
               
NOBLE LORD, ALEXANDER SEYTON,
L. Vrquhard and Fyvie, President in the Senate of
Iustice, and Provest of Edinburgh, &c. All health and
felicitie in Christ.
            
               YOur Lordshippes gentle
humanitie toward all honeste
and well-hearted
men, and namely, towards
me, since my first acquaintance,
hath mooved mee, to dedicate to
your honour, this parte of the fruite of my
studies, knowing, that amongst the rare
Mecenases of this Land, your name is
with the highest ranke, vnder his Maiestie
to be mentioned. The first cause (I
confesse) that mooved mee to publish this
Treatise in our English tongue, was to
disswade the too curious conceites of certaine
men, desirous to be at Rome this approching

1600. yeare commonly called a
year of Iubilee, wherof they shuld receiue no
profit, but rather domage, with losse of time
& expenses. For your L. knows wel ynough
the maners of Rome, & (as I am perswaded)
allowes not of that pompose superstition:
yet if your L. wil take paines (not being
fashed with more weighty matters) to
reade this whole discourse, I trust you shall
finde other heads, whereof you shal like verie
well, that haue troubled the heades of
learned men, and not bene so exactly found
out. Wishing your L. to accept of this smal
token of my good fauor towards your honor,
and to accept of me amongst the clientele
of your friendship, wherfore God-willing,
ye shall not finde me vnworthie. To whose
almightie protection, I commit your L.
This last of October. 1599.
            
               Your L. ever ready to power in God.
ROBERT PONT.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE READERS.
            
               HAVing in hand a more large work
                  •
               
concerning controllment and examination
of times, by occasion of this
incident 1600. yeare of Christ, which
is reckoned by the Papistes and others,
applauding to their superstition,
to be a yeare of Iubilee; I thought
good to prevent that errour, by this
little Treatise: discevering thereby the vanitie of divers men
of this Ile, & of others far cuntries, who with great los of time
and hazard, not onely of their substance and liues, but also of
their soules and consciences, minde to visite that Idole the
Pope, and to be present in Rome, onely to see his yeare of
Iubilee: falsely being counterfaited to the imitation of the
Iubilees of the Iewes, but indeede derogatory to the true Iubilee,
and spirituall libertie purchased vnto vs by our Saviour
Christ. And for-as-much as this instante yeare is the
ende of a great Period of time, to witte, sixteene hundreth
yeares, from Christ his nativitie, wherein there appeares
diverse great mutationes, to fall out, aswel in the estate of Religion,
as in civill affaires and common wealthes: I haue
herewith, not onely discovered diverse erroures, in reckoning
of times, and ages of the Worlde, and laboured to finde out
the right reckoning, but also touched the revolution of the
heauen, and reformation of Kalendars and Prognostications,

and declared my iudgement, concerning the Prophecies and
signes of the latter day, appearing nowe shortly to approche.
If any be not satisfied with the brevitie of this Treatise, I re
               
                  ••
               itte
them to my more ample discourse, to be set out in Latine
(if GOD graunt me abilitie and time) wherein
the proofe of these propositiones, with other matters
of the like arguments, will be conteined
at large.
            
               Read, learne-well, and try,
               Then judge advisedly.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            OF THE DECAYING
ESTATE OF THE
worlde this instante, 1600.
yeare of Christ.
            FIRST PROPOSITION.
            
               That the most sure reckoning of the age of the worlde, is by
Sabbath's of yeares; and they that count, not considdering
the same, are in an errour; and that by iust account this
1600. yeare from Christ his birth, is from the beginning of
the worlde, the 5548. yeare.
            
            
               IN The beginning (as the Spirite
of God recordeth by MOYSES)
after that the Lord in sixe dayes,Gen. 2. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
had created the Heaven & Earth,
with all the furniture thereof, Hee
rested vpon the seventh day; Therefore
hee blessed it, and hallowed it.
               Exod. 2
                     •
                  . 11.
This is also repeated in the fourth
Commandemente, for the perpetuall observation of
that daye; and because the number of seauen, by that
reason is a sacred nomber, and most meete for al kinde
of reckoning: It was ordained also in the lawe, that amongst
the people of God,Leuit. 2
                     •
                  . everie seventh yeare should
be holden holy: wherin the land should rest frō labor;
so that therin there shuld neither be sowing of cornes

nor cutting of Vine-yardes: That libertie should bee
granted vnto servantes, and that it should be called a
yeare of rest vnto the Lorde. And by like reason it was
also institute, that the Israelites should number vnto
them seaven Sabbathes of yeares, conteining 49. years;
& immediatlie in the beginning of the 50. yeare thereafter,
the trumpet of a Iubilee should be blowne, the 10.
day of the seuenth Moneth (whereon fell the solemnitie
of reconciliation) proclayming libertie to all the
inhabitantes of the lande, so that everie man might returne
to his owne possession; as at more length is set
foorth by MOYSES in the law. Now, albeit that the law
specifyeth, that these Sabbaticall yeares, and Iubilees
should be kept by the people of Israel, when they were
come in the Land which the Lord was to giue them,
& obtayn rest therin (because they could not wel keep
the same before that time) yet the reason of this sacred
reckoning, proceeding by the number of sevens, hath a
grounde in the naturall Lawe, which was before the
written Law of MOYSES, and the ensample of GOD
himselfe, who was before all Lawes. And thereby, wee
may well gather, that this Sabbaticall reckoning, hath
respect even to the beginning of the world; and is to be
counted even from that first Sabbath, wherin the Lord
rested from all his workes. So that as God rested the
seventh day of creation, in like manner, the Sabbaticall
yeares, and yeares of Iubilee, should proceede from that
beginning: For MOYSES himselfe, who wrote the holy
historie, from the creation of the worlde to his dayes,
knew well ynough, the just reckoning of these Sabbaticall
yeares, and by the Spirite of Prophecie, also hee
knew what time the people should obtaine peaceable
rest and possession of the Lande of Chanaan, that then

they might begin to reckon by these Sabbatical years
and yeares of Iubilee. For an evidence whereof, wee
finde by just reckoning, which hereafter is to be sette
downe, that the 6. yeare of the governement of IOSVA,
wherein the Israelites obteined peaceable possession
of the Lande, the same being devided amongst them,
was a Sabbatical yeare: and also the complete 49. yeare
of a Iubilee: So that from the creation, vnto that time,
there wil be 357. Sabbathes of yeares, and 51. Iubilees,
And the next yeare thereafter (which was the 7. yeare
of IOSVA) will be found a just beginning, from the
which forward, the people reckoned both their Sabbaticall
yeares, and yeares of Iubilee: whereupon it followeth,
that this manner of counting, by Sabbaticall
yeares, is the most sure reckoning of the yeares and ages
of the World, and may wel be deduced & brought
to this present yeare, commonly counted the 1600.
from the birth of Christ. In the which reckoning, wee
haue to proceede after this manner. First taking an fixed
yeare out of the Scripture, being surely a Sabbaticall
yeare, for an fixed stay or ground: and then reckoning
from the same backe, to the beginning of the
Worlde: and like wise forward, to the yeare of the Nativitie
of Christ; and so consequently, to this presente
yeare. These stayes or rootes of time, in Greek are called
Epoche, & in Latine, Aera temporum. And wee shall
take the ground therof for our present reckoning out
of the 28. chap. of the Prophet IEREMY, where he reckoneth
the first yeare of K. Zedekiah (wherein Hananiah
the false Prophet, prophecyed against him) to be the 4.
year of Sabbath or week of years. So that the 4. year of
Zedekiah by his reckoning, was a Sabbatical year, & also
the 11. yeare. Next, we haue to remember, that the coū
               ting
of these Sabbatical yeares, after the Law of Moyses
               
is from the tenth day of the seventh Hebrew Moneth,
called Tishri, which answereth for the most part to our
September; and not from Ianuarie, which beginneth our
yeare: By reason whereof, the one halfe of the Sabbaticall
yeare preceedeth the beginning of our yeare, and
the other halfe, or little more, followeth after. Therefore
it is, that some reckoning with the Iewes, from
Tishri, or September, count a year more then others, that
reckon from Ianuary. But because the count made from
Ianuary, comprehendeth the most parte of the Sabbaticall
yeare, I. with the most number of Christian reckoners
follow it. Thirdly, by this reckoning, wee suppose
the Worlde to haue bene created in this seaventh
Moneth called Tishri, which then probably was the first
Moneth of the yeare: albeit it was institute thereafter,
at the departing of the Israelites out of Aegypt; that Nisan,
               Exod. 1
                     •
                  .
or the Moneth of Abib (aunswering for a greate
parte to our March) should be the first Moneth. Now,
comming to our counte, let vs take the elleventh yeare
of ZEDEKIAH (which being a Sabbaticall yeare, was
called the yeare of desolation, because from it begouth
the captivitie of Babylon) and let it be the ground of our
reckoning. That yeare (I saye) counting back, was the
3360. yeare, from the creation of the world, which being
divided by seavens, hath for the quotient number
(as the Arithmetickes tearme it) 480. Sabbathes of
yeares, & no superabundant od years. And to prooue
historicallie, this to be a just reckoning of the yeares of
the Worlde, by particular count of the Scripture, wee
haue first from the creation,Gene 6. 7. 11. 12. 15. to the floud of NOAH: 1656
yeares. Then from the floud, to the promise made to
ABRAHAM,That to Exod. 12. 367. yeares. And from the departing of the
Israelits out of Aegypt 430.Gal. 3. years. And frō the departing
to the buylding of the Temple by SOLOMON 480,1. King. 4.
               
yeares: And last, from the buylding of the Templ
                  •
               , to
the elleventh yeare of ZEDEKIAH 427. yeares: The
whole summe of these yeares collected, come justly to
3360. years. Now to trie other reckonings, which haue
not respect to Sabbaticall yeares not to bee right, let vs
take for example, the supputation of them, who suppose
ABRAHAM to haue beene borne the 130. yeare
of TERAH his father, (& not as the Scripture speaketh)
in the 70. yeare. By that count we must adde to the former
reckoning, 60. yeares moe. And so the 11. yeare
of ZEDEKIAH, would be from the creation the 3420.
yeare: which yeares, being divided by seavens, there
will remaine after the division, conteining 488. Sabbathes
of yeares, 4. superfluous and odde yeares. And
so aggreeth not that the 11. year of ZEDEKIAH, should
be a Sabbaticall yeare, as I haue proven it to be by reckoning
of the Prophet IEREMY. An other example.
Supposing, as some others do, that the children of Israel
remayned in Aegypt, the whole space of 430. yeares,
whereas by our former count (which may be verifyed
by Scripture) their remayning there, was onely 215.
yeares. By this their rekconing, we must adde other 215
yeares to our former count, and so the 11. yeare of ZEDEKIAH
would be the 3575. yeare, from the beginning
of the world. Nowe dividing the number by seaven,
there will remayne after the division of 510. Sabbathes
of yeares, 5. odde yeares, whereby we may vnderstand
that reckoning not to be right. The like wee may perceiue
in all other reckonings, that bring not the 11.
yeare of ZEDEKIAH, to a juste Sabbaticall yeare, with
out any superfluous odde yeares. And so for the backe
reckoning of yeares, to the beginning of the worlde, &
from it, to the 11, yeare of Zedekiah, we haue not onely
the just reckoning of Sabbaticall yeares, but also the

Scri
                  ••
               ures for our warrant. And for further confirmation,
the agreement of the Sabbatical yeares, & yeares
of Iubilee, with the 6. yeare of Iosua, from the which,
the Israelites made that reckoning as was declared before.
That yeare being from the Creation, the 2499.
yeare. As also, by this our counte, the yeare of the promise
made to Abraham being of the world, the 2023.
wilbe found a Sabbaticall yeare. And likewise the year
of the birth of Moyses, being the 2373. yeare. And this
much for the back-reckoning. Now to count forward,
from this our staie of time, to 
                  〈◊〉
               , the 11. yeare of Zedekiah,
being from the creation, the 3360. yeare: first we
shall adde thereto, the 70. yeares of the captivilie of Babylon
(which we reckon from the 11. yeare of Zedekiah,
being the yeare of desolation) and so there will bee
3430. yeares, from the beginning of the World. The
which yeares, we shall take for our second stay or roote
of reckoning, to wit, the first yeare of the raigne of Cyrus;
wherein libertie was proclaymed to the people to
returne, this 3430. year of the world, divided by seavens
hathin the quotient 490. Sabbathes, or weekes of years,
leaving no odde yeares. And the quotient againe, being
packed by seavens, hath justlie 70. Iubilees of years,
and there remaine no odde yeares, nor oddes weekes
of yeares. So this 3430. yeare of the world is a most per
                  •
               fite
stay of time, and roote or grounde to reckon vpon.
And hath as manie Weekes of yeares, as the 70. weekes
mentioned in Daniel (whereof wee are to speake) haue
of yeares, that is, 490. which laketh not a mysterie.
Then to goe forwarde with this our second staying of
time, I holde with some of the best learned, that from
this first yeare of Cyrus, to the Nativitie of Christ, are
518. yeares, and from the creation of the World, 3948.
yeares, by adding to 3430. these 18 yeares. And so the

yeare immediatly preceeding the birth of our Saviour
Christ, to be a Sabbatical yeare, conteining in the q
                  •
               otient
524. weekes of yeares, and leaving no odde years.
Nowe to prooue the forwarde reckoning to be right,
we shall take two warrandes out of the Scripture, the
one out of the ninth Chapter of Daniel, and the other
out of the 
                  •
               . Chapter of Iohn his Revelation. As to the
former out of Daniel, it was revealed to him by the Angel
that talked with him, that 70. weekes of yeares were
determined, or (as the Hebrew word properlie signifyeth)
decided and cutte in partes concerning Danie
                     •
                  l his
people, and his holy Citie: And thereafter the Angell
divideth these 70. weekes, in seauen weekes, and 62.
weekes, and finallie in one weeke. It is out of question,
that this Prophecy is ment of the returning of the people
of Israell, from the captivitie of Babylon, and of the
building againe of the Cittie of Ierusalem, after the
captivitie, and it cannot bee without a speciall cause,
that the Angel divided the first seven weekes of years,
from the 62. weekes, and finally speaketh, of the laste
weeke of the seaventy, by the self. I therefore thus take
it vp, that as there was foure diverse liberties graunted
to the people, at foure severall times, so this prophecie
hath respect to them all, and divideth the time according
thereto. The first libertie was granted by Cyrus, in
the first yeare of his raigne, over the Babylonians, wher
of mention is made in the first of Ezra. The second libertie
to proceede in building of the Temple (which
worke was impeded a certaine time) was given by Da
                  
                     ••••
                  ,
called Longimanus, whom Ezra in his fourth Chapter
nameth King of Persia. The third and fourth liberties,
were graunted by Artaxerxes the Great, the one
to Ezra, and the other to Nehemia. As wee reade in Ezra
the 7. and in Nehemiah, the 2. Chapter. Nowe where it

is said in Daniel, that from the going out of the Comma
                  •
               dement,
to bring againe the people, and to builde
Ierusalem vnto Messiah the Prince; there should be seaven
weekes, and 62. weekes, and that after 62. weekes,
Messiah should be slaine, &c. Of these weekes, I take the
first seaven to begin immediatly after the first libertie,
graunted by Cyrus to the people to returne, and to end
at the 6. yeare of Darîus, who in the second yeare of his
raigne, gaue new libertie to build the Temple, which
was finished in his sixt yeare. And this is called the going
forth of the commandement, to bring againe the
people, conteining the space of 49, yeares, which make
an Iubilee. The other 62▪ weekes of yeares, I take to beginne
betweene the two liberties graunted by Artaxerxes,
the one to Ezra, in the 7. yeare, and the other to
Nehemia, in the 20. yeare of his raigne: To wit, the beginning
of these 62. weekes, to be the 14. yeare of the
King Artaxerxes, and to ende the 28. yeare of our Saviour
Christ his age. The which two last liberties, concerne
the maintenance of the service of GOD, in the
Temple of Ierusalem, being alreadie builded, and the
building againe of the Cittie and Walles thereof, by
moyen of Nehemiah, and his assisters: For the Angell
maketh a distinction, betweene the bringing againe of
the people, and bulding of the Temple, ascribing there
to the first seaven weekes; and betweene the building
againe of the Cittie, and inhabiting therein, which he
ascribeth to the other 62. weekes. Then, I saye, having
the beginning and endings of these weekes so distinguished▪
there will bee founde an intervall of time betweene
the end of the seaven weekes, and beginning of
the 62. weekes, conteining the space of 63. yeares, that
is, 9. weekes of yeares, the which space and interruption
of yeares, is most probably meante by the Angell,

where hee sayeth, seven weekes, and 62. weekes 
                  •
               ere
decided or cutte in partes, concerning the bringing againe
of the people on the one part, and the building
of the Cittie and Walles thereof, on the other parte: so
that there is a discontinuance of time, betweene the
one and the other. As toward the last weeke of these 70
weekes of Daniel, it is to be reckoned from the 28.
yeare of Christ his age, as may be taken vp by the text,
wherein it is said, that after 62. weekes, Messia
                     •
                   should bee
slayne. And a little thereafter, that hee should confirme
the covenante with manie for one Weeke: and in the
middest of the Weeke, shoulde make the Sacrifice and
oblation to cease. The which thing, Christ accomplished
indeed, by offering his owne precious bodie, in
sacrifice, about the middest, or neere the ende of this
last weeke of Daniel, which endeth in the 35. yeare of
Christ his age. And as to the confirmation of the covenant,
it is meant (no doubt) of the Preaching of the
Gospell, which hee begouth neere the middest of this
last weeke, about the 31. yeare of his age. Now to come
to the yeare before the birth of Christ, we must take off
35. yeares; which will be fiue weekes of yeares: and so
there will remaine of the 70. weekes of Daniel, 65.
weekes, which make 455. yeares, and adde thereto, the
63. yeares, interlaced betweene the 7. weekes, and 62.
weekes: The summe of yeares then, from the first yeare
of Cyrus, or from the captivity to Christ, wil come justlie
to 518, yeares, as I set downe in the beginning of this
reckoning, and adde these 518. yeares, to 3430. yeares,
which was our ground and second staie of time: The
whole summe of yeares, from the creation, to the birth
of Christ, are 3948. yeares. Nowe wee haue further to
verifie this forwarde reckoning, from the captivitie to
Christ to be iuste, and agreeable to the trueth, which I

sha
                  ••
                do, both by reason and count of Sabbatical years,
and yeares of Iubilee; and also by Scripture, and beste
approoved Histories of these times. First, for Sabbaticall
reckoning, it is manifest that Daniel hath respecte
thereto, in the count of his 70, weekes, which make 10
Iubilees of yeares counte. Now it was proven before,
that the 3430. yeare of the Worlde, endeth in an Iubilee,
to witte, counting 70. Iubilees from the beginning,
and 490, Sabbathes of yeares, which is the same number
that Daniell comprehendeth in his 70. weekes, to
wit, 490 single yeares, so that there bene as manie years
in this Periode of Daniell, as were weekes of yeares
from the beginning of the World, to the beginning of
his reckoning. And seeing he counteth by Sabbathes
of yeares and Iubilees, his count vpon 490. yeares, muste
needes follow immediatly the other reckoning of 490
weekes of yeares, from the beginning of the world: &
so must proceed from the 3430. yeare of the World, &
consequently, from the first yeare of Cyrus. Secondly,
we haue to remember the seconde authoritie which I
alleadged out of the 8. Chapter of the Revelation, for
the second warrant of Scripture, to confirme this our
reckoning. In that Chapter, mention is made of seaven
Angels, to whome seaven Trumpets were given by
God to blow, and to declare thinges that were to fall
out in the World thereafter. The blowing of Trumpettes
(being figuratiuely spoken) hath respect to the
blowing of the Trumpets, at the ende of every Iubilee,
as is mentioned in the Law, the 25 
                  •
                Chapter of Leviticus,
whereby it may be gathered, that the distinct times
wherein these Trumpets, figuratiuely were blowen,
(that is, the Angels and Ministers of God declared, his
will concerning the estate of the World, & his Church
therein, after every Trumpet blowing) were yeares of

               Iubilee: For Iubilee taketh the name from Trumpets, &
we know that the Preaching of the word of God is also
figured by blowing of Trumpets, Esay 27. and 58.
And in the beginning of that 8. Chapter of the Revelation,
it is declared, that at the opening of the seaventh
seale of the closed booke of the counsell of GOD, the
first Angell prepared him to blow his Trumpet. Now,
the opening of the seaven seales of the Booke, signifyeth
(as all godly writers expone it) the revelation and
declaration of the hid counsels of GOD, which was
when he sent his beloved Sonne in the worlde, first to
Preach the Gospell by himselfe, and his Apostles, and
thereafter, by the lawfull Pastours and Ministers of his
VVorde, declarers of his holy will vnto the world: the
space of opening of these seales, as they were seaven in
number, so everie Seale opening, comprehendeth the
space of seaven yeares. And the first seavent year of the
first Seale, is the last weeke of the 70. weekes of Daniel,
called, The fulnesse of time by Paule:
               Gal. 4. wherein the Gospell
begouth first to bee preached. From the which
counting by seauens; we finde the opening of the seauent
Seale, to fall vpon the 71, yeare, after the birth of
Christ, as likewise the blowing of the first Trumpet: &
consequently, the 70. yeare, to compleate a Iubilee of
yeares: whereanent, who would know further, let them
reade that learned and divine worke of IOHN NAPER,
in the exposition of the Revelation, the 5. 6. 7. 8. & 9. propositions.
Now having found the 70. yeare of Christe,
to be the 49. and last yeare of Iubilee: let vs count backe
from the 71. yeare of Christ, to the first yeare of Cyrus,
by Iubilees, and we shall finde by our former reckoning,
the space of 588. yeares, which make 12. Iubilees
compleete, and leaue no odde yeares. For the 70. weeks
of Daniel, make ten Iubilees, and the 63. yeares interjected

betweene the 7. weekes, and 62. weekes, together
with 35. years, that are betweene the end of the weekes
of Daniel, & the 71. year of Christ, being joyned together,
mak
                  •
                98. years, & two just Iubilees. So that they ar 12
Iubilees in the whole, frō the 3430. year of the world, to
the 71. yeare of Christ. And from the beginning of the
VVorlde, to that 71. yeare 82. Iubilees: Yet further to
make this reckoning good by Histories of the time: we
finde by count of the Kings of the Persian and Babylonian
Monarchie, by Megasthenes (corruptly called Metasihenes)
the Persian Historiographer, whervnto Philo the
the Iewe, in his Chronologie aggreeth, counting by
the yeares of the Hie-Priestes, and governours of the
house of David, to witte, from Iehosua the Hie-Priest, &
Zorobabel Prince of Iuda, and first Governour after the
Captivitie; that betweene the first yeare of Cyrus, and
the first yeare of Alexander the Great, conquerour of
the Persian and Babylonian Empire, were 191. yeares:
VVhereof, 49. yeares are reckoned from the first of Cyrus,
to the 6. yeare of Darîus Long
                     •
                  manus, who was the
seconde that gaue libertie to build the Temple, as was
declared of before: For Cyrus raigned 22. yeares, Assu
                     •
                  
                  rus
Pris
                     •
                  us 20. yeares. Then there was the inter-reigne
of one yeare: Then adde to those 6. yeares of Darîus,
they make vp these 49. yeares. And from the 6. yeare of
Darîus Longimanus, to the 14. of Great Artaxerxes, called
Mnemon, are 63. yeares: thus reckoned. Darîus reigned
yet 31. yeares, Darîus Nothus 19. yeares, adde 13. of
Artaxerxes, the summe is 63. years. And from Cyrus, 12
yeares. So there resteth, from the 13. of Artaxerxes, to
Alexander, 79. yeares thus reckoned. Artaxerxes, yet
raigned 42. yeares, Artaxerxes Ochus 26. A
                     •
                  ses 4. and Darîus
the last, vanquished by Alexander, 6. yeares. The
summe is 79. yeares completing the 191. yeares before

mentioned. Now least any should derogate the authoritie
of Megasthenes and Philo, in counting of these
yeares of the Persian Monarchie: I will affirme (for my
part) them to be most authentick of all that I haue read,
whatsoever be said against them. And that they are to
be prefer
                  •
               ed to all the Greeke authors, who are of light
credite, and full of Fables; as I intende to declare at
large, in my more ample discourse. For as to Combyses,
whom they make one of the Persian Monarches, if wee
reade diligentlie the latter parte of the 10. Chapter of
Daniel, wee shall finde him to haue bene Prince of Persia
onlie, who ruled that Kingdome in place of his father
Cyrus, hee being occupyed in the Scythian warres.
And that this Cambyses was an enemie to the Church
of God: And as for Xerxes, whom they count for an other,
albeit hee invade Grecia, with an huge armie, yet
we reade never that he did raigne in Babylon, but in Persia,
in the daies of Darîus Longimanus. It resteth then, to
go forwarde, with the yeares betwene Alexander and
Christ: And by our counte, they must be 327. yeares,
which are to be reckoned after this manner. From the
beginning of the Empire of Alexander in Asia, after that
hee vanquished Darîus, to the beginning of the Kingdome
of the Greekes, by Seleucus Nicanor, after the reckoning
of the Iews, are 18. years, as Iosephus Scaliger proveth
in his fifth booke, De emendatione temporum. And
from the beginning of the kingdome of the Greekes,
to the Macchabees, are 145. years, as we haue in the first
book of the Macchabees, the secōd Chapter. And the
Macchabes ruled, as witnesseth Iosephus, in his Antiquities
127. years. And after them, King Her
                     •
                  de raigneth 
                  •
               7.
yeares complete, neare the end of whose raigne, Christ
was borne. Ioyne those yeares together, and they will
make vp, from the beginning of the Empire of Alexander
               
to Christ, just 327. yeares: And adding thereto, 191.
yeares, betweene Cyrus and Alexander, the summe wil
be 518. yeares, according to our first counte. The same
may be prooven by the Astronomicall calculation of
Piolemee, who in the ende of his thirde Book, reckoueth
from the decease of Alexander, vnto the raigne of Augustus
Caesar 294. yeares. And hee counted the beginning
of Augustus his raigne, from the time that hee begouth
to raigne himselfe alone, after his victorie against
Antonius: who slew himself in Alexādria, So we
must separate the yeares that Augustus ruled with Antonius,
from the reste of his Empire, which were fourteene
yeares, as Iosephus and the Romane Histories beare
record
                  •
                and hee raigned 56. yeares. Nowe Christ was
borne in the 42. year of his raigne: So joyning 27 years
of the Empire of Augustus, and 6. yeare of Alexander, his
Empire, to the 294. mentioned by Ptolemee: The sūme
from the beginning of Alexander to Christ, will be 327.
yeares, as of before. I haue insisted the longer vpon this
reckoning, because of the greate varietie amongst writers,
namely, concerning the Monarchie of the Persianes
and Kings thereof: Alwaise I thinke, I haue proven
sufficientlie our reckoning by Sabbatical yeares, &
yeares of Iubilee to bee juste: yet there remayneth one
scruple;Lib. 4. 
                     •
                   26 wher as Iosephus writeth in his Antiquities, that
that King Herode besieged Ierusalem in the third year
of his raigne, and that then there was a great scarsitie of
victualles, because of the Sabbaticall yeare: which appeareth
not to stande with our counte, to make the 37.
yeare of Herode, to be a Sabbaticall yearte: But we muste
vnderstande, that Iosephus meaneth not that the third
yeare of Herode was a Sabbaticall yeare, but the second
yeare which preceeded, which made the scarsity in the
third yeare following. So our counth oldeth just, that

the 
                  •
               7. yeare of Herode, was a Sabbaticall yeare; at the
end whereof, Christ was borne. For Herode lived till about
the Passeover therafter, making the beginning of
his reigne, to haue bene in Ianuarie, when he was made
King at Rome. To this also aggreeth the counte of the
great Cycle of the Iewes, who reckon the yeare that our
Saviour Christ was borne, to haue bin the first of their
Semitah, that is, of the Sabbaticall week. Now then wee
haue the just reckoning of the yeares of the VVorld
vnto Christ, to be 3948. yeares. And this yeare of Christ
1600. to be from the beginning, the 5548. yeares. In the
which counte of yeares (albeit by an other manner of
reckoning) I agree with the learned Iosephus Scaliger, &
some others more auncient then he. And as to others, I
finde onely Erasmus Reynoldus, Peucerus and P. Crusius,
with some others that follow their reckoning, to haue
had some apparant respecte to the Sabbaticall yeares,
counting to Christ, 3962. yeares, but they will bee two
weekes of yeares, over our calculation, and so will not
agree in the yeares of Iubilee. Others, whosoever they
be, that holde no counte of the Sabbaticall yeares, are
further out of the way, as they that reckone to the birth
of Christ, 3944. yeares, leaue odde after division by seavens,
three yeares. And likewise they that count 3974.
years. And so is to be seene in others, who commonlie
are further from the marke, in not following the direction
of Sabbaticall yeares, which being thus justlie taken
vp, make a stronge bulwarke against the obstinate
Iewes. For it being knowen by the weekes of Daniel,
that the just count therof, endeth about the time when
Christ suffered vpon the Croce, they are convict, will
they, or will they not to know, that he is, of whome the
Angell speaketh vnto Daniel, who was appoynted of
God his Father, (as the text beareth) to finish iniqui
                  •••
               ,

to seale vpsinnes, and reconcile wickednesse, and to
seale vp visiones and prophecies, bringing in ever lasting
righteousnesse; and consequentlie, he is the moste
holie anoynted, and that true Me
                     •
                  ias promised to their
fathers. And that in vaine that miserable Nation so manie
hundreth yeares looketh for an other.
         
         
            SECOND PROPOSITION.
            
               That this present yeare of Christ, 1600, by right reckoning, is
neither a Sabbaticall yeare, nor yet a yeare of Iubilee. And
that the true Iubilee of Christians, is alreadie accomplished:
With a detection of the abuse of the counter faited Iubilees
holden at Rome.
            
            NOt without weighty causes, haue I so long insisted
vpon Sabbaticall reckoning of yeares: For
thereby more sure waie is found out, to come to the
right acoūt of years, & progres of times, frō the beginning
of the worlde, vnto the last decaying age thereof,
then by anie other common maner of reckoning. And
besides that, it is most facile and easie. And we knowe
there is nothing more necessarie for the knowledge of
Histories, and divers estates of the Worlde, nor the
right reckoning of yeares and times, wherein the same
with the circumstances thereof fell out, that thereby
men may be led to vnderstand the antiquitie of everie
thing; as also by conferring time with time, may know
the differēce of the maners of men, of one age from an
other: without the which, not onelie great darknes and
obscuritie, both in civill governement and actiones of
mens liues, and in things concerning the estate of religion
may ensue. And that which is worse, manie may
fall in that inconvenient, wherin Aristotle, & the Epicurians
haue fallen. For through ignorance of the antiquitie

of times, hee esteemed the world to haue bene
from all eternitie, and these (to witte, the Epicutians)
counted the nature of all things to haue bin by chance,
and by, I wote not what, a concurrence of motes and
invisible bodies. This reckoning also, resolveth manie
doubtes, wherein writers are involved, that haue no
regarde thereto, and oft-times count by gesse, especiallie
in reckoning of yeares, from the captivitie of Babylon,
to Christ: and the right beginning and ending of
the weekes of Daniel, whereinto many learned men
haue bene greatly troubled; laboring by a just count to
agree the Histories of times there with: which cannot
be, vnlesse there be certaine weekes of yeares, interjected
betweene the beginning and ende thereof. And
thirdly, I haue vsed this kinde of Sabbatical reckoning,
becaus one of the chief purposes, that presenttie I haue
in hand, is to discover the vanitie and ignorance of the
Papisticall reckoners, concerning their counterfaited
yeares of Iubilee, by a preposterous imitation of the law
of Moyses. For the which cause, it is expedient to haue
the exact knowledge of Sabbaticall years: For by them
the yeares of Iubilee are reckoned and found out. For
thus layeth Moys
                     •
                  s: Thou shalt also number vnto thee seaven
Sabbathes of yeares, even seven times seaven yeares:
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   and
the space of seaven Sabbathes of yeares, will be vnto thee nine
and fourtie yeare. Then thou shalt cause to blowe the Trumpet
of the Iubilee, in the tenth day of the seventh Moneth:
To witte, in the beginning of the fiftieth yeare, which
was commanded to be hallowed, and to be a yeare of
Iubile
                     •
                  
                vnto the people: But is not so to bee vnderstood,
that everie Iubilee conteined full fiftie yeares, but
that fiftie yeare wherein the Iubilee was proclaymed,
was also the first yeare of the next Iubilee; for otherwise
the reckoning by weekes of yeares, should haue bene

confounded, and could not bee holden in just counte;
which is contrary to the minde of the Law-giver. And
yet the fiftieth yeare, by a common Phrase of speaking,
was called the yeare of Iubilee. As the Olympiades of
Greece, albeit they conteined but the space of foure
yeares, are called by Pindarus, and other Poets, the spectacles
or vassallages of fiue yeares, because they returned
everie fift yeare; And we commonly call the space
of an week, eight daies, albeit it conteineth but seaven.
So it is evident, that the right count of Iubilees, proceedeth
from everie 49. to other 49. yeares. Now let vs
considder the bastard Iubilees, begotten and feyned by
the Popes of Rome, wherevnto they haue no respecte
to Sabbaticall yeares, whereof Iubilees (as the law required)
are made vp. But Pope BONIFACE, the S. Pope of
that name, the first father and inventer thereof, in the
yeare of Christ, 1300. tooke the whole compleit number
of everie hundreth yeare, conteining twise fiftie,
for his Iubilee. And CLEMENT the 6. reduced the same
to everie fiftie yeare compleete. And after him, PAVLE
the 2. to everie 25. yeare. And finallie, IVLIVS the 2. to
everie tenth yeare. Ever diminishing the yeares; to augment
their Antichristian superstition, and the vent of
their vngodlie wares. So vnstable and changeable is the
estate of that vsurped Kingdome. This then is the
first errour of those counterfaited Iubilees, concerning
the times of the appoyntment thereof: That they are
nothing like in reckoning, to the Iubilees of the Lawe,
which those Apish juglares pretend to imitate. And as
concerning this 1600. yeare, from the Nativitie of
Christ, whether wee count by the number & date of
these yeares, or by the yeares from the beginning of
the Worlde, it will neither be found a Sabbatical year,
nor yet a year of Iubilee. For dividing 1600. by seavens,

it leaveth 4. odde yeares remaining ouer 228. weeks of
yeares: And dividing againe this quotient by 7. it leaveth
4. od weeks of years, aboue and attour 32. Iubilees.
The like may be also found, if we shal divide the whole
yeares from the creation of the world, to this present.
For 5548. being parted by seavens, leaveth four odde
yeares. And the quotient againe, which is, 792. being
divided by seavens, after 113. Iubilees, leaveth one od
weeke of yeares. And so the appoynted times, of these
new-invented Iubilees, are no-wise rightlie reckoned
to counterfaite the Iubilees of the Law. The second &
greater errour is, that they make their reckoning from
a wrong ground, to wit, from the Nativitie of Christ:
wheras, if any such reckoning were to be made, it shuld
be taken from the yeare of the suffring & death of our
Saviour Christ; to the which, Daniel reckoneth his Sabbaticall
yeares. For thereby Christ accomplished the
true Iubilee, putting ende to all the preceeding figuratiue
Iubilees, & purchasing vnto the faithful ful libertie
and remission, from the Spirituall debt of sinne, which
was signified by the freedome and libertie, graunted
by the Iubilees of the Lawe. And the Popes pretend to
doe the like, by their blasphemous indulgences and
Pardones; which is the thirde and worst errour of all:
So that others might be borne with, if this followed
not. But when the substance, the Satanicall inuention,
and false ground, wherevpon these Iubilees are set vp,
is truly considdered: There is no-well instructed Christian
hart, but must needes abhorre the impietie and abuse
thereof. And first let vs make a conference betweene
these & the olde Iubilees of the Iewes. The year
of Iubilee of the Iewes, was called the yeare of remission,
because in it, all debtes were remitted, and the
Landes that were solde, returned to their former owners.

These thinges had the expresse commandement
of God for their warrant. The Papisticall Iubilees haue
no ground of the word of God, but haue bene latelie
invented, but 300. yeares agoe; by Pope BONIFACE
the 8. a man of extreame arrogancie and crueltie, as a
tryumphe of his pride, when the Popedome was at the
hight of tyrannie. This was also he, that set out the Sext
booke of Decretales of the Cannon law: and as is testify
ed in his life, regisirate in the same booke, he obtayned
the Papacie, by wicked deceit and circumvention of
one CELESTINE a simple man. The pretence of this
BONIFACE, in the first institution of his Iubilee, was vnder
colour to dispense his Pardones; but indeede, to
make manie people resort to Rome, & Princes & Great
men, to adore the beast, and kisse his filthy feete. For
it is reported in the Historie, that there were gathered
thereby vnto Rome, such a multitude of people, that
hardly might men passe through the Cittie, and ruipes
thereof, albeit being most large. The Iubilees also in the
policie of the people of Israel, were institut for weightie
causes, and for a great benefite: For besides that,
they figured our Spirituall libertie, which we haue by
Christ, and were an instigation to the people more diligently
to Sanctifie their Sabbathes; by them also the
fieldes and possessiones of everie man, were reserved
to their heires: The licencious libertie of prodigall sellers,
and the avarice of greedie buyars was restrayned,
because they behooved to restore that which they had
bought, at the yeare of Iubilee. The Papistical Iubilees, to
the contrarie are institute, for no good cause, but superstitiouslie,
to maintaine the pride and avarice o
                  •
                the insatiable
Courte, and corrupt Church of Rome, and to
cause men exhaust and wast their substance, who vainely
mak long voyages to Rome to see that Idole the Pope

false hope of remission, by his Indulgences; albeit they
never learne to mortifie the sinfull lustes of the flesh,
that they may liue a licenceous life, without controlment:
And so ever to proceede from worse to worse.
For as the profane Poet sayeth, Omnes licentia deteriores
sumus: Over-great libertie and licence, maketh vs all
to become worse and worse. Now where some of his
Sophistes saye, that these are onely Canonicall paines
inflicted by men, that he remitteth by his Indulgences:
His owne Canons testifie the contrary, which speake
generally of the remission of all sinnes, and temporall
paines or punishments due for sinne: Ex plenitudino potestatis,
that is, fulnes of power, which the Pope presumpteously
arrogateth to himselfe. And supposing
these Indulgences were extended onely to Canonical
paines, or satisfactions appoynted by men; what absurditie
is it, to graunt the same fully and indifferently
to all persones, by him who never knew the persones,
for the most part to whom they are graunted, nor the
qualities of their offences, nor the quantitie or causes
of their Injunctions, les nor more, to whom he pretēds
alwaies falsely to giue full remission: neither suffiseth
it to say, the Papale indulgences are given to none but
to them that are truely penitent, and confesse their sins.
For by that argument, the same might bene given to
Iudas the traytour, of whom our Saviour sayeth, It had
bene good for him, he had neuer bene borne. For it cannot
be denyed but he was truly penitent, and made publick
confession of his sinne: Yea, and more over, made Papistical
satisfaction therefore; returning againe the money
which he had wrongeouslie received. And for the
more sure declaration of his repen
                  •
               ance, he
                  •
                finally
hanged himselfe: But because he had no grace to turne
to God by true faith, to seek mercie, and fi
                  •
               mly beleeue

to obtaine it for Christ his sake: His repentance availed
not. Like as there will be many other desperates, that
wil repent & confesse their faultes, but haue no grace
to seek mercie at Gods hand, who hath only power to
giue it, with true fayth to obtaine the same. Besides all
this, there is a greater impietie (if greater may be) in
these Antichristian Indulgences, whereby this man of
sinne pretendeth, to take away all corrections for sinne,
not onely in the name of Christ and by his blood (the
which,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                as Iohn testifieth, purgeth vs from all sinne) but
also in the name and merites of Peter, Paule, and other
Martyrs and Saintes; For so speaketh his Canon lawe:
That to the heape of the Thesaurie of Christes bloud,
the merites of the blessed Virgine Marie, and of all the
elect:
                  C. V
                        •
                     ige. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   before ci
                  
                     •
                  ed. from the first just man, to the last, are knowen to
be valiable. And what can be spoken to greater derogation,
of the precious bloud & merites of Iesus Christ,
then to mingle therewith, the blood and merites of
creatures, & sinful persons, (For the most iust man falleth
seven times a day, as the Psalmist testifieth) ascribing a
part of our salvation, to them who had no temission of
their owne sinnes, but by the bloud of Christ onelie:
Whereto should I further insist, in refelling these and
the like blasphemies against the croce of Christ, which
be knowen well ynough, to all them that haue eares to
heare the true preaching of his Gospell: Seeing the
Popes officiares themselues, who make vente of his
Pardones at Rome, and make their gaines in sheepeskinnes,
and peeces of plombe appended thereto, taunt
and mocke the receivers of them, holding them for verie
fooles, as they are indeed. For who is indued with
natural iudgement, that seeth not, that these counterfaited
Indulgences, serue for no other thing, but to
mocke and deceiue the people, to make marchandise of

their soules, & to bring in money to those vagabound
pyke-parles,C Quemadmodum vb. S. called in their law, Questores indulgentiarum,
that is, Collectours of the money of these Indulgences.
What madde stupidity & foolishnes is it then,
in this cleare light of Christs Gospel, to men to hazard
themselues with great daungers, losse of time, and expenses,
to raike to Rome, either to behold, or to be participant
of these vnworthy wares: For if they do it of
blinde zeale, beleeving them to be of any availe, they
are miserably deceived, to the great hurt of their soules
health. And if they do it onely of curiosity, to see such
things as they never saw before; they therein declare
the lightnesse and vaine transportation of their minds,
not being selted in the true knowledge and feare of
God. For as the common Proverbe sayeth, there is neither
man nor horse, that vseth to be better of the passing
to Rome: And so is seene indeede of many of them
that returne from thence.
         
         
            THIRD PROPOSITION.
            
               That the Iubilee of the Papisticall Romanistes, neither doth
rightly counterfaile the Iewes, neither the secular yeares
of the auncient Romanes. And of diverse manners of
reckoning the ages of the Worlde, and of mens liues: And
that reckoning by hundreths, wee are now in the fiftie sixe
age.
            
            AS The papall religion in manie things is patched
and made vp, partly of the old rites and ceremonies
of the Iewes, and partely of the superstition of the
Gentiles, so counterfaite they by imitation, sometime
the one, and sometime the other; and when they lacke
the one, they take the other for their ground. So it is
concerning their Iubilees, whereof I haue bene hitherto
speaking: and haue proven already, that their imitation

in times, is not according to the institution of
Gods lawe, promulgate by Moyses. Nowe then they
being put from that grounde, may alleadge, that they
having no necessitie to obserue Moyses law in al poynts,
haue appoynted thē 
               Iubilees, after imitation of their ancient
Romanes (whose degenerate posteritie they are) to
wit, that as they had their stages or playes, which they
call their seculare solemnities, every hundreth yeare,
once in memory of the antiquitie of their cittie: where
in it was proclaymed, by founde of Trumpet, that the
people of Rome, should see such pompes and guises, as
no man that was then living, ever sawe before, neither
should see thereafter. So Pope BONIFACE the eight,
did institute his Iubilees, to be holden every hundreth
yeare, with solemne Proclamation of his Pardones.
Now graunting this to be true, as their ground is vaine
and profane, so whatsoever is builded thereupon. And
yet let vs see how happely and circumspectly these Romanistes
imitate the auncient Romanes: supposing that
they celebrate their secular solemnities, at the precise
end and periode of every hundreth yeare. This their
ground (I say) is false: For it was the space of an hundreth
and ten yeares, betweene every one of the seculare
solemnities, according to the old institution, thereof,
which 110. yeares were composed, of twenty two
of their Lustra, wherein they did lustrate and muster
their people: every Lustrum conteining the space of
fiue years, which being 22. make eleven times ten year:
Whereof Horace the Poet, beareth witnesse in his song
or ode intituled Carmen seculare, in these verses:
            
               Certus vndenos d
                     •
                  cies per annos,
               Orbis vt cantus referatque ludos.
            
            The sense is.
            
               That certaine circula
                     •
                  y space,
               Ten times elleven yeares in a race,
               
                  
Must bring againe the songs and Playes,
               At Rome of secular yeares and dayes.
            
            So the Papisticall Romanistes, are wrong wrested
in their reckoning in this also. Now it is trueth, that albeit
this secular Periode of time, conteining the circulare
course of an hundreth years, was most diligentlie
observed by the Romanes, for diverse causes. Yet we
notwithstanding, for the common reckoning of an
age, may well take the precise number of an hundreth
yeares: Because it is commonly the longest course of
mans life in our dayes. And because I am entred in to
make mention of ages, I thinke it good, to discourse a
little vpon the ages of the World, and likewise of mens
liues. And to declare how many manner of waies the
same are taken: and of the diverse reckoning thereof.
For the which we haue to vnderstand, that as al things
in this visible world, haue a certaine age and continuance
of time, so the Worlde it selfe hath the owne age:
which being taken generally, signifyeth, the whole
space of the durance and continuance thereof. Otherwise
the age of the Worlde, betokeneth the decaying
parte thereof, as the eeld or age of a man, is called the
latter pa
                  •
               te of his life. And indeed it may well be saide
now, that we become to the decaying parte, and latter
age of the World.1, Cor. 10. For (as the Apostle sayeth) We are
they vpon whom the ends of the World are come.
               1. Tim. 4. And in an
other place, hee calleth these our dayes, the latter times.
Now the age of the Worlde, taken in the former generall
signification, is divided againe in diverse particular
ages, and that by sundrie manners of reckoning: For
some distribute the whole ages of the World in three
partes: ascribing to everie age 2000. yeares: Which
commeth of that common opinion, holden of maine,

and recited, for the saying of the house of Elias (not
that great Prophet Elias, but a certaine Rabbin of the
Iewes so named) that the World should stande 6000.
years, and thereafter should be dissolved. Of the which
they count, 2000, yeare before the law (called the voyd
time) 2000. vnder the law, & 2000. vnder Christ, which
shalbe shortned, for the sinnes of the world, which are
many. There be divers learned and godly fathers of
this opinion: supposing, that as the worlde, with all
things therein conteined, was created in sixe dayes, so
the same should endure 6000. years, taking each thousand
yeare for a day, as it is taken in the second Epistle
of Peter, where he sayeth, That one day before the Lorde, is
as a thousand yeares,
                     
                        •
                     . Pet. 3. and a thousand yeares as one day: And
amongst others, Augustine writing of these ages, & dividing
them in six, reckoneth the first age to be frō 
               Adam,
to Noah: The 2. from Noah to Abraham: The 3 from
Abraham to David: The 4. from David to the captivity
of Babilon: The fifth, from the captivitie to Christ: The
sixt and last, vnder the Kingdome of Christ, vnto the
end of the World. But this division not to be equall, it
may be evident, by the supputation of yeares, conteined
in the first proposition, and namely, of the last age
vnder Christ, which now hath already indured sixteen
hundreth yeares; and it is not certaine how long the
same shall yet further continue. Albeit by all probable
conjectures, the world now appeareth to draw neare
an end. Alwaies, I thinke it not altogether to be resused,
that is alleaged of the Iewes, of this their Doctor Elias,
who-so-ever hee was. For it lacketh not a reason,
counting 2000. years before the law. For indeed, from
the beginning vnto Abraham, with whom the first covenant
was made, and to whom the Law of circumcision
was given, wee finde to be about the space of 2000.

yeares. And likewise vnder the law to Christ, about other
2000. yeares. And now they lack but 452. yeares of
the last 2000. vnder Christ. Therefore this authority
being brought forth by the Iewes themselues, maketh
much against them, who will not yet acknowledge the
true Messias: seeing they haue wayted in vaine for an
other Christ; about sixteen hūdreth years, aboue their
ownereckoning. Others there be, that distribute the ages
of the world in foure, according to the nature of
four kindes of mettalles. The first they call the golden
age, or Golden world, which was the most auncient &
best of all; like as Gold is the chiefe amongst mettalles.
The second, is next best, the silver age: The third, the
age of brasse, and the fourth yron, declyning ay, from
better to worse, as the world doth indeed. Of this division
of ages, the Poets oftentimes make mention.
And the originall thereof, appeareth well to haue bene
taken from the Prophecie of Daniel, who in exponing
the dreame of Nebuchadnetzar,
               Da
                     ••
                  . 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                speaketh of that greate
Image, representing the foure chiefe Monarchies of
the worlde, whereof the head was of Gold, signifying
the Kingdome of the BABYLONIANS: The armes
of silver, figuring the Monarchie of the Medes and Persians:
the wombe and sides being of Brasse, betokeneth
the Macedonian Monarchie, obtayned by great Alexander:
The legges of Yron, and feete partely of Yron,
partely of clay, that of the Romanes or the feete, as others,
interprete the Kingdome of the Greekes, begun
by Seleucus, which being strong as yron, and noysome
against the people of God, become thereafter, mingled
with clay, declyning to weaknesse and being 
                  〈◊〉
               
in the selfe. And finally, the Kingdome of Christ did
rvse, wholy after destruction of all those Kingdom
                  •
               s,
shall endure for ever, as at more length is specified in

that prophecie. VVho would know more of the foure
ages, represented by these foure metalles, may reade aboundantly
in Hesiodus and others Poets, Others count
the ages of the VVorld by seavens, after the number
of seaven Planets, having a certaine periode and revolution
amongst themselues, whereof wee are to speake
more in an other place. There bee others also, that distinguishe
the ages of the worlde, by the ages of men
                  •
               
And sundry others vse diverse other distributiones of
the ages and times of the worlde, whereupon I wil not
now insist. Alwaies I think the most facill & common
division of the ages of the worlde, is by thousandes,
counting in the whole sex, according to the analogy of
the sex dayes of creation. For to count by the liues &
ages of men, hath rather a peculiar respect to the generationes
of men, then to the time of the continuance
of the world. So it is more proper to count the ages of
the world by thousands, because of the long continuance
thereof, in respect there was never no man that lived
out compleitly a thousand years. But this divisiō of
the ages of the worlde by thousandes, would appeare
more proper, if it were made by equall division of
thousandes, or at the leaste, approaching neare to an equalitie,
then as it is commonly parted by greate inequalitie,
as was before recited out of Augustine. There
fore it may be divided after this maner: The first thousand
yeare, counted from the creation; to Noah, albeit
it conteineth 56. yeares more. The second millenarie,
from the birth of Noah, to the calling of Abraham, albei
                  •
               
there be twenty three more. The third milenary, from
Abraham his calling, to the building of the Temple
by Solomon, albeit they be 67. yeares lesse. The fourth
millenarie, from the Temple building to Christ, albeit
there be fiftie two years lesse. The fift millenarie, from
firist his nativitie extendeth it self to his 1052. year
                  •
                but

but I reckon the same to the 1000. yeares, when the
Antichristian Papale kingdome, did vtter the selfe in
the person of SYLVESTER the second, who by art Magick,
and divelrie, made himself to be promoted Pope
The Image of the Romaine Empire, being translated
a little before, by Otho the Third, vnto the Germanes.
The sixt millenary, whereinto now we are, shal take
end, when God pleaseth, if so be the worlde shall continue
to the end thereof. The ages of the world being
thus taken vp by thousands, wee may call the first age,
The old age, or the Golden, because in it the worlde
was governed in innocencie, in respect of the ages
following, vnder Saturne, as the Poets recorde. And if
we giue credite to the Astrologes, Saturne is the Planete
of quietnesse and peace: But this age had the ende
or the evening, thereof declining to darknesse, when
the seede of the godly, mingled themselue with the vngodly,
and al kinde of wickednesse begouth to abound
before the floud. The second age or millenarie, may be
called the renewed age of the world, and the poeticall
silver age, worse then the first, but better then others
that followed; wherein, after the destruction of mankinde,
by that fearefull floud, the world was renewed
and inhabite againe by Noah, and his sonnes; and succession,
vnder the benevolent Planete Iupiter; but the
same turned to a greate darknesse in the ende or evening
thereof, when the whole posterity of Noah, for
the most parte, declyned to Idolatrie, Nembroth begouth
to vsurpe dominion over others, and to be the
founder of the first tyranny in the worlde. The thirde
millenarie or age, may be tearmed the age of the Law,
or poetically, the brasen age: Because in it God seperated
Abraham from the Idolaters, and gaue to him
and his posterity, his Oracles, and a written Lawe,

whereby they should knowe howe to serue him, and
write his commandements in Tables of stone, hard as
brasse, to declare the heard harts of the people of those
dayes. The fourth age or millenary, we may call the age
of the foure Monarchies, and the Poeticall yron age,
because in it were al the foure Monarchies, succeeding
one after an other. And then Martiall armour made of
yron, troubled the whole world, & subdued it to those
impotent dominators. The fift millenarie or age, we
call the age of Christ, and the returning of the golden
world againe. For in it not onely externall, peace was
restored to the world, vnder Augustus Caesar, but also
peace from heaven, to the conscience and soules of
men; as the Angels in the Nativity of Christ did declare:
Whereof, Virgile the Poet also maketh mention,
in citing the Oracles of Sibylla, (which he vnderstandeth
not) in his foure Eclogue. The sixt and last age, we
may call the age of Antichrist and his kingdome. For
in it both, Gog and Magog is hid and open Antichristian
enemie, to witte, the Pope, and Mahomet, with their
wicked lawes, chiefely haue troubled the worlde, and
true professors of Christ, his true religion: But because
these are kingdomes of darknesse, and not of light, after
the darknesse thereof. God in his mercie hath made the
light of his Gospel, as the Morning star to shine in our
hearts, by which this darknesse is expelled. But the vnbeleevers
hearts are more and more darckned, till the
just judge shall come and put an end to all darknesse,
whose comming we beseech the Lorde, in his greate
mercie to hasten. As to insist longer vppon these ages,
of the world, or the allegorical analogie thereof, with
the sixe dayes of Creation: I think it not expedient, let
them that delite therein, reade others, that haue discoursed
thervpon. This much then for the ages of the

world. As to the ages of mens liues, they are also diversly
reckoned. For some there be that take the fourth part
of an hundreth yeare, which is, twenty fiue yeares only
for a mans age; and some take thirtie, because man
of that age, is able to become a father: And they refer
                  ••
               e
that which Homer the Poet speaketh,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                of the age of N
                     •
                  
                  stor
that he attayned to three ages, to be vnderstood of
thrise thirtie yeares. But the Poet Ovid, vnderstandeth
that place of Homer otherwise, to witt, of three hundreth
yeares: saying in the person of Nestor, VIXI
               
                  Annos bis centum, nunc tertiae viu
                        •
                     tur aetas.
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                  
                  Two hundreth yeares I haue over-past,
                  Now the third age my life doth last.
               
            
            As indeed it is most probable, to haue bene so ment
by Homer. For in those dayes it was no rare thing to see
men liue thrise thirtie yeares. Others they be, that distribute
the ages according to mens life-times, by seavens;
but after divers manners. For in the 90. Psalme,
whereof the title is ascribed to Moyses, the common
age of mans life is counted to be ten-times seaven, that
is, seaventy yeares. And the cause why the ages be reckoned
by seavens, is, by reason that seaven is a perfite
number, whereof hath bene spoken largely of before:
And commonly, every seaventh yeare, some notable
change or accident falleth out in mans life: And namely,
at the age of nine times seaven, which make, threescore
three yeares, called the Climacterick yeare, which
many counte for a fatall yeare, and tearme of mans life
in our dayes. Others (as Hippocrates) count seaven-times
seaven yeares, for a mans age, which maketh 49. yeares,
conforme to the Iubilee of the Iewes. Yet notwithstanding,
these other reckonings, if we shall compare the
ages of the world, with the longest age of mans life, the
most perfite and convenient reckoning, is to counte

by hundreths: ascribing 100. yeare in a full and perfite
number to every age: for that is the farthest tearme of
mans life, that we can now reckon to. Albeit a few men
in some cuntries liue longer: And it appeareth well to
be so taken in the Scripture. For (as it is written in Geneses)
when God shewed vnto Abraham by Orackle,
That his seede should be a stranger in a Land that was not
their owne:
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 15. The space of four hundreth yeares thereafter,
he exponeth it of foure Generationes, saying, In the
fourth Geneneration they shall returne thither againe: where
he taketh foure generationes, for foure ages. The same
may be approoven, by that which was cited out of
Homer, concerning Nestor. So holding vs at this division
of ages by hundreths, there will be from the beginning
of the World of those ages, now cōpleetly passed
by our reckoning, before this 1600. yeare of Christ, fiftie
hundreth yeares, which make 55. ages: And we are
now in the 56. age, and at the 48. yeare thereof: which
may well be called, an age of the decaying and fading
worlde, not onely because it appeareth to approche
neere vnto the worlds end, but also by reason greater
mutatiōs, & alteratiōs are likely to fal out therein, both
in the visible heavens, the earth, & other elements, then
in other ages before: whereof I intend to speake more
largely afterward. But to intreat of particular accidents
that fel out in the former ages, it pertayneth to a more
large discourse.
         
         
            FOVRTH PROPOSITION.
            
               That in our time, the signes and revolutions of the heauen,
are changed and remooved from the olde accustomed places:
And therefore the vulgar Prognosticator
                     •
                  , are in an
error: And of the way to reforme the same.
            
            LIke as I haue travelled heretofore, by Sabbaticall
reckoning to deduce & finde out the perfite count

of the yeares of the world, how long it hath continued
vnto this instant 1600. yeare of Christ: And there with
to discover the erroneous reckoning of the Papisticall
Iubilees, and their impieties: So now might I enter into
an other kinde of reckoning, which is called Astronomicall,
gathered by the course and revolutiones of the
Heaven; the Sunne, the Moone, and the Starres: For as
the Sabbaticall reckoning, (whereof I haue spoken)
hath the grounde out of the Scriptures, and worde of
God; So this Astronomicall count, hath also the original
out of the same. And as thereckoning of Sabbathes
and Sabba
                  •
               icall yeares, beginneth at the seaventh daye
of creation, when God rested from all his workes; so
this Astronomical calculation, hath the beginning frō
the 4. day of creation, when as God made those heavenly
lights, and placed them in the lyft of heaven: not
only for that cause, that they should shine & giue light
vpon the earth, separating the day from the night
                  •
                but
also to be for signes and for seasons of times, dayes, and
yeares: that is, by their motions and revolutions, to distinguish
times and seasons, and therewith, to signifie
certaine effects following, vpon their courses and motions:
So that thereby, we may learne the difference of
times, and make distinction of the partes thereof: as of
yeares, monethes, dayes, and of all seasons and appointed
diettes: Without the knowledge and reckoning
whereof, there should be nothing but extreame confusion,
in all the actions of men. For neither could the
memory of things, by past be kept, norrespect had of
things to come, nor the progresse of time be numbred,
without the same were defined and measured, by the
motion of these heauenly bodies, and namely, of the
Sunne and Moone. For the Sunne, by his most equall
and simple motion, is as a most perfite rule to vs, to appoynt

and measure the yeares and seasons thereof: The
Moone also by her shorte motion, to measure and distinguish
the Monethes of the years: So there is no
more perfite way to measure the yeares of the World,
then by the course of the Sunne, the Moone, and the
Starres, which everie one haue their juste periodes of
time, within the which, they compleit their courses, &
revolutiones, the which, albeit they appeare sometime
vnequall to vs that dwell on the earth, yet they are most
equall & constant in themselues. But because I think
I haue prooven sufficiently already, both by Sabbaticall
and by Historicall reckoning, the just count of the
yeares of the World to our dayes: I thinke it not necessarie
in this short Treatise, to set downe the Astronomicall
reckoning: al-be-it it would ratifie and confirme
our former count. For it should be both long-some &
tedious to them that are not well grounded in Astronomie:
and peradventure, over difficill to be taken vp.
Therefore I refer the same to a more ample worke: In
the meane time, by reason of the great errour I see fall
forth among the vulgare Prognosticators, for wronge
taking vp of their groundes, in judging the face of the
heaven, the weather, and other accidents and influences
thereof: I haue thought good to discover their errour,
that they may amend the same, and others be no
further deceived by them. But first I would informe
them to amend their errour also, that deny the heavenly
influences to be effectual, because the predictions of
such as commonly set out the vulgare Prognostications
oft-times, take not effect: I say, these men declare them
selues very ignorant in naturall Philosophie, and are
convict by experience and ensample of such things, as
daily fal out, by vertue of the heavenly influences. Yea,
by the Scripture it self, Namely in Iob, where the Lord

himsele maketh mention of the pleasant influence of
Pleiades,
               Iob. 3. 
                     •
                  
                which is the pleasant spring-time of the year,
when the Sunne commeth to those starres. For these influences,
not onely make the earth to fructifie, but also
worke a great varietie in the seasons of the year: so that
they are not like one to another, nor to themselues every
yeare in many thinges. And many evident signes
are founde in the motiones, configurations, and interchangeings
of the courses of the heavenly light, where
by men, who are expert in divine science of Astrology,
may gather and conjecture, many things to fall out, not
onely in the aire, but also in the naturall inclination of
earthly creatures. For, for that cause, the eternall God
appoynted them in the beginning, not onely to shine
and shew light vnto the world, but also to be for signes
of things to come: as it is testified in Genesis. So that by
the great providence of God,Gen
                     •
                  
                three excellent benefites
are communicated to men, by these heavenly bodies:
The one is, to shine and giue light vnto the Earth: The
seconde, to distinguish times, dayes, and yeares: The
third, to forewarne men of many things profitable for
this life; not that wee should thinke that all things can
be fore-told thereby, or that the starres haue force to
mooue the minds and willes of men, as it were by constraint,
to this or that. For this science, hath certaine limittes
and boundes, over the which it ought not to be
drawen. For as the chiefe author in this arte Ptolemee
himselfe affirmeth, that part of Astrologie, which is called
Iudiciar, exceedeth the weaknesse of mens apprehension,
which is aggreeable to that which God by his
owne wordes objected vnto Iob, in the place before cited,
saying: Knowest thou the statutes of the heaven, & canst
thou set downe the ruling thereof in the Earth? And besides
this obscure knowledge of the heavenly influences,

there are supersticious observations vsed by many
in the artificial setting vp of the figure of the heaven, &
applying the same without any sufficient natural cause
or reason to every purpose, which I for my parte, altogether
improoue & cōdemne. And yet it followeth not
hereof, that this divine science should be allutterly rejected
or contemned, as many that be ignorant of it
do. For by it, many profitable things ar knowen, which
some for the vtilitie of men edifie, and namely, for instruction
of Physitiones, labourers of the ground, Sea-faring-men,
and other travellers & observers of times,
to knowe and fore-see, the falling out of windes,
tempest, and other accidents of the aire, and for releeving
of infirmities of mens bodies, by knowing the
right times of applying medicines, according to the
dispositions of the complexions and humours, over
which, the Moone is knowen by experience, to haue
great dominion. For if it be granted (as we know it is)
to certaine foules of the aire, and beastes of the earth,
to fore know and feele the mutationes of the aire, and
tempestes to come, how should we altogether denie
fore-knowledgs to be graunted to men, to conjecture
of these accidents, having reason, judgement, and experience
to lead them thereto? not as to come by absolute
necessitie (for God is aboue all second causes, &
may stay them when he pleaseth) but by probable reasones
and appearance. And yet, I confesse, that men of
no evill inclination, are mooved to haue those Astronomicall
predictiones in greater contempt, because of
the errour and ignorance of many professores of this
science, and namely, of such as set foorth the vulgare
Prognostications, that are yearely to be sold abroade.
For when the common sorte of men see, that the accidents
fore-tolde by them, as namely, concerning the

mutationes of the aire, fall not out according to the
judgement of such Prognosticators, they suppose the
fault, which is in the ignorance and evill-taking vp of
the men, to be in the science it selfe: as though there
were no probable certaintie in Astronomical predictiones.
But as it followeth not, if an ignorant Physition,
kill a man, when he professed to heale him, that therefore
no man should vse medicine, so the vnskilfulnesse
of the professor is no good cause to derogate authoritie
to this divine science: if it be lawfullie vsed and reteined
within the right boundes. Now because I perceiue
one of the chiefe causes, of the errour of those
cōmō Prognosticators to be, that they take not rightly
vp the grounds of their cōjectures, but follow the old
rules of the Chaldeans, Arabians, and others auncient
authors in that science, which serue not for our dayes
and time. For the doctrine of the signes and houses of
the heauens, and placing of the Planets thereinto, with
their triplicities & mutuall qualities, in their applicationes,
and joyning with the fixt starres, which served
for the former ages; cannot now serue, nor be sufficient
to ground solide conjectures vpon, for they are altered
and changed. For the which, it is to be vnderstood, that
the auncient out-letters of this science, who divided
the whole arche of the Zodiake in twelue equall parts,
and into twelue signes: For that time, considdered the
qualities of every signe, depending vpon the nature &
qualities of the sixt starres, that were in such a signe; so
that when any of the Planets, come to the stars, or had
aspect thereto, they caused the alteration of the aire, according
to their naturall qualities, and other accidents
to fall out, beg inning at the signe of Aries; and so counting
consequently from the Spring-time Aequincctium
throughout the rest of the signes: At which time,

the entring of the Sun, in the Aequinoctiall poynt, was
i
                  •
                the beginning of the signe of Aries, of the eight
sphere, or not farre distant from the first starre of that
signe, which they peradventure thought to bee vnchangeable:
But by processe of time and experience,
it is found, that the Aequinoctial poynt is moveable, flitting,
and remooving back-wards, contrary the order of
the signes, and the fixed starres that were in the signe
of Aries remooued forwarde. In so farre, that from the
first observation of the heauenly motions, when the
beginning of the signe of Aries, aggreed in position &
situatiō, with the first star of that signe in the 8. spheare,
vnto our dayes, counting in the midde-motion of the
Aequinoctial, to witte, to this 1600. yeare of Christ, the
fixed starres of the signe of Aries, that were some time
in the beginning thereof, at the Acquinoctial poynt, are
now distant more then twenty seaven degrees, and fifteene
minutes from that poynt fore warde: or rather,
the Aequinoctial poynt is slipped backe from them, and
preventeth their course in the motion of the heavens.
And so the stars that were in the signe of Aries of olde,
are now (counting from the Aequinoctial point) for the
most part in the signe of Taurus, & they of the signe of
Taurus in Gemini; and so consequently of the reste:
Notwithstanding of this difference, the common setters
out of Prognostications, and also the Mediciners,
in giuing of their medicine, mak their counte after the
olde maner, as the signes were woont to be reckoned,
nearer to the poynt of the Vernall Aequinoctial: where
vpon followeth this errour, that the signes taking their
nature and properties from the fixed starres, and having
now changed their place, render other influences
to the aire and earth, them they did of before. So
that they which sometime were hoat, are now become

colde, and they that were drye humide; and by the
contrary, cold, hote, and humide drie: And so no certainty
can folow, to know the mutatiōs of the aire, or other
accidēts thereby: neither can the placing of thē in
the twelue houses of the heaven, after the old reckoning,
nor the compting of their triplicities or aspectes
by that calculation be right; and consequently, all that
is builded 
                  •
               herupon, by out common Prognosticators,
falleth to the ground, and can haue no solidity: So that
it is no marvell, albeit they erre in their predictions for
the most part. As to the cause of the prevention of the
Aequinoctial, and concerning the inequall variation
thereof, because it belongeth to a more subtil & ample
discourse, for the present I leaue it: Only to speak some
what of the remedie of this errour in reckoning, which
falleth out by not-taking-heede to the anticipation of
the Aequinoctial poynts. In my opinion, I think there
may be two waies to remeid the same: The one is, to
reckon and calculate the signes, according to the eight
spheare and fixed starres being therein, as they were
reckoned of old, & in the daies of Ptolemee, not having
respect to the vernall Aequinoctial poynte: Albeit, in
describing the generall disposition of the year, respect
may be had thereto, and likewise to the reste of the
tropike poyntes and fixed starres being therein for
the time, with the configurationes of the Planets, and
the conjunction or opposition of the Lights, being
nearest vnto the same. The other way is not far differēt
frō the former, that is, without respect of the signes
of the ninth spheare, to begin to reckon at the twentie
seuen degree, & fifty one minutes of Aries, as if it were
the first degree this present yeare, and as the Moone
flitteth her Mansiones, frō the Aequinoctial poynt hereafter
to follow the degree of the Zodiake, where shee

b
                  •
               gouth her first Mansion, and so to proceed with the
rest, and to counte by the mansiones of the Moone,
ascribing to every mansion, twelue degrees, fifty one
Minutes, and thirtie secondes, as the maner is throughout
all the twenty eight ma
                  •
               siones, which is a verie
sure way. For certaine it is, that the affections and influences
that flow from the Moone, especially cōcerning
the alterations of the aire, are of greater force and effect
nor those that come of other planets, by reason of her
propinquitie to the earth. As also in medicine, shee
worketh greater effects then all the rest of the Planets,
because she is predominant in all humide things, aswel
in mens bodies, as in the Sea and the aire: And shee
bringeth foorth her effectes, according to the qualities
of the fixed starres that are founde in every one of her
mansiones, when shee is joyned with them: And so
commonly is the disposition of the aire at that present
time, vnlesse some other greate impediment stay the
force thereof: Therefore, having respect to the mansiones
of the Moone, a
                  •
               d the aspects and applications of
other Planets to her, and to her Mansiones, great conjecture
may be taken of the wether that is to fall out at
any time, according to the season of the yeare. Moreover,
they that would Prognosticate rightly of the weather,
should haue more respect to the Moone then all
the rest of the Planets, because, as the Moone setteth
after the first evidente appearing after every change
(which is commonly the third, or the fourth daye) so
followeth the course of that whole Moone: Therfore,
considderation would be taken, what disposition the
Moone hath the third and fourth daye, and the fourth
day especially, in what mansion she will be, to what other
Planets she will be applyed in a conjunct opposite
or quadrate aspect: and namely, if she apply to Saturne
               
soone after the change, or immediatly before, for then
besure of rough weather. But if she be rid the fourth
day, of all malevolent aspectes, the mansion wherin she
is, being of temperate nature, the whole space of that
Moone, commonly for the most part will be faire: and
generally note, that if any evill weather is to fall out in
the Moone, it falleth with greater effect in the dayes of
the quarters and full Moone. But to speake more
particularly and exactly of these thinges, it belongeth
to a more large treatise then this present, which serveth
only for a taist of things that may be spoken herevpon.
And my intent was principally, to shew the errour only
of the common sort of Prognosticators, that deceiue
the people, founding them selues vpon wrong groūds,
and thereby make the divine science, of naturall and
lawfull Astrologie, to come in mockage and contempt.
         
         
            FIFT PROPOSITION
            
               That the olde Iulian or Romaine Kalendar, might receiue
an easie reformation: And that the late attempted reformation
thereof is not circumspectly taken vp, but giue
                     ••
                  
occasion of errour in reckoning.
            
            SEing we are entred in Astronomicall reckoning of
times; & there is nothing more necessary and profitable
for all sort of people, that are not trayned vp in
Astronomie, then to haue a perfite Kalendar, wherby
the right course of the Sunne and Moone being counted
and knowen, the true distinction of all times, may
be particularly set downe as in a Table, wherein all
the actions of men, both concerning Ecclesiastical and
civill affaires, may be ordred and done in due season.
Concerning the which purpose, it is to be vnderstood,
that in all ages, men haue travelled to finde out such a

perfite reckoning of the yeare, monethes, weekes, and
dayes thereof, as might serue for this vse: Some framing
their Kalenders (for so we must cal them for doctrines
cause) to the course of the Sunne, to compt their
years thereby, & some to the course of the moone, reckoning
by Monethes, and some labouring to reduce
both those reckoninges to an equalitie, & to make their
Kalenders to agree to both. The which thrid being the
most perfite forme of reckoning and most commodious
for all affaires both holy and politick, was first vsed
amongst the Godly patriarkes, euen from greatest antiquitie,
whereof wee haue euident Testimonies in the
book of God. For in the time of Noah mētiō is made of
monethes of the yeare, which coulde not be counted
but by a certaine forme of Kalender or Almanack,
counting by moones so many Moneths (for moneths
take their denomination from the moone) which wee
may gather then to haue bene 12. in number, to make
out the space of an yeare. And that the same were ruled
also according to the course of the Sun, we may haue
intelligence by the principal feastes appointed by God
in the law, which were not onely affixed to certaine
dayes, but also to such times as had respect to the seasones
of the year ruled by the Sunne, & to the times of
growing & winning of the fruits of the groūd, proceeding
from the course of the Sunne. As the first moneth
named Abib, tooke the name from the first fruites, because
in it was the barly haruest in the cuntry of Palestina,
as Plinius also testifieth. So was the feast of the Passouer,
celebrate the 15 day of the first moneth being the
first full moone after the vernall Equinoctium, likewise
the feast of Pentecost, was the fifth daye of the third
Moneth, wherein the first fruites that were made in
bread of corne were offred. In like manner after collection

of all the rest of the fruites, & namely of wine and
oyle, was the feast of Tabernackles, which was celebrat
in the reauent moneth. All these feastes hade respect to
the course of the Sunne, as I said before. Now to make
the course of the Moone to aggree with the Sunne, so
that the reckoning of the Moneths might bee conformed
to both, after two or three yeares as the count fell
out. The Hebrewes in their Kalender added a certain
od month called their Intercalare month whereof mentiō
is made in their almanacks & named it Ve-Adar: the
second or posteriore Adar, wherevpon I wil not now insist.
Alwaies, because this forme of agreeing the years,
and framing them both to the course of the Sunne and
the moone was thought (as it is in deede) most pe
                  •
               fite,
Iulius Caesar, a man of great magnanimitie, & well seene
in letters, by the counsel and instigation of Sosigenes, an
expert Mathemat
                  •
               cien in those dayes, where as the Romane
years very confusedly were reckoned of before
vnto the course of the Moone, about the space of 45.
yeares before the Natiuitie of Christ, divised a newe
forme of Kalender: First framed after the course of the
Sunne, diuiding the whole yeare in 365. dayes and six
houres: and making it to conteine 12 Moneths where
of the names are yet in vse. And because of the od sixe
houres, which coulde not bee brought to count euery
yeare, he ordained that euery 4 yeare one day shoulde
bee added to Februarie, because fouretimes six houres
make vppe an whole day of 24 houres. And the yeare
wherein this od day falleth, we call commonly Leape
yeare. And because it was added at the sixe Kalendas
of March. it is named in latine Bissextus, or Biss
                     •
                  xtilis
annus, for the Romanes diuided their moneths in Kalendas,
Nonas and Idus. Now Iulius Caesar begouth his
yeare at the kalendes of Ianuarie, which was then when

the Sun entred in the eight degree of Capricorne, eight
daies after the winter Solstiti
                     •
                  m, which then being the
shortest day of the yeare, fel vpon the 25. day of December:
And the Spring time Equiuoctium, when the Sun
entred in Aries, after that old reckoning, fell vpon the
25. day of March. And the Sommer Sols
                     •
                  itium, making
the longest day vppon the 25. of Iune. And the harvest
Equinoctium, about the 26. or 27. day of September: The
which places of the Sun, are now changed and slyden
backe in the Iulian Kalendar (by reason of the prevention
of the Equ
                     •
                  noctial, whereof I spak in the fourth proposition)
to the 12. 11. or 10. day of the said Monethes,
and 13. or 14. of September. The chiefe cause hereof (besides
the prevention of the Equinoctial) is that the Iulian
yeare, reckoned by Caesar, to conteine 365. dayes &
six od hours, conteineth somewhat more, then the just
calculation For by true Astronomical reckoning, there
wil be every yeare, taking off the sixe odde houres, elleven
minutes of an houre, and certaine secondes: The
which, in the space of 130. yeare, or thereby, will make
vp an whole daye. And so in the space of 1645. yeares,
which is the time since Iulius Caesar set out his Kalendar,
there will be 
                  •
               ore then the space of thirteene dayes
accressed, to be taken away from the count of the odde
sixe houres, about the 365. dayes of the Iulian year. For
this cause, sundrie learned men of our memory and
time, haue earnestly desired, that some Reformation of
the Iulian Kalendar might be made to bring the same
to the old estate and institution thereof, as it was firste
set foorth, by reason of divers inconvenients, that by
processe of time, occurre by neglecting thereof. And
namely, that the aggreement of the course of the Sun,
with the Moone (which two Planets, were ordained
of God in the beginning, to distinguish times) cannot

thereby, as it is now, be knowen. The which mater, being
proponed to divers general councels, could not tak
effect; till now lately in our daies, with favour of Pope
Gregory the 13. his Cardinals & counsels, it was permitted
in the 1582. year of Christ, to one Aloysius Lilius, professor
in Mathematical Astronomie, to set downe this
long desired reformation: Who having performed the
same after his maner, hath thereby purchased a merveilous
assent of divers Princes & cuntries, to accept & authorize
the same: Albeit not without divers contradictions.
For in the year, 1584. in Auspurge of Rhaetia, there
fell out a great commotion, both in the Church & civil
governement therof. As also the 1585. yeare in Riga of
Lituania, great trouble was raised, till finally it was agreed,
that the old Kalendar should stande as it was before,
without reformatiō. And many cuntries yet there
be, that haue nor accepted not allowed this pretended
correction. Now as concerning this reformer Aloysius
Lilius, albeit (as it is supposed) he would haue brought
the Iulian Kalendar to the old estate, as it was in the beginning,
or neere thereby, yet they of the Papisticall
Clergy, & others to whom the reformation therof was
first proponed, would not agree that it shuld be drawen
back any further, but to the time of the Nicene councell,
which was holden and concluded in the 328. yeare of
Christ; herefore hee was forced to begin thereat. And
because there interveend betweene that time, and
the 1582. yeare of Christ, the space of 1254. yeares, hee
brought backe the reck
                     •
                  ning of the Iulian Kalendar,
onelie tenne dayes, seting foorth a newe Kalendar,
wherein he had respect to twelue hundreth years, with
so many ods, to wit, 54. yeares: For the which cause, he
was also forced to alter the Cycle of the Sunne (the
which is not compleeted, but in 28. yeares) and so to

change the Sundayes letter to an other thē that which
was founde in the olde Kalendar books, nowe this reformation
of the olde Kalendar. albeit it was exactly
calculate to the time of the Nicene councel, yet it maketh
a great change from the reckoning of the old kalendar,
and putteth many men in doubt what to follow,
whether the olde style of counte or the new. And hath
brought great controuersie in diuers places (as partly I
shew before) seing that the day of the natiuity of christ
& other festiual dayes (as they cal them) & daies of holding
faires & mercates, are changed & holden ten dayes
before the accustomed times. And merchandes and others
in making their contractes and obligationes are
often disappoynted of their dayes of payment, with diuerse
others such inconueniences, where as it had bene
farre easier, without any such perceptable change (if so
great neede had bene to reforme the olde Kalendar)
to haue done, as yet it may bedone, if it please Christian
Princes and countries to agree therevnto, after this
manner, to witte, that for the space of 56 yeares following
this 1600 yeare of Christ, there should be no leap
yeare at al: But al years to be common & equal conteining
365 dayes onely, according to the quantity of the
olde Egiptian yeare. So that two cycles of the Sunne
should passe by continuall progresse in the Kalendar,
by, A, B, C, D, E, F, G, wsthout any variation, during
these 56 yeares, to bring it to the first institution, leauing
out the foureteene od letters of leape yeare, which are
now interlaced in euery two Cycles of the Sunne, for
in them are fourteene times foure, which make 14 leap
yeares. So by this reckoning 14 dayes being left out in
the space of 56 years, the year should come to the same
estare wherein it was, at the first setting foorth thereof
by Iulius Casar, which was 45 yeares before the birth of

Christ. And these fourty fiue yeares, added to the fiftie
sixe yeares, before mentioned, make 101. yeares, which
101. yeares being added to 1600. yeares, which nowe
haue bene from the birth of Christ, will make vp in the
whole, 1701. yeares, which being divided by 130. by
true calculation, giue in the quotient, thirtteene whole
dayes: and there will remaine after division, twentie
odde houres, and fourty sixe Minutes of an houre, laking
only three houres, fourteene Minutes, to accomplish
twenty foure houres: For the fourteen daye,
which is no perceptible difference, and will be made
vp in the space of sixteene yeares thereafter. And giving
this reformation, should not be made till sixteene
yeares here after were past, it should make vp the selfe:
So by this maner of correcting of the Kalendar, it were
casie to bring the Iulian yeare, to the first institution:
letting the Cycle of the Sunne, after the 56. yeares before
mentionate, returne to the former estate, as it is
now set downe in our Almanackes, as for example: If
this Reformation should be attempted to beginne in
the yeare, 1601. next following. The Sundayes letter,
that yeare being D. the Cycle of the Sunne fourteene,
the yeare of Christ. 1656. being compleet, the same letter
should be the Sundaies letter, in the 1657. yeare: &
the Cycle of the Sunne, 14. And so consequently, the
Cycle of the Sunne, with the Sundaies letter, should
proceede as they stand in the old Almanacks, without
any variation for many yeares; and, as may be supposed,
should neede no further reformation to the ende
of the world, which appeareth now shortly to approch.
At least, every 134. year, leaving out a leape year, should
hold it at the old stand. And this should make no perturbation
nor varietie in the order of the Kalendar, nor
in the dates of Obligations, or cōtracts; neither change

any of those dayes, which are called, fixed Feasts, from
the dayes whereon they are now placed in the olde
Kalendare. Let this much then suffice for reformation
of the Kalendare, to the course of the Sunne. There is
also an other alteration vsed in this late reformed Kalendare,
concerning moveable Feasts, which commeth
by occasion of the course of the Moone, and defection
of the Golden number. For the which, it is to be
vnderstood, that they that first placed and set downe
the Golden number in the Kalendare, as it is now (for
it was not Iulus Caesar) set the number of the year therof,
directly against the day of each Moneth, wherein
the Moone then changed: But now the course of the
change is flitted forward from those places, four daies
with the more. Now this number, called the Golden
number, by reason of the vtilitie thereof, whereby it
was worthy to be written in Golden letters, was placed
in the Kalendar, to agree the course of the Moone
with the Sunne (as is supposed) by DIONYSIVS,
called EXIGVVS, a certayne Romane Abbotte,
who after the Nicene Councell, about the yeare of
Christ, fiue hundreth, thirtie two yeares, sette out
that Cycle: which is called the Paschall Cycle, or
rather corrected that which was set out of before, a
two hundreth and nine yeares, by EVSEBIVS CAESARIENSIS:
This Golden number (I say) which is
verye profitable indeede, conteining the space of
nine teene yeares, was beleeved by the auncientes, to
compryse in the periode or revolution thereof, the
exacte course of the motion of the Moone: So, that
after the accomplishmente of nine-teene yeares, the
Moone did returne to the same course, that shee was
in before at the beginning therof: and so they thought

it sufficiente to agree the dayes of the Romane Kalendar,
with the chaunges of the Moone precisely. Albe-it,
it bee of veritie, that the true motion of the
Moone, in the space of nine-teene yeares, is more
then to agree exactlie to the course of the Sunne, by
the space of one houre and an halfe, or thereby, which
in the space of three-hundreth and foure yeares, or
little more, will make vp an whole daye, wherein the
reckoning of the course of the Moone, by the Golden
number, exceederh the course of the Sunne,
and goeth forwardes in our Kalendars. And so in the
space of an thousand, two-hundreth, seventy two years,
which is from the time of the Nicene Councel, from
the which DIONYSIVS reckoned, to witte, from
the yeare of Christ, three hundreth twentie eight, vnthis
present yeare, a thousand six hundreth years, are
foure times, three-hundreth and foure yeares, and
more-over, fifty sixe odde yeares, which, adde foure
dayes (as was declared) and almost sixe houres of the
forward passing of the course of the Moone, attour the
reckoning of the Golden number. Now because this
DIONYSIVS that placed the Golden number in the
Kalendar, tooke no heede to this, or rather vnderstood
it not, by processe of time, the changes of the Moone
fall not vpon the dayes of the Kalendare, where DIONYSIVS
placed the Golden number, but foure
dayes, and some-times fiue dayes thereafter. And also
those dayes, which are called moveable Feastes,
and namely, the Feaste of Easter or Pasche daye, cannot
bee rightlie reckoned by the Cycle of DIONISIVS,
called the Paschall Cycle, conteining the number
of fiue hundreth thirtie two yeares, that is, nineteene
times twenty eight yeares, by multiplying the
Cycle of the Sunne, by the Cycle of the Moone:

for albeit this man, named Dionysius Exignus, a certaine
Abbot of Rome, who lived in the dayes of Iustinian the
Emperour, about 500. yeares after the incarnation of
Christ, the authour of the Romanes Paschall count or
Cycle, intended by setting out of that his Cycle of
532. yeares, to giue a perpetuall and infallible rule, to
know the true daye of the celebration of the Paschall
feast, called Easter, after the minde and determination
of the Nicene councell, which decreed, that all times
thereafter, the Feast of Easter should be celebrate vpon
that Sunday, which immediatly followed the fourteen
day of the Moone (which the Hebrewes hold to be the
fourteen day of their first Moneth, called Nisan) next,
after the Spring time, Equinoctium, which then fell out
in March, as it doth nowe, but not vppon the same day
of the Moneth. Yet this Dionysius was deceived in two
things. For first (as I haue told) he took no heed, or vnderstood
not, that every ninteene yeare, the Golden
number lacketh of the juste reckoning, an houre and
halfe an houre, or thereby. Secondly, hee remembred
not the leape yeare in his reckoning, or else supposed
the Moone to haue a leape yeare, aswell as the Sunne,
which very proposterously is called [Saltus lunae] the
leaping of the Moone by some; For the Moone hath
no leaping, but keepeth a constant course. Herefore it
is, that the Cycle of Dionysius, serveth not exactly to
count the course of the Moone, and those moveable
Feastes: For Easter day, as it is commonly now counted
by that Cycle, falleth out often-times a Moneth
and more, after the just appoynted time of the Nicene
councell. And if we shall follow, the old Romane Kalendar
and Golden number, set downe by Dionysius, there
in minding to celebrate Easter day thereafter; we shall
see a great variation from the decree of the councell.

For sometime, Easter daye shall fall before the middest
of March, the Tuesday called, Fastings even, shall fall in
Ianuary: And Whit sunday sometime in April. And after
the reckoning of the Hebrewes, our Easter day, shal fal
in the Moneth of Adar, the last Moneth of the yeare,
and not in Nisan, the first Moneth. For the which, I wil
giue you one example. In the yeare of our Lord 1598.
lately by past, according to the decree of the Nicene
Councell, and late Kalendar, set outby Lilius, Easter
day, fell vpon the twelft daie of March, in the olde Kalendare
and Almancks, whereby we yet reckon in England
and Scotland: And Whit sunday vpon the last daye
of Aprill: And Fastings-euen, vpon the twenty foure of
Ianuary: Whereas after the vulgare maner and count,
Easter daie was celebrate that yeare, the sixteenth daie
of Aprill, Whit-sunday, the fourth of Iune: And Fastings-even, the last of February. Yee see the distance betweene
the one calculation and the other, is more
then the space of a Moneth: what errour it may growe
to by proces of time, it is easie by this example to perceiue:
And so wee must confesse indeede, that the olde
Kalendare in this poynt, hath neede of reformation:
As also, that Cycle or count, called the Paschall Cycle
of Dionysius. Now Lilius in his new Kalendar, to restore
that Cycle of Dionysius to the right reckoning, maketh
his counte by hundreths, because every 304. yeares,
which is the space of sixteene Golden numbers, one
day being added to the Golden number of nineteene
yeares, supplieth the houres and Minutes of the course
of the Moone. But this counte by hundreths, hath divers
imperfectiones: Namely, because in his Epactes,
counting by hundreths, no exact methode can be observed;
yea, the variety of the course of the Moone, can
not so formally bee counted thereby, as by the Golden

number, which conteineth lesse space: besides that, the
Paschal tearms aggree not oftimes thereto: wheranent
you may reade, Ioseph Scaliger, in the end of his learned
woork, De emendatione temporum; where also he setteth
downe a more perfite reckoning, by a Table of equall
Epactes; where-anent, because it is hard to be conceived
by them that are not wel acquainted with Astronomical
reckonings, I cease now further to speak. Alwaies,
wee shall vnderstande, it is very difficill to finde
out ane Cycle that may make an absolute perfite reckoning,
of the course of the Moone, to frame it to anie
perpetuall Kalendar: Yea, as Io. Stoeflere wryteth in
his greate Romane Kalendare;Propositi
                  
                     ••
                   37. no Paschall Cycle,
may exactly comprehend the same: Which alwaise is
best found out by the Epacts, and by the Golden number,
receiving a juste correction. Therefore, for the
instruction of the common 
                  •
               orte of men, best it is by
Astronomicall counte, to sette a Table or Almanacke,
conteining the right reckoning of the course
of the Moone, for manie yeares, either by her midde
motiones, or by her appearing and true motiones: as
Io. Stoeflere did for certaine yeares in his dayes. In
the meane time, it shall suffice, for a grosse and common
instruction of all men, to place the Golden number
in the Iuliane Kalendare, vppon the precise dayes
of the change of the Moone, as it is nowe set downe
in diverse Kalendars: For that will serue to declare
what daye everie change falleth out; and whether it
be before or after noone, by adding of the letter B. or
A. to everie particulare Golden number, which maye
serue for a long season, without anie perceptible variation.
And who would knowe more exactlie the
houres and Minutes of everie Change, Full, or quarter
of the Moone, let them gette once by ane Ephemeride,

or right Prognostication, the chaunge of one
Moone, with the dayes, houres, and Minutes thereof,
and counte to the next change, twenty nine daies,
twelue houres, and fourtie foure Minutes: And
from the Change to the Full, fourteene dayes, eighteene
houres, and twentie two Minutes. And for everie
quarter, seaven dayes, nine houres, and elleven
Minutes, proceeding so farre as you lyste, it shall bee
the true reckoning of the course of the Moone. As
to the Paschall Cycle, we need not be carefull thereof;
But take heede to the first full Moone, after the vernall
Aequinoctium, and ever the next Sunday thereafter,
should be Pasche or Easter day: and thereby, you may
propagate an Almanacke for the moueables Feastes,
as farre foorth as ye please, after the rule of the Nicene
Councell. But to bee too much curious, concerning
the observation of those Feastes, it is not necessary for
true Christians; for wee know that concerning the resurrection
of Christ, which admonisheth vs to ryse
in newnesse of life, everie seventh daye in the yeare,
(which wee call the Sundaie or Lordes day) putteth vs
in remembrance thereof. And otherwise, wee are forewarned
by the Apostle, Not to be supersititions in observation
of times,
               Gal. 
                     •
                  . 
               dayes, and yeares, that wee be not brought in
Iewish bondage thereby: And againe, That no man
shoulde iudge vs in Meate or Drinke,
               Col. 2
                     •
                  
                
               or in respecte of
an Holic-daie or of the newe Moone, or of the Sabbothe
dayes, which were but shaddowes of thinges to come: But
the bodie is in Christe: meaning the substance thereof,
was accomplished in Christe. And wee haue no
commandement nor ground out of the Scripture, nor
any example of Christ or his Apostles, for observation
of those daies. For as to the typical Pasche or Passeover
of the Iews; it was finished in Christ, when he our true

Passeover, or Paschal Lambe was sacrificed for vs: And
we (as Paule sayeth) haue now to keepe a feast spiritually,Cor. 5.
al the days of our life (putting away the olde leaven
of malice and vvickednesse) with vnleavened bread of
sincerity and trueth. And the other invented Paschetyde
or Easter, after the resurrection of Christe, is but
the invention of men, how auncient soever it be. So
that the great contentiones and controversies that followed
in the auncient Church, for the day wherin the
same was to be observed, both before and after the
Nicene councell, are skarsely worthy to be recited. And
yet Victor Bishoppe of Rome (as that seate was ever
proude) for not observing the same day, which he and
his adherentes kept, did excommunicate al them of the
churches of Asia, that kept an other day. For the which
cause, the godly Irenaeus Bishop of Lyons, justly founde
great fault with him: Notwithstanding, the Church agreeing
to the observation of such a day, as an indifferent
thing, in remembrance of the resurrection of
Christ, there is no necessity to counterfaite the lawe of
Moyses, in observing the time of the Moone, but it
may be fixed to a certaine day of the Moneth, or else,
following the full Moone, to finde it out after the maner
before recited: Alwaies, our Christian libertye
ought not to be prejudged herein: And so I make an
end.
         
         
            SIXT PROPOSITION.
            
               That there is a certaine merveilous Sympathie and aggreement
of Periodes of times, in reckoning by seauens, and by
Sabbaticall yeares. And of the manifold mysteries of the
number of seaven.
            
            EVen as God the author and conserver of all things,
in a comely and decent order, hath appoynted an

succession and progresse of time, for accomplishment
of the naturall course thereof; so hath hee appoynted
certaine periodes and revolutiones of time, wherein
thinges returne to the same or like estate, wherein they
were of before. So wee see in the motions of the heaven,
which are measured by time (or rather which are
the measures of time) the Sunne, the Moone, and the
starres, to haue their peculiar and distinct revolutiones,
wherein they accomplish their courses, and returne after
a limitate and determinate space of time, to the places
from the which they did departe. As the Sunne
compleeting his course and revolution, in the space of
365. dayes, and neere sixe houres, or the quarter of an
day, ascribeth vnto vs, that space of time, which we cal
the yeare, which returning in it selfe, in Latine is tearmed
Annus, quasi annulus, taking the similitude from an
Ringe. And for the like cause, the auncient Aegyptians,
made the figure thereof, in the similitude of a Serpent
by ting his owne tayle. The Moone likewise, by her revolution
in the lyft, determineth vnto vs the Moneths,
and the Sunne by his dayly motion, sheweth vs the
dayes and the houres thereof. The rest of the Planets
also, haue each of them their peculiar and determinate
recourses of time, wherein they compleit their revolution,
as Saturne in the space of thirty yeares, or thereby:
Iupiter in twelue yeares, March, in two yeares, Venus
and Mercurie aggreeing with the course of the Sun.
The fixed starres also haue their peculiar motions and
revolutions, wherof it is not now necessary more largely
to speake. It is verifyed also by experience, that inferiour
thinges vnder the heavens haue their appoynted
recourses and returnings: Wherevnto SOLOMON hath
respect where in his booke called the Preacher, he maketh
mention of the Elements, the Sunne, the aire, and

the water.
                  
                     ••
                  cles. 1. 
               The Sunne [sayeth he] ryseth and goeth to, and
returneth againe to the place from whence it did ryse. The
wind (which maketh the moving of the aire) goeth compassing
from the South to the North, turning round about, &

                     〈◊〉
                   by his curcuits. All the rivers go into the Sea, yet
the sea is not filled 
                     •
                  ver. The rivers returne to the places from
whence they come to flow. Hee giveth these examples, to
shew the revolutions of worldly things, and applyeth
it to declare the revolution of the estate of mens ages
and liues. So a generation [sayeth he] passeth, and another
commeth, and there is nothing new vnder the Sun, but that
which is newe, hath bene in the ages before, and the like shall
be hereafter: Signifying, that after certaine Periods and
courses of time, all worldly and earthly thinges shall
returne to their former, or to their like estate, according
to the determination and appoynted will of God, as
the first cause, and as hee directeth and governeth the
second and inferiour causes. And this falleth forth, not
onely in the ages and liues of men, but generally in all
things worldly that haue a generation, must needs also
haue a corruption. So that also in the common-wealths
and policies, established by men, for holding vp mutuall
societies amongst themselues, there be certain periodes
of time, which make them to change and alter:
which may be found out by experience and ensamples
of Histories of all ages, aswell Ecclesiasticall, as profane.
The cause thereof, cannot be ascribed to Chance
and Fortune, as vnskilfull men doe: for then all these
changes should be most vncertaine, neither is it altogether
to be ascribed to the corrupt manners of men,
that cannot long remaine in one estate, but evermore
seeke novationes and changes: Albeit it bee, from the
better to the worse, although that maie be as a concurrente
cause, but it must needes proceede from an high

grounde. Some therefore there bee, that make all
these Revolutiones and chaunges, to depende and
hange vppon the Revolutiones of the Heaven,
which is by the courses, and influences of the Planets
and Starres, being therein moderate, and governe
all inferioure thinges in the Worlde. Therefore,
some of them parte the Circkle of the Zodiake
in Foure Threes, or Quarters, called Triplicities:
And like-wise, the whole Heauen, and fixed
Starres being therein, and according thereto, Prognosticate
of the estate, and changeing of Realmes,
and Empyres of the Earth, attrybuting also vnto
everie Region and Kingdome, certaine fixed Starres,
to beare particular rule and dominion there. Others
haue ane especiall respecte to the moste notable conjunctiones
of the Plannets, And namelie, of the
superioure Plannettes, and to the Eclipses of the
Sunne and the Moone. Others also, more probablie
respecting the manifolde mysteries of the number
of seauen, divide in seavens, the whole periodes
of time, according to the number of the seaven Planets,
making everie particular Periode, to followe
the nature of the Plannets that then raigneth, beginninge
at Saturne, and descending through the reste.
So that the influence of thinges that fall out in everie
Periode, may bee founde agreeable therev-nto.
It is not to bee denyed indeede, but there is greate
force and efficacie in the influence of the Heavens,
and Heavenlie Lights, to alter and chaunge
inferioure thinges, but I can not bee perswaded, tha
                  •
               
menne haue yet so farre attayned to the knowledge
thereof, as to finde out perfitelie thereby, the generall
chaunges and alterationes of Kingdomes, and
common-wealthes: Al-be-it it may bee, and is probable,

that they haue found out many particulars, concerning
particular persons. Therefore that which is gathered
thereby, is involved in great obscurity and imperfite:
Albeit I confes, I haue lately seene a Table, not
yet set out in prente (the authors name I will suppresse
till he himselfe publish it) wherein, in the space of the
side of an through of Paper, the lesse periodes of time,
whereof we are to speake, aggree so concerning things
falling out thereto, even from the beginning of the
world vnto our dayes, with the nature of the seaven
Planets in their revolutions and order, that it is merveilous,
and appeareth not to lacke a great mystery: where
of I cease to speake further at this time. For I wil not ascribe
vnto me, the prayse of other mens labours. But
to our purpose, it is to be graunted also, that there be
many other concurrent causes of the changes of Kingdomes
and earthly governements, which make them
to fall from their foundations, or at least to be translated
from one estate to an other, which may be spoken
generally of the revolution of all worldly things: And
namely, Plato, in the eight Booke of his Republicque,
maketh mention of three courses of the estates of cō
               mon
wealthes, to witte, the rising, flourishing, and the
decaying estate, and of foure tearmes of their Periods:
The precise time of the which Periodes, he involveth
in an Aenigmaticall speech, of two harmonies of numbers.
But vnles we take a better and more sure ground
then such Philosophical conjectures, we shall never attaine
to anie sure knowledge of periodes of time, that
bring great chances and alterations, either in Ecclesiasticall
or in civill affaires: Therefore we must come to
the booke of God, and first lay that generall grounde,
whereof Daniel maketh mention: that it is he who altereth
and translateth kingdomes, and giueth them to

whom he pleaseth. And as concerning the periodes of
times, of such translationes and mutationes, it is leisome
to inquire and finde out the same also by the
Scriptures. For albeit, the Apostles proponing the like
question to Christ, after his resurrection, if that was the
time wherein he should restore the kingdome to Israel? received
this aunswere,Act. 1. 
               That it was not for them to knowe the
times or the seasons, which the father had put in his own power:
Yet that is not so to be vnderstood, as though it were
not lawful to search out and know those times and seasons,
which the father hath revealed to be knowen by
his Scripturs: or that may be gathered the revpon, with
sobrie
                  •
               ie of inquisition: For our Saviour Christ himselfe
in an other place, willeth his Apostles to take heed
when they shall see Ierusalem besieged with souldiers, for then
they shuld vnderstand,Luk. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪
                that the desolation thereof was nere.
And againe, (as it is in an other Evangelist) When ye shal
see the abhomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel, the
Prophet, standing in the holy place: Then let him that readeth
(meaning him that readeth the Prophecie) considder.
And thereafter he giveth his Disciples a signe, Saying,
learne ye the similitude of the Figge-tree,Mat. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     ▪
                   when her bough is
yet tender, and bringeth foorth leaues, ye know the Summer is
neere: So likewse yee (sayth he)when ye see all things, which
I haue foretold, know that the Kingdome of God is neere, euen
at the doores. With many other sayings to the like purpose:
Where hee vnderstandeth, by the Kingdome of
God, his spirituall Kingdome, and not as the Apostles
in their question meant of a Temporal Kingdome. For
he came not to restore any such Kingdome: Likewise,
Daniel and the rest of the Prophets, are oftimes warned
to marke the times, when such things as were reveiled
to them should come to passe: And Iohn in his Revelation
to write the same. And expressely in Daniell, wee

haue set downe the periode of time (whereof was spoken
in the first proposition) of the standing of the policie
of the Iewes, after the captivity of Babilon, to wit,
of those 70. weekes which were prefixed to that people,
and to their cittie of Ierusalem, to stand. Now this
space of 70. weekes of years, set down by the Angel in
Daniel, for the time of the standing of the common-wealth
of the Iewes, after the restauratiō thereof, so that
thereafter it should come to a determinate desolation,
being a greate periode of time, about 500, yeares, to wit,
490. yeares, appeareth plainly by a certaine fatal lawe,
appoynted and determined by God, to bring to all
other kingdomes and great Empires, a merveilous mutation,
as is evident and founde out by aggreemente
of many examples, not sticking vpon the precise daye
nor year, but about or neere such a revolution of time,
either kingdomes fall, and are turned vp side downe,
or else are transferred and changed from their former
estate, in other newe formes, for the moste parte. And
also other most notable accidentes fal out in the world,
both concerning the estate of the Church, and earthlie
policies, either about such a time (I saye) which I
call the great or more periode of 490. yeares, conteining
70. weekes of yeares, that is, the space of ten Iubilees,
or else, about the halfe space thereof, which I call
the lesse periode, conteining 35. weekes of yeares, and
fiue Iubilees, that is, 245. yeares, which is the space of
the blast of everie trumpet, reckoned by IOHN, in the
Revelation. So that hereinto also the reckoning by
seavens, and by Sabbaticall years, bringeth out a great
sympathie, and agreement, to count the changeing of
times thereby, of the which, I haue thought good here
to shew many examples. And first we do finde in the
Scriptures, and concerning the estate of the Church of

God, and of the olde Worlde; that in the first halfe periode
of time, to witte, about 245. yeares after the creation,Genes
                     •
                  .
after the birth of Enosh the name of the Lord begouth
to be called vpon, that is, the hearts of the godly
begouth then to be mooved to restore the purity of religion,
which by Cain, and his wicked seed before had
bene suppressed. About the end of the second great periode
of time, to wrtte, from the creation 987. yeares,
Henoch was translated by God from this mortal life,Genes▪
                to
immortalitie, to cōfort the faithfull of that age, & confirme
them against the vngodlines of the world, in hop
of the general resurrection. About the end of the third
great periode,Gen 6▪ 7. 8 when fell out in the 1470. yeare, from
the creation, the world begouth vniversally to be corrupt,
when the seede of the godly begouth to be mingled
with the vngodly. For the which cause, within the
half period of time therafter, God in his just judegmēt
destroyed the whole race of man-kinde, except Noah
and his familie, by that feareful invndation of waters.
Not many yeares after, the fourth great period, which
ended in the 1960. yeare of the World, was Abraham
called out of his natiue cuntry by God, to whom, and
his posteritie,Genes. 1
                     •
                  . God promiseth the Land of Canaan, &
that in his seede, al nations should be blessed. From the
promise made to Abraham, to the departing of the Isralites
out of Aegypt, we know, were 430. yeares, to the
which adding 60. yeares of the former age of Abraham,
they will make out the fift great periode. So that
the next yeare, after the departing of the people out of
Aegypt, to possesse the Land of Canaan, will compleite
the same: which falleth in the 2450. yeare, after the 
                  •••
               
               ation
of the world. We do know likewise, that frō the
departing out of Aegypt, to the building of the tēple by
Solomon, ar 480. yeares (which lack only 10. or 11. years

of an other just great period: For the sixt great period,
from the creatiō, endeth in the 
                  •
               940. year of the world,
which was the 15. yeare of the raigne of Solomon, neere
the time of the dedication of the Temple.
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                The seventh
great period by exact calculation, commeth justly to
the yeare of the Worlde, 3430. which was the first year
of Cyrus, wherein the people of the Iewes were delivered
from the captivitie of Babylon, in the which yeare,
there was a great concurrence of Sabbathes and Iubilees,
as was shewen before. And if we wil count forward
from this yeare, we shall finde the eight great periodes
to extend to the 3920. yeare of the world, which is but
28. yeare before the birth of Christ. So wee see and gather
by the Scriptures, howe about the ende of these
great periodes of 490. yeares, or 70. weekes of yeares,
mentioned by Daniel, greate accidents fell out in the
Worlde, and amongst the people of God, even from
the beginning, vnto the birth of Christ. We shall finde
also, that about the space of one of these great periods,
the people of Israel were ruled by Iudges, and thereafter,
about the like space, by Kings: And so long lasted
the restored policie of the Iewes. And to come to profaine
histories, many the like periodes of Empires and
Kingdomes, and great mutations may be founde out,
and commonly, the greater dominions, haue the more
suddaine changes, according to the saying of the Poet:
Summisque negatum stare diu, It is not granted to
highest things, to haue long standing. Concerning this
matter, we read of the Philosopher Cratippus, that he being
demanded by Pompeius, after that hee was vanquished
by Caesar, at the fielde of Pharsalia; If there were any
divine providence, seing that he who had the more
just cause, was so over-come: The Philosopher answered,
that there were certaine fatal periodes of Empires,

whereby then the common-weale of Rome was to bee
changed in a Monarchie. And to indeed we finde into
the foure Monarchies. For the first two Babylonian Monarchies,
the former occupyed by the Assyrians and
Medes; the other, by the Medes and Persians, indured
both but the space of 495. yeares. The kingdome of the
Greekes, begunne by Seleucus N
                     •
                  cator▪
                lasted but the half
space, or lesse periode, to witte, about 245. yeares. Rome
was governed by Kings, likewise by one of these lesse
periodes, to wit, about 243. year. The Concelles thereafter
governed Rome by the space of an great period; to
witte, about 462. yeares. Thereafter indured the Monarchie
of Emperours, from Iulius Caesar the First, to
Valentinian the Third: one of these great Periodes, in
whose time Rome was taken and sacked: First by the
Gotthes, and thereafter by the Vandales: And albeit smaller
Kingdoms oftimes be not subject to great mutations,
yet they haue also certaine fatall periods of time, wherin,
either they are changed from their former estate, or
els alluterly altered in new formes of governemēt. For
by the space of one of these great periodes, Kings did
raigne in Athenes: By the like space flourished the
common-wealth of Sparta: But the Kingdome of the
Troianes, indured little more then one of the lesse or
halfe great periodes. Many like charges may be found
in other Kingdomes, who list diligently to reade the
auncient Histories. But in time of the last of the foure
Monarchies, according to the Prophecy of Daniel, was
raised vp, that everlasting kingdome, of the true. Messas
Iesus Christ; which albeit it hath no end, yet in time of
it, many changes and mutations haue fallen, and are to
fall out in the World, both in the estate of the Church,
and of earthly policies. Concerning the which, wee
haue set foorth in figure, by the propheticall Spirite of

               Iohn, in his Revelation, in seaven Trumpets, blowing
by seaven Angels, the whole estate of the Church, vnder
the kingdom of Christ, every blast of trumpet conteining
the space of one of those les periods, to wit, 245
yeares. And likewise, the troubles & plagues that were
to fall foorth in the world, vnder the figure of other 7.
Angels, pouring our seaven Viols of the wrath of God
vpon the earth and elements, for not obeying the Gospel
of Christ, where-anent, I wil remit the Readers to
the profounde and learned Commentaries, of IOHN
NAPER, vpon the Revelation, wherein the accidents of
evrie particular periode of time, both in the one estate
and in the other, are set out at large. It shall suffice for
this shorte Treatise, to haue poynted out these matters,
to prooue this our sixte proposition, concerning the
Sympathie of periodes of time, even from the beginning
of the World, vnto the end thereof. For with the
last blast of the Trumpet of the seventh and laste Angel,
by all appearance, the worlde is to take an ende, as
I minde to speake more particularlie, in the seaventh &
last proposition. There are also other periodes of times
vsed in reckoning of the yeares of the world, and of the
right revolutions of the heaven: whereof, there be two
that haue a special respect to Sabbaticall yeares: as that
which is called, the great Cycle or period of the Iewes
conteining the space of 6916. yeares, which is made vp
of 988. weekes of yeares, and 141. Iubilees, with a weeke
of yeares, It hath also 364, Cycles of the Moone, and
247. of the Sunne, and conteineth 13. periodicall Cycles
of Dionysius. By it the Iewes counte all their newe
Moons & week daies, & they suppose it reacheth to the
begining of the world, but they ar deceved in the space
of 190. years: alwaise this 1600 year of christ is the 5359
of that cycle: for the year of the nativity of Christ was

the 3760. year of the same. The other cycle that hath respect
to Sabbatical years, is that which is cōmonly called
the cycle or period of Dionysius, cōteining the space
of 532. years, which is made vp by multiplication of the
Golden number: by the cycle of the Sun, is cōteined 76
weeks of years. And by it the Paschal termes were reckoned.
Now by taking vp of this matter, wee see alwaies,
that there are many great hid mysteries in the nūber of
7. not only by counting Sabbatical years & Iubilees, but
also in reckoning of periods of years: as by the les period,
wherby Iohn reckoneth in his Revelation, cōteining
35. weeks of years, & 5. Iubilees: & the greater period cō
               teining
10. Iubilees, & 70. weeks of yeares, according to
the reckoning of Daniel. Moreover, many of al the mysteries,
both of the Old & New Testament, bin cōprysed
vnder the nūber of 7. As al the sacrifices for the most
part wer offred by seavens, as cōmonly by 7. bullocks,
& 7. Rams or sheep, which was observed amongst the
people of God, but also by Balaam, that hyreling prophet,
as we read in the book of Numbers: & was also vsed
by ancient imitation of the sacrifices of Gods people,
by the profaine Gentiles; wheranent, the Poet Virgil
bringeth in Sibylla the prophetesse, thus admonishing
Aeneas, when he was to consult the Oracle of Apollo.
               
                  Nunc grege de intacto septem mactare iuvencos
                  Praestiterit totidem lectas de more bibentes.Aened. 6.
                  
               
               
                  Better it were seaven Bullockes now to take,
                  Without blemish a sacrifice to make:
                  Seaven chosen gymmers of the sheepe also,
                  According to the rite of times ago.
               
The principal feasts or solemnities of Gods people, lasted
7. days, and on the 8. daye were dissolved 7 dayes,
the people did eat vnleavened bread at the Passover,

Seauen weekes were counted betweene the Passeover
and Pontecost: Maniest Feastes were celebrated in the
7. 
                  〈◊〉
               . And in a misery also, the ark of Noah which
was 
                  〈◊〉
                of the Church) in the seaventh Moneth
rested vpon the Mountaines of Ararat; signifying the
restauration of all things, to be in the seaventh estate of
the Church.
                  
                     •
                  word. 10 Likewise, Wisedome hath builded her house,
with seauen Pillers: By her house, wee vnderstande the
Church, and by her seaven Pillers, the gifts of the Spirite;
by which the Church is established: The which,
albeit they be many, yet principally they are comprehended
vnder the number of seaven,Apoc 
                     •
                  
                which also, are
figured, by seaven burning Lampes; and in Exode,
               Exod. 
                     •
                  5. by
the seaven graved Candle-stickes. Likewise, in Zachary,
               Za
                     •
                  h. 3. & 
                     •
                  .
the stone, which is Christ, hath seaven eyes, that goe
through the whole world. Which is to be vnderstood
of Christ, lightning the world by these manifold graces
of the Spirite: Or as others expound it, by the
watching eies of Gods divine providence. Many other
like similitudes, taken from the number of seaven, may
we gather out of the olde Testament, as from a divine
number, and a number of perfection.Act. 
                     •
                  
                Likewise, in the
new Testament, by the seaven Deacons, which were
elected by the Apostles, may be signified a number of
perfection. And the wicked spirites also are numbred
by seavens, when it is said, that Christ ejected out of Marie
Magdalene▪ 
               seuen Devils.
               Luk. 
                     •
                  . And in an other place, how
when the vncleane spirite goeth out of a man, hee goeth about
seeking rest,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , 12. and when he findeth none, hee passeth and taketh
vnto him,Luke 11 seaven other Spirites worse then himselfe, and returneth
to his former habitation. Not that in all places
of Scripture, the number of seaven is taken for a certain
& precise number. For we know, when it is said in the
Psalme,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪ 119 
               That the iust man falleth, seaven times a day: And

when Christ saide to PETER, That he should forgiue
his brother,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   not onelye seaven times, but seaventy times
seaven times, the meaning is of many times, yet the
seaven folde number oft-times also is taken for a certaine
number, as in many places before cited, and
namely, almost through the whole Revelation, the
divine Spirite, in IOHN, setteth out the estate of the
Church,Apoc 
                     •
                  
                by the manifold numbers of seaven. As first,
he is commanded to write to seaven Churches in Asia,
vnder the figure of seaven Golden candlesticks, & to the seaven
Angels, are the ministers thereof figured, by seauen
stars in the right hand of Christ: Next, we haue the book
closed with seaven seals, which signifyeth,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                the hid misteries
of God opened by Christ, where the opening of
everie seale, conteineth the precise space of seaven
yeares. As likewise, The seaven Angels, with their seaven
Trumpets, and seauen Viols, everie one of them (as was
declared before) conteine the space of fiue times seaven
weekes of years. As also may be vnderstood of the
seaven thunders.
               Chap.▪ 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                By every of them, are at least, of the first
three seaven-time seaven yeares, that is, the space of
ane Iubilee. There is amysterie also, in the seaven
heades and seaven Crownes of the beaste, set out in
the twelft Chapter, which with the reste, I referre to
the learned exposition of IOHN NAPER, vpon the Revelation
before mentioned, By all which similitudes &
reckonings, & many moo, we may perceiue not onlie
of the number of seaven, to contein great misteries, but
also to be a number of such perfection, that years, times
and other accidents, bee specially courted thereby. As
also (if I would insist) the like may be founde in manie
naturall thinges, both in heaven and earth. As in the
heavens, the seaven Planets haue their seauen severall
courses, which worke great operations in the inferiour

Elements: Likewise, amongst the fixed starres, there be
7. called Pleiades, and other 7. Hyades, and the two Polare
Images, called Visa maior & Vrsa minor, conteine
either of them 7. stars. And in the earth there be 7. principal
habitable climates. The stature of mans body, is
of 7. foote, with many other such-like. But it shal suffice
here to make an end.
         
         
            SEVENTH PROPOSITION.
            
               Of the estate of this present 1600. yeare of Christ in particular:
And that there is an appearant dangerous alteration, to
fall out therein, and within few yeares thereafter.
            
            THe estate of this present 1600, yeare of Christ in
particular (which mooved me to write this Treatise)
is now to be considered which (as was declared) is
from the creation of the world the 5548. year, cōteining
792. weekes of years: & for od years, it conteineth also
113. Iubilees, & 11 single yeares. For before the 71. yeare
of Christ, were passed 82. Iubilees: and from thence to
our time, to wit, to 1589. year of Christ, 31. Iubilees. Signifyed
by the Evangelist Iohn, in his Revelation, by the
space of the blowing of the 7. trumpets, every trumpet
conteining 245. years. So that this 1600. yeare, is the 60
yeare of the blast of the seaventh & last trumpet: for to
the compleiting of this 7. & last blast & yeares thereof,
there wil be from the creation of the world 117. Iubilees
that is, 819. weeks of years, & 5733. single yeares, which
wil extend to the year of Christ 1785. years, if the world
shal continue so long. But the time by great probabilitie,
& good arguments, is to be abbreviat, for the Elect
sake. This 1600, yeare. then may justly be called a yeare
of the decaying and fading age of the world for many
reasons. First, because all things that approch neere
an end, are saide to decaie and fayle, as it commeth to

passe in this yeare, by the preceeding reckoning. For if
the reckoning fall not,Apoc. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                the prophetie in the Revelation,
cannot fayle, where it is written, That the Angell that
stood vppon the sea and earth, hauing the booke in his hande,
sware by him that liueth for euer more, which created the heaven,
earth, and sea, and all things conteined therein, that time
shalbe no more. But in the dayes of the voyce of the seaventh
Angell, when he is to blow, even the mystery of
God shall be finished, as hee hath declared to his servants
the Prophets. Now the seaventh Angel hath begunne
alreadie to blow his trumpet by our reckoning,
in the 1541. yeare of Christ by-gan, and now the voyce
of that trumpet stil soundeth in our eares, willing vs to
prepare vs for that great day of the Lordes judgement.
Secondly, because the signes & tokens fore-told, aswel
by our Saviour himselfe, as by the Prophets, and namely,
by the Spirite of God in the Revelation, that were to
proceed that great judgemente, are for the most parte
already come to passe and accomplished. Concerning
the which, when as the Apostles asked of our
Maister Christ, hee fore-warneth them of seaven. For
they demaunded him of three questions, to witt, when
shall be the destruction of the Temple and cittie of Ierusalem?
What should be the signe of his comming?Mat. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   and of the ende of
the Worlde?
               Mark. 13. He maketh his aunswere in two, resolving
all these three questiones,Luke. 21. by the two-times of his
comming in the Worlde: Whereof, the former was
of his first comming in the flesh; & the other in his latter
comming to judgement. For the signes, both of
the one and the other, he declareth to be a like. Therefore
(sayeth he) Verely I say vnto you,Matth. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . this generation shall
not passe til all these things be fulfilled: And againe, there be
some here standing, that shall not taist of death, til all be done.
For albeit, the signes that preceed the latter judgement

by extraordinary, yet they were not to bee vnlike to
them that were at his first comming in the flesh: as hee
deduceth them by the particulars. First (sayeth hee)
there shal come false Christs and false prophets: So was there
in his first comming, Benchobab, alias Barchosha
                     •
                  , who
feined himselfe to be Messias: And Iudas Galilaeus and
The
                     •
                  das,
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                with other false Prophets: And in this laste
comming likewise, The Romane Antichrist, vsurping
Christ his authority▪ And the sect of the Iesuites, falsely
taking their name from Iesus, but more worthie to take
it from Iudas Ischariot, with the Anabaptistes, Libertines,
and many other false Prophets. Secondly, where hee
sayeth, There shall be battelles, and rumours of battelles,
with pestilence, famine and earth-quakes, in divers places.
So was it found especially at his first comming among
the Iewes, rebelling against the Romanes, by whome
they and their common-wealth, were finally vtterly over-throwen:
And what famine was in the Cittie of
Ierusalem, with pestilence and strange deathes: ye may
reade in Iosephus de bello Iudaico. So in these latter daies,
what warres haue bene, and yet continue: Nation rysing
against Nation, and kingdome against kingdome,
even amongst vs Christians, the fearefull effects can
declare, whereby we appeare to be made a pray to the
Tyranny of the Turke▪ vnlesse God of his mercy bridle
his furie. As to the Pestilence, Famine, and earthquaks
& such thinges, were in the first comming of Christ, as
namely,Act, 
                     〈◊〉
                  . the famine whereof Agabus the Prophet fore
warned, as that terrible Earth-quake; that was in the
time that Christ suffered, with other the like plagues:
So we haue seene, & daylie see, many such feareful accidents,
more grieuously vexing the World nor ever
they did manie yeares of before. The third signe, is
persecution of the servants of God, and especially, of

those that foreshewe faithfully the Gospell of Christ,
as it was in his first comming: So is it notour, what innocent
blood hath bene shed, for renewing the true
Preaching of the Gospell in our dayes: because these
things are in recente memory, vppon the particulars, I
need not to insist. The fourth signe, fore-tolde by our
Maister Christ, is the abundance of iniquitie, that shuld
accompany both his commings, which with the reste
of the signes of his first comming, is properly to be applyed
to the Nation of the Iewes, whose iniquities 
                  〈◊〉
               
to such exceeding measure, that to overcome all
the rest, they regarded not to Crucifie the Sonne of
God. And nowe in these latter dayes, vniversally amongst
vs Christians, what abundance of all impietie
and wickednes, what vnkindly dealing, what vntruth?
Yea, amongst the better sort, who is not either cold or
carelesse? I neede not seeke examples, they are so ryfe.
The first signe is, the Preaching of the Gospell vniversally,
the which, maketh all the other signes to worke
effectually. For these signs otherwise being natural, or
after a maner common, being joyned with the Word,
are made Sacraments; as was the Rayne-bow, in the
dayes of Noah: signifying, that there should not be an
other like floud to destroy the whole world: so in these
latter times, such signes preceeding Christ his latter
comming, and their significations, declared by his Gospell,
prognosticate vndoubtedly his latter comming
to judge the world by fyre. For as it was in the dayes
of Noah, when a merveilous security was in the world;
notwithstanding, the Preaching of Noah, and preparation
of his arke: And as the Preaching of Christ and his
Apostles was securely contemned by the Iewes: So
now a dayes, the cleare light of the Gospell shining againe
to the Worlde, and making all men without excuse

worketh no more in the minds of the most parte,
then 
                  〈◊〉
                were raw flesh, which cannot digest vpō a lothsome
stomack. And as to the sixt token of signes in the
Sun, the Moone, & the stars; & concerning the shaking
& mooving of the powers of the heaven; such thinges
appeared in the first cōming of Christ, when that most
famous star appeared, which declared to the Wise-men
Christ his birth: & when that extraordinary darknes
fel vpon the land of Iudaea in time of his suffring, which
albeit, I take it not to haue bin an Eclipse of the Sun,
by interposition of the Moone, between it & the earth
(which could not then be, without the whole motions
of the heauen had bin changed) yet was it an evidente
darknes, both in the Sun & in the aire, throughout all
the Land of Iudaea.
               
                  
                     ••
                  od. 10. The like whereof, was in Aegypt vniuersally,
except where the Children of Israel remayned,
being the ninth plague wherewith the Lord smot
that land. Now likewise haue we seen in our dayes, divers
apparitions in the heaven, namely, that most notable
star or comete, which appeared in the yeare of our
Lord 1572. most cleare, without any spowting haires or
beames from it, the which the most learned did take for
a signe of the approching of the Lord to judgemente
against the bloudy tyrants of the earth, & namely, that
Herode of France. We haue also seene now lately, that
great Eclipse of the Sunne, the 1598. yeare, whereof
the effect yet continueth. And as to the commotion
or shaking of the powers of the heaven, I shew of before,
how the signes are changed from their former
places: so that Aries is come to Taurus, and Taurus
to Gemini for the most parte, and so foorth the reste:
To speake of the Triganes, and great conjunctiones, I
will not now enter: For I suppose the force thereof
to be now greatlie debilitate, by reason of the alteration

of the signes, and so leaue the discourse to others.
The seaventh and last signe, is of the comming of the
Sunne of man, Christ himselfe, who as hee appeared
in his humanitie, taking vpon him our nature, wherein
he suffered for our sinnes: So is he to appeare in the
cloudes, in his seconde comming, fearefull to the wicked,
and comfortable to the Electe: The which seaventh
signe resteth onelie to come: For other sixe i
                  •
               
a manner are come alreadie, albeit it may be, they appeare
more evident hereafter. Alwaies, wee see howe
the signes of the first and second comming of Christ
do agree, so farre as wee haue yet seene. And as for
this present yeare, and yeares shortlie to come hereafter,
there appeares no lesse, but rather greater mutationes
yet to follow, which may bee the thirde evidencie
and argument, of the approching of the latter
daie. For as to the signes of the heaven, so manie
and so greate Eclipses, namelie, of the Sunne, haue
not bene seene, these manie yeares by-gane, as shall
be within sixe yeares to come: What other heavenlie
tokens wilbe annexed thereto, the Lord knoweth. But
this I see, that after or before the effecte of one Eclipse
be ended, immediatlie falleth out an other,
as this presente 1600. yeares, at the ende of the effecte
working of that Eclipse, which was in the 1598.
yeare: signifying, and bringing greate Windes and
drought. In the ende of Iune, falleth out an other Eclipse
of the Sunne, and so foorth in the rest. As to other
particulars, that are to fall foorth this yeare, I will
speake sparingly thereof: for I pretend not the Spirite
of prophecy, neither do I depend much vpon the conjectures
of Astrologues, notwithstanding, I shall recite
that which I finde in others, concerning the estate of
this yeare, and certaine yeares following, & thereafter

shortely declare mine owne opinion, following the
grounds which I haue already laid. I reade in the Treatise,
called, The seconde comming of Christe, whereof,
Scheltco a Geueren is the author: his conjecture, that about
this 1600. yeare, shall be the end of the periode of
the Papisticall kingdome. But he taketh vp his periods
by full 500. years, where as by our reckoning, the greater
period, conteineth only 490. yeares. And againe, he
counteth from the creation of the world, to this, 1600
yeare of Christ 5562. yeares, more then our former
count, 14. yeares. So that there will be a difference betweene
our reckonings of 44. yeares, but the matter &
space is not great in substance. For doubtlesse, that Antichristian
kingdome, as it hath begun already to fall, so
shortly shall it come to vtter ruine. For Babylon muste
needes fall, according to the Prophecie of the Revelation.
In the which, we finde also, at the end of the 14.
Chapter, this number of 1600. where it is said, That the
Vine-presse of Gods wrath was troden without the Cittie, and
blood come out of it, to the horse bridies, by the space of 1600.
stades or furlungs. This number, some of the learned
vnderstande to be meant of yeares, as though after the
out-running of 1600. yeares, the end shalbe, when the
wicked shalbe tormented in hell, after the similitude of
a woundrous great bloud shed in the field. But in my
judgement, that number is rather to be vnderstood, of
a space of grounde, conteining so many Fur-longs or
stades. For there being eight Furlongs in a myle of our
reckoning, they come to 200. of our common myles,
which was the longest reaching of the boundes of the
Land of Israel. For by the citie, is signifyed Spirituall
Ierusalem, the Church of God; within the which, the
Elect and godly are conteined: And the tredding of
the vine-presse without the Citie, is meante of them

that are out of the true Church, which are in a far greter
number, vpon whom Gods wrath doth fal, as it wer,
comprehending the whole space of the Land, without
the citie: But to returne to that Treatise, of the second
comming of Christ, the author insisteth very much vpon
the number of 5555. from the creation of the world,
which after his reckoning, endeth in the year of Christ
1593. yeares; but after our count, the 1607. yeare: of the
which number, he gathereth a great mysterie: Because
it conteineth, both an Arithmeticall & Geometrical proportion
of numbers, to wit, an Arithmeticall, in proceeding
by Foure fiues, and a Geometrical, by reason the
parts therof are made vp in progres, by multiplication
of 10. As fiue-times ten, mak, 50. ten-times 50. mak 500.
& ten times 500. make 5000. Or if ye like to proceed the
cōtrary way, the tenth part of 5000. is 500 & the tenth
part of 500. is 50. & the tenth part of 50. is 5. wherof he
gathereth, that after the cōpleiting of 5555. years, frō the
Worldes creation, there shall fall foorth a merveylous
change of the estate of the World, as indeed there was
not such a concurrence of numbers, since the yeare of
Christ 496. Neither shall the like so long as the World
lasteth. Now because of the perfection of the number
of fiue, aboue other numbers, it comprehendeth in it,
all vnities, of the which, all other numbers do consiste,
be they eauen or odde: and because, distributiue justice
standeth in Geometrical proportion, hee gathereth and
supposeth, that the Lord God, maker and governour
of all things, by this proportionable agreeing of numbers,
would leade vs to a certaine deepe consideration
of a perfite expyring and ende of all thinges: So that
hee trusteth, the comming of the Sonne of GOD to
judgment shortly thereafter to insue. To the which,
he addeth many other arguments and conjectures to

the same purpose. As to me, albeit I like not to follow
any Pythagorical superstition, in observation of numbers,
yet in so far as we may haue any good ground out
of holy Scriptures or evident reason. For such reckoning,
I think it not altogether to be refused, having the
concurrence of other good testimonies, to confirme
the same. As indeed, there appeares to be some greate
mysterie in the conjoyning of so manie fiues to-gether.
For before it, or with it, the manifolde Eclipses
that are to fall out, with their effects, and specially, that
fearefull Eclipse of the 1605. yeare, wherein the Sun
shall be allutterlie darkned at Noone-daie, whereof
the effectes shal▪ continue certaine yeares thereafter;
pretende great mutations and perturbationes to ensue
in those few yeares following; As wartes, seditiones,
pestilences, famine, with many other grievous calamities,
and Tragicall eventes; such as treasons, conspiracies;
so that few men may truste one another, wherewith
the common societie of men, is like to be dissolved,
and all licencious libertie to wickednesse to haue
place. And shortlie, Loue to waxe colde, and selfe-loue
to waxe hote, with all other such enormities and corruptiones,
as the Apostle PAVLE prophecieth to fall
foorth in the latter dayes in his Epistles: And namely,
in matters of Religion,
                  
                     •
                  . Tim. 3. new sectes and heresies, shall aryse,
with a merveilous defection from the faith, according
to the wordes of our Maister Christ, When the
Sonne of man shall come, beleeue yee, he shall finde faith in the
earth? But the most evident testimonie of all, is the agreement
of those said heavenly signes, with the prophecies
of the Revelation of the sixt and seventh trumpets.
For the end of the sixt trumpet and Vi
                  •
               le, and the
beginning of the seaventh (vnder which now we are)
agree together, as they doe in all the reste. Nowe the

summe of all those tokens and signes, is to declare,
how when God sendeth his Worde, and Preachers
of the Gospell in the worlde, men refusing the same,
are tormented with wartes, and manie other calamities,
and that by his juste judgement. This is meant
first generally, by opening of the seaven seales of the
closed booke. For at the first seale opening, the white
horse,Apocal. 7. and the ryder, with his bow bent, signifyeth, the
Preaching of the Evangel. At the second seale opening
the red horse, with his rydar, betokeneth the sworde,
blood, and battel, which God sendeth in the VVorld,
being disobedient to the preaching of the Gospel. Like
wise, the black-horse, with his ridar, and the ballance in
his hande, at the opening of the thirde seale, signifyeth
dearth & famin, sent for the same cause. And the fourth
horse, being of pale colour, with his ridar Death, at the
opening of the fourth seale, declareth the plague of
pestilence, and other deadly diseases, punishing mens
rebellion and disobedience to the Gospell. At the opening
of the fift seale: The Saintes & Martyrs, for the testimonie
of the trueth, craue revenge at God hand, for
the innocent shedding of their bloud. At the sixt seale
opening, the great earth-quake, with obscuratiō of the
Sunne, and the reste of the signes therein specified, declare
great troubles in general, corruption & darkning
of the truth, with bloudy persecutiō, & throwing down
of the Ministers of the Gospell, so that the Church did
lurke in obscurity for a time, and many made defection
from the Romane Empyre. But in the meane time,
GOD had his servantes marked, as is specified in the
seaventh chapter. Finally, at the seaventh seale opening
the silence for halfe an hourse, signifyeth, a little rest by
God, graunted to his Church, in the middest of these
troubles: And there-with, is declared, howe GOD

accepted the prayers of his Saintes, offered by Christ.
All these thinges (I say) testifie in general the estate of
the Church, and such troubles as haue f
                  •
               llen foorth in
all ages & periodes of time, the beginning of the Preaching
of the Gospell, & yet continue in ou
                  •
                daies. For
the end is not yet come. And the estate of the Church
is like to the selfe almost in all ages. But by the blowing
of the seaven trumpets, alluding to the Iubil
                     •
                  es of
the lewes, we vnderstand the particular estate of every
periode of time, since the first Preaching of the Gospel,
as partly was declared before. Of the which periodes,
wee are now into the seventh and last, to wit, in the beginning
thereof, which hath affinitie and similitude,
with the ende of the former sixt periode and blast of
Trumpet.Apoc. 8. Therefore, ceasing now to make discourse in
particular of the first foure blasts of the Trumpet, wherin
the first plague of haile & fyre mingled with bloud,
doth signifie, a certaine vnmeete temperature of colde
and heate of men, in receiving the Gospell, with mingled
bloudy persecution of the tyrantes of the earth.
And the seconde, of the burning mountaine, cast into
the sea, may signifie, the greate persecutor, Diocletian
being last of these emperors, with his fierie rage against
the wavering multitude of christians, of whō, the third
part were either destroyed, or yeelded to his tyrannie.
The third trūpet likewise, making mention of a greate
star falling from heaven, doth properly signifie Arius,
who with his bitter heresie, against the divinity of the
Son of God, infected the pure fountains of the word of
God. And wher it is said, that at the blaste of the fourth
trumpet, the third parte of the Sunne, the Moone, and
Starres were smitten: Wee vnderstand, the light of the
pure Gospel, with the Ministers therof to haue bin in a
great part obscured in that foure periode of time. Of

these things (I say) I wil not nowe intreate in particular,
but come to the last three blastes of trumpet, conteining
three woes, that is, three more fearefull plagues
then the former.Apoe. 
                     •
                  . So commeth the fift blast, and first
woe, about the 1051. yeare of Christ, wherein a greate
starre falleth from heaven, to whom was given the 
                  •
               eye
of the bottomlesse-pit, out of the which, arose a great
and dark smoke, and out of the smoke Locustes, which
are described at length in the text. This starre I take
vndoubtedly, to signifie the Pope, with his feyned
keyes, whereby he pretendeth to haue power to hinde
& louse, not only in the earth, but also to deliver mens
soules out of Purgatorie, with the smoke of false doctraine:
and the 
                  •
               ocustes, to signifie his corrupted Clergie,
and swarmes of Cloysters, who are set foorth with
their liuely colours & properties, that, no man can deny
to agree wel vnto them. This star may also signifie,
Mahomet that false prophet, with his corrupted Alcoran
and 
                  〈◊〉
                of his secte. Alwaies, the remanent of this
first 
                  〈◊〉
               , 
                  •
               et troubleth the world, albeit this Antichristi
                  ••
               
and Papisticall kingdome, in a parte hath gotten
a great fal: Therefore we come to the sixt trumpet,
which begouth to be blowen, about the year of Christ
1296. wherein the foure Angels were loused from the
floud Euphrates, which is most conveniently interprete
of the four great Mahometane nations, comming from
the East, to witte, the Arabianes, Saracenes, Turkes, and
Tartarianes, with the infinite number of their Horsemen,
ay ready for battel, with a furious and fyrie rage;
& namly, that bloudy Nation of the Turkes, who now
hath the dominion over the rest, and over a great parte
of the Earth. This is the second woe, whereof this day
still we haue experience; IOHN therefore sayeth, hee
saw these horses long before in a vision, with them that

sate vpon them, having fyerie habbergeons, and of Iacynth
& brimstome, & that of the fyery smoke & brimstone,
the third part of men were killed: which may wel
signifie their goodnes & artillery; by the which devillish
inventiō, a great part of men of the world, are daily
murthered; shutt out at their mouthes & fyered at their
tayles. This plague then being one of the last plagues,
signifyed also in powring out of the sixt Viole vpō the
great river Euphrates to dry it vp, that is, to take away all
impediments, & to giue place in the wrath of God, to
the kings of the East, to invade Europe; ceaseth not this
day to continue, & is appearant to continue with great
rage, this instant, 1600. yeare, & certain years hereafter,
concurring with the threatning signes of the heavens,
whereof I haue already spoken. And the cause thereof,
is evidēt: Because (as it followeth in the text) The rest of
men which are not already killed by these plagues, repented not
of their workes of their hands, that they should not worship divels
& Idoles of God and of silver, of brasse and stone, and of
wood, which neither can see, neither heare, nor goe: expressely
damning the Papistes, which yet remaine in their Idolatrie.
As also these repenteth not of their murthering of the
Saints of God, nor of their sorceries, neither their fornications
nor of their thieft. In the which they, and other feyned
Christians amongs vs still are involved: For the which
causes followeth the third & last woe▪ with the blast of
the 7. trumpet, which begouth to blow about the 1541
year of Christ.Apoe 10. & 11. But before this last woe fal out: the Lord
by the Angel of his covenant Iesus Christ, of his great
goodnes, offreth to the world, the book of his new Testament,
& willeth the same to be preached by his Ministers:
& with that to our great cōfort, the true church
is measured, & the elect ar marked, so that Satan & the
tyrants of the world, cānot hinder their salvation. Thē
               
finally commeth the last plague & woe, vpon infidels
& impenitent sinners, suddenly & vnlooked for, when
they with then head, the divell shall passe with manie
woes vnto everlasting torment, but this shal not be till
the second woe, be vtterly consumed & past, with the
dependances therof, which a
                  •
                signifyed in the seaventh
blast, by a wounderfull great Earth-quake, with lighenings
and voyces, and thundrings, with much haile.
The like whereof is repeated, in powring of the seavent
viole of Gods wrath, where it is said also, that the hail was
great like talents that fell out of heauen vpon men,Chap. 16. so that th
                     •
                  y
blasphemed God, because of the plague of the haile, it was so
great. By which figures, the Spirite of God will vtter
vnto vs, the great destruction of his enemies, with such
as hold stil the beasts mark, & haue no grace to repente
in these last daies. For of before, the thundring of Gods
word, called all men to repentance, and to obedience
of the Gospell, with an amiable and loving voyce. But
now finally, such as will not come out of Babylon, nor
repent their wicked lines, by Gods just judgement, are
threatned with an other kinde of thundring, to witte,
with horible punishmēt, alluding by these similituds to
the over throw of Sodome, & to the words of the Psalmist
where he saieth,Psal. 1
                     •
                  . 
               vpon the wicked, God shal raine snares fyre
& brimstone, and stormie tempests. It is more-over added,
in powring out of the seaventh viole in the aire (wherby
is signifyed a great perturbation of al the elements)
that there was such an Earth-quake, that the like had
never bene. These tempestes in the aire, may both
be vnderstoode literallie and Spiritually. For literally,
our Maister Christ fore-warneth vs of the like, where
he testifyeth, that before his latter comming, the powers
of the heauen shalbe moved: & spiritually, the moving
of the aire & the great earthquak signifie such a cō
               fusiō
of al things in the world, that the lik hath not bin

seene of before: And by the much and vehement great
haile, is meant the great coldnes of loue that now wee
see in the world, as also it was fore told by our Saviour
Christ: And by his Apostle PAVLE, speaking of selfe-loue,
and lack of zeale in Religion, which maketh men
to dispise God and godlinesse, and to blaspheme against
the Gospel, and Preachers thereof, which plague
now (al
                  •
               s) doth everie where increase. And it is added
futher in the text of IOHN, that the great citie was divided
into three parts. By this citie (no doubt) is meant
the externall face of the visible Church, composed of
true professors, Papistes, and Hypocrites so that we see
there shall not be a full and perfite vnitie of religion, to
the end of the World. But in the midde-time, we haue
this soli
                  ••
               e comforte, that at the blast of the seaventh
trumpet, the mysterie of God shall be fulfil
                  •
               ed toward
his Saintes, and great joye shal be among the Elect, because
the Kingdomes of this world, are our Lords and
his Christs, and he shal raigne for evermore. And with
this shall come the end of this world, which albeit it be
vncertaine, as touching the year, day and houre, when
it shalbe, yet certainely it is not farre off, seeing al these
tokens and others, specified in the Scriptures, are already
fulfilled, and the great Angell hath sworne that
there shall be time no more: The Lord make vs readie
for his comming, that wee may lift vp our heades
from the vanities of this worlde, and waite
for that day of our Redemption: Come
Lord Iesus come.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            A faithfull and godlie Admonition to al
true Christians, gathered vpon the words of
the Apostle PAVLE
            
               Ephes. 5. vers 16. Coloss 
                     •
                  . vers 5.
               To redeeme time, because the dayes are euill.
            
            
               GOD The creator and author of
time, as hee hath appoynted all
things that are done in the World
to be measured thereby; so hath
he ordayned, certaine limites and
bounds of time; some short, some
longer, vnto the life of every man
in this earth, according as it is written
in Io
                  •
               , where he sayeth,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                
               Are not the dayes of man, and
the number of his Moneths appoynted with thee [O Lord]
thou hast limited his bounds, which he cannot passe ouer. And
a little before, to declare the shortnes of these bounds,
he compareth the life of everie man that is borne of a
woman, to a flowre that suddenly shoteth vp, and is cut down,
and vanisheth away as a shaddow, and continueth not. Likewise,
DAVID in the Psalme,Phalm▪ 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                compareth his dayes
to an hand breadth, and sheweth, how every man walketh,
as in a shaddowe; disquieteth him selfe in vaine,
heapeth vp riches, and cannot tell who shall gather
them. And Pindarus the Poet, to expres to the vttermost
the brevitie and vncertaintie of mans life, compareth it
not onelie to a shaddow, but to the dreame of a shaddowe:
And yet so is the corrupt nature of the moste

part of men that they imagine and dreame vnto themselues,
a certaine false opinion of immortalitie in this
present most frayle and transitorie life. And (as the
same Poet sayeth) a certaine presumpteous hope, so
hath knit vp our mortall members, that wee imagine
manie great matters in our mindes, and our fore sight
hath farre endes. To refrayne this vaine curiositie, the
Prophet Moyses, in the ninetie Psalme, after that hee
hath distributed the frayle estate of mans life, declaring
how they passe awaie, as a sleepe, and as the Grasse
that groweth in the Morning, and at the euening is
withered awaie.
            And howe that commonlie, the longest tearme of
mennes yeares, is about three score and ten yeares:
And if some of greater strength, attaine to the age of
foure-score yeares, yet are they the more subject to
laboure and sorrowe: hee maketh his supplication
vnto GOD, that hee will teache vs to number our
dayes, that wee maie applie our heartes vnto wisedome:
Whereby hee sheweth, that none but they
whome GOD of his especiall grace, doth illuminate
by his Spirite, canne rightlie applie their heartes, to
this true Wisedome, to considder the brevitie of the
shorte number, of the dayes we haue here in this present
life.
            Therefore (deare brethren and Christians) wee
haue great neede most earnestlieto call and crie vnto
GOD, that wee forget not this counte: Forthere bee
manie that can make great reckonings of long times,
and manie yeares that are paste before them: And
yet cannot rightlie reckon the shorte time and continuance
of their owne liues: yea, men wil reckon and
counte by Arithmeticke all things, and even as the

very distance, betweene the Heaven and the Earth,
and the moste highest Starres: And yet onelie the
faithfull, (and they that put their confidence in God)
knowe the distance that is betweene this shorte and
transitorie life, and that blessed and immortall life
which hath no ende, vnto the which wee are created,
and to the which ende, this presente life ought to bee
directed.
            For, (deare brethren) let vs bat considder the vanitie
of the moste parte of menne in this poynte, how
littele they esteeme of the shorte time they are to
remayne in this presente and momentaneous life:
Not-with-standing, moste of all their vayne pretences
and imaginationes, is to compasse the whole Worlde,
(if it were possible) and to doe greate wounders and
actes therein.
            For time being so precious, and so highlie to be regarded,
in respecte of the shortnesse of this life, that
GOD hath lente vs in this wretched Worlde, and (as
the Prophet DAVID sheweth vs moste plainely and
evidently, in the some score and tenth Psalme) wee
knowe not how soone the Lord shall saye vnto vs, Returne
yee sonnes of ADAM vnto corruption.
            
            And more-over, time once being lost, cannot be againe
recovered, for no Gold not price, yet is there
not any thing where-of men are more prodigall, in so
much, that there is nothing whereof they regarde
lesse the losse, yea, that which is worse, the greater
parte of menne counte so little of time, that for a
shorte and transitorie passing of time in this life,
they lose the ioye and felicitie of that everlasting life,
and perpetuall time, whereof, commeth this speec
                  •
               e
cōmonly vsed of this world (pas time) but by corruptiō
               
of maners of men, who esteemlightly how time passeth
awaie, so they may haue some vaine pleasure in the
drist thereof, as a thing where with they be fasshed and
wearied: So wee see, how the little time that men haue
in this life, for the most part is spent, to witte, in vanitie,
idlenesse, yea, over often in vice and wickednesse, and
that little time which is bestowed in vertue or godlinesse,
is commonly most wearisome: As when men are
occupyed; be they Magistrats or judges, in hearing the
plaintes of the poore, and execution of justice; be they
inseriours or craftel-men, or labourers, in doing their
handie worke, and appoynted labour, to the profit of
themselues, and their families: But in spending of it,
which by that meanes they winne, as in drinking, playing,
or vaine games, there is no hoe, not falsherie to be
occupyed night and day; and in matters of godlinesse,
see we not what fassherie it is, even to many, not of the
worst sort, to spend the space of an houre, or little more
in hearing the word of God, wherein standeth our salvation,
who will not like nor tire of sit at table thrise as
long to feede the bodie? yea, oft-times, to over-burden
it with meate and drinke, to whome it is so irksom,
shorter time to haue their soules fedde with that word
which is the more precious an delicat food of everlasting
life. VVherfore, seing the most part of this world,
regards so little of time, but pas it over so lightly, to their
great damnage and perrill of their own soules: we, the
faithful, ought to be the more earnest, to exhort & admonish
one another, to occupy the short time we haue
heare, not as the common sorte of carelesse men vses:
but in such waies, as wee may bee able (at least in some
measure) to giue account to him that 
                  •
               es placed vs in
this earth, as vppon a skaffold to play our parte: and if
we haue neglected or mispent the time by-past, to take

heede to recover the losse thereof in times comming.
Nowe this is the cause and ende wherefore Paule in
the words of our text, exhorted so diligently the faithfull
of his daies, to redeeme time, by recovering the losse
by-past, & making much of the time present, & of time
to come, so long as they haue it, apprehēding greedely
the occasiō offred vnto them to do wel: And this the Apostle
speaketh to the Gentiles of his time, being newly
converted to the knowledge of the Gospell, having respect
to their-by-past life and conversation, spent in vanitie,
wickednesse and ignorance of God, according
to the which, tendeth that saying of Peter in his first Epistle,
4. chap. verse 3. as he writeth also of the same matter,
saying, It is sufficient for vs, that we haue spent the time
past of the life, after the lusts of the Gentiles, walking in wantonnesse,
lustes, drankennesse, in gluttonie, and in abhominaeble
idolatries: And this same our Apostle, to the like purpose,
in another place sayeth,Rom. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 
               We know the time, that the
houre is now to rise from sleep for our salvation, is nearer then
when we beleued the night is past, & the day is at hand: Let vs
therefore caste awaie the workes of darkenesse, and put on the
armor of light, that we may walke honestlie as in the da
                     •
                  e, not in
gluttony & drunkennesse, nor in strife nor invying, not in
chambring & wantonnes, but to put on the Lord Iesus Christ,
& take no thoght for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts of it. So here
the meaning of the Apostle is, where he speaketh of redeeming
of time, that the faithfull take greate diligence
in the recovering of that which is by-past and lost, by
walking more circumspectlie and diligently, in the
trad of godlines, in times comming, taking a similitude
from worldly men, & worldly affairs: As if a Merchant
hauing slipt & slept his businesse, in not comming in
due time to his market, should be put in remembrance
to be more vigilant in times comming, and vse more

diligence in vttring his wares in time to come, or as if
it were, to fore-warne vs not to be like vnthriftie spenders
wedde-setters of lande, who spend ryotously the
money they take vpon it, & haue taken no heed to pay
the yearely duetie, or annuel-rent to the creditors, but
let it slip over, the longer they so do, the Land is worse
to redeeme, vnlesse they take better heede in times
comming.
            So they that driue time, to amende their liues
from daye to daye, and suffer themselues to be carryed
awaie in a custome and habite of evill doing, repent
over-late, when they cannot amend the former losse.
Therefore the Apostle in the words preceeding, desireth
the Ephesians, to take heede to walk circum spectly. not as
such vnwise men, but as the vvise, and vnderstand what the
vvill of the Lorde is. And as wee are made light in the
Lorde, so wee walke in the Light and sight of him
and his Angelles, having them as witnesses of all our
doings: Al-be-it, no mortall man should knowe the
same, and so to become wiser then the common sorte
of the Worlde, as being instructed in the Schoole of
Christ, the fountaine of all true wisedome. This being
the minde and meaning of the Apostle, concerning
the redemption of time, wee haue to marke the cause
of this his earneste admonition, which hee addeth
immediatlie, saying, Because the dayes are evill, not that
the dayes were evill of themselues; but this hee speaketh,
in respecte of the time, and daungerous estate
of Christians in his dayes, the worlde being also then
full of corruption, and offences, and therefore more
difficill to the faithful, to walke warilie therein, the Gospell
then having so manie adversaries; and the Divell
himselfe occupying a tyrannie in the Worlde, so
that the time coulde not be dedicate and consecrate to

the service of GOD, vnlesse the same were in a manner
redeemed, & the lost time by-past, bought againe
with the losse of worldlie pleasures, and forsaking
of the vnfruitfull workes of darkenesse: Seeking after
newe occasiones of Godlinesse, which the Worlde
and worldlings, by euill example, would plucke awaie
from vs.Colloss. 
                     •
                  . And therefore he admonisheth the Collossians
likewise to walk warelie, towards them that are without,
redeeming the time, meaning toward the infidels,
that they being mingled amongst them, might not
onelie beware, least they were defyled with their corrupt
manner of living, and so by processe of time, become
like to them, but also to beware to giue them occasion
of slander by any apearand evil ensample of life,
thereby to make them to speake evil of the Gospel, and
also to bee more cruell, and bente to persecute them
for the Gospelles sake; therefore hee willeth them, to
redeeme the time, by taking occasion of well dooing
Wheresoever he same was offered, and striue against
all impedimentes, and that because of the evill dayes
and greate corruptiones, that then reigneth in the
World.
            Now, if the Apostle had neede in his dayes, to vse
this exhortation, howe much more is it needefull in
this corrupted age wherein we are of the which, the
same Apostle PAVLE, speaketh vnto TIMOTHEE,
in the second Epistle the third Chapter, in this manner,
Knowe thou this, that in the laste dayes, there shall
bee perrellous times: For menne shall bee lovers of themselues,
boasters, proude, cursed speakers, dissobedient
to Parentes, vn-thankfull, vn-holie, vvithout naturall
affection, truce-breakers, false accusers, intemperat, fearce, despisers
of them which are good, Traitours, heady, high-minded,
lovers of pleasure more then of GOD, hauing a shew

of godlinesse, but denying the power thereof. Turne away
therfore (sayth he) from such. Surely, if ever there
was any time since the beginning of the world, or any
age where-into such corruptions and maners of men
abounded; this may bee holden the principall, wherevnto
charitie is waxed could, and all kinde of iniquity
waxed ho
                  •
               e, and hath full libertie: And albeit the Apostle
in this place, by the last times, meaneth in a manner
the whole estate of Christs kingdome, that was to follow
his dayes, yet the nearer the Sunne draweth to an
ende,Math. 24 the more danger and greater troubles no doubt
were to ensew: For as Christ himselfe doth forewarne
vs, In these latter dayes shall aryse warres and tumultes of
warres, famine, pestilence, pers
                     •
                  cution for the Gospell, with other
calamities and inconveniences, which fall out
against mens bodies, but the corrupt and evill maners
of men, also should infect the soules of those that bee
not ware with them, and that which is worse, the Apostle
here meaneth, not only that such vices shal reign in
these latter times, amongst the vngodlie, and enemies
that are without the Church, but even of domesticall
professoures with the same, that would be reckoned
amongst the members of his Church, for GOD will
haue the same so exercised, that she shall be subject to
beare, albeit not to foster such pestiferous corruptions,
within her bosome: for which cause, we haue al great
neede in these daies, of this fore-warning, that wee
should learne in time to beare patientlie our estate, and
to eschew the evil example of those men, who are now
mingled amongst vs, whose companie is declared to
be the more dangerous, that he shewed, that such men
polluted with so manie erroneous faults, should neverthelesse
professe outwardlie, and haue a shew of godlinesse,
for so is the nature of Hypocrites, to cloke their

sinnes with extreame impudencie: Of such sorte were
the Pharisees of old; and in our time, the filthie Papistical
Clergie, and over-manie of those who pretend
aye reformed Religion: For the Apostle here maketh
a catalogue of such signes, as appeare not outwardlie
incontinent, but lurk and are hid vnder a certaine feined
holinesse. For where shall wee finde an hypocrite
but he is proude, a lover of himselfe, and contemner
of others: yea, fearce, cruell, and deceitfull: but fo hee
will not appeare to mens eyes, vnlesse he be more narrow
                  •
               ie
espyed by them that haue the spirit of discretion,
to know them by their fruits. Of these Hypocrites,
the Apostle Paule, in his other Epistle to Timothee, giveth
two examples,1. Tim. 4. which hee declared also, shall be in
the latter dayes, wherein some shall departe from the
faith, taking heed to deceivable spirites; yea, teaching
devilish doctrine, to witte, forbidding mariage, and
commanding to abstaine from meates, which God
created and ordained, to bee received with thanks-giving.
Noting in speciall (besides vther heretickes) the
Papistes with their superstitious decrees, wherby they
binde the consciences of men, with these two errovrs
& many vthers, contrarie to the libertie of the Gospel,
& persecute by fyre & sword true Christians, that wil
not assent to their devilish decrees: therefore wee may
well conclude, these are the dangerous dayes, whereof
Paule meant, and that the faithfull haue great neede to
take heede to them selues: And by all appearance this
same present yeare of Christ, 1600. with certaine fewe
yeares, immediatly following, are like to be yeares of
great troubles to the Church of God and persecution,
intended by the Papisticall tyrannie, against all true
professoures of Gospell, wherein they may be able
to invade, as may witnesse, that late League, made in

               Ferrar, at the mariage of the King of Spaine, and that
mis-made Cardinal, Albertus, Arch-duke of Austria,
celebrate by Pope Clement the eight, which hath bene
interprysed to be begunne and to take execution in
some parts of Almanie, and of the Low cuntries: and
great vowes and preparationes made (as we heare) not
onely against those cuntries, but against this Ile of Brittaine,
and inhabitantes thereof, the which, the Lorde in
his mercie, turne to the confusion of the interprisoures
thereof, as he did before: And giue vs grace, that wee
may with watching and prayer, depend vpon his majestie,
trustling, and waiting for his deliverance, occupying
the time, and ocasion offered to vs of peace and
quietnesse, in such sorte, that suddane destruction apprehend
vs not before wee beware, according as wee
haue bene forewarned of our maister Christ, and of
his Apostle Peter, declaring that his latter comming to
iudgement, shall be as in the dayes of Noah, when as they
were eating and drinking, marying, and giuing in Mariage,
vnto the day that he was entred into the Arke, and then came
the floude and destroyed them al. So shall the comming of the
Sonne of man be (sayeth he.) We see now the worlde is
in as great and greater securitie, then it was then, and al
the sins that reigned thē in the world aboūd now more
then they did. Therefore, the sinnes that we reade of
them of that age were two in speciall, the one was
the vnlawfull conjunction in mariage of the children
of God, or the faithfull seede with the cursed posteritie
of CAIN, and that there were then Gyants in the
Earth, to witte, mightie oppressoures, vsurping 
                  •
               yrannicall
dominion over men, such as was not seene in
the worlde of before. And haue wee not these and
manie moe greater sinnes and enormities, raignning
at all libertie in our dayes, for who now seeketh

allyance of mariage with the Godlie, for vertue or
Godlinesse cause? But be they Godlie, be they vngodlie;
the first question is, what may they spend, how
much men may giue with their daughters; & as to tyrā
               ny
& oppressiō was there ever greater since the world
stood. But besides these specials, kindnes, fidelitie, and
loue, true feare of GOD (which is principal) where
be they to be founde? But in place thereof, craft, doublenesse,
deceite, insatiable greedines, and such other
sinnes, as was recited before, and prophecied by
PAVLE, beare the swinge in such sorte, that it is marvell
howe a common societie can stande anie longer
amongst men. And if this were onelie amongst the
Romane sorte of prophane menne, it were more
to be borne with, but even they who will be in account
& haue place in the Church of God, are no better
for the most part: And (to cease now to speake in
particular, of other forrayne cuntries) comming to our
selues in this Iland; what is there in England, and Scotland,
but a naked profession of Religion, with out
fruites following? In England, a proude ambition,
both in Church, and amongst the whole multitude:
Yea, proude profanitie, with contempt and disdayne
of others. In Scotland, a sluggish securitie, and in
both the Landes, a loath-some haiting of the worde of
GOD, casting off the yoke of discipline, and licenceous
liberty in all kinde of vngodlinesse, yea, meiting of
the Lorde our God, with extreame vnthankfulnesse,
in respect of his graces offered so long to both the Nationes:
Falsehood, oppression, murthers, harlottries,
and all other such kinde of mischieuous dealing,
without hauing anie punishmente: Yea, filthie
Swine,2. Pet. 
                     •
                  . Iude. and Dogges, eating their owne vomite, as was
prophecyed in PETER and IVDE, in their Epistles;

and namely, such prophaine mockers of all religion,
hauing once professed the trueth, aud now turning to
Epicureisme, & develish Atheisme, tanting at the promise
of the cōming of the Lord Iesus to judgement, &
saying, that all worldlie things continue in the same estate
they were frō the beginning, & so supposing the
world never to haue ende, & that there shall neither be
punishment for evill doing, nor reward for wel doing,
after this life: To whom Peter answered accordingly, as
in his second Epistle, we may read, howe they willinglie
misknow howe the first worlde was destroyed by
water, and it resteth, that the next, which we are in, be
destroyed by fyre, and that the long suffering of the
Lord is (if it were possible) to bring al men to repētance
and howe a thousand years is with him as one day, and
one daye, as a thousande yeares, as indeede what is the
time, if wee shall reckon all the ages from the beginning
of the worlde, vnto this present, but as it was not
sixe daies expleit, for giueing to everie age a thousand
yeares, as some do, the six thousand; vet it wil lack foure
hundreth forty fiue years, & if we count by hundreths,
the ages of the worlde (which is now commonly the
longest time of mans life) there will be but fiftie fiue ages
paste, and we are now in the fiftie sixtage, wherein
all tokens of the latter times, appeares for the most parte
to be fulfilled (whereof we haue spoken in our Treatise
before) and if we shall beleeue the Astrologues, Saturne
being Lorde of the revolution of the great Circle
this yeare, signifieth Sectes, changing of estates and
Kingdomes. Seeing then all these things threatten vnvnto
vs the hastie cumming of the Lord to judgment,
it becōmeth vs now not to neglect the occasion offred
vnto vs, so long as wee are in this present shorte life, to
do well, for we know how occasion is paynted, as the

verse sayeth:

                  Fronte capillata est, post hac occasio calva.
               
               
                  Occasion on the fore-head hath haire,
                  But ay behinde she is naked and baire.
               
            
            Wishing al men therefore earnestlie, (as our Maister
fore-warneth vs) to lift vp their heades, and waite for
their approching redemption, when the Lord shal appeare
in the clowdes to the comfort of the faithfull.
And seeing there is no perpetuall remayning for vs in
this world, but after a certaine shorte space of time, we
all must needes change our dwelling place, and compeare
before that celestiall Iudge; that wee learne to addresse
our selues for that heavenly life, while we haue
time, for it shall come to passe, that time shall bee no
more, when as the seaventh Angel shal begin to blowe
his trumpet. For then (as Iohn speaketh in his Revelation)
the mysterie of God shall be finished. Let vs not
therefore be like the foolish virgines, but whē the bridgroome
commeth,Math. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . let vs haue our Lampes reddy prepared
with oyle to meet him, and the more thornie
and dangerous the way of the jorney of our life is in
these euil dayes, let vs be the more diligent, & warily taking
heed to the steppes of our feet, that we may walke
as in lighte and not in darknesse; & the Lord will come
shortly and put an ende to our labors, receauing
vs in his everlasting kingdome, euen the Lord
Iesus Christ. To whome with his heauenly
Father, and the holy Ghost, be al honour
and praise for euer,
Amen.
         
      
   