
      
         
            
            
               
THE LIVES OF EPAMINONDAS, OF PHILIP OF MACEDON, OF DIONYSIVS THE ELDER, AND OF OCTAVIVS CAESAR AVGVSTVS: COLLECTED out of good Authors.
            Alſo the liues of nine excellent Chieftaines of warre, taken out of Latine from EMYLIVS PROBVS, by S. G. S.
            
               By whom alſo are added the liues of Plutarch and of Seneca: Gathered together, diſpoſed, and enriched as the others.
            And now tranſlated into Engliſh by Sir THOMAS NORTH Knight.
            
               ANCHORA SPEI.
            
            Imprinted at London by Richard Field 1602.
            
            
         
         
            TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTIE PRINCESSE ELIZABETH, BY THE GRACE OF GOD, OF ENGLAND, Fraunce, and Ireland, Queene, Defender of the Faith, &c.
            
               THE Princely bountie of your bleſſed hand (moſt gracious Soueraigne) comforting and ſupporting my poore old decaying life, of right challengeth the trauels in my ſtudie, the labours of my bodie, and the prayers of my deuotions to be wholly imployed for your Highneſſe, and altogether dedicated to your ſeruice. Wherein whileſt I ſtriue to bring in open ſhew ſome ſmall performance of my moſt humble dutie to your ſacred Maieſtie, mine owne vnworthineſse amazeth me with trembling feare for my preſumption, but that your Highneſſe matchleſse grace to ſo many your moſt admirable vertues offer my pardon. Vnder which I preſent in all humbleneſse into your Maieſties ſacred hands this my ſecond tranſlation of the late addition of fifteene other liues, vnto thoſe former in Plutarch, publiſhed for benefite of my country, vnder protection of the moſt royall name of your moſt gracious Maieſtie. And albeit in reſpect of my ſelfe I offer but dutie, which I wiſh I could in other and better ſort performe: yet I am the rather emboldned herein, for that the famous memorie of renowmed Emperours, mightie Kings, worthie Chieftaines and Generals of armies yea and of two famous Philoſophers Plutarch and Seneca, being the whole ſubiect of this ſecond tranſlation, is worthily publiſhed vnder your Maieſties patronage. Whoſe rare vertues and wonderfull wiſedome, neither former mightie kings, nor learned Philoſophers might equall: from whoſe bleſſed fortunes many oppreſſed Kings, and diſtreſſed kingdomes haue ſought and found their ſuccors:

and whoſe moſt honourable and moſt happy peaceable gouernement, is worlds wonder to all poſteritie.
            Wherefore moſt gracious and moſt bleſſed Soueraigne, I beſeech your Princely fauour to accept with grace the ſimple performance of your poore vnworthie ſeruant his moſt humble ſeruice, whoſe ſoule with heartieſt prayer according to his moſt bounden dutie, continually calleth vnto God for preſeruation of your most royall perſon, in all honour, health, and happineſse, and ſo ſtill to raigne ouer vs.
            
               Your Maieſties moſt humble and obedient ſeruant. Thomas North.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE LIFE OF Epaminondas.
            
            
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
            
            
               O onely like thy ſelfe, the world alwayes
               Admireth thy great valure, grace and wit:
               And thinking to haue all good parts in it,
               By hauing thee, triumpheth in thy praiſe.
            
            
               WRiters of hiſtories report that Cadmus the ſonne of Agenor hauing taken ſea out of PHENICIA into EVROPE, by commandement of an Oracle he left the countrey of THRACIA where he had dwelt, and came into BOEOTIA, where he had great doings againſt a certaine neighbor-people called SPARTANS: of whom hauing ouercome part of them by ſubtilties, he made alliance with the chiefe of thoſe that were left aliue, and grew into ſuch fauour with them, that he drew them and their people vnto THEBES, where theſe great men which were of noble houſe tooke them wiues, and ſo had a great number of worthie men of noble race deſcended from them. Of which ſome of them were very rich men, and attained to the tipe of royall dignity: as Creon and Iocastus. Now becauſe they were deuided into two principall houſes, it is hard to iudge out of which of the two families of the Chronians or Echionides, Polymnis the father of Epaminondas was deſcended. Some are of opinion that he came out of the houſe of another chiefe man of the SPARTANS, called Vdaeus, from whom deſcended the deuine Tireſias. But howſoeuer it was, he deſcended from one of the moſt noble and ancient houſes of the THEBANS, of whom they report this notable thing: that the moſt part of this noble linage caried vpon their body euen for a naturall birth-marke from their mothers wombe, a Snake: and ſo did they beare it in their armes in the deuice of their Scutchions. Touching this matter, I hold the ſaying of the Poet Euripides to be true: that the honor of noble houſes falleth to decay, if once their goods faile thē. For the pouerty wherof ſome of Epaminondas
               
anceſtors made vertue and profeſſion, ſeemed to be the cauſe that they were made ſmall account of. Otherwiſe I cannot allow that the ſayd Poet ſpake of, that a noble and vertuous man is no body, if he be poore. For one Epaminondas onely throughly confuteth this opinion, who notwithſtāding he was exceeding poore, obtained neuertheleſſe the chiefeſt places of honor in the common wealth: for he was one of the beſt learned and moſt excellent Philoſophers of the world, being Platoes folower and familiar, and the moſt renowmed man of all the GREEKES, as appeareth by the diſcourſe of his life. Now Polymnis had two ſonnes, to wit, Caphiſias, and Epaminondas, whom he was very carefull to ſee well brought vp and taught all the liberall and honeſt ſciences, eſpecially Epaminondas: who had the moſt ſtayedſt wit, and beſt inclined to vertue, deſirous to hearken and to learne, humble, obedient, and wonderfull apt and docible. And according to the diſcipline of the THEBANS, he learned of one Dionyſius to be very skilfull in ſong and playing vpon inſtruments. And as for learning, and in Philoſophy chiefly, it happened well for him that he fell into good mens hands by ſuch a meane. When the colledges and companies of the Pythagorian Philoſophers that were diſperſed through the cities of ITALIE, were baniſhed by the faction of the Cyloniaus: they that kept ſtill together, met in councell at METAPONT to determine of their affaires. But ſome ſeditious perſons roſe againſt them, ſet fire in all parts of the houſe where they were, and burnt them all together, ſauing Philolaus and Lyſis, who being young and luſty, ſaued themſelues through the fire. As for Philolaus, he recouered the countrey of the LVCANIANS, and kept there with his friends: but Lyſis went further, and got to THEBES, where when he was arriued, Polymnis receiued him, and prayed him to be Epaminondas ſchoolemaiſter, who was but a young boy, but yet of good capacitie, and of very great hope. This Philoſopher imployed his endeuour to manure this noble and quicke wit of Epaminondas, and in ſhort time made him ready and perfect in all ſcience and vertue: ſo that it is hard to find a more wiſe, graue, and vertuous perſon then he was, of whom it is fit we ſhould ſay ſomewhat more at large. When he was but fifteene yeares of age, he gaue himſelfe to all manner of exerciſes of the body, as to runne, wreſtle, play at the weapons, and to practiſe all maner of armes: and being quickly skilfull in all theſe, he then gaue himſelfe to his booke, being naturally ſilent, fearefull to ſpeake, but neuer wearied to heare, and to learne. Whereupon Spintharus the TARENTINE hauing bene a long time with him in THEBES, ſayd he neuer ſpake to any man that knew ſo much and ſpake ſo litle as Epaminondas. If he fortuned to be in any company where there was talke of Philoſophy, or of ſtate matters: he would neuer from thence till he ſaw the matter ended that was propounded. Furthermore, he had no great liking of theſe darke and myſtical arguments of ſome, that thinke to hide vertue in the obſcurity of their words, but he gaue himſelfe wholly to the true practiſe thereof: though otherwiſe he was as pleaſant a man to giue a fine ſlent in diſcourſe, as could be poſſible to be found. As the diſputation betwixt him and Theanor, touching pouerty and riches doth witneſſe, which worthily deſerueth to be mentioned here, as in his proper place.
            
               Lyſis after he had liued a long time in THEBES, died, and was honorably interred by his diſciple Epaminondas, who had honored and entertained him whileſt he liued, & at his death omitted no ceremonies requiſite at his funerall. Arceſus, one of the chiefe of the Pythagorian Philoſophers that ſtayed in SICILIA, vnderſtanding that Lyſis was at THEBES, through age not able to go to him: appointed by his will and teſtament that they ſhould bring Lyſis aliue againe into ITALIE if it were poſſible, or at leaſtwiſe the reſt of his bones, if it ſo happened he were dead. The warres that fell out in the interim were a hinderance that that could not be done ſo ſpeedily. But when the wayes were open and free, the Pythagorians ſent Theanor of their ſect to THEBES, where he found Lyſis dead and buried, and ſo comming to Epaminondas, after ſalutations and preambles, told him before Polymnis and Caphiſias that his companions which were very rich, willed him to giue Polymnis and his children a good ſumme of money, in recompence of their courteous entertainement which they had giuen to Lyſis. Whereupon after pleaſant excuſes made, Epaminondas concluded, that none could be receiued: and added further, that Iaſona Captaine of the THESSALIANS thought I had giuen him a rude and vnciuill aunſwer, when he hauing earneſtly intreated me to take a good ſumme of gold which he gaue me, I ſent him word that he did me wrong, and began to make warre with me: for that he aſpiring to make himſelfe a Lord, would corrupt me with money, a plaine citizen of a free towne, and liuing vnder the law. But for thee, Theanor, I commend thy good will, becauſe it is honeſt

and vertuous, and I loue it with all my heart: but I tell thee, thou bringeſt phyſicke to men that be not ſicke. Admit then that thou hearing we had bene in warres, haddeſt brought vs armes to defend vs, and then in the ſame place thou haddeſt found vs quiet, and in good peace and amitie with our neighbours, thou wouldeſt not haue thought it good to haue beſtowed theſe armes, and left them with thoſe that had no need of them. Euen ſo thou art come to relieue our pouertie, as if it were a griefe vnto vs: whereas to the contrary it is an eaſie and pleaſant thing for vs to cary, and we are glad we haue it in our houſe amongſt vs: and therefore we need no armes nor money againſt that that doth vs no hurt at all. But thou ſhalt tell thy brethren there, that they do vſe their goods very honeſtly: and alſo that they haue friends here which vſe their pouerty well. And as for Lyſis entertainement & buriall, he himſelfe hath fully recompenced vs: hauing taught vs amongſt many other goodly things, not to be afraid of pouerty, nor to be grieued to ſee it amongſt vs. After Theanor had made ſome reply touching the good or euill of riches: as that if pouerty were not euill of it ſelfe, neither was riches to be had in contempt, and deſpiſed. No truly ſayd Epaminondas, yet conſidering with my ſelfe that we haue a world of couetous deſires of many things, ſome naturall as they call them, and borne with vs, bred in our fleſh for the luſts pertaining to it: others ſtraunge vnto vs grounded vpon vaine opinions, which taking a ſetling and habite in vs by tract of time, and long vſe through euill education, ofentimes do plucke vs downe, and withdraw our ſoules with more force and violence, then thoſe that be naturall vnto vs. For reaſon, by daily exerciſe of vertue and practiſe thereof, is a meane to take many of thoſe things away from vs that are borne and bred within vs: yet this notwithſtanding, we muſt vſe continuall force and exerciſe againſt our concupiſcenſes that are ſtrangers vnto vs, to quench them in vs, and by all poſſible meanes to repreſſe and ſubdue them. Now hauing made ſufficient proofe of that, there is alſo, ſayd he, an exerciſe of Iuſtice againſt greedy couetouſneſſe of getting, which is not, not to go rob and rifle his neighbors houſes in the night, nor not to rob men on the hie way ſide, nor if any man betray not his friends nor his countrey for money: ſuch one doth not exerciſe himſelfe againſt couetouſneſſe, for law poſſible, or feare, bridleth his couetous deſire to offend any man. But that man that oftentimes willingly abſtaineth from iuſt gaines, which he may lawfully take: he it is that by continuall exerciſe keepeth himſelfe farre off from vniuſt and vnlawfull taking of money. For it is vnpoſſible that in great pleaſures, yea wicked and daungerous, the ſoule ſhould containe it ſelfe from coueting of them, vnleſſe before being oftentimes at his choiſe to vſe them, he had not contemned them. And it is not eaſie to ouercome them, nor to refuſe great riches euill gotten being offered, vnleſſe he had long before killed in him this couetous deſire of getting, the which beſides many other habitudes and actions is ſtill greedily bent ſhamefully to gaine, pleaſing himſelfe in the purſute of iniuſtice, hardly ſparing to wrong another, ſo he in any thing profit himſelfe. But to a man that diſdaineth to receiue liberality and gifts of his friends, and refuſeth to take preſents offered him by kings, and that hath reiected the benefits of fortune, putting by all couetous deſire of gliſtering treaſure layed before him: he ſhall neuer be aſſailed to attempt him to do that is vniuſt, nor his mind ſhall neuer be troubled, but will content himſelfe quietly to do any thing that is honeſt, carying an vnright hart, finding nothing in it but that that is good and commendable.
            But his life is farre more excellent then his diſcourſe: and as touching that, I will yet ſpeake ſomewhat of it. Diomedon DYZICENIAN, at Artaxerxes requeſt, promiſed to win Epaminondas to take the PERSIANS part. To bring this to paſſe, he came to THEBES, and brought a great maſſe of gold with him, and beſtowing three thouſand crownes, he bribed a young man called Mycithus, whom Epaminondas loued dearely. This young man went to Epaminondas, and acquainted him with the occaſion of the other mans comming to THEBES. But Epaminondas ſtraight anſwered him, Diomedon being preſent: I haue no need of mony: if the king wiſh well to the THEBANS, I am at his commaundement without taking one peny: if he haue any other meaning, he hath not gold nor ſiluer enough for me: for I will not ſell the loue I beare to my countrey for all the gold in the world. As for thee that haſt now attempted me, not knowing me, haply thinking me to be like thy ſelfe, I pardon thee: but get thee away quickly out of the citie, leſt thou ſeduce ſome other, hauing failed to corrupt me. And for thee Micythus, deliuer him his crownes againe: and if thou doeſt it not preſently, I will ſend thee before a Iuſtice. Thereupon Diomedon beſought him he would let him go away with ſafetie, and cary that with him he brought thither. Yes mary, ſaid Epaminondas, but it ſhall not be for thy ſake, but for mine honor: being afraid that

if thy gold and ſiluer ſhould be taken from thee, ſome man would accuſe me that I had a ſhare in that which I refuſed to take openly. Then he asked him: Whither wouldeſt thou I ſhould cauſe thee to be conueyed? Diomedon ſaid, TO ATHENS: which was done, and he had a very good conuoy with him: and becauſe he ſhould not be troubled by the way betwixt the gates of THEBES, and the hauen where he ſhould imbarke himſelfe, Epaminondas gaue Chabrias the ATHENIAN charge of this man, that he ſhould ſee him ſafe at his waies end, and ſo he ſtraight returned backe againe.
            Now though he was very poore, yet he would neuer take any thing of his citie or friends, he was ſo well acquainted with pouerty, which he bare more patiently through his ſtudie of Philoſophie. For on a time he hauing the leading of an armie of the THEBANS into the country of PELOPONNESVS, he borrowed about fiue crownes of a citizen for his expences in his iourny. Pelopidas being a man of great wealth, and his exceeding good friend, could not poſſibly euer make him take any part of his goods, but rather Pelopidas learned of him to loue pouertie. For Epaminondas taught him to thinke it an honor to him to go plainely apparelled, to eate moderatly, to take paines willingly, and to make warre luſtily. But to releeue others, he would make bold to vſe his friends goods, and in ſuch a caſe their goods were common to him. If any of his citizens were taken priſoner with the enemy, or any friend of his had a daughter to be maried, and was not able to beſtow her: he called his friends together, and ſeſſed euery man of them at a certaine ſumme, and afterwards brought him before them that ſhould haue this money, and told him how much euery man had beſtowed vpon him, that he might thanke them all. But on a time he went farre beyond this: for he ſent a poore friend of his to a rich citizen of THEBES, to aske of him ſixe hundred crownes, and to tell him that Epaminondas willed him to let him haue them. The citizen being amazed at this demaund, went vnto Epaminondas to know what he meant to charge him ſo deepely, to make him disburſe theſe ſixe hundred crownes vnto him. It is, ſaith he, becauſe this man being an honeſt man, is poore: and thou that haſt robbed the commonwealth of much, art rich. He liued ſo ſoberly, and was ſuch an enemy vnto all ſuperfluitie and exceſſe, that being on a time inuited to ſupper to one of his neighbours, when he ſaw great preparation of fine meates, baked meates, made diſhes and perfumes: he ſaid vnto him: I thought thou haddeſt made a ſacrifice, not an exceſſe of ſuperfluitie, and euen ſo went his way. Euen the like he ſpake of his owne table, ſaying, that ſuch an ordinarie neuer receiued treaſon. On a time being at a feaſt with his peeres and companions, he dranke vineger. And when they asked him what reaſon he had to do ſo, and if it were good for his health? I cannot tell, ſaith he, but well I wote it is good to put me in remembrance how I liue at home. Now it was not for that his nature miſliked ſweet meates, that he liued thus ſtrictly, and did loue and embrace pouerty, for he was maruellous high and nobly minded: but by his ſtraight and vnreproueable life he led, he thought to bridle many inſolencies and diſorders then raigning amongſt the THEBANS, and to reduce them to the former temperance of their aunceſtors. As vpon a time a cooke giuing vp an account to him and his fellowes of their ordinarie expences for certaine daies, he could find fault with nothing, but with the quantitie of oyle that was ſpent. His companions maruelling at it: Tuſh, ſaith he, it is not the expence that offendeth me, but becauſe they haue powred in ſo much oyle into their bodies. The citie of THEBES made an open feaſt, and they were all of them in their banquets, feaſts, and great aſſemblies one with the other: but Epaminondas to the contrarie, he went drie vp and downe the towne very ſad, without being annointed with any oyle of perfume▪ or decked with braue apparel. Some of his familiar friends met him in this eſtate, and wondering at him, asked him why he walked ſo alone, & ill apparelled through the citie? Becauſe, ſaid he, you might in the mean time ſafely giue your ſelues to drink drunke, and make merie, taking thought for nothing. Thus haue we ſpoken enough touching his temperance: and as for his other vertues they are moſt famous in armes, the which he with great good fortune and happineſſe managed for the good of his countrie.
            Now his modeſty would in no wiſe ſuffer him to ſeeke his aduauncement, but contrariwiſe he withdrew himſelfe from gouernment, onely to giue himſelfe quietly to the ſtudie of Philoſophie. Howbeit it happened that the LACEDEMONIANS on a time prayed aide of the THEBANS, at that time being in league with them, who ſent them certaine foot-bands. Epaminondas being about fiue and thirtie yeares of age, armed himſelfe, and went with the reſt. Then it was that that friendſhip began betwixt Pelopidas and him, which conſtantly continued euen to the

end. For they both being in battell ray the one by the other, againſt the ARCADIANS, whom they had in front againſt them in the plaine of MANTINEA, it chaunced that one of the points of the battel of the LACEDAEMONIANS in the which they were, retired, and many of them left their ranckes: but they being reſolute, determining rather to die then to flie, ſtood to it like men, vntill that Pelopidas being hurt in ſeuen places, fell downe vpon an heape of dead bodies: then Epaminondas, though he tooke him to be but a dead man, ſtepped manfully before him to defend his bodie and armes, and he alone fought againſt many, reſolued to die in the place, rather then to leaue Pelopidas among the dead men, vntill that himſelfe being thruſt into the breaſt with a pike, and wounded in the arme with a blow of a ſword, (ready to giue ouer) by good fortune and in a happie time, king Ageſipolis came on with the other point of the battell, and ſaued them both. Afterwards the LACEDAEMONIANS finely wanne the caſtell of THEBES called CADMEA, put in a ſtrong garriſon there, and gaue the gouernment of the citie vnto Archias, Philippus, and Leontidas, authors of all the miſchief. Wherupon to auoide their violence, Pelopidas and many others with ſpeed fled and ſaued themſelues, and were baniſhed by ſound of trumpet. And as for Epaminondas they ſaid nothing to him, but let him alone in the citie: for he was contemned as a man of no reckening, becauſe he was ſo giuen to his booke: and if he ſhould haue had any will to haue ſtirred againſt them, he could haue done them no hurt for his pouertie. Now whileſt Pelopidas and his companions being at ATHENS, had laid a plot to free THEBES, Epaminondas making no ſhew of any thing, had long before deuiſed another practiſe, which was: to lift vp the hearts and courage of the young men of THEBES. For when they went out to play and exerciſe their bodies, he alwaies found a way to make them wreſtle with the LACEDAEMONIANS. Afterwards when he ſaw the LACEDAEMONIANS fiercely throw them, and giue them ſhrewd fals they being the ſtronger, he rebuked the THEBANS, and told them, it was a ſhame for them for want of courage, to ſuffer the LACEDAEMONIANS to ſet their feet vpon their throats, that were not halfe ſo ſtrong, rough, and boiſterous as they were. All this while Pelopidas and his followers went on with their complot, and they had ſo good ſucceſſe in their purpoſe, that one night they got priuily into the citie of THEBES, and met at Charons houſe, where they were to the number of eight and fortie. Epaminondas knew all well enough, and ſome towards night taking him aſide, went about to perſwade him to ioyne with them in this enterpriſe, and to take armes with them to ſet vpon theſe tyrants: maruelling much, that he would be ſo backward, the liberty of his countrey ſtanding vpon it. He anſwered, that he had taken order with his friends and Gorgidas, that they ſhould put themſelues in readineſſe vpon any occaſion, howbeit that he would put none of his citizens to death, vnleſſe they were condemned by law: yet if you will make an attempt for deliuery of the citie, ſo it be without murther, and ſhedding the bloud of the citizens, I will helpe you (ſaid he) with all my heart. If you will not beleeue me, but perſeuer in your determination, I pray you let me alone, pure and vndefiled with the bloud of my citizens, and ſo blameleſſe to attend occaſion, whereby I may iuſtly take hold of that which may turne to the good of the commonwealth: for the murther that will be committed, cannot poſſibly be contained within reaſonable bounds. I do certainely beleeue that Pherecides and Pelopidas peraduenture will ſpecially ſet vpon the authors of the tyrannie: but Eumolpidas and Samiadas, both cholericke and fierce men, taking the liberty of the night, they will neuer lay downe their armes, nor put their ſwords vp into their ſheathes, before they haue filled all the citie with murthers, and ſlaine diuers of the chiefe perſonages. Moreouer, it is very conuenient for the people of THEBES, that ſome be left free, and blameleſſe of this murther, and guiltleſſe of all that ſhall be done in this furie of action: for ſo the people ſhall leaſt ſuſpect that we giue any incouragement to their riſing, although to good end. Notwithſtanding all this the enterpriſe was executed, and the tyrants put to death, the citie reſtored to her auncient liberty, and the caſtle of CADMEA rendred vp by compoſition, and Lyſandridas the LACEDAEMONIAN and other commanders within, ſuffered to depart, with ſafetie of their goods and the ſouldiers.
            Theſe were the beginnings of the long wars of the LACEDAEMONIANS againſt the THEBANS, with whom the ATHENIANS ioyned in league. For Epaminondas, he quietly gaue himſelfe to his book: notwithſtanding he was put forward by Pammenes, a principall man of THEBES, and he began to follow the warres very hotly, and in diuers encounters made great proofe of his wiſdome, hardineſſe and valure: inſomuch that by degrees he attained at the length to the higheſt charges of gouernment in the commonwealth. And his citizens hauing made no further reckoning

of him, being a man of fortie yeares old: after that they came to know him, and had truſted him with their armie, he ſaued the citie of THEBES that was like to haue bin vndone, and freed al GRECE from the ſeruitude and bondage of the LACEDAEMONIANS: making vertue as in a cleare light ſhine with glorie, ſhewing her effects when time ſerueth. Furthermore, Ageſilaus being entred into BOEOTIA with an armie of twentie thouſand footmen, and 5. thouſand horſe, preyed and ſpoiled all the plaine countrey, and preſented the THEBANS in open field that which they would not accept, finding themſelues the weaker: howbeit they defended themſelues ſo well, through the aide of the ATHENIANS, and of the wiſe conduction of Epaminondas and Pelopidas, that Ageſilaus returned home with his armie. But after he was gone, the THEBANS went with their troupes before the citie of THESPIES, where they ſurprized and put to the ſword two hundred men of the garriſon, and afterwards gaue diuers aſſaults one vpon another vnto the wall, and ſeeing their labor loſt, they returned with their army backe againe to THEBES. Howbeit Phoebidas the LACEDAEMONIAN, he that had taken the caſtle of CADMEA by treaſon, (whereupon roſe all this warre that followed) and was then gouernour of THESPIES, made a ſallie out of the towne, and raſhly went to giue a charge vpon the THEBANS in their retreate, where he loſt fiue hundred of his men, and himſelfe was ſlaine in the field. Not long after, the LACEDAEMONIANS with the ſelf ſame power returned againe to make war with the THEBANS, who hauing wonne certaine ſtreights and places of aduantage, ſo blocked vp the way, as they could not ouerrunne the countrey, and ſpoile it as they had done before. Neuertheleſſe, Ageſilaus had ſo harried and troubled them, that by litle and litle they came to a maine battell, which held very long and cruell. Now though Ageſilaus at the firſt had the better, yet the THEBANS charged him ſo hotely, that at the length he himſelfe was hurt, and conſtrained to retire, being well payed for teaching the THEBANS militarie diſcipline. And this was the firſt time that the THEBANS knew themſelues to be as ſtrong and luſtie as the LACEDAEMONIANS: whereupon they triumphed in ſigne of victorie, and from that time forwards, they waxed more couragious to make head againſt the enemy, and to preſent them battell. But the onely thing that did moſt encourage them, was the preſence of Epaminondas, who counſelled, commaunded, and executed very wiſely, valiantly, and moſt fortunately. A certaine time after that, they went with a great number of good choſen men before ORCHOMENE, where they preuailed not, becauſe there was a ſtrong garriſon of the LACEDAEMONIANS, that ſallied out vpon them to giue them battell, which was very ſharpe betweene them. And yet, albeit the LACEDAEMONIANS were many againſt one, the THEBANS gaue them the ouerthrow, which neuer happened to them before: but what nation ſoeuer they had bene, they thought they had done a great feate, if with a greater number by many, they had ouercome a ſmall number of the LACEDAEMONIANS. But this victorie, and the encountring of TEGYRE, where the THEBANS obtained another victory vnder the conduct of Pelopidas, lift vp their hearts on high, and made their valure more famous then before.
            The next yeare following, Artaxerxes king of PERSIA, meaning to make warre in AEGYPT, and therefore to retaine diuerſe ſtraungers, determined to appeaſe the warres againſt the GREEKES in hope that they being at peace, would more eaſily be contented that ſouldiers ſhould be leauied in their countrey: and thereupon ſent his Ambaſſadours to all the townes of GRECE, to perſwade and intreate them to be at peace together. The GREEKES were very willing to hearken vnto it, being wearied of all ſides with ſo long a warre, and were eaſily drawne to treate of peace: whereby it was eſpecially agreed and concluded, that all the cities of GRECE ſhould be free, and vſe their owne lawes; and commiſſioners were ſent all about to withdraw the garriſons in euery place where any was kept. Vnto this the THEBANS onely refuſed to agree, that euery towne ſhould by it ſelfe ſeuerally capitulate in this treatie, requeſting that the townes in the countrey of BOEOTIA ſhould be comprehended vnder the city of THEBES. Thereunto the ATHENIANS mightily oppoſed themſelues, and there was one of their Orators called Callistratus, that touching this matter made a notable oration before the aſſembly of the ſtates of GRECE. And Epaminondas on the other ſide alſo, made a wonderfull and vehement oration in defence of the right of the THEBANS: inſomuch as this controuerſie was left vndecided, and the treaty of peace was vniuerſally agreed and concluded amongſt all the other GREEKES, the THEBANS onely excepted, who were not compriſed within the treatie. So through the motion of Epaminondas, they were bold to withſtand the decrees of all the reſt of

GRECE. For the ATHENIANS and LACEDAEMONIANS that many yeares before had contended for the principality of GRECE, made then diuiſion together: ſo that the one ſhould commaund by ſea, and the other by land. Thus they could not like in no wiſe, that the THEBANS ſhould aſpire to be chiefe, and therfore they ſought to diſmember the other townes of BOEOTIA, from the citie of THEBES. And the rather for that the THEBANS being ſtrong and luſtie of body, and encouraged for that of late they had oftentimes beaten the LACEDAEMONIANS, would ſtriue with them for the ſuperiority of GRECE by land, but ſpecially they had a wonderfull confidence in the wiſedome and proweſſe of their Captaines, but eſpecially of Epaminondas. Matters reſting thus doubtfull, the citizens of PLATAEES, a towne of BOEOTIA, deſirous to be at league with the ATHENIANS, they ſent to requeſt ſome ſouldiers of them, promiſing to put the towne into their hands. The gouernors of the country of BOEOTIA hauing intelligence of it, deſirous to preuent the garriſon of the ATHENIANS, brought a troupe of ſouldiers againſt them, and they all came before PLATAEES, before the townes men had any knowledge of their comming: inſomuch that part of them were ſurpriſed in the fields by the horſemen, and the other fled into the towne. But hauing no body to aide them, they were compelled to receiue and accept ſuch compoſition as it pleaſed the THEBANS to graunt them: which was, to leaue their towne, and to go ſafely with bagge and baggage, and neuer to returne againe into the countrey of BOEOTIA. After this, the THEBANS razed the city of PLATAEES to the ground, and had the ſacke of the towne of THESPIES enemy vnto them. All the GREEKES ſolicited againe by the Ambaſſadors of PERSIA, thought it good to make a generall peace, and ſo aſſembled the commiſſioners of all the townes at SPARTA. Epaminondas that was yet ſcant knowne, becauſe he loued not to ſhew himſelfe, and in all his exploits of warre had euer preferred the aduancement of his great friend and companion in armes Pelopidas, before himſelfe: yet famous among the GREEKES for his great knowledge and experience, was ſent thither by the THEBANS. Epaminondas finding that the other commiſſioners did leane to Ageſilaus, began to ſpeake boldly and plainely, and made an oration, not onely in the THEBANS behalfe, but for all GRECE alſo: making them plainely ſee, that warre did ſtill increaſe the greatneſſe of the city of SPARTA only, and keepe all the reſt of the townes of GRECE vnder. Therfore he gaue counſell to all to eſtabliſh a firme peace indifferently betwixt them, that thereby it might haue the longer continuance, when all comprized within the contract ſhould be equals. Ageſilaus perceiuing all the GREEKS aſſiſtant at this aſſembly to giue very attentiue eare vnto him, and to be tickled, hearing him ſpeake ſo freely of peace: he asked him aloude if he thought it iuſt and reaſonable, that all BOEOTIA ſhould be ſet at liberty. Epaminondas on the other ſide, did preſently and boldly aske him againe, if he thought not alſo that it was iuſt and reaſonable that all LACONIA ſhould be ſet at libertie. Thereupon Ageſilaus in anger ſtood vp on his feete, and commaunded him to anſwer plainely, if they ſhould not reſtore all the prouince of BOEOTIA to her liberty. Epaminondas returned the ſelfe ſame ſpeech againe vnto him: if they ſhould not alſo put that of LACONIA in her liberty. This did ſo anger Ageſilaus, beſides that it did him good to haue this colour for an old grudge he bare vnto the THEBANS, that foorthwith he put the name of the THEBANS out of the liſt of thoſe that ſhould be compriſed within the peace, and immediatly proclaimed open war againſt them. But this being done had euill ſucceſſe afterwards, and by reaſon of the ſodaine and raſh enterpriſe of the LACEDAEMONIANS, it turned to their vtter ouerthrow. For the THEBANS, there was no remedie but they muſt beare the whole brunt alone: for there was not a town that durſt ſend them any aide, becauſe they were all agreed and ſworne to this peace, inſomuch as euery one thought them vtterly caſt away and vndone. Many pitied their eſtate, and they that loued them not reioyced: they made ſo full account, that the LACEDAEMONIANS ſhould find nothing that could ſtand before them.
            So the LACEDAEMONIANS made king Cleombrotus march with his army towards THEBES: and being come neare to CHAERONEA with ten thouſand footmen, and a thouſand horſe, he pitched his camp there to ſtay for the reſt of his allies. The THEBANS hauing intelligence of the approch of the enemy, choſe Epaminondas to be captaine generall, giuing him the charge of this warre, with ſixe other Councellers, whom they call Beotarches, as who would ſay, Gouernours of BOEOTIA, to be of his counſell, and to aſſiſt him. Now there came Oracles to the THEBANS from all parts: ſome promiſing victory, others threatning ouerthrow. He commaunded them to ſet thoſe on the right hand of the chaire for Orations that promiſed victorie: and thoſe that

threatned ouerthrow on the left hand. They being thus diſpoſed of, he got vp to the chaire for Orations, and ſaid to the THEBANS: If you will be obedient to your Captaines, and couragious of heart to encounter your enemies, theſe here, (ſhewing the good Oracles on the right hand) are yours: but if for faint hearts you refuſe daunger, thoſe there (ſhewing the bad on the left hand) ſhall be for you. Thereupon enrolling all the THEBANS names that were of age to beare armes, and of ſome parts of BOEOTIA thoſe that he thought fitteſt for wars: word was brought him that a very honeſt and valiant man of his perſon died in his bed. O Hercules, ſaid he, what, had this man leyſure to die in all theſe troubles? His preſence reioyced and made all his armie liuely: alſo all the time he was Captaine of the THEBANS, they neuer ſaw any of theſe terrours happen in his campe without manifeſt cauſe, which they call ſodaine feares. He was wont to ſay, that there was no death more honeſt, then to dye in the warres: and that the body of a ſouldier ſhould not onely be kept in exerciſe like the champions that fight for maiſtrie, but rather more hardened to endure any labour or paines meet for a good ſouldier. And therfore he could not abide very fat men, but caſſered a whole band of them for that cauſe only: ſaying that ſcarce three or foure targets could couer ſo great a belly, as did keepe him that he could not ſee his owne priuities. So he drew his armie out of THEBES, hauing in all but ſixe thouſand fighting men. Euen as they were marching away out of THEBES, diuers of the ſouldiers thought they had had many vnluckie ſignes. For as they were going out of the gates, Epaminondas met on his way a Herald, that following an auncient ceremonie and cuſtome of theirs, brought an old blind man as if he had bene run away: and the Herald crying out aloud, Bring him not out of THEBES, nor put him not to death, but carie him backe againe, and ſaue his life. The old men tooke this meeting and cry for an euill ſigne: but the young men kept ſilence, and ſpake neuer a word, for feare it ſhould be thought that their hearts failing them, they would ſeeke to diſſwade Epaminondas from going the iourney he had vndertaken. And he himſelfe, vnto ſome that were bold to tell him, that it were well done before he went any further, to conſider firſt what ſucceſſe the flying of the birds did promiſe vnto him, anſwered this verſe of Homer:
               
                  It is a happy ſigne, to fight for his countrey.
               
Such a preſent and francke reſolution ſtopped the mouthes of all thoſe that were not very conſtant. But there happened yet another ſigne worſe then the firſt. For there went a Secretarie before him carying a Iauelin, vnto the which was tyed a ſcrole to make the ſoldiers know that they ſhould do what the Generall commanded them. The wind roſe and blew off this ſcrole and caried it away, folding it vpon a ſquare pillar that ſtood vpon a tombe of certaine LACEDAEMONIANS, and PELOPONNESIANS, that had bene ſlaine in that place when Ageſilaus brought his army thither. Alſo there came againe certaine old men vnto him to ſpeake with him, perſwading and proteſting that he ought not to go any further with his armie, ſince the gods were ſo manifeſtly againſt it. All this notwithſtanding he neuer ceaſſed to march with his campe, thinking that the conſcience and reſolution to fight in a good cauſe, ought to be much ſtronger and of more force to put him in good hope, then theſe euill ſignes that appeared to make him miſtruſt the worſt. And as in marching to meete with the LACEDAEMONIANS they heard it thunder: they that were neare vnto him, asked him, what that thunder meant? That, faith he, betokeneth that the enemies braines are troubled and aſtonied: ſeeing they hauing hard by them ſo commodious places to campein, they now lye encamped where they are. Indeed they halted, ſtaying for diuers of their allies that came not: all of them hauing at better leyſure conſidered of the diſcourſe Epaminondas made in SPARTA in open aſſembly of all the commiſſioners of euery town, againſt the ambition of the LACEDAEMONIANS. For him therefore applying to good purpoſe at that time all the goodly diſcourſe he had learned by the ſtudie of Philoſophie, for the preſent time the common people blamed him much: but after the fortunate ſucceſſe of his intention, euery man then iudged him to be a man ripely vnderſtanding the dutie of a wiſe and valiant chieftaine of warre. For making his army march with ſpeed, he wanne the ſtraights hard by the citie of CORONEA, and camped there. Cleombrotus on the other ſide, vnderſtanding that the THEBANS had gained that paſſage, diſpairing he could not paſſe that way: made his army go a great compaſſe about by the countrey of PHOCIDE, and marching alongſt the ſea ſide in a very troublous and daungerous way, at the laſt he pierced into the countrey of BOEOTIA without aany daunger. And as he went alſo he tooke in litle townes, and certaine gallies that lay alongeſt that coaſt, and in the end arriued at LEVCTRES: and there ſet downe to refreſh his men a litle,

ouer-wearied with trauell in their iourney. The BOEOTIANS marched preſently that way to meet with them, and ſo paſſing ouer ſome litle mountaines, they diſcouered them in the plaine of LEVCTRES, which did amaze them, ſeeing ſo great an army.
            The Boeotarches thereupon came together to conſult whether they ſhould go forward, and to fight one againſt many: or elſe retire, and find out ſome better place of aduantage. In this counſell their opinions fell out to be equall: for three of them thought it good to retire: the other three with Epaminondas, ſaid, they muſt tarie and fight. So the concluſion of this counſell being doubtfull, and the Boeotarches diſagreeing, Pelopidas captaine of the holy band came to thē, who was of the ſecond opinion: ſo that they all agreed together to put it to the hazard of battell. But Epaminondas ſeeing their ſouldiers affraid through the ſuperſtition of theſe ſignes, deuiſing by ſome like remedy to put this miſtruſt out of their heads: to bring this to paſſe, ſome being newly come from THEBES, he willed them to ſay and giue it out euery where, that no man could tell at THEBES what was become of the armes that hung vp in Hercules temple: but that the voice was all the towne ouer, that the auncient demigods their aunceſtors had come and taken them away, for the aide of their deſcendants at this preſent time. He ſuborned another alſo, that gaue it out he was newly come from Trophonius truncke or hole, and that the god which giueth the Oracles in the ſame, commanded him to tell the BOEOTIANS that after they had ouercome their enemies in the plaine of LEVCTRES, they ſhould celebrate yearely playes in the honor of Iupiter. And thereof it came that the BOEOTIANS long time after that did yearely celebrate a feaſt, which is made in LEBADIA. Now to end the painting of this artificial deuiſe, Leandrias a SPARTAN, being a baniſhed man out of his countrey, and fighting at that time for the BOEOTIANS, being brought before the ſouldiers, whom they encouraged to fight like men the day of the battell: he did ſweare vnto them that the LACEDAEMONIANS had an auncient Oracle, that ſaid they ſhould loſe their principalitie, when they ſhould be ouercome by the THEBANS in a pitched field, in the plaine of LEVCTRES. It is true indeed that the LACEDAEMONIANS had had many oracles and forewarnings to bid them beware of the anger of LEVCTRES: but the common people vnderſtood not what this warning meant, but were deceiued by the equiuocation of the word: for that there were three LEVCTRES: to wit, in LACONIA, ARCADIA, and BOEOTIA. Howbeit, the viſion of Pelopidas, whereof is made large mention in his life, and the ſacrifice he made of the yong Filly that came into his campe, confirmed all the former inuentions, and made them bold that were moſt diſcouraged. Adding withall, that Epaminondas hauing aſſembled all his armie, began to encourage them with theſe ſtrong and liuely reaſons to ſhew their valour: inſomuch, that being freed from this ſuperſtitious feare, they longed for nothing more then to come to blowes. Epaminondas euer concluded all his orations in this manner: O worthy men, embrace ſacred death, aduauncing your ſelues to the moſt honorable and famous fight for your country, for the tombes of your aunceſtors, and for the holy things. Euen at the ſame time came to the THEBANS an aide of fiue hundred horſe, and fifteene hundred footmen THESSALIANS, conducted by Iaſon: who practiſed with both ſides to make a peace for certaine daies, telling them he was not wiſe that feared not the euents. Some iudge it was not at that time that Iaſon trauelled betweene them both, but rather that it was after the iourney of LEVCTRES. Howbeit, I haue followed that which Diodorus the SICILIAN writeth, as a thing moſt likely. Now as Cleombrotus retired with his army out of BOEOTIA, he met with a great ſupply of naturall LACEDAEMONIANS, and of ſome of their allies, brought to him by Archidamus, Ageſilaus ſonne. The LACEDAEMONIANS ſeeing the THEBANS ſo reſolute, and fearing their deſperate boldneſſe: ſent theſe two troupes the eaſilier to daunt the courage of their enemies. Theſe two being ioyned together they were aſhamed to be afraid of the BOEOTIANS, and whether it was that the truce taken was neare expired, or that they forced not of it, they returned on the ſodaine againe into the plaine of LEVCTRES fully bent to fight. The BOEOTIANS alſo for their part ſhrunke not an inch backe, and ſo on both ſides they ſet their men in order of battell. For Epaminondas, he ſet his battell after a new faſhion, neuer before ſhewed by any other Captaine. For hauing choſen out of his armie the beſt men and valianteſt ſouldiers he had, he placed them together in one of the points of his battell, where he ſhould be himſelf & fight in perſon, ſeconded with Pelopidas, with his three hundred choſen men, called the holy band: and in the other corner he placed his weaker men, commaunding them expreſly not to abide the charge of the enemies that ſhould come to aſſaile them in front, but faire and ſoftly to retire when they ſaw them come neare them. So the matter

fell out as he wiſhed: and he hoped to determine the battell by the vertue and proweſſe of that point where he had placed all the flower and choiſe of his armie.
            Now the ſigne to fight being giuen, the LACEDAEMONIANS marched of euen hand with the two hornes of their battel, ordred in forme of a Creſſant. On the contrarie part, one of the wings of the battell of the BOEOTIANS began to giue backe, and the other with great furie ranne to charge the enemie in the flancke: ſtraight they were both come to the ſword together. And at the firſt, becauſe either ſide fought very deſperatly, the victorie was doubtfull for a certain time: but at the length Epaminondas troupes brake in amongſt the LACEDAEMONIANS, and killed the moſt part of them that were about king Cleombrotus. So long as the king was aliue, he kept backe the THEBANS from victorie, becauſe he was accompanied with all the moſt valiant men of his army, valiantly fighting about him. But after he fell downe dead on the ground, hauing receiued an infinit number of wounds, and ſtriken downe many of his enemies: then they thronged together on all ſides, and there was a cruell fight about his bodie, where were heapes of mens bodies ſlaine one vpon another. And although Epaminondas did ſharply follow his point, yet the LACEDAEMONIANS made ſuch reſiſtance at the laſt, that they did a litle repulſe the BOEOTIANS and cleared the bodie of the king out of the preſſe and multitude: but that held not long. For Epaminondas through his perſwaſions did ſo lift vp the hearts and courage of his men, that they gaue a ſecond and ſo fierce a charge vpon them, that they wholly ouerthrew the LACEDAEMONIANS, & made them flie for life. Then Epaminondas fiercely purſuing the flying enemies, made great ſlaughter, and wan one of the moſt gloriouſeſt victories that euer Captaine did: hauing in a pitched field ouercome the moſt noble and warlike nation of all GRECE, with a farre ſmaller number of men then his enemies had. Alſo he tooke more glorie of that aboue all his other exploits, & eſpecially becauſe it hapned vnto him in his father Polymnis life time. And oftentimes he had theſe words vp in his mouth: that of all the honeſt and happy fortunes that euer chaunced vnto him, nothing ioyed his heart more, then that he had vanquiſhed the LACEDAEMONIANS at the battell of LEVCTRES, his father and mother that begat him being both aliue. And to ſay truely, he that day preſerued the life of his father and mother, and of his whole countrey beſides: for the LACEDAEMONIANS were fully reſolued vtterly to deſtroy the THEBANS. Now he vſing at all other times to ſhew himſelfe amongſt them, fine and neat, with a pleaſant countenance: the next day after the battell at LEVCTRES he came out openly very ſad, heauie, and penſiue. Whereupon his friends asked him preſently if he had heard any euill newes, or ſome miſfortune had happened to him. None, ſaid he, but I perceiued by my ſelfe yeſterday, that ouerioyed with the victorie I obtained, I lift vp my ſelfe more then became me: and therefore to day I correct this ioy, which yeſterday was too exceeding in me. He knowing that it was the maner of the SPARTANS to hide and couer (as well as they could poſſible) all ſuch misfortunes, deſirous openly to ſuppreſſe and ſhew the greatneſſe of the loſſe they had ſuſtained: he would not ſuffer them to carie away their dead bodies by great all together, but euery citie one after another: and ſo by this meanes it appeared that there were aboue a thouſand LACEDAEMONIANS. Some make the number of the dead to be greater, and ſay they were foure thouſand naturall LACEDAEMONIANS, but that muſt be vnderſtood of them and their allies: and of the BOEOTIANS, there were not aboue three hundred or thereabouts found dead. This battell of LEVCTRES was ſtriken at the beginning of the 2. yeare of the hundred and ſecond Olympiade.
            The LACEDAEMONIANS hauing at that battell loſt the greateſt part of their honor and greatneſſe, which men had ſeene before in their eſtate, loſt not their courage for all this: but to keepe their youth ſtill in heart, and to take away all feare which had poſſeſſed them that had eſcaped from this ouerthrow: Ageſilaus entred ARCADIA with an armie, and was contented to take a ſmall towne of the MANTINEEANS, and to prey and ſpoile the country, which done he returned home againe. Some thinke that this was the cauſe that brought Epaminondas into LACONIA. Otherſome report it otherwiſe, and ſay that Ageſilaus would not ſuffer the MANTINEANS to reedifie their citie. And there be that are of another opinion, which is: that Lycomedes Captaine of the ARCADIANS hauing made a rode hard to ORCHOMENE, he ſlue vpon an encounter Polytropus Captaine of the LACEDAEMONIANS, and 2. hundred SPARTANS with him, his purpoſe being to win ORCHOMENE: and that thereupon they finding themſelues too weake to ſtand againſt the LACEDAEMONIANS, they ſought the alliance and aide of the THEBANS. How ſoeuer it was, the LACEDAEMONIANS and ARCADIANS being enemies, by reaſon of their chiefe

citie of MANTINEA: that was the cauſe the THEBANS ioyned with the ARCADIANS, and being followed with their allies, led by Epaminondas, they entred into LACONIA with an armie of forty thouſand men of warre, and with thirty thouſand others that followed the campe. The ATHENIANS ſent Iphicrates Captaine with twelue thouſand men to aide the SPARTANS: but before his comming Epaminondas entred into LACONIA in diuers places, and ſacked all the whole countrie, which had not bene laid waſt by any enemy in ſixe hundred yeares ſpace before, when the DORIANS came to inhabite there. The SPARTANS ſeeing their countrey waſted and deſtroyed before their eyes, were deſirous to go out with all the force they could make: but Ageſilaus would not ſuffer them, telling them how daungerous it was to leaue the citie, to ſet vpon ſuch a mightie enemie. So they were quiet, and Epaminondas in the meane ſpace deſcended the mountaine Taugete with his armie, towards the riuer of Eurotas, the which at that time was riſen very high by reaſon of the winter. He ſought what he could to draw Ageſilaus to fight, who beholding Epaminondas a great while, marching in battell ray alongſt the riuers ſide at the head of his troupes: he wondred at his boldneſſe and valure, but would by no meanes come out of his fort. Inſomuch as after this armie had preyed and foraged all LACONIA, Epaminondas led them backe againe laden with bootie. And though Ageſilaus had won himſelfe great honour for his wiſedome, in looking to the ſafetie of his citie: yet Epaminondas had made his countrey ſo poore, with the former loſſes ſuſtained, eſpecially at the ouerthrow at LEVCTRES: that SPARTA could neuer afterwards recouer that loſſe againe, nor grow into that reputation and power it had before. Furthermore, notwithſtanding all the aide of the ATHENIANS, and the experience of Iphicrates, Epaminondas returned with his whole armie as he came. And the more to keepe the LACEDAEMONIANS ſtill vnder their feet, and to heape new troubles vpon them: he gaue counſell to the ARCADIANS and other their allies, to reedifie and repleniſh the citie of MESSINA with new inhabitants againe, which the LACEDAEMONIANS had long before that deſtroyed. All the whole councell giuing their conſents vnto it, he made diligent inquirie forthwith to ſeeke out all thoſe that till that time had bene auncient inhabitants in MESSINA: and in the ſpace of foureſcore and fiue daies hauing reedified the ruined houſes, he ſet a foot againe one of the nobleſt and moſt auncient cities of GRECE, and left there a ſtrong garriſon: for the which he was as much eſteemed and rather more, then for any other ſeruice he had euer done.
            The LACEDAEMONIANS being lightened of a maruellous great feare, made an agreement with the ATHENIANS, and left them the chiefe commaund by ſea, reſeruing to themſelues that by land. Afterwards through the aide of the ATHENIANS, and the ſupply that was ſent vnto them out of SICILIA, they wan their townes againe by litle and litle. The ARCADIANS to ſtop their courſe, aſſaulted the citie of PALLENE in LACONIA, put all the garriſon there to the ſword, razed the towne, and preyed all the countrey thereabout: and doubting that the LACEDAEMONIANS would be reuenged, they prayed aide of the THEBANS, who ſent Epaminondas thither with the other Boeotarches, ſixe thouſand footmen, and fiue hundred horſe. The ATHENIANS hauing intelligence thereof, ſent their armie before vnder the leading of Chabrias, who marched directly to CORINTH, and there had ſupply of ſouldiers, of the MEGARIANS, PALLENIANS, and CORINTHIANS: ſo that he had made vp a regiment of ten thouſand men. And afterwards the armie of the LACEDAEMONIANS and of their allies, being arriued at the very place of CORINTH, they made all together the number of twenty thouſand fighting men. So they determined to repaire and fortifie all the paſſages and entrances into the countrey of PELOPONNESVS, to ſtop the paſſage of the BOEOTIANS. And beginniug frō the city of CENCHREES vnto the hauen of LECHEVM, they ſhut and blocked vp all the waies from the one ſea to the other, with mighty great peeces of timber a croſſe, and with a maruellous deepe ditch. And this great peece of worke was followed with ſuch ſpeed, both by meanes of the great multitude of people, as alſo through the goodwils of thoſe that laboured it hard: that they had finiſhed and done all before the BOEOTIANS could arriue there. Epaminondas at his comming hauing diligently viewed and conſidered this fortification, perceiued that the eaſieſt way to be forced, was that which the LACEDEMONIANS themſelues kept. So he ſent to giue them defiance, though they were thrice as many men in number as his owne. For all this that they had the defiance, they durſt not come out, but kept them cloſe vnder this fortification, which receiuing certain aſſaults, they were repulſed. Now all of them doing their beſt indeuour, being occupied, ſome aſſailing, other defending, Epaminondas choſe out the beſt men in all his armie, and luſtily charging the

guard of the LACEDAEMONIANS enforced them to giue him way, and in deſpite of them he entred into PELOPONNESVS, which was a wonderfull and memorable exploit of all others. Frō thence he marched towards the cities of EPIDAVRE and TROEZEN, and ſo foraged all the countrey: howbeit he could take none of the townes, becauſe they were defended with ſtrong garriſons. Neuertheleſſe he put SICYONE, PHEVNTE, and ſome other townes in ſuch feare, that they yeelded themſelues vnto him. That being done, he went to CORINTH, and there ouercame the CORINTHIANS in a ſet battell, and bet them home fighting euen to the wals of their citie. There were ſome of his men ſo raſh, and preſuming of their valour, that they entred hand ouer head with thoſe that fled, euen within the gates of their citie, which put the CORINTHIANS in ſuch a terrible feare, that they ran with all ſpeed poſſible to get their houſes ouer their heads. Chabrias beat them out againe, and killed ſome of them. Whereupon he cauſed a token of triumph to be ſet vp, as if it had bene an ouerthrow. Epaminondas laughing him to ſcorne for it, ſaid he ſhould not call it a Trophee, or token of triumph, but rather Hecateſie, as one would ſay, a ſtatue of Proſerpina: becauſe in times paſt they commonly ſet this image of Proſerpina at the firſt gallowes they found before the gate of any citie. The BOEOTIANS therefore came on with their battell as neare vnto CORINTH as they could, and Chabrias with his troupes camped without in a very ſtrong place of aduantage for him: ſo there were many skirmiſhes betweene them, in the which Chabrias ſhewed ſuch valour, that he wan great fame and reputation, euen of Epaminondas himſelfe. Who being asked on a time whom he thought the greateſt captaine, himſelf, Chabrias, or Iphicrates: It is hard to iudge, ſaid he, whileſt we are all aliue. Another brought him word that the ATHENIANS had ſent an army againe into PELOPONNESVS, furniſhed with new armours. Well, anſwered he, doth Antigenidas weepe when he knoweth that Tellin hath new flutes? This Tellin was a very bad player of the flute, and Antigenidas excellent good & skilful. Touching the ſupply of this armie, they were ten thouſand SPANIARDS and GAVLES, whom Dionyſius the tyrant ſent out of SICILIA to aide the LACEDAEMONIANS, hauing payed them for fiue moneths. They had ſerued reaſonably well in this warre, and ſo in the end of ſommer returned home againe.
            Now it fortuned in theſe laſt encounters, that Epaminondas hauing forced the LACEDAEMONIANS that ſtood to the defence of the fortification aboue mentioned, and hauing them in his power to haue ſlaughtered a great number of them at his will: he contented himſelfe onely with this glorie, that in deſpite of them he had entred into PELOPONNESVS, and ſought to do them no more hurt: which gaue thoſe occaſion that did enuie his glorie to blame him, and to accuſe him of treaſon, as hauing willingly ſpared the enemies, becauſe they ſhould particularly thanke him onely. But now that we haue begun to ſpeake of this matter, we muſt ſee how he behaued himſelfe among his citizens, and the wiſedome he vſed in defence of his integritie. Among all thoſe that could not endure the glorie of his vertues, was Meneclides the Oratour, an eloquent man, but withall moſt wicked and malicious. He finding that Epaminondas wan ſuch honour by warres, neuer left perſwading the THEBANS to embrace peace, and to preferre it before warre: becauſe they ſhould not liue alwaies vnder the obedience and command of one man. Epaminondas told him one day in open councell: Thou wilt deceiue the THEBANS, going about to counſell them toleaue warres: and highly commending eaſe, thou goeſt about to put iron bolts vpon their feet. For warre begetteth peace, the which cannot hold long but among thoſe that know how to ſeeke and keepe it with the edge of the ſword. Then ſpeaking to the citizens: If ye will haue the principalitie and commaund of all GRECE, before all others: you muſt ſhrowd your ſelues in your tents and pauilions in the open field, and not follow games and wreſtlings here at home. Alſo he knew well enough that the BOEOTIANS ſpoiled and vndid themſelues by eaſe and idleneſſe: which was the cauſe that he conſtantly bare this mind to keepe them continually in warres. Whereupon when time came that they fell to chooſing of Captaines, and that they went about to chuſe him Boeotarche: he ſaid to the citizens: My maiſters, I pray you conſider of it now you are at leyſure, before you chooſe me: for I tell you plainely, if I be choſen your captaine, you muſt to the warres. He called the country of BOEOTIA, which is all plaine champion, the ſcaffold of warre: ſaying it was vnpoſſible to keepe it, vnleſſe the inhabitants had their targets on their armes, and their ſwords in their hands. This was not becauſe he did not loue peace, and ſolitarineſſe to ſtudie Philoſophie, and that he was not more feareful of them he had in his charge then for himſelfe, vſing alwaies to watch and forbeare his meate, when the THEBANS were at

their banquets and feaſts giuing themſelues to all pleaſures: but he knew them well enough, and he was neuer more carefull of any thing, then to keepe his armie from idleneſſe. For on a time the ARCADIANS intreating that his troupes might enter into one of their towns, to lye drie there in couert all the winter, he would by no meanes yeeld to it. For now (ſaid he to his ſouldiers) that they ſee you exerciſe your ſelues in armes, they wonder at you as braue and valiant ſoldiers: but if they ſhould ſee you at the fire ſide parching of beanes, they would eſteeme no better of you then of themſelues. No more could he endure couetouſneſſe: for if ſometime he gaue his men leaue to go a booting, his meaning was, that whatſoeuer they got ſhould be beſtowed in furniſhing of armes. For if any man went about to fill his purſe with mony, he thought him vnworthie to be a ſouldier. As on a time when he perceiued that his Target-bearer had receiued a great ſumme of money for the raunſome of a priſoner, he ſaid vnto him: Giue me my target, and go thou thy waies, and buy thee a Tauerne to leade the reſt of thy life there: for I perceiue thou wilt no more like an honeſt man put thy ſelfe in daunger in the warres, as before thou haſt done, becauſe thou art now rich and wealthy. Now Epaminondas being ſuch a one as you haue heard, Meneclides notwithſtanding would neuer ceaſe controlling of him: and one day he went ſo far as to reproch him that he had no children, that he was not maried, and that he magnified himſelf more then euer king Agamemnon had done. Epaminondas anſwered him, thou haſt nothing to do to counſell me to marie: for in that reſpect there is neuer a man here in all this councell whome I would leſſe vſe then thou. And this he ſpake, becauſe the other was ſuſpected to be an adulterer. And where thou thinkeſt that I do enuie the glorie and fame of Agamemnon, thou art foule deceiued: yet I tell thee he was not a litle troubled to win a towne in ten yeares: where I to the cō
               trarie putting the LACEDAEMONIANS to flight in one day, haue deliuered our citie and all GRECE from them. But thankes be to you, my Lord THEBANS, (ſpeaking to all the whole aſſembly:) through you I did it, and ouerthrew and ruined the power and gouernment of our enemies. Neuertheleſſe, Pelopidas and he were very euill recompenced for this good ſeruice of theirs: for at their returne from LACONIA, they with ſome other of the Boeotarches were accuſed, for that after the time of their charge and gouernment was expired, they had kept it foure moneths beyond the time the law had appointed them. With much ado Pelopidas was abſolued: but Epaminondas willed his companions to lay all the fault vpon him, as being forced vnto it by his authoritie: and that for his part his words could be no better then his deedes. So vpon this he being called before the Iudges, and after he had iuſtified that he had paſſed the time limited of his authority: in ſtead of excuſing himſelfe, he went and told brauely his worthy exploits he had done in this iourney at that time, adding withall, that he was willing and readie to die, ſo they cauſed his condemnation to be written vpon the pillar of his tombe, to the end the GREEKS ſhould vnderſtand that they had put Epaminondas to death, becauſe he had compelled the THEBANS againſt their wils to burn the country of LACONIA, the which in fiue hundred yeares before had neuer once bene ſpoiled: that he had reſtored the citie of MESSINA with inhabitants againe, two hundred and thirtie yeares after the LACEDAEMONIANS had laid it waſt: that he had brought al the people and townes of ARCADIA to be as one bodie in league together, and had ſet all the GREEKES at libertie: and all theſe things, ſaid he, we did in our iourney. The Iudges vnderſtanding this worthy and true defence, they all roſe from their ſeates and laughed a good, and would neuer take their bals to ballot againſt him.
            But as for this ſecond accuſation, that he had ſhewed fauour vnto the LACEDAEMONIANS for his owne particular honour, he would make no anſwer before the people of THEBES to this falſe imputation, but he roſe out of the Theater, and paſſing through the aſſembly walked into the parke of exerciſes. The people being in vprore againſt him, made no choiſe of him againe as they were wont to do, although there was great need: but created other Boeotarches to go into THESSALY. And the more (as they thought) to deſpite Epaminondas, they commaunded him to go that voyage as a priuate ſouldier: the which he refuſed not, but went very willingly, and vpon this occaſion. Pelopidas being ſent the ſecond time into THESSALY, to make accord betwixt the people and Alexander the tyrant of PHERES, was by this tyrant (not reſpecting the dignitie of an Ambaſſador, nor of his countrey) made priſoner with Iſmenias. Whereupon the THEBANS being iuſtly offended, ſent thither an army of eight thouſand footmen, and fiue hundred horſe, howbeit vnder the leading of vnskilfull Captaines, who wanting iudgement to vſe the time, thought it good to returne home againe without doing any thing. But as they went

their way, Alexander being ſtronger in horſmen then they, followed them, and gaue charge vpon the rere, killed ſome, and grieuouſly wounded others. So they knowing neither how to go forward nor backward, were in great diſtreſſe, and the rather becauſe their victualsfell ſhorter euery day then other. But being now almoſt out of all hope to retire home with ſafety, Epaminondas being then amongſt the foote, was earneſtly intreated by the ſouldiers and Captaines to helpe to redreſſe this diſorder. Thereupon he choſe certaine footmen light armed, and all the horſemen, and ſo falling himſelfe amongſt them in the rereward of the army, he ſo luſtily repulſed the enemies, that the reſt of the army afterwards marched in great ſafety: and did ſo well, fighting at times, making head as occaſion ſerued, and keeping his troupes in ſo good order, that he brought them all away ſafe. This act crowned him with a new glorie, confounded his enemies, and wanne him great honour euery where, beſides the loue and good will of his citizens: who ſet great ſines vpon their Captaines, becauſe they had hehaued themſelues ſo euill in this iourney. Againe, the people ſeeing that by ſo many worthy deeds Epaminondas razed out all the ſlaunders and accuſations which his euill willers had vomited out againſt him: they choſe him a new their Captaine generall, to returne into THESSALIE with another army. At whoſe comming all the country ſtraight reioyced for the reputation of ſo great and famous a Captaine, and there wanted litle euen to breake this tyrants necke▪ altogether, his friends and Captaines ſtood in ſuch feare, and his ſubiects in good mind to rebell, and very ioyfull for the hope they had ſhortly to ſee the tyrant at one blow well recompenced for all his curſed and wicked deeds he had done long before. Neuertheleſſe Epaminondas▪
                ſetting aſide the conſideration of his honour and glorie, in reſpect of the deliuerance and ſafety of his friend Pelopidas, and being afraid that Alexander, when he ſhould ſee his eſtate in daunger to be ouerthrowne, would take reuenge in his madneſſe vpon Pelopidas: he purpoſely drew this warre in length, wheeling about in euery place, refraining to ſet on him in earneſt, diſſembling to make his preparations, and ſtill delaying, becauſe he would prepare and ſoften the heart of this tyrant by this deuice, not to leaue him too much to his bold vnbridled will, neither to ſtirre vp (to the danger of Pelopidas) the ſharpe and inhumane anger of this bloud-ſucker. Who being a monſter, compounded of cruelty and cowardice, was ſo afraid onely of the name and reputation of Epaminondas, and hanging the wing as they ſay: that he preſently ſent men vnto him to excuſe and iuſtifie him. But Epaminondas would not that the THEBANS through his ſlackneſſe ſhould make peace and alliance with ſo wicked a man, but onely he was contented to take a truce with him for thirtie dayes, taking Pelopidas and Iſmenias out of his hands. So with them he returned backe againe to THEBES, and alwayes continued faithfull friendſhip with Pelopidas, refuſing euer to haue any part of his goods, but did ſtill perſeuere in his wonted ſimplicitie and diſcipline. Now ſpeaking of this friendſhip, they report that Epaminondas hauing committed a man of baſe condition for ſome light fault to priſon, Pelopidas prayed him to ſet the poore man at liberty, but he denied him: and yet afterwards being intreated by a woman he kept, he did it at her requeſt, ſaying that harlots were to be graunted ſuch requeſts, not Captaines.
            This boldneſſe he ſhewed in all places, and to all men, yet mingled with a great ſweetneſſe, and with a good liuely grace: whereof we will bring many examples, beſides that he ſpake at SPARTA againſt the LACEDAEMONIANS and Ageſilaus, in the preſence of all the commiſſioners of GRECE. The ARGIANS hauing made league with the THEBANS, the ATHENIANS ſent their Ambaſſadours into ARCADIA, to ſee if they could gaine the ARCADIANS to be their friends. So theſe Ambaſſadours began roundly and hotly to charge and accuſe both the one and the other: inſomuch as Calliſtratus ſpeaking for them, reproued the other two cities, ORESTES and OEDIPVS. Epaminondas being preſent at that aſſembly of counſell, ſtood vp, and ſayd: My Lords, we confeſſe that in times paſt we had a man that killed his father in our city, and in ARGOS one that killed his mother: but for vs, we haue driuen out of our countrey, and baniſhed all ſuch wicked murtherers, and the ATHENIANS haue receiued them both. And to the SPARTANS that had layed many great and grieuous imputations vpon the THEBANS: If they haue done nothing elſe, my Lords of SPARTA, anſwered Epaminondas, yet at the leaſt they haue made you forget to ſpeake litle. The ATHENIANS had made league with Alexander the tyrant of PHERES, mortall enemy of the THEBANS, who promiſed the THEBANS that he would let them haue a pound of fleſh for an halfe peny. Epaminondas hearing of it, Well ſayd he, and we will find them wood that ſhall coſt them nothing to ſeeth this fleſh withall: for we will go fell and cut downe all the

trees they haue in their countrey, if they go about to make any alteration other then good. So when he went into THESSALY, and brought backe Pelopidas againe, the ATHENIANS made no great ſtirre againſt him: and the tyrant that promiſed fleſh ſo good cheape, had much ado at that time to keepe his skin whole. But afterwards he had his payment, as you may reade in the latter end of Pelopidas life. But that which did excell in Epaminondas, and did cut the throat of enuy it ſelfe, was his moderation and temperance, knowing how to vſe any ſtate or condition offered him, & neuer to rage againſt himſelfe nor others, alwayes bearing this mind, that howſoeuer they tooke him, and in what place ſoeuer they ſet him, he was well contented, and all for the good of his countrey: for proofe whereof I will ſhew you this example. His euill willers on a time thinking to bring him in diſgrace, as they ſay, for ſpite they made him ſuperintendant and ouerſeer of all the cuſtomes, whileſt others his inferiors, vnworthy to be compared to him, were placed in the moſt honourable offices. This notwithſtanding he deſpiſed not this office, but did diſcharge it very faithfully: for, ſayd he, office or authority ſheweth not onely what the man is, but alſo the man what the office is.
            But now further: ſhortly after Epaminondas returne out of THESSALY, the ARCADIANS were ouercome by Archidamus and the LACEDAEMONIANS, and they loſt not a man: and therefore this dayes iourney was called for them, the teareleſſe battell. Epaminondas foreſeeing that the ARCADIANS ſhould yet haue a ſtorme, gaue them counſell to fortifie themſelues: whoſe counſell they following, they built the towne which afterwards was called MEGALIPOLIS, ſituated in a very conuenient place. Whileſt they made warre with the ELIANS their neighbors, Epaminondas heart neuer fainted, but his mind was alwayes giuen to high enterpriſes for the good of his countrey: where being reſpected and honoured aboue all others, he made an oration vnto his citizens, perſwading them to make themſelues ſtrong by ſea, and to attend the conqueſt of the principality, making themſelues Lords of it. This oration of his had bene long thought of before, being full of liuely reaſons, which did ſhew and proue vnto them that the enterpriſe was both honourable and profitable, aſwell by other arguments he alleadged, as alſo for that he told them it was an eaſie thing for them that were now the ſtronger by land, to make themſelues alſo the ſtrongeſt by ſea: and the rather for that the ATHENIANS in the warre againſt Xerxes, notwithſtanding that they had armed and ſet foorth two hundred galleys well appointed with men, they neuertheleſſe willingly ſubmitted themſelues vnto the LACEDAEMONIANS. So alledging many other reaſons to this purpoſe, he preuailed ſo much, that the THEBANS inclined to vndertake the enterpriſe by ſea. Thereupon the people gaue preſent order they ſhould build a hundred galleys, and withall an arſenall with ſo many roomes to lay them vnder couert in the docke: and that they ſhould ſend to them of RHODES, of CHIO, and of BYZANCE, to pray them to further them in this enterpriſe. And for this purpoſe Epaminondas was ſent with an army vnto theſe cities. So in his courſe he met with Laches, a Captaine of the ATHENIANS, and a good number of ſhips in his fleete, ſent of purpoſe to hinder the intention of the THEBANS. Notwithſtanding, Epaminondas made him ſo afraid, that he draue him backe againe: and he holding on his voyage, brought the cities before named to make league with the THEBANS, who on the other ſide were at warre with the citie of ORCHOMENE, which had done great hurt and miſchiefe in their eſtate. So they hauing won it by aſſault, they ſlue euery man that was able to beare armes, and moreouer made all the women and children ſlaues.
            Some time after Pelopidas death, certaine priuate men of MANTINEA, fearing to be called to account for their bad behauiours and robberies they had done, if the ARCADIANS and ELIANS fell to agreement: they practiſed ſo, that they raiſed vp a new quarrell within the countrey deuided into two factions, of the which the MANTINEANS were chiefe of the one ſide, and the TEGEATES on the other part. This quarrell went ſo farre, that the parties would try it by armes. The TEGEATES, they ſent to demaund aide of the THEBANS, who choſe Epaminondas their Captaine generall, and ſent him with a good number of men of warre to aide the TEGEATES. The MANTINEANS aſtonied at this aide comming out of BOEOTIA to their enemies, and at the reputation of this Captaine: they immediatly ſent vnto the ATHENIANS and LACEDAEMONIANS, the greateſt enemies of the BOEOTIANS for aide, which both the cities graunted. Whereupon there fell out often and many great skirmiſhes in diuerſe parts of PELOPONNESVS. Epaminondas being not farre off MANTINEA, vnderſtood by the ſame country men, that Ageſilaus and the LACEDAEMONIANS were come into the field, and that they waſted all the territory of the

TEGEATES. Whereupon imagining ſtraight that there were few men left in the citie of SPARTA to defend it, he went about a great exploit, and a wonderfull ſtratageme of a man of warre: and had brought it to paſſe, if the maruellous great good fortune of SPARTA had not hindred it. So he departed from TEGEA by night, the MANTINEANS knowing nothing of it, and taking another way then Ageſilaus, he had taken SPARTA without one ſtroke ſtriken, but for a poſt of CANDIA that with ſpeed brought Ageſilaus word of it: who foorthwith ſent out a horſeman to giue them intelligence that were left at SPARTA, that they ſhould beware they were not ſurpriſed vpon the ſudden: and he himſelfe came ſpeedily after, and arriued there a litle before the THEBANS comming thither: who being very neare the city by breake of day, gaue aſſault to them that were within to defend the towne. Then Ageſilaus beſtirred him throughly, beyond the power of an old man. But his ſonne Archidamus, and Iſadas the ſonne of Phoebidas, fought valiantly of all parts. Epaminondas ſeeing the SPARTANS in order of battell, began then to miſtruſt that his enterpriſe was diſcouered. This notwithſtanding, he left not off to force them all he could, albeit he fought with great diſaduantage for the inconuenience of the places he occupied: and continued alwayes couragiouſly doing and receiuing hurt, vntill the army of the LACEDAEMONIANS came on, and the night alſo: whereupon he made them ſound the retraite. Now he being aduertiſed that the MANTINEANS came on alſo with their forces, he drew his troupes ſomewhat further off the towne, and there camped. After that he cauſed his men to refreſh themſelues with victuals, and hauing left certaine horſemen in the campe, he commanded them to make fires in the morning, and he himſelfe went in the meane ſpace, to ſurpriſe thoſe that remained at MANTINEA before any man wiſt he was gone. Neuertheleſſe he failed of his purpoſe, albeit he had forethought him of all misfortunes that any man poſſible could haue conſidered in ſo waighty a cauſe. But the proſperity of the THEBANS was come to his height, and the courſe of Epaminondas life drawing neare to an end, would very ſhortly depriue GRECE of this noble and famous perſon, from whom was taken a moſt notable victorie, and that twiſe, by a moſt ſtraunge accident. For at this ſecond time, when he was neare vnto MANTINEA, left without gard and defence; on the other ſide of the towne there arriued ſix thouſand ATHENIANS, led by their Captaine Hegelecus: who hauing put ſufficient force into the towne, he ordered all the reſt in battell without the towne wals, as though he meant to haue fought a field: and immediatly after them came alſo the LACEDAEMONIANS and MANTINEANS together, who prepared themſelues to put all to the hazard of a battell, and therefore ſent for their allies out of all parts. They were in all fiue and twenty thouſand footmen, and two thoſand horſe. The ARCADIANS, BOEOTIANS, and their partakers, made the number of thirty thouſand footmen and aboue, and three thouſand horſe. Firſt, the horſmen charged with ſo great furie as was poſſible, inſomuch as the horſmen of the ATHENIANS finding the THEBANS in front, were the weaker: not becauſe they were leſſe valiant and hardy then the other, but becauſe they had not ſo good leaders, and had few archers among their troupes. The THEBANS on the other ſide they were well appointed, and ſpecially of THESSALIANS amongſt others, men very skilfull in their bowes, who ſo plied the ATHENIANS, that they brake them, and put them all to rout. Yet they did not flie amongſt their footmen, which made them ſomewhat recouer their honour they had loſt by running away, and all becauſe they had not broken the rankes of their allies. On the contrary part, as they fled they met with certaine troupes of ſouldiers of NEGROPONT, whom the ARCADIANS ſent to take in certaine hils hard by the plaine where the battell was fought, and they put them all to the ſword. The men at armes of the THEBANS ſeeing them turne their backes, did not purſue them at all, but gaue charge vpon agreat battalion of footmen, forcing them all they could to breake and run through them: ſo the fight was very cruell and ſharpe, but in the end the ATHENIANS left the place. This notwithſtanding, the Colonell of the horſemen of the ELIANS being appointed for the ſafety of the reregard, defended them, and comming to the encounter of the BOEOTIANS he reſiſted them, and made them ſpeedily giue backe: and this reformed the fault againe of the left point of their army. But in the right point, after the horſemen had charged one vpon the other, the fight was ſoone tried. For, by reaſon of the great number of the men at armes of the THEBANS and THESSALIANS, the partakers of the MANTINEANS were preſently put to rout, and after they had loſt a great number of their men, they ſuccoured themſelues about the battalion of their footmen. And this was the ſucceſſe of the fight of the horſemen. As touching the battalions of the

footmen, after they came once to the ſword, it was a maruellous bloudie and moſt cruell fight: for neuer before that time was there ſo great a number of GREEKES in battell one againſt the other, nor ſo great Captaines, nor of better fighting and more valiant men. The two nations that at that time bare the name to be the braueſt ſouldiers for footmen of all the world, to wit, the THEBANS, and LACEDAEMONIANS, they were ſet in front in the battell one directly againſt the other. So the firſt began to charge, neither ſparing life nor limme. The firſt charge they gaue was with their pikes, which being broken by force of the great blowes they gaue to each other, then they fought with their ſwords, and laying about them body to body, there was no kind of ſlaſhing and wounding but they both gaue and receiued: and neither part ſhrunke nor gaue ouer, but ſtucke to it manfully. And ſo continuing this dangerous fight a long time, by reaſon of the valiantneſſe of either ſide: the victory ſtood doubtfull a great while, and could hardly be iudged which ſide were like to haue the vpper hand. For euery one that fought had this reſolution in his heart, not to feare death what ſoeuer hapned: but rather deſiring to make proofe of the valour of his perſon, worthily gaue his life in pray, to win honour in exchange. By reaſon whereof, though the fight was moſt ſharpe and violent, the euent of it remained a long ſpace betwixt two irons, not to be diſcerned of whether ſide the victorie ſhould fall. Vntill ſuch time as Epaminondas ſeeing that there was no remedy, but that the reſolution of this doubtfull fight depended vpon his owne vertue and valour: he reſolued with himſelfe to venter his life vpon it. So he preſently gathered about him all the beſt and choiſe men of his army, and of them hauing made a company of reſolute men, he ranne with great furie into the greateſt preſſe of all the enemies, marching himſelfe the formeſt man before his troupe, with a ſpeare in his hand, with the which at the firſt blow he gaue, he ſlue the Captaine of the LACEDAEMONIANS, ſtraight way the other began to aſſaile their enemies. But Epaminondas killed ſo many in the place with his owne hands, and did ſo terrifie the others, that at the laſt he opened the battell of his enemies, and layed on them ſo luſtily, that they not able any longer to defend themſelues againſt the valorous force of himſelfe and his followers, were enforced to giue backe, and to leaue the place to the BOEOTIANS: who were ſtraight at their heeles, beating and following them ſo eagerly, that in a ſhort ſpace all the field was couered with dead bodies, lying on heapes one vpon another. But in the end, the LACEDAEMONIANS ſeeing they could by no meanes ſaue themſelues, becauſe Epaminondas followed them ſo neare (giuen ouer too much to his paſſionate courage) they gathered a troupe together, and running all on heapes they ſet vpon him, throwing infinite number of darts at him, of the which he put by ſome, and receiued others vpon his target, but yet there were many that ſtucke in his body, which he pulled out himſelfe, and with the ſelfe ſame weapons fought with them that had throwne them at him. At the laſt, when he had fought more then a man, and beyond all the force a man could vſe to giue his countrey the victory: a LACONIAN called Anticrates thruſt him into the breaſt with a dart with ſuch a force, that the wood brake, and the iron with the tronchion remained in his bodie. Hauing receiued this great wound, he ſuddenly fell downe to the ground: but then was there a more cruell fight about him then before, with great ſlaughter of both ſides: vntill that the THEBANS, which had much ſtronger bodies then the LACEDAEMONIANS, made them flie for life, and after they had followed them a litle way, they returned againe to the campe where the battell was fought, to the end they might haue the dead bodies in their power, and ſo the whole victory. Thereupon they ſounded the retraite, and thus the battell ceaſed, for the which both of them ſet vp tokens of triumph, either ſide pretending they had the better. For the ATHENIANS hauing ouerthrowne thoſe of NEGROPONT and their adherents which were ſent to take the hils of that plaine: they kept the bodies in their power.
The THEBANS on the other ſide hauing ouercome the SPARTANS, had the bodies of thoſe that were dead in that battell in their power, being the farre greater number alſo: wherefore they ſayd that they were victours. So ſtanding in theſe termes, it was a good while before they ſent trompeter or herauld the one to the other, to burie their dead: vntill that the LACEDAEMONIANS ſent firſt of all, and then they all tooke their dead bodies and buried them. And furthermore, he that had killed Epaminondas was ſo wel thought of, & highly eſteemed for this valiant act of his, for the great feare all the SPARTANS had had of Epaminondas in time paſt: that they gaue him many great preſents and honours, and beſides, made thoſe that came after him free from all publicke charges and contributions in the common wealth. And Plutarch alſo ſayd, that in his time one Callicrates, a nephew of Anticrates
               
aboue named, did then enioy that freedome. Touching Epaminondas, he was brought yet aliue into his tent: howbeit the phiſitions and ſurgeons being called together to dreſſe him, they all agreed, that ſo ſoone as euer they pulled out the head and ſplent of the dart out of his body, he muſt needs dye. So he made a moſt worthie and noble end of his life: for firſt he called for his target-bearer, who was alwayes at his hand in battell, and asked him, Is my target ſafe? He brought it ſtraight to ſhew it him. Then he asked who had the victory? The BOEOTIANS, ſaid the target-bearer. Then he commanded they ſhould bring him Diophantus and Iolidas: but being told they were both dead, he willed his citizens to make peace with their enemies, for that now they had no more Captaines of skill to leade them to the warres. Adding further to that aboue ſpoken, It is now time I dye, and ſo commanded them to plucke this ſpell of the dart out of his body. At that word all his friends about him fetched grieuous ſighes and cried out: and one of them weeping, ſayd vnto him: Alas Epaminondas, thou dieſt now, and leaueſt no children behind thee. No that I do not, ſayd he: but I leaue two faire daughters behind me, whereof the one is the victory of LEVCTRES, and the other that of MANTINEA. Immediatly they pulled out the ſpell of the dart, and at that inſtant he gaue vp the ghoſt, without ſhewing any ſigne or token that he was troubled in his mind. And thus did he embrace that bleſſed death: that fortuning vnto him which he often had in his mouth: that warre is the bed of honour, and alſo that it is a ſweete death to dye for his countrey. Now may we well ſee, that he excelled all the Captaines that euer were before him, did accompany, or follow him. For whoſoeuer would compare all their vertues, with the deeds and glory of Epaminondas, he ſhall ſee that the vertue of him was more noble and excellent, then any of theirs. For in them will appeare at the firſt ſight ſome ſpeciall thing more eminent then all the reſt, which hath made their fame great and glorious: but in this man onely were ioyned together all the vertues and good parts that could be wiſhed for in a graue, politicke, and a great Captaine, to make him perfect and complete in all things. For in the liberall ſciences, in experience, ripe vnderſtanding, force of eloquence, ſtrength of body, diſpoſition of his perſon, in height and greatneſſe of courage, in temperance, wiſedome, watching, ſweetneſſe and courteſie: and moreouer in hardineſſe, proweſſe, good iudgement, and ſufficiencie in militarie diſcipline: I know not where there is to be found ſo complete a man. For my opinion, I compare Epaminondas to himſelfe. Alſo in his time he wan to his countrey by force of armes, the principalitie of GRECE: but after his death his citizens loſt it immediatly, and fell daily to decay: that at the laſt Alexander the great vtterly ouercame them, made them that were aliue ſlaues, and deſtroyed their citie to the very ground. To conclude, before, and after Epaminondas, THEBES was vnder foote, and yet commanded all others whiles he ſtood on his feete. And ſo we muſt conclude, that THEBES was vtterly ouerthrowne in the battell of MANTINEA, and that Epaminondas at that time wan an immortall glorie. And as in his life time he had caried himſelfe modeſtly, and alwaies deteſted couetouſneſſe: ſo after his deceaſe the THEBANS brought him to his graue at the common charge of the towne, becauſe they found no money in his houſe to defray the leaſt charges of his funerall.
            The end of Epaminondas life.
         
         
            
            THE LIFE OF Philip of Macedon.
            
            
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
            
            
               Philip: that wiſedome booteth not at all,
               Which ſcorning iuſtice, hopes to climbe on high.
               Let Princes that behold thy ſudden fall,
               Loue right and meekneſſe, least like thee they dye.
            
            
               
                  AMyntas, the ſecond of that name, and ſeuenteenth King of MACEDON, of the race of Temenides or Caranides, deſcended from Hercules, and that reigned foure hundred and ninetie eight yeares, reckoning from Caranus vnto Antipater, in whom began another race: he had three ſonnes by his firſt wife called Eurydice, borne in ILLYRIA: to wit, Alexander, Perdiccas, and Philip. Alexander hauing ſucceded his father, raigned but one yeare, during which time he made warre with his baſe brother Ptolomaeus Alorites. But to appeaſe the ſtrife betwixt them, they ſent for Pelopidas, who was at that time in THESSALIE. He tooke vp all their quarrels, reſtored thoſe that were baniſhed vnto their houſes, and (becauſe this peace ſhould be more ſurely kept) he tooke of them for hoſtages, Philip, and thirty other of the nobleſt mens ſonnes in MACEDON, and brought them all away with him to THEBES. Now during the time that Perdiccas raigned, which was the ſpace of fiue yeares, Philip kept at Pammenes houſe, with whom Epaminondas was very great: & hereof it came, that ſome thought Philip was a hearer of Lyſis Epaminondas ſchoolemaiſter, and that they conferred together in Philoſophy. Howbeit Epaminondas was then much older then he, & ſurely it can hardly be that they were ſcholers together: except they will ſay that Epaminondas continuing all his life time to profit by the ſtudy of wiſedom, made Philip deſirous to heare him ſometime, and to follow him alſo. And it may be well inough alſo that he had learned of Epaminondas to be ſo quicke and ſudden of execution in the warres, as he was: which was but one of the leaſt parts of Epaminondas vertues. But as for his continency, iuſtice, magnanimitie, and clemency, which were the parts that in truth made him great: Philip, neither bv nature, nor by education, nor by ſtudy, euer attained vnto it: for all this, he wanted not great gifts of body & mind, as ſhall appeare in the diſcourſe of his life: and as Theophraſtus teſtifieth, he was greater then any other of the kings of MACEDON, not onely in proſperity of fortune, but alſo in wiſdome, bounty, and moderation of manners. So it came to paſſe that Alexander, notwithſtanding the accord Pelopidas had made, was

traiterouſly killed by Ptolomy ſurnamed Alorites, who vſurped the kingdome, and was ſlaine himſelfe by Perdiccas: who after he had bene ouercome in a great battell by the SLAVONS, in the which he was ſlaine: Philip which was the laſt of the three brethren, ſtealing away from the place where he was in oſtage, fled into MACEDON, and came to ſucceed in the kingdome, the which he found in great trouble. For there were ſlaine at the laſt battell aboue foure thouſand MACEDONIANS, and thoſe that eſcaped were ſo beaten and aſtonied with blowes, that they thought of nothing leſſe then to take armes againſt the SLAVONS. On the other ſide the HVNGARIANS made inrodes into MACEDON, and the SLAVONS muſtered againe to returne thither. There was one Pauſanias alſo that aſpired to the kingdome, by the ſupport of the king of THRACIA. And the ATHENIANS alſo, they would eſtabliſh one called Argaeus, and to this end ſent a great fleet by ſea, and three thouſand footmen well armed by land, led by Mantias. Philip taking heart to him in theſe rude beginnings, began to embolden the MACEDONIANS by wiſe perſwaſions: he reeſtabliſhed militarie diſcipline, furniſhed his ſouldiers very well, making them arme themſelues, and gaue order they ſhould be continually trained and exerciſed. It was he that amongſt other things deuiſed how to cloſe his footmen, and that framed the ſquare battell, which euer ſince was called the MACEDONIAN Phalange. He was very gracious in his words, and by his promiſes and gifts he wan the hearts and goodwill of his ſubiects.
            Now finding himſelfe ſtrong, although he was yet but young of yeares, he reſolued to make head againſt all his enemies, yet not by open force, but where there was need: being alwaies of this mind, to buy time and men as much as he could poſſible. So perceiuing that the ATHENIANS did their vttermoſt indeuor to win the citie of AMPHIPOLIS againe, and that by this means they ſought to bring the kingdome of MACEDON into the hands of Argaeus: he made them leaue it, and thruſt out their garriſons. As for the PANNONIANS (others reade PAEONIANS) or HVNGARIANS hauing ſent ambaſſadours to them, he corrupted ſome with money, and wan others by faire promiſes: inſomuch that they were all contented to liue in peace with him. And by the ſame meanes he brake the hope of Pauſanias, hauing by preſents gained the king of THRACIA that aided him. And for the regard of Mantias captaine of the ATHENIANS, he marched with his armie vnto the citie of METHONA: but he remained there, and ſent Argaeus with the ſouldiers ſtraungers whom they had brought with them, vnto the citie of AEGES. Argaeus approching neare the towne with his troupe, ſent to feele the inhabitants, if they would receiue him, and be the firſt that ſhould be cauſe of his entrie into the poſſeſſion of the kingdome of MACEDON. But perceiuing they cared not for him, he returned againe. Philip that followed him hard at his heeles gaue him battell, killed the moſt part of his men, and draue the reſt vnto a litle mountaine, where he did beſiege them ſo ſtraightly, that they were forced to deliuer him all the baniſhed men of MACEDON amongſt them: whereupon he let them go their liues and goods ſaued. This firſt victorie of Philip put the MACEDONIANS againe in heart, and made them bold to enterpriſe any thing afterwards. Hereupon he made peace with the ATHENIANS, and vnderſtanding that the king of HVNGARIE was dead, he entred into their countrie with a maine armie, ouercame them in battell, and made them ſubiect vnto him. Of all his enemies there were left none but the SLAVONIANS, whom he went to aſſaile with ten thouſand footmen, and ſixe hundred horſe. But ſince they could not agree together, Bardyllis their king truſting in the victories he had gotten before time of the MACEDONIANS, and in the valiantneſſe of his SLAVONS, he came into the field, and preſented battell. The which hauing bene fought a long time, Philip behaued himſelfe ſo valiantly with his men of armes the MACEDONIANS, that he ouerthrew the SLAVONS, leauing ſeuen thouſand of them dead on the ground: and the reſt eſcaped by flying away. Shortly after they were agreed together, and reſtored to Philip all the places they held pertaining vnto MACEDON. Now the AMPHIPOLITANS had of long time borne Philip euill will, and whilſt he was occupied in other places, they did him many inuries: wherefore he determined to make a ſharpe warre vpon them. He hauing beſieged them with a puiſſant armie, and hauing brought his engines of warre hard to their wals, he beat them with ſuch furie, that he made a ſufficient breach, and entred the towne by force: out of the which he draue thoſe afterwards that were his enemies, and very courteouſly vſed and intreated the reſt. This towne being ſeated in a very commodious place, vpon the frontiers of THRACIA, and of the countries neare adioyning thereto: ſtood him afterwards in great ſtead for the furtherance and increaſe of his greatneſſe. For by meanes of that he preſently had

the citie of PYDNE, and made league with the OLYNTHIANS, of great power at that time: by reaſon whereof he and the ATHENIANS, enuying one the other, they both practiſed to winne them. But Philip hauing wonne POTIDEA, draue out the garriſon of the ATHENIANS and vſed them very honeſtly: for the ſent them home to their houſes their liues and goods ſaued, not becauſe he loued the people of ATHENS, but for that he feared the power of their citie. After he had taken in the citie of PYDNE, he gaue it to the OLYNTHIANS, with all the territorie belonging vnto it. Then he returned to CRENIDES, the which he hauing augmented with a great number of inhabitants, he changed the firſt name of it, and called it by his owne name, PHILIPPI. Within that territorie he had mynes of gold, the which he opened and digged ſo diligently, that he drew out yearely new made, about the ſumme of ſixe hundred thouſand crowns. By this means in a ſhort time he gathered together a great treaſure, and daily the kingdome of MACEDON grew great, becauſe it had one of the chiefeſt ſinewes and props of warre. So he coined a number of peeces of gold called Philippus, wherewith he waged a great number of men, and bribed many priuate GREEKES: who afterwards ſold him for ready mony the townes of their countrie, as we ſhall ſee hereafter. In all this buſineſſe, Alexander the tyrant of PHERES in THESSALIE, hauing bene ſlaine by his wife Thebe, and by her brethren called Lycophron, and Tiſiphonus, at the firſt they were honoured as men that had deliuered their countrey of a cruell tyrannie: but very ſhortly after, theſe two men chaunging their minds, by money wan the ſouldiers whom Alexander kept for the guard of his perſon, and put themſelues in his place whom they had killed, putting many citizens to death that withſtood their enterpriſe: and hauing gathered together a great number of ſouldiers, they made themſelues Lords of PHERES. The ALLEVADES, men of authoritie and greatly followed in the countrie for the auncient nobilitie of their houſe, would haue oppoſed themſelues againſt this new tyranny. But finding themſelues to be too weak, they made meanes to Philip: who entring into THESSALIE with his armie, ouercame the two tyrants, and ſetting the townes at liberty which theſe tyrants held in ſubiection, he ſhewed great loue and fauour to the THESSALIANS. By which occaſion, in all his conqueſts he obtained afterwards, he found the THESSALIANS alwaies readie to do him ſeruice, and to aide him in all his affaires, and not himſelfe alone, but alſo his ſonne Alexander. But the greatneſſe of Philip grieued his neighbours, inſomuch as the kings of THRACIA, HVNGARIA, and SLAVONIA, not being ſtrong enough of themſelues, they ioyned forces together to make warre vpon him, and to be reuenged. Whileſt they were preparing to ioyne their forces, Philip went before, and compelled them to do what he would.
            About this time, to wit, in the laſt yeare of the hundred and fifth Olympiade, fifteene years after the battell of MANTINEA, the holy warre began amongſt the GREEKES, which continued ten yeares ſpace: and this was the occaſion. The THEBANS not being contented with the victorie they obtained at the battell of LEVCTRES, framed a complaint againſt the LACEDAEMONIANS in the aſſembly of the Eſtates of GRECE, which they call the councell of the Amphictyons: and followed the matter ſo hard, that the LACEDAEMONIANS were condemned in a great ſumme of money, becauſe they had in time of peace ſurpriſed the caſtell of CADMEA. The PHOCIANS alſo, they hauing plowed vp a great deale of a certaine land ſacred to the gods, called the land of CIRRHE, were condemned by the Amphictyons in a great ſum of money: and becauſe they would not pay it, the councell pronounced, without longer delay and refuſall, all their towns and lands to be confiſcated to the gods: & that all other which were cōdemned (of which number were the LACEDAEMONIANS) ſhould be compelled to pay their fines, and if they refuſed, they ſhould be taken for excommunicate, and the other GREEKES ſhould make warre with them as againſt accurſed and execrable men. Philomelus, a man of great authoritie among the PHOCIANS, did ſo much, that he perſwaded them not to pay it, but contrariwiſe to defend their countrey with armes, and to win DELPHES. Whereunto they giuing their conſents, he gathered together a great armie, and in deſpite of all hindrances made himſelfe maiſter of DELPHES: cut aſunder with ſheares the decrees made by the Amphictyons engrauen vpon marble pillars: poſſeſt all the gold and ſiluer that was in the temple: and afterwards rendred a reaſon of his fact, and prepared himſelfe to make warre againſt the THEBANS, THESSALIANS, and LOCRIANS, and wanne three great battels of them. But being ouercome at the fourth battell, he threw himſelfe downe off a high rocke. In the meane ſpace, Cerſobleptes, the ſonne of Clotis king of THRACIA, hauing rendred vp to the ATHENIANS the towns of CHERRONESVS, partly for the good will he

bare the ATHENIANS, and partly for the hatred he had to Philip: the people of ATHENS ſent inhabitants thither to keepe and defend the townes. Philip perceiuing that thoſe of METHONE lent out their towne to all them that would make war againſt him, went and laid ſiege before it. They that were beſieged, did valiantly defend it for a time: but in the end finding themſelues too weak to make reſiſtance, they yeelded vpon condition, that the inhabitants ſhould go out euery man with one only gowne. Aſſoone as euer Philip had the towne in his hands, he razed it euen to the hard ground, & gaue the country all about vnto the MACEDONIANS. At this ſiege he was wounded with an arrow, that put out one of his eyes. Afterwards he led his army alſo at the inſtance of the THESSALIANS, into the country againſt Lycophron, that began againe to tyrannize thoſe of PHERES: who hauing demanded aide of the PHOCIANS, they ſent thither Phayllus with 7000. fighting men, whom Philip ouercame, and draue them out of THESSALY. Then Onomarchus that ſucceeded Philomelus in the charge of general, hoping to haue won THESSALY, made great ſpeed thither with all his army, vnder colour to bringaide vnto Lycophron. Philip went againſt him with the THESSALIANS, but becauſe Onomarchus had the greater number of men, he ouerthrew him, and killed many of the MACEDONIANS, inſomuch that Philip himſelfe was in great danger. For his men alſo were ſo afraid, that they would haue forſaken him, & he had much trouble to keepe them together▪ and in the end was conſtrained to retire home into his kingdome. Onomarchus departing from thence, entred into the country of BOEOTIA, ouercame the BOEOTIANS in battell, and tooke the city of CORONEA. But Philip returned immediatly with a great force into THESSALY, to driue out Lycophron: who hauing called in the PHOCIANS, Onomarchus returned thither, followed with 20. thouſand footmen, and fiue hundred horſe. Hereupon Philip perſwaded the commons of THESSALY, that they muſt all together vndertake this warre. And he could ſo well ſolicite them, that he aſſembled in one campe twenty thouſand footmen, and three thouſand horſe. Then was there fought a moſt cruell battell, whereof the victory fell to Philip through the valiantneſſe of his THESSALIAN men of armes. For Onomarchus and his men, they fled on foot towards the ſea, where was by chance Chares the ATHENIAN Captaine ſailing all alongſt the coaſt with certaine gallies. There was great ſlaughter of the PHOCIANS there followed by the victors. Others to flie with more ſpeed, threw downe their armes, and leapt into the ſea, by ſwimming to get to the gallies of the ATHENIANS. There were ſlaine in battell and flight as well of naturall PHOCIANS, as of ſtrangers that came for pay, aboue 6000. men, & there were taken priſoners to the number of 3000. Onomarchus that was one of them, was hanged, and all the other drowned as ſacrilegers, by the cōmandement of Philip: vnto whom Lycophron yeelded the towne of PHERES, & ſo retired out of THESSALY, which by this means was ſet at liberty.
            As for Philip, he marched with his army towards the way of THERMOPYLES, to make war with the PHOCIANS, within PHOCIDE it ſelfe: but the ATHENIANS ſtopped his paſſage. Wherfore he was conſtrained to returne backe into MACEDON, where he ſtaid not long at reſt, but determined to bring the townes of CHALCIDE in ſubiection to him. So he took by aſſault a fort called Gyre, the which he razed. But this was ſuch a terror to the other ſmall townes, that they put themſelues vnder his obedience. Paſſing from thence into THESSALY, he draue away Pytholaus that had made himſelfe maiſter of PHERES. And intending to bring the townes of HELLESPONT vnder his ſubiection, he tooke in without paine or daunger (rather by treaſon) the townes of MICYBERNE, and of TORONE. Afterwards he went with a great army againſt the city of OLYNTHE, the greateſt & of moſt power that was in that marches: where firſt he ouercame the OLYNTHIANS in two great fights, ſo that he made them leaue the field, & ſhut them in within their owne town, vnto the which he gaue many aſſaults, and loſt a great number of his men there. But hauing with great ſums of mony corrupted Euthicrates & Laſthenes gouernors of the towne, at the length he had it by treaſon: and hauing ſacked it, he ſold the townſmen for ſlaues by the drum. The taking of this towne brought him a great quantity of ſiluer to helpe to defray the charges of his war, and did alſo make the other towns afraid, which had taken armes to reſiſt him. Now after he had beſtowed many rich preſents vpon his captaines and ſouldiers, that had done him good ſeruice in this warre, he gaue alſo all about great ſums of mony to the heads of the towns, and found merchants alſo among them that ſold him their owne countrey and fellow citizens. Inſomuch that he himſelfe confeſſed he had enlarged his kingdome more through gold and ſiluer, then he did by force of armes: according to an anſwer that was made him, when he began firſt to put himſelfe forward: for being deſirous to know how he ſhould carie himſelfe, the oracle anſwered:

                  
                  VVith ſiluer ſpeares begin and end thy war,
                  So ſhalt thou topſie turuy turne all things what ere they are.
               
Now the ATHENIANS being iealous of his greatneſſe, did euer helpe them whom he would hurt, and ſent Ambaſſadours to all the cities to perſwade them to maintaine and preſerue their libertie, and to put their towneſ-men to death whom they found willing to betray the Commonwealth: promiſing them to aide them all, and declared themſelues open enemies vnto Philip. He that ſet them moſt againſt him, was Demoſthenes: the moſt eloquent man of all GRECE at that time, and that did more trouble and hurt Philip with the blowes of his toung, and his continuall motions then all the Captaines of GRECE did him beſides. All this notwithſtanding, with all the diligence and labour ATHENS could vſe, they could neuer bridle the wicked diſpoſition of ſome priuate perſons, but they ſtill ſought to ſell their countrey: for he that bought, ſowed ſiluer without any ſpare, and there were a great number of traitours at that time through all GRECE. And touching this purpoſe, they ſay, that he being deſirous to winne a very ſtrong hold, he ſent ſome men before to view it: who returning, reported that it was vnpoſſible almoſt to approach it, and did by deſcription ſet it downe in all points impregnable. Then he asked them if the place were ſo hard to come to, that a poore Aſſe laden with gold could not come neare it: for he had oftentimes with ſiluer very eaſily wonne that which otherwiſe was not to be had by force of armes. And this was the cauſe that he practiſed to haue traitours in euery towne by gifts and penſions, calling them that receiued him his hoſtes and friends, corrupting mens manners beſides by vnworthie and diſhoneſt meanes. As after that he had wonne OLYNTHE, he made ſumptuous and magnificent ſacrifices to his gods, to thanke them for the victorie they had giuen him: and ſo hauing ſet downe a day of triumph for tilting and tourneying, and common ſports: thither repaired a great number of ſtraungers that came to ſee the feaſt. So keeping open court, he inuited many of theſe ſtraungers to come to his ſumptuous feaſtes he made, and in them he ſhewed all the familiaritie and courteſie that might be to entertaine them. For he dranke to ſome, and then gaue them the cups wherin he dranke to them: to others he gaue great preſents, and vnto all generally he gaue good words, and large promiſes▪ inſomuch that many ſought how to obtaine his loue and fauour. So it is reported, that one day at a banquet he eſpied Satyrus, an excellent Comedian and player, that he was very ſad: and that he asked him why he did not craue ſome thing of him, that he might ſhew his liberalitie vnto him. Satyrus anſwered him againe, that he would be glad to obtaine a ſute at his hands, but he durſt not aske it him, being afraid he ſhould be denyed. Philip liked his anſwer well, and bad him aske boldly. Then he told him, that a friend of his had two daughters among others priſoners, both of them mariageable, and beſought him that he would beſtow them vpon him: not for any other pleaſure or profite he ſhould haue of them, but becauſe he would marie them both at his owne charge, before they ſhould be forced to their diſhonour. Philip thanked him for his honeſt petition, and preſently cauſed theſe two maides to be deliuered vnto him. Thus he beſtowed many ſuch courteſies euery where, whereof he made his profite afterwards with great vſurie. For a number being drawne by the ſent and odour of ſo many good turnes, ſtudied with themſelues, enuying one another, which of them might do him beſt ſeruice, and find out moſt meanes to deliuer townes and countries into his hands.
            But now to returne againe to that we had begun to ſpeake of the holy warre. The PHOCIANS that had three very ſtrong holds in BOEOTIA, to wit, ORCHOMENE, CORONEE, and CORSIES, did ordinarily from thence make incurſions into the country of the BOEOTIANS with great number of ſouldiers ſtraungers whom they kept in pay, and did burne and lay waſt all the territorie thereabouts, and euer had the vpper hand in all their inrodes and skirmiſhes they had with the countrimen. Vpon this occaſion the BOEOTIANS being weake of men, and wanting money, ſent in the end to demaund aide of Philip: who was not a litle glad to ſee them brought ſo low, for he deſired their pride might be pulled downe, which had lift them vp ſo high ſince the battell of LEVCTRES. So he ſent them a good number of ſouldiers, not for any deſire he had to aide them, but to make them thinke that he made great account of the temple of DELPHES, which the PHOCIANS had ſpoiled. After diuers exploits of warre, the one ſide and the other ſeeing themſelues wearie and bare, the BOEOTIANS prayed Philip to come and aide them: which he graunted them, and taking a ſupply of THESSALIANS with him, he came to LOCRIDE with a good armie, and put himſelfe in order to end this warre at one battell. But Phallecus Generall

of the PHOCIANS, finding himſelfe not ſtrong enough to fight with him, ſent vnto him to treat a peace: ſo he was ſuffered to go ſafely with his men whither he would. Whereupon vnder the aſſurance of this peace, he retired with eight thouſand men into PELOPONNESVS. The PHOCIANS then left without all hope, yeelded themſelues to Philips diſcretion. Thus hauing ended this holy war without ſtroke ſtriken, beyond all mens opinion, he called a councell of the BOEOTIANS and THESSALIANS: in the which it was determined that there ſhould be an aſſembly of parliament of the Amphictyons, vnto whom they would wholly referre themſelues for deciding of this matter. Whereupon the Commiſſioners for the parliament of the Amphictyons were aſſembled, and there among other actes it was ordained, that from thencefoorth it ſhould be lawfull for Philip and all of his race to ſit in this councell of the Amphictyons, and that they ſhould haue the two voyces which the PHOCIANS (by him lately conquered) had before. Alſo, that he and his thencefoorth ſhould haue the gouernment and ſuperintendancie of the ſports PYTHIANS, with the BOEOTIANS and THESSALIANS. Becauſe the CORINTHIANS had bene partakers with the ſacriledge of the PHOCIANS. The reſt of their decrees concerned thoſe of PHOCIDE, the ſafetie of the temple of DELPHES, and the vnion of the GREEKES. Philip hauing broken vp the armories of the PHOCIANS and of the ſtraungers that had fought in their pay, he defaced their townes, and made them ſell their horſes. After he had receiued of the Amphictyons the greateſt honour and thankes they could deuiſe, he returned into his realme of MACEDON, hauing wonne him the name of a deuout and valiant Prince, and layed the foundations of the greatneſſe vnto the which his ſonne Alexander came afterwards. For he ſingularly deſired to be choſen Captaine generall of all GRECE, with full power and authoritie to make warre with the king of PERSIA, as he did. Furthermore, the hereditarie quarrels he had againſt the SLAVONS, being as irreconciliable, he entred with his armie into SLAVONIA, where hauing ſpoiled a great part of that countrie, and taken many townes, he returned backe into MACEDON laden with bootie. After that he went into THESSALIE, and draue out the tyrants there, which held the townes in ſubiection. By this meanes he wanne the hearts of the THESSALIANS, whom indeed he had great care to vſe well, hoping that if the THESSALIANS remained his faithfull friends, he ſhould eaſily gaine the other GREEKES to deſire his friendſhip, and ſo it hapned: for the people neighbours to THESSALY, did preſently enter into league with him. Soone after that, he led his army into THRACIA to repreſſe Cerſobleptes, who troubled all the townes of HELLESPONT next adioyning to his realme. When he had beaten the THRACIANS in diuers encounters, he compelled the vanquiſhed to pay yearely vnto the MACEDONIANS, the tenth part of their reuenues, and fortifying a few good townes in the beſt parts of the countrie, he bridled the boldneſſe of theſe barbarous people: whereupon the townes within thoſe marches being deliuered from warres, they very willingly entred into league and alliance with Philip.
            
            Thus waxing greater euery day then other, he led his armie before the city of PERINTH, becauſe that ſtood againſt him, and tooke part with the ATHENIANS. So he laid ſiege vnto it, and brought his engines of battery before it, among the which there were rams of 80. foot long, and built vp towers of wood higher then the higheſt towers of ſtone that were within the towne: vpon the top whereof he maruellouſly annoyed the beſieged: and battering the wals with theſe rammes, he made them fall downe in diuers places. The PERINTHIANS on the other ſide very luſtily defended themſelues, and reared vp other wals within, in place of them that were fallen down. He plyed them continually with wonderfull aſſaults, the aſſailants and aſſailed ſhewing all their poſſible force and endeuour. Now Philip had great Croſſebowes and other engines of all ſorts to kill farre off, great arrowes long and ſharpe at the end, which did wound thoſe that came to the cranewes of the walles, and thoſe that were beſieged loſt many of their men euery day. But at the length, they were ſupplied with armes and men whom the BYZANTINES ſent vnto them: whereupon equalling their enemies, they beganne to be couragious againe, and reſolutely offered themſelues vnto any daunger for defence of their countrey. For all this, the batterie begun diſcontinued not, and Philip deuiding his men into diuers troups gaue them many aſſaults, continued by turnes one in the necke of another night and day. Which he might eaſily do, conſidering he had thirtie thouſand fighting men in his campe, with an ineſtimable number of miſſile weapons, with engines to beſtow great ſhot a farre off, and of all ſorts of engines to beate downe townes, with the which he wonderfully plagued and hurt the beſieged. Neuertheleſſe, the ſiege drew on in length, and many of the townes men died, beſides

thoſe that were hurt and wounded: and becauſe that victuals alſo waxed ſcant amongſt them: ſo that they hourely looked for no other thing, but to take PERINTH. But it fell out cleane contrarie: for the fame of Philips greatneſſe being blowne abroad throughout all ASIA, the king of PERSIA being affrayed of ſuch a power, writ vnto his Lieutenants vpon the ſea coaſtes, that they ſhould aide the PERINTHIANS all they could poſſible. Thereupon his Satrapes hauing conſulted of this matter together, ſent vnto the beſieged a great ſupply of men of warre, ſtore of gold and ſiluer, plentie of corne, of armes, and of all other neceſſarie prouiſions for the warres. The BYZANTINES on the other ſide ſent them the beſt experienced Captaines and ſouldiers they had. By this meanes the two forces of the beſiegers and the beſieged being equall of new againe, the warre began to be hotter then before. For Philip beating at the walles without ceaſe with his rammes, made very great breaches, and with his engines to ſhoot farre off, kept them that none durſt ſtay at the cranewes of the walles: and at one inſtant made his men to giue an aſſault at the breaches of the walles throwne downe, and cauſed others to ſcale the walles that were yet ſtanding whole, and ſo fighting with their ſwords, many were ſlaine in the place, and others ſore wounded, both valiantly fighting for the reward and honour of victorie. The MACEDONIANS hoped to haue the ſacke of a rich and wealthie citie, and more then that, to haue goodly preſents of the king. They that were beſieged on the other ſide, ſetting before them all the calamities and miſeries of the taking of a citie, did luſtily endure any paines and daunger to preuent ſo great a miſchiefe. Beſides that, the ſituation of the towne was a great helpe vnto them, not onely to hope well, but alſo that in the end they ſhould be maiſters. For the towne of PERINTH ſtood all vpon the ſea ſide, vpon a hauen of halfe an Iſland that ſtood of a great height, and this hauen was about halfe a quarter of a league long. The houſes there were very narrow and high, and becauſe they ſtood high vpon the hanging of the coaſt, all the towne being vnderneath it on the ground, they were built much higher then thoſe that ſtood beneath: ſo to ſee them aboue, they ſhewed like the degrees of ſeates in a Theater. And although that they without did ſtill beate downe ſome part of the wall: that vantaged them nothing for all that. For thoſe within did nothing elſe but mure vp the entrance into the ſtreetes which were narrow, and they alwaies defended themſelues making rampers before the low houſes, as if they had bene the beſt wals in the world.
            So Philip hauing gotten the outward walles of thetowne, with all the troubles and daungers poſſible: he found other walles readie built ſtronger then the other, as if they had bene done of purpoſe, beſides that the BYZANTINES did alwaies furniſh them with any thing they wanted. Philip conſidering this, deuided his army into two, and left the halfe of them to continue the ſiege, vnder the charge of the beſt captaines he had: and taking with him the other halfe, he went to beſiege BYZANCE it ſelfe, and gaue it a moſt braue aſſault: wherat the BYZANTINES were amazed, becauſe their ſouldiers, their armes, and all other their neceſſarie prouiſions for warre were in the citie of PERINTH. But the ATHENIANS ſent them immediatly an army by ſea to aide them, as alſo thoſe did of CHIO, of RHODES, and out of other places. Chares went thither ſent by the ATHENIANS, but he did nothing of worth, nor worthy of the fleet he brought thither: becauſe he was ſuſpected of his friends, and deſpiſed of his enemies. So that they ſent Phocion thither, who before that time had fought brauely with Philip in the Ile of EVBOEA, (which he thought to haue won by means of traitours) had ouercome the MACEDONIANS in battel, and had done many other notable exploits. Howbeit after his departure, Philip being the ſtronger, departing from thence came to beſiege PERINTH, and after that BYZANCE, into the which Phocion entred with his troupes: who did ſo valiantly in all fights and aſſaults, that Philip (who before that time was thought ſo terrible in armes that none could reſiſt him, neither durſt any man preſent himſelfe in battell againſt him) roſe from beſieging of PERINTH, and retired from BYZANCE and out of HELLESPONT, and did nothing but loſt much of his reputation. For, beſides the men that were killed at theſe two ſieges, he loſt ſome of his ſhippes, and many ſtrong holds, out of the which his garriſons were throwne, and his friends forraged by the ATHENIANS. This was the cauſe why he offered articles of peace, fearing the forces of the ATHENIANS, deſirous to forward his affaires ſome other way, or rather to meddle no more with them. Phocion counſelled the ATHENIANS to hearken vnto it, and to accept the conditions vnto the which Philip ſubmitted himſelfe. But the Counſellers (eſpecially Demoſthenes) that bare the ſway at that time, moued the ATHENIANS to a new league, the which Demoſthenes prepared againſt Philip: who

bethinking himſelfe, determined to employ all his meanes to ſubdue the cities all at once, to the end that he might afterwards paſſe further. So he leauied an armie with great ſpeed, and hauing ouercome certaine troupes of the townes in league together neare vnto AMPHISE, he marched into the countrey of ELATIA, and afterwards wan PHOCIDE, and being lift vp with ſuch proſperous beginnings, he reſolued to go to ATHENS. Whereof the ATHENIANS hauing intelligence, they were ſtraight in armes euery where, the people being ſo amazed, that none durſt be ſo bold as to ſpeake, and they knew not what to do. They reiected the wiſe counſell of Phocion, of which Demoſthenes was the cauſe. Wherefore to repaire his fault, he ſtepped out and counſelled the ATHENIANS to ſeeke the friendſhip of the THEBANS. So thereupon they ſent him to put it in practiſe, and happily he obtained it, notwithſtanding all Philips oppoſitions to the contrarie: who being aſtonied more then before with theſe croſſes, which the eloquence of one man did againſt him: he ſent againe to offer the GREEKES peace. But they kept themſelues cloſe, and made ſtraunge of it, expecting the euent of all this great tempeſt: not being diſpoſed at that time to hearken to pacification. But as if the time of their bondage had bene at the gate, they refuſed all conditions, yea contemned the very oracles of DELPHES, and Demosthenes had it often in his mouth, that the Propheteſſe did Philippizate, to wit, fauoured Philips affaires. Theſe oracles threatned both the one and the other, and eſpecially the GREEKES. Now Philip, though he ſaw he was deceiued of the friendſhip of the BOEOTIANS, yet he reſolued to fight with the one and the other. Therefore keeping his campe certaine daies, looking for the forces of his friends that were not yet come vnto him: he entred into BOEOTIA, with thirty thouſand footmen, and about two thouſand horſe. So both campes being ready to giue charge vpon each other, they both had like courage and reſolution to do well. But as touching the number of men, and skilfulneſſe of Captains, Philip did paſſe them farre: for hauing done in many places ſo many worthie exploits of armes, he was become very expert in militarie diſcipline. To the contrarie, on the ATHENIANS ſide, their beſt captaines, as Iphicrates Chabrias, and Timotheus, were dead. Phocion alſo, he neuer thought well of this warre: and the factious, they had hindred the beſt they could that he ſhould haue no charge. Then was there but Chares and Lyſicles, that were too weake to take ſuch a great charge vpon them, and were much inferiour to many of the Captaines Philip had then with him.
            The day being broken, and both armies ſet in battell the one againſt the other in the plaine of CHAERONEA: Philip placed his ſonne Alexander, comming but newly out of his infancie, in one of the points of his armie, attended vpon by the beſt captaines he had: and he placed himſelfe in the other point, with the valianteſt men in his armie, giuing order and direction in all things according to time and place. The ATHENIANS, hauing taken one of the points of their battell, left the other vnto the BOEOTIANS. So the fight began very ſharply, & many were ſlain on both ſides, and it could not be diſcerned yet whether ſide had beſt occaſion to hope of victory: vntill that Alexander at the length, deſirous to make his father ſee ſome proofe of his valor, and many other valiant men ſeeing the courage of this young Prince following him, they with him brake into the battell of the enemies, and there was a maruellous cruell ſlaughter. Philip on his ſide alſo giuing charge vpon the greateſt preſſe and multitude of his enemies, not enduring that any ſhould take the honor from him, no not his owne ſonne: ſet vpon them ſo fiercely that withſtood him, that he put them out of order, and made them flie for life. There died in this battell aboue a thouſand ATHNIANS, and there were taken priſoners to the number of two thouſand. And of the BOEOTIANS in like manner there were many killed in the field, and a great number taken. After this battell, Philip cauſed a token of triumph to be ſet vp, and ſuffered the enemies to take away the bodies of their dead, and to bury them. He made ſumptuous ſacrifices vnto his gods, to giue them thankes for his victorie: and honoured them that had done good ſeruice in this battell, euerie one according to his degree and deſert. Howbeit he committed certaine inſolencies: for after he had drunke wel with his friends, he went to the place where he dead bodies lay, and there he fell a ſinging in mockerie, the beginning of the decree which Demoſthenes had propounded, whoſe counſell they following, the ATHENIANS concluded to warre againſt him, lifting vp his voice, and keeping meaſure with his foote, Demosthenes, the ſonne of Demoſthenes PAEANIAN ſet out this. But afterwards when he beganne a litle to come to himſelfe againe out of his drunkenneſſe, and that he had thought a little of the daunger he had bene in: then his haire began to ſtand vpright on his head,

when he entred into the conſideration of the force and vehemencie of ſuch an Orator, that had brought him in a peece of a day, to put his whole eſtate and his life to the hazard of a battell. And when the ATHENIANS ſent vnto him to treate of peace, he preſently ſet his countenance, rubbed his eye-browes, and laying aſide all madneſſe and wantonneſſe, made them a very ſober and aduiſed aunſwer. Others ſay, that he dranke too much at the feaſt of his ſacrifice, and that after ſupper he daunced and made a mommery with his minions: paſſed by the priſoners, and gaue them ſharpe taunts in mockerie, touching the misfortune of their ouerthrow: and that Demades then being one of the number, was ſo bold franckly to ſpeake a word to him which was of ſuch efficacie, as it made him refraine from his inſolencie. O king, ſayd he, being now thy fortune to play Agamemnons part, thou art not aſhamed to ſhew the deeds of Therſites. Philip finding himſelfe touched to the quicke with this word ſo well ſet, he preſently chaunged his apparell and countenance, caſt downe to the ground his garland of flowers he wore on his head, cauſed all the other ſignes of mockerie which were caried after him to be broken, and from thencefoorth began greatly to eſteeme of Demades, and would haue him about him. Demades, being paſſing eloquent aboue others of his time, did ſo well entertaine Philip, that he cauſed him to deliuer all the other priſoners of the ATHENIANS, without paying of any ranſome. And further yet, humbling the conquerours fierceneſſe, he made peace with the ATHENIANS, but put a garriſon within THEBES, and moreouer graunted peace vnto the BOEOTIANS.
            But that which principally brought him to incline vnto it, was the deſire he had to be choſen Captaine generall of GRECE. And to this end he cauſed them to giue out abroad, that he would vndertake to make warre for the GREEKES againſt the PERSIANS, and to be reuenged of them for the outrages and ſacriledges which they had committed againſt the temples of the gods in GRECE: and ſought to gaine the good will and friendſhip of all the GREEKES by all kind of courteſies he could poſſibly deuiſe or thinke of, as well openly as ſecretly. So he made a motiue, that he deſired to ſpeake with the townes openly, and to communicate ſomethings vnto them which concerned the good of all their common wealth in generall. And for this purpoſe there was appointed a generall aſſembly of the ſtates in GRECE in the citie of CORINTH, in the which he propounded this, to vndertake the warre againſt the PERSIANS, and putting them in great hope of happie ſucceſſe, he perſwaded the commiſſioners of euery towne, which were preſent in this aſſembly of counſell, boldly to conclude this enterpriſe. He ſolicited this matter in ſuch ſort, that the GREEKES with generall conſent choſe him their Captaine generall with ſoueraigne authority. Then he began to make great preparation for this war, and hauing made a deſcription and ſeſſe of all the contributions, as alſo the number of men of warre which euerie citie ſhould furniſh for this enterpriſe: he returned into MACEDON, and ſent from thence two of his chiefe Captaines before into ASIA, Attalus and Parmenio, with a part of his armie, commanding them to deliuer the GREEKES cities of ASIA out of bondage. But his death brake the voyage, ſo that they went not very farre. Now hitherto we haue ſeene Philips naturall diſpoſition in the middeſt of his deeds, and what is commendable and reprochfull in ſo great a Prince. But before we go further in the reſt of his life, it may peraduenture not be much impertinent, to inſert in this place, ſome of his ſentences and memorable actions, whereby he may be the better diſcerned, to compare him afterwards with the others. For mens words and faſhions amongſt their familiars, be the very liuely tables of the affections and paſſions of the ſoule: being vnpoſſible for any man alwayes to counterfeit ſo, but that they may oftentimes ſee his heart at his tongues end.
            So then, newes being brought him in one ſelfe day of three great proſperities: the firſt, that he had wonne the prize at the courſes of coaches with foure horſe in the ſolemnity of the Olympian games: The ſecond, that his Lieutenant Parmenio had ouercome the DARDANIANS in battell: The third, that his wife Olympiade had brought him a goodly ſonne: he lift vp his hands to heauen, and ſayd: O fortune, I beſeech thee ſend me in exchange of this, ſome reaſonable aduerſitic, againſt ſuch and ſo great happineſſe. Lasthenes an OLYNTHIAN, that for a great ſumme of money had ſold him the towne of OLYNTH, complained to him one day that ſome of his minions called him traytor. He aunſwered him againe, that the MACEDONIANS were rude plaine men, that called all things by their name. He ſeemed to repute the ATHENIANS happie men, for that they found yearely ten Captaines in their towne to be choſen: and

that he to the contrary in many yeares could find but one, and that was Parmenio. After he had ouercome the GREEKES, many aduiſed him to put good and great garriſons in the townes, that they might with more ſafety be kept vnder. But he anſwered them, I had rather be called a long time courteous, then a ſhort time Lord. And when his familiars gaue him counſell, to baniſh a malicious perſon, that did nothing but ſpeake euill: he anſwered them he would not, fearing leaſt he ſhould euery where elſe ſpeake euill of him. There was an ACHAIAN called Arcadion, that made profeſſion to ſpeake euill of him euerie where, and warned euery man to flie ſo farre from Philip, as none could tell there what man he was. Arcadion being by chance met in MACEDON, the courtiers would haue had Philip to haue puniſhed him, and not to let him eſcape out of his hands. Philip to the contrary ſpake him faire, and ſent him preſents to his lodging. Shortly after, he commaunded they ſhould make inquiry what talke Arcadion had of him among the GREEKES. Euery man brought him word, that he did wonderfully commend and praiſe him whereſoeuer he came. Then ſayd Philip vnto them, I am a better phiſition for euill ſpeech then you are. Another time in the aſſembly of the Olympian games, as the GREEKES ſpake euill of him, his friends ſayd, that ſuch ill ſpeakers would be ſeuearely puniſhed, to ſpeake ſo much euill of him that had done them ſo much good. Nay, but what would they do then, anſwered he, if we did hurt them? Smicythus did often accuſe Nicanor vnto him, telling him that he did nothing elſe but ſpeake euill of Philip: ſo that his beſt familiars thought it good he ſhould be ſent for, and be puniſhed according to his deſerts. Yea but (replied he) Nicanor is one of the honeſteſt men of MACEDON: were it not better therefore to inquire whether the fault be in vs, or not? And foorthwith hauing made diligent ſearch whence this diſcontentment of Nicanor came, he found that he was a man oppreſſed with extreme pouerty, and that no man would relieue him in his neceſſity: whereupon he ſent him immediatly a good preſent. Afterwards Smicythus brought word, that Nicanor euery where ſpake great praiſes of Philip. See then, ſayd he, how it dependeth vpon our ſelues to be well ſpoken of. He was wont alſo to ſay, that he was much beholding vnto the connſellors of ATHENS, for that they ſpeaking euill of him, were cauſe to make him an honeſt man of word and deed. For, ſayd he, I do daily enforce my ſelfe both in my deeds and words to make them lyers. He ſent home (as hath bene ſpoken before) all the ATHENIANS priſoners at the battell of CHAERONEA, without paying any ranſome, and yet moreouer they asked for their beds, their apparell, and all their baggage, and complained of the MACEDONIANS, becauſe they did not deliuer it vnto them. When Philip heard of this, he fell a laughing, and ſayd to them that were neare about him: How ſay you, do not you thinke theſe ATHENIANS ſuppoſe they were ouercome by vs at the play at bones? He ſaid alſo that they which gaue him counſell to deale ſharply with the ATHENIANS, were men of an ill iudgement, to counſell a Prince that did and ſuffered all things for glory, to deſtroy the Theater of glory, which was the city of ATHENS, by reaſon of learning. There was a great number of priſoners taken at a battell, and he was preſent to ſee them ſold by the drumme, ſitting in his chaire, his gowne being turned vp alitle higher then was decent. Then there was one of the priſoners that was a ſelling, that cried out a loud vnto him, I beſeech thee, ô king, to pardon me that I be not ſold: for I am thy friend from father to the ſonne. Philip asked him, how and from whence this friendſhip ſhould come betweene vs? I will tell thee in thy eare, anſwered the priſoner. Philip commaunded they ſhould bring him to him. Then the priſoner comming neare to him, told him ſoftly: O king, let thy gowne fall downe before a litle: for as thou ſitteſt, thou ſheweſt that that is vnfit to be ſeene. Then ſpake Philip aloud to his men, Deliuer him, and let him go: for he is indeed one of my friends and wel-willers, but I had forgotten it. Such was his behauiour to his enemies, and thoſe that ſpake euill of him.
            Let vs now ſpeake ſomewhat of his iuſtice, and of diuerſe other affections worthie to be noted in him: the which do appeare ſomething in his words, and by the effects that followed. And they do ſhew more & more that this prince had learned very much with Epaminondas, but aboue all, to be nobly minded, patient, and deſirous of honour without ſhame: qualities that had bene much more excellent in him, if he had not made ſuch marchandize with wicked men, as he did that ſold their country, beſides that they ſaw in him an ardent ambition: as alſo in that he coueted to be Captaine generall of all the GREEKES, and the triumphs preceding his death, and all his life do ſhew. And to this purpoſe, he counſelled his ſonne Alexander to ſpeake graciouſly vnto the MACEDONIANS, to winne their good wils, whileſt he had leiſure now to be

courteous vnto them, another raigning in the kingdome: as if he would haue ſayd, that when he came to be king, he ſhould carie the grauitie of a maiſter and of a Lord, and that he ſhould do iuſtice. He gaue him counſell alſo to ſeeke to get the loue of thoſe that bare credite and authoritie in good townes, as well of the wicked as of the good, that he might afterwards vſe the good, and abuſe the euill. But now to returne to his iuſtice againe: Being a Iudge betweene two bad men, he ordained that the one ſhould flie out of MACEDON, and the other ſhould runne after him. It is reported of him, that he had gotten together a number of the wickedeſt and moſt diſorderedſt men that were in his time, whom he lodged all together in a towne which he had cauſed to be built, and called it PONEROPOLIS, the towne of knaues. He had on a time beſtowed the office of a Iudge vpon one recommended vnto him by Antipater: but vnderſtanding afterwards that he vſed to paint his haires and beard, he tooke it from him, ſaying, that he that vſed deceipt in his haire, would hardly deale truly in a good cauſe. Machetas pleaded a cauſe on a time before him whileſt he ſlept, ſo that not conceiuing nor vnderſtanding well the matter, he wrongfully condemned him. Whereupon Machetas began to cry out, that he did appeale. Philip being angred at that word, asked him preſently vnto whom he did appeale from him? Before thy ſelfe, ô king aunſwered he, when thou art awake, and wilt giue good eare to conceiue of my fact. Theſe words touched Philip to the quicke, whereupon he roſe vp on his feete, and calling himſelfe better to mind, knew that he had wronged Machetas in his ſentence, and yet neuertheleſſe he would not reuoke his iudgement: howbeit he himſelfe with his owne mony diſcharged the matter, whereupon the ſute was brought before him. Harpalus had a kinſman and friend of his called Crates, attainted and conuicted of great crimes. He beſought Philip that paying the fine, ſentence ſhould not be pronounced againſt this Crates, that he might auoide the ſhame and diſgrace. But Philip anſwered him againe, It is better he ſhould beare his owne blame and diſcredit, then I for him. A ſouldier of his, a valiant man of his hands, hauing by falſe report obtained of him the gift and forfeiture of the goods of a MACEDONIAN: it fortuned that the MACEDONIAN ill willing to put vp ſuch an outrage, bewrayed vnto Philip the vnthankfulneſſe of the ſouldier whoſe life he had ſaued. Philip was ſo offended with the villanie of this ſouldier, that after he had reuoked his gift, he made him quaile in ſuch ſort, that his wickedneſſe was knowne of euerie one, and the MACEDONIAN reſtored againe to all his goods. A poore old woman being in ſute of law, beſought him to giue iudgement, and preſſed him continually: but he excuſed himſelfe, and told her he was not at leiſure to heare it. The old woman cried out aloud: Leaue then to be king. He being aſtonied and liuely pricked with this word, did heare her, and all others in order. As for his friends, Philo a Gentleman of THEBES had done him many pleaſures at the time when he remained in hoſtage in the citie of THEBES: for he was lodged in his houſe, and after that he would neuer receiue any gifts or preſents of him. Whereupon Philip ſayd vnto him: Take not from me the title and honour of inuincible, being ouercome by thee of courteſie and liberality. Word being brought him of the death of Hipparchus, borne in the Ile of EVBOEA, he was very ſory: and as one that ſtood by told him, he was ripe, and ready to dye forage: Yea, ſayd he againe, for himſelfe, but not for me, to whom he is dead too ſoone: for he is dead before he receiued any recompence of me, worthy the friendſhip he bare me. As touching houſhold matters, he fell out on a time with his wife Olympias, and his ſonne Alexander: in which time of his anger, Demaratus a Gentleman of CORINTH went to viſite him. Philip then asked him, how, and after what manner the GREEKES liued one with another. Truly, aunſwered Demaratus, thou careſt much for the peace and vnion of the GREEKES, ſince the perſons that touch thee ſo nearely, and thoſe whom thou oughteſt to make moſt account of, are ſo ſeparated from thee. This word made him conſider ſo well of it, that afterwards he appeaſed his anger: the cauſe thereof is ſhewed in the beginning of Alexanders life, and ſo reconciled himſelfe vnto them. Being told him that his ſonne Alexander miſliked it, and complained that he begot baſtards of other women: he told him, Since thou ſeeſt now that thou ſhalt haue manie competitours with thee for the kingdome after my death: endeuour thy ſelfe to be an honeſt man, that thou mayeſt come to the crowne not ſo much through me, being mine heire, as through thy ſelfe, for that thou art worthie. He perſwaded him much, diligently to ſtudie Philoſophie vnder Ariſtotle, to the end, ſayd he, thou do not many things that I haue done, whereof now I hartily repent me. Being on a

time fallen backward, lying all alongſt the place where they exerciſe wreſtling: and wallowing vp and downe, as if he had ſeene the figure and print of his body in the duſt: O Hercules, ſayd he, how litle quantity of ground will ſerue vs by nature, and yet we couet to inhabite all the world. He would on a time lodge his campe in a faire ground: but being told that there was no forrage for the beaſts, he was conſtrained to diſlodge from thence, ſaying, What is our life, ſince we muſt take care euen to place Aſſes? There was an hoſt of his that on a time bad him to ſupper with him. So, as he was going, he met diuerſe by the way, whom he caried thither with him. Whereupon perceiuing his hoaſt was much troubled, becauſe he had not meate inough to feede ſo many mouthes: Philip ſeeing it, ſent ſecretly to tell euery one in their eares whom he brought with him, that they ſhould keepe a place in their ſtomacke for the tart. The other beleeuing that he ſpake in earneſt, did forbeare to eate, whereby there was meate inough for them all. That which is alreadie ſayd, is ſufficient to make vs know the naturall diſpoſition of this great Prince: whoſe end we are now about to deſcribe vnto you. He vndertaking to paſſe into ASIA, to make war with the PERSIANS, in the ſtate of Captaine generall of the GREEKES: being deſirous his voyage ſhould be fauoured of the gods he asked of the propheteſſe of DELPHES, whether he ſhould ouercome the king of PERSIA? She anſwered him:

                  The oxe is crowned when his end is neare at hand,
                  To offer him in ſacrifice, a man doth ready ſtand.
               
This oracle being doubtfull and obſcure, Philip tooke it for his aduantage: as if Apollo had told him, that the king of PERSIA ſhould be ſlaine by him, as an oblation of ſacrifice. But cleane contrary, the oracle threatned him with death in a day of a ſolemne feaſt: and that he ſhould be ſlaine as a bull, whom they crowne with garlands and hats of flowers, when they go about to ſacrifice him. Notwithſtanding ſuppoſing that the gods did fauour his enterpriſe, he was very pleaſant, perſwading himſelfe that ASIA ſhould ſhortly be tributarie to MACEDON. So he prepared ſumptuous and magnificent ſacrifices in honour of the gods, and made preparation for the mariage of his daughter Cleopatra. Now he being deſirous to draw to this feaſt as many GREEKES as he could poſſible, to that end made proclamation euery where, that there ſhould be games of prize for learning, and muſicke, and ſent to ſummon all his hoſts and friends, in what part of GRECE ſoeuer they were, to come to this mariage: and commaunded the Lords of his Court that they ſhould do the like for their part. For he deſired to ſhew the GREEKS all ſignes of friendſhip, and to make them the beſt cheare that could be poſſible, in recompence of the honour they had done him, to chooſe him their Captaine generall. There was a wonderfull aſſembly of people from all parts at this feaſt, and the mariage was ſolemnized betwixt Alexander king of EPIRVS and Cleopatra, and the games alſo at AEGES acitie of MACEDON. Where not onely Philips priuate friends, and the moſt notable men of the GREEKES, but alſo the principall and chiefeſt townes of GRECE (and among others ATHENS) gaue him preſents of many rich crownes of gold. The decree of the people preſenting a crowne of gold, and openly proclaimed by a herald, the effect of it was: that if it hapned any man hauing conſpired or attempted ought againſt the perſon of king Ppilip, ſhold flie to ATHENS in hope of priuiledge there: that he ſhould be deliuered into the hands of the king. In the middeſt of this great feaſt at the mariage, there was an excellent player of tragedies, called Neoptolemus, that rehearſed verſes touching the enterpriſe of Philip: and as if he had meant to haue reproued the pride of the king of PERSIA, he liuely touched that of his maiſter Philip, and before he was ware, foretold his death in couert termes, and which might be applied (as alſo Philip did, blinded and aſtonied with his proſperity) vnto the eſtate, and vnto the king of PERSIA. Among other verſes the beginning of it was very neare to this effect:
            
               Aboue the skies exalt thy pride,
               Surmount all hautineſſe that is
               Within this earthly vale ſo wide:
               Promiſe thy ſelfe a worldly bliſſe,
               And proſperous life for euer ſure,
               Yet canſt thou now no longer dure.
               For ſome already haue begun
               Thy ruine, which thou canſt not ſhun.
               And death neare to that breaſt of thine
               Shall ſhortly breake off thy deſsigne.
            
            
               
The day after this royall mariage the games began to be played, and the people ranne from all parts to the Theater to ſee them, euen vntill it was darke night. And in the morning at the breake of day there was a proceſſion, in the which among many other ſumptuous and magnificent ſhewes, they caried the images of twelue principall gods of GRECE, wonderfull cunningly wrought with great art: and then after them was borne the image of Philip for the thirteenth, as if he would haue placed himſelfe in ranke with his gods. When the Theater was full ſet with people, Philip himſelfe came in the end, apparelled all in white, hauing commanded all his gard to follow him a farre off: deſirous to ſhew the GREEKES, that becauſe of the great confidence he had of their faithfull friendſhip, he thought he needed no gard for his body. But at that time he was put to death after a ſtrange ſort: and that we may know by what occaſion, we will take the matter further off.
            There was in his court a MADEDONIAN gentleman, called Pauſanias, borne in the countrey of ORESTIDE, one of the gentlemen penſioners of Philips gard, that ſometime was beloued for his beauty. He perceiuing that the king loued another, whoſe name was as himſelfe, Pauſanias: began to gall him with iniurious words, calling him Androgyne (as much to ſay, as womaniſh man) and reproued him that he abandoned his body to any that would. This ſecond Pauſanias, very impatiently bare theſe words in his heart, yet made no reply to them, but onely imparted vnto his friend called Attalus what he meant to do, and within few dayes after loſt his life after a notable manner. Philip fought a battell with the SLAVONS, in the which this young man behaued himſelfe very valiantly, right before the perſon of Philip, and receiued vpon his body all the blowes they ſtrake at him, ſo that he died in the field. This valiantneſſe of his being blowne abroad through the army, Attalus, that then was in great fauour with the king, intreated the firſt Pauſanias to come and ſuppe with him, and hauing made him drunke, he left his bodie to all the horſe-keepers and moyletters to be carnally abuſed. His drunkenneſſe hauing left him, he was ſo grieued at his heart for the outrage Attalus had done him, that he went and complained to the king himſelfe. Philip was maruellouſly offended withall, becauſe of the villany that was offered him. But becauſe of the loue he bare to Attalus, and alſo for that he ſtood in need of his ſeruice, and for that he was vnckle of Cleopatra, the laſt and well beloued wife of Philip, and appointed his Lieutenant for the warre of ASIA, he made as though he knew it not. But to appeaſe Pauſanias, he gaue him great preſents, and placed him amongſt the number of them of the gard about his perſon. Pauſanias hauing made his complaint to Olympias, vnto Alexander, and to ſome other, had ſundrie aunſwers, but no iuſtice at that time. Wherefore keeping this deſpite in his heart, he reſolued not onely to be reuenged of him which had done him this iniurie, but alſo of Philip that would do him no iuſtice. But to further him in this diuelliſh purpoſe, amongſt others a Rhetoritian called Hermecrates did ſet him on, whom Pauſanias frequented to learne of him. Diſcourſing one day together, he asked him how a man might in a ſhort time make himſelfe famous, to be ſpoken of of euerie bodie? Hermocrates aunſwered, in killing one that had done many great things. For, ſayd he, it is of neceſſitie that remembring his facts, the name of him that killed him muſt alſo be compriſed. Pauſanias applying that to the purpoſe of his anger, hauing no patience to prolong time, his heart being ſo full of choler and griefe: determined with himſelfe to execute his enterpriſe the ſame day the playes ſhould be: the which he did, as followeth. He layed horſes readie at the gate of the Theater, and went about it, hauing a ſword vnder his downe after the faſhion of the GAVLES as they weare it. When the time was come that Philip would himſelfe go to the Theater, all the Noblemen and Gentlemen that attended vpon him, went into the Theater before him, who had commaunded all the Gentlemen of his gard to come a good way behind him. Then Pauſanias ſeeing Philip going all alone, ranne to him, and gaue him ſuch a blow with his ſword ouerthwart his flankes, that he ranne him through and through, ſo that he fell downe ſtarke dead. The blow being giuen, he ranne away ſtraight vnto his horſe, and ſome of the gard ranne to Philip, others ſwiftly followed the murtherer, among which was Leonidas, Perdiccas, and Attalus. Howbeit Pauſanias that had gotten the ſtart before, had eaſily mounted on horſe-backe before the others could haue come neare him to ouertake him, had it not bene that in the way as he fled, he ſtumbled at the roote of a vine, which ouerthrew him. Then Perdiccas and the reſt lighted on him as he roſe, and thruſting at him, killed him in the place. Behold how Philip, that was the greateſt king in his time of EVROPE, and for the greatneſſe

of his power, placed himſelfe among the gods: was brought low euen to rancke with the weakeſt of the world, and died being but ſixe and fortie yeares old, hauing raigned 24 yeares. That therfore whereof he gloried moſt, was in his skill of warres, and in the actions which he managed brauely: preferring that farre aboue all his exploits of warre. For, ſayd he, in victory all that fight in the battell haue their part: but in thoſe things that I haue atchiued vnto, hauing wiſely directed them, none is partaker of the honour but my ſelfe only. He had fiue wiues, the firſt was Olympias the daughter of Neoptolemus, king of the MOLOSSIANS, of the line of Aeacus, of whom were borne, Alexander ſurnamed the Great, and Cleopatra. Alexander ſucceeded his father: and for Cleopatra, ſhe was maried to her vnckle Alexander, king of EPIRVS, and brother of Olympias. The ſecond wife of Philip was Audate, a Lady of SLAVONIA, of whom he had a daughter called Cyne, maried vnto Amyntas his conſin germaine: who being ſlain, ſhe was betrothed vnto Lagarus, king of the AGRIANIANS, who died before conſummation of mariage. After the death of Alexander the Great, ſhe being of a manly courage, and oppoſing her ſelfe againſt thoſe that would depriue the children of Alexander of the crowne of MADEDON: was ſlaine by Perdiccas commandement. The third was Phila: and the fourth was called Mede, the daughter of the king of THRACIA. Theſe two had neither of them any children. And laſtly being too old to marry, he maried Cleopatra, the daughter of Hippoſtratus and Attalus neece: at the mariage of whom he would haue killed his ſonne Alexander, for throwing a cup at Attalus head: after the which followed great trouble, and foule ſtirre betwixt Philip, Olympias, and Alexander: but Demaratus the CORINTHIAN ſalued all that againe. Of this laſt wife, he firſt had a daughter called Europe, and then a ſonne called Caranus, whom Olympias put to a cruell death. For his concubines, the one called Arſinoe, being gotten with child by Philip, ſhe fell into Lagus hands, vnto whom ſhe gaue Ptolomie afterwards king of EGYPT. The ſecond was a girle of LARYSSENE, called Philinna, of whom he begat Aridaeus: who firſt of all was poyſoned, and in the end cruelly murthered by Olympias: being the laſt king of the race of Temenides in MACEDON. For the iſſue of Alexander, they were reiected by Caſſander. The third was Nicaſipolis, a woman of THESSALY, and Iaſons ſiſter, tyrant of PHERES: of whom he had a daughter called Theſſalonica, whom Caſſander maried, and was afterwards ſlaine by Antipater. The end of Alexander, of his mother, and of his children and ſucceſſours, was lamentable in diuerſe ſorts. And thus we ſee in Philip and in his race, how many wayes the high Iudge of the world hath in his power and hand to ouerthrow the greateſt, when they are drunke with their proſperity.
            The end of Philip of Macedons life.
         
         
            
            THE LIFE OF Dionyſius.
            
            
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
            
            
               Baſe Tyranny is wrongs vnhappy mother,
               Witneſſe this wretch, in ſhew both graue and wiſe:
               Yet he himſelfe beguiling, and each other,
               Shew'd that his heart was fierce, and full of vice.
            
            
               IN the ſecond year of the ſecond Olympiad, Archias a CORINTHIAN, not daring to returne againe into his citie for a foule fact committed by him in the perſon of an honeſt youth called Acteō: he tooke the ſea, and ſailed into SICILIA with certaine CORINTHIANS and DORIANS, and there built the city of SYRACVSA, the which by proceſſe of time became ſo great, that it had within it as it were foure townes, of the which the one was called the Ile, the ſecond Acradine, the third Tychè, and the laſt Neapolis: the one neare vnto the other, with a fort called Hexapyle, which commanded all the other, and it was in the top of a high place which they called Epipoles, as much to ſay, as ouer all the other townes. It was gouerned at the firſt, by the commaund and power of Archias onely: but he being killed by Telephus, whom he had abuſed in his infancie, the SYRACVSANS gathered together of diuerſe parts, brought their eſtate to Ariſtocratia, which flouriſhed for a time. But being come to paſſe that Tyndaris one of the Lords of the towne caried himſelfe after ſuch a manner, that he made many iealous that his driftand pollicy was to make himſelfe chiefe Lord: the other Lords made a law called Petaliſme, to meete with this practiſe: howbeit it was that that increaſed his enterpriſe. Petaliſme baniſhment for fiue yeares.The effect of this law was, that the name of him that aſpired to make himſelfe abſolute Lord of the city, ſhould be written in an oliue leafe, the which being put into the hand of this Lord, without further ceremony it was to tell him that he was baniſhed the city for fiue yeares, much after the faſhion that is reported of the Oſtraciſme of the ATHENIANS. By meanes of this Petaliſme, the Lords baniſhed one another, ſo that in the end, the people became Lord. But hereupon a dangerous ſedition happening amongſt them, Gelo, Lord of the city of GELE, did ſo wiſely looke into the troubles of the SYRACVSANS: that they choſe him king in the ſecond yeare of the three ſcore and twelfth Olympiade. After him ſucceeded Hieron, who at the beginning caried himſelfe very euill: but afterwards falling into acquaintance with the Poets Simonides,
               
               Pindarus, and Bacchylides, which taught him many good things, he raigned very prudently. So, he hauing raigned about twelue yeares, left his brother Thraſybulus his ſucceſſor: who for his cruelties and inſolencies was driuen out of SYRACVSA by force, and went to LOCRES, and there ended the reſt of his daies. Then the SYRACVSANS eſtabliſhed the gouernment of Lords, which continued ſixtie yeares: in which time they make warre with the AGRIGENTINES, and compelled them to ſue for peace: they deſtroy the TRINACRIANS and their town: they ſet vpon the LEONTINES, which are aided by the ATHENIANS vnder the conduct of Laches and Carceadas, who behaued themſelues ſo euill, that at their returne home they were baniſhed. Shortly after the new troubles betwixt the SYRACVSANS and the LEONTINES, the ATHENIANS ſent Phaax into SICILIA to kindle the fire a litle, and to mutine the one againſt the other. Howbeit it had no good ſucceſſe, but rather raiſed a cruell warre betwixt the SYRACVSANS and ATHENIANS, in the which at the laſt Nicias and Demoſthenes were ouercome by ſea and land both, and afterwards put to death, and the ſouldiers of ATHENS that were priſoners moſt cruelly vſed. The SYRACVSANS lift vp with this victorie, did put downe their Lordly gouernment, and brought it to a popular ſtate againe. Then thinking to be reuenged of the CARTHAGINIANS that were come to the aide of the SEGESTANS againſt the SELINONTINES, which were their friends: they ſent Diocles with foure thouſand good men againſt Hanniball the ſonne of Giſco, who lay in campe at that time before HIMERA, the which he wan after he had ouercome Diocles, and ſlaine the moſt part of his troupes. The SYRACVSANS caſting their anger for this loſſe vpon Hermocrates one of their chiefeſt citizens, they baniſhed him with the Petaliſme, and draue him out of the towne. He helping himſelfe with the meanes he had in his hand, made vp and armed fiue gallies, and afterwards with certaine baniſhed men of HIMERA, attempted to put in againe into SVRACVSA. But ſeeing he could not preuaile, he landed and poſſeſſed the ruined towne of SELINONTE, he repaired it, called home againe all the inhabitants diſperſed through SICILIA, fortified himſelf there, and in few daies got together a troupe of ſixe thouſand men. With theſe forces he ſet vpon them of PALERME, and of MOTYE, in league with the CARTHAGINIANS, ouercame them in a pitched field, maintained his friends, and followed his victorie. The SYRACVSANS hearing good report of Hermocrates valour, began to repent them that they had ſo diſhonourably vſed him. He on the other ſide being aduertiſed by his friends of the good affection of the citizens vnto him: to win their good fauour againe, he was very carefull to gather together the bones of thoſe that were killed by HYMERA vnder the leading of Diocles, and ſent them to SYRACVSA, in carts very richly ſet out. For all this they ſent not for him home, the SYRACVSANS being affraid of him, for that he was a man of ſuch courage and wiſedome, leſt he ſhould make himſelfe Lord of the towne. He ſeeing himſelfe thus refuſed, went backe to SELINONTE, and ſhortly after being ſollicited by his friends, he found meanes by night to come into SYRACVSA, and poſſeſſed the Acradine. The SYRACVSANS tooke armes immediatly, fought with Hermocrates, killed him in the great market place with part of his traine, and baniſhed thoſe that fauoured him. His friends ſaued ſome of them from the violence of the citizens, and amongſt others Dionyſius the ſonne of Hermocrates, a plaine citizen of SYSACVSA, whoſe life we preſently write of.
            Now it is reported, that his mother being with child of him, dreamed that ſhe was brought to bed of a Satyre, and that the Soothſayers being asked their opinion, anſwered, ſhe ſhould haue a ſonne that ſhould be famous aboue all the GREEKS. Furthermore, a young gentlewoman of SYRACVSA called Himera, ſome time before Dionyſius made himſelf Lord of the city, dreamed that ſhe was taken vp to heauen, by a guide that hauing caried her too and fro, in the end brought her before Iupiter, at whoſe feet ſhe ſaw a yong man with a yelow haire, bound with iron chains: and asking her guide what he was: It is, ſaid the other, the cruell ſcourge of SICILIA and ITALIE, the which ſhall ſpoile a great countrie, aſſoone as his bolts be off his feet. Within few yeares after, Dionyſius hauing alreadie ſeized vpon the eſtate, as he came to make his entrie into SYRACVSA, and that the citizens went out to meet him to do him honor: Himera being there by chaunce, knew him, and ſtraight cried out: This was the young man that ſhe ſawin heauen. This being reported to Dionyſius, he cauſed them to kill this young damoſell. Another time his horſe falling in the mire that he could not get out, Dionyſius left him faſt there: but the poore beaſt with ſtrugling got himſelfe out, and ranne after his maiſter: bringing in his maine a ſwarme of bees. This did hearten him, eſpecially through the counſell of his ſoothſayers, to follow his purpoſe to ſubdue

his countrey: the which he obtained by this meanes. The CARTHAGINIANS deſirous to make themſelues great in SICILIA, ſent thither their Captaine Himilco with a great army: againſt whom the SYRACVSANS made head, wanne a battell, and killed ſixe thouſand of his men. Notwithſtanding this, he went and beſieged AGRIGENTE, and hauing vpon ſurpriſe ouerthrowne the army of the SYRACVSANS by ſea, he enforced them that were beſieged to ſaue themſelues as they could, entred into this great rich city abandoned, and tooke the ſpoile of it. The AGRIGENTINES that eſcaped gaue the allarme through al SICILIA, & retiring themſelues to SYRACVSA their friend towne, began in full aſſembly of the city to accuſe the Captaines of SYRACVSA, ſaying, that by their treaſon the countrey was ſold vnto their enemies. Dionyſius, the ſon of Hermocrates, a yong man of a ſtout hart, and that did embrace great matters in his mind, being in this aſſembly, tooke hold of the occaſion offered: and ſeeing the people out of countenance, he ſtepped forth, charged the Captaines very much, & gaue counſell that they ſhould do iuſtice: whereupon the magiſtrates did ſet a fine on their heads. And hauing found Philiſtus inclined that way, and gotten money of him (who was very rich) to pay this fine, with promiſe to furniſh others if they were condemned: he followed his purpoſe in other aſſemblies, hauing ſpeech at will, & a comely maner withall, ſo that almoſt for litle or nothing, he wan the harts of the people, who moued by his orations, did caſſeere the old Captaines, and choſe new, & among others Dionyſius, who was a good ſouldier, & had made proofe of his valiantneſſe in diuerſe encounters againſt the CARTHAGINIANS. But after they had choſen him Captaine, he neuer came to counſell with his other companions, nor would not be acquainted with them: but vnder hand, made a foule report run abroad that they practiſed with the enemies. This made men of good iudgement to preſume that he himſelfe went about to make ſome alteration: and they could not forbeare to blame him for it. Neuertheleſſe the people not looking ſo inwardly into it, they eſteemed him very much. Herupon many aſſemblies were made to thinke of their affaires in wars, in one of the which Dionyſius perceiuing the SYRACVSANS aſtonied, gaue aduice that they ſhould call home their baniſhed men, ſaying: that it was a great mockery to run into GRECE and ITALY for ayd, ſince they had hard at their doores ſuch as had bene citizens, who had rather die like vagabonds, then ſerue the enemy. And that the fauour they ſhould ſhew them, would ſpurre them forward to do their countrey good ſeruice. The wiſeſt men durſt not gainſay this aduice, perceiuing that the people did incline vnto it: that if they hindred that, it was to get as many enemies as there were baniſhed: and that they being called home, ſhould thanke none but Dionyſius, at whoſe commandement they would euer be afterwards. No man ſpeaking a word, the decree of repeale was authoriſed by the people, and the baniſhed men returned to SYRACVSA. In the middeſt of all this buſineſſe, letters were brought from GELE, which demanded aide. Dionyſius offered himſelfe ſtraight, & was ſent thither with 2000 footmen, and 400 horſe. Being arriued at GELE, & finding the city in trouble, he tooke the peoples part, accuſed the principals, made them be put to death, & their goods forfeited. With which forfeiture he payed the ordinary garriſon of GELE, and promiſed double pay to them that folowed him from SYRACVSA: vnto the which he returned immediatly, hauing the fauour of his ſouldiers. So all the people ran about him in multitudes, asking him where the enemies were, and what they did? You do not conſider, ſayd he, thas your enemies indeed are in your towne. They that gouerne in your eſtate are more to be feared, then the CARTHAGINIANS: for whileſt you are buſie about your playes and feaſts, they deuide the common treaſure among themſelues, and pay not the ſouldiers. In the meane ſpace Himilco prepareth himſelfe to come & beſiege you, whereof your gouernors make no reckning, neither do they giue any order for it. I knew this well inough before, but now I am moſt aſſured of it: for Himilco ſent a trumpet vnto me, vnder colour of certaine priſoners, and ſecretly bad him tell me, that he wold giue me more then any other of my companions, ſo that I would not ſearch
him too narowly: and if ſo be that I would not helpe him, at the leaſt yet that I would not hinder him. And therefore thinke with your ſelues to find another captaine in my place, for it is no reaſon whileſt others ſell the town to the enemies, that I ſhould go hazard my ſelfe with my fellow citizens, & in danger in the end that they ſhould thinke of me I ſhould be partaker with the wicked practiſes of others. Thoſe that heard what he ſpake, being maruellouſly offended, caried theſe words immediatly all about the towne. But for the preſent time euery one went home to their houſe, ſad, and troubled in their minds. The morow after, as thoſe that ſhould ſpeake before the people did draw by lot of letters, that they might know in order how they ſhould ſpeake, and

that the letter F. came to his lot: ſome ſtander by told him, this F. ſignifieth A Ieſter or ſ
                     ••••
                  d Foole.Foole, Dionyſius, becauſe thou wilt tell vs great follies. No, replied he quickly: that I ſhall be a Monarke. Preſently the people being aſſembled, and his turne being come to ſpeake, he accuſed his other companions with great vehemency, was heard very attentiuely, and with great praiſe of all the people, whom the day before he had angred very much: ſo that in the end there was ſome of the aſſembly cried out, that neceſſity required that Dionyſius ſhould be choſen alone Captaine generall, with all authority and ſoueraigne power, and that it was no tarying till the enemies be vnder our wals, and that he was a fit man to take care of this buſineſſe: and as for the traytors, that they ſhould thinke of them at better leiſure. Hereupon the people choſe Dionyſius their Captaine generall, giuing him full authority, and power of the affaires of the commonwealth, and praying him to conſider of all that ſhould be expedient to reſiſt the enemies.
            He ſeeing his enterpriſe ſo well grounded, propoundeth a decree to the people, that the ſouldiers pay ſhould be doubled ouer that it was before: for that would make them more couragious and willing to do good ſeruice. And as for money, that the SYRACVSANS ſhould take no thought for that, for he knew a way how to come by it well inough. This ſo ſudden aduancement, and his bold promiſes ioyned with the diſpoſition of this young man, made many ſuſpect him that had any vnderſtanding and iudgement: in ſo much that ſome began to go and come to houſes to conferre together to find meanes betimes to withſtand the tyranny, which had now (as they ſay) put the irons in the fire. But Dionyſius hauing an eye abroad, and a number of ſpies that ſlily fell into companies, being afraid they would do him ſome hurt, determined to prouide for it by a farre fetch to ſight, but very fit to ſerue his turne: which was, to obtaine licence to chuſe a gard for his perſon, vnto the which he came, as foloweth. He proclaimed in the towne that thoſe that were able to beare armes ſhould follow him, and to make their rende-vous with their armes at a day ſet downe at the towne of the LEONTINES, and bring victuals with them for one moneth. There was then in that towne a garriſon of the SYRACVSANS: the baniſhed, & all ſorts of men withdrew themſelues, whom Dionyſius hoped would haue taken his part, for that they were men which deſired nothing more then change and alteration, and perſwaded himſelfe that few of the SYRACVSANS would follow him. Hereupon he went himſelfe into the field, and being incamped neare the towne, one cauſed his friends to giue the alarme, and to cry helpe, as if the enemies had enuironed him to kill him in his tent: and making as though he had bene maruellouſly afraid, he fled, and ſaued himſelfe by ſwiftneſſe within the caſtell of the towne, where he paſſed all the reſt of the night, made fires all about, and ſent for his ſoldiers in whom he put moſt truſt, as a man that is afraid, ſeeing his enemies lye in waite for him. The next morning ſome of the people of SYRACVSA being gathered together in this towne of the LEONTINES, in open aſſembly he made a long diſcourſe of that that had paſſed, to make them beleeue that his euill willers would haue ſurpriſed him, and could ſpeake ſo well, that the people appointed him ſixe hundred ſouldiers to gard his perſon, ſuch as he himſelfe would chuſe out. Immediately he choſe young men to the number of a thouſand which had nothing to looſe, hardy and deſperate to put any thing in execution that they were commaunded. Theſe he furniſhed with all things neceſſarie, and made them great promiſes: ſo that he wanne their hearts, and got vnto him the ſouldiers ſtraungers that were in the SYRACVSANS pay. Howbeit he chaunged the Captaines from their companies, and put in their places ſome other made to his hand. And afterwards he ſent Dexipus, a wiſe and valiant Captaine LACEDAEMONIAN, backe againe into his countrey, of whom he ſtood in feare, and perceiued he would be a barre in his way to hinder that he went about. Ouer and aboue that he ſent for the ſouldiers of the garriſon of GELE, and gathered together all them that were baniſhed, all theeues and rogues that would come and ſerue him, iudging them to be fit men to ſerue the turne he purpoſed. When he had gotten a great troupe of ſuch rakehels, he ſtraight returned to SYRACVSA, and lodged his forces in the Arſenall, and then ſhewed himſelfe openly Lord, and tyraunt, without any longer diſſimulation. This amazed and grieued the SYRACVSANS moſt extreamly: neuertheleſſe they were enforced to beare this yoake which they could not helpe, becauſe the towne was full of ſouldiers ſtraungers, and for that alſo they were afraid of the CARTHAGINIANS that were neare vnto them with a mightie armie. All this happened, Dionyſius being but fiue and twentie yeares old, in the third yeare of the ninetie three Olympiade, and in the three hundreth ſeauen and fortieth

yeare of the foundation of ROME. Thus you ſee how this young man of a baſe condition, meanely borne, made himſelfe Lord of one of the greateſt commonwealths in the world at that time, and continued this vſurpation all the dayes of his life, which was the ſpace of 38 yeares.
            This being done, he made them all rich and wealthy that aided him in this enterpriſe, draue out all thoſe he could find that withſtood theſe his attempts, put to death before all the people Daphneus, and Demarchus, two of the chiefeſt men, and of greateſt power that were at that time in SYRACVSA, and that had moſt croſſed him of all others in the deuice of his purpoſe. Afterward, becauſe he would yet ſtrengthen himſelfe the better, he maried Hermocrates daughter, a SYRACVSAN Captaine, that ouercame Nicias and the ATHENIANS, and maried his ſiſter vnto Polyxenus, brother in law vnto Hermocrates. Whileſt things paſſed thus, the CARTHAGINIANS, being maſters of AGRIGENTE, after they had ſpoiled, burnt & razed it, they marched away with their Generall Himilco, and went and beſieged the city of GELE, friend to the SYRACVSANS, in maner of a like diſtance from SYRACVSA and AGRIGENTE, very farre in land, where the other two were ports of the ſea. The beſieged did wonderfull valiantly defend themſelues, their towne being weake and kept by the citizens onely, accompanied with their wiues and children that would not forſake them. Dionyſius hearing of their neceſſity, brought a ſtrong aide vnto them of thirtie thouſand footmen, and a thouſand horſe, beſides a great number of galleys, that lay off and on vpon the Ile, to cut off victuals from Himilco, and to land alſo. But when they came to ioyne, Dionyſius hauing deuided his bands into three troupes to trouble his enemy the more, he could not do ſo well but the CARTHAGINIANS had the better, and ſlue many of his men. He very hardly eſcaping with his troupe entred into the towne, and there called his friends together to counſell what they were beſt to do. They ſeeing the place dangerous, and of great diſaduantage to hazard a battell in, gaue him counſell to retire againe. He ſent a trumpet ouer-night to Himilco, to pray him to ſurceaſe armes till the morning, that he might gather the dead bodies together to bury them. In the meane ſpace, in the firſt watch of the night, he made all the people come out of the towne, and diſlodged himſelfe about midnight, leauing there 2000 men lightly armed, commanding them to make great fires and noiſe, that the enemies might thinke that he and his men were ſtill in the towne: & that they at the breake of day ſhould come to their troupes. Dionyſius hauing eſcaped thus, came vnto CAMARINE, a towne halfe-way betwixt GELE and SYRACVSA, and commanded all the inhabitants to diſlodge and come to SYRACVSA, that they might auoide the cruelties of the CARTHAGINIANS who ſacked GELE. So, all the inhabitants of theſe two townes compelled to leaue their houſes and countrey, all the fields & high-wayes were full of women, children, and of poore people of the country. This moued the ſouldiers againſt Dionyſius, who accuſed him that he had done this of purpoſe, that he might more eaſily ſeaſe vpon the other cities of SICILIA, which ſhould be deſtroyed by the barbarous CARTHAGINIANS: and thus they complained one to another of the litle aide he had giuen to the towneſmen of GELE: how the ſouldiers of his gard had dealt cowardly in their ſeruice, and ranne away without the loſſe of a man of theirs, and no body purſued after them. Vpon this diſcontentment, the ITALIAN ſouldiers that came out of ITALIE, tooke their iourney to returne home. And the men of armes of SICILIA at the firſt began to lie in waite to kill Dionyſius on the way: but ſeeing that the ſouldiers of his gard were neuer from him, nor he from thē: they departed all together, and went with ſpeed towards SYRACVSA, and found them that were left there in garriſon, lodged in the place of the Arſenal, who knew nothing what had hapned before GELE. By this meanes being entred without reſiſtance, they ſacked the pallace of Dionyſius, where they met with great riches, and did ſo villanouſly abuſe his wife, that for griefe ſhe killed her ſelfe. But about the time that they departed from the camp, Dionyſius imagining by the way what would follow after this, he choſe out certaine footmen and horſemen which he thought he might beſt truſt about his perſon, and went with all ſpeed poſſible with them to SYRACVSA, ſuppoſing he ſhould not ouercome theſe mē of armes, vnles
he did as they. And euen as he thought ſo it came to paſſe: for they perſwading themſelues that Dionyſius could not well tell what courſe to take, whether to follow them, or to keepe with is army: thought they had won all, and walked vp and downe the towne telling ſtories of the cowardlineſſe of Dionyſius: who hauing marched well neare nineteene leagues at one iourney, came about midnight to the gates of ACRADINE, with about a hundred horſe, & ſix hundred footmen: and finding it ſhut, cauſed ſtore of fagots, reeds, and ſedge of the fens to be laid againſt the gate, wherewith the SYRACVSANS vſe to burne

their lime, which they found there ready at hand. Whileſt this gate was a burning, his men that could not follow him ſo faſt arriued one after another. And ſo the gate being burnt he entred, & found in the market place ſome of theſe men of armes, who in haſt had ſet themſelues in order of battel: but on the ſudden they were engaged, and killed with pikes and darts. Dionyſius on the other ſide, he ran through the towne putting them all to the ſword he met here and there in the ſtreets, that were running to aid their men. And not ſtaying ſo, he entred into their houſes whom he knew to be his enemies, killed ſome of them, and draue others out of the city. The reſt of the men of armes fled, ſome here, ſome there, and the next morning all his forces arriued at SYRACVSA. But they of GELE, and of CAVARINE, being angry with him, went into the city of the LEONTINES.
            In the middeſt of all theſe ſtirs and doings, the plague being hot in the campe of the CARTHAGINIANS, enforced Himilco to ſend a herauld vnto SYRACVSA to demaund peace. Dionyſius accepted it very willingly. So peace was concluded, that the CARTHAGINIANS ſhould haue the SICANIANS, beſides al the towns which they had before the war in their power: That they of SELINONTE, of AGRIGENTE, of HIMERA, of GELE, and of CAMARINE, might returne home to their houſes, dwell in their country, & in their townes without wals, paying a certaine yearely tribute vnto the CARTHAGINIANS: That the LEONTINES, thoſe of MESSINA & all other the SICILIANS ſhould be free, and enioy their liberties and priuiledges: That the SYRACVSANS ſhould remaine vnder the gouernement of Dionyſius: That the priſoners and galleys taken in this war ſhould be reſtored againe on either ſide. By meanes of this peace Dionyſius got the CARTHAGINIANS out of SICILIA, eſtabliſhed his principality ſurer then euer, and maried againe two other wiues together: the one a ſtranger of the city of LOCRES, called Doris: the other of SYRACVSA called Ariſtomache, the daughter of Hipparinus the chiefe man of all the citizens. He had asked a wife of them of RHEGE, but they refuſed him, and ſcorned his tyranny: of whom he was cruelly reuenged, as we will tell you hereafter. It is reported that he maried them both in one day, and it was neuer knowne which of them he knew firſt: for the reſt, that euer afterwards he ſhewed them both a like fauour. They did ordinarily eate together with him, and both of them by turnes lay with him. They of SYRACVSA were deſirous that his wife of SYRACVSA ſhould be preferred before the ſtranger. But Doris had this good hap, to bring foorth Dionyſius eldeſt ſonne: which ſerued his turne well to defend himſelfe that ſhe was a forreiner. Ariſtomache to the contrary was maried a long time to Dionyſius and had no children: though he was very deſirous to haue one by her. Inſomuch that he put Doris mother to death, charging her that ſhe had by charmes and ſorceries kept backe Ariſtomache from conceiuing. But afterwards ſhe had children, to wit, two ſonnes, Niſaeus, and Hipparinus: and two daughters, Arete, and Sophroſyne. Dionyſius the yonger, maried his ſiſter Sophroſyne: and Arete was maried vnto Thearides, brother to Dionyſius the elder: and her ſecond husband was Dion, the brother of Ariſtomache. Furthermore, conſidering that the SYRACVSANS being deliuered from the warre of the CARTHAGINIANS ſhould haue leiſure to thinke to recouer their libertie againe: and perceiuing that the quarter they called the Ile was ſtronger of ſituation, and eaſier to keepe then any other of the three: he encloſed it in with a ſtrong wall from the reſt, & built there many great and high towers, pallaces to keepe his courts, hals for his Counſell and publicke aſſemblies, goodly galleries, and ſpacious gate-houſes to containe a great number of people. And to retire himſelfe vnto vpon any ſudden emotion of the common people, he built a maruellous ſtrong caſtell, within the compaſſe whereof he incloſed the Arſenall, where mightly in docke threeſcore galleys: and there was a gate alſo to ſhut too, into the which could enter but one galley at a time. Then chuſing out the goodlieſt and beſt place of all the territorie of SYRACVSA, he deuided it among his friends, and gaue it vnto them that had charge of men of warre vnder him. That which remained, he diſtributed by equall portions vnto other inhabitants of the towne, aſwell naturall borne citizens, as ſtrangers, come from other parts to dwell at SYRACVSA, concluding vnder the name of citizens the bondmen enfranchiſed, who he called the new burgeſſes: and diſtributed to the people alſo the houſes of SYRACVSA, thoſe reſerued of the quarter of the Ile, which he gaue vnto his friends and ſouldiers.
            So, hauing as he thought well aſſured his eſtate, he began to make warre vpon the free cities of SICILIA, vnder colour that they had fauoured the CARTHAGINIANS. HERBESSE, a city in firme land neare vnto the mountaines, in the hart of the countrey, was the firſt he attempted, and

went and beſieged it. But the SYRACVSANS that were a great number in this army, and well appointed, began to haue ſecret meetings, and to blame themſelues, for that they ioyned not with the men of armes to driue out this tyraunt. He whom Dionyſius had giuen them for their captaine called Doricus, was ware of their conferences, and threatned one that ſpake louder then the others: who replyed ſo fiercely againe, that the captaine came to him in choler to ſtrike him. But his companions tooke the quarrell, and did ſo conteſt againſt him, that they killed the captaine in the place. Then ſtirring vp their fellow citizens to recouer their libertie, they ſent for the men of armes of the SYRACVSANS, who were retired into the fort of AETNE. Dionyſius amazed with this chaunge, preſently raiſed his ſiege, and with all expedition tooke his way towards SYRACVSA, that he might be there firſt. After he was gone, thoſe that had mutined choſe them for their leaders that had killed captaine Doricus, went and encamped themſelues with the men of armes before SYRACVSA, in a place called Epipoles to make warre with the tyrant, hauing ſtopped all the paſſages that he could not come out into the field. And forthwith they ſent to them of RHEGE and MESSINA, to pray them to ſend them aide: which they obtained, to wit, ninetie gallies well appointed. Furthermore, they promiſed by open proclamation, a great ſum of money to him that would kill the tyrant: and to the ſtraungers that were in pay, to make them Burgeſſes as themſelues, if they would take their part againſt him. They prouided engines of batterie to beate downe the walles of the Iſle, and euery day gaue new aſſaults vnto them, and made very much of all the ſouldiers ſtraungers that tooke their part. Whereupon Dionyſius ſeeing himſelfe ſhut out of the field, and that his men forſooke him euery houre, aſſembled his friends to conſult with them what was to be done. Some counſelled him to tarie, alleaging that tyranny and abſolute power vſurped by him, was a faire tombe. Polixemus his brother was of the mind, that he ſhould ſaue himſelfe on the ſwifteſt horſe he had in his ſtable, in the lands which the CARTHAGINIANS held in SICILIA. But Philiſtus, who afterwards wrote the ſtorie of his geſts, ſaid then, that Dionyſius ſhould neither flie away, nor yeeld vp his tyrannie, the which he ſhould neuer forgo but by force, and his feet forward. Dionyſius tooke hold of this opinion, and reſolued with himſelfe to abide all extremitie, rather then to yeeld vp his place. Being in this caſe he fortuned to come to ſee a butcher ſlaughter an oxe, and hauing obſerued that at one ſtroke he fell downe ſtarke dead: Alas, ſaid he, were it not great ſhame that for feare of death which laſteth ſo litle while, and is ſo ſoone gone, I ſhould leaue ſo goodly and great a Seigniorie? But knowing what people he had to deale withall, he ſent ambaſſadours vnto them that kept him in ſo ſtraightly, to beſeech them to permit him with ſafetie to come out of the towne with his followers. Euen at that inſtant he ſent men to the ſouldiers CAMPANIANS, to promiſe them all that they would haue, ſo they would come and beſiege SYRACVSA. The towneſmen hauing ſuffered him to go his way with fiue ſhips, ſlept quietly in hope that he would be gone: and caſſiered a part of their ſouldiers, ſuppoſing they ſhould need no longer to beſiege it. So that their ſouldiers diſperſed themſelues here and there in the fields, euen as if the tyrannie had bene put downe. But the CAMPANIANS allured by Dionyſius promiſes, came into the field, and being come to AGYRIDE, they left their cariage to be ſo much the ſooner before SYRACVSA. They were twelue hundred horſemen, and made ſuch ſpeed, that they ſurprized the SYRACVSANS, and in deſpite of them rode through the towne vnto the caſtell of Dionyſius, in whoſe aide alſo at the very ſame time there arriued by ſea, three hundred other ſouldiers: ſo that now he became more couragious then euer he was. The SYRACVSANS on the other ſide began to diſarme themſelues, ſome being of one mind ſome of another: which Dionyſins vnderſtanding, he made a fallie out vpon them that kept the quarter called NEAPOLIS, or new towne, and put them all to flight: howbeit many were not killed, for Dionyſius riding euery where about, willed his men to kill none that fled. Thus were the SYRACVSANS driuen and diſperſed in the field, where there gathered about the horſmen aboue ſeuen thouſand. Now for Dionyſius, he hauing cauſed them to be buried that were ſlain in this conflict, he ſent ambaſſadors vnto AETNE to them that were retired thither, to intreate them to be at peace, and to returne home to their houſes, promiſing them by oath, that he would neuer be reuenged for any thing they had practiſed or done againſt him. Thoſe that had wiues and children at SYSACVSA, were compelled to truſt to his words and promiſes. But when the ambaſſadours alleaged to the others, the humanitie of their maiſter in burying the dead: they anſwered, that the tyrant deſerued to haue as much done to him, and that they prayed the gods they might quickly requite him. For all this they would not ſtirre out of AETNE,

expecting oportunitie to ſet vpon their enemy: who being eſcaped from ſo great a daunger, he courteouſly vſed them that returned, to entice the others to follow. And for the reſt, after he had well payed the CAMPANIANS, he put them out of the citie, ſuſpecting their inconſtancie and treaſon. They departing from SYRACVSA, went vnto the citie of ATELLE, where they preuailed ſo much, that they were receiued into the towne to dwell there. But their wickedneſſe burſt out into ſuch extremitie, that one night they ſet vpon the naturall inhabitants, killed euery man that was able to beare armes, and afterwards by force thruſt out their wiues: and by this meanes made themſelues maiſters of the towne, and of all the territorie thereabout. At the ſame time Ariſtus, one of the chiefeſt men of LACEDAEMON was ſent vnto SYRACVSA, vpon a rumour giuen out amongſt the people, that it was to driue out the tyrant. But the effect ſhewed that it was but to negociate with him, and to bind him vnto them, to ſerue their turnes in their affaires. Aristus then hauing immediatly after his arriuall had ſecret conference with Dionyſius, he began to mutine the SYRACVSANS, promiſing them all the aide he could, for the recouerie of their liberty. But afterwards he himſelfe killed Nicoteles the CORINTHIAN, who had promiſed the SYRACVSANS to be the head of this enterpriſe: and accuſing them that gaue credit to his words, he made the tyrant more bold and ſtronger then euer. So did he alſo begin to ſhew himſelfe more then before: for he found the meanes to ſend the SYRACVSANS into the fields to get in their corne and harueſt, and in the meane ſpace whileſt they were out of the citie, he went into the houſes himſelfe, and fetched out all their armes that had any. Then he enuironed his caſtle round about with another ſecond wall, built diuers ſhippes, and aſſembled a great number of ſouldiers ſtraungers, whom he afterwards entertained. Now he thinking himſelfe too litle a Lord, vndertooke to conquer ſome fronter townes neare vnto the territorie of the SYRACVSANS, and before he would aſſaile them, he brought his armie before AETNE, which he wan preſently. From thence he came to beſiege the citie of the LEONTINES, the which hauing reſiſted him, after he had foraged and preyed the countrie about, he turned vnto the townes of the naturall SICILIANS, making as though he meant to ſet vpon thē, to the end that thoſe of CATANE, & of NAXE, ſeeing the warre in another place, ſhould care the leſſe for themſelues. So being neare vnto the towne of ENNE, he put into Limneſtus head, a citizen of the ſame, that he ſhould take vpon him to make himſelf Lord of the town, promiſing to helpe him in it: which the other executed. Howbeit he kept the town for himſelfe, & ſhut the gates againſt Dionyſius: who being angry with this repulſe, counſelled the ENNIANS to driue out this new tyrant. The people being ſet on by him, ran one day in armes into the market place, and cried, Libertie. Dionyſius vnderſtanding that, followed with ſome of his faithfull friends, tooke hold of Limnestus, & deliuered him to the ENNIANS, and went out of the towne again immediatly, to make others to truſt him. From thence he went vnto CATANE, and wan that town through the treaſon of Arceſilaus captain of the ſame: tooke all the armes from the inhabitants, and left a good garriſon there. Procles captain of NOXE, ſhortly after played euen the like part that Arceſilaus had done: and was well recompenced for it, and all his kinſmen and friends were giuen him: but the other inhabitants were ſold by the drum, their towne deſtoyed, and their lands giuen vnto the SICILIANS, neighbors to SYRACVSA. For thoſe of CATANE, they were alſo ſold vnto them that would giue moſt within SYRACVSA, and their town giuen to the ſoldiers CAMPANIANS. This made the LEONTINES hold vp their hands, leaue the towne, and go dwell at SYRACVSA. Now Dionyſius fortified SYRACVSA a new, and hauing determined to cloſe in the quarter called Epipoles with walles, he aſſembled threeſcore thouſand labourers diſtributed by troupes, and ſeruing skilfull maiſters, accompanied with Maſons that had their day worke. Theſe men encouraged by his preſence, by his promiſes and gifts, finiſhed the wall in three weekes of a reaſonable height and thickneſſe, being litle leſſe then two leagues about. The baniſhed men of SYRACVSA being fled to RHEGE, did what they could poſſible to moue the inhabitants to make warre againſt Dionyſius. They laboured it ſo well, that in the end the RHEGIANS went into the field, and induced the Gouernours of MESSINA to keep them companie. But a MESSENIAN called Leomedon, hauing diſcouraged the troups, euery one went home againe, and did nothing: and as for Dionyſius, he looked no further into them, but the RHEGIANS and MESSENIANS hauing ſent vnto him to treate of peace, he iudging that the friendſhip of theſe two cities would be very expedient for him, made peace with them.
            So hauing aſſured himſelfe on that ſide, and conſidering that many GREEKES of SICILIA fled into the townes which were ſubiect to the CARTHAGINIANS, and that there were townes,

vntouched, vnto the which they caried their goods: he thought that ſo long as he was at peace with them, diuers of his ſubiects would be willing to do the like. Howbeit that in making warre with them, thoſe whom the CARTHAGINIANS ſhould ouercome by armes, would come to his ſide. Furthermore, word was brought him that CARTHAGE was wonderfully afflicted with the plague, which did the more ſtrengthen him in his reſolution. But knowing that he had to deale with mighty enemies of all the people of EVROPE, and that this war would not ſo ſoone be ended: he gathered together into SYRACVSA out of all the coaſts of ITALIE, of GRECE, and of SICILIA, the beſt workmen and artificers, vnto whom he gaue great wages, and great gifts vnto thoſe that were moſt skilfull and diligent. Who labouring in enuie the one of the other, they built vp in a ſhort time two hundred gallies, repaired a hundred and ten that had ſerued a long time, forged an hundred and fortie thouſand bucklers or targets, ſo many ſwords and daggers, as many helmets and ſallets: fourteene thouſand corcelets, curates, and brigandines of all ſorts: engines of batterie of all faſhions, and of darts, an incredible and vneſtimable number. Touching the galleys, to arme them with pylots, mariners, and galley-ſlaues, the citie of SYRACVSA furniſhed for the one halfe: and Dionyſius for the other halfe payed the ſouldiers ſtraungers. The furniture of theſe ſhippes, armes, and harneſſe being readie, he began to gather his armie together, and would not for ſauing of charges put himſelfe in readineſſe before. He gathered together within SVRACVSA all thoſe that were able to beare armes: he drew out of the townes ſubiect vnto him, all that were meet for war: he leauied men out of LACONIA with conſent of the Lords of SPARTA, and got a great number out of all parts becauſe he payed well, and gaue them very gracious entertainment that came to ſerue him. But aboue all the reſt he ſhewed himſelf a maruellous friend to the RHEGIANS, and MESSENIANS, that had a reaſonable ſtrong army in readines to be employed: being afraid that ſo ſoone as they ſhold ſee the CARTHAGINIANS paſſed into SICILIA, they would ioyne with them: for to which ſide ſoeuer theſe two cities would incline, they would helpe to make a great weight in the ballance, and to bring the victory to fall on their ſide. It was at that time that he gaue a great countrie of extent vnto the MESSENIANS, and prayed the RHEGIANS to giue him a wife of their towne. But they would not heare of that in any wiſe. Wherupon he went to the LOCRIANS, who gaue him her of whom we haue ſpoken before: and for many daies together did nothing elſe but make banquets and feaſts, aſwell to his ſouldiers, as vnto the more part of the citizens of SYRACVSA. For he had now changed his firſt ſoureneſſe and cruelty of a tyrant into gentlenes: he did vſe his ſubiects in a more ciuill ſort, put no more of them to death, nor baniſhed any mo of them, as he did at the firſt beginning. Shortly after this mariage was paſt, he aſſembled the people of SYRACVSA, & did perſwade them to make war with the CARTHAGINIANS, telling them that they were enemies of all the vniuerſall GREEKS, and of thoſe eſpecially that dwelt in SICILIA, whom they practiſed by all means they could to make ſubiect vnto them. And that albeit they did not now make any alteration, it was becauſe of the plague that tormented them much: but ſo ſoone as they were free from that, they ſhould ſee the effects of their malice againſt all the inhabitants of SICILIA, which they caſt long before in their minds. And that it were better for him, ſince it muſt needs be, ſoone or late, to begin to make war vpon them they being now weak, then to tarie till they were recouered again: and that it was a great ſhame to thē to ſuffer the towns of GRECE ſo neare vnto them, to be made ſubiect to barbarous people: that being deſirous to recouer their liberty, ſo much more willing they wold be to yeeld themſelues vnto the SYRACVSANS, ſo ſoone as they ſhould ſee that it were open war. Theſe and other reaſons were receiued and allowed by the SYRACVSANS, who were no leſſe deſirous then himſelfe to make war with them. For they hated the CARTHAGINIANS, becauſe that for feare of them they were conſtrained to put themſelues vnder the yoke. And next, for that they hoped Dionyſius would vſe them more gently, ſo long as on the one ſide he ſhold be afraid of the force of the enemies, and on the other, of the rebellion of thoſe whō by force he kept vnder. And eſpecially aboue the reſt, for that they hoped being armed, if occaſion were offred, they might one day ſtand for the recouery of their liberty.
            Warre being concluded vpon in this aſſembly, Dionyſius ſuffered the SYRACVSANS to ſpoile the PHENICIANS that trafiqued in their hauen: which they executed out of hand. The other SICILIANS did aſmuch: ſo that the CARTHGAINIANS were driuen to run away, and thoſe that they could catch were cruelly handled in euery place, for the hatred they bare them, becauſe of the proud parts they committed in the wars paſt. Dionyſius hauing all his army in readineſſe, ſent a

Herald vnto CARTHAGE with letters, containing that the SYRACVSANS had decreed in their Councell to make warre vpon the CARTHAGINIANS, vnleſſe they departed from the townes of GRECE which they held in SICILIA, and did leaue them at libertie. The Senate and people of CARTHAGE amazed at it, knew that they had to fight with Dionyſius, neuertheleſſe they reſolued to take armes, and ſent to leauie men out of all parts. Dionyſius on the other ſide, he tooke the field with an armie of foureſcore thouſand fighting men of foote, and three thouſand horſe: and had at the ſea nere two hundred gallies and ſhips of ower, accompanied with fiue hundred great ſhips of burden, full of all ſorts of engines of batterie, and of neceſſarie munitions for ſuch an armie. All the townes almoſt of SICILIA yeelded themſelues vnto him, ſauing MOTYE, ANCYRE, SOLES, EGESTE, PALERME, and ENTELLE. Leptines his brother and Admirall, lay before MOTYE, and beſieged it: and himſelfe ſpoiled all the countrie of the SOLENTINES, PALERMITANS, and ANCIREIANS: and beſieged EGESTE, and ENTELLE, and gaue them diuers aſſaults. Newes being brought vnto him that Himilco was at hand, he went and encamped before MOTYE, a town ſituated within a litle Iſle of SICILIA, halfe a league from firme land, ſtately built, and very rich at that time. The which he aſſaulted by ſea and by land, draue Himilco and his forces back, and wan the towne by aſſault: but they ſold their liues and towne very deare, hauing killed a great number of the enemies, before they were forced. The SICILIANS yet angry in their harts for the miſchiefes they had endured through the inſolencie of the CARTHAGINIANS in the former wars: were ſo brued in bloud, that all thoſe of MOTYE were put to the ſword. They that ſaued themſelues in the temples, had their liues graunted them: but Dionyſius made them all be ſold by the drumme. Whileſt he was occupied there, the EGESTANS made a ſallie vpon the campe which he had left before the towne, and ſet it on fire, which burnt the moſt part of his ſoldiers, and the reſt well warmed, ſaued themſelues as they could. But Dionyſius not much regarding this loſſe, ſet vpon all the townes of the CARTHAGINIANS with his armie. They for their part, gaue all the authoritie and power vnto Himilco, to prepare for this war of SICILIA. He made an armie of three hundred thouſand footmen, and of a great number of horſemen, and gaue the rende vous to the ſhippes of burthen at PALERME: where he arriued with his fleet of gallies that followed him. The Admirall Leptines hauing deſcried his comming, ſet forward with his ſhips, and fought with them in the maine ſea: he killed fiue thouſand of his men, ſunke fiftie ſhips, and two hundred carts of warre: and the reſt of them ſaued themſelues by flying. But Himilco hauing landed his armie, went and aſſailed MOTYE, and wanne it againe of the SARACVSANS.
            At that time Dionyſius was before EGESTE, where word being brought him of the arriuall of the CARTHAGINIANS, and of the taking againe of MOTYE: he began to be affraid, and to take aduice to return to SVRACVSA: he commaunded the SICILIANS to retire, and made their lands waſt, to diſaduantage their enemies by ſo much the more. This ſudden change of Dionyſius, was cauſe that many of his friends tooke part with Himilco, who ſeeing his affaires proſper ſo well, made his armie march to MESSINE: tooke in (paſſing by) the Ile and towne of LYPARE: and then beſieged the MESSENIANS ſo ſtraightly, that in the end he wan the towne by aſſault. And there hauing refreſhed his troupes, he razed the towne to the very ground, the which did ſo much amaze the SICILIANS, that all, except the ASSARINS, turned vnto the CARTHAGINIANS. Dionyſius being at his wits end for ſo many loſſes, did fortifie the ſtrong holds that were in the territorie of the LEONTINES, ſent the CAMPANIANS to AETNE, that dwelt in the towne of CATANE: and taking order for his affaires the beſt he could poſſible, he went into the field with foure and thirtie thouſand footemen, and a thouſand horſe, and lodged vnder the mount Taur, where the baniſhed men of SYRACVSA were placed, fauoured by the CARTHAGINIANS, and had fortified it, and made it in forme of a towne: whileſt he made his abode there, newes came vnto him that the armie of the CARTHAGINIANS was deuided into two, and that the one part of them went by land to CATANE with Himilco: and the other came towards him by ſea, led by Mago. He hoping to make this fleet as nothing, commaunded his brother Leptines to make out with his ſhipping againſt Mago. But Leptines was put to flight, with the loſſe of twenty thouſand men, and well neare a hundred of his ſhips. This loſſe draue Dionyſius into ſuch a feare, doubting beſides leſt Mago following his victorie ſhould draw towards SYRACVSA, which was eaſie to be wonne hauing no garriſon in it: he retired into his citie, and from thence ſent men into ITALIE and into GRECE, to pray aide againſt the CARTHGAINIANS.

               Himilco knowing his retraite, brought all his forces immediatly vnto SYRACVSA, beſieged it by land and by ſea, wan the ſuburbes of ACRADINE, and ſet vp his pauilion in the temple of Iupiter Olympian, all the other temples of the ſuburbes hauing bene rifled by the ſouldiers. In the meane time Polyxemus brought to the aide of the towne, thirtie ſhippes of their friends vnder the conduct of Pharacidas, a Captaine of the LACEDEMONIANS. With this aide, and all the ſhippes of burthen, Dionyſius put to the ſea to go get victuals. But now whileſt he was at the ſea in his voyage, the SYRACVSANS being carefull to looke to their citie, and ſpying out all occaſions to miſchiefe the beſiegers: they deſcryed a boate that brought corne to the campe of Himilco. Whereupon on the ſodaine they armed all their galleys, and fought ſo valiantly with the CARTHAGINIANS, that they tooke their Admirall with twentie others, and ſunke foure of them, and followed the reſt that fled, vnto the very place where their ſhips lay at anker within the great hauen, prouoking thē to battel. But the CARTHAGINIANS aſtonied with this ouerthrow, ſtirred not.
            Then the SYRACVSANS faſtened the galleys priſoners vnto the poopes of theirs, and brought them into the citie. Whereupon they being couragions againe for this litle aduantage they had of their enemies: they began to talke among themſelues, how the tyrant had bene many times ouercome, and that they to the contrary without him had ouercome the CARTHAGINIANS. And therupon gathering together by troupes, they went ſpeaking one to another, that they were weary with ſeruing a tyrant, and now ſpecially hauing means to put him downe for euer: for before they were diſarmed, but now by reaſon of the wars they had their armes in their hands. Notwithſtanding they daily held this talke, Dionyſius made the people to aſſemble, and praiſed them highly for the good ſeruice they had done, perſwading them furthermore to be of good courage, for within few daies he would make an end of this war. But as the aſſembly of the people was ready to go their way, Theodorus SYRACVSAN, iudged to be one of the beſt men of armes within the towne, ſtepped vp, & made a long oration, in the which after he had by peecemeale laid open all the tyrannies▪ cowardlineſſe, and wicked deeds of Dionyſius, whom he called grammarian, clerke, a careleſſe man, ignorant of the affaires of war, oppreſſor of all SICILIA, and fauorer of all theeues and ill men of the world: he perſwaded them by diuers reaſons to indeuour themſelues to recouer their liberty. And ſince that their allies of ITALY and GRECE were within the city, that they ſhould bring backe againe the power and authority to create ſuch captaines as they ſhould thinke good, into the hands of the citizens, according to the tenure of their ancient lawes, or elſe into the hands of their anceſtors and firſt founders, which were the CORINTHIANS: or at the leaſt into the LACEDAEMONIANS hands, who had then the ſeigniority of all GRECE. The SYRACVSANS being maruellouſly moued with ſuch a ſpeech, behold the countenance of their confederates aſſiſtants in this aſſembly: vntill ſuch time as Pharacidas being gotten vp into the pulpit for orations, made euery man hearken, ſuppoſing it ſhould be he that ſhould begin firſt to ſtir vp and encourage others to the recouery of their liberty. But to the contrarie, he being particularly friend to Dionyſius, began to tell them, that his Lords had ſent him to aide the SYRACVSANS and Dionyſius againſt the CARTHAGINIANS: not to deſtroy them, nor to aboliſh his eſtate. This ſpeech being cleane contrary to that the common people expected, the ſouldiers ſtraungers ran ſtraight about him. Wherupon the SYRACVSANS ſtirred not, ſauing that to themſelues they curſed the LACEDAEMONIANS, becauſe that heretofore they had ſent them Ariſtus, who pretending he came to aide them for to recouer their libertie, was a traitor and ſold them: and now that this Pharacidas had broken the harts of their courages, being well diſpoſed to root out this tyrannie. For Dionyſius, he ſpake ſmoothly for the time, being throughly afraid they would haue ſet vpon him, and ſo diſmiſſed the aſſembly, vſing the moſt gracious words vnto them he could poſſible. To others he gaue preſents, he ſent for others to come and eate with him at his table. In the meane time the plague ſtraungely poſſeſt the campe of the CARTHAGINIANS, and in a ſhort time killed wel-neare 150000. of them: wherupon the moſt part of them were forſaken aliue and dead, the contagion was ſo horrible. Some imputed it partly to the diſcommoditie of the place, and exceſſiue number of men liuing as it were on heapes together: partly vnto the vengeance of God puniſhing their pride, the inſolencies, cruelties, and ſacrileges of the CARTHAGINIANS. Dionyſius vnderſtanding of this miſerie, would not vainely let ſlippe ſuch a fit occaſion, but armed foureſcore galleys, vnder the conduct of Pharacidas and Leptines, and his troupes, with whom he aſſailed Himilco by ſea and by land, tooke his fortes, burnt and drowned the moſt part of his ſhippes, brake the reſt, and gaue his people of SYRACVSA meanes to ſet

vpon the litle barks, & to ſhut them within the citie. To be ſhort, he brought them to ſuch extremitie, that they ſent ſecretly vnto him to pray him to ſuffer that which was ſaued from the ouerthrow the day before, to paſſe the ſea, and to retire home to AFRICKE with ſafetie: promiſing to make him a preſent of an hundred and foureſcore thouſand crownes. His anſwer was, that it was not poſſible all ſhould be ſaued, yet he was contented the naturall CARTHAGINIANS ſhould paſſe. For he doubted much that the SYRACVSANS and their friends would neuer ſuffer him to reſpite thoſe other, if they once vnderſtood it. But he did it of purpoſe, being vnwilling that the armie of CARTHAGE ſhould be vtterly deſtroyed, for feare that when the SYRACVSANS ſhould ſee themſelues free from this feare: they would remember the Oration of Theodorus, and put too all their force to recouer their liberty againe. The mony promiſed him being deliuered, Himilco imbarked by night all the naturall CARTHAGINIANS that were left into fortie gallies, and made ſaile immediatly towards AFRICKE. Howbeit he was ſcant out of the hauen, but certaine CORINTHIANS perceiued his ſtealing away, and ſuddenly came to tell it to Dionyſius, who ſeeming to be very greatly buſied, commaunded to ſound thealarme, and that the Captaines ſhould prepare themſelues to follow him. The CORINTHIANS ſeeing he went but faintly to worke, would tarie no longer, but euen at the preſent houre imbarked themſelues, drew vp their ankers, and rowed hard after their enemies: ſo that in a ſhort ſpace they ouertooke the rere of their veſſels, and ſo rudely hurt them, that they ſunke ſome of them. Immediatly after, Dionyſius drew his armie into the field: but the SICILIANS, friends vnto the CARTHAGINIANS, had gotten the ſtart before croſſing the countrie, inſomuch that the more part of them got home to their houſes. For this cauſe Dionyſius hauing left a guard to keepe the paſſages by the high waies, he brought his army backe againe to the enemies campe. The barbarous people ſeeing themſelues betrayed by their Generall, forſaken of the naturall CARTHAGINIANS and SICILIANS, their hearts were killed, and began to flie, ſtealing away, ſome this way, ſome that way: but all of them in manner fell into the hands of the ſouldiers that guarded the high wayes. Thoſe that were left, came before Dionyſius, and caſting downe their armes, beſought him to take pitie of them, and to ſaue their liues: the SPANIARDS onely excepted, who gathered themſelues together with their armes, and ſent vnto him to offer their ſeruice, if it would pleaſe him to accept them: the which he did, and receiued them into pay among the ſouldiers ſtrangers. For the reſt, he tooke the other priſoners, and gaue their baggage in prey to his ſouldiers. For Himilco, after he had liued ignominiouſly and poorely at CARTHAGE, he died diſtract of his wits. Some hold opinion that immediatly after he was arriued, not able to endure the ſhame he got in this warre, he killed himſelfe.
            
               Dionyſius hauing driuen the CARTHAGINIANS out of SICILIA, he built vp MESSINA againe which they had ruined. Then he went to beſiege TAVROMENION, fortified by the SICILIANS: who luſtily gaue him the repulſe, and made a ſallie vpon him, and killed the moſt part of his men, hauing much ado to eſcape himſelfe. On the other ſide, Mago chiefe of the AFRICANS in SICILIA, did courteouſly intreate his allies, and receiued into his protection all thoſe whom Dionyſius oppreſſed. By which occaſion hauing won the hearts of the moſt part of them, he became ſo ſtrong in a ſhort time, that he got a great armie againe on foot, marched with them to MESSINA, and ouerranne all the plaine countrie, where hauing gotten a great bootie, he tooke vpon him to beſiege the ABACENIANS confederates of Dionyſius: who being bound to aide them, he went againſt the CARTHAGINIANS, beat Mago in a conflict, and killed eight hundred of his men. So hauing brought his troupes to SYRACVSA and refreſhed them, he armed a fleet of an hundred veſſels, to go and make warre with thoſe of RHEGE, and comming to their hauen by night, at that inſtant time he did fiercely aſſaile them, ſet fire on their gates, and ſet vp ſcaling ladders in diuerſe parts: neuertheleſſe the RHEGIANS defended themſelues ſo couragiouſly, that he was forced to retire. And therupon receiuing certaine intelligence what great preparation they made at CARTHAGE to begin the warre againe: he left RHEGE, and returned againe to SYRACVSA. So the CARTHAGINIANS had gotten together againe foureſcore thouſand men, whom they ſent into SICILIA vnder the conduct of Mago. But before they came to ioyne with the enemies, they concluded peace with theſe conditions, that euery one ſhould enioy that they had gotten: That one of them ſhould not quarrel with the other for any thing: That Dionyſius might without breach of peace make warre with the TAVROMENITANS. Theſe being thus agreed vpon betweene them, Dionyſius went and beſieged TAVROMENION the ſecond time, and did more

furiouſly aſſault it then before: ſo that in the end, after long reſiſtance of them that were beſieged, he wanne the towne, draue out the SICILIANS that dwelt there, and did repleniſh it with ſtraungers whom he kept in pay. Afterwards becauſe his armie ſhould not be idle and mutinous, he choſe twentie thouſand footmen, and three thouſand horſe, and went into ITALY with them next adioyning vnto SICILIA, to ſubdue thoſe GREEKES which had dwelt there of long time. Newes being brought vnto them of Dionyſius intention, they aſſembled all the eſtates of the countrey of CROTONE, where they all reſolued to ioyne together to repulſe this common enemy: and making all the forces they could, eſtabliſhing Eloris, a baniſhed man of SYRACVSA their Chieftaine, they made their armie march againſt Dionyſius, who camped before the city of CAVLONE. He vnderſtanding of their comming, raiſed his ſiege ſuddenly to go and meete with them: and the next morning after his departure, by breake of day he gaue charge vpon the GREEKES with his troupes well appointed, who marching diſorderly, he killed their Chieftaine, and the valianteſt men of their army: and afterwards beſieged the others that had ſaued themſelues in a towne, and compelled them to yeeld for that they had no water. Yet contrary to all mens expectation, he vſed them very courteouſly, and ſent them home ſafe without ranſome. After he had won this goodly victory, he led his armie into the territorie of the RHEGIANS, whom he hated to the death. They hauing no friends, and too weake of themſelues to reſiſt ſuch a mightie enemy: were conſtrained to make peace with him with very hard conditions. For he made them giue him threeſcore galleys, a hundred and foureſcore thouſand crownes, and for hoſtage and obſeruation of other articles, a hundred of the chiefeſt of the towne. From thence he returned to beſiege CAVLONE, and held them ſo ſtraight, that he wan it by aſſault, deſtroyed it, and gaue the lands vnto them of LOCRES.
            But for as much as he could not forget the vnreconciliable hatred he bare vnto the RHEGIANS, he hauing demaunded on a time one of their daughters in mariage: they report that the anſwer they made in an open aſſembly of the towne vnto his Ambaſſadors, was that they would giue him none of them, vnleſſe he would marry the hangmans daughter of the towne: this made him reſolue that he would ſee the end of it. And where before he had made peace with them, it was not for any good will he bare them, nor that he deſired their friendſhip, but becauſe he would take their galleys from them, hoping that after he had left them bare at the ſea, he ſhould come cloſer to them, and haue them at his diſcretion. Therefore whileſt he was in ITALIE, he ſought nothing elſe but to take an occaſion to make warre with them, ſo that he might not be charged that contrary to his faith he had broken the edict of pacification. Hauing therefore led his army vnto the ſtraite, making as though he would paſſe into SICILIA: he ſent vnto the RHEGIANS to demaund victuals for his army, promiſing to ſend them ſo much againe vpon his returne to SYRACVSA. Which he did, to the end that if they refuſed, he might excuſe himſelfe well if he did ſet vpon them: and if they did giue him any, it ſhould then turne to the hurt of the towne, which if it came to be beſieged, ſhould be conſtrained for famine to hold vp their hands to him. The RHEGIANS that leaſt doubted his malice, furniſhed him with victuals for certaine dayes: but perceiuing he taried there too long, now counterfeiting he was ſicke, then that he vſed other delayes to prolong time, they began to ſee his fetches, and refuſed to victuall him any more. Thereupon he faining to be much offended, ſent them home their hoſtages, and came to beſiege the towne: comming hard to their wals, he made daily and continuall aſſaults, beating vpon the wals with great engines which he had made expreſly of an incredible greatneſſe. They hauing choſen a valiant man for their Captaine, called Phyton, and furniſhed all thoſe that were able to beare armes in the towne, they defended themſelues couragiouſly, and did many wayes hurt their enemies: and ſpecially in a ſally they made, Dionyſius was ſore hurt with a launce in the flancke, that he was like to haue died. But being recouered and well againe, he purſued his purpoſe more obſtinately then euer: whereby he tooke all hope of aide from them, and hauing continued ſiege there eleuen moneths all together, in the end the RHEGIANS found themſelues in great want of victuals of all ſorts: for a buſhell of wheate was at fiftie crownes. After that all kind of come failed them, firſt they did eate vp their horſes, and all kind of beaſts of burthen. Then when they had no more to eate, they did ſeeth all their hides and leather they could find within the towne, and ſo liued awhile. And laſt of all, comming out of the towne, they did eate and deuour vp ſuch hearbes and rootes as they could find by their walles, euen as wild beaſtes. Dionyſius perceiuing it, in ſtead of pitying

of them (nay rather deſiring they ſhould eate one another of them) he cauſed the graſſe to be cut downe, and put his beaſtes in the campe into it, to feed of all that was alongſt the towne walles and ditches, to the end they ſhould haue nothing more to eate. So that in the end the poore RHEGIANS ouercome by neceſſitie, were conſtrained to yeeld themſelues and their towne to the diſcretion of the tyrant. Who being entred into the towne, found heapes of bodies dead of that plague of famine: and ſuch as were yet aliue, ſeemed rather ghoſts then liuing perſons. So he gathered together about ſixe thouſand priſoners, whom he ſent all to SYRACVSA, ſuffering notwithſtanding all that could raunſome themſelues, (paying a talent) to be redeemed: and the reſt to be ſold by the drumme to him that would giue moſt. Amongſt the priſoners there was Phyton and his ſonne. Dionyſius made his ſonne to be drowned firſt: and the next morning after, he made the father to be tied to the higheſt engine of battery he had, and ſent to tel him newes of the death of his ſon. He was happier by a day then his father, ſaid Phyton: who was drawne all the towne ouer, and whipped moſt ſhamefully: hauing a ſergeant at his back that cried out aloud, that Dionyſius made him be whipped thus, becauſe he had made the RHEGIANS take armes againſt him. But Phyton that had like a valiant captaine and worthy man ſhewed himſelfe in this ſiege, and had liued honorably all his life time, did patiently endure the paine which the tyrant made him ſuffer. For he remained conſtant, ſpeaking out aloud that euery body heard him: That he was put to death, becauſe he would not betray his countrey, and deliuer it into the tyrants hands, howbeit that within few daies the gods wold be reuenged of him for this outrage. His conſtancie was ſuch, that it moued Dionyſius ſoldiers to compaſſion: who began already to murmure againſt him. Wherfore fearing leſt they ſhold be ſo bold to take him out of the tormentors hands: he made thē leaue whipping of him, & cōmanded that they ſhold drowne him in the ſea with all his kinred, which was done: for the reſt, the city of RHEGE was razed to the ground.
            Thus haue we made a large diſcourſe of the practiſes and wars of Dionyſius. Now let vs ſpeake ſomthing of his priuate gouernment. He had wit enough, but troubled with many vices: & the more he grew in yeares, the more it was corrupted. The flatterers made an end of his deſtruction: for they called his cruelty, the hate of wicked men, and good iuſtice, & made him beleeue that he was a moſt worthy man in all things: inſomuch that he thought himſelfe the only man of the world, and would be ſo reputed. Being thus caried, and ſeeing himſelfe at good leyſure, he entred into a courſe which he had ſomwhat diſcōtinued during the wars, & wherwith he was ſtrangely taken: which was, to write verſes, & to make tragedies. He fel to this ſtudy againe with more diligence then before, & ſent for Poets out ofal parts, whom he honored, and gaue preſents vnto, becauſe they ſhould correct his works of Poëtry. They ſeeking to gratifie him for their profite, ſaid nothing, but that which they thought ſhould be moſt pleaſing vnto him: ſo that being puft vp with their flatteries, he gloried more in his verſes, then he did in his warres. Now amongſt other Poets that followed him, there was one they called Philoxenus, a learned man, and excellent to write hymnes in praiſe of the gods. Dionyſius one day gaue him a tragedy of his to peruſe and correct, he croſſed it all ouer from one end to the other: and one night being asked what he thought of certaine poëſies which the tyrant made, he ſpake openly, that they were woorth nothing. He anſwered ſo plainly, that Dionyſius angrily ſaid, it was of enuy that he cenſured his works ſo, and ſent him forthwith to dig in the quarry pit. The next morning his friends intreated Dionyſius to pardon him, which he did: & would haue him againe to ſupper with many others of his ſort. In the midſt of this feaſt, Dionyſius that deſired nothing more then to haue his verſes heard: he rehearſed ſome of them, and of thoſe eſpecially which he thought beſt done. Then turning himſelf to Philoxenus, he asked his opinion. But he anſwered him neuer a word, but looking about him, called one of Dionyſius guard and ſaid vnto him: Cary me againe to the quarry pit. Dionyſius ſmiling at it, bare this nip well: and ſoone after taking Philoxenus apart, perſwaded him not to be ſo ſharpe. His friends alſo told him that he might eaſily forbeare to ſpeake ſo freely to no purpoſe. Then Philoxenus made him an anſwer all new, ſaying, that from thenceforth he would keep ſuch a weight on his words, that he would ſpeake the truth, and keepe himſelfe in Dionyſius fauor, as he did. For Dionyſius hauing rehearſed certaine verſes full of great lamentations, to moue the hearts of the hearers to pity: he prayed Philoxenus to ſay his mind of thē: who anſwered him, that thoſe verſes had filled him full of pity. It was a ſharpe gird of mockery which Dionyſius perceiued not, no more then that which Melanthius ſpake of a tragedy after the like ſort, that he could not ſee it, it was ſo darke of ſpeech. And ſo was Plato not much better vſed then Philoxenus. Dion his

diſciple, and brother in lawe of Dionyſius, had ſpoken ſo much good to this tyrant, that being at leyſure he was contented to ſee Plato, and to heare him. So they being together, their talke generally was all of vertue: but chiefly they diſputed, what was true force and proweſſe? Where Plato proued vnto him, that tyrants were nothing leſſe then valiant men. Out of that, turning his talke to ſpeake of iuſtice: he ſhewed him that the life of the iuſt was very happie: and that to the contrary, the life of vniuſt men was moſt wicked. Inſomuch that the tyrant ſeeing himſelfe conuinced, could no longer endure talke with him: and was ſorie to ſee thoſe that were preſent ſo muchto eſteeme of him, and to take ſuch ſingular pleaſure to heare him ſpeake. So at the laſt his choler being vp, he asked him what buſineſſe had brought him into SICILIA? To ſeeke an honeſt man, ſaid Plato. And how? (replyed Dionyſius) by the gods (to heare thee ſpeake) it ſeemeth thou haſt yet found none. Dion thought his choler ſhould go no further, and ſo ſent Plato away in a gallie, whom Polis a captaine of LACEDAEMON brought backe againe into GRECE. But Dionyſius prayed this captaine ſecretly, that whatſoeuer he did he ſhould kill Plato by the way, or at leaſtwiſe ſell him: adding too this ieaſt withall, He ſhall be neuer a whit the worſe for that: for if he be a iuſt man, he ſhall be as happy being a ſeruant as otherwiſe. And ſo Plato was ſold in the Ile of AEGINE for the price of 200. crownes, and afterwards bought againe by Annicerius a Philoſopher, and ſent to ATHENS.
            
               Dionyſius gaue himſelf all to Poëſie, and ſent for the beſt ſingers he could recouer in the games Olympials, to rehearſe and ſing his verſes before the people. The ſingers at the beginning were heard with admiratiō of euery bodie, for the goodnes & fineneſſe of their voyces: but when they came to examine their ſongs, they were deſpiſed, mocked, and whiſtled at, which angred him extreamely when he heard of it. So this paſſioned deſire did ſo much increaſe in his head continually, that he became almoſt as a man beſide himſelfe: & ſaid that his faithfull friends did enuie him, and began to be at defiance with them, as if they had bene traitors vnto him. To conclude, this fury of his did ſo poſſeſſe him, that he did put many to death vpon falſe occaſions, and baniſhed others, as Philiſtus, and Leptines his brother, both of them valiant men, & that had done him great ſeruice in his wars. Howbeit afterwards he ſent for them againe, and they were his friends as before. But ſince we are now to talke of his cruelties, let vs ſay ſomething as we paſſe by. One of his greateſt friends called Marſyas, dreamed one night that he cut his throate. The tyrant vnderſtanding of it, put this poore dreamer to death: alleaging that this dreame could not haue come to him at night, but that he had it ſetled in his mind to commit ſuch an act in the day. Leptines being deſirous one day to deſcribe SICILIA in his preſence, tooke a halbard from one of the ſouldiers of his guard, and with the but end of it drew on the ground that which he would: wherewith Dionyſius was ſo angry, that he bitterly tooke vp Leptines, and put the ſouldier to death that had giuen him his halbard. Dionyſius one day being diſpoſed to diſport himſelfe ſome way, gaue his Bardaſſe his ſword and his cloke to keepe: which one of his familiars perceiuing, ſaid: And what, do you truſt this young boy with your life? The youth began to ſmile at it: but Dionyſius made him be killed, becauſe by his ſmiling he ſeemed to allow of this word: and he alſo diſpatched the other, becauſe he had ſhewed him the mean to kill him. He was determined to haue put his brother in law Polyxemus to death: but he hauing an inkling of it, fled out of SICILIA. Dionyſius ſent for Teſcha his ſiſter, and chid with her becauſe ſhe had kept his flying away cloſe from him. But ſhe anſwered him with a bold countenance: And how thinkeſt thou, Dionyſius, that I am a woman ſo cowardly and faint hearted, if I had knowne that my husband would haue gone, that I would not haue taken ſea with him, aud haue bene companion of his fortune? I knew nothing before he was gone, for it had bene more honorable for me to haue bene called the wife of Polyxemus baniſhed, then ſiſter to thee a tyrant. Dionyſius was blanke at this ſpeech, and the SYRACVSANS wondred at the vertue of this woman: inſomuch that after the tyrannie was deſtroyed, they did not leaue to do her all the honor that they could haue done to a Queene. And when ſhe was dead, all the citizens by common conſent went with her body to the ſepulture. A queſtion being moued one day, to wit: Which was the beſt copper? Antiphon anſwering quickly that it was that wherwith the ATHENIANS melted the ſtatues of Armodius and Ariſtogiton, Dionyſius made him to be ſtrangled and die in great torments. They report of him that he ſpared not his owne mother, but cauſed her to be ſtrangled, though ſhe was very old. And as for his brother Leptines, he ſuffered him to be killed by his enemies, albeit he might eaſily haue ſaued and deliuered him at that time. Some talked of his tyrannie in a Barbers ſhop, and ſaid it was well eſtabliſhed,

and alſo euill to be deſtroyed, as the Diamond to be broken. I maruell, ſaid the Barber, ſmiling, how you ſay that of him, vpon whoſe throat I paſſe my razour ſo often? Theſe words being brought to Dionyſius, he hanged the Barber. He had put to death at diuers times ten thouſand of his citizens, and though he had written in one of his tragedies, that tyrannie was the mother of iniuſtice: notwithſtanding he had oftentimes this word in his mouth: That children muſt be deceiued with plaies, & men with faire promiſes. And he ſaid, that the greateſt pleaſure and cōtentment he found in all his gouernment, was: that what he wold haue done, was ſodainly executed.
            One day he would haue had money of the SYRACVSANS: they complained and lamented, beſeeching him to hold them excuſed, telling him they had no mony. He to the contrarie, made them to be asked alſo by others: which he did twiſe or thriſe one after another. And as he continued ſtill vrging of them yet further: it was told him they did nothing but laugh as they walked in the market place. Then he commanded his receiuers to preſſe them no more: for it is a ſigne, ſaid he, that they haue no more, ſince they make no account of vs. His mother being paſt age to marie, would needs mary a yong man. He anſwered her, that indeed it was in his power to break the lawes of SYRACVSA, but of nature, not. He ſeuerely puniſhing all other malefactors, pardoned theeues that tooke away mens gownes and clokes whom they met by night in the ſtreetes. To the end that for this cauſe the SYRACVSANS ſhould leaue to make feaſts and aſſemblies, wherin they could not keepe themſelues from ſpeaking & complotting againſt him. On a time a ſtranger promiſed him aloud to teach him ſecretly, how he ſhould know thoſe that did practiſe any thing againſt him. Dionyſius prayed him very earneſtly. So the other going to him, Giue me ſaid he, ſixe hundred crownes, that the SVRACVSANS may thinke thou haſt learned of me the ſignes to diſcouer the conſpirators. He gaue them him, and fained that he had learned theſe meanes of him: greatly commending the ſubtill faſhion to get money which this man had inuented. Hauing heard one day a man that played vpon the citherne paſſing well, he openly promiſed him the ſum of ſixe hundred crownes. The next morning he came to demaund this ſum: and Dionyſius told him: Thou gaueſt me great pleaſure yeſterday to heare thee play: and ſo did I thee in making thee this promiſe: and ſo thou wert paid in the field for the pleaſure thou gaueſt me, by that that thou receiuedſt. One asked him on a time, If he were not idle. God forbid, ſaid he, that that ſhould euer happen to me. He being enformed that two young men of the city drinking together, had ſpoken many euill words of him and his tyranny at the table: ſent to inuite them both to ſupper to him: and ſeeing that the one after he had drunke a litle, ſaid and did many od fooliſh things: and that the other to the contrarie was very ſober, and dranke but ſeldome: he pardoned the one, as being a drunkard and inſolent of nature, and that through drunkenneſſe had ſpoken euill of him: but he put the other to death, as one that bare him euill will in his heart, and being enemy vnto him euen of ſet purpoſe. Some of his familiars reproued him, becauſe he had honored and aduanced a wicked man, and euill beloued of the SYRACVSANS. And he anſwered them, I will that there ſhall be ſome one in SYRACVSA, that ſhall yet be more hated then my ſelfe. Once he ſent preſents vnto certaine ambaſſadors of CORINTH, which came vnto him. They refuſed them, becauſe they had a ſtatute in their commonwealth, that did forbid ambaſſadors to take or receiue any gifts or preſents of Lord or Prince whatſoeuer. He was diſcontented withall, and told them that they did euill to take away that only good which is in tyrannies, that is, to haue power to giue: but they taught men alſo, that to receiue any good of tyrants, is a thing one ſhould feare and ſhun. Being informed that a towneſman of SYRACVSA had hidden a treaſure in the ground in his houſe, he commanded him to bring it him: the which he did, but not all for all that, for he reſerued a part with the which he went and dwelt in another town, and bought ſome land there: which when he vnderſtood, he ſent for him to come to him, and reſtored him all his gold and ſiluer: Since thou knoweſt now, ſaid he, how to vſe riches, and not to make that vnprofitable which is made for the vſe of man.
            Now his cruelties and tyrannous behauiour made him maruellous odious to the world, by reaſon whereof he entred into ſuch a miſtruſt of euery body, that he made a trench be digged about his lodging where he lay, and becauſe he would lye ſafely, he drew vp a draw bridge, and ſhut himſelfe in with great feare, hauing a great guard without round about him. His wiues durſt not come into his chamber before they had put off their gownes, he was ſo afraid leſt they ſhold bring a dagger vnder their gownes. Yea his brother and his owne ſon were faine to put off their clothes, & the guard of his chamber ſhould come naked whatſoeuer he was that put his foot into

it: then there was another garment caſt vpon him. He was afraid of his owne ſon as much as of any other, doubting that when he felt his owne courage, and frequented men of vnderſtanding, he would make ſome complot againſt him, and in the end thruſt him out of his ſeate and ſigniorie. He locked him vp in a chamber, and would ſuffer no man to come and ſpeake with him: where for lacke of other occupations, this young man occupied himſelf to make litle coaches or charrets, candleſtickes, ſaddles, ſtooles, and tables of wood. Neuertheleſſe, after he had ſome more libertie, and that his father beganne to let him come abroad: he ſtraight grew to be proud and diſſolute as might be. And they ſay, that when he had rauiſhed a towneſmans wife by force, his father being angrie with him, asked him: whether euer he had ſeene him do any ſuch thing or not? the ſonne anſwered him: No more had you a father that was a tyrant. But Dionyſius replyed vpon him again: So ſhalt thou neuer haue a ſon at all, if thou leaueſt not to play theſe wicked parts. Another time going to ſee his ſon in his lodging, and ſeeing there great ſtore of veſſels of gold and ſiluer, he told him: there is nothing in thee of a Lord or Prince, ſince I haue giuen thee ſuch a deale of gold and ſiluer plate, and yet thou knoweſt not how to get a friend. It was an ordinarie thing with Dionyſius to tell wonders, and do litle, being ſo exceeding timorous, but ſpecially after the execution of his Barber, and that his daughters were now waxen great, he would not abide that any ſhould clip his haires with ſizers: but he made an image-maker of images of earth to come to him, who with a burning cole burnt his glib round about his head. Now he made himſelfe to be knowne by a memorable fact he did: which was this. A certaine flatterer called Damocles, praiſing the maieſty and riches of Dionyſius, and the magnificence of his pallace, maintained that the Sun neuer ſaw a more happy man. Dionyſius to make him partaker of this felicitie, made him ſit downe vpon a litle bed very ſumptuous, and enriched with wonderfull precious things. Then he cauſed them to ſet vp tables laden with veſſels of gold and ſiluer, and couered with wonderfull daintie meates, a number of fine Pages attending on his ſeruice, perfumes paſſing rare and moſt excellent ſweet for the chamber, and daintie muſicke both with voice and inſtruments. To be ſhort, all the pleaſures and paſtimes poſſible to be thought of, did compaſſe this minion of court round about. But in the midſt of al this magnificent furniture, Dionyſius cauſed a naked ſword, gliſtering, and ſharpe pointed, to be faſtened to a ſmall haire of a horſe, and to be hanged right ouer Damocles head: who forgetting this felicity he had ſo much commended, beſought Dionyſius it might quickly be taken away. And like as he was cruell vnto men, ſo did he ſhew himſelfe a deſpiſer of his proper gods, wherof we will alleage ſome examples. Hauing ſacked the temple of Proſerpine in the citie of LOCRES, he tooke the ſea, and hauing a gale of wind at pleaſure: You ſee, ſaid he, how the immortall gods do fauour ſacrileges. He tooke off a cloke of fine gold from Iupiter Olympian, in the towne of SYRACVSA, which cloke weighed foureſcore and fiue talents, which are more woorth then fiftie thouſand crownes, and gaue him another of woollen, ſaying: That the cloke of gold was too cold for winter, and too heauie for ſommer▪ and that the woollen cloke would be more conuenient in both ſeaſons. He rounded alſo the ſtatue of Apollo, which had a glibbe of gold. And finding that money went low with him, by reaſon of his great expences in the warres he had againſt the CARTHAGINIANS, he tooke the ſea with a fleete of threeſcore galleys, with pretence to ſet vpon pyrates, but indeed it was to ſpoile a temple of great fame, full of goodly and rich iewels that had bene offered vp there, the which was ſeated vpon the edge of a quarter of a citie of TVSCAN called AGYLLE. Being arriued there in the night, and hauing landed his men: in the morning by breake of day he ſodainly and without any daunger executed his enterpriſe. For the place being guarded with ſome few men, he eaſily forced it, and afterwards at his leyſure ſacked the temple, where he got to the ſumme of 600000. crownes. Which the towneſmen vnderſtanding, came out vpon him ſtraight to ſee if they could defend the temple: but he ouercame them in battell, and hauing taken a great number of priſoners, he ſpoiled all their countrie, and then returned to SYRACVSA, where he ſold his priſoners and his bootie, for the which he had alſo 300000. crownes more.
            So being now well ſtored againe, he began to ſet vp an armie: and becauſe he ſaw the towns ſubiect vnto the CARTHAGINIANS willing to reuolt, he did entice them, & vſed them very graciouſly that came and took his part. The CARTHGINIANS hearing that, ſent vnto him to demand their townes, otherwiſe they proclaimed warre againſt him. So on both ſides they came into the field. For the CARTHAGINIANS, they diſpatched Mago into SICILIA with a great armie. Dionyſius being afraid of nothing, marched before with his troupes, and being camped neare to a

place called CABALES: both the armies fiercely gaue charge vpon each other, & after a long fight Mago was ſlaine in the place with 10000. of his men, and 5000. taken priſoners. The CARTHAGINIANS were not diſcouraged for all this, but choſe them againe the ſon of Mago for their chiefe Captaine, a young Gentleman, wiſe, couragious, and valiant. So after they had ſtayed Dionyſius by a truce for a certaine time, the terme being expired, they preſented him battell, and fought it out ſo reſolutely, that after they had ſlaine his brother Leptines (whom he forſooke at his need) and fourteene thouſand of his men, with much ado he ſaued himſelfe. But the conquerers being neuer a whit prouder of ſuch a victory, they ſent ambaſſadors vnto him that cōcluded a peace for their aduantage. For beſide the townes that remained vnto them, Dionyſius paid them 600000. crownes to defray their charges in the wars. Alſo he kept not this peace long, but brake it ſhortly after: for vnderſtanding that the plague was hot amongſt the CARTHGAINIANS, and that they were fallen out amongſt themſelues: he tooke occaſion of this aduantage, and to giue colour to his pretence, gaue it out that the ſouldiers AFRICANS had foraged the lands of his friends, wherupon he leauied an army of 30000. footmen, and 3000. horſe: with this army he began to make war againe, and in the firſt employment of his forces he wan SELINONTE and ENTELLE: & after that he marched to LILYBEE to beſiege it: but ſeeing it well guarded, he returned backe againe. Hereupon newes was brought him that fire had taken ſome of the arſenals of the CARTHAGINIANS: wherfore ſuppoſing al their ſhips of war had bene burnt, he began to ſcoffe at al their forces. But they hauing armed vpon a ſodain a fleet of 200. gallies, aſſailed vnlooked for 130. of Dionyſius gallies, which wintered in the hauen of ERIX, ſome of them he ſunke and brought away the others. After this loſſe Dionyſius retired into SYRACVSA, and fell very ſicke. The which Dion perceiuing, entred into talke of his children, and of his ſiſter Ariſtomache. But the Phiſitians to currie fauor with yong Dionyſius, hindered him that he could haue no fit time to ſay any thing to him. Or as Timaeus writeth, they gaue him a drinke (as he had commanded them) to make him ſleepe, and by this means tooke from him his ſenſes, ioyning death with ſleepe. Some others ſay, that he was killed by his guard: others, that he was poiſoned. But Diodorus the SICILIAN ſetteth downe the cauſe after another ſort: which is this. He had cauſed, ſaid he, a litle before, a tragedy of his intituled, The LENEIANS, to be plaid at ATHENS: & hauing gotten the victory, one of the muſitians brought him word of it by ſea: which did ſo pleaſe him, that after he had richly rewarded the meſſenger, he made a great ſacrifice to the gods to giue them thanks for this proſperity, & ſumptuous feaſts, vnto the which he inuited all his friends, and dranke ſo largely, that he fell into a great ſicknes wherof he died. Now he had in times paſt an oracle, that had foretold him he ſhold dye then, when he had ouercome thoſe that ſhould be worthier then himſelf. He applyed this oracle to the CARTHAGINIANS, ſuppoſing it was meant by them, becauſe they were ſtronger then he. This was the cauſe that oftentimes in the battels he had wonne againſt them, he being victour, fled, or willingly ſuffered himſelf to be ouercome becauſe of this prediction. Howbeit he could not ſhun his deſtiny: for being an ill Poet, he was iudged by the ſentence of corrupt iudges, to haue excelled all the other Poets better then euer he was: & then came he to end his daies, as the oracle had foretold him. Now though he had raigned the ſpace of 38. yeares full out, and had boaſted many times that he would leaue his ſon a Principality chained with ſtrong chaines of a diamond: this yong Dionyſius ruled no long time, but being ſhortly after driuen out of SYRACVSA by the inhabitants themſelues, ſecondly by Dion, & at the laſt by Timoleon, who ouerthrew him altogether: he was ſent to CORINTH, where he ended the reſt of his daies in miſery. Afterwards the SYRACVSANS maintaining their liberty for the ſpace of 20. yeares: they fell into Agathocles hands, who alſo cōmitted terrible cruelties. After his death, they being full of ciuill diſſention, demanded aide of Pirrhus king of EPIRVS againſt the CARTHAGINIANS. He hauing made a iourny into SICILIA, was conſtrained to leaue it, and had great war with the ROMAINS. By reaſon wherof the SYRACVSANS willingly yeelded themſelues vnto Hieron the ſecond of that name, vnder whom (a great friend of the ROMAINS) they proſpered the ſpace of fiftie yeares. But after his death, his litle ſonne Hieronymus, a yong Lord and vnruly: tooke part with the CARTHAGINIANS: and hauing raigned only fifteene moneths, he was killed by his guard. Now for that his death brought on great confuſions, and that the SYRACVSANS enclined to the CARTHAGINIANS part: the Conſull Marcellus went to beſiege SYRACVSA, and tooke it in the ſecond yeare of the 142. Olympiade. So that afterwards it was gouerned by Praetors, and according to the ROMAINE law, euen to the declination of their Empire.
            The end of Dionyſius life.
         
         
            
            THE LIFE OF Octauius Caeſar Augustus.
            
            
               DIVVS AVGVSTVS PATER.
            
            
               Thy youth Auguſtus, and thy tongues good gift,
               Thy valour, wiſedome, and thy worthy feats,
               Thy countries loue, thy lawes, and ſtatutes, lift
               Thy throne aboue all other princely ſeates.
            
            
               
                  ACcia, the daughter of Accius Balbus and of Iulia the ſiſter of Iulius Caeſar, was maried vnto the father of this man, whoſe life we write of now, and who was deſcended of the auncient race of the Octauians, iſſued out of the countrey of the VOLSCES, and knowne at ROME from the time of Tarquinius, and of Seruius Tullus. Their ſonne Octauius was borne in the yeare of the Conſulſhip of Cicero and of Caius Antonius, at that time when as the conſpiracy of Catiline was diſcouered, and ſuppreſſed. He was called Thurinus: but afterwards, according to the tenor of his vnckles teſtament, who made him his heire, he was called Caius Iulius Caeſar, and laſtly Auguſtus, by the aduice of Munatius Plancus, and by the decree of the Senate. He was but foure yeares old when his father died, and at twelue yeares he made the funerall oration for his grandmother Iulia: foure yeares after that, he became a gowneman, though he were but yong: yet his vnckle gaue him a preſent at his returne out of AFRICK, ſuch as the ſouldiers are accuſtomed to haue of their Captaines▪ Shortly after he followed his vnckle into SPAINE, whither he was gone againſt the children of Pompey, and paſſed through many great dangers to ouertake him. This warre being ended, becauſe Caeſar vndertooke other longer iourneys, Octauius was ſent into the city of APPOLONIA: and there plied his booke very diligently. And it chanced him, without hauing any mind to it, that being gone to ſee Theogenes a learned Aſtronomer, he caſt his natiuity, and ſuddenly he leapt being amazed, and honoured him. The which made Octauius conceiue great hope of himſelfe, and in memorie of this good hap, he cauſed certaine peeces of money to be coined, and he himſelfe told the opinion of Theogenes. Being returned from APPOLONIA to ROME, after his vnckle was ſlaine by Caſsius, Brutus, and their allies, he declared himſelfe to be his heire, though his mother and Marcius Philippus were of another mind. And hauing put himſelfe forward, he gouerned

the commonwealth of ROME, firſt with Antonius and Lepidus: afterwards with Antonius the ſpace of twelue yeares: and laſtly himſelfe alone, the ſpace of foure and forty yeares. But before we ſpeake of his gouernement of common affaires in time of peace and warre, let vs ſay ſomewhat (after Swetonius) of his family and his maners. He married being yet very young the daughter of Publius Seruilius Iſauricus: but hauing made peace with Antonius after the warre of MVTINE, and at the requeſt of their armies who were deſirous to ſee them friends, he maried with Clodia, the daughter of Publius Clodius and of Fuluia then wife of Antonius. But before he knew her, he ſent her to her mother, with whom he was ſomewhat diſcontented, and becauſe of the warre alſo of PEROVSE. Immediatly he maried Scribonia, and kept not her long becauſe ſhe was too troubleſome: yet he had a daughter by her called Iulia. But forſaking her, he tooke another which he loued vnto the end: and that was Liuia Druſilla the wife of Tiberius Nero, whom he caried with him great with child as ſhe was, and had no child: by her but one, and yet ſhe went not out her time, and it had no life. His daughter Iulia was maried vnto Marcellus, the ſonne of his ſiſter Octauia: and after his death vnto Marcus Agrippa, by whom ſhe had three ſonnes, Caius, Lucius, and Agrippa: and two daughters, Iulia, and Agrippine. After the death of Marcus Agrippa, he choſe for his ſonne in law Tiberius the ſonne of Tiberins Nero and of Liuia Druſilla, at that time a knight of ROME, and compelled him to forſake his wife Vipſamia, of whom he had a ſonne called Druſus. But as he was fortunate in managing the affaires of the common wealth, ſo was he vnfortunate in his race: for his daughter and his neece Iulia committed ſo foule faults in ROME, that he was conſtrained to baniſh them. Agrippine was maried vnto Germanicus, the ſonne of his ſiſters daughter. Caius and Lucius died in leſſe then a yeare and a halfe one after the other: whereupon he adopted his nephew Agrippa, and his ſonne in law Tiberius. But becauſe Agrippa was of a churliſh nature and vnhoneſt, he did diſinherite him, and confined him to SVRRENTVM. His neece Iulia had a child after ſhe was baniſhed, but he would not know it, nor ſuffer it ſhould be brought vp. He was very modeſt and continent in all the parts of his life, ſauing that he was ſomewhat giuen to women and play: for the reſt, he liked not great pallaces, but was contented with meane lodgings: and if there were any ornament, it was in porches and parkes. His houſhold-ſtuffe and apparell was nothing ſumptuous nor coſtly. It pleaſed him well to make feaſts, he very carefully made choiſe of his gueſts, and oftentimes he ſate downe at the table a long time after euery body, and would riſe before others, which remained after he was vp. In his ordinarie diet he baniſhed ſuperfluity of meates: he delighted to be merry and pleaſant among his friends, or to bring in pleaſant players of comedies to paſſe the time away. And he did not tie himſelfe to any certaine howres to eate his meate, but when his ſtomacke ſerued him he tooke ſomething. So that ſomtimes he ſupped not at al, and then when euery man was gone, he made them bring him meate, neither dainty nor delicate. Alſo he drunke very litle wine, he ſlept in the day, and by times in the night, talking with ſome, or reading: ſo that oftentimes he ſlept not till the breake of day, and for that he tooke no reſt in the night, he might chaunce to ſleepe in his litter as they caried him in the ſtreetes in the day time vp and downe ROME. He was a goodly Prince, and that kept himſelfe in good ſtate from the beginning of his life to the latter end: not curious to ſet himſelfe out, as litle caring to be ſhauen, as to weare long haire: and in ſtead of a lookingglaſſe, reading in his booke, or writing, euen whileſt the Barber was trimming of him. Whether he ſpake or held his peace, he had ſo comely a face, that many of his enemies bent to do him hurt, their hearts would not ſerue them ſo ſoone as euer they looked on him. He had very cleare and liuely eyes, but with time he was ſubiect to many diſeaſes and infirmities, the which he remedied with great care. As for his exerciſes, he left armes and horſes immediatly after the ciuill warres: for he was neuer any great ſouldier. He would play at tennis, at the ballone, he would go abroad in his coach to walke and ſtirre himſelfe. Sometimes he would go a fiſhing, or play at the bones, or at nuts with yong children of the MOORES & SYRIANS that had ſome prety maner and behauiour with them, and alwayes ſpake words to moue laughter. He was learned in the liberall ſciences, very eloquent, and deſirous to learne: inſomuch that during the warre of MVTINE, in the middeſt of all his infinite affaires, he did reade, he wrote, and made orations amongſt his familiars. He neuer ſpake vnto the Senate nor people, nor to his ſouldiers, but he had firſt written and premeditated that he would ſay vnto them, although he had ſpeech at commaundement, to propound or aunſwer to any thing in the field. And becauſe he would

not deceiue his memory, or loſe time in ſuperfluous ſpeech: he determined euer to write all that he would ſay: and he was the firſt inuenter of it. If he had to conferre with any man, or with his wife in any matters of importance: he would put that downe in his writing tables, becauſe he would ſpeake neither more nor leſſe. And he tooke pleaſure to pronounce his words with a ſweete voyce and good grace, hauing continually about him for this purpoſe a fine man to frame his voice. But one day hauing a paine in his mouth, he made his oration to the people by an Herauld. He made many bookes and verſes of diuerſe ſorts: but all is dead with time. His ſpeech was as the reſt of his life, eloquent, well couched together, and ſententious. He delighted to reade good authors, but he gathered nothing other then the ſentences teaching good maners: and hauing witten them out word by word, he gaue out a copy of them to his familiars: and ſent them about to the gouernours of prouinces, and to the magiſtrates of ROME and of other cities. He was ſomewhat, and too much giuen vnto deuinations: he was maruellouſly afraid of thunder and lightning: he had a great confidence in dreames, and in ſuch like vanities. But peraduenture we are too curious ſearching out his priuate life: yet that may ſometime diſcouer great perſonages more then their publicke actions, in the which they are more carefull to frame their countenances, and do counterfeit moſt.
            Now, as we haue lightly runne ouer his priuate life before ſpoken of: ſo ſhall the memorable deeds done by his authorite be briefly repreſented: being vnpoſſible to comprehend in a few lines ſo many notable things, vnleſſe a man would make a great booke of them. This is to be noted in him, that ſo young a man hauing ſo ſmall beginnings, comming out of a meane houſe in compariſon of others, hath excelled all other young and old men in wiſedome and greatneſſe of courage: ſhould riſe ſo high, that before he had bene Praetor the Senate gaue him the name of Auguſtus, created him maiſter of the horſe, when as yet he neuer had charge of a company of men at armes: proclaimed him Emperour and ſoueraigne captaine, afore he had bene placed in any publike office by authority of the Senate. Furthermore, for the firſt time he was choſen Conſull when he was but twentie yeares old: and he was thirteene times Conſull, and twentie times called Soueraigne captaine. Afterwards, when he was not yet foure and thirtie yeares old, the Senate and people of ROME gaue him this goodly name of father of his country, becauſe he had maintained and preſerued the commonwealth. It is a wonderfull thing that he could wind himſelfe out of ſo many great affaires and warres, that he could within foure and twentie yeares of age, reſtore againe into ſo good eſtate the commonwealth of ROME, turmoiled and troubled with ſo many proſcriptions and ciuill warres as it was. And that afterwards ſo long as he commaunded alone, he did ſo firmely eſtabliſh this Monarchie, that notwithſtanding the infinite troubles receiued vnder other Emperours, yet it ſtood vpright and in ſo great proſperitie for ſo many hundred yeares. After the death of Iulius Caeſar, this man being but bare eighteene yeares old, came to ROME, where he was welcomed and immediatly did conteſt with Antonius, hated of Cicero and of many others: from whence the aduancement of this young Caeſar came, and the declaration of the warre againſt Antonius, iudged an enemy of the commonwealth, and ouercome by the Conſuls Hirtius and Panſa. Caeſar who was their aſſociate, was called Soueraigne captaine, though he had not yet fought: both the Conſuls being dead of their hurts. But the Senate after this ouerthrow, beginning to change their mind, he perceiuing that they were ſlow to graunt him the Conſulſhip, reſolued to poſſeſſe it by force of armes, and began to acquaint himſelfe with Antonius and Lepidus which were ioyned together: he made that the ſouldiers promiſed by oath the one to the other, that they would fight againſt none of Caeſars troupes, & ſent 400 men to ROME to aske for him, in the name of all the army, the office of Cōſull. They hauing deliuered their charge vnto the Senate, Cornelius the Centiner chiefe of this legation or ambaſſade, perceiuing they wold giue him no preſent anſwer, caſting vp his caſſocke, & ſhewing the Senate the pommell of his ſword, ſayd vnto them: This ſhall do it, if you will not do it. So they being returned without obtaining their demand, Caeſar made Antonius and Lepidus come into ITALY, & he for his part hauing paſſed the riuer of Rubicon, marched with 8 legions right to ROME. This put all ROME in ſuch a feare, as they ſent to Caeſar to preſent him the Conſulſhip: and twiſe ſo much in gift, as they had promiſed the legions. Now whileſt the Ambaſſadors were on their way, the Senators beginning again to take hart to them, encouraged by the arriuall of the legions of AFRICK, they determined to try all meanes before they wold betray the liberty of their coūtry, being minded to cal backe that which they had ſent to Caeſar, & ſo diſpoſed themſelues

to make warre. Caeſar being offended with this inconſtancie, ſent certaine horſemen before to aſſure the people that he would make no tumult at all: he drew his legions neare, and made himſelfe Lord of ROME without one ſtroke ſtriken: and contrariwiſe, the people and Senate receiued him with ſhew of great ioy. Then, in the aſſembly of all the people he was choſen Conſull, iuſt at the full accompliſhment of twenty yeares of his age. So he demaunded in the field that they ſhould proceed criminally againſt thoſe that had killed his father Caeſar. Q. Pedius his fellow Conſull publiſhed the decree. So were Brutus and Caſsius, and all their friends condemned, with interdiction of water and fire. But for as much as Auguſtus had too ſmall meanes to ſet vpon Brutus and Caſsius, he reconciled Antonius and Lepidus with the Senate, and made alliance with them, followed with great armies. They ioyned, and were in conſultation of their affaires the ſpace of three dayes together, neare vnto BOLONIA, or vnto MVTINE, and as if the ROMAINE Empire had bene their owne inheritance, they deuided it betweene them three. So that Caeſar had the high and baſe LYBIA, with SICILIA, and SARDINIA. SPAINE and GAVLE NARBONNESE fell vnto Lepidus: and the reſt of GAVLE was for Antonius. They did decree alſo that they ſhould be called Trium-viri, appointed for the reeſtabliſhment of the commonwealth, with ſoueraigne authority for fiue yeares, to diſpoſe and giue the eſtates and offices to whom they thought good, without asking aduice of the Senate nor people. So they eſtabliſhed Lepidus Conſull for the yeare following, in the place of Decimus Brutus that was killed: and they gaue him the gard of ROME and ITALIE, ſo long as they two that remained made their preparations to go againſt Brutus and Caſsius. Beſides the preſents they ſhould make vnto the ſouldiers after the victory, they promiſed to giue them leaue to eaſe themſelues, & eighteene rich townes in ITALIE for them to dwell in. Then they began to ſet vp a rolle of all the citizens of ROME appointed by them to be ſlaine. And they decreed to euery free man that ſhould bring the Trium-viri a head of the proſcripts, the ſum of two thouſand fiue hundred crownes, and halfe ſo much vnto the ſlaues with enfranchiſement: and the like ſumme alſo to whoſoeuer could diſcouer any man that had hidden or fauoured the proſcripts. Antonius and Lepidus were thought to be the chiefe authors of this horrible tragedie: and Caeſar ſeemed willing to none but to the murtherers of his father, and did a long time oppoſe himſelfe againſt the other two: but at the length he gaue ouer, and they made wonderfull changes, abandoning their owne parents and friends the one to the other, to be reuenged of their enemies. But when the ſword was one drawne, he was no leſſe cruell then the other two. Cicero was not forgotten, as we may ſee in his life: and it would be very hard to deſcribe the wickedneſſe of that time, the which like a furious ſtreame caried away ſo many citizens of ROME. In whoſe hiſtorie do appeare moſt rare examples of all ſorts of vices and vertues in all manner of perſons: of whom we will make mention, after thoſe that haue written more at large: as amongſt others, Appianus Alexandrinus: which will ſerue to ſhew, how much a man is a furious beaſt, being lift vp in authoritie in the commonwealth, and giuen to reuenge. That there is nothing certaine nor ſure in mans proſperitie, which bringeth much enuie to his ſeruants: as to the contrarie aduerſitie maketh the afflicted contemptible: and euery body aſhamed of them. But they are wiſe men, that in ſuch tragicall accidents do cary an inuincible heart, reſolutely obeying neceſſitie, and a more high prouidence then that of man. We muſt not call that intollerable which may happen to great or meane men: for all humane accidents are vnder the feete of vertue. It chaunceth often, that force and wiſedome do defend a man, as alwayes theſe two vertues do preſerue his honour. He is well aduiſed that can finely pacifie and diuert the furie of an enemy: as to the contrary ſhame and deſpaire do gripe cowards, ſlothfull, and fearfull. But in fine, neceſſity preſſeth on the one ſide, and danger on the other.
            So they did ſet vp the names of the proſcripts faſtned in diuers places of ROME, to the number of an hundred & thirty Senators for the firſt time, a hundred & fiftie at the ſecond time, and two thouſand Knights. Then was the gate open to all villanies and cruelties, fought withall by patience and fidelity: but the examples will ſhew that better then all the diſcourſe a man can make. Saluius Otho, Tribune of the people, was one of the firſt. Hauing inuited his friends to his laſt ſupper, a Centener came in, who in the preſence of all his gueſts, halfe dead for feare, ſtrake off his head. Minutius the Praetor was alſo killed, ſitting in his ſeate of iudgement. L. Villius Annalis, a man that had bene Conſull, being eſcaped out of the hands of the murtherers, ſaued himſelfe in the ſubburbes in a litle houſe of one of his clients: but his owne ſonne hauing

no patience to ſtay for the inheritance of his father, bewrayed him vnto the ſouldiers who went to kill him there. Shortly after, this parricide being drunke had a quarrell with the ſelfe ſame ſouldiers, who ſtabbed him in with their daggers. C. Toranius was betrayed in like maner by his owne ſonne, who hauing conſumed in a few dayes the ſucceſſion which he had ſo execrably purſued, and being condemned for theft, was baniſhed into a place where he died for want and pouerty. Now againſt theſe wicked, let vs ſet ſome vertuous children. Q. Cicero was hid by his ſonne, whom they could neuer make confeſſe (though he was tormented) where his father was: who, not able any longer to endure they ſhould afflict ſo vertuous a ſonne with ſo many euils for his ſake, came and preſented himſelfe to the murtherers. The ſonne began to intreate them to kill him before his father: but they were both killed at one time. The Egnaces, father and ſonne, one embracing the other, were both run through and ſlaine at one blow. C. Hoſidius Geta was buried for dead by his ſonne: who ſaued him, ſuſtained and kept him till it was peace. Arruntius, after he had comforted and ſtrengthened his ſonne, put himſelfe to the ſwords of the murtherers. The ſonne died immediatly after for griefe, and famine. Some other children carefully ſaued and kept their fathers, and hid them. Certaine women alſo ſhewed themſelues maruellous faithfull and louing to their husbands: and ſo were there to the contratrary ſome vnfaithfull, that diſcouered their wonderfull wickedneſſe. Tanuſia made ſuch earneſt ſute, that ſhe obtained grace of Caeſar for T. Iunius her husband, who was hidden by Philopoemen his bondman enfranchiſed: whom Caeſar knighted for his fidelity to his maiſter. Q. Ligarius hauing bene kept by his wife was diſcouered by a ſlaue, and killed: wherefore his wife killed her ſelfe with famine. Lucretius Veſpillo, hauing erred and runne in great daunger here and there, not knowing whither to flie: came ſecretly to his wife Thuria, and was hidden and kept cloſe betwixt the ſeeling and the top of the houſe, vntill ſhe had obtain ed his grace of the Trium-viri. Apuleius was ſaued by his wife, who fled with him. The wife of Antius wrapped vp her husband in couerlets, and made him be caried to the ſea as a packet of ſtuffe, where he imbarked, and ſailed into SICILIA. Coponius was ſaued by his wife, who put her honour aſide in reſpect of her husbands life: for ſhe lent her body one night vnto Antonius to preſerue him (which ſhe did by that meanes) whom ſhe loued better then her ſelfe. Now to the contrary, ſome women vnfaithfull to their husbands, deliuered them into the hands of the murtherers, becauſe they might marrie againe. Amongſt other, the wife of Septimius hauing ſhamefully giuen her body vnto one of Antonius familiars: ſhe cauſed her husband to be put in the number of the Proſcripts, that ſhe might more eaſily continue her adulterie: and ſo was Septimius put to death. Q. Vettius Salaſſus, was hidden in a ſure priuy place: wherewith he acquainted his wife, but ſhe ſtraight reuealed him to the murtherers. The which he perceiuing from a high place where he was, caſt himſelfe downe headlong, chuſing rather to die ſo, then to make his cruell wife paſtime. Fuluius was diſcouered by a ſlaue of his, and his concubine: ielous becauſe he had maried a wife, and had left her, although notwithſtanding he had made her free, and had giuen her goods to liue withall. Now let vs preſently ſpeake of the faithfulneſſe and vnfaithfulneſſe of ſlaues enfranchiſed. P. Naſo was betrayed by his ſlaue freed, with whom he had bene too familiar. But he ſold his death, for he killed the traytor with his owne hands, and afterwards held out his neck to the hangmen. L. Lucceius had put into the hands of two of his ſlaues manumiſſed, as much as was neceſſary to haue relieued him in his baniſhment: but they ranne away with all, and he came and put himſelfe to the ſlaughter. Haterius, that was in a ſecret place, was ſold and diſcouered by a ſlaue of his. Caſsius Varus being bewrayed by a free man that was his ſlaue, eſcaped neuertheleſſe, and hid himſelfe among reeds: where being found by thoſe of MINTVRNES, they tooke him for a theefe, and would haue racked him to haue bewrayed his companions, he diſcouered himſelfe to be a Senator of ROME: but they would not beleeue him, becauſe he was in poore eſtate. But whileſt they were reaſoning of the matter, there cometh a Centener that ſtrake off his head. C. Plotius was ſaued by his ſlaues: but being a man giuen to parfume and rubbe himſelfe with odoriferous ointments, the ſent and ſmell of them diſcouered him to the ſouldiers, that went ferriting vp and downe in his houſe: yet could they not find him, but cruelly tormented his ſeruants, to make them confeſſe where he was: which they would neuer do. But Plotius hauing compaſſion of the euils of his faithfull ſlaues, came out of the place where he was hidden, and becauſe he would prolong their life, he ſhortened his owne, and preſented himſelfe to the murtherers. Appius Claudius, as he was neare to be had by the backe, chaunged his

gowne with his ſlaue, who went in that ſort to preſent himſelfe to the murtherers: but they tooke off his head, and ſo he ſaued his maiſters head. Another ſlaue of Menenius did the like: for he went into his maiſters litter, and offered his necke to the ſword of the murtherers: who diſpatched him whileſt his maiſter got to the port of the ſea, from whence he eſcaped into SICILIA. But the ſlaue of Vrbinus Panopio is worthy of memory euery where: for he hearing the murtherers came to ſacke his maiſter, tooke his maiſters gowne from him and his ring, gaue him his owne, and put him out at the backe gate. Then he goeth vp into his maiſters chamber, and lay downe vpon his bed, where he boldly attended them that killed him for Panopio. Another ſhewed himſelfe no leſſe faithfull in the behalfe of Antius Reſtio: for although his maiſter had throughly thwacked him for his knauiſh trickes played a few dayes before, and that then it ſeemeth he had oportunity to be reuenged: he to the contrary imployed himſelfe after a maruellous faſhion to ſaue his maiſter: for he meeting with an old man in his iourney ſtrake off his head, and ſhewing that with his whippings together to the murtherers, he made them eaſily beleeue that he had bene well reuenged of his maiſter, with whom immediatly after he ſaued himſelfe in SICILIA. The ſlaues of Martius Cenſorinus kept him a long time, and ſo well that he had leiſure to go to Sextus Pompeius. Q. Oppius an honourable old man, and being almoſt at the pits brincke, like to be killed, was reſcued by his ſonne, who hauing finely gotten him out of ROME, tooke him vp on his ſhoulders, and afterwards led him into SICILIA, where all the poore diſtreſſed ROMAINES were gently receiued: for Pompeius had ſent certaine ſhips to keèpe vpon the coaſt of ITALIE, and pinaſſes euery where, to the end to receiue all them that fled on that ſide: giuing them double recompence that ſaued a Proſcript, and honourable offices to men that had bene Conſuls and eſcaped, comforting and entertaining the others with a moſt ſingular courteſie: many went into MACEDON to Brutus and Caſsius: others into AFRICKE to Cornificius. Some hauing eſcaped the tempeſt that was in the time of Sylla, were euen glutted with this cruelty: as amongſt others, M. Fiduſtius, and Lucius Philuſcius. T. Labienus was one of the number of the murtherers in the proſcription of Sylla. Afterwards he did nothing elſe but go vp and downe with a ſoule poſſeſſed with furies: ſo that being weary of his life at this time, he went and ſate in a chaire at his gate, quietly attending that they ſhould put him in the number of them that ſhould be killed. Statius Samnis, an honourable Senator, being foureſcore yeares old: becauſe theeues ſhould haue no part of his goods, he left them in pray whoſoeuer would take them: and afterwards ſet his houſe on fire, and burnt himſelfe within it. Aponius being kept a good while by his ſlaues, was ſo weary to be ſhut vp in a troubleſome place, and where he liued very poorely: that he came out to the market place, and held out his throat to the murtherers. Ceſtius being poſſeſſed with the like griefe, cauſed his ſlaues to make a great fire, and then caſt himſelfe in it. Sulpitius Rufus, a man that had bene Conſull died, becauſe of an Ile of his the which he would not ſell vnto Fuluia: as alſo Ampius Balbus, for that he refuſed to giue this woman a pleaſant place of his. Balbus was betrayed by a ſeruant of his, that ſhortly after was hanged vpon a gibbet by ſentence of the people: and ſo had his reward for his villanous fact. Antonius did put in the number of Proſcripts a Senator called Nonius Struma, and onely to get out of his hands an Emerode eſteemed at fiftie thouſand crownes. But Nonius found the meanes to eſcape with this Emerode to the great deſpite of him that greedily deſired this pray. Some valiantly defended themſelues, as Atteius Capito, that killed many ſouldiers running rudely vpon him, thinking he would haue ſuffered himſelfe to be killed as others were. Howbeit after he had ſold his fleſh deare, he was ouercome by multitude of aſſailants. Vetulinus aided with his ſonne, hauing many times valiantly repulſed the murtherers, he would haue ſaued himſelfe in SICILIA: but in the ſtraight he met with ſuch a number of enemies, that there he was killed. Sicilius Coronas a Senator, was put in the number of Proſcripts, becauſe he would not with others condemne Brutus and Caſsius: deuiſing how to eſcape, he put himſelfe in ranke among thoſe that caried a dead corpes to buriall: but he was diſcouered and put to death. The Triumviri appointed ſuch men as they liked of to take charge of them that had bene killed. They ſold the goods of the Proſcripts by the drumme, at ſuch price as the ſouldiers would: and yet the moſt part of them were ſpoiled and giuen away. They promiſed the widowes their ioynter, and to the ſonnes the tenth part of the patrimonie of their fathers, and to the daughters the twentieth part. Howbeit there were few, and in maner none, that had any benefite by that: but to the contrarie, they ſacked many that demaunded ſuch rights. On the other ſide, they did

exact great ſummes of money vpon the citie of ROME, and ouer all ITALIE: the owners were conſtrained to giue the halfe of their yearely reuenue: the tenants to furniſh one yeares rent of that they held of others: the maiſters of houſes, the halfe of the rent of their houſes, according to the rent they went for. To encourage the ſouldiers, the Triumuiri gaue vnmeaſurable gifts, granted them daily new pillage: the legions wintered in the richeſt townes, who were compelled to feed the ſouldiers at their owne charge. Furthermore, all the rich men were conſtrained to pay in nature of a tribute at one time, the tenth part of all that they were woorth. To be ſhort, ſo that they could find out new inuentions, it was enough to exact mony. For the feare and cuſtome to endure all, had faſhioned men to be more ſlaues, then the murtherers and exactors would haue had them. And to cloſe vp all, the Triumuiri cauſed mony to be coyned: the which on the one ſide had the image of Antonius with an inſcription in Latine, the effect whereof is this: M. Antonius Emperor, Augur, Triumuir, for the eſtabliſhment of the commonwealth. And on the other ſide there were three hands ioyned together, with the markes of the Conſulſhip, and had theſe words: Salus generis humani, that is to ſay: The health of mankind.
            Now during the cruelties of this Triumuirate, Brutus and his followers made themſelues ſtrong in MACEDON, and did diuers exploits of warre: and were afterwards ouercome in the fields PHILIPPIANS, as hath bene ſaid in the life of Brutus, which we need not rehearſe againe, the principall being comprehended there. After this victorie, Antonius went into the Eaſt to diſpoſe of his affaires in ASIA, and to leauie money there to pay his ſouldiers, hauing promiſed to euery one of them fiue hundred crownes. Caeſar returned into ITALIE to refreſh himſelfe, to aſſigne Colonies to his ſouldiers, to pacifie the troubles Lepidus had procured, and to ſet a pike betwixt him and Pompey at a need: if he were neuer ſo litle in league with him. Caeſar fell grieuouſly ſicke at BRVNDVSIVM: but being recouered againe he entred into ROME, pacified all things, and kept Lepidus in his wonted degree. But when he came to bring his ſouldiers into Colonies, then the ſtorme began to riſe: for the owners cryed out that they were tyrannized, being driuen out of their inheritances: the old ſouldiers they complained that promiſe was not kept with them. Fuluia and ſome others practiſed to ſet them on, to the end to draw a warre into ITALIE, and by this meanes to make Antonius come againe beſotted by Cleopatra. Theſe things proceeded ſo farre that Fuluia tooke armes, for ſhe was then in the campe, her ſword by her ſide, and commanded like a Captaine. Caeſar on the other ſide being angry, ſent her daughter home to her, vnto whom he was betrothed, and led his armie againſt the NVRSINIANS and SENTINATES the allies of Fuluia. In the meane ſpace Lucius Antonius departed in the night with ſpeed, and entred into ROME by treaſon: vſed it as a citie taken in warre, and draue out Lepidus. Caeſar left Suluidienus to beſiege the SENTINATES, returned to ROME, and draue out Lucius, followed him and ſhortened his iourney as he was going into GAVLE, ſhut him vp, and beſieged him a great time in PEROVSE, and compelled him through famine to yeeld himſelfe, and to craue pardon, which he graunted him. PEROVSE was burnt by a ſtrange accident: for one of the chiefeſt of the citie hauing ſet his houſe on fire, after he had wounded himſelfe with his dagger, a boiſterous wind being riſen vpon it, ſo diſperſed the flames abrode, that it burnt all the houſes beſides. Caeſar cauſed ſome of his Captaines to be killed that were againſt him. He condemned the NVRSINIANS in a great ſumme of money, and becauſe they could not pay it, he draue them out of their citie and territorie. Afterwards he ſuppreſſed ſome troubles raiſed in NAPLES by Tiberius Claudius Nero, father of Tiberius Caeſar, and fauourer of Fuluia: who ſeeing her ſelfe vnder foot, ſhe fled vnto ATHENS. But Caeſar to preuent a new conſpiracie, ſent Lucius Antonius far from ROME, to commaund the legions that were in SPAINE: he gaue him alſo commiſſioners to looke into him, and to obſerue his actions. He finely draue out Lepidus alſo into AFRICK with ſixe legions. On the other ſide Fuluia being dead, Caeſar and Antonius agreed being ready to fight: after that they made peace with Pompey that gouerned SICILIA. Immediatly after that he went into GAVLE, to appeaſe ſome troubles that happened there, and ſent Agrippa before, who compelled the AQVITANS to ſubmit themſelues, and pacified al GAVLE. On the other ſide Cneus Caluinus ſubdued the CERETANIANS in SPAINE. And becauſe the legions had committed certaine inſolencies, whereupon they fell together by the eares, and the enemies had the better hand: after he had ſharpely reproued them, he took the tenth man of the two firſt bands, and belaboured Iubellius with a cudgell. In the mean time Caeſar ſent at times troupsof men of armes into DALMATIA, and ILLYRIA, to the end to breath them for other warres that were a hatching, as that of SICILIA

was the firſt. For Menas the pyrat, Sextus Pompeius Lieutenant, hauing for deſpite brought his fleet vnto Caeſar, and taken his part, vnto whom alſo he deliuered the Iles of SARDINIA and CORSICA, with three legions: Caeſar did him great honors, & refuſed to deliuer him againe vnto Pompey, who asked him of him. Beſides that Pompey complained of Antonius, and pretending to haue iuſt occaſions, he tooke armes againe. Wherfore Caeſar ſent for Antonius and Lepidus out of GRECE and AFRICKE to come and aide him. Antonius came to the hauen of BRVNDVSIVM: but vpon the ſudden, not knowne wherfore, he tooke ſea againe, & returned from whence he came. Lepidus came too late, which made Caeſar (ſeeing all the weight fall on his armes) that he ſent his Lieutenants againſt Pompey: who fought with them by ſea & by land, & had the better, and put Caeſar to great trouble, who had like to haue bin killed by a ſlaue alſo, that wold haue reuēged the death of his maiſters father, that was a proſcript. After that Antonius being come to TARENTVM, with intention to make war againſt Caeſar: Octauia ſiſter of the one, and wife of the other, agreed them, ſo that they did yet prolong with Lepidus their Triumuirate for fiue yeares more. Antonius went againſt the PARTHIANS, and Caeſar prepared to ſet vpon Pompey againe. Hereupon Menas being angry for that he was not ſo well accounted of as he thought he deſerued: he returned againe to ioyne with Pompey with 7. gallies. Caeſars fleet hauing ſuſtained great hurt by tempeſt, was alſo beaten by Menas. Lepidus wan LILYBEE, & tooke certaine neighbor villages. Caeſar hauing repaired his ſhips and army by ſea, and made it ſtronger then before vnder the conduct of Agrippa, who ſailed vnto LIPARE, he gaue battell by ſea vnto Pompeys Lieutenants. But they being aided by Menas (that was returned the ſecond time) he ouercame and wan thirtie ſhippes. But the other fleet that Caeſar himſelfe brought, was wholly ouerthrowne by Pompey, neare vnto TAVROMENION, and Caeſar brought to that extremitie, that he was readie to kill himſelfe. But Cornificius ran to the ſhore who ſaued him, and brought him to the campe: from whence he retired further off, and very quickly (but with great daunger) vnto MESSALA. After certaine encounters where Pompey euer had the better, inſomuch as Lepidus was ſuſpected to leane on that ſide, Caeſar reſolued to commit all to the hazard of a latter battell: and to draw Pompey vnto it, he cut him ſo ſhort of victuals, that he was conſtrained to come to blowes, and the fight was verie cruell: wherein Agrippa beſtirred himſelfe ſo valiantly, that he wan the victorie, ſunke 28. ſhips, brake and ſpoiled the moſt part of the reſt, and tooke two of the chiefeſt Captaines Pompey had: one of the which called Demochares, killed himſelfe with his owne hands. Now for Pompey, who but a litle before had about three hundred and fiftie ſaile, he fled away with all ſpeed only with ſeuenteene, and went to MESSINA ſo diſcouraged, that leauing all hope and his armie he had by land, he went to the Ile of CEPHALONIE, where being ſomewhat come to himſelfe, he determined to repaire to Antonius. But Tiſienus a Frenchman (his lieutenāt of the armie by land) led all his troupes vnto Lepidus: ſome GREEKE hiſtorians report that it was to Caeſar. Plemminius was within MESSINA with eight legions, and did capitulate with Lepidus to render vp the towne to him: wherupon Agrippa hapned to come thither: who maintained, that they ought to regard Caeſar that was abſent then. But that ſtood him in no ſtead, for Lepidus entred the towne, & gaue the ſpoile of it as well to Plemminius ſoldiers as to his. Therupon Caeſar vndertooke a thing worthie of memory, which was: that being vnarmed he went into Lepidus campe, & turning by the blows of the darts that were thrown at him by ſome, which hit his cloke & pierced it: he took hold of an enſigne of a legion. Then the ſouldiers all of them armed followed him, and left Lepidus: who ſhortly after loſt empire and army: he that with 20. legions promiſed himſelf SICILIA and a great deale more, Caeſar gaue him his life, and the office of ſoueraigne Biſhop of ROME, whither he ſent him. Some ſay he was baniſhed. Vpō theſe ſtirs there roſe a ſedition in Caeſars campe through the inſolencie of the ſouldiers, that ran euen to his iudgement ſeat, vſing great menaces. But he wiſely appeaſed all, puniſhed the authours of the tumult, and did caſſiere all the tenth legion with great ſhame and ignominie, becauſe the ſouldiers of the ſame did outbraue him in words. He diſperſed and ſent ſome others to their houſes, and gaue vnto them that had vſed themſelues gently, two thouſand Seſterces for euery ſouldier: which is thought to amount neare to fiftie crownes. He made them to be muſtred, and found that they were fiue and fortie legions, fiue and twentie thouſand horſmen, and ſixe and thirtie thouſand lightly armed. Afterwards he did great honours vnto his Lieutenant Agrippa for his notable ſeruice, and commaunded Statilius Taurus to go into AFRICKE to take poſſeſſion of the Prouinces of Lepidus. Whileſt Antonius made warre with the PARTHIANS, or rather infortunately they made

warre with him to his great confuſion: his Lieutenant Titius found the meanes to lay hands vpon Sextus Pompeius that was fled into the Ile of SAMOS, and then fortie yeares old: whom he put death by Antonius commandement: for which fact he was ſo hated of the people of ROME, that though he had giuen them the paſtime of certaine playes at his owne coſts and charges, they draue him out of the Theater.
            Moreouer, Caeſar thinking to haue ſailed out of SICILIA into MAVRITANIA, the ſea being rough ſtayed him: which was the cauſe that he ſent his armie into ILLYRIA, and ſet vpon the IAPVDES, which did him much miſchiefe, yet at the laſt he ouercame them. Then he ranne vpon the PANNONIANS, and the DALMATIANS, whom he made tributaries, being hurt in his thighes, in his armes, and in one of his knees, in this warre againſt the ILLYRIANS. On the other ſide, Meſſala his Lieutenant fought againſt the SALASSIANS, dwelling in a valley enuironed with high mountaines of the Alpes: and after diuerſe ouerthrowes, he made them ſubiect to the Empire. And ſhortly after Caeſar was choſen Conſull the ſecond time: but he reſigned the office the ſame day vnto Autronius Paetus, being about to make himſelfe friends againſt Antonius: who being ſtayed about Cleopatra, gaue his wife occaſion to returne from ATHENS to ROME. Now after the fire of enmitie betwixt theſe two competitours had bene a hatching a certaine time: it ſtood either of them both vpon to ſeeke all the meanes to ouerthrow his companion. The ſtraunge proceedings of Antonius in fauour of Cleopatra haſtened the warre, whereupon followed the battel of ACTIVM, the flying of theſe wicked louers, and the beginning of the Monarchy of Caeſar, confirmed by the conqueſt of AEGYPT, and the tragicall death of Antonius and Cleopatra. The which we touch briefly, the whole being largely ſet downe in the life of Antonius. They did great honours vnto Caeſar after theſe exploits. The memorie of Antonius was condemned, and his ſtatues maimed and throwne to the ground. A litle before, M. Lepidus, ſonne of the Trium-vir and of Iunia ſiſter of Brutus, conſpired againſt Caeſar. But after they had diſcouered it, he was put to death by the wiſedome of C. Maecenas a knight, and gouernor of ROME: his wife Seruilia killed her ſelfe, as Portio the wife of Brutus. After the vtter ouerthrow of Antonius, Caeſar tooke order for the affaires of the Eaſt parts, he made alliance with Herodes king of IVDAEA. He ſent the king of the PARTHIANS ſonne in hoſtage to ROME, vntill they ſhould ſend all the enſignes and ſtandards they had wonne of Craſſus and Antonius. He gouerned the affaires of ASIA, receiued into league and friendſhid with him the kings of GALATIA, CAPPADOCIA, & PAPHLAGONIA: & he puniſhed ſome others by fines, that were not his friends. He gaue priuiledges to the cities of EPHESVS, of NICE, PERGAME, and BITHYNIA, to build temples in the honour of Iulius Caeſar, of ROME, and of himſelfe. He ſet the SAMIANS at liberty, and after he had taken order for all the reſt, he went towards ITALIE: where after he was arriued, it cannot be expreſſed with what great ioy he was receiued of high and low, from BRVNDVSIVM vnto ROME. There he triumphed three dayes together, for the ILLYRIANS, for Antonius and for Cleopatra. He gaue great preſents vnto ſouldiers, and beſides the mony that was made of the booty, and diſtributed by euen portions, he gaue euery one fiftie crowns a peece, the double to a Centener, and the treble to a Knight: and to euerie perſon among the people ten crowns, euen to litle children. He brought ſuch ſtore of gold and ſiluer out of AEGYPT (by him reduced into a prouince, and condemned to pay twenty millions of gold to the people of ROME for a fine) that he brought downe vſurie from twelue in the hundred, to foure: and made that land and houſes were ſold deare, where before the rich men had them almoſt for nothing. Furthermore, he brought in a maruellous change in all trafficke: he alſo aboliſhed all taxes and ſubſidies impoſed by neceſſity of the ciuill warres. He cried downe all ſtraunge coine, which were at too high a price for their law, and all through the iniquity of time. He lent out money for a time without intereſt, vnto thoſe that had meanes to make double profite of it. He would not receiue the gold which the cities of ITALIE ſent him to make him crownes: but ſent them it backe againe with his thankes for their good will. He gaue the paſtime of all maner of games and magnificent ſights vnto the people, ſuch as they had neuer ſeene before. He made goodly feaſts vnto the Senators and Magiſtrates, and by a world of pleaſures he appeaſed the ſorow of proſcription, and of ſo many ciuill warres. Being occupied in theſe matters, letters came from Craſſus Caeſars Lieutenant, aduertiſing that he had ſubdued the BASTARNES, diuerſe people of MAESIA, of DACIA, and of THRACIA: that he had won ſeuen or eight battels of them, that with his owne hands he had killed the king of the BASTARNES, and had brought the king of GETES to ſuch extremity,

that he killed himſelfe. Theſe newes did increaſe the ioy, and the triumph was granted to Craſſus, and to Caeſar alſo: who by decree of the Senate cauſed the temple of Ianus to be ſhut the third time, which had remained open the ſpace of 200 yeares. At this time Caeſar that was in his fift Conſulſhip, numbred and muſtred all the people of ROME, reformed the Senate, the order of knights, the diſtribution of corne: and becauſe of the great dearth that was then, he made come to be diſtributed to the people at a very meane price to ſome, & for gramercy to the poore. They that had bene bound to the common wealth of too long a time, he diſcharged them, and burnt their obligations. He confirmed the propriety of houſes in ſtrife betwixt them and the common wealth, if they had bene in quiet poſſeſſion any conuenient time. And to aſſure all thoſe that had adhered vnto Antonins, & to keepe them that they ſhould no more giue eare to any new rumors: he ſware vnto them in good faith that hauing taken Antonins coffers, he had burnt all the letters he found in them, and read not one of them. He ſet downe an order for Cuſtome, eaſed the cuſtomers that had bene too much oppreſſed: alſo he reſtored the treaſure againe, and the augure of health. And by reaſon of that aboue named, he was called father of the countrey in open Senate: and at the ſame time he ſent people to CARTHAGE, to ſet vp the families of the Patricians, greatly diminiſhed by the proſcriptions and ciuill warres.
            The next yeare following, which was the 725 of the foundation of ROME, and the ſixt of his Conſulſhip: ſeeing all the wars appeaſed, peace eſtabliſhed, armes laid downe euery where, the cōmonwealth in good ſtrength, the laws honored, iuſtice in authority, the Senate in their anciēt glory, & the people reſtored by him to their rights of aſſembly to chuſe their yearly magiſtrates, and to giue out their commiſſions & charges according to their old cuſtome: he began to reaſon the matter with himſelfe, which of the twaine was moſt profitable: either to keepe (for the good of the ſtate, and vnder the title of a Prince) the Empire which he had in his hands: or whether he ſhould render it vp vnto the people. He found himſelfe grieued for that Antonius had oftentimes accuſed him of tyranny & vniuſt inuaſion: and on the other part alſo he apprehended the fury of the people, and the factions of ambitious men, which like the billowes of the ſea, would incontinently toſſe in horrible faſhion this vnconſtant ſea. Being thus perplexed, one day he tooke aſide Agrippa and C. Maecenas, his two faithfull friends, very wiſemen and of great experience aboue all others: and prayed them to tell him plainly without flattery, what they thought of it, being reſolued to follow that which ſhould be moſt expedient for the good of the commonwealth. Agrippa by an ample diſcourſe did counſell him to render vp to the people his principality and ſigniority. Maecenas was of the contrary opinion, & gaue ſuch counſell as Caeſar followed, tempering both opinions, & made himſelfe maſter in ſuch ſort that the people felt it not, but rather confeſſed that they needed ſuch a Phiſition to raiſe thē vp againe from the incurable maladies they were fallen into. He thanked both his friends, gaue his neece Marcella to be the wife of Agrippa, and did him new honours, proceedeth to a new reuiew of the citizens of ROME: and is choſen Prince of the Senate by Agrippa, who was then his companion in the Conſulſhip. Furthermore, aſſuring himſelfe that ſo much good and honours as had bene communicated to the ſmall and great, would make them they ſhould not much paſſe for their ancient dignitie and liberty: and that the ſweetneſſe of the eaſe and reſt they did enioy, would make them forget all the good and euill paſt: he borowed of his magnanimitie the maruellous counſell that followeth. He reſolued to diſcharge himſelfe of the principality into the hands of all the Senate, to render it vnto the people: hoping that the Senate ſeeing his affection ſo to ſubmit himſelfe to the accuſtomed order, & not to ſeeke a domination and gouernment ill-willed, they would thanke him the more: that all the great perſons would lay aſide the enuy which they might beare vnto him, and that the people would eſteeme and loue him ſo much the more. Vpon this thought, and after he had acquainted ſome of the Senators withall that ſtood affected to him, to the end to win others by their meanes, he made an oration in open Senate, well ſtudied, and fit for the time. Hauing made a long diſcourſe of the great extent of the Empire, and of his inſufficiency: he added vnto it, that this common burthen could not be caried but by the immortall gods: that he had continued ſome yeares to manage a part of it, and that experience had made him know that his ſhoulders were too weake to beare ſuch a burthen as the principalitie, ſubiect to infinite changes, and expoſed to a thouſand ambuſhes. He therefore required, the citie being furniſhed with ſo many noble perſons, that the affaires might be managed by many men, who ioyning themſelues together, might more eaſily ſatisfie the charges, then one alone: that in a good hower,

hauing ſet all things in good eſtate againe, he did put the common wealth into the hands of the Senate and people of ROME. This oration diuerſly moued the Senators. Some of them thought there was more art then truth in it. Others iudged that it was not expedient to put the eſtate into the power of many. The moſt of them enriched and made great by Caeſar, and that were riſen vp by the ruines of their countrey, ſayd: that they ſhould preferre that which now they had in hand, before all the time paſt, beaten with ſo many tempeſts. Many others enclined to that ſide, not that they were in good earneſt of that mind, but for feare to be looked vpon with an euill eye, if they did ſpeake againſt their companions. So then all of them with one conſent vnaduiſedly, rather then of a common and ripe iudgement, began to beſeechand adiure Caeſar, that it would pleaſe him to be chiefe and preſeruer of the Empire, of the which he had ſet downe ſo many goodly and happy foundations. Immediatly they ordaine that Caeſars guard ſhould haue twiſe as much pay as they had before. Agrippa was of opinion that they ſhould caſſeere the SPANISH gard, and Caeſar in their place ſhould chuſe a gard of ALMAINES, knowing well that in thoſe great bodies there was litle malice hidden, and leſſe ſubtilty: and that they were a people that tooke more pleaſure to be commanded, then to command.
            He being thus eſtabliſhed in his Empire by the conſent of the Senate and people, to the end they ſhould not thinke he would lift himſelfe vp aboue meaſure, or to giue ſure footing to a perpetuall Monarchie: he would not accept the charge to prouide for the affaires of eſtate, and the gouernement of the Prouinces, but for the ſpace of ten yeares: with condition to giue vp his charge before this terme, if things were ſooner ſetled in their full eſtate. Firſt therefore, he left a part of the Prouinces vnto the Senate and people, to take care for the gouernement of the ſame: and for himſelfe he kept thoſe that were not yet in order, and in the which he ſhould be driuen to make warre. In thoſe that were quiet, he eſtabliſhed Proconſuls: and for others, he gouerned them by his Lieutenants, which had their leſſon, according vnto the which they were bound to be directed. Among other lawes they were forbidden to leauie any money, or to gather men of warre together, or to aſſaile any Prouince, without the commandement of the Senate, or of Caeſar. That foorthwith when they ſent any ſucceſſour, they ſhould leaue their gouernement, and repaire to ROME within three moneths. He appointed alſo vnto the Proconſuls a certaine ſumme of money to beare their charges for their horſe and cariage of the ſtuffe. Furthermore he eſtabliſhed a law that the Proconſull or gouernour ſhould not go to his Prouince appointed him, till the end of fiue yeares after his commiſſion graunted him: to the end that they which were conuinced for taking of money corruptly, ſhould pay to the Prouinces the fine they ſhold be condemned: in and he depriued them of all eſtates and honors, which through their euill behauiours had bene condemned in ſuch fines. And further, he would not that the officers that had to deale in his affaires ſhould haue any authoritie, but to demaund their ſtipends and money which the Prouinces were bound to furniſh. And becauſe he would beautifie and adorne ROME, as the maieſtie of the Empire required: he raiſed vp many common buildings, and repaired many that had bene left vnfiniſhed or ruined, leauing the names of the founders. His buildings among other were the temple of Apollo in the pallace, with the porch, and a librarie of GREEKE and Latin books. Alſo the Monuments, and the park, for the walkes and pleaſure of the people of ROME. In his ſeuenth Conſulſhip, certaine Senators propounded that they ſhould call him Romulus, for that he hauing preſerued the citie of ROME, it was as much bound vnto him, as vnto the firſt founder. But he would not accept of that name. Wherefore Munatius Plancus bethought himſelfe of another, the which was giuen vnto him by common conſent of all, and he held it to his death: as alſo we will call him from henceforth in all that remaineth to be ſet downe of his deeds: to wit Augustus. He not to ſeeme vnworthy of this name, and to cary himſelf ſo that no man ſhold repent this change of gouernement, began diligently to ſet his hand to theſe affaires. He wiſely reformed the auncient lawes, and made new, that were very neceſſary. To make ſure worke in theſe affaires, he choſe from ſixe moneths to ſixe moneths fifteene Senators that had bene Conſuls, and did priuately acquaint them with all that was requiſite to be done for the preſeruation of the quietneſſe of the commonweath, giuing order that nothing ſhould paſſe but it ſhould be ſearched and examined to the bottome: ſaying that he would giue the people lawes which they ſhould all allow, and that he would not be his owne iudge alone. Afterwards he reformed the aſſemblies of the city, where all things were caried by ſutes, preſents, and violence. He then reſtored the people their

right by voices to chuſe the magiſtrates. And to cut off all ſutes, he forbad them to make any rolle of ſuters names, but of thoſe that had layd downe great ſummes of money, to the end that being conuinced of their ſutes, they ſhould be put to their fines: adding alſo this ignominy, that ſuch ſhould be depriued of all eſtates & honors for the ſpace of fiue yeares. And furthermore, he finely hindred the bad practiſes in elections, giuing order that none ſhould be put in nomination, but ſuch as were vertuous and of good reputation. He left vnto the Magiſtrates their charges whole, and did alwayes require in al his Conſulſhips that they ſhold giue him two companions: howbeit the Senate wold neuer agree vnto it. The yeare before, he had reduced the nūber of Senators to ſixe hundred, all honourable men. At that time alſo he reeſtabliſhed the auncient order and dignitie: ordaining that the Senate ſhould haue the ſuperintendencie of the treaſure, and of all the reuenues that belonged to the people of ROME. That all the expences for the commonwealth ſhold be made by their ordinance. That the Senators ſhould haue the hearing of all crimes of treaſon, conſpiracie, ambuſhes, and offences to his Maieſties perſon: and that it ſhould pertaine to them to giue entertainement and anſwer that ſhould be fit, to Ambaſſadors of nations. When in matters of importance he asked the aduice of the Senate, in ſtead of comming to the Prince of the Senate according to the accuſtomed manner, or to him that was appointed Conſull, or to other Senatours by order: he made choiſe of any one of them which he thought good, to the end that euery one ſhould giue attentiue eare, and be readie to deliuer his opinion: and not to hold his head downe in his rancke, and content himſelfe to be of other mens minds. He ordained alſo, that the whole bodie of the Senate ſhould not aſſemble but from fifteene dayes to fifteenes dayes: howbeit that in ordinarie matters the magiſtrates ſhould thinke of that that were expedient. In the moneths of September and October, the Senatours were not bound to meete, but onely foure hundred drawne by lot: who might eſtabliſh any decree. And as for himſelfe, to honour this company the more, the day of the aſſembly he neuer ſaluted any of the Senators apart, but all of them together in the counſell chamber when they were ſet, and all of them name by name, the one after the other. If he would go out, and that he ſayd he would detaine the companie no longer: he bad them farewell in the ſame manner that he had ſaluted them at his comming in. He ruled iuſtice alſo ciuill and criminall, and willed that amongſt other things the criminals accuſed by certaine enemies, ſhould be ſet at libertie: with condition notwithſtanding that they ſhould be brought to priſon againe, if the accuſer did ſubmit himſelfe to receiue the like puniſhment as the offender, if it were found he ſlaundered him. Moreouer, he made prouiſion for common workes, and reparations of bridges, cauſeyes, and high wayes. And becauſe he was determined to make a voyage into GAVLE, he eſtabliſhed Meſſala gouernour of ITALIE and of ROME, for feare leaſt any trouble ſhould happen in his abſence. But this place being troubleſome vnto Meſſala, he beſought Auguſtus he would diſcharge him: and therefore Agrippa was ſubſtituted, who ridde all ITALIE of a great number of theeues and robbers on high wayes, and ſtayed the courſes of many other troublers of the ſtate.
            The affaires of ROME and ITALIE being in ſo quiet eſtate, vnderſtanding that ENGLAND was full of ſedition, SPAINE next vnto the mountaines PIRENEI in armes, and GAVLE readie to riſe: he opened the temple of Ianus, and tooke his iourney to giue order for all. But the Ambaſſadours of ENGLAND preuented him, and promiſed tribute. Then he went to GAVLE in NARBONE, to draw nearer to SPAINE. And ſo holding on his iourney to NARBONE, he pacified the GAVLES, he made an exact numbring of all the GAVLES, of their goods, poſſeſſions, and ſlaues, and cauſed the rolles to be brought vnto him. He eſtabliſhed lawes and cuſtomes in euery place, and deuided GAVLE into foure parts: of the which the firſt part was called NARBONENSE, which extendeth it ſelfe from the riuer of Var, vnto the mountaines PIRENEI. AQVITAIN the ſecond, vnto the riuer of GARONNE. The third, GAVLE LYONNOISE, vnto the riuer of Seine. Then GAVLE BELGICA, bordered with the riuer of Rhein: and rated all the GAVIS at ten milions of gold for a taxe. Now there remained no more for him to do, but to bring SPAINE to order: in the which the ROMAINES had made continuall warres the ſpace of 200 yeares together. Neuertheleſſe the CANTABRIANS and ASTVRIANS (which are the BASQVES) and other people neighbors dwelling in the mountaines, they neither cared for Auguſtus, nor for the Empire: for they were euer in armes, and made incurſions vpon the allies of the people of ROME, and did them great miſchiefe: who complaining vnto Auguſtus of the great neceſſity they

were brought vnto, he being neare vnto them, came to aide them: and found the CANTABRIANS beſieging of a fort, hauing taken the towne by it called SAGESAME. He charged them home with ſuch furie, that he left them dead in the place, after they had valiantly defended themſelues. Afterwards he deuided his armie into three parts, and enuironed the countrie of the CANTABRIANS, who made head for the ſpace of fiue yeares, and did maruellous great hurt to the ROMAINES: and if the ſtreights wherby they might eaſily enter into their countrie, had not bene diſcouered vnto Aguſtus, they had ſent him home againe to ROME with ſhame. But hauing found the way to ſurpriſe them on euery ſide, he made a cruell warre vpon them, putting all to fire and bloud. They retired with ſpeed to one of their higheſt mountaines, with all that they could carie with them. The ROMAINES perceiuing that it was too hard a match for them, if they ſhould go thither to ſet vpon ſo warlike a nation, and that could not be ſubdued by force: they made forts in the midſt of the mountaine, and placed a ſtrong guard there, to the end to famiſh the CANTABRIANS, and by that means to bring them to reaſon. But they on the other ſide, in ſtead of yeelding themſelues, did abide all the miſeries that any man can poſſibly thinke of: and it came to that paſſe, that euen to ſuſtaine nature the ſtrong ſonnes killed their old fathers, the mothers their infants, and the young men did deuour the old to eate vp their fleſh. Vpon this euill, there followed another, to wit, diſcord among them. Some would yeeld, others were of another mind. The former alleaging, that they muſt needs ſubmit themſelues to the mercie of the ROMAINES: the other, that they ſhould make a deſperate ſallie vpon the enemies campe, and ſo ſell their liues. Their contention waxed ſo hote and violent, that the CANTABRIANS thruſt out ten thouſand of the ASTVRIANS with their wiues and children, and compelled them to deſcend alongſt the forts made by the ROMAINES: whom they intreated with the teares in their eyes to make them ſlaues, and to giue them ſomewhat to eate. Tiberius then one of Caeſars Lieutenants, would not ſuffer them to be receiued, to the end to famiſh the one by the other, and to end this warre without any bloudſhed. This poore people being depriued of ſuſtenance and hope, and being afraid they ſhould yet endure greater euils, began to powne a venimous hearbe like vnto Smallage, and poiſoned themſelues. The young men killed themſelues running one againſt another with their ſwords in their hands. The others, to the number of three and twenty thouſand came downe in a moſt miſerable eſtate from the top of the mountaine, and yeelded themſelues to the diſcretion of the ROMAINES: who ſet aſide ten thouſand of the ſtrongeſt of them, to ſerue them in the warre which they intended to make againſt the ASTVRIANS. The reſt were ſold by troups, with condition that they ſhould be caried farre from their countrie, and that they ſhould not be made free, before they had ſerued them as ſlaues the ſpace of thirtie yeares. They diſarmed ten thouſand of them: which they bare ſo impatiently, that many killed themſelues with their owne hands, eſteeming their life nothing without armes. They ſay, that a litle child with a dagger killed his father and brethren that were chained together, and that by the commaundement of the father: and that a woman did the like to ſome of her kinsfolkes. And that many of theſe mountainers accuſtomed to rob paſſengers, being vpon the gibbet, ſang out ſongs aloud, euen at their deaths, ſhewing a ioy and maruellous courage. Augustus being then in thoſe parts, gaue leaue to the ſouldiers of his guard of SPANIARDS to depart into the territorie of the GASCONS with great preſents, and priuiledge to enter in rancke amongſt the ROMANE legions. He built SARAGOVSSE, and other townes which he repleniſhed with ſouldiers, to bridle the courſes and tumults of the CELTIBERIANS: and afterwards made a ſtone bridge ouer the famous riuer of Eber.
Then hauing ouerthrowne the CONISCES, friends of the ASTVRIANS, taken their head citie, and put all the inhabitants thereof to the ſword: he ſet vpon the ASTVRIANS, who being enuironed of all parts, and chooſing rather to die then to be made ſlaues: burnt, killed, and poiſoned themſelues, and with them many other of their neighbours. There were ſome of them yet left aliue, with whom the CANTABRIANS ioyned and other their neighbours, and that a long time. Theſe people had this cuſtome, that all goods were common amongſt friends, and when one of them came to the other, he receiued and vſed him as himſelf: and ſo alſo in aduerſitie they ran one fortune, or elſe killed themſelues immediatly after their friends were dead. Amongſt them were certaine looſe people gathered together out of diuers parts, who reſolued all together to go charge the ROMAINES, and came to fight with ſuch a furie, that nothing but the night could ſeparate them, hauing loſt many of both ſides. The next morning they began to ioyne againe with more violence then before, and the fight continued euen till night that the ROMAINES obtained the

victorie: but they confeſſed that they neuer encountred with ſuch cruell enemies. They that were left aliue fled into a towne, in the defence whereof they made themſelues all to be killed, rather then to yeeld themſelues. Augustus built certaine places there in that countrie, which afterwards by time were much enlarged. In this ſelfe ſame yeare of his ninth Conſulſhip, Terentius Varro his Lieutenant ſubdued the SALASSIANS, which are thoſe of the vale of OSTE: he diſarmed them, ſold the young men by the drumme, gaue part of the territorie vnto the ſouldiers Pretorians, & built there a citie called AVGVSTA PRETORIA. Vinicius alſo appeaſed ſome troubles in GERMANIE, and made warre very fortunately in diuers places. By means of which victories, Auguſtus was called the eighth time Imperator, as much to ſay, as ſoueraigne Captaine: and they ſuffered him to weare from that time foorth the firſt day of the yeare, a hat of Laurell, and a robe of triumph. At his returne he ſhut the temple of Ianus the fourth time, maried Cleopatra, (the daughter of Antonius and Cleopatra) vnto Iuba the Storie-writer, ouerthrowne by Iulius Caeſar in AFRICKE, with a part of MAVRITANIA and of GETVLIA to raigne there. He reduced into a prouince GALLOGRECIA and LYCAONIA, which made a portion of a kingdome: and by reaſon of his ſickneſſe not able to be preſent at the mariage of his daughter Iulia, whom Marcellus maried, the ſonne of Octauia his ſiſter: he left all to the charge of Agrippa, and went to ROME. There being choſen Conſull the tenth time, the Senate gaue him abſolute power ouer the eſtate and lawes, to make and vndo them at his pleaſure. They did him greater honours then before, and gaue Marcellus his nephew before his time great offices in the commonwealth: and to Tiberius his wiues ſonne. He in token of thankfulneſſe, gaue to euery one of the people ten crownes apeece. Whileſt theſe matters werein hand, the CANTABRIANS and their neighbours reuolted, by ſubtiltie caught ſome of the ROMAINS, and cut their throates. Aelius Lamia, gouernor in thoſe parts, to be reuenged of this outrage, put all the whole countrie to fire and bloud, deſtroyed ſome townes, and ſold their young men by the drum. To be ſhort, he followed them ſo hard, that he brought them in ſubiection. Aelius Gallus gouernor of AEGYPT, almoſt about the ſame time, being ſent by Auguſtus commaundement with ten thouſand men, fiue hundred ſouldiers of Herods guard, and fifteene hundred NABATEIANS: vnder the conduct of a noble man of ARABIA called Syllaeus: he did nothing to be accounted of, but diſcouer the countrie. But hauing loſt the moſt part of his men within the deſerts where this Sylleus brought them, and ouercome the SABEANS in a battell, he was enforced to retire. Afterwards this Sylleus, for that he killed his king Oboda by treaſon, he was taken priſoner, and beheaded by decree of the Senate.
            
               Auguſtus being Conſull for the eleuenth time, the plague was in ROME, and for himſelfe he was grieuouſly ſicke: but reſtored againe to health by Antonius Muſa his Phiſition. The people therefore cauſed a ſtatue to be ſet vp to this Antonius, the Senate did him great honours, and in fauour of his profeſſion, gaue immunitie to all others that from that time foorth did practiſe Phiſicke. Furthermore, by many ceremonies they did ſhew the ioy they had for the health of Auguſtus: and ſpecially fathers of houſhold dying, expreſly commaunded their children to bring their ſacrifices to the Capitol with a title in great letters, ſaying: THAT AT THE DAY OF THEIR DEATH THEY LEFT AVGVSTVS IN GOOD HEALTH. It was alſo ordained that from that time foorth they ſhould neuer put any man to death, as often as Auguſtus entred into the citie. Shortly after he did aſſociate with himſelfe Calpurnius Piſo in the Conſulſhip, who had followed the partie of Pompey and of Brutus. Afterwards when he was gone from ROME into the countrie, he made Lucius Ceſtius his deputie for him, an inward friend of Brutus and of his memorie. Whereof the Senate maruelling, by decree made him perpetuall Proconſull of the ROMAINE Empire, Tribune of the people, and gaue him power to aſſemble the Senate as often, and when it pleaſed him. The people would haue compelled him to haue bene Dictator: but he bowing a knee, caſting downe his long robe, and ſhewing his breaſt, beſought them to diſcharge him of ſo odious an eſtate. In the meane time he accepted the decree of the Senate, and the charge to cauſe corne to be brought in, becauſe of the dearth that chaunced in ROME. In the which he ſerued his turne by Tiberius created Quaeſtor at the age of nineteene yeares. As for Marcellus his nephew, he was choſen Aedilis Curulus, who aided him to ſet foorth all the magnificent pompe of plaies, which he cauſed to be played before the people: euery man iudged that he ſhould be the ſucceſſor of all his power. But this young man of great hope, died ſhortly after, to the great griefe of euery man: and no man can tell whether it was of naturall ſickneſſe, or of poiſon giuen him by the practiſes of Liuia. A litle before his death, Agrippa impatient to beare the riſing of this Marcellus whom he deſpiſed,

went into ASIA vnder colour of another voyage. They ſay that Auguſtus much troubled with ſickneſſe, returned to his firſt conſultation, to put the commonwealth againe into the hands of the Senate and people: and for this cauſe he called for the Senators and all the the other magiſtrates: vnto whom he gaue an account of the Empire: and that was a litle booke containing the numbring of all the riches, townes, and prouinces allies, legions, armies by ſea and by land, of all the kingdomes and countries tributarie, of all the cuſtoms of the Empire of ROME, that which was neceſſarily to be leauied or releaſed. But being ſomwhat amended againe, he changed his mind. And furthermore, hauing giuen audience to the ambaſſadors of Phrahartes king of the PARTHIANS, which demanded a ſon of his brought by Tyridates vnto Auguſtus: he ſent backe the child, & ſuffered Tyridates to remaine at ROME, where he ſumptuouſly entertained him. By this means he kept himſelfe in friendſhip with the one and the other, and held the PARTHIANS in ſuſpence, to the end they ſhold alter nothing. At the beginning of the next yeare following, vnder the Cō
               ſulſhip of M. Claudius Marcellus, and of L. Arruntius, the famine increaſing at ROME, he wiſely prouided for it. And then the people would conſtraine him by force to accept the Dictatorſhip, and threatned to ſet the pallace on fire and to burne all the Senators in it, if they refuſed to allow this decree. He would none of the office of Dictatorſhip, and did refuſe alſo to be Cenſor, although that office had bene void the ſpace of 28. yeares. But foraſmuch as Munatius Plancus and Aemilius Lepidus, who were choſen Cenſors, deſerued themſelues to be cenſured, becauſe of their diſcords, Augustus without the name tooke vpon him to diſcharge it: and prouided to reforme infinit diſorders that were in ROME, in apparell, countenances, companies, and in the fight of Fencers at the ſharpe. At the ſame time Fannius Caepio, & L. Muraena hauing conſpired againſt him, and being diſcouered by Caſtricius, they were taken as they thought to haue eſcaped, & put to death. In the meane time the ASTVRIANS and CANTABRIANS ill intreated by Cariſius, they rebelled, but were ouercome in a ſet battell, and the priſoners ſold. The CANTABRIANS preferring death before ſeruitude, they killed, burnt, and poiſoned the one the other. The ASTVRIANS being ouercome the fourth time, did ſubmit themſelues: and their armes were taken from them. In the ſame time, Petronius gouernor of AEGYPT, followed with 10000. footmen, and with 800. horſe, went to make warre with the ETHIOPIANS, which dwell vnder AEGYPT, who had inuaded and ruined certaine townes, ouerthrowne and caried away the ſtatues of Auguſtus. Therupon he purſued them, and made them flie before him: took certaine places vpon them, and pierced far into their countrie: ſo that he inforced their Queene to ſend her ambaſſadours vnto Auguſtus (then wintering in the Ile of SAMOS) to pray peace, which he granted them paying tribute.
            At the beginning of the Spring, he prepared himſelfe to giue order for the affaires in the Eaſt: but becauſe they that bent themſelues for the Conſulſhip, had almoſt put the city in alarme, and that in the end notwithſtanding the order he had ſet downe, the people had choſen men whom Auguſtus feared: through the aduice of Maecenas, he made Agrippa come againe to gouerne ROME in his abſence, and maried his daughter Iulia vnto him, Marcellus widow. Now whileſt Agrippa gaue order for the affaires of the citie, Augustus tooke ſea, and hauing prouided for the affaires of SICILIA, he went into GRECE, did much good for the LACEDAEMONIANS, and to the contrarie, repreſſed the pride of the ATHENIANS, from whom he tooke away the tribute they had leauied of the Iles of AEGINA and ERETRIA. In the meane time, though he made litle account of ſtraungers ceremonies, yet he made himſelfe to be receiued into the fraternitie of myſteries: and the ambaſſadors of PERSIA hauing cauſed the temple of Iupiter Olympian to be finiſhed begun of long time in ATHENS: they ordained that it ſhould be dedicated to the ſpirit of Augustus. Being paſſed from thence into ASIA, he gaue order to his prouinces and thoſe of the people of ROME: puniſhed the CYZICENIANS, that had killed the ROMAINE citizens in their town. He impoſed a tribute vpon thoſe of TYRE and SIDON, who had dealt badly, and brought them into the forme of a prouince. He did much good vnto the townes that had bene faithfull vnto the commonwealth: to ſome of them he gaue the right of Burgesſhip of ROME, and to others the ſame rights and priuiledges which the naturall citizens of ROME had. He built vp againe the cities of LAODICEA, and of THIATIRA: he ſet vp them of the Iſle of CHIO againe, afflicted before by an earthquake, he did exempt them from all ſubſidies for ſixe yeares. He reſtored certaine Realmes vnto their kings whom he had ſubdued: or elſe he did ſtabliſh others anew, who came to attend him at his Court as ſubiects, without any ſignes or tokens of royall dignitie. He ſent Tiberius into ARMENIA, to inſtall Tigranes vnto his royall throne againe, hauing bene

driuen out of it. Tiberius returned thither, and hauing fought with the ARMENIANS, he gaue them Artauaſdes for their king, who ruled not long. Phraates king of the PARTHIANS being afraid they would ſet vpon him: was very carefull to get all the ROMAINES together, which were taken after the ouerthrow of Craſſus and Antonius, whom he ſent euery man of them vnto Auguſtus, with all the ſtandards and enſignes, and alſo his ſonne and nephewes for pledges of his faithfull friendſhip vnto the people of ROME. Auguſtus granted him peace, and then he came into the Ile of SAMOS, comforted RHODES, repleniſhed CORINTH and PATRAS with a great number of men enfranchiſed, whom he made Burgeſſes of ROME. In this place alſo there came vnto him embaſſadors from Porus and Pandion, two of the mightieſt kings of the INDIANS, who prayed alliance and friendſhip with him, and brought him very rare preſents. There came with them a philoſopher of INDIA called Zarmanus: who being brought to the citie of ATHENS, he burnt himſelfe aliue, as one Calamus did in the time of Alexander the Great.
            In this meane ſpace the citie of ROME was ful of great trouble by the practiſes of Egnatius Rufus, who by force would needs be choſen Conſull in Auguſtus place being abſent: who gaue not him his voice, but named Lucretius Veſpillo, eſcaped from the proſcription, as hath bene ſpoken of before. But this put him in ſuch a rage, that he conſpired with M. Genucius, and Plautius Rufus to kill Auguſtus. But they being diſcouered betimes, they were impriſoned and executed by decree of the Senate: who made infinite numbers of honours vnto Auguſtus at his returne: howbeit he would not accept them all, but caried himſelfe very modeſtly in euery place where he was. The people choſe him Cenſor for fiue yeares, and perpetuall Conſull: and at his requeſt they graunted triumph vnto Cornelius Balbus, although he were no ROMAINE borne (for he was a SPANIARD) by reaſon of his notable victories he had obtained, as Lieutenant of Auguſtus, vpon the GARAMANTES. Agrippa on the other ſide was ſent into GAVLE troubled by the inuaſions of the GERMAINS, whom he ordered well enough. Then he led his armie into SPAINE, troubled with the rebellion of the CANTABRIANS: the which came thus to paſſe. The priſoners CANTABRIANS whom they had ſold by the drumme: by a complot they made together, cut their maiſters throates, and then fled into their countrie, where they ſollicited others to take armes, got their fortreſſes into their hands, and ſet vpon the ROMAINE garriſons. Agrippa could by no meanes bring his ſouldiers thither, whether that they deſerued to take reſt, or that the reſolution of the CANTABRIANS did aſtoniſh them. But after that he had brought them to his hand, he marched directly againſt the enemies: who had the better at the firſt encounter, and the ROMAINES were well beaten. But they being rebuked and puniſhed by Agrippa, who gaue them barley for wheat, he returned again to fight. But then the CANTABRIANS that bare armes were all cut in peeces, the reſt diſarmed, and drawne from the mountaine to dwell in the plaine. Auguſtus was ſaluted Emperour, or ſoueraigne Captaine, becauſe of this victorie: but Agrippa modeſtly refuſed triumph, and within a while after he ouercame the PANNONIANS alſo. The yeare following, the GETES and DACES being at ciuill warres, Lentulus that had ſubdued them before, counſelled Auguſtus not to loſe this occaſion: for he might eaſily ſubdue theſe barbarous people being thus deuided. But Auguſtus not being of the mind to make any warres at all with any nation, without great and iuſt cauſe, (although there were more hope of gaine, then apparance of loſſe,) he anſwered: There was no cauſe for him to do ſo: adding alſo, that thoſe that ſought a litle gaine with great loſſe and daunger, were like vnto thoſe that would angle with a golden hooke, the which breaking and falling into the water, no fiſh is woorth the value of it. And therefore that the barbarous were to be left to their owne miſeries: and that by their bloudſhed, by their owne companions, they were more then enough puniſhed for the illes they had done the ROMAINES, who ought not to begin firſt to do euill.
            In the ſame yeare Auguſtus being very deſirous to put his hand to the reformation of abuſes in ROME, and that effectually: he ioyned with him his nephew Agrippa in the ſtate of a Cenſor, and did eſtabliſh him Tribune for fiue yeares. Firſt of all he began to correct ſome diſorders that were in the Senate, he reformed the knights, ſpectacles, and playes, and the maner of ſutes for publike offices. He ſet fines vpon their heads that would not marie, and beſtowed much vpon them that had wiues and children. He gaue vnto Hortenſius Hortalus fiue and twentie thouſand crownes, to procure him to take a wife, that he might raiſe vp iſſue to that noble houſe and familie of the Hortenſes. He ordained alſo that maidens ſhould be twelue yeares old at the leaſt before they maried, and ſuffered them to kill adulterers taken with the fact, without puniſhment:

condemning the Sodomites without remiſſion. And for militarie diſcipline, he looked very carefully vnto that. And becauſe a knight of ROME had cut off his owne ſonnes thombes, for that he ſhould not go to the warre: he made him to be ſold by the drumme and all his goods. But becauſe the Regrators were greedie to ſeize vpon them, he made them ceaſe the ſale, and put the knight into the hands of one of his bondmen enfranchiſed, and was contented to driue him out of ROME. Furthermore he procured that the Senate ſhould not be kept but with great reuerence: that the Senators ſhould come together as into a temple of deuotion, and that no decree ſhould paſſe, but in the preſence of 400. Senators if it might be: that no man ſhould be made free of ROME, but vpon great conſideration. For the reſt: he and Agrippa gaue the people the pleaſure of ſecular yearely games, which had not bene ſeene a hundred yeares before. But he tooke very great care that there ſhould be no inſolencies committed. He puniſhed the players in diuers ſorts, that behaued themſelues more licentiouſly then became them. And when one of them amongſt them called him Lord, he ſhewed the people with his voice, his eyes, and his hand, that he was not well pleaſed withall: and the next morning he publiſhed a ſharpe Edict, forbidding all perſons expreſly to ſay ſo, and would neuer ſuffer that any of his ſhould giue him this name. But theſe playes being ended, he adopted Caius and Lucius the ſonnes of Agrippa. In all this great buſines, the SICAMBRES, VSIPETES, & TENCHTERES, people of GERMANIE, ſurprized certaine ROMAINS in their territorie, hanged them vp, paſſed ouer the Rhein, ſpoiled GAVLE, ouerthrew certaine horſemen, and following their purpoſe, ouercame M. Lollius Proconſull of GAVLE, and tooke away an enſigne from him. Yet though he were a man of ſmall action and very couetous: neuertheleſſe he was reuenged of them, and coming vpon the inuadors, fought with them, and draue them beyond the Rhein. On the other ſide, C. Lentulus made war with the DACES, & killed three of their chiefe leaders with a great number of men: and afterwards he eſtabliſhed a garriſon by the riuer of Danuby, to ſtop the incurſiōs of this wild nation. Auguſtus ſeeing theſe troubles, diſpoſed of the affaires of ITALIE to go into GAVLE, to rid himſelfe of theſe griefes, & by his abſence to make his preſence more honorable. At that ſame time, diuers people inhabiting vpon the riuer of Danuby rebelled: but Auguſtus Lieutenants beſtirred them ſo well, that they were all compelled to ſeeke peace. At that time alſo all GAVLE was in commotion, and that in diuers ſorts. But the couetouſneſſe of Licinius Enceladus, made free, and ſoliciter of the affaires of Auguſtus, was cauſe of all this miſchiefe. For he hauing commaunded the people to furniſh the tribute for euery moneth, he had put fourteene moneths in the yeare for twelue. So being accuſed to his maiſter for money ill gotten, although all the world cryed out of him, yet he found the meanes to eſcape well enough. For after he had gotten an infinite maſſe of gold and ſiluer togther, he brought it to Auguſtus, ſaying, he had neuer other intention but to take from the GAVLES the meanes to rebell. For all this Auguſtus withdrew him from thence, and ſent Tiberius thither to ſettle all things in good eſtate againe. Almoſt during theſe commotions, and outragious diſſentions, the RHETIANS, neare vnto the lake of Come, they brake into GAVLE, CISALPINE, and tooke out of ITALIE ſtore of boote. They were a people ſeparated from all others, and ſo cruell, that hauing taken any place from the ROMAINES, they killed all the male children, and further, did aske their ſoothſayers of women with child: and if they ſaid ſhe was great with a boy, they preſently ran her through, and killed her and the fruit of her wombe. Auguſtus would not endure theſe outrages, but ſent Druſus the ſonne of Liuia againſt them: who draue them out of ITALIE, hauing ouercome them in a ſet battell, neare vnto TRENT. They ſay that their women ſhewed themſelues ſo cruell in this fight, that their darts failing them, they tooke their litle children by their legges, and did moſt barbarouſly force themſelues to ſmite their enemies in the face. Thoſe that were driuen out of ITALIE would haue entred into GAVLE, but they were repulſed by Tiberius. In the end, theſe people and their allies were conſtrained to ſubmit themſelues.
            
               Auguſtus ſenta Colonie vnto NISMES in LANGVEDOCKE: and made them free Burgeſſes of ROME. It is thought that he ſent another vnto ARLES, of the ſixtlegion: and one of the ſecond vnto ORANGE. Some make report of theſe Colonies in the time of Tiberius. M. Agrippa on the other ſide, he gaue order for the affaires of ASIA, and of all the Orient, where he behaued himſelfe ſo well, that all that were friends to the people of ROME, were of better courage then before, and all their enemies ſo valiantly ſuppreſſed, that Auguſtus was ſaluted the tenth time ſoueraign Captaine. But Agrippa after his wonted maner, he wold haue no triumph: which was the cauſe of the

loſſe of this cuſtome, and following his example, were contented from thenceforth with the ornaments of triumph. But of another ſide, the PANNONIANS, the GENOVESES, and thoſe of PIEMONT rebelling, they were ſubdued by the Lieutenants of Auguſtus: who builded two cities in teſtimonie of his victorie againſt theſe two laſt people: whereof TVRIN (called Auguſta Pretoria) was one, and GENVA the other.
            
               Auguſtus hauing pacified GAVLE, ſtayed the inuaſions of the GERMANES, and quenched the rebellion of SPAINE: he left Druſus with authoritie and his armie vpon the Rheine, and came to ROME as Agrippa did out of ASIA, and became extreamely ſicke of the gowt. Lepidus he died at the ſame time, to whom Auguſtus ſucceeded in the eſtate of chiefe Biſhop, and made ſumptuous ſpectacles and ſights vnto the people. He burnt all the bookes of deuination and prophecie, except thoſe of the Sibylles: and yet he kept them not all. He reformed the Kalender, and ordained that there ſhould be no leape yeares for twelues yeares following. He ſuffered that the ſixt moneth then called Sextilis, ſhould be called Auguſtus after his name. All that yeare was ſpent in plaies and paſtimes, ſauing that Auguſtus (hauing bene ſicke) cauſed all that he had done in his gouernment to be rehearſed before the Senate. He tooke a reuiew of the Senatours, and confirmed his nephew Agrippa in the eſtate of a Tribune for fiue yeares more. But ſhortly after, this great perſon being returned from a iourney out of PANNONIA, whither he was gone to preuent diſorders that were likely to be renewed: he fell ſicke and died, before Auguſtus could come in time. That was a maruellous griefe vnto him: and not knowing now on whom he ſhould beſtow his daughter Iulia, in the end he choſe Tiberius his wiues ſonne, and maried them together: but they continued not long in good tearmes together. From thencefoorth Tiberius and Druſus dealt almoſt in all the affaires of warre, and Tiberius eſpecially after the death of the other: of whom we ſhall ſpeake to beſt purpoſe in the life of Tiberius, yet we will briefly note it here. So then Tiberius went and made warre in PANNONIA, riſen by meanes of the death of Agrippa: yet he made an end of it, killed ſome of them, ſold and ſubiected the reſt: and compelled all that people to ſubmit themſelues vnto the people of ROME. Druſus on the other ſide made warre in high and low Almaine, and brought the moſt part of theſe nations vnto ſome reaſon: and afterwards he returned to ROME. Where Auguſtus held ſo ſtraight a hand to bring the Senate to order, that there were few men deſired to be of the Senate: and many to the contrarie that gaue vp their offices. But Auguſtus compelled thoſe that were of age, of qualitie and ſufficiencie, and gaue order alſo that the dignitie of the Tribunes of the people ſhould remaine entire: ſuffering thoſe notwithſtanding which had this office, their time expired, to be amongſt the Senators, or with knights. As for the townes of ASIA afflicted with the earthquake, he payed of his owne to the commonwealth, the yearely tribute which they ought. And for the regard of thoſe which were of his Prouinces, he freed them from all impoſtes for ſixe yeares, and gaue them of PALESTINE a great quantitie of corne, which ſuſtained great want and famine. In the meane time Druſus paſſed ouer the Rhein, made warre with the VSIPETES, SICAMBRIANS, TENCHTERES, CATTIANS, CHERVSIANS, and SVAVBIANS, whom he ouerthrew in diuers encounters: and eſpecially in a great battell, where were killed a very great number. For theſe people were gathered together with ſuch a confidence of victorie, that they had alreadie made agreement among themſelues for diuiſion of the bootie. But ſpecially at the laſt battell, the CHERVSIANS ſhould haue the horſe, the SVAVBIANS they ſhould haue the baggage, and the SICAMBRIANS the priſoners. And yet to bind themſelues more ſtraightly together, they burnt twenty Cēteners of the ROMAINES. And this was the cauſe that the battell was ſo long and cruelly fought betwixt them: yet in the end the victorie remained to Druſus, who gaue the priſoners and all the bootie to the ſouldiers, making the horſe, baggage, and captiues to be ſold to them that would offer moſt. All the field for a great league and a halfe of length was ſtrawed with dead bodies, and they found in the enemies campe great ſtore of iron chains prepared by them for the ROMANES: howbeit they ſerued for thē. Druſus ſet vp a tokē of triumph, & was called Imperator of his troups in the field where the battell was pitched. Afterwards he built aboue fiftie caſtles vpon the riuers of Meuſe, Viſurge, and of the Rhein. Tiberius on the other ſide was in DALMATIA, where he brought them vnder that roſe in armes againſt them. The triumph of Ouatio was decreed to them both, and Augustus was ſaluted by the Senate Imperator of ſoueraigne Captaine, and this for the twelfth time. But in theſe buſineſſes, the warre was hote in THRACIA, and more then euer before: all the Prouinces being in rebellion vnder the conduct of Bulogaeſes, who had killed

the king Rhacuſpolis, an allie of the people of ROME, driuen out his Vncle and Lieutenant Rhymetalces out of THRACIA into CHERSONESVS. L. Piſo gouernor of PAMPHILIA went againſt them, and at the firſt encounter had not the aduantage, but in the ſecond he ouercame them vtterly. Druſus hauing made a voyage to ROME, to celebrate the birth day of Auguſtus in great magnificence, whilſt his troupes repoſed themſelues in their garriſons, about the Spring he returned into GERMANIE, ouercame the SVAVBIANS, gaue them a king: then he inuaded the countrie of the MARCOMANNES, fought with them diuers times, killed a great number of them, and made all the reſt ſubiect to the ROMAINES. Becauſe of this victorie, and of that of Piſo, Auguſtus was called Imperator the thirteenth time. Almoſt in this time he put Proculus to death in priſon, one that he loued beſt of all his bondmen made free: being conuinced of many adulteries. He made the thighes of his Secretarie Thallus to be broken, for the ſumme of an hundred crownes which he tooke for ſhewing a ſecret letter. In this meane time Tiberius continued warre in DALMATIA and PANNONIA, moued through the great impoſts whereof the people complained: but in the end he ſubdued them, and built many caſtels vpon the riuer of Danuby to ſtay the inuaſions of the enemies. Piſo alſo in THRACIA ouercame the MAESIANS, and BASTARNES, and brought away a great number of priſoners, who bit their iron chaines for anger, and moſt impatiently did beare their ſeruitude. Druſus made the CATTIANS ſubiect alſo, then he came to LYONS to meete with Auguſtus: from whence they both returned together into ITALIE. They had a cuſtome alſo that yearely on the firſt day of Ianuarie, (though Auguſtus were abſent) all the Senatours, officers of iuſtice, and others of meane eſtate, brought him New-yeares gifts to the Capitoll: and alſo euery one caſt a peece of gold or ſiluer into the lake Curtius, for a vow that they had made to his health. He did beſtow all theſe New-yeares gifts to buy many rich ſtatues of the gods, which he ſet vp in all the croſſe ſtreetes.
            In the fiue and thirtieth yeare of his principalitie, vnder the Conſulate of Druſus Nero, and of Quintius Criſpinus, Druſus hauing ſubdued a great part of GERMANIE, and preparing to go further: a viſion hauing the ſhape of a great woman, that ſpake bigger and louder then a mans voice could do, ſaid to him in Latine: Go no further: which was a ſigne of his death. The which followed incontinently after, this young Nobleman of an excellent hope, being but thirty yeares old. Auguſtus had put him in the rolle of his heires, and made an oration in his praiſe. Afterwards all the charge of the warres of GERMANIE was committed vnto Tiberius. And for Auguſtus, he being the ſame yeare called for a witneſſe in certaine cauſes, did patiently ſuffer any man to aske him, or refuſe him, as he had oftentimes done before. One day as he ſpake in full Senate, one of the Senatours told him: I vnderſtood nothing: another, I would ſpeake againſt it, if I might be heard. Another time being wearie with the conteſtations of certaine pleaders, he went in choler out of his ſeate. But ſome began to ſay vnto him, that it was lawfull for Senatours to ſpeake freely to any matter that came before them: and that no man was euer offended for the replies or conteſtations of any man.
            
               Nonius Aſprenaes, one of his greateſt friends, was accuſed by Caſsius Seuerus to haue poiſoned a hundred and thirtie bidden gueſts at a banquet. Auguſtus did not recommend him, but let the Senatours alone, who baniſhed Caſsius. An old ſouldier vpon complaint being brought before the Senatours, and in daunger of his life, beſought Auguſtus to helpe him. And when he had giuen him an Aduocate to defend him: the ſouldier opened his breaſt, and ſhewing him the markes of the wounds which he had receiued in the battell of ACTIVM, ſaid vnto him: But I beſeech thee Auguſtus, conſider that I haue receiued theſe wounds here vpon my bodie for to defend thee, and would put no other in my place. Auguſtus moued with theſe words, appeared in iuſtice, and pleaded this mans cauſe the which he wanne. Soone after he was ſaluted ſoueraigne Captaine for the fourteenth time: becauſe of the victories which Tiberius and Sextus Apuleius had obtained in GERMANIE, and in ITALIE. And the authoritie which had bene giuen him for ten yeares ouer the ſtate of the Commonwealth being expired, was continued vnto him for ten yeares following. Then he did greatly enlarge the bounds of the territorie of ROME, and hauing aduanced Saluſtius Criſpus (the ſon of the Hiſtorian) vnto the place which Maecenas held, the ROMAINE knight his faithfull friend and principall Counſeller, deceaſed in thoſe daies: and by Tiberius continued to bring the GERMAINES vnder: for the victorie of whom, and alſo for that he had ſubdued all the people inhabiting alongſt the Alpes; the Senate had ſet vp a token of triumph, and granted triumph to Tiberius.
            
            
               
Vnder the ſecond Conſulate of Claudius Nero, and of Calphurnius Piſo, Caius and Lucius yong ſonnes of Augustus, were called young Princes, and appointed Conſuls, although they were but of tender yeares, and vnder fourteene yeares old. This pleaſed Augustus greatly, though he fained to take no pleaſure in it. Furthermore, he then made an edict touching ſlaunderous libels, declaring who ſhould haue the hearing of thoſe crimes, and how they ſhould be puniſhed: although he himſelfe cared not much, and patiently ſuffered they ſhould gibe at him, contented to anſwer by open defence, vnto the reproches and mockeries they made of him. They ſcattered abrode one day in the pallace many bils of paper of cruell iniuries againſt him. This moued him not at all, neither did he trouble himſelf much to anſwer it: but in ſtead of ſearching it out, he did aduiſe that hereafter they ſhould haue an eye vpon thoſe, that by litle bookes or Epigrams publiſhed (vnder falſe names) ſcandale againſt any man. Tiberius wrote a round letter to him one day, to the end he ſhould carie a ſtraighter hand vpon that: but he ſent him theſe words: I pray thee, my friend, let not thy youth ouerrule thee in this matter, nor be not ſo hote, though I be euill ſpoken of by ſome. It is enough if we gaine this point, that no man can hurt vs. Afterwards he deuided the citie of ROME into fourteene regions, and two hundred and ten ſtreetes, and in euery of them he eſtabliſhed Officers to ſee that all things ſhould be maintained as they ought to be, and to report vnto the Prince any memorable thing that ſhould happen. He prouided for the violence of fire, he built vp the temples that were burnt or ruined by time: and gaue at one time vnto the temple of Iupiter Capitoline, for the renewing of the ſame, ſixteene thouſand pounds of gold, and of rich and coſtly pearles, to the ſumme of twelue hundred thouſand Crownes.
            Now Caius and Lucius his young ſonnes growing apace, and Iulia his daughter beginning to be too well knowne for her wantonneſſe: Tiberius that could no longer endure her, nor theſe two young Princes (and becauſe he would haue the ROMAINES a litle long for him) he demanded and obtained leaue with extremitie, threatning to kill himſelfe with famine, if they did not graunt him: and ſo went to ſtudie at RHODES. In the meane time Auguſtus prouided for the affaires of ISTRIA, deuided ITALIE into eleuen Prouinces: and becauſe he doubted they did enuie his greatneſſe, he choſe nine Pretorian cohorts for his guard, of the which he kept three of them in ROME, lodged here and there in houſes, ſo long as they were in their quarter: and the ſixe others were quartered in the next villages vnto it. He alſo erected new offices, to impart to ſo many men more the honours and charges of the Commonwealth. At the ſame time when before the Senate they did obiect many crimes vnto Aimilius Aelianus, and amongſt other things, that he ſpake ill of Auguſtus: he turning to the accuſer, ſaid vnto him as in choler: Proue me that, and I will make Aelianus know that I haue a tongue: for I will ſay more of him, then he hath ſpoken of me. He made no further inquirie afterwards, and ſhewed himſelfe very gentle and courteous alſo vnto Caſsius of PADVA, a man of a meane eſtate: who hauing ſpoken openly at a table, that he lacked no good will nor courage to kill Augustus: he contented himſelfe to impoſe this onely puniſhment vpon him, as to driue him out of ROME. From his eleuenth Conſulſhip vnto the twelfth, there paſſed ſeuenteene yeares: in all which time he diuerſe times had refuſed this charge: but now he demaunded it, and obtained it. His intention was to aduaunce Caius his litle ſonne to great dignitie, whom he cauſed to be proclaimed, yong Prince, and ſent him to ſee the Prouinces and armies, in the title of a Proconſull. Then he commaunded him to go into ASIA, hauing giuen him for gouernours Lollius, and Sulpitius Quirinus. He himſelfe in the meane time remained at ROME, where he eſtabliſhed extraordinarie guards, vnder colour to keepe theeues and maiſterleſſe men from offering violence, whileſt the armies abrode were farre off. The yeare following, Caius hauing trauelled in diuerſe parts of the Orient, made peace with Phraates king of the PARTHIANS, and brought away hoſtages for aſſurance thereof, the kings three brethren, and all the Princes of the bloud. The which was practiſed by the meanes of the Queene Thermuſa, borne in ITALIE, who being ſent by Auguſtus for a gift vnto Phraates, he fell ſo in loue with her, and held her in ſuch high eſtimation, that after ſhe had brought him a ſonne called Phraataces, he receiued her for his lawfull wife. She being deſirous her ſonne ſhould poſſeſſe the Crowne, draue the right heires farre off by meanes of this peace. And at the end of certaine yeares, Phraataces who entertained it killed his father, and poſſeſſed the kingdome. But he was not long in quiet poſſeſſion, for the great Lords conſpired againſt him, and tooke from him his life and Crowne together. Furthermore,

               Caius conquered ARMENIA, and ſhortly after Auguſtus demaunded the thirteenth Conſulſhip, to the end to aduaunce his litle ſonne Lucius as he had done Caius. He ſent him Proconſull into SPAINE, but he fell ſicke by the way, and ſtayed almoſt a yeare at MARSEILLES. Though theſe two brethren were farre enough off Tiberius, who kept himſelfe as a ſimple ſcholer at RHODES: yet they loued not him greatly, nor he them: for which purpoſe, the proceſſe ſerued not much againſt their mother Iulia, baniſhed becauſe of her adulteries into the Iſle of PANDATARIE. Shortly after, her daughter alſo called Iulia, maried vnto Lucius Paulus, was alſo conuinced of the ſame crime that her mother was: and was baniſhed into another Iſle of the ſea Adriaticum, called TREMERA. This affliction ſo neare vnto him, maruellouſly grieued Auguſtus, who could not beare it but in mourning, and deuouring himſelfe with ſorrow. Then all the Prouinces of the ROMAINE Empire being in peace, Auguſtus ſhut vp the third time the temple of Ianus: and the King of kings, the Sauiour of the world, being borne of a virgin in IVDAEA, appearing amongſt men: he ſhut vp the Oracles of all the Painim gods, as the Oracle of DELPHES among others was conſtrained to confeſſe it, and neuer ſpake afterwards. Wherewith Auguſtus being aſtonied, cauſed a great altar to be ſet vp in the Capitoll with an inſcription, ſignifying that it was The altar of the God firſt borne. The yeare following, to ſtay the violent courſe of great vſuries, and to raiſe vp againe many families decayed: he put into the Exchange two millions and a halfe of gold: that is to ſay, fiue and twenty hundred thouſand crowns: and ſuffered priuate men to take of it for three yeares without intereſt, putting in pawne into the Exchequer lands and poſſeſſions, being twiſe as much worth as the principall: and condemned the vſurers that had taken intereſt more then Iulius Caeſar had ordained, to pay foure times aſmuch, and deducting out of the principall that which had bene paid ouer and aboue the taxe of the law: he gaue the debters three yeares ſpace to pay it, at three equall times from yeare to yeare. He made prouiſion alſo for diſtributing of corne, and brought it to 200000. heads of thoſe that ſhold come to haue any of it: and did wiſely remedy diuerſe diſcontentments of the people. Shortly after, Lucius Caeſar being 16. yeares of age, died at MARSEILLES: the which was the cauſe that Tiberius being reconciled for ſome other occaſion with Caius, he obtained leaue to returne from RHODES to ROME: with condition (for ſo was Caius will) that he ſhould meddle with no affaires of eſtate, and that he ſhould remaine yet the reſt of the yeare at RHODES. As touching Auguſtus, he laboured to recreate himſelfe with his friends: and did willingly ſee learned men▪ and amongſt others, T. Liuius that renowned Hiſtorian: the Poets Virgil and Horace, but eſpecially Virgil, who was one of his moſt familiar friends. Which maketh men thinke that Ouid committed ſome great fault, ſince he was a baniſhed man ſo long, and that they could not obtaine his grace, though the greateſt men were ſuters for him. And yet the Hiſtorians ſay Auguſtus was not angry, as appeareth by the fact of Timagenes the Hiſtorian: who hauing diſperſed abrode ſome pleaſant by-names againſt Augustus, Liuia, and their familiars, wherat euery one of them laughed, it was ſo pleaſant an encounter: Auguſtus was contented to aduiſe him to moderate his toung from thenceforth, and did only forbid him his houſe and familiaritie, ſuffering him to waxe old in the companie of Aſinius Pollio. He did greatly ſupport ſome alſo that were accuſed to haue ſealed a falſe Will, & mingled with the marks of condemnation and abſolution a third, pardoning all thoſe that it ſhould ſeeme had through ignorance ſinned in this fact. One being euidently conuinced to haue killed his father, was euen at the point to be ſewed vp in a leather ſack, according to the cuſtome, and throwne into the ſea. Auguſtus deſirous this curſed wretch ſhould not be thus handled, put the anſwer in his mouth, in asking of him alſo: Surely I beleeue thou haſt not killed thy father. The ſon of Tarius being charged to haue conſpired againſt the life of his father, Augustus was ſent for into Tarius houſe, to counſell him what were beſt to be done: he gaue the father counſell to baniſh him far off from all knowledge. And when Tarius would haue made Auguſtus his heire, he refuſed it, and obtained that the ſon ſhould be baniſhed vnto MARSEILLES: and that during his fathers life he ſhold haue a penſion to maintaine him withall.
            In the 44. yeare of the monarchie of Auguſtus, Tiberius hauing bene abſent the ſpace of eight yeares, he came againe to ROME, where he liued, and medled with no matters. But that held not long: for in the ſame yeare Caius, vpon whom Augustus principally looked, died in LYCIA: and ſome ſay, that Liuia knew well enough of what death. For ſhe greatly deſired the aduancement of her ſon Tiberius, knowing that Auguſtus did not greatly loue the laſt ſon of Agrippa & Iulia, by reaſon of the rudeneſſe of his nature. Auguſtus tooke the death of his ſon Caius very vnpatiently.

He made his ſchoolemaiſter and domeſticall ſeruants to be drowned: and furthermore, he diſpoſed all the forces of the Empire and the legions amongſt the Prouinces, in commodious places as well by ſea as by land. Afterwards he obtained the Tribuneſhip for Tiberius, more through the procurement of Liuia then otherwiſe: although in the end he was content to aduance him, to make his memorie to be ſo much the more deſired, when they had made proofe of his ſucceſſor, whom he knew better then any other, and neuer ſpake any thing well, but he ſpied alwaies ſome croſſe thing in him of a dangerous nature he had. And yet ſome iudge, that Auguſtus did repute the vertues in Tiberius to be greater then his imperfections: conſidering alſo that in the Oration he made, his words tended to this end, that he adopted Tiberius in fauor of the commonwealth. But before he would declare this adoption: he compelled Tiberius to adopt his nephew Germanicus the ſon of Druſus: and he adopted with Tiberius Agrippa Poſthumus, the ſon of M. Agrippa. Then to preuent the complots of ſome of the chiefeſt of ROME, he made Tiberius to be choſen Tribune for ten yeares following. That was the cauſe that in ROME they began to ſpeak well of Tiberius, whom they ſaw by that meanes ſomwhat ſtepped into Auguſtus place, ſo ſoone as he ſhould happen to die. Furthermore, at the inſtance of the people of ROME & of Tiberius himſelf, Auguſtus did tollerate the baniſhment of his daughter Iulia: howbeit for no intreatie he would euer reuoke her again. So after the deceaſe of Augustus, ſhe was deſtitute of all helpe, and Tiberius made her dy for want in an vnknowne place. The yeare following, Valerius Meſſala, and C. Cinna litle ſon of the great Pompey, were elected Conſuls. Cinna that tooke part with his couſins, was taken priſoner, & brought to Auguſtus, who gaue him life & aduanced him. This notwithſtanding, he was afterwards attainted and conuinced to haue conſpired againſt the life of Auguſtus: whom through the counſell of Liuia he ſent for into his chamber, & gently rebuked him for all the good deeds he had done to him: pardoned him this laſt offence, & afterwards raiſed him to the dignity of a Conſull, being ſory that he durſt not demand it. After that Cinna became his faithfull friend and ſeruant, & bequeathed all his goods by will vnto Auguſtus: againſt whom neuer any man cō
               ſpired more. His Lieutenants in AFRICK obtained ſome victories, & Tiberius continued the war in GERMANIE, from whence he oftentimes returned to ROME, to keepe himſelf in Auguſtus good fauor. Who hauing limited the pay, recompence, commoditie, and time that the ſoldiers ſhould haue, he procured for ſome time the good of the commonwealth: which had continued longer in proſperitie, if his ſucceſſors had better entertained militarie diſcipline. Afterwards to reſiſt the mutinies of the people by reaſon of famine, he eſtabliſhed corps of guard in all the places of ROME, and draue out a great number of vnprofitable mouths. And when corne came againe to beare the ordinarie price, he was about to aboliſh the diſtributiō of corn which the cōmonwealth made: becauſe that the people truſting vnto that, made no reckening to plow their lands. At the ſame time many towns in diuerſe Prouinces were inclined to rebel, which cauſed the Senate to make a decree, that the gouernors of Prouinces ſhold command two years one after another, and ſhould not depart thence til their ſucceſſor were arriued. The ILLYRIANS alſo they began to riſe, but they were ſuppreſt immediatly by Valerius Meſſalinus. For GERMANY, all were ſubiect vnder the name of the ROMAINS, except the MARCOMANNES, and their king Maroboduus, a valiliant and wiſe man, that kept himſelfe and his people in good diſcipline, hauing alwaies an army readie of threeſcore and ten thouſand footmen, and foure thouſand horſe, all the which he trained and put in readineſſe againſt his neighbours, to defend him the better againſt the ROMAINES, if they came to aſſaile him. Tiberius prepared himſelfe with twelue legions to make warre with him: but being conſtrained to go againſt the ILLYRIANS, he made agreement with Mareboduus, that ſought peace and quietneſſe: and ſo marched where neceſſitie called him. For the ILLYRIANS, to the number of eight hundred thouſand men and vpwards, roſe in manner all at an inſtant, and muſtered vp in ſhort time, with ſuch order in their affaires and warlike exploits, that they poſſeſt and brought in ſubiection almoſt all MACEDON, and put Augustus into a maruellous perplexitie, becauſe they prepared themſelues to come into ITALIE. Hereupon Tiberius is choſen to go againſt them, the which he did with ſo good direction and warlike iudgement, that he diſperſed their armie. But now concerning the countrey of THRACIA: there the armie of the ROMAINES was put to flight: yet taking heart againe, they returned to meet with their enemies, and obtained an honourable victorie. For which cauſe they called Augustus Imperator or ſoueraigne Captaine the ſixteenth time. The ILLYRIANS made head againe better then before vnder the conduct of Bato Deſidiates: they made violent and ſtraunge

inuaſions, and Tiberius neuer came againſt them. Whereupon Auguſtus conceiuing an euill opinion, diſpatched Germanicus the ſonne of Druſus, to go into ILLYRIA with a complete armie. On the other ſide, Agrippa Poſthumus ſhewed himſelfe ſo inſolent, and committed ſo many follies, that Auguſtus could no longer endure them, and therfore he diſauowed & diſinherited him, confiſcated his goods, and confined him to SVRRENTVM: where being more audacious then before, he baniſhed him into the Ile of PLANASIA, neare vnto CORSICA: and cauſed the Senate to make an ordinance that he ſhould remaine there till his death. By this meanes euery man began to regard Tiberius, who was alſo declared the ſon and colleague of Auguſtus by decree of the Senate, who committed vnto him all the armies and prouinces of the Empire. Liuia his mother did helpe him greatly in all theſe affaires. Furthermore, he would not ſtir out of ILLYRIA vntill he had made an end of this warre, which continued three whole yeares.
            Now at the arriuall of Germanicus, the chieftaines of the ILLYRIANS came ſuddenly to aſſaile the campe of the ROMAINS: who faining to be afraid, ſtaid till the enemy came to charge them in diſorder. Then they came out with furie againſt them, killed a great number of thē, and made the reſt to flie. Germanicus wan another battell againſt the DALMATIANS, and purſuing his victorie, he followed them ſo neare at the heeles, that they ſubmitted themſelues, and demaunded peace. By reaſon whereof they gaue Augustus the name of Imperator the eighteenth time. Bato Deſidiates came to ſalute Tiberius ſet in his tribunall chaire, without holding downe his head, or any way imbaſing himſelfe: and being asked why after ſo many battels loſt, he did yet rebell againe? he anſwered boldly againe, that the ROMAINES were the cauſe of it: who in ſtead of ſhepheards had ſent them wolues to keepe their flocke. Peace was graunted vnto the DALMATIANS vpon certaine conditions. And as for the BREVCIANS which continued their warre, they were ouerthrowne in many encounters, and at the length brought to ſubiection by Plautius Siluanus, who triumphed. Their king Bato Breucus had betrayed and deliuered vnto the ROMAINES another great Captaine of the ILLYRIANS called Pinnetes: and afterwards he was deliuered himſelfe by his owne men vnto Bato Deſidiates, who killed him with his owne hand: and then fortified himſelfe in DALMATIA, where hauing made head almoſt a yeare and a halfe againſt the armies of Tiberius and of Germanicus, he won and loſt many battels: at the laſt being able to hold out no longer, he ſent his ſonne to demaund peace of Tiberius, promiſing to yeeld himſelfe and his into the hands of Auguſtus. He obtained ſafe conduct, and came by night vnto Tiberius campe: who gaue him very gracious entertainment, and many rich preſents. Afterwards he made him be brought to RAVENNA, and was alſo gently vſed: becauſe that in an encounter where he was▪incloſed, and in daunger of his life, he had giuen him meanes to eſcape and ſaue himſelfe. And becauſe of the diuers victories obtained by Germanicus and Tiberius, Auguſtus was ſaluted for the nineteenth & twentith time Imperator or ſoueraigne Captain. And for the PANNONIANS, their young men that had ſo many times threatned ITALIE, were conſtrained to bring all their armes together on a heape, as they were commaunded, and to fall on their knees before Tiberius to demaund peace of him. He receiued them into grace, and ſent them home to their houſes, diſpoſing his garriſons in ſtrong places, vnder the charge of Mareus Lepidus. The glorie of Tiberius was yet more noble, and the anguiſhes of Auguſtus increaſed by the ouerthrow of Quintilius Varus: who being gone to aſſaile Arminius Prince of the CHERVSSIANS, was encloſed in mariſhes, and vtterly ouerthrowne with three ROMAINE legions that were ſlaine in the place: and for himſelfe, fearing to fall aliue into the hands of the CHERVSSIANS, he killed himſelfe with his owne hand.
The victours did neuer ſo cruelly handle the ROMAINES as thoſe whom they might know were common Counſellers and pleaders. For at the beginning when Varus came to commaund their countrey, where they knew not what proceſſe meant, he perſwaded himſelfe he ſhould tame them well enough, vſing the ſame forme and order of proceſſe there amongſt them, as they did at ROME. So he had a iudgement ſeate, and all matters were pleaded before him. Some of them amongſt the reſt being very ſubtill, ſeemed to eſteeme much this pleading: and to bring him aſleepe, they of purpoſe moued occaſion of proceſſe and ſute one againſt the other: and then they went before him, and by ROMAINES themſelues whoſe tongues they borrowed, they demaunded iuſtice. Then they reioyced not a litle when they could catch any of theſe Counſellers: for they put out the eyes of ſome of them, cut off the hands of others of them: and they ſay, that they cut out the tongue of one, and afterwards ſowed vp his mouth, and he that held the tongue in his hand, ſaid vnto him:

O viper, at the laſt yet thou wilt leaue whiſtling. Auguſtus was ſo aſtonied at this loſſe, that at times he would beate his head againſt the wall, crying out, Varus, giue me my legions. Certaine yeares after, Germanicus buried the bones of the ROMAINES that were killed in this ouerthrow. The yeare following Tiberius returned into GERMANIE, and to keepe the paſſages of the Rhein, Augustus ſerued his turne with the ſlaues enfranchiſed, which cauſed afterwards great confuſions and ſeditions in the ROMAINE armie. In all theſe ſtirres, two men of no worth, called Andaſius and Epicadus, complotted to take away Iulia the daughter of Auguſtus, and Agrippa Poſthumus from the places where they were, and to bring them to ſome legions to alter the eſtate. But they were ſoone diſcouered, and puniſhed for their raſhneſſe. Some others alſo committed the like fond enterpriſes, but they vaniſhed away without any effect.
            Furthermore, Auguſtus being now old and broken, began to leaue all great companies, caſſiered his guards, and ſent them to garriſons farre off, to the end they ſhould not go about to make any chaunge. He gaue commaundement that the GAVLES and GERMAINES ſhould depart the citie by a day prefixed. In the meane time Tiberius hauing deuided his armie into foure parts, entred into GERMANY, about fiue and twentie leagues into the country beyond the Rhein, & put al to fire and bloud: then he retired fearing ſome encounter of Varus. Touching Auguſtus, he qualified ſome ſtrict lawes againſt the vnmaried, the gifts of the husband to the wife, the banquets and ſutes: he did forbid the Deuines to anſwer the vaine queſtion of thoſe, that wold know how long they ſhould liue: and he ſuffered the knights (if they were challenged) to fight at the ſharp. Germanicus being returned to ROME obtained the Conſulſhip, and Tiberius triumphed of the ILLYRIANS, PANNONIANS, DALMATIANS, and GERMAINES: followed with his Lieutenants Germanicus, Vibius Posthumus, Plautius Siluanus, and Marcus Lepidus, with triumphing robes. But before he went vp to the Capitoll, he went out of his charret, and fell downe on his knees before Auguſtus. Then he made a dinner for all the people, and had a thouſand tables ſet vp for them: and gaue to euery one of then ſeuen crownes and a halfe. Vnder the Conſulſhip of C. Silius, and of Munatius Plancus, Auguſtus hauing obtained ten yeares with Tiberius to prouide for the affaires of the commonwealth: to the end to quench many falſe rumors, about ſixteene moneths before his death, he made his will, and gaue it to the Veſtall virgins to keepe. Becauſe his ſickneſſe kept him from coming to the Senate, he prayed the Senators to thinke of ſome meanes to entertaine the men of warre. Which they hauing well conſidered, found no better meanes then that which he himſelfe had found out, to wit: of the twentieth part of the inheritances: and they all agreed vnto it. The next yeare following, he went (as they ſay) to ſee Agrippa in his Iſle of PLANASIA, the which troubled Liuia much: for ſhe knew what was paſt. At the ſame time he and Tiberius tooke muſter of the ROMAINE citizens, and ſhortly after he fell ſicke, wherof they recite many cauſes. But therupon he went into the countrie vnto ſome places of pleaſure, where he mended a litle, and paſſed the time away pretily merie, carying Tiberius with him, whom he would haue brought on his way to BENEVENT, from whence he went into ILLYRIA.
At his returne his ſickneſſe increaſed, that he was faine to ſtay at NOLA, and ſent for Tiberius, and talked with him a long time very priuately, and after that neuer did any thing of importance: although the Hiſtorians do not agree whether Tiberius was come before his departure or not. For Liuia had ſet ſpials in the houſe he lay ſick in, and on the high waies, giuing it out abrode that Auguſtus was well: & on the other ſide ſending meſſages vpon meſſages vnto Tiberius, fame ſpreading it abrode that Auguſtus was dead, and that Tiberius held his place. Auguſtus being at the point to giue vp the ghoſt, made himſelfe to be combed, and ſpeaking to his friends, asked if no bodie made any noiſe without. So he exhorted them to reioyce with him, for that he had ſo happily played the Comedy of this humane life. Then hauing ſent them all out of his chamber, he asked if Liuilla Druſus daughter were in health: and ſo embracing his wife, ſaid theſe words vnto her: Farewell Liuia, behaue thy ſelfe well, and remember our mariage: and ſuddenly went away, making a ſweet end, which he alwaies deſired as often as he heard talke of thoſe that died quietly. He died in the ſame towne, and in the ſame chamber that his father Octauius died in, and liued neare vnto the age of threeſcore and ſixteene yeares. His corps being brought to ROME, the Veſtall virgins brought out his will and teſtament, by the which he appointed Tiberius his heire, and gaue him three parts of his goods, and his wife Liuia the fourth part. Furthermore he gaue to the people of ROME twelue hundred and fiftie thouſand crownes: to the fiue and thirtie Tribes, thirteen hundred, ſeuen and thirty thouſand, fiue hundred crownes: to euery one of the Pretorian ſouldiers

25 crownes, to thoſe of the towne 12 crownes and a halfe. There were other legacies to be payd within a yeare: & he ſayd, that all his legacies performed, he left his heires foure millions of gold. Within 20 yeares before his death, he did inherite of his friends goods which had made him their heire, about 35 millions of gold: howbeit that he had ſpent all that with two patrimonies of his owne for maintenance of the common wealth. With his teſtament there were three litle libels or codicils, the one ſhewing what he would haue done at his funerals. The ſecond was a briefe of all his actions, which he commanded ſhould be grauen in copper tables before his tombe. The third contained the eſtate of his reuenew, & of the principall affaires of the Empire. He had added to them alſo the names of the infranchiſed bondmen and of the ſlaues, whom they might bring to account, and therewith he aduiſed them to keepe the limites of the Empire which they had at that time. They caried him with great pompe into the field of Mars, where he was reduced into aſhes, which they cloſed vp in his ſepulcher built in his ſixt Conſulſhip. After all theſe ceremonies the Senate appointed him a temple and diuine honors, and was placed in ranke with the gods. To make this honour yet greater, one Numerius Atticus that had bene Praetor, a man of great authority in ROME, was entiſed by Liuia, who gaue him fiue and twenty thouſand crownes, to ſweare before all the people, that he ſaw Auguſtus caried vp into heauen. After his death, many ſpeeches were diuerſly ſpoken of his life: ſome reprouing him, as much as others commended him. But his ſucceſſour made him oftentimes to be lamented. And ſo he was wont to ſay of Tiberius, that he ſhould leaue to the ROMAINES in ſucceſſion of the Empire, a ſucceſſour that neuer conſulted twiſe of one thing. And as he was a happy Prince in all his enterpriſes, and that by his Lieutenants had done an infinite number of worthie exploits againſt the enemies of the Empire: ſo in his life amongſt his friends he ſhewed himſelfe very gracious, pleaſant, and well diſpoſed in company: being learned, eloquent, and ſententious in all his talke. And to conclude, ſuch as the Empire of ROME had neuer any Auguſtus Caeſar but him alone.
            The end of Octauius Caeſar Auguſtus life.
         
         
            
            THE LIFE OF Plutarch.
            
            
               PLVTARCHVS.
            
            
               Thy precepts are a crowne of pureſt gold
               To Traian, deem'd the glorie of mankind.
               In hands, and harts, if great men would thee hold,
               Vertue ſhould rule, and vice ſhould go behind.
            
            
               HAuing vndertaken to gather the liues of Plutarch and of Seneca, as they themſelues are amply ſhewed in their workes, the which in deſpite of the furie of an infinitie of ſtraunge accidents haue yet remained whole and in reputation vntill this preſent time: Firſt, this thought hath poſſeſſed me before, that ſome man may maruell, how, and wherefore I do ioyne Philoſophers, quiet men, and friends of ſolitarineſſe: vnto ſo many noble and worthy warriers. Wherein it ſeemeth I wander too farre off from the principall intention of Plutarch, who was ſo willing to honor the Muſes, ioyning into one body ſo many members and parts of hiſtories offered vnto the poſteritie, that in the meane time he hath accompanied, and as it were enuironed them:

                  With darts, and targets of Mars redoubtable.
               
But I hope, that if thoſe (which thinke ſtraunge of my doings) will but at leiſure with a repoſed eye looke vpon the liues before: they ſhall find that I haue not gone ſo farre from the right meaning, as at the firſt ſight may be iudged. For, beſides that the liues of ſome Orators, eſpecially of Demoſthenes and of Cicero, are ſeene amongſt the others: you ſhall find few noblemen repreſented by our Author, but that they haue as carefully handled bookes, as their ſwords. And if ſome ſeeme to be ſo much giuen to armes, that they haue left the ſtudie of learning behind them: yet we may ſee that they haue loued Philoſophers, and that they themſelues haue earneſtly and effectually reaſoned of Philoſophy, in time of warre and peace. And whereas Plutarch hath mingled ſome with vertuous men, ſome (I ſay) which haue done infinite hurt to themſelues, and to all the world during their liues, and whoſe names are deteſted at this day by thoſe themſelues which follow their execrable doings: his intention was not to place them in the Theater of vertue, as if they had deſerued it: but as learned painters finely apply cloudy and darke colours in their tables, to the end that the liuely and freſh colours ſhould appeare more beautifull and as it were imboſſed; ſo in entermingling the ſtrange exceſſes of ſome GREEKES and ROMAINES

amongſt ſo worthie acts of others, he hath ſo fitly mingled the ſweete and profitable together, that it is not poſſible to be better. But if my two Philoſophers (ſince I haue begun to qualifie them thus) were contented to ſhut vp themſelues in ſome ſchoole or ſtudie, and to do nothing elſe but declaime and faſhion ſome ſcholers: it may be indeed I ſhould haue better left this enterpriſe vnto ſome follower of Diogenes Laertius, that would deſcribe the ſects of Philoſophie, and the principall founders of the ſame. Now there are here two perſonages, which (as the ſoule within the body) haue through their notable counſels giuen motions vnto great and meane men in their time, and by other mens eyes and hands haue done infinite things in the ſocietie of mans life, vnto the which they ſerue at this day with their precepts and goodly inſtructions, without the which the exploits of others ſhould be partly buried and aboliſhed: as thoſe haue bene of ſo many other men that came before and after. They be the two ſchoole-maiſters and counſellors of two Emperors. They be men that beſide their ſtudy haue borne great and honorable offices, in the which they haue ſo caried themſelues, that by their actions a man may gather, that knowledge is a great prop and ſtay to a vertuous man. If they haue not worne armor and commanded armies: if a man ſee them in a long gowne, and their bookes in their hands, they loſe not therefore their glory which ſo many wayes recommendeth them at this preſent, hauing lift vp learning in honour, and furniſhed ſtrong armes, by meanes whereof all Princes may wiſely and happily maintaine their eſtates againſt the fury of warres, and vnder the quiet gouernement of peace. As to the contrary, when violence alone would rule, and that men thought there was no need that our ſpirits ſhould be kept in and directed by the exhortations of Philoſophy: confuſions came on in heapes, which ruined and ouerthrew that which they thought had bene ſureſt ſet in the ground. Moreouer, I did not beare my ſelfe in hand that I could attaine to that, as to repreſent Plutarch and Seneca in their beſeeming comelineſſe. They themſelues could haue done that, and in their writings there are draughts very agreeable to their grauity. But as we do not willingly take the penſile to paint our ſelues, but to pleaſe our ſelues, the diſcourſe of our thought ſufficeth. In like maner alſo theſe goodly ſpirits here, being contented to be knowne by the glaſſe of their vertue which followeth them: they leaue euery body to thinke of their deeds and words that that is meete. Amongſt all the bookes that ſerue for the vſe of mans life, next vnto that which concerneth our ſoueraigne good we hope for in a better place then this world: I thinke there are none more profitable nor neceſſary to all ſorts of men, then hiſtories. And amongſt hiſtories, thoſe of men which haue bene brought to honor and place of gouernment in the commonwealth: and among thoſe men there, thoſe that haue brought their deeds and ſayings to ſome commendable end. Wherefore I will not enter into diſputation nor conference of ſtories, nor mingle the Scriptures with the prophane, or confound the diſcourſe repreſenting men deſtitute of the knowledge of the true god, with the holy and admirable conſiderations of the life of them, which haue bene lightned with the happy and ſupernaturall light. That requireth a whole booke, and ſeparated from this preſent worke, our purpoſe being otherwiſe bent to the ſame. But as in the former liues I was deſirous to waken the good ſpirits of our nation, and by the interiection of ſome of my conceipts to induce them to do better: I do the like alſo in theſe two, attending the commoditie to ſet foorth others, if the Author of life do permit me.
            Now before we proceed any further, for as much as Seneca was long time before Plutarch, ſome might alſo require another order in my diſcourſe. Notwithſtanding, as Plutarch doth ordinarily place the GREEKS before the ROMAINES, and that for the matter of their liues there is no need otherwiſe for a man to trouble himſelfe much about the diſpoſing of them, and that thoſe which be dead do not quarrell together to know who ſhall go before or behind: I haue thought with my ſelfe that I might begin this worke where I thought good, without binding my ſelfe too curiouſly, either to the order of time, or to ſuch other circumſtances. For if any man be offended, I will alledge that vnto him which was ſpoken vnto one diſpleaſed, becauſe his horſe was painted ſtanding on his feete, which he would haue had lying on his backe, and his feete vpward: Turne the other ſide vpward, and you ſhall be pleaſed. Euen ſo is it in his choiſe to reade ſuch a life firſt, as he thinketh good, and to turne the table at his pleaſure, no man being conſtrained to come into the cloſet of the Muſes, but at his owne will, and by the gate which pleaſeth him beſt. I could haue bene contented to haue offered Plutarch onely, or left him hidden in his workes, the true and durable treaſures of his glory: but hauing bene ſolicited

to ſhew ſome patterns, I was vnwilling to let him go alone. Now, I cannot caſt mine eye vpon that perſonage, but Seneca doth alſo preſent himſelfe vnto me, for many reports and agreements that are betweene them. For, beſides that nature hath brought them into the world, in the reuolution of one age, both came out of a ſtraunge countrey to ROME: both of them were rich and of great power, maiſters and teachers of two Emperours, which did enrich and aduance them to honour, and great offices in the commonwealth. In regard of their learning, although the one of them was of a ſect impugned by the other in diuerſe reſpects: yet they both tended to one end, although it was by diuerſe wayes: to wit, to driue away vice and vanity out of the harts of their diſciples, and to plant in them the loue of vertue, the contempt of death, and of the world, with ſo ſound reaſons, and ſo well combined the one to the other: that it is vnpoſſible to enter into a ſchoole of the heathen better ordred then that of theſe two, to learne (as we ought) to be aſhamed of diſhoneſt things, and to exerciſe thoſe that be honeſt and vertuous. But as touching other agreements and diſſemblances which may be noted as wel in their life and behauiour, as in their doctrine: peraduenture it ſhall be better to reſerue it to fitter place, or to leaue the diſcourſe vnto the ſtudious reader: who aduiſedly conſidering this litle which we preſently preſent vnto them, and ioyning thereto the writings of the one and the other: ſhall know what authority and art theſe two wiſe men haue to draw the moſt ignorant and fooliſh to the loue of vertue. Alſo that their ſtile with their pertinent and plaine manner of diſcourſe is accompanied with great grauity and forcible reaſons, to make men confident to beleeue them. If the one flow ſweetly, and alwayes almoſt maintaineth himſelfe in the ſame: the other in his wandrings and rollings about can well reforme his errors, and come to it againe in time: and then go on better then when he firſt began. Plutarch vſeth a world of approches and hookes to pull downe vice. Seneca ſeemeth to prouoke him to the combat, and when he ſetteth vpon him, it is in taking him by the coller and ſhaking him in all parts. The one ſeemeth to be a company of light horſemen charging very ſwiftly, and at diuerſe wheelings and returnes: the other, to a battalion of footmen well ſet in order, aſſailing reſolutely, and not remouing out of the place before he haue won the victory. The opinions of Plutarch are handled with Platonicall inductions, enriched with examples, with ſimilitudes, with quicke ſentences, and gracious recitals, which force the reader to yeeld. Seneca drawing that which is praiſe-worthy from the STOICKES, and from EPICVRVS alſo goodly inſtructions: as the Bee finely draweth from the herbe of bitter iuyce that which maketh ſweet hony, differing ſomwhat from the common vſe, he maketh a very profitable and ſure harbor wherein a heart ill ſetled may repoſe it ſelfe. The one ſpeaketh as a friend, the other as a maiſter: and both with ſuch a grace, that whether they giue good counſell, or that they command: the eares and hearts do bow at their voices. Inſomuch that the wicked are conſtrained in reading of theſe Philoſophers to acknowledge and plainely to heare within this graue ſchoole, a million of truths which condemneth them: and I cannot tell with what hidden force (as the Adamant draweth iron) they feele themſelues to be caried that way, vnto the which the learned inſtructions of theſe two Philoſophers do direct them, to delight in them euen with mourning, and to confeſſe that thoſe be the perſons of whom men may learne to be leſſe vicious, and more vertuous: good men alſo they gather there a ſweete fruite as poſſible may me, for remedy againſt ſo many cruelties of this preſent life. And although they find their true and perfect contentment in a farre better ſchoole without compariſon: yet ſo it is, that in this ſchoole here they vnderſtand things which afterwards makes the other more agreeable, and more honourable. Now for as much as afterwards we haue mixed the memories of their liues with diuerſe particularities, which will make vs ſee a part of their compariſons that may be noted betweene them: let vs begin with Plutarch, and conſider his life principally by the inſtructions which he himſelfe hath left vs, and namely in many places of his morall and mingled workes.
            
               Pauſanias, in the ninth booke of his deſcription of GRECE, ſaith, that there ranne a common rumour abroad among the THEBANS, that Cadmus the ſonne of Agenor comming from DELPHES into PHOCIDE, was guided by a cow marked in both her flankes with white ſpots in forme of a full Moone: and that the Oracle commaunded him to ſtay with his troupes in that place where the cow ſhould lie downe. Which came to paſſe in the territory afterwards called BOEOTIA, becauſe of this cow. At the beginning of the ſame booke he ſayth that BOEOTIA tooke the ſame name of Boeotus the ſonne of Iton, and of the nymph Menalippe: which

ſhould ſeeme repugnant. But the one and the other opinion may well agree, if we ſay that Cadmus being come into that part of the countrey, Boeotius that had a charge in theſe troupes, and remaining there after the others, left his name to all the territorie which is neare neighbour to ATTICA, but in a thicker aire, becauſe it ſtandeth betwixt two mountaines, and that the country is more Northwards. So that the ATHENIANS were euer thinner of body, and of liuelier ſpirit: and the BOEOTIANS to the contrary, fuller of fleſh, and duller of wit alſo. From whence came many ſlents of laughter againſt the maſſe and waight of their vnderſtandings, and they made prouerbes diſperſed in Greeke and Latine bookes. Yea the Poets themſelues, and Ebulus among others, do floute the BOEOTIANS, that they are great feeders, and loue to ſpeake much: which agreeth very well with the reſt of their maners. Plutarch alſo himſelfe in his firſt treaty of eating of fleſh, noteth ſomewhat of that. Neuertheleſſe, of ſuch a countrey came Pelopidas, and other excellent men, but namely him of whom we are now preſently to ſpeake of, no ſimple nor ſottiſh man: but as

                  Midſt buſhes, and the thickeſt of the thorne
                  The floures of tendreſt violets are borne.
               
Euen ſo out of a countrey accuſtomed to bring forth fat men, as they ſay, and fitter for war then learning: came Plutarch, borne in the city of CHAERONEA, neare vnto LEBADIA. In old time (as Pauſanias ſaith) it was called ARNE, becauſe of Arné the daughter of Aeolus. But afterwards becauſe it ſtood euill, and looked towards the Weſt: Chaeron the ſonne of Apollo and of Thero the daughter of Phylas, cauſed it to be new built, and turned to the Eaſt, to make it more wholeſome and habitable. Vpon which occaſion, in token of thankfulneſſe for the good act of the founder, it was euer after called CHAERONEA. And although for many memorable accidents this towne is noted in hiſtories, yet do I not know any thing that hath ſo much kept vp the memorie of it vntill this preſent, as the name of Plutarch, whoſe anceſtours, men of a noble race, maintained themſelues from father to the ſonne in honourable office and place of charge in their litle common wealth, vntill the time of Nicarchus his great grandfather, who liued in the time of Auguſtus Caeſar, as Plutarch reporteth in the life of Antonius: where he ſaith alſo, that all the citizens of CHAERONEA, not one excepted, were compelled themſelues to carie vpon their ſhoulders, a certaine meaſure of corne to the ſea coaſt, which is before the Ile of ANTICYRE: and yet they were driuen forward whipped with many a ſore laſh. Againe, as they were preparing for a ſecond iourney, and that euery man had his burthen ready: newes came that Antonius had loſt the battell before ACTIVM, which ſaued CHAERONEA. For Antonius commiſſioners and ſouldiers fled immediatly, and the citizens deuided the corne amongſt them. Nicarchus, amongſt other children had Lamprias, a learned man amongſt thoſe of his time, and of whom Plutarch makes often mention in his bookes, where he ſpeaketh of talke at the table: how that he had bene in company with other learned men at many feaſts, where there was no talke but of learning, and matters of Philoſophie. He ſpeaketh alſo of his father, the ſonne of Lamprias, not expreſſing his name although he repreſenteth him diſcourſing of many points of Philoſophy, and namely in the bookes aboue mentioned. Of this Philoſopher then the ſonne of Lamprias, were borne many children, and amongſt others Plutarch, Timon, and Lamprias: all which three were very carefully brought vp and inſtructed in the liberall ſciences, and in all the parts of Philoſophie: vnto the which they ſhall euer ſee an humble reuerence towards their grandfather and father ioyned together, and amongſt themſelues a faſt and pleaſant friendſhip, as may be gathered in many places out of their table talke. Whereupon in reſpect of the grandfather and father, I remembred that Plutarch in thoſe bookes ſpeaking of his grandfather, he makes alwayes honourable mention of him. And as for his father, in the inſtruction for thoſe that deale in affaires of the eſtate, he reporteth, that he being young was ſent with another in embaſſage to the Proconſull, and his companion remaining vpon ſome occaſion behind, he went thither alone, and executed the commiſſion. And at his returne, as he would haue giuen the common wealth account openly, and haue made report of his charge and embaſſage: his father riſing vp alone, forbad him to ſay, I went, but we went: and I ſpake, but we ſpake, and ſo commanded him to make his report, alwayes ioyning his companion with that he had done. We ſee in the treaty of brotherly loue, how hartily he loued his brother Timon, when he ſayd in theſe words: For my ſelfe, although fortune hath ſhewed me many fauours, which deſerue that I ſhould be thankfull to her for them, yet there is none that maketh me ſo much bound vnto her, as the loue and good

will my brother Timon hath borne, and doth beare vnto me in all things: the which no man can deny to be true, that hath but a litle frequented our company. And in his talke at the table, bringing in his father and brethren with many others, or together, reſoluing diuerſe queſtions of Philoſophy, he repreſenteth men that with a grounded knowledge had ioyned a ſweete behauiour, and a wonderfull good vnderſtanding, and namely the yong Lamprias, who was of a pleaſant nature, and loued to be merry. Plutarch then hauing a father that loued learning and vertue, was in a good houre put out to learning, whereunto he was wholly inclined. And amongſt other good maiſters, he met with Ammonius, an AEGYPTIAN borne, ſaith Eunapius, who hauing with great praiſe taught in ALEXANDRIA, he did alſo viſite the cities of GRECE wherein learning did yet flouriſh, and taried a great time in ATHENS, reſpected and well beloued of euery man. In the latter end of Theomistocles life, Plutarch ſheweth that he was a boorder and lying in Ammonius houſe, and in talke at the table he brought him in, either diſputing, or teaching his ſcholers. So the cuſtome to teach the youth at that time was very fine and eaſie, to giue children a taſt of learning and vertue: for as the tutors imployed part of their time to diſcourſe in the preſence of their diſciples, they occupied them in the ſame exerciſe afterwards, and made them declare, and ſay their opinion of diuerſe matters: ſo that in few weekes by way of ſport and recreation they had runne through all the ſecrets of Philoſophie. Vnto the which they ioyned alſo, beſides their compoſitions and particular exerciſes, their familiar talke and recreatiue diſputations in their walkes, at their ſuppers and feaſts, where nothing elſe could be heard but that which made the young men wiſe and vertuous in a ſhort ſpace. That may be gathered out of Plutarchs writings, and out of thoſe eſpecially where he ſpeaketh how children ſhould be taught, of the lecture of the Poets, how they ſhould heare, his talke at the table, and a good number of declamations diſperſed in the middeſt of his morall workes. In this place I remember that which he himſelfe ſpake in diſcourſe, how a man ſhould know a flatterer from a friend, touching the direction of this his tutor. Our maiſter Ammonius, ſayth he, perceiuing in his lecture he made after dinner, that ſome of his diſciples & familiars had made a larger dinner then was fit for ſtudens: he commaunded one of his ſeruants a free man to beate his owne ſonne: he could not (ſayth he) dine without vineger. When he had ſpoken that, he caſt his eye vpon vs: ſo that they which were indeed culpable, found that he meant it by them. We may ſee alſo in the firſt and ſecond queſtion of his third booke of talke at the the table, how ready this Philoſopher was to ſharpen the ſpirits of young men that frequented him. Thus therefore Plutarch hauing ſo good a helpe, in few yeares he profited greatly in the knowledge of all the parts of Philoſophy, and neuer went out of his countrey, nor trauelled to vnderſtand ſtrange languages, although the Latine tongue was common in ROME, and in diuerſe places of the ROMAINE Empire: which extended it ſelfe into GRECE, and beyond, as Plutarch noteth it in the end of his Platonicall queſtions. Without notwithſtanding that he euer profited much in the knowledge of any other tongue, ſauing in the knowledge of the GREEKE: the which alſo hath a taſt of his Philoſophie of BOEOTIA. He doth alſo confeſſe in the beginning of the life of Demoſthenes, that whileſt he was in ITALIE and in ROME, he had no leiſure to ſtudie, nor to exerciſe the Latine tongue, as well for the buſineſſe he had then in hand, as to ſatisfie thoſe that frequented him to learne Philoſophie of him. So that very late, being well ſtepped on in yeares, he began to take Latine bookes in his hand, wherein there happened a ſtrange thing vnto him, but yet true notwithſtanding: that is, that he did not learne nor vnderſtand things ſo much by the words, as by a certaine vſe and knowledge he had of things he attained to the vnderſtanding of the words. But furthermore (they are his owne words) to know how to iudge well, wherein conſiſteth the beautie of the Latine tongue, or to ſpeake it readily, or to vnderſtand the figures, tranſlations, and the fine knitting of ſimple ſayings one with the other, which do adorne and beautifie the tongue, I thinke well (ſayd he) that it is a very goodly thing and pleaſant▪ but withall it requireth a long and labourſome exerciſe, fit for thoſe that be at better leiſure then I am, and that be yet able for age to attend ſuch fineneſſe. That which is aboue aboue ſpoken of, ſheweth that in that time they learned ſciences in their mother tongue, ſo that euen from their cradle children began to enter into the ſchoole of the Muſes, and pierced into the goodlieſt ſecrets of the ſame, hauing in their owne tongue the arts and goodly diſciplines diſcouered euen to the bottome: whereas preſently the beſt of our age ſtealeth away in learning of words, and when we ſhould enter into the knowledge of things, our memorie is ouer-whelmed and iudgement altered with

an infinitie of obiects, which (like diuerſe ſawces) haue moſt times altered our right taſt. Inſomuch that almoſt commonly we ſee that we delight for the moſt part to heape together letters vpon letters, and after a great prouiſion of ſtrange words, we find our ſelues children, and voide of the true knowledge of things. But now to come againe to Plutarch, as touching his ſufficiency and his aduancement in ſciences, we need not ſpeake of them in particular, conſidering that his writings do ſufficiently proue them, and that we haue alſo ſpoken ſomething in the preface of his morall workes.
            Now, as his good fortune made him meete with excellent maiſters, and men very carefull to manure ſo noble a ſpirit: ſo he for his part aunſwered their hope very ſufficiently, ſhewing himſelfe euen from his infancy to the end of his life wholly giuen to ſtudy, with an earneſt deſire (but well gouerned) to keepe his body in health, to content his mind, and to make himſelfe profitable a long time to himſelfe, and to others alſo. Which was no hard matter for him, hauing bene carefully brought vp euen from his cradle, and ſo well gouerned, as was requiſite to maintaine himſelfe long in ſtrength: his fathers houſe and table being a ſchoole of temperance and of frugalitie. Conſidering furthermore that talke with learned men was very neceſſary for him to attaine to that which he pretended: and hauing a mind deſirous to excel in all things, he trauelled into AEGYPT, & talked there of all the ancient doctrine with the wiſeſt men, whereof afterwards he made a collection and intituled it, of Iſis, and Oſiris: which is yet left vnto vs, where he ſheweth himſelfe to be well ſtudied in the Diuinity and Philoſophy of the AEGYPTIANS. From thence he returned againe into GRECE, and viſited the townes and vniuerſities where there were any Philoſophers, and frequented them all, to gather together the goodly inſtructions which he hath left vs. Moreouer he began to make collections, & culled out remembrances not only out of the bookes already publiſhed, but alſo of the notable talke and diſcourſe which he vnderſtood of the one & the other. Alſo of regiſters & autenticall inſtruments kept in towns where he came, wherof afterwards he did moſt artificially frame the moſt part of his workes.
And pretending ſuch a laudable end, the better to eſtabliſh his conceits, and to ſpeake with a more commendable authority and good maner: he made a iourney vnto the city of SPARTA, of purpoſe to ſee the papers & memories of all the gouernment of this goodly commonwealth, & of their lawmakers, Kings, and Ephores, and gathered together all their notable deeds & ſayings ſo carefully as could be poſſible, euen to the leaſt words of the ſimple ſouldiers and women of SPARTA, together with all their cuſtomes, ordinances, ceremonies, and faſhions to liue in common, and particularly, in warre and in peace. He did the like in diuerſe other commonwealths, as his liues, & the demands of things pertaining to the GREEKES and ROMAINES doth amply proue it: without which collections alſo it was vnpoſſible for him to haue left in writing ſuch particularities, & he could not but of neceſſity haue had communication with a great number of men louers of antiquities. Vnto that he ioyned a curious ſearch of ſtatues, mettals, inſcriptions, paintings, tables: alſo of Prouerbes, Epigrams, Epitaphes, Apophthegms, & other ornaments of hiſtory, to leaue nothing behind him. And being continually almoſt in the company of learned men in all profeſſions: it ſeemeth his memory was alwayes bent to gather, & his iudgement occupied to diſcerne that which was to be reiected or retained. By which meanes he ſaw himſelfe in a ſhort time aduanced to the knowledge of all things: moreouer he had in his hands goodly briefes and collections, with the which he finely holpe himſelfe, and afterwards made a good part vnto his friends and poſterity. He himſelfe at the beginning of his booke treating of the contentment and quietneſſe of the mind, makes mention of the memories which he had of long time made for his owne vſe. So that out of this rich cloſet he hath drawne the excellent peeces which haue remained vnto vs, and which ſhew how much we haue loſt being depriued of them that are no more to be found, and the which time hath diſperſed, or vtterly conſumed.
            Now though that in generall it may be ſayd, that this man was ignorant in no learning, nor of the goodly ſecrets of nature: yet this word we muſt adde to it, that whoſoeuer ſhall duly conſider the entrance, continuance, compoſition, binding and incloſing of his diſcourſe, be it that he write an hiſtorie, or that he by any treatie apart will put backe vice, and make vertue to be beloued: be it that he ſport himſelfe in clearing the difficulties of naturall Philoſophie, or of the Mathematickes, be it that he beginnneth to commence ſome diſputation againſt thoſe whoſe opinions he diſproueth: we ſhall find in his writings an exact and eaſie method both together, his proofes ſound, and his inductions pleaſant and agreeable to all ſorts of wits, and of ſuch

pithie diſcourſes, ſo that of force we muſt confeſſe that this perſon had bene moſt excellently directed in his ſtudies, conſidering that in ſpeaking after ſuch an eaſie manner, he preſenteth ſo profound inſtructions, and I cannot tell what, where there is alwayes ſomewhat to be learned. Furthermore, ſeeing diuerſe ſects in credite in his time, it ſeemeth he had a good will to ſound into the depth of the value & error of them. Then reaching higher yet, he hath ſearched out the opinions of the firſt Sages. So that the Pythagorians, Platonians, Epicurians, Stoickes, and Peripateticians, with their precepts haue bene very familiar with him. But not being content with turning ouer the leaues of their writings, and ſeeing to the end all that which the naturall Philoſophers haue thought of the ſecrets of the world: yet would he familiarly frequent thoſe whom he vnderſtood to be practiſed in ſciences, and conferre with them, vnderſtand their reaſons, and be throughly reſolued of them: and at the length obtained his deſire, as his bookes make mention. That was accompanied with a continuall reading of all ſorts of good Authors, as well to amplifie his collections, as ſtill more and more to enrich his memorie, and to poliſh his iudgement: as may be noted in his workes three ſeuerall excellences of his ſpirit. For ſome of them are certaine declamations made in the ſchoole, and by way of exerciſe, as we haue ſhewed them placed at the beginning of the ſame: ſo that if he would haue taken the paines to haue reuiewed and ſmoothed thoſe peeces there, they would haue ſeemed to be others then they were. But we perceiue that he left ſome vnperfect, not thinking that that (which ſerued not but for a proofe of ſome thing better laboured) deſerued to come to light. There are alſo ſome other diſcourſes better poliſhed, yet in ſuch ſort notwithſtanding, that it plainely appeareth, he might haue amplified them and made them better. And there be other peeces, vnto the which it may be ſayd, he hath put his laſt hand: as are his Liues, and the moſt part of his Morall workes, written at leiſure, very aduiſedly, conſidered in all vnderſtanding, and to diuerſe reiterations. He could haue done the like in all, and with the like ſtile haue raiſed his writings to their perfection: but hauing as it were more expreſſely ſtayed himſelfe vpon ſome, he hath ſhewed therein the diſpoſition of his ſtudies, and with what diſcretion he ſpent his time.
            Now, though he had taſted of all the ſects of the Philoſophers, yet you may perceiue that inclining to the Platonians (for he greatly reuerenced Socrates and Plato, whoſe birth dayes he did yearely celebrate) he neuertheleſſe ſhut himſelfe within the bounds of modeſtie of certaine ACADEMICKES, being content ſimply to propound the things, but to leaue them to the iudgement of the readers, forcing no man. Furthermore, we ſee with what diligence he had turned ouer the leaues of the writings of the Epicurians, and of the Stoickes, againſt whom he ſtoutly oppoſed himſelfe. But morall Philoſophie was his chiefeſt end: for the rationall, the naturall, and the Mathematickes (the which he had greatly ſtudied) they were but ſimple paſtimes in compariſon of the other. Whereupon may be diſcerned, that hauing receiued in himſelfe a ſingular pleaſure of ſuch ſtudy, he alwayes ſought to print the ſame deſire and contentment in the thought of all men, leauing the ſpeculations and pricking queſtions: onely tending to this good, to bring wiſedome into the houſes, to eſtabliſh it in the thrones of kings, to make it go in the ſtreetes, to lodge it in the eyes, in the eares, vpon the tongues, and in the bottome of the hearts of all men. See here what his thoughts haue bene, which he could well diſgeſt afterwards: ſo that it ſeemeth he was altogether giuen to that. Now though he was occupied in meditations and ſo excellent workes, he forgot not therefore any thing that was requiſite for the exerciſes of his body, ſuch as men vſed at that time, to keepe their ſpirits in ſtrength, as alſo more ioyfully to paſſe ouer ſo manie other croſſes as our life is aſſailed withall. And we may ſee alſo in the precepts he hath written of health, that albeit Phyſicke was not his profeſſion, neuertheleſſe he learned that which was the principall for his owne priuate good. For in that booke of his, he ſpeaketh reaſonably of the vſe of meates, and ſheweth from what meates we ſhould abſtaine. Afterwards hauing declared in what ſort one ſhould vſe his appetite and the pleaſures of the bodie, he condemneth the exceſſe of drinking and eating, he teacheth how to preuent ſickneſſe, ſetteth downe remedies, treateth of diet, and of ſignes of ſickneſſe, and of the true wayes how to keepe health. And thereupon he commeth to reaſon of the exerciſes and diet of ſtudents, laying that open which we ſhould moſt carefully obſerue therein: which maketh me beleeue that he hauing knowne ſo well what was fit for the preſeruation of the body, he did wiſely helpe himſelfe: as alſo euen to very old age he

hath borne office in the commonwealth, and alwayes caried a body and mind luſty and readie to take paines, hauing had this wiſedome to conſider well his nature and diſpoſition: alſo to take ſuch meates and drinkes as were good for his ſtomacke, and to vſe them ſoberly, and keeping his body in good ſtate by commendable exerciſes and nouriture, to make himſelfe profitable a long time for humane ſociety. It is true that he being a graue man, raiſed to honour, and a Philoſopher by profeſſion, his chiefeſt exerciſes of body were to walke with other learned men, where without contention of words, he alwayes decided ſome points of Philoſophie. Furthermore he loued to talke at the table, and to mingle pleaſant & graue matters with ſome new deuice: ſo wittily and ſweetly to enterlace and deuide the courſe of his life: being no crabbed nor ſullen perſon, but pleaſant, and whoſe company was troubleſome to none: and otherwiſe as ſober and diſcreet in his talke, as he was in drinking and eating.
            So then his maners, as well alone, as with his friends and openly, do ſhew, that truly he had a good ſoule within a body well tempered. Now I do not enter here into the examination of the ridiculous opinions of Plutarch in matter of religion: being ſory that ſo rare a ſpirit hath bene ſo miſerably enuironed with the darkneſſe which was at that time in the moſt part of the townes & men of GRECE, & ſpecially among ſo many wiſe men, ſtraungely ignorant and dull in reſpect of the knowldge of the true God. If we had not bin warned betimes by the true and onely wiſe men taught in the ſchoole of eternall wiſdome, of ſuch a iudgement of God vpon the wiſe men of the world, who haue bene confounded in their diſcourſe, when there hath bene queſtion of the honor due to our ſoueraigne Lord: then we might haue bene aſtonied, and remained as men caſt away. And whereas ſo many great wiſe men haue erred in their wayes, that will not excuſe them before their iudge, as if he had kept the light from them. For, ſince that which may be knowne of his eternitie and omnipotent power, hath bene reuealed vnto them in nature and in philoſophie: ſtaying a man vpon himſelfe, or vpon other creatures, and forſaking the onely Creator, they condemne themſelues by their owne words and writings. Now to come againe to Plutarch. He hauing bene Apolloes Prieſt, as himſelfe confeſſeth, and from his youth ſuckled with the fooliſh dotings of the GREEKES: I do not find it ſtraunge, that many abſurd opinions and without good ground (yea wicked and pernicious) are ſcattered in his diſputations, touching the default of Oracles, of the religion of the IEVVES, of the inſcription of the letter E'i' in the temple of DELPHES: why the propheteſſe Pythia doth no more giue her oracles in verſe, and in many places of the liues and workes, in the which he openly inclineth to the ſuperſtitions and Atheiſmes of the PAGANS. There he ſheweth a conſcience euill informed, and a man running very ſwiftly out of the right way. By the ſame meanes a man may plainely note, that in matter of ſupernaturall and diuine philoſophy, another manner of light then that of our corrupt vnderſtanding is wholly required, not being poſſible that a man left to his owne wit can comprehend the things which are of God: becauſe they are diſcerned after a faſhion meerly vnknowne vnto him, and of the which he cannot be partaker but by a ſpeciall grace, and which nature doth not beſtow vpon him, but he which hath made and reformed nature. It is no maruell then if Plutarch ſhould be miſled, that hath had ſo manie inſtructions and maiſters ſtrayed from the way of the eternall truth, and whoſe predeceſſours were drowned in the bottomleſſe pit of ignorance. Yet notwithſtanding, in the middeſt of that darkneſſe he hath had ſo much light, that he ſeemeth at times to note and condemne the laberinth of errour, as a man that hath loſt his way in an horrible darke night ſhould from one time to another be directed rightly by the light of the flaſhings of lightning. For ſome do gather by his diſcourſe, of the ceſſation of the Oracles, and by other places, that he did acknowledge one God, and very liberally condemned many old and new ſuperſtitions, vnto the which both himſelfe, and others his like, did cleaue vnto rather by cuſtome for faſhions ſake, and to pleaſe the people, then for any opinion they had that they were worth ought. But as I haue ſayd, my intention is not to iudge this perſon nor his deeds: conſidering that beſides the matter I touch (euery where where he goeth out of the way) he confuteth himſelfe ſufficiently: witneſſe his diſcourſe of ſuperſtition, and the ſeuenth chapter of his firſt booke touching the opinions of the Philoſophers, where he will diſpute of the eternall prouidence: and the third queſtion of the ſecond booke of talke of the table, making mention of the egge: and the laſt queſtion of the fourth booke, where he medleth with ſpeaking of God, and of the ceremonies of the IEVVES. In the meane time, and in the middeſt of this great blindneſſe, they ſee in Plutarch a heart that is enemie vnto vice, and a

friend of good manners. Let a man ſee him in his familie, in the ſchoole, in bankets, with his friends, and openly: behold, there is a graue man, modeſt in behauiour, ſharpe, learned, and pleaſant in his diſcourſes, offending nor hurting no man. If he ſpeake of vice, he letteth out the filthineſſe, and ſcantly maketh the patient cry. If he ſpeake for vertue, it is with ſuch efficacie, that euerie man may know he ſpake of the aboundance of his heart. He is a good father of a houſe, a wiſe ſchoole-maiſter, a graue hiſtorian, a braue politician, an excellent Philoſopher, a good writer to imitate: and furthermore, a faithfull, profitable, true, and a ioyfull counſellour and friend. His plaineneſſe, ſimplicitie, and graue modeſtie ſhineth in all his writings: his vertue, accompanied almoſt ordinarily with all others which we need not ſpeake of particularly, neither to vnfold the life of our Philoſopher from one part to another to ſee his vprightneſſe, integritie, grauity, ſweetneſſe, conſtancie, force, prudence, temperancie, and liberality: that may be truly ſpoken of him, which had bene long time before applied in the Theaters vnto Amphiaraus, and to Aristides:
            
            
               He litle cares to ſeeme vpright, but ſtriueth ſo to be,
               In deepeſt thoughts preferring vertue ſtill:
               Whence day by day, proceeding we do ſee
               Wiſe counſels, that without reſpect, true honours lawes fulfill.
            
            In teſtimonie of his ſweete grauitie, and of part of his thoughts: I will alledge ſome words couched in his owne diſcourſe againſt choler. As for me, ſayd he, If I haue done well or euill I know not, but by that meanes I haue rid my ſelfe of choler. As the LACEDAEMONIANS did in old time, who to learne their children not to be drunke at all, ſhewed them their ſlaues being drunke: ſo do I conſider the effects of choler in others. And afterwards he addeth more, that a man ſhould accuſtome himſelfe to beare many of his wiues words, and of his familiars and friends, which do reproue vs for that we are too gentle and ſoft. And this was the chiefeſt cauſe (ſayd he) why I was ſo often angrie with my ſeruants, fearing they would waxe worſe for want of reproofe and correction. But I obſerued my ſelfe at the laſt, though late, that firſt I were better by patience and pardoning them, make my ſeruants worſe: then to hurt my ſelfe by ſharpneſſe and choler, ſeeking to reforme others. I conſidered alſo with my ſelfe, and remembred (ſayd he) that as he which teacheth vs to ſhoote in a bow, doth not forbid vs to draw, but to faile in drawing: ſo he that teacheth vs to puniſh in time and place, moderately, profitably, and as we ſhould: doth not let vs but that we may puniſh. I do labour all I can to withdraw, and vtterly to baniſh all choler: principally becauſe I would not take from them that are puniſhed, the meane to iuſtifie themſelues, and to heare them. For time bringeth in the interim to the paſſionate mind, a delay and forgetfulneſſe which diſſolueth it: in which ſpace the iudgement of reaſon findeth both the meane and the meaſure to giue reaſonable correction. And beſides that they giue the partie puniſhed no place to reſiſt the puniſhment, if he be not corrected in anger and choler, but conuinced for that he had well deſerued it. And (which were yet more vnſeemely) they ſhall not find that the ſeruant puniſhed ſpeaketh more iuſtly then his maiſter that puniſheth him. Touching this purpoſe, I will remember the pleaſant report which the Philoſopher Taurus made of Plutarch, as Gellius reciteth it in the ſixe and twentieth chapter of the firſt booke of his nights Attiques, as ſome man hath heretofore expreſſed it in our language. A ſlaue, a vile and vicious man (but yet that had his eares ſomewhat inſtructed with bookes and diſputations of Philoſophie) hauing bene ſtripped naked for ſome fault he had done, by the commaundement of his maiſter Plutarch, whileſt they were whipping of him, he grombled at the firſt that it was without reaſon, and that he had done nothing: but in the end crying out amaine, and iniuring his maiſter, he told him that he was no Philoſopher as he bragged himſelfe to be: and that he often heard him ſay it was a fowle thing to be angrie, yea that he made a booke of it: and that now (ouercome with choler) in making him be beaten ſo cruelly, he vtterly belied all his writings: Thereunto Plutarch coldly and quietly aunſwered: Why, how now roiſter, ſayd he? whereby doeſt thou thinke that I am angrie at this preſent? my countenance, my voice, my colour, my words, do they giue thee any ſigne that I am angrie? I do not thinke I haue cruell eyes, nor a troubled face, nor any fearefull crie. Do I bluſh? do I fome? doth any thing eſcape me that I ſhould repent me? do I ſtampe? do I rage? For to tell thee truly, theſe be the ſhewes of choler. Afterwardes he turned to him that whipped him:

ſaying: Forward with your buſineſſe, whiles he and I do reaſon the matter. Furthermore, we may eaſily gather what Plutarch was amongſt his friends, from the nine bookes, containing the queſtions decided at the table. And for his diſputations againſt the EPICVRIANS and STOICKES, they ſhew that this perſon for the regard of his actions concerning the commonwealth, hauing reſpect vnto thoſe whom at that time he made his iudges, and to the poſterity into whoſe hands his writings might come hereafter: he alwayes caried himſelfe in ſuch a modeſt grauity, that they could require no more of him. And if ſometime he did feelingly touch ſome, as Colotes, and Herodotus, it was not in vaine. Alſo he alwayes vſed termes which witneſſed that he had an vpright ſoule. To be ſhort, it appeareth euery where that his paſſions were maruellous well ſtaied. And if any of them were furious or violent, he could tell in time and place how to reforme them by the precepts of Philoſophy, leading (as is ſayd) a life without blame of men. But aboue all the reſt, when any diſcourſe or diſputation drew him vnto it, to ſpeake of ſhamefull or diſhoneſt things, he did conuey it with ſuch diſcretion as it cannot be amended: whereof we need not to bring forth examples diſperſed in his writings, and eſpecially in the dialogue of loue, ſeeing that being concealed it doth no hurt, as alſo remembred or too expreſſely reuealed, it cannot but hurt the eyes, and an honeſt thought.
            Furthermore, Plutarchs ſtudie of Philoſophie tooke not away the care he had to liue with ſome profit amongſt men, nor made him to diſdaine the meanes which his predeceſſors had left him. But as he came of a noble houſe, and with time being aduanced vnto office and charge in the commonwealth, greatly eſteemed of Traian the Emperor, and of the noble men of ROME, he ſaw he had goods inough to liue at eaſe: whereof notwithſtanding he neuer made ſuch account as that he wold forget his ſtudy, & intangle himſelf in the ſnares of the loue of riches, within the which ſo many miſerable ſoules haue bin engaged vnto death. His means ſerued his turne to maintaine himſelfe among his friends, and to bring vp his children: for he had many of an honorable Lady which he maried, and loued moſt dearly. Amongſt his other ſons, himſelfe maketh mention of Autobulus, of Plutarchus, & of Charon, who died a yong infant, & ſome others whom he nameth not at all. Alſo of daughters, two of the which were maried to Firmus, and vnto Craton, learned philoſophers: and Timoxene, who died very yong. As for Autobulus, he maried in his fathers life time, and it is not well knowne, whether Sextus of CHAERONEA, a Philoſopher of the Scepts, who liued in great honour in the Empire of Antonius, was his ſonne, or the ſonne of Plutarchus. That which I am now about to ſpeake of, may be gathered out of diuerſe places in the workes of Plutarch, and ſpecially of the diſcourſe at the table. And in the conſolation which he wrote to his wife vpon the death of their daughter, they may note that ſhe was an honorable Lady, modeſt, and vertuous, well attended on with women and ſeruants: and otherwiſe charitable to her children, and bearing great reuerence vnto her husband. That the houſe of Plutarch was very well gouerned: that he had a great number of kinsfolkes and friends. And in other places of his booke intituled Sympoſitum, and other treaties, we may know that his ſonnes and nephews were ſtudious and learned, and ſpecially in the ſixt queſtion of his eight booke of talke at the table, ſpeaking of his youngeſt children: who becauſe they taried ſomewhat longer at the Theater then they ſhould haue done, to ſee and heare the paſtimes they made there, came by that meanes late to ſupper: it ſhewed ſufficiently that they now began to follow the fathers ſteps. And there appeared in no partany euill touch amongſt theſe perſons: but as Plutarch did conuerſe in a ſingular reuerence, friendſhip, and gentleneſſe, with his grandfather, his father, and his brethren: we are to iudge the like conuerſation with his wife, his children, and his nephews: as alſo they being in ſo good a ſchoole could not faile but euery day to go forward in the knowledge and practiſe of vertue.
            But as a fountaine hidden ſerueth to no vſe, ſo it had litle preuailed Plutarch to haue ſeene, read, and gathered ſo much together, vnleſſe he had made litle ſtreames runne from ſuch a liuely and goodly fountaine, vnto ſuch places where his vertue might ſhine more then in any other parts of the world. That was ITALIE, and the city of ROME, the ſeate of the Empire, and where (notwithſtanding the diſorders brought in by former warres, and by the diſſolutions and tyrannies of ſome Emperors) notwithſtanding there were many learned men, and in the Emperors courts alſo ſome counſellors, and other perſons of authority which loued vertue. Now Plutarch hauing begun to aduance himſelfe in GRECE, about the time of Veſpaſian and Titus, it ſeemeth he came to ROME immediatly after the death of Titus, vnder Domitian, as well to make

profeſſion there of Philoſophy, as alſo that he might more nearly know the auncient gouernement of the commonwealth, and to increaſe his collections, from the which proceeded afterwards infinite particularities incloſed in his workes: but eſpecially the liues of the noble ROMAINES compared with the GREEKES. For my part, I thinke Plutarch was drawne to ROME by meanes of ſome friends he had there, eſpecially by Soſsius Senecio, that had bene a Conſull, who was of great eſtimation at that time, and namely vnder the Empire of TRAIAN. And that which maketh me thinke ſo, is becauſe of Plutarchs owne words, who ſayth in the beginning of his firſt booke of his diſcourſe at the table, that he gathered together all his reaſons and diſcourſes made here and there, as well in ROME with Senecio, as in GRECE with Plutarch and others. Not being likely that he wold haue taken the paines to haue made ſo long a voyage, & to haue come to ſuch a citie where he vnderſtood not their vulgar tongue, if he had not bene drawne thither by Senecio, and ſuch other men: as alſo in acknowledgement of the good turnes and honour he had receiued by ſuch men, he dedicated diuerſe of his bookes vnto them, and among others, the liues vnto Senecio, and the nine volumes of his diſcourſe at the table: with the treatie, How a man may know that he profiteth in vertue. Now for the time, conſidering what he ſayth in the end of his booke againſt curioſitie, I ſuppoſe that he taught in ROME in the time of Titus and of Domitian: for touching that point, he maketh mention of a noble man called Ruſticus, who being one day at his lecture, he would not open a letter which was brought him from the Emperor, nor interrupt Plutarch, but attended the end of his declamation, and vntill all the hearers were gone away: and addeth alſo, that Ruſticus was afterwards put to death by the commaundement of Domitian. Furthermore, about the beginning of the life of Demoſthenes, Plutarch ſayth, that whileſt he remained in ITALIE and at ROME, he had no leiſure to ſtudie the Latine tongue: as well for that he was buſied at that time with matters he had in hand, as alſo to ſatisfie thoſe that were his followers to learne Philoſophie of him. He doth not tell what matters he had in hand beſides his profeſſion: but following that which Suidas and others ſpeake of him, that he was neare to the perſon of Traian, and had the honor and place to be his ſchoole-maſter and teacher, or at the leaſtwiſe one of ſo many learned men as this prince made much of, as ſome ſtory writers do teſtifie, he was honoured and aduanced to ſome charge or gouernement: which I thinke is that he ſpeaketh of in this place. Now furthermore, his chiefeſt labour was publickly to teach all the parts of Philoſophie, mingling in his declamations and lectures a diligent and curious ſearch of all that the auncient Philoſophers, reaſonable, naturall, or morall, of what ſect ſoeuer they were had treated of: as appeareth by his writings, which are as ſummaries of his leſſons and orations he made with his owne voyce. His ſpeech doth not flow ſo as that of many other Philoſophers, Oratours, and Greeke Hiſtorians: but being come later, and in a more rude and harſh world, his ſtile alſo is more hard, briefe, enforced, and Philoſopher like: ayming at this marke to inſtruct the mind firſt, not tarying to tickle the eares much, though he did fill and content them learnedly. But the flowing ſweetneſſe we taſt in Plato, in Xenophon, in Herodotus, and in ſome other, wanting indeed in Plutarch, is ſupplied and recompenced in him by infinite ſtories, ſentences, ſimilitudes, and notable particulars which he boroweth of others, and whereof he compoſed a worke ſo well deuided, ſo rich, and ſo pleaſant, by reaſon of his varietie, that it is not poſſible to reade bookes of a more gentle and profitable reading, amongſt all the hiſtorians, & Philoſophers, GREEKS or ROMAINES. If Plutarch then doth at this preſent content all ſorts of men, what may we thinke he did with his liuely voyce? but after the example of this Hercules of GAVLE, which held his auditors eares faſt chained to his toung: ſo hath he by his goodly documents moued an infinite number of men, to leaue vice, and to cloath them with the loue of vertue.
            So he hauing continued theſe exerciſes for ſome yeares, being heard and viſited of all ſorts of men, grew to be of ſuch reputation, that the greateſt perſons began to ſeeke him and to make much of him, yea to thinke themſelues honoured by his friendſhip: as his bookes dedicated vnto ſome of them do ſufficiently teſtifie it. And touching the acceſſe he had about the perſon of Traian himſelf, it may be gathered from the beginning of this goodly collection of Apothegmes, which he dedicated vnto this great Emperour, what was his intention: that is to wit, to ſerue for the good of all the ROMAINE Empire, giuing wholeſome inſtructions vnto the head thereof. For he wiſely iudged, that in ruling the thought of that man, it was to giue phiſicke at once vnto all the ſubiects of that great Monarchie. The ſame being a common thing, that

                  
                  Subiects and kingdomes commonly do chuſe
                  The manners that their Princes daily vſe.
               
It is true that ſuch inſtructions in reſpect of Traian, do onely concerne his perſon and politicke affaires. For as touching the only true religion, it was meerely vnknowne of Plutarch, and rudely perſecuted vnder the Empire of Traian: who notwithſtanding in the end being ſoftened by the precepts of moral Philoſophie, and through the aduertiſements his deputie gouernors gaue him, & namely Plinius ſecundus gouernor of BITHYNIA, of the innocencie of the Chriſtians: or rather reſtrained by the ſecret prouidence of our ſoueraigne Lord, (who excellently ſtrengthened his, put the Oracles of the lying ſpirit to ſilence, and ouerthrew Idolatrie in moſt places) he caried himſelfe more gently, and did forbid to vexe and trouble them any more, whom before they had purſued with all ſorts of cruelties. Furthermore, I thinke that it was in fauour of Traian chiefly, that Plutarch made certaine particular Treatiſes, (beſides the liues of Noblemen) and amongſt others that, where he maintaineth, that it is requiſite a Prince ſhould be wiſe. The inſtruction for thoſe that deale in the affaires of eſtate. The notable ſayings of GREEKES and ROMAINES, and others concerning the dutie of Princes and great Lords. Now conſidering that wherein he reaſoneth, and briefly defendeth, (but grauely, and with aſſured proofes) that a Philoſopher ought to conuerſe with Princes: ſome may ſay that it is an Apologie of Plutarch, againſt the common and light obiections of ſome Courtiers, which thinke that Princes cannot be well counſelled, but by men that blow (as they ſay) fire with their mouthes, and that carie the rapier and dagger in their hands: and would that men of learning (whom in ſcorne they call ſchoolemaiſters and Philoſophers) ſhould be turned to their ſtudie, or into a ſchoole, to crie out there as much and as lowd as they thinke good. Therefore he was willing as well to encourage himſelfe firſt in that diſcourſe, as alſo to remedie what in him lay, certaine euils infinitely abounding and ouerflowing in others. In all times and ages euery man hath granted and confeſſed, that amongſt thoſe that want good companie, are Princes, Lords, and great perſonages. For their affaires being ſo important and waightie, as euery man knoweth, their bodies being weake, and their ſpirits not able to diſpatch all things: they muſt needes ſee by others eyes, and worke with others hands. Whereupon there are three ſorts of men which are to be reproued. For the firſt, they are the Princes themſelues, who in ſtead of calling and drawing neare vnto them, men of honour that might helpe them in any matter, they giue acceſſe vnto ill-minded men, that corrupt them, and ouerthrow their eſtate. The ſecond (but a ſmall number at all times) are the Philoſophers, that is to ſay, men of authoritie, wiſe, learned, louers of vertue, and of the good of Princes and of their ſubiects: who being able to do much, yet they draw backe: or being aduanced, haue not alwaies that conſideration nor courage that is fit, being oftentimes caried away with the greateſt opinion, and mingling ſomewhat too much their humane wiſedome with the apprehenſion of their true dutie: whereof their conſcience being cleared diuerſe waies, doth ſufficiently informe them. For the laſt, they are ignorant tutours, or Atheiſts, minions, ſhifters, ieſters, flatterers, brokers of filthie pleaſures, and ſuch practiſers, which by wicked meanes creepe into Princes Courts, houſes and cloſets. And in recompence of the charges they boldly accept, and of the treaſures which they heape together with a wicked conſcience, and do afterwards ſpend of the ſame, they do deceiue, diſhonor, and finally they vndo their vnwiſe maiſters: as a million of examples in hiſtories do teſtifie. Plutarch therefore conſidering theſe things, doth attempt in this Treatiſe to giue courage vnto thoſe, that haue a deſire to ſee all things well ordered: and ſuch maner of men doth he exhort to be about Princes. But becauſe grauity and wiſdome maketh men modeſt and ſlow: as to the contrary, ignorance & malice maketh them haue braſen faces: he ſheweth that it is no ambition of a Philoſopher to be about great Lords, but rather that his duty doth beare it, ſithence that ſuch receiue honor, pleaſure and profit: and this he proueth by reaſons, & notable examples. But aboue all, he forgetteth not to ſet vpon thē that come to Princes courts to make thēſelues great, ſhewing that Philoſophers ſhould ſhoot at another marke. And laſt of all he treateth of the contentment thoſe receiue, which ſeruing one alone, do by the ſame means helpe an infinit number of others that are bound vnto them for ſo great a good turne. I haue written at large the argument of this treatie of Plutarch, becauſe it containeth the briefe of al the conceits of this Philoſopher coming to the Emperor: & it is a patterne alſo to al learned mē that enter into ſeruice of great lords, the which if they wil painfully follow,

the chiefeſt may recouer ſome part of their auncient glorie. Now I make no doubt of it, but that Plutarch hath aſſayed by all poſſible meanes to practiſe that which he teacheth in this booke, to gaine to himſelfe a great contentment in his ſoule, and to leaue a good ſent of him vnto all poſteritie.
            The cauſe that maketh me ſpeake this, is the conſideration of the eſtate in the which the Empire of ROME ſtood in at that time, the which if any man will at leyſure confer with that which he may gather out of many parts of Plutarchs workes, he ſhall find the words of Plato very true: that happie are thoſe commonwealths which are gouerned by Philoſophers, or by Princes that haue Philoſophers about them. For like as an expert pylote by his skill and knowledge reſiſteth the winds and billowes of the ſea, and in deſpite of their force beareth ſaile to the deſired hauen: euen ſo when the ſhip of the commonwealth hath a maiſter that guideth it by the precepts of Philoſophie, the gouernment is peaceable and happy euery way. And if any ſtorme happen, and neceſſitie requireth it, he finely plucketh downe the ſailes, and yeeldeth himſelfe in ſuch ſort to the waues, that he eſcapeth and ouercometh it with honor. Dion writeth, that one of the firſt actes Traian did, after he was choſen Emperor in the place of Nerua, was: that he wrote letters with his owne hand to the Senate of ROME, promiſing by them he would neuer put any man to death, or make him infamous, that was an honeſt man: and this he afterwards confirmed by ſolemne oth. He put Aelianus and the ſouldiers Praetorians to death, becauſe they mutined againſt Nerua. And after he had made his entrie into ROME, he gaue good order for the affaires of the eſtate, and ſpecially fauoured vertuous men many waies, graunted them great priuiledges, and gaue meanes to the cities of ITALIE to bring vp their youth. He raigned Emperour ninteene yeares and a halfe, being two and fortie yeares old when he was choſen. His behauiour was ſuch that he obtained the name of a iuſt, valiant, moderate, & a good Prince: ſo that in the flower of his youth, they noted in him a ſtayed iudgement, and in his age a great courage. He enuied no man, he hurt no man, he raiſed good men to honorable place and charge in the commonwealth: whereby it came to paſſe that he was neuer afraid, nor had no enemy in the world. Accuſers had no acceſſe vnto him: he was as gentle a Prince as was poſſible, and as much an enemy of couetouſneſſe, as he was of murthers and robberies. In time of peace and warre he was at great charge in ſtately buildings, witneſſe the wonderfull bridge ouer Danuby. But with magnificence ſuch enterpriſes and reparations ordinarily were neceſſarie, without oppreſſing or wronging any man: for he was a noble Prince, that deſired rather to be beloued of his ſubiects, then feared and much made of, as ſome of his predeceſſors. To meane men he ſhewed himſelfe courteous and eaſie to haue acceſſe vnto: graue and honourable among the Senatours. The ROMAINES loued him as much as they could poſſible, and his enemies infinitely were afraid of him. His paſ-times were hunting, feaſting, and the Theater to ſee common playes and ſports. Oftentimes he would be priuate with his friends, and came without his guard into their houſes, yea ſometimes he would lye there, and paſſe away the night. He was not of the wiſeſt, although by his behauiour they could not iudge otherwiſe of him, but that he was a wiſe and learned Prince. There was nothing in him but it was excellent, and in manner blameleſſe. For although he loued to drinke wine, and delighted to ſee faire boyes: yet for all this he neuer committed any foule act, being very warie in his paſſions, and aboue all, keeping himſelfe from abuſing his authority. He deſired nothing but war, but it was principally to ouercome his enemies, and to enrich his friends. Furthermore, he was ſo fortunate and braue a chieftaine of an armie, ſo beloued of his Captains and ſouldiers, that there was neuer any mutinie or diſorder in his campe. That made him dreadfull to thoſe that troubled him neare or farre off, of which the chiefeſt was Decebalus king of the DACIANS: whom he purſued ſo hard, that being vnpoſſible for him to eſcape, he killed himſelf. Furthermore he made warre with the PARTHIANS, with the ARABIANS, and with the IEVVES, with diuerſe euents, but almoſt alwaies to his aduantage. Furthermore, to come to his manners, he loued ſo faithfully, that it was a hard thing to make him thinke euill of thoſe whom he loued, which we will proue by ſome example. Certaine ill-willers brought him word that Sura Licinius, one of his priuate friends did practiſe ſomewhat againſt him. In ſtead of taking it ill to conceiue a hard opinion of him, he went (vnbidden) into Sura his houſe, he would ſup there, and ſending backe his guard, firſt he made Sura his Phiſition come to him, and ſhewed him his eyes to helpe ſome griefe that troubled him: not being ſo contented, he ſendeth for his Barber to ſhaue his beard: then being trimmed, and hauing waſhed, he ſate down at the table and ſupped▪
               
The next morning ſome reporting vnto him the ill will that Sura did beare him: If he would haue killed me, ſaid he, yeſterday he might haue done it, for he had meanes to do it. This Sura was he vnto whom Traian had giuen the office of the great Marſhall of the Empire: and coming to him to tie his girdle baudricke wiſe about his necke, hauing the ſword drawne in his hand, he vſed this ſpeech vnto him: Receiue this ſword of me, and if I commaund as I ought, employ it in my defence: if I do otherwiſe, draw it againſt me, and take my life from me. He cauſed ſtatues to be ſet vp of Soſsius Senecio, of Palma, and of Celſus, who were all three Senators whom aboue all others he loued and honored. He ſet vp Libraries, and did many notable acts, in teſtimonie of his great courage. But that which moſt of all other doth commend him, is, that hauing done wonderfull much good to the Empire, by decree of the Senate, he was ſurnamed Optimus Imperator: that is to ſay, moſt good Emperour. And ſo was he wonderfully beloued of the Senators, and Officers of the Empire, of all the people, and ſpecially of the ſouldiers, amongſt whom he would be ſo familiar as if they had bene his companions. Furthermore, nothing pleaſed him ſo much as this title of Optimus: wherin he gloried amongſt his friends, and did more and more indeuour to ſhew himſelfe ſo. As alſo after him (as Eutropius reporteth) when any new Emperor was choſen by the Senate, after the ſhowtings of happie preſage, and well wiſhings of the Senatours, they cryed out vnto him: What, canſt thou be more fortunate then Auguſtus, and better then Traian! Now if we bring to the writings of Plutarch the life of this Prince, we will ſay that the Prince did alwaies thinke of the wiſe precepts of the Philoſopher: and on the other ſide that the Philoſopher hath framed the deedes of the Prince to the rule of good life, which he hath ſo fitly propounded to great and meane men. And therefore it is not to be maruelled at, if Plutarch declare (to the high praiſe of Traian and the Senate) in his treatie, where he inſtructeth thoſe that deale in publike affaires: that in his time for peace ſake, people had no need of wiſe gouernours to defend them: for (ſaid he) all the warres againſt the GREEKES and barbarous people are fled from vs. Thus ſtandeth the eſtate of the Empire, the which if any man will particularly conferre with that which Plutarch ſetteth downe in his writings: he ſhall find it was happie to haue met with ſo well diſpoſed hearts, to receiue, and carefully to practiſe his goodly leſſons. And that as it was a ſingular honour to Traian by his vertue to haue obtained a ſurname that made him greater then the moſt part of the ROMAINE Emperors: ſo is Plutarch euery way to be commended, that was the excellent inſtrument to aduance and maintaine ſo great a good. Whereupon I deſire his Morals ſhould be ſpecially remembred, to apply that which he ſpeaketh of vice and vertue, vnto that which hath bene touched in the life of Traian. For I thinke the one can hardly be ſpoken of, but that the other by the ſame meanes muſt be remembred. And it ſeemeth that one ſelfe ſoule hath put forward theſe two hearts, both to giue and receiue one commendable inſtruction. Onely for proofe a man may with his eye run ouer two or three diſcourſes. As for example, that of the difference betwixt the flatterer and the friend: Againſt choler: How a man may know if he profite in the exerciſe of vertue: That it is requiſit a Prince ſhould be wiſe: The inſtruction for thoſe which deale in the affaires of the eſtate: The apothegmes: and there ſhall a man find the rules which the Emperour Traian could wiſely apply to himſelfe, and practiſe in all his actions.
            So could he well acknowledge the good he had receiued of Plutarch, being a noble and bountifull Prince, as hath bene ſaid here-before. For, beſides the great honour he had done him at ROME, hauing made him a Conſull: he commanded (as ſaith Suidas) that all the magiſtrates and officers which were in the Prouince of SLAVONY, ſhould do nothing but vnder his authoritie. If we had the bookes of Marius Maximus, of Fabius Marcellinus, of Aurelius Verus, and of Statius Valens, which haue written the life of Traian: we might eaſily draw on this matter further, the which Suidas (according to his ſtile) is contented to touch in one word. And Dion who was a GREEKE, a man very forgetfull for an Hiſtorian, and that in ſome places ſhewed he had no great iudgement: he ſeemeth to haue ſuppreſſed the name of Plutarch, as though he had bene offended with the fame obtained by this man. Or elſe, if one will take things in good part, as I encline vnto it: it may be he thought he needed make no mentiō of one whoſe writings made him to be knowne ſufficiently. Yet furthermore, I do not find that Plutarch was in SLAVONIE at all, and if ſo be that he made any iourney thither, I thinke he taried not long there: becauſe it appeareth in diuerſe places of his works, that his abode was moſt in ITALIE and in GRECE. And for his honorable charges committed vnto him, that ſhould not be thought very ſtraunge, if we conſider the

merits of Plutarch, the names of Traian, and the goodwill that Soſsius Senecio, (one of the principall men of ROME, and of the chiefeſt fauorites of Traian) bare vnto Plutarch. For he that was in ſo great credit with his maiſter, would not forget him whom he loued aboue all other men: wherein he loſt not his time, foraſmuch as the ſtatue that was ſet vp for him, and that which Dion and ſome others do briefly paſſe ouer, do not commend Soſsius, as do the prefaces of honor, and the bookes which Plutarch dedicated vnto him. The which we need no more rehearſe, then to write ouer againe the Epiſtle of Plutarch vnto Traian, the which is written in Latine, as Amyot ſheweth in his preface of the liues: where he hath inſerted the Epiſtle at length, becauſe he thought it wiſely and grauely written, a briefe worthie of ſuch a Philoſopher as Plutarch. That which Cuſpinianus ſaith in the latter end of the life of Traian, ſeemeth to touch that: ſpeaking alſo, as if it had bene expreſſed out of Greeke into Latine. But time hath depriued vs of that, and of many other goodly peeces of the ſelfe ſame, as we haue ſomewhat ſpoken of it before in the beginning of the Morall workes. Now he hath written nothing touching his behauiour in his publike charge, but contenteth himſelfe to ſpeake a word ſometime paſſing by, becauſe he made no account of any thing but of Philoſophie, through the helpe whereof he aſſayed to make him ſelfe and others wiſer, and more vertuous euery day then other. Being a thing very likely that ſuch a man as had ſo painefully conſidered of the eſtate of the world, and of all ſorts of publike gouernments, and had ioyned his ſtudies with ſo great experience: that he hath happily managed the charges that were committed vnto him. To conclude, to liue as we ſhould amongſt men, the ſpeculation and knowledge of things being ioyned with the practiſe of the ſame, do bring foorth excellent effects: whereas thoſe that do content themſelues with the ſimple theoricke, and others that follow exerciſe, contemning the true vnderſtanding of the cauſes and grounds of affaires, as Philoſophie doth ſhew them: they oftentimes fall into wonderfull difficulties.
            For Plutarch, though he taried a long time in ITALIE and in ROME, yet that tooke not away the remembrance of the ſweet aire of GRECE, and of the litle towne where he was borne: but being touched from time to time with a ſentence of an ancient Poet, who ſaid, that
            
               In whatſoeuer countrey men are bred,
               (I know not by what ſweetneſſe of it led,)
               They nouriſh in their minds a glad deſire
               Vnto their natiue homes for to retire:
            
            He reſolued to go back into GRECE againe, there to end the reſt of his daies in reſt and honor amongſt his citizens, of whom he was honorably welcomed home. Some iudge that he left ROME after the death of Traian, being then of great years, to leade a more quiet life. So being then at reſt he earneſtly took in hand that which he had long thought of before, to wit, the Liues: and tooke great paines in it vntill he had brought his worke to perfection, as we haue done at this preſent: although that ſome liues, as thoſe of Scipio African, of Metellus Numidicus, and ſome others are not to be found. Now himſelfe confeſſeth in ſome place, that when he began this worke, at the firſt it was but to profit others: but that afterwards it was to profit himſelfe, looking vpon thoſe hiſtories, as if he had looked in a glaſſe, and ſeeking to reforme his life in ſome ſort, and to forme it in the mould of the vertues of theſe great men: taking this faſhion of ſearching their maners, and writing the liues of theſe noble men, to be a familiar haunting and frequenting of them. Alſo he thought (ſaid he himſelfe) that he lodged theſe men one after the other in his houſe, entring into conſideration of their qualities, and that which was great in either of them, chooſing and principally taking that which was to be noted, and moſt worthie to be knowne in their ſayings and deeds. In ſumme, he declared that by continuance of reading auncient hiſtories, and in drawing out the liues which he hath written, and receiuing daily in his vnderſtanding the memorable things of the moſt honeſt and vertuous men of times paſt: he inſtructed himſelfe, and prepared him to lay aſide all euill, fooliſh, diſhoneſt, or ſpitefull condition: if by chaunce by often frequenting their companie he muſt of neceſſitie keepe, he learned any euill touch. The which he did reforme, turning his quiet thought not ſtirred with any paſſion at all, to the conſideration of ſo many goodly examples. Now becauſe that ſome might obiect vnto him, that for the finiſhing of ſo great a peece of worke, he could not haue made choice of a fitter place then ROME: or rather that being a man giuen to his booke as he was, he ſhould haue left that worke vnto ſome other that had ſeene more. This obiection being of ſome weight, he anſwereth it at the beginning of the life of Demoſthenes, and ſaith: That to attaine to true felicitie, whereof the greateſt

part conſiſteth in the maners, qualities and conditions of the ſoule: it maketh no matter whether a man be borne in an obſcure towne and of ſmall name, no more then if he were borne of a foule or litle mother. For it were a mockerie to thinke that ſome ſmall townes or litle Ilands could notwithſtanding bring forth good Poets and excellent players of Comedies: & that they could not in like ſort bring out an honeſt, iuſt, conſtant, wiſe, and noble or worthy man. And although we haue reaſon to thinke that arts and ſciences inuented to make things neceſſary for the vſe of men, or elſe to win a name and reputation, are made and counterfeited in poore litle towns: ſo we muſt alſo thinke that vertue, none otherwiſe then a ſtraunge plant can take foot and root in any place, where it meeteth with a good nature, gentle and patient to indure paines. Wherfore if we come to cōmit any error, or that we liue otherwiſe then becometh vs, we muſt not accuſe or blame the meanneſſe of our countrey, but iuſtly attribute the fault to our ſelues. It is true (ſaith he) that he that hath vndertaken to frame a peece of work, or to write any hiſtory, in the which many things ſhould be put, not familiar in his countrey, and that they find not alwaies at their hand euery where, but ſtrange for the moſt part, diſperſed here and there, and that muſt be gathered from many places and diuers authors: in truth he muſt firſt and before all other things dwell in a great and noble city, full of people, and a great number of men louing goodly and honeſt things, to the end there may be ſtore of books, and that in ſearching vp and downe, and hearing them tell with liuely voice many things, which other ſtory-writers peraduenture haue left vnwritten, and that ſhall beare ſo much more credit, becauſe they are freſh in memory of the liuing: he may make his worke complete and perfect in all things, and not wanting many things that ſhould be neceſſarie for it. Hauing made this preface, he excuſeth himſelfe, that he could not profit ſo much in knowledge of the Latine tongue, as he deſired, and ſheweth how he did helpe himſelfe. But foraſmuch as it is in this worke of his Liues that Plutarch hath moſt ſhewed his ſufficiencie, whether you conſider the length of the worke, or trie with what iudgement he hath proceeded: peraduenture it will not be hurtfull to ſpeake ſomewhat of it, beſide that which hath bene ſpoken by his Tranſlator in the Preface. I do not enter here into commendation of Hiſtorie in generall, nor we need not apply that vnto Plutarch, which Cicero and many others haue ſpoken. For if euer there were booke, next to that we call the holy Scriptures, it may be ſaid, that that which containeth the liues of the noble GREEKES and ROMAINES, is an aſſured teſtimonie of many hundreds of yeares, a Sunne of veritie, a life of memorie, a true miſtreſſe of life, and an excellent meſſenger of antiquitie. And as the ſtone called the Opall, ſheweth many Orient colours aboue all other precious ſtones: ſo doth the liues of Plutarch make an abridgement of all the beſt things contained in the Greeke and Latine hiſtories. For there are ſeene worthie examples of vices and vertues, an infinite number of Maximes and notable precepts touching the duties of euery one, their vertues and vices. Now although Plutarch in the ignorance and blindneſſe of the true God, could not (no more then other prophane Hiſtorians) touch the true end of hiſtorie: yet we may note ſome admirable thing in him in that reſpect. Since hiſtorie (which containeth in it an infinite number of particular deedes and honourable actions, as the collection of the liues of Plutarch) is a goodly or gliſtering glaſſe or table, within the which may be diſcerned the wonders and admirable working of the diuine Prouidence: for to comprehend that well which God and men do, there are three things to be conſidered in euery hiſtorie: to wit, the men whereof there is queſtion, the things worthie of memorie, and the circumſtances, keeping this ground againſt the Epicurians and enemies of mans life: That there is a Godhead and ſupernaturall power which gouerneth and maintaineth the world, wherein nothing happeneth by chaunce, but all is guided by a moſt wiſe diſpoſition of the ſame, for the preſeruation of families, of ciuill pollicie, and of a companie and happie congregation that ſhall be taken out of this world into a better. A wiſe and learned Hiſtorian muſt haue an eye vpon theſe three things, for to applie them vnto three other vertues that ought to ſhine in him: veritie, moderation, and eloquence. Forſomuch as if he ſet out fables, or if he talke to no purpoſe, and make diſcourſes at pleaſure, or if he be troubleſome in a ſpeech not coherent and hanging well together: then he deſerueth no more the name of an Hiſtorian. As for theſe vertues, I do aſſure my ſelfe that euery man of iudgement will agree, that they are readily to be found in Plutarch, accompanied with a ſweet grauitie that alwaies pleaſeth the reader, and giueth him at a hundred times reading as good a ſauor and taſt of him as at the firſt. Let a man look vpon ſtories that haue nothing in them but the name, and vpō ſo many books ill compoſed,

of the which Europe is full: they ſhal find that the parts neceſſarie to be obſerued in the perſons is nothing at all regarded: that thoſe which thinke to repreſent others, they do ſample them after a ſtrange faſhion. Therupon the affections and paſſions, the hatred, the enuie, euill ſpeaking, falſe reports, flatteries & lies, preſent themſelues ſo vntowardly that they marre all. To the contrarie, we ſee Plutarch very exact in that reſpect. It ſufficeth me to touch the things paſſing by: whether he ſhew the vices or vertues of great and meane perſons, he doth it in good termes, without aggrauating or making it leſſe. He taketh no maner of pleaſure to ſpeake euill of any, but wiſely hideth that whereof we ought not to ſpeake but with ſhame and compaſſion of mans infirmitie. And he is more enclined to commend the good in vicious perſons, then too much to ſet open the ſhops of their wickedneſſe. But if neceſſitie enforce him vnto it, it is with ſuch manifeſt proofes, that others which are wicked ſeeing him waſh the head of their companions, they are compelled to hang downe their heads, and to condemne their wicked thoughts. Now touching matters that ought to be remembred in hiſtories, therein are to be conſidered, the counſels, executions, and accidents. For counſels, who noteth better then he the wickedneſſe of thoſe which aske counſell of the world, of the vnconſtant multitude, of men of as litle iudgment as themſelues, or of themſelues? With what grace doth he lay open the errors committed by Xerxes, Pyrrhus, Marius, and infinite others? And though euill counſell proſper for a time, yet the eternall wiſedome, hath a ſecret intention to bring things to paſſe, which the wiſedome of man cannot ſee till it be done: as Plutarch doth finely diſcouer them in the life of Cato Vtican, and of others. The executions are of diuers ſorts, according to the workmen and their means. In this point, Plutarch is admirable, ſhewing particularly infinite thoughts in actions which he repreſenteth: ſo that for one ſelf deed he giueth alwaies entrance and direction vnto the ſtudious reader, to make halfe a douſin of ſundrie rules for the direction of mans life: he was euer ſo fortunate to comprehend all things well, and to draw that which was to be offered vnto the view of poſteritie. If accidents come in queſtion, he can excellently referre them to the counſels, and draw out goodly inſtructions for all ſorts of men. Now there remaineth the circumſtances of times, of places, of people, and others ſo diligently ſearched out in Plutarch, that in this matter he ſeemeth to haue ſurmounted himſelfe. To proue all that hath bene preſently ſpoken in few words, behold here the booke lyeth open, and vnder the indifferent examination of the learned and vertuous men.
            I am not ignorant thatſome men wel thought of among the learned men of our time, haue veryboldly cenſured Plutarch, accuſing him of ignorance: alſo that he had writtē things incredible, fabulous, and that he had made vnapt compariſons. For his ignorance, that hath bene ſufficiently handled heretofore ſpeaking of Plutarchs toung. And if we muſt ſpeake of the ſufficiencie of an Hiſtorian, I thinke it is moſt excellent in him: howbeit I ſhall not need to defend him, ſeeing that he defendeth himſelfe ſufficiently well. If he be miſtaken in ſome circumſtances, and that they diſcouer ſome fault in his memorie, or of diſcordance condemned by many other Hiſtorians: that deſerueth not ſo ſharpe a reprehenſion. And for all the reſt, I will adde too the anſwer of a noble perſon well ſtudied in Plutarchs lecture, for that it ſufficeth and fully agreeth with that which we now ſpeake of. And theſe be his words: If one had ſpoken ſimply that Plutarch reciteth things otherwiſe then they be, it was no great reproch: for thoſe things which we haue not ſeene, we take them at other mens hands of credit: and I ſee that to his knowledge he reporteth at times one ſelfe hiſtorie diuerſly. As the iudgement of three of the beſt Captaines that euer were, giuen by Hanniball, is otherwiſe ſet downe in the life of Flaminius: and contrarie again in the life of Pyrrhus. But to charge him to haue taken for ready money things vncredible, and alſo vnpoſſible: it is euen to accuſe for want of iudgement, the author of the beſt iudgement in the world. And here is the example which they alledge, to wit, that Plutarch ſaid that a child of LACEDAEMON ſuffered his belly to be torne out by a foxe he had ſtolen, & hid vnder his gowne, euen to ſuffer death rather then to bewray his theft. Firſt of all I find this example very euill choſen to bound the indeuours of the faculties of the ſoule, whereas for corporall forces we haue more law to limite and know them. For this cauſe, if I had had to do withall, I would rather haue choſen an example of this ſecond ſort, and they are leſſe credible. As amongſt others, that which he reciteth of Pyrrhus: that being hurt as he was, he gaue his enemy armed at all peeces ſuch a blow with his ſword, that he claue his head downe to the loweſt parts, ſo that the body fell aſunder in two parts. In the other example I find no great wonder, neither do I like the excuſe they make for Plutarch, for that he added too this word, (as they ſay) to aduiſe vs, and to be warie in

our cariage and behauiour. For vnleſſe it be in things receiued by authoritie, or in reuerence of antiquitie or of religion, he would not himſelfe haue receiued, nor haue made vs beleeue things of themſelues incredible. And that this word (as they ſay) is not vſed in that place to that purpoſe, is eaſie to be iudged: for that he himſelfe reporteth in another place vpon the ſubiect of the patience of the children of LACEDAEMON, of examples that fell out in his time vnlikelier, to perſwade vs. As that which Cicero alſo hath teſtified before him: for that he was (as he ſaid) euen in the very places: that euen till their time there were children, for proofe of patience, that were tried before the altar of Diana, who ſuffered themſelues to be whipped vntil the bloud ran down their legs, not onely without crying, but alſo without weeping, yea and ſome of them euen to death. And that which Plutarch telleth with an hundred witneſſes: that at a ſacrifice a burning cole being fallen into a boies ſleeue of the LACEDAEMONIANS, as he was cenſing: he ſuffered all his arme to be burnt, vntill the very ſauor of the burnt fleſh came to them that were preſent. There was nothing according to their cuſtome that did more diſgrace them, and for the which they ſhould ſuffer more reproch and ſhame, then to be taken ſtealing. I am ſo inſtructed with the greatneſſe of theſe men there, that it ſeemes to me, that this report which Plutarch made ſhould not be incredible, or not ſo much as rare or ſtraunge. Marcellus alſo reporteth, touching this matter of theft: that in his time there could be found no manner of torture or torment how cruell ſoeuer, that could force the AEGYPTIANS taken with theft, (whereunto they were accuſtomed and hardened) once to tell their names. I know that there were certaine poore countri-men, in the miſerable ciuill warres, that did indure the frying of the ſoles of their feet againſt the fire, and the nipping of their fingers ends, to thruſt their bloudie eyes out of their heads, their foreheads being faſt bound with a great cord, before they would be ranſomed. I haue ſeene one left ſtarke naked in a ditch for dead, hauing his necke ſwollen with a halter tyed about it, with the which they had dragged him at a horſe taile all night long, his body thruſt in with a dagger in an hundred places, not to kill him, but to make him full of paine: who had endured all that, hauing loſt his ſpeech and ſenſes, reſolued (as he told me) to die a thouſand deaths, rather then to promiſe any thing, and he was one of the richeſt laborers in all the countrey. We muſt not iudge that which is poſſible and that which is not, as it is credible and vncredible to our capacitie. It is alſo a great fault, (into the which notwithſtanding the moſt part of men do fall) to make it nice to beleeue that thing of another man, which we our ſelues cannot do. This is that which this perſon anſwereth vnto the obiection made, touching the fact of the boy of LACEDAEMON ſet out to accuſe our Plutarch ouerthwartly with a lye. The other example which they alledge of incredible things, and altogether fabulous, ſpoken by Plutarch, is: that Ageſilaus was condemned in a fine by the Ephores, becauſe he alone had won the harts and goodwils of al his citizens. I know not what note of falſhood they find in that: but ſo it is, that Plutarch ſpeaketh of things which he ſhould better know then we. It was no new thing in GRECE to ſee men puniſhed and baniſhed onely for that they were too great with their Citizens: witneſſe the Oſtraciſme and Petaliſme. And where they accuſe Plutarch, that he did not well ſort the GREEKES with the ROMAINES: witneſſes, Demoſthenes and Cicero, Ariſtides and Cato, Lyſander and Sylla, Pelopidas and Marcellus, Ageſilaus and Pompey; iudging that he fauoured the GREEKES, for that he gaue them companions ſo litle reſembling them: which is iuſtly to blame Plutarch for that wherin he was moſt excellent and praiſe▪worthie. For in his compariſons (which is the moſt admirable part of his works, and in the which (in my opinion) he tooke more delight then in any other of his writings) the fidelitie and ſinceritie of his iudgements, equalleth their profoundneſſe and their waight. He is a Philoſopher that teacheth vs vertue. Let vs ſee if we can defend him from this reproch of malice and falſhood. I think that which hath bene the cauſe of this cenſure, is the great ſhining colour of the names of the ROMAINES which we haue in hand. It appeareth not to vs that Demoſthenes can equall the glorie of a Conſull, Proconſull, or Quaeſtor of this great commonwealth. But he that ſhal conſider the truth of the thing, & the men in themſelues, wherat Plutarch euer moſt aimed: and to weigh their maners, their diſpoſitions, their ſufficiencie and their fortune: I think to the contrarie, that Cicero and old Cato are indebted to their companions. For the purpoſe of this cenſure, I would rather haue choſen the example of the younger Cato cō
               pared vnto Phocion: for in this compariſon there might be found a more likely diſparitie to the aduantage of the ROMAINE. For Marcellus, Sylla, and Pompey, I ſee well that their exploits of war are more puft vp, glorious and ſumptuous, then thoſe of the GREEKS which Plutarch compareth

with them. But the moſt faire and vertuous actions are not alwaies (no more then in wars) the moſt famous: I oftentimes ſee the names of Captaines drowned by the glory of other mens names of leſſe merit: witnes, Labienus, Ventidius, Teleſinus, and diuers others. And to take it from thence, if I were to complaine me for the GREEKES, might I ſay that much leſſe is Camillus comparable vnto Themistocles, the Gracchi vnto Agis and Cleomenes, Numa vnto Lycurgus, and Scipio vnto Epaminondas, which were alſo of his rolle. But it is a follie to iudge things on a ſudden of ſo many men. When Plutarch compareth them, he doth therefore equall them. Who could more eloquently or conſcionably note the diſparities and differences? Doth he come to compare the victories, the exploits of armes, the power of armies led by Pompey, & his triumphes, with thoſe of Ageſilaus? I do not beleeue, ſaid he, that Xenophon himſelf if he were aliue, although that they ſuffered him to write what he would to the aduantage of Ageſilaus: durſt put him in compariſon. Doth he ſpeake to compare Sylla with Lyſander? There is no compariſon, ſaid he, neither in number of victories, nor in hazard of battels: for Lyſander wan only but two battels by ſea, &c. That taketh away nothing from the ROMAINES. To haue ſimply preſented them to the GREEKES, he could haue done them no iniurie, what diſparitie ſoeuer there might be: neither doth he weigh them alſo all together: in the great there is no preferencie. He hath compared the peeces and circumſtances one after another, and iudgeth them ſeuerally. Wherfore if they wold conuince him of fauour, they muſt vnfold ſome particular iudgement, or to ſay in generall that he had failed to match ſuch a GREEKE with ſuch a ROMAIN: becauſe there were others fitter to be compared, and of better report. So much for this point. There are other that haue blamed the length of Plutarchs diſcourſes, alſo that he hath mingled many light things, & that he delighteth to thruſt in many verſes of Poets, without any neceſſity, ſay they: iudging that he did that to loſe no part of his memories, & ſo hath confuſedly put all peeces together in his worke. But that which hath bene ſpoken of before, anſwereth that obiection. And to accuſe Plutarch to haue wanted iudgement, (he that hath alwaies bene very diſcreet in his writings, as he proteſteth at the beginning of his booke of fatall deſtiny) is to ſhew himſelfe madde, and out of his wits. Thoſe things that men iudge to be ſmall are not ſo alwaies, if they be better conſidered of: neither is his length ſo far out of ſquare and troubleſom, neither is that out of the matter, which he intermingleth of the Poets, but is ſpoken to good purpoſe, and oftentimes vpon good ground of aduice in matters of great waight: whereof his workes ſhall make proofe whoſoeuer will examine them without paſſion.
            But now let vs leaue theſe cenſors to thinke more aduiſedly hereafter what they ſpeake, and come againe to Plutarch: who after his returne to GRECE, gaue himſelfe more to his booke then he did before: and notwithſtanding he was very old, he made an end of his Liues. And furthermore, continuing ſtill the loue he bare vnto his countrey: he employed himſelfe in diuers Offices of the commonwealth, whereof he maketh mention alſo in ſundry places of his Morals, and eſpecialy in the booke where he inſtructeth thoſe that deale in the affaires of eſtate. For he ſaith there theſe words: I anſwer them that reproue me when they find me preſent in our towne, to ſee them meaſure, and tell bricke, and tile, ſtones, ſand, and lime which they bring: that it is not for my ſelfe that I build, but for the Commonwealth. And in his Treatiſe, Whether an old man ſhould yet deale in the affaires of eſtate. Thou knoweſt (ſaid he, writing vnto Euphanes) that there are many Pythiades, that is to ſay, many termes of fiue yeares that I do exerciſe the Prieſthood of Apollo PYTHIAN: yet I thinke thou wouldeſt not ſay to me, Plutarch, thou haſt ſacrificed enough, thou haſt made proceſſions enow, thou haſt led many dances: and now that thou art old and ancient, it is time thou leaue thy crowne off thy head, and abandon the oracle, becauſe of thy age. At the beginning of the eight queſtion of the ſixt booke of his diſcourſe at the table, he mentioneth his Office of being Maior of the towne of CHAERONEA. To conclude, euen to the end of his life he ſhewed in his deedes, that which he excellently handled in his writings: which is, that there is nothing letteth old men to ſerue and profite their commonwealth in diuers ſorts of gouernment, whether it be with good words, with good counſell, with liberty and authority to ſpeake boldly, and with graue reſpect, as the Poets ſay. For they are not the feet, nor the hands, nor al the ſtrength of the body only, which are the parts and good of the cōmonwealth: but they are firſt of all and principally the ſoule, and the beauties thereof: as iuſtice, temperance, and wiſdom, the which coming late to their perfection, it were to no purpoſe they ſhould enioy a houſe, land, & all other inheritances of his citizens, and that it could receiue no more any profit by thē for the good of the Commonwealth, becauſe of their long time, the which doth not ſo much

depriue them of ſtrength and abilitie to do ſeruice, as it doth increaſe them with ſufficiencie and knowledge of faculties requiſite to commaund and gouerne. Furthermore Plutarch hauing liued alwaies honorably euen to old age, he died quietly among his children and friends in the citie of CHAERONEA, leauing in his writings an immortall ſauour of his name vnto poſteritie. Beſides the honour his citizens did him, there was a ſtatue ſet vp for him by ordinance of the people of ROME, in memorie of his vertue. Now furthermore, though time hath deuoured ſome part of the writings of this great man, and miniſhed ſome other: neuertheleſſe thoſe which remaine being a great number, haue excellent vſe to this day among vs. Howbeit, hauing met with ſome fragments in Stobeus, of ſome Treaties which are not to be found any more, I thought it would not miſlike the reader to cull out ſome peeces to preſent them vnto him, to ſhut vp all this diſcourſe. Wiſedome, ſaith he, (in the booke Of the profite which knowledge bringeth of the time to come) conſiſteth not in ſhew, but in affaires, before a man ſetteth too his hand: and ſheweth how he ſhould come before them, and receiue them when they be offered him: for it conſidereth the things to come. The bodie hath no eyes but before, the backe ſeeth nothing at all: but wiſdome by helpe of memorie, ſeeth euen the things that are paſt and gone. It is the Secretarie which alwaies remaineth and abideth within, as Plato ſaith. It is the part or inſtrument of the ſoule which taketh hold of things paſt, keepeth them, and layeth them vp ſafe, making a circle, within the which that that is paſt ioyneth with the thing preſent, and will not ſuffer it to extend it ſelfe beyond compaſſe, and to paſſe the bounds of nature and knowledge. Of the Booke againſt pleaſure. Pleaſure vndoeth the bodie, and daily maketh it tender by deliciouſneſſe, the common vſe wherof cutteth downe the luſtineſſe and conſumeth the ſtrength, ſo that weakneſſe and ſickneſſe do abound, and in youth they begin to waxe old. Voluptuouſnes is a beaſt that maketh men ſlaues, but yet no ſauage beaſt: for if ſhe did openly aſſaile any bodie, there would ſoone be an end: but ſhe is ſo much more daungerous, becauſe ſhe hideth her ill courage, and taketh vpon her the habite of goodwill. We muſt ſhunne her therefore for two cauſes, the one, that ſhe ſhould not hurt vs, the other, that ſhe ſhould not ſeduce vs. Let vs no more call voluptuouſneſſe honeſt pleaſures, but rather acknowledge that they be troubles, ſeruices and duties: and eſteeme the reſt as ſhamefull and violent things, which by their diuerſitie flatter vs, and in the meane time finely hurt vs. Now our ſelues and affaires ought to be ſubiect to the ſame law that the brute beaſtes are: to the end that when we haue ſatisfied our deſire, we haue no new mind to couet further, but that our moderate pleaſures be contented when they haue things neceſſarie. Is there any man that will commend traitours? Now pleaſure is euen ſuch a one: for ſhe betrayeth all that dependeth vpon vertue. Doth any bodie eſteeme hangmen much? See notwithſtanding what it is to follow ſenſualitie, which tormenteth and rendeth aſunder all moderate things. Will any man commend auarice? Voluptuouſneſſe is as vnſatiable as the loue of money. What pleaſure can we take of a beaſt that deſtroyeth vs by flatterie? I aske, why doeſt thou not play the foole and knaue in the preſence of all men? To the contrarie thou flyeſt, and beareſt reuerence to thy ſelfe, abuſing thy ſelfe in the night and darkneſſe which cannot depoſe againſt thee. No man ſeeketh to hide him that doth well, nor is affraid of the light that is round about him: but rather to the contrarie, he would all the world were become a bright Sunne, to giue light to all the parts of the good workes he doth. But if he happen to commit any fault, he doth all his poſſible indeuour to hide it, and blameth his paſſion. Now let vs take away the veile, and openly muſe vpon theſe pleaſures. They make vs drunke, euen to loſe our ſences: they continually make knaues and drowſie lubbers to follow harlots when they ſhould labour: enemies of mans life, neither caring for father nor mother, void of all reuerence vnto the lawes. In the Booke that treateth, how women ſhould be taught and learned. It is no eaſie thing to hide his ignorance, ſaith Heraclitus: and much leſſe then when he hath drunke more then ordinarie. Plato ſaith alſo, that the thought is diſcouered by wine: as much to ſay, after a man hath drunke too much. Sophocles blamed Aeſchylus, becauſe he wrote his tragedies when he had drunke out of meaſure: for, ſaith he, though Aeſchilus doth well, yet he knoweth not what he doth. Pythagoras being asked how it could be brought to paſſe, that a drunkard ſhould abſtaine from being drunke? If he remembred ſaid he, oftentimes what he did when he was drunk. It is a common ſaying in euery mans mouth, Let not the child haue a knife. And I ſay, keepe riches from a child, and ignorance from a man. Of the Booke of accuſation. Hippias ſaid, there was nothing ſo intollerable as accuſation: becauſe there was no puniſhment ordained by lawe for accuſers, as there was for theeues: although they

ſtole friendſhip from men, which is the goodlieſt riches a man can haue. So that an outrage of fact though it be great, is leſſe then accuſation, which doth much more hurt becauſe it is hidden. Of the diſcourſe or Epiſtle of friendſhip. He is a true witneſſe of the truth, that is not bound by benefite vnto him that bringeth him forth, and that ſpeaketh before the Iudges without exception of perſon. We muſt win loue by gentleneſſe and bountie, rather then by menaces: and for the commonwealth, wiſedome and gentleneſſe ſhould be ioyned together. Agrippinus in his gouernment, attempted to perſwade them whom he condemned to loſe goods and life: that it was expedient for them they ſhould be condemned. For, ſaid he, I do not pronounce ſentence againſt you, as a theefe paſſing by ſhould ſay, Deliuer thy purſe, or thou art dead: but I do that as your tutor, and one that hath a care of you: like vnto the Phiſition that comforteth his patient from whom he would cut ſome member, and perſwadeth him to be ruled. Cotis king of THRACIA was very cruell vnto his ſubiects: and when one of his familiars told him, That is called furie not kingly gouernment. But ſo it is, anſwered the king, that this furie of mine maketh my ſubiects wiſe and quiet. Of the booke againſt the ſtrength of the bodie. Doeſt thou thinke the ſtrength of the body to be ſo great a happineſſe, that thou wilt conclude that nature which hath giuen more ſtrength to beaſts then to men, ſhould be mother to them, and ſtepmother to the other? Doeſt thou think it is by reaſon of the maſſiuenes or waight, or by the ſwiftneſſe or ſtrength of the eyes? The true ſtrength of men conſiſteth in diſcourſe of the ſoule, by means wherof he hunteth in the forreſts, and taketh the Elephants in a ſnare: he rideth horſe and breaketh them, he bringeth oxen ſubiect to the yoke, he beateth downe birds with bolts, and catcheth with angles fiſh that lye hidden in the bottome of waters. There is his ſtrength, which is ſeene much better, when he conſidereth at his eaſe, the roundneſſe of the earth, the breadth of the Element, and the reuolutions of the ſtars. Such were the worthie exerciſes of Hercules. And who had not rather be Vlyſſes, then Polyphemus the CYCLOPIAN? Alſo when one ſpake much in commendation of a venturous and hardy man, as if he had bene ſome braue ſouldier: There is great difference, ſaid Aratus the SICYONIAN, betwixt eſteeming vertue, and regarding life nothing. Of the booke of Deuination. It is moſt apparant that from the beginning Neceſſitie inuented and poliſhed certain arts, which ſhe doth keepe euen till this preſent. It is ſhe that hath taught all things. For, is there any thing that neceſſitie hath not thought of? ſhe hath brought foorth the occupation of weauing, of building, the art of Phyſicke, tilling of the ground, and all that belongs vnto it. There be other crafts alſo found out, I cannot tell by what pleaſure: as Perfumers, Apothecaries, Cookes, and others that ſerue for ornaments of the bodie: alſo Painters. Againe, there are ſciences which men ſeeke, learne, and teach, becauſe of the probable and apparant reaſon which they diſcouer, and for the beautie of them: as Arithmeticke, Geometrie, and all others conſiſting in meaſures and proportions, then Aſtrologie. And yet though we contemne them, neuertheleſſe becauſe of their excellencie, we are conſtrained in ſome ſort to know them, ſaith Plato. Of the Treatie, That loue and iudgement are diuerſe things. Some ſay, that loue is the facultie of the ſoule, which we call vnderſtanding: others, that it is a concupiſcence or voluptuouſneſſe: others, that it is a madneſſe: and there are that thinke it is, I cannot tell what diuine agitation of the ſoule: and others that make it a God. This diſputation hath made that ſome haue iudged, and rightly, that from the beginning, loue is a ſimple deſire or luſt: but if it exceed, it is furie. Alſo that friendſhip doth reſemble it. If loue be deſpiſed, it begetteth melancholie: if it increaſe as wiſhed, he that is poſſeſſed withall hath a thouſand conceipts and phantaſticall imaginations, and doth imagine all the greatneſſe and fauours of heauen and earth. And this is the reaſon why the Poets ſay, that loue is a Torch: and the Painters, Potters, and Statuaries do repreſent it in that eſtate. For that part of the fire which doth giue light, is very pleaſing, profitable and commodious: but that which burneth, bringeth nothing but trouble and ſorow. Like as it is a good thing to reproue and admoniſh our friends, and ſuch as belong vnto vs, whileſt they be in their right wits, and capable of iudgement and vnderſtanding: ſo to the contrarie, if they be light headed and diſtraught of their wits, we do not vſe then to reaſon and conteſt with them, but we rather do yeeld to that they ſay. So muſt we freely and liuely reproue them, that commit a fault through choler or couetouſneſſe: but as for louers, they muſt be excuſed becauſe they be ſicke. And therefore from the beginning, it were the beſt way not to ſuffer loue to take root in them: if it do, repaire then to the altars of the gods that giue remedy, as Plato ſaith, that is to ſay, keepe company with wiſe men. Driue this beaſt farre from thee, before his teeth and nailes do grow: if not, thou muſt fight with

the euill when it is great and full growne, the which thou didſt embrace in thine infancie and youth. But which are theſe teeth and nailes of loue? Suſpition and Iealouſie. Now ſome will ſay to me that there is alſo I know not what, a thing that draweth, and is pleaſant. So had this famous Sphinx wings of diuerſe colours, very pleaſant to behold: for when he turned them to the beames of the Sunne, they ſhined like gold: and when he was againſt the cloudes, one would haue ſaid it had bene azure mingled with yellow and red, like the rainbow in the Element. Loue after the ſame ſort hath in it (I know not how) a gracious, gentle, and faire ſhew. But it deſtroyeth men, ouerthroweth houſes, diſſolueth mariages, and confoundeth great Captaines, without propounding of hard Enigmaes or queſtions to be reſolued: but himſelfe being ſo taken that he cannot be freed. For example. If one asked: What is that which at one inſtant loueth and hateth, flieth and purſueth, threatneth and prayeth, angreth and flattereth, taketh and leaueth, laugheth and weepeth with a breath? it is a knot which one cannot eaſily vndo. Furthermore, the Sphinx had many things deuiſed for pleaſure, mingled in the midſt of his Enigma. For though an old man go with a ſtaffe, yet he hath not three feet: and the litle child is not a beaſt with foure feet, although he creepe of all foure, helping his weake legs with his two hands. But there be no ſuch Enigmaes in the paſſions of louers. They loue and hate, deſire the thing abſent, and feare the thing preſent: they flatter and do iniurie, they die and kill themſelues for the thing they loue: they deſire not to loue, and yet will not leaue to loue: they repent them and waxe blind: they become wiſe, and yet caſt themſelues away: they will command, & yet yeeld themſelues ſlaues. And therfore it is that ſuch a paſſion is holden for a pure rage: as alſo Eurypides doth confeſſe it. Now loue is not begotten vpon a ſudden, nor doth not inuade all the perſon, as choler doth: but it kindleth by litle and litle, as a litle fire. It ſlippeth in ſoftly, and when it hath poſſeſſed the ſoule, it diſlodgeth not eaſily: but we ſee it ſomtimes luſty and freſh euen in old men that haue white haires. If it ceaſe, and begin to coole by ſucceſſion of time, or that it be dead by ſome accident: it doth not altogether leaue the ſoule, or the ſubſtance of his fire conſumed, where the marks of his heate paſſed are to be ſeene, as if lightning had paſſed thorow there. As for the ſorow paſt and the choler after it is quenched, there is no ſpark left in the ſoule, but they perceiue that the inflammation of the paſſion which made a great noiſe is quiet: but the bitings of loue, albeit the beaſt be gone, do not therfore loſe their venime, but the inward wounds do renew and refreſh thēſelues again. To be ſhort, no man knoweth what ſuch a paſſion meaneth, nor how it cometh, nor from whence it ſlipped into the heart. In the books where he diſputeth for beautie. Are not men compounded of bodie and ſoule? Is the one enough for vs without the other? how could that be? for if the body were not gouerned by the ſoule, it would not liue, and the ſoule had need of a place to be kept and lodged in. Since then both the one and the other are adorned with gifts proper vnto them: the ſoule with iuſtice, temperance, and wiſedome: and the body with force, beautie and health: were it not to be wondred at, if one deſpiſed that which cōcerneth the bodie, & that he made no reckening but of the goods of the ſoule? Corporall beautie is a worke of the ſoule, which maketh a preſent of this gift to the bodie. For when the ſoule is gone, there remaineth nothing good in the bodie. The ſtrength, the colour, the ſight, and the voice do vaniſh. To conclude, the body being abandoned of his auncient inhabitants, there is nothing left that is amiable. Thou therefore that accuſeſt beautie, vnwares thou ſpeakeſt outrage to the ſoule, which is cauſe of this beauty. Aristotle to one that asked him, why a man did loue faire things? anſwered: It is for a blind man to aske ſuch a queſtion. Diogenes called faire Curtiſans, Queenes, becauſe many do execute that which they commaund. Of the Booke againſt Nobilitie. What do we thinke that Nobilitie is, but riches gathered together by aunceſtours, or ſome honour attained vnto long time before? whereof the one nor the other proceedeth not of our will: but the one cometh by vnconſtant fortune, the other proceedeth from the diſorders of the world. So then this proud name of Nobilitie floweth from two ſtraunge ſprings. Now riches maketh not thoſe that are born like vnto them: but vertue proceeding from the ſincere habitude of the ſpirit, is planted in the race of the vertuous, and doth make them truly noble. In this is true Nobilitie, to wit: the conformitie vnto vertuous manners. But I pray you, king Midas riches, were they more rich then the pouertie of Ariſtides? although he left not wherewithall to defray his charges of funerall. To the contrarie, king Midas tombe paſſed for magnificence all the riches of the world: but Nobilitie is not incloſed in gold nor ſiluer. Vice is rightly compared vnto fire: for when neither the one nor the other wanteth nouriture, it goeth out. But the baſeneſſe of the race of Socrates the

Philoſopher, the ſon of an Imagegrauer, and of a midwife: is it not more noble then the glorie of Sardanapalus? Thou ſhouldeſt not thinke Xerxes more noble then Cynegyrus, who had one of his hands cut off fighting for his countrey: ſince the other fled to ſaue his life, being a king enuironed with cowardlines. Of the Treatie against riches. Hunger neuer gaue any man cauſe to be an adulterer: nor want of money hath made any man diſſolute. Pouertie is a kind of temperance, and need may be called a ſummarie obſeruation of the lawes. Arceſilaus ſaid, pouertie was rude, no leſſe then the Iſle of ITHACA: but furthermore, a good nurſe for children: becauſe it did vſe them to frugalitie and abſtinence: and at one word, it is the healthfull ſchoole of vertue. Thus haue you ſome fragments of our Philoſopher, of the which as of the reſt of his workes, we deſire that all may learne to be vertuous.
            The end of Plutarchs life.
         
         
            THE LIFE OF Seneca.
            
            
               L. A. SENECA.
            
            
               A knowledge that doth many errors flie:
               A life reſiſting vices poiſoned breath:
               A death, in death, that conquerd death by death,
               O Seneca, are fruits of thy Philoſophie.
            
            
               SPAINE is deuided by the Geographers into three principall parts, of the which, one of them abutting vpō the ſtraights of GIBRALTAR and the Mediterrane ſea, called by Strabo TVRDITANIA, was in old time the beſt inhabited. And albeit he doth confine it into two thouſand furlongs in compaſſe, yet he ſaith that in his time they made account of two hundred towns within that circuite, which at this day is called ANDALVZIA, hauing taken the name of the VANDALES, which haue dwelt there ſince the ruine of the ROMAINE Empire. In this part of SPAINE was (and yet is) ſituated vpon the riuer called of the auncients Baetis, and at this day Guadalquibir, (that is to ſay, the great riuer, by reaſon of his long courſe) the citie of CORDVBE, or CORDOVE: which was in old time one of the moſt famous cities of SPAINE, built by Marcellus, and inhabited with noble ROMAINES, as Plinie and Strabo 
               The family & 
                     〈◊〉
                   of Seneca.do witneſſe. This place amongſt others was a ſeed-plot or garden of good ſpirits, and men giuen to ſtudie. Among other honourable families of that time was that of the Annaeans, which

beſides their nobilitie loued learning, ſpecially about the father of Seneca, whoſe life now we Senecaes father.write. He was a ſimple gentleman bearing no charge in the commonwealth, for that he had no ſpirit in him to embrace ſuch burthens, and gaue himſelfe moſt to learning, although otherwiſe he left not his ſword, being a knight as many other PATRICIANS in the prouince where he was. With his armes he ioyned the profeſſion of learning, but ſpecially of eloquence, in the which he excelled the moſt in his time. He maried a Lady called Elbia, of whom he had three His brethren.ſonnes, the eldeſt bearing the name of the father, to wit, Lucius Annaeus Seneca. The ſecond, Annaeus Nouatus, afterwards called Iulius Gallio. The third, Annaeus Mella, father of Lucan the Poet. The father was very carefull to haue his children well taught and brought vp, but the eldeſt eſpecially, who with time gaue himſelfe wholly vnto Philoſophie. For Gallio, beſides his learning, he was raiſed vp to ſome publicke dignities at ROME. Mella on the other ſide, he cared not for aduancement, and therein he followed his father, as we will ſhew hereafter more at large. Seneca, of whom we haue preſently to ſpeake, was borne as it ſhould ſeeme a litle before In vvhat time Seneca vvas borne.the death of Augustus Caeſar. For himſelfe writeth in the hundreth and ninth Epiſtle vnto Lucillius, that he was a young man when by the commaundement of Tiberius the ceremonies of the ſtraungers religions were driuen out of ROME: the which Cornelius Tacitus in the ſecond booke of his Annales ſayd to haue happened in the fift yeare of Tiberius. But of this we will ſpeake more hereafter, treating of the writings of Seneca. Furthermore, the occaſion why himſelfe and his brethren came out of SPAINE to ROME, was this. About the tenth yeare of the raigne of Tiberius Empire, matters began to be troubleſome in diuerſe parts of the dominion of ROME, by reaſon of the cruelties and inſolencies of this Prince: who hauing about him Seianus, and ſome other dangerous counſellers, he ſhewed his diſpoſition more then before. The ſickneſſe of the head floweth into all the principall members: ſo that the prouinces were left without gouernours, or elſe were tyrannized by Praetors: whereupon followed great alterations. SPAINE amongſt others, in many places liued as they liſted: it was managed at that time by exactors, which cauſed people to rebell and enter into factions. It chanced amongſt others, that L. Piſo Praetor, was killed by a TERMESTAN, becauſe he caried himſelfe tyrannouſly amongſt the people. This TERMESTAN being caught by the backe, and cruelly tortured, he ſhewed himſelfe The great conſtancy of a Spaniard.ſo ſtout notwithſtanding, that they could not poſſibly make him confeſſe any of his aſſociates. But being quickly diſpatched by the hands of the hangmen, who would haue put him to a new torture, he knocked his head againſt a ſtone with ſuch force, that he died preſently in the field. Shortly after the cities began to be wearie of their yoake, and CORDOVE ſpecially among others, which being of the principalleſt and of great importance, an army was ſent thither vnder the conduct of Cneus Domitius Aenobarbus, who hauing ſubdued CORDOVE, tooke amongſt others Seneca, his two brethren, and Lucan his nephew, their father being dead ſome yeares before. Domitius knowing what men they were, he ſet them at liberty, and did ſo much that he perſwaded them to leaue SPAINE, and go to ROME, as well to continue and to aduance their ſtudies well begun, as to be knowne and honoured with publicke office. Now the ſtate of SPAINE was ſuch at that time, that Seneca and his were eaſily perſwaded and won by him that had authority ouer them, and at the laſt they went into ITALIE. Some thinke that Annaeus Mella remained ſtill in SPAINE, being a man that loued to liue priuately, and that made no account of the honour and vanity of the world. For his ſonne Lucan, he was brought very young after his two vnckles, who did heare at ROME Pomponius Marullus, Iulius Hyginus, Ceſtius and Aſinius 
               His maiſters at Rome.
               Gallus in Rhetoricke: and in Philoſophie, Socio Alexandrinus, and Photinus a STOICKE, very famous. Vnder which they all profited, and Seneca ſpecially, who ioyning to the grauity of the doctrine of the STOICKES, a compendious and ſententious ſpeech, in ſhort time made himſelfe to be knowne.
            Now hauing remained a ſpace ſhut vp in ſchooles, or hidden in the companie of ſome learned men whom he harkened vnto, and familiarly frequented: he was put forward at the beginning of the Empire of Caligula, by Cneus Domitius (who had maried Agrippina the daughter of Germanicus, & litle daughter of Tiberius, of whom Nero was borne, nine moneths before the death of Tiberius) and began to ſhew himſelfe openly, pleading before the Senate with great grace: for from that time foorth he was eſteemed for one of the wiſeſt and moſt eloquent men of ROME. By meanes whereof his credite increaſed from day to day. But as prickes be hidden vnder roſes, and where men thinke to winne honour, oftentimes they get repulſe and

contempt: the reuolution of mens affaires flouriſhing, yet maruellous brittle and ſubiect to fall: So Seneca proued that his eloquence profited others more then himſelfe: and that as ſometimes it is a wiſer part to keepe the ſword in the ſcaberd, then in the hand: euen ſo

                  The hire of ſilence doth no danger threate.
               
The Emperour Caligula was a Prince that cared little for liberall ſciences, yet he was very curious to ſpeake well, hauing words at commandement, and eſteemed eloquent among others: ſpecially if ſometime he diſpoſed himſelfe to ſpeake againſt any man, the words and whole ſentences did increaſe in his mouth, with ſuch an accent and geſture, that they heard him and knew him a farre off, and ſometimes he threatned men with the force of his tongue. This quickneſſe and vaine eloquence of his, made him (beſides that he had an ill ſhaped head) wonderfull preſumptuous. For there was neuer a learned man and eloquent in all the ROMAINE Empire, but he would prefer himſelfe before him. And thoſe which directly or indirectly went about to croſſe him, they did put themſelues in manifeſt danger: witneſſe that which happened to the Orator Domitius Afer, and vnto Seneca. Caligula bearing ill will a long time vnto Domitius for ſome light ſpite he had vnto him, Domitius was accuſed before the Senate: where Caligula made a long oration written, and therein layed open all his ſufficiencie, to ſhew himſelfe better able then Domitius, eſteemed one of the beſt ſpoken men at that time. Now his purpoſe was to put Domitius to death, if he had ſtudied to anſwer eloquently. But Domitius eaſily diſcouering this dangerous reſolution, made no reply, nor excuſed himſelfe, but ſayd he was aſtonied at the oration of the Emperour: and faining that the babling of Caligula had rauiſhed him, he made a briefe repetition, as if he had come thither to hearken. Then hauing magnified his diſcourſes, and being commaunded to defend himſelfe: he began to lament, and to craue grace, and kneeling downe beſought Caligula, being more afraid of his word then of his hand. Caligula wonderfull ioyfull of this honour, and thinking to be Eloquence it ſelfe, receiued Domitius into grace. Seneca taking no heed otherwiſe to that matter, and hauing at that time the free ſpirit of the STOICKES: within few dayes after he fell almoſt into the like perill or greater daunger then Domitius: he knew that Caligula did beare him ill will, and did alſo ſpeake euill of him amongſt his friends: and did compare him in his talke to grauell or ſand without lime, as if he would haue ſayd, that there was neither good band or conſequence in Senecaes diſcourſe. And to conclude, that he was but a iangler. But Seneca being caried away with the glorie he had wonne, which pleaſed him well, continued notwithſtanding to be in the Senate. Inſomuch that one day hauing a cauſe to pleade before Caligula, he behaued himſelfe with ſuch a grace and vehemencie, that all that heard him eſteemed him more then they did before, Caligula onely excepted: who being vexed, and as it were pierced through with the eloquent words of Seneca, (he hauing in the meane time let fall no word to offend Caligula, but went on roundly with his matter) he was euen at the point to put him to death, and then had executed his thought, had it not bene for a woman he kept, who perſwaded him not to do it, aſſuring him that Seneca had a diſeaſe that would ſoone diſpatch him out of the world. But after that, Seneca forbare, knowing with whom he had to deale. And ſoone after Caligula being ſlaine by Charea: and Iulius Sabinus his vnkle (the ſonne of Druſus and of Liuia) called Claudius, was choſen Emperour: at the beginning Seneca came againe into his former credite and fame, and continued it for ſome yeares: but at the laſt he was baniſhed ROME for this cauſe. Claudius was a Prince of ſmall iudgement, and caried by certaine minions and paraſites of the court, and by his wife Meſſalina, one of the moſt ſhameleſſe women that euer was. This woman wholly poſſeſſing Claudius, cauſed men and women of all qualities to be put to death, and baniſhed as ſhe thought good: and thoſe aboue all others that went about to hinder the courſe of her ſtrange wayes. Among others ſhe did beare Iulia the daughter of Germanicus ill will, (as Dion reporteth) becauſe Iulia did not regard nor flatter her. Furthermore Iulia was a very faire Lady, which made Meſſalina iealous, who by litle and litle, found the meanes to accuſe this Lady of many crimes, and ſpecially of adulterie: and made her be baniſhed, then put to death immediatly after. Seneca was caried away with this tempeſt, as culpable of the faults pretended againſt Iulia. Some thinke that Iulia is this Agrippina mother of Nero, whom Claudius maried after the death of Meſſalina, and that ſhe was baniſhed from the court but for a time onely. The which is very likely, as alſo Cornelius Tacitus ſeemeth to incline to that opinion. But for Seneca, it is not onely in one place, but in many, that Dion and others do accuſe him, that he had bene ſomewhat bold with Agrippina, as if the credite he had in the houſe

of the late deceaſed Cneus Domitius, had giuen him the boldneſſe to defile the bed of his benefactor, dead a little before Tiberius. Furthermore, he was baniſhed into the Ile of CORSE, where he remained about two yeares: during which time he earneſtly diſpoſed himſelfe to the ſtudie of Philoſophie, with a ſingular contentment and quietneſſe of mind, as may be gathered out of the goodly diſcourſe he wrote, and ſent vnto his mother Helbia, who did hardly beare this baniſhment of his. But he did comfort her, and by liuely reaſons ſhewed her that this entertainement was not grieuous vnto him, but that Philoſophie had ſtrengthened him after an excellent faſhion, againſt all the aſſaults of fortune. Whileſt he was in this profitable ſolitarineſſe, Meſſalina continued in her wantonneſſe with ſuch an impudent and hote furie, that without the teſtimonie of ſo many worthie hiſtorians, it were impoſſible to beleeue that the wife of an Emperour durſt once haue thought to haue committed the thouſandth part of the villanies vnto the which ſhe had giuen her ſelfe ouer to the ſight and knowledge of all the world. In ſo much as in the end in the day time, within ROME, in preſence of many perſons of qualitie, & in the ſight of all the people, Claudius being no further off then at HOSTIA: ſhe maried with great pompe an adulterer called Sillius, a gentleman of ROME, with all accuſtomed ceremonies and ſolemnities. Se made a feaſt, and held Sillius for her husband. Tacitus in his Annales reporteth theſe things at large. Now though Claudius was ſo fooliſh before, and then too, that he perceiued not that which all others ſaw ſo openly: in the end being wakened by Narciſſus, one of his minions, he put Sillius to death, and ſome others culpable of this ſtraunge exceſſe. And for Meſſalina, ſhe had almoſt come againe into grace: but in the end ſhe was killed by the commaundement of Narciſſus. After Meſſalina was executed, the three minions of Claudius, to wit, Narciſſus, Calistus, and Pallas, they layed their heads together to giue their maiſter a wife. But in the end Pallas, that pleaded for Agrippina the widow of Cneus Domitius, litle daughter of Tiberius, daughter of Germanicus, and neece of Claudius: he caried it from them, the reaſons he propounded had ſo much more force, being accompanied with dainty ſugred words: who vnder the colour of a kinſwoman, came often to viſite her vnkle, and ſhe flattered him ſo brauely, that ſhe being preferred before others, and not yet maried, ſhe did already vſe the authority and power of a wife. And out of hand, immediatly after the mariage was ſolemnized with her vnkle Claudius, ſhe aduanced Domitius Nero her ſonne, and the ſon of Cneus Domitius. Furthermore by her practiſes, Octauia the daughter of Claudius, & of Meſſalina, betrothed vnto Sillanus, was promiſed and afterwards giuen vnto Nero for his wife. Who being yet very yong when his mother maried Claudius (and but eleuen yeares old onely) it was in queſtion to get him a good maiſter and tutor to teach him his booke betimes, and to traine him vp in affaires of eſtate. Agrippina, a woman of a maruellous ſpirit, and that plotted great things, as the effect ſhewed afterwards, as Tacitus hath wiſely noted: ſhe reſolued to haue Seneca called backe againe, and immediatly obtained his grace of the Emperour. She did this to diuerſe ends, the one was to haue a man of great authority and bringing vp about her ſonne, to the end to maintaine Nero vnder the ſhadow of ſo great an apparance, vntill the time of his aduancement were come. The other, to make the remembrance of Meſſalina the more odious, who had bene the cauſe of the baniſhment of Seneca: to put backe Britannicus, the ſon of her, and brother of Octauia, & by that meanes to haue men at her cōmandement, litle affected vnto Claudius. So then Agrippina ouer-ruling Claudius at her pleaſure, ſhe did not only obtaine the repeale, but alſo the Praetorſhip for Seneca, whom they ſent for quickly, & he returned to ROME with great honor, to the contentment of high and low.
            Immediatly after he was arriued, Claudius receiued him graciouſly, made him a Senator, and inſtalled him in his charge. Afterwards being called into the pallace of the Emperour, Domitius Nero is giuen him in charge, with great promiſes of Agrippina, who had two vices common to ſuch perſons. The one was, that ſhe was ſet on fire with extreame couetouſneſſe to get money, vnder colour that ſhe layd a foundation in ſtore to helpe to maintaine her eſtate. The other, that ſhe gaue largely vnto thoſe whom ſhe knew meete▪ for the aduancement of her ſonne, whom ſhe would raiſe vp to be Emperor what ſoeuer it coſt her, yea were it her owne life: as appeared by her anſwer to a wiſe man whom ſhe had asked what ſhould become of the future greatneſſe of her ſonne Nero. For he hauing aunſwered her, that he might be Emperour, but it ſhould be to her vndoing: Let me dye then, ſayd ſhe, ſo he may raigne. Tacitus writeth that Agrippina thought the people would reioyce at the returne of Seneca, becauſe of the great fame of his knowledge: and alſo procured this good, to the end that the infancie of Domitius might

grow vntill his adoleſcency vnder ſuch a maiſter, and ſhe to vſe his counſell, to attaine to the greatneſſe of commaund which ſhe hoped for: Seneca, in ſtead of continuing in his ſolitarineſſe, and not remembring that

                  Who entreth tyrants houſes, doth become
                  A ſlaue: though he a free man thither come.
               
He to the contrary, thinking he had found the meanes to ſhew the effects of a Philoſopher (the wit of man, yea of the wiſeſt, is ſo ſnared in darkneſſe vpon darkneſſe, when there is queſtion of the troubles of this life) went and engaged himſelf in the ſeruice of Agrippina. And although for a time he bridled the youth of Nero, and did withſtand certaine diſorders: yet in the end he was conſtrained to leaue all, and ſuffer the fierce ſtreame to runne, hauing deſired (but too late) ſolitarineſſe: and with leſſe goods and honours of the world, more libertie, and quietneſſe of mind. Now, as he himſelfe knew very well, and did excellently teach it vnto others, that ſo as migrims and paines in the head are not healed by a crowne or royal band, neither to the contrary is good health, nor the good ſtate of a man loſt, though he be not a great Lord: ſo this greatneſſe in the which he ſaw himſelfe highly lift vp in a ſhort time, did nothing elſe but increaſe his cares, wherwith he found himſelfe bound, as with ſtrong chaines to the end of his life. And though he did ſhake them, and at times had proued to breake them, yet he could not poſſibly vnlooſe them: and in the end there was no way but he muſt periſh vnder the waight

                  Of maſsie chaines, that of no iron were,
                  But ſuch as ſhamefaſtneſſe, did make him beare.
               
It is true that at the firſt this charge and gouernement ſeemed light vnto him. For Nero was a yong Prince of great hope, & in youth he ſhewed himſelfe gentle, tractable, obeying his ſchoolemaiſters inſtructions, who delighted to manure this plant, hoping all the world ſhould haue ioy of him. But as the Emperors that were before, euen in their young age, had made ſome ſhew of that which might be expected of them in time to come: Seneca alſo perceiued through the goodly apparance of his ſcholer, ſome part of his wild, naughtie, and vntoward nature, which he ſhewed within few yeares after. Alſo Cneus Domitius his father, as ſome came to gratifie him for that Agrippina his wife had brought him a ſonne: he holding downe his head, anſwered, that that they ſhould not thinke that of him and of ſuch a woman ſhould be borne an infant, but to the ruine and confuſion of the Empire. This prediction was not noted. But when Agrippina her ſelfe felt by the loſſe of her life, what a child ſhe had brought into the world, and aduanced by ſo many ſtraunge practiſes, and by the degrees of inceſt, of bloud, and filthineſſe vnto the Imperiall dignitie. Now whileſt Seneca imployed himſelfe to poliſh this ſpirit of Nero, and ſought to princ in his hart the loue of vertue: Agrippina, carefull of the worldly greatneſſe of her ſonne, ſhe followed her purpoſe, cunningly helping her ſelfe (as much as ſhe thought fit to ſerue her turne) with the counſell of Seneca, whom ſhe acquainted not but with the leaſt part of the corruption of her intentions: for ſhe being a cruell woman, and that neuer receiued thoſe into fauour whom ſhe hated: ſhe cauſed Lolia Paulina to be put to death, that had reaſoned againſt her for the mariage of Claudius. She cauſed Calpurnia to be baniſhed out of ITALY. And hauing through Pallas credite, who priuatly gouerned her, and alſo kept her, made her ſonne Nero to be adopted, who was preferred before Germanicus the right ſucceſſour vnto the Empire: to the end ſhe would haue her power and authority to be knowne to the friends and allies of the Empire, ſhe cauſed a number of ſouldiers of the old bands and people to be caried to the place where ſhe was borne, a towne of the VBIANS, at this day called CVLLEN, vpon the Rhein. So that this citie was afterwards, and is at this preſent called COLONIA AGRIPPINA. Afterwards, Caractacus a king of England and his Queene ſubmitted themſelues to Claudius the Emperour of Rome.for a new teſtimonie of this authoritie, Caractacus king of ENGLAND, was led priſoner vnto ROME, and preſented with his wife and his brethren vnto Claudius: who in preſence of the people and of his gards pardoned them: this king and his traine went the ſame time before Agrippina (who was ſet vpon a ſcaffold ioyning vnto that of her husbands:) they did her reuerence, and thanked her with the ſame praiſes they gaue the Emperour. Which was found very ſtraunge and new, againſt the cuſtome and faſhion of doing of the ancients: to ſee a woman ſet amongſt the ſtandards and enſignes of the ROMAINES. But ſhe maintained that ſhe was a companion of the Empire obtained by her predeceſſors. Now theſe were but ſlight approches in compariſon of this that followeth. For hauing cauſed her ſonne to be declared to be of ſufficient age, in teſtimonie whereof he tooke the robe due vnto thoſe that were come to mans

eſtate, and obtained that he might receiue the Conſulſhip at twentie yeares of age: ſhe made him haue the power of Proconſull out of the city, and the name of Prince of the youth. Beſides all this, there was great largeſſe made vnto the people in his name, and a ſumme of money giuen to euery ſouldier. Alſo Nero himſelfe paſſing on to go to the playes of Circes, went apparelled with an Imperiall robe, and Britannicus as he was wont: who remembring ſo many outrages as they had done vnto him, could not containe but muſt ſhew ſome diſcontentment. But this ſerued Agrippina her intention: for ſhe preuailed ſo much with Claudius, that ſhe procured him to baniſh or put to death all the gouernours of his ſonne Britannicus. And worſe yet: he committed him vnto men ſuborned by Agrippina; who paſſing further yet, diſcharged Lucius Geta of his Captaineſhip of the gard, and Ruffus Criſpinus, ſeruants of the houſe of Meſſalina, and placed in their roomes, Burrus Afranius, a man greatly eſteemed for a warriour, but who knew well inough by whoſe fauor he was aduanced. Such was the boldneſſe of this Agrippina, a great Ladie in truth (for ſhe was the daughter, ſiſter, wife, and mother of an Emperour) but of a ſpirite compounded of all ſorts of miſchiefes. We haue touched theſe things paſſing by, vpon the occaſion of Seneca: who being occupied about his pupill, was conſtrained to be partaker of many counſels, of the which he vnderſtood not the depth alwayes. But ſo it is, that Agrippina ſerued her turne much by his authoritie, to aduance her buſineſſe: the which Seneca perceiued well, but he could not remedie it, for he thought of it too late. Now touching Nero: although the free admonitions of his maiſter were barres to keepe him in order, yet the corruptions of that time, and the working of his mother alſo, began by litle and litle to appeare in him: ſo that by time he made it manifeſt, that the good inſtructions had beaten his cares a litle, and troubled his braine ſomewhat: but that euill had taken too deepe roote in his heart. Furthermore, whileſt Nero remained ſo as vnder the rod, openly there could be noted in Agrippina nothing but ſeueritie and grauitie, no inſolencies in her houſe, otherwiſe then ſhe thought might ſerue for the aduancement of her affaires: for then, her ſelfe, as alſo all her traine, gaue themſelues ouer to all diſſolution. Now after ſhe had aduanced a part of her intentions, Nero being ſixteene yeares old maried Octauia the daughter of Claudius: and to ſhew that he had learned vnder Seneca, he pleaded many cauſes of importance vnto the Senate, with the praiſe of all men. Immediatly after, a matter happened, that compelled Agrippina to looke aduiſedly vnto her affaires. Claudius hauing drunke well at a feaſt, let theſe words eſcape him, that his deſtinie was firſt to endure all the miſchiefes of his wiues, and afterwards to puniſh them. She being afraid to be preuented, determined to make haſt, after ſhe had firſt deſtroyed Lepida her coſin germaine, who wanne the heart of Nero by her kindneſſe and liberalitie. Theſe troubles of Agrippina gaue Narciſſus the alarme, and made him ioyne with Britannicus. But in theſe ſtirres Claudius was poyſoned by a woman, an Eunuke of his, and his phyſition, practiſed of long time by Agrippina, who hauing diſdained Britannicus and his ſiſters a long time, ſuddenly the gates of the pallace were opened, and Nero accompanied with Burrus preſented himſelfe to the ſouldiers PRETORIANS, of whom being ſaluted Emperour, he was confirmed by decree of the Senate, and afterwards allowed by the Prouinces. Then Nero made diuerſe orations penned by Seneca, who beſides the contentment he had of the high dignitie of his pupill, wrote a pleaſant diſcourſe vpon the death of Claudius, and did intitule it, Apocolokynthoſis, that is to ſay, immortalitie gotten by muſhrommes: becauſe the meate was ſprinkled all ouer with muſhrommes, whereof Claudius was poyſoned. The which Nero afterwards called the meate of the gods, ſeeing that by that meanes his father in law was ſcraped out of the world, & made one of the gods after the faſhion of the ROMAINES. Alſo Gallio Senecaes brother gaue Claudius a mocke, ſaying that he was drawne vp to heauen with a hooke, ſlenting at the cuſtome in practiſe at that time: to draw the bodies of malefactors put to death in priſon, with an iron hooke into the riuer. Such was the end of Claudius, rewarded for his inceſt, and for the iniurie he did vnto his ſonne Britannicus, to aduance a ſon in law, for to pleaſe an ambitious woman, to wit, Agrippina. Nero being thus raiſed vp, his mother ſet vpon Iulius Sillanus Proconſull in ASIA, who was poyſoned becauſe ſhe feared him, for that being the laſt ſon of Auguſtus, the people did greatly honor him, and ſayd he ſhould be preferred before Nero. On the other ſide Narciſſus was haſtily compelled to die, although Nero was very angry withall. To be ſhort, the kniues were drawne, and this woman had ſhed much bloud, if Burrus and Seneca had not beaten downe the blowes. They being Neroes gouernours, and agreeing well together in

this equall and common greatneſſe, they had both alike power and authority, but by diuerſe meanes. Burrus, he diſpoſed of all matters militarie, and was a graue man, but had ſower maners. Seneca with a pleaſant and comely faſhion taught this young Prince eloquence. They did carefully helpe one another, and often conferred together what meanes they ſhould vſe to make Nero loue vertue, whereof he ſeemed to haue great beginnings. To hold him in more eaſily, they let him haue his owne will in exerciſes and honeſt pleaſures, and left him to his diſpoſition to do as he thought good. This young man from his infancie vſed his wit, which was quicke to diuerſe things, peraduenture better for a man of ſome other qualitie, to wit: to graue, to paint, to ſing, to play on the citherne, to ride horſes, and to make verſes. That a Prince haue all theſe parts in him, and be furniſhed with others: is not a thing in it ſelfe to be blamed, ſo that the principall do alwayes go before, and that nothing be forgotten requiſite for diſcharge of his gouernement receiued of God. Otherwiſe, as he was iuſtly reproued, that of a wiſe Phiſition was become an euill Poet: and ſometime a great Lord was blamed for that he was too good a Muſitian. Alſo it was ſayd to a king, that would conteſt againſt a player on the flute: that it was not his craft. So they may aunſwer him that would deſcribe the praiſes of a Prince: He was a good player at tennis, a cunning workeman, a braue fencer, a fine dauncer, a great talker: My faire friend, thou doeſt as if one being about to ſpeake of a man and his contentment, came to tell vs that he handleth his feete and his hands finely, and that he hath fine ſhooes on, and weareth his hat gallantly: and thou forgeſt bodies without a ſoule, and men without vocation, and vocations ridiculous. Ageſilaus hearing one call the king of PERSIA, a great king: Why, ſayd he, is he greater then my ſelfe, vnleſſe it be that he is iuſter then I am? Nothing ſurely maketh Kings and Princes truly great but iuſtice. Other things how exact ſoeuer they are found, they ſhall oftentimes meete with more excellent in a poore crafts mans hand, hidden amongſt the refuſe of the people. The Prince therefore is not deſirous of true honour, nor a man that deſerueth praiſe, that is carefull to cloth his bodie ſumptuouſly, and that glorieth to be a painter, a grauer, a cunning workeman, a ſinger, a player at tennis, a hunter, a dauncer, and that his houſe be richly furniſhed with houſhold ſtuffe, and himſelfe daintily ſerued: and all this while he giueth no order for his ſpeech, his companie, and conuerſation, that therein he be grauer and wiſer then a baſe and common perſon, making no account to haue the pallace of his ſoule royally apparelled and ſet foorth, as appertaineth to a royall magnificence. But how can a Prince be great, what power or authoritie ſoeuer he haue, if he be giuen to vile things, vnworthy of his true greatneſſe: and worſe then that, if he ioyne vice vnto theſe ridiculous things in him? Away with this traſh, and take vertue from a great man in the world, you ſhall ſee him little in all other things. Litle in his gifts and preſents: becauſe he will not, or knoweth not how to diſpoſe them. Litle in paines, becauſe of his delicateneſſe: litle towards God, becauſe of his ſuperſtition: litle vnto the good, becauſe of his enuie: litle vnto men, becauſe of his cowardlineſſe: litle among women, becauſe he is ſubiect vnto voluptuouſneſſe. For like as euill workemen, which ſet vp litle ſtatues vpon great and large baſes, do by meaſure ſhew the ſmalneſſe of their ſtatues: euen ſo when fortune lifteth vp to high eſtate a man of a weake and little hart, where he is to be ſeene of all the world, and in the place of the robe and ſtaffe of iuſtice, he is ſeene apparelled like a crafts man, or an enterlude player: ſhe doth diſcouer, deſcrie, and diſhonour him, making it to appeare how he reeleth and ſtumbleth for his lightneſſe. Let this be ſpoken to the purpoſe of Neroes paſtimes: who ſhortly after left all ſuch comedies, to play terrible tragedies. And for his ſmall pleaſures, although at the firſt Burrus and Seneca were warie that this young Prince liued modeſtly inough: yet we muſt confeſſe that ſometime they gaue him libertie to entertaine women: which the eſtate of his court and of ROME did offer him at pleaſure. But that which moſt troubled them, was the boldneſſe of Agrippina: who being ſet on fire with all the paſſions that may be found in a wicked gouernement: had neare about her pallace an arrogant man, and that hauing forgotten with what condition he came to mount ſo high, braued all the world, and Nero himſelfe: who, notwithſtanding his youth, did very vnpatiently beare the inſolencie of this minion. And yet he bare it, becauſe he would not anger his mother, to whom he ſpared no reuerence, honour, and kindneſſe amongſt his Lords: alſo he called her his good mother, euen to giue this name otherwhile for a watch-word vnto the Captaine. In theſe beginnings Nero made many goodly and well penned orations, after the manner of Seneca, who had a gentle ſpirit, and meete for the eares of this time. Theſe exerciſes

faſhioned Nero, kept vnder his wild nature, and framed it to the affaires of eſtate: in ſuch ſort, that the firſt fiue yeares of his Empire, he was ſo finely handled by Seneca, ſeconded with Burrus, that the affaires of peace and warre proſpered, euery man hauing great hope of Nero, who ſhewed himſelfe lowly, and giuen to vertue. Seneca reporteth wonders in his bookes he did dedicate vnto him, where he treateth of clemencie, ſingularly of this gentleneſſe of his. For at the beginning of the ſecond booke he ſayth, that Burrus deſirous to hang two theeues, ſued to the Emperour ot ſet too his hand, againſt whom, and for what cauſes this execution ſhould be done. This being put off diuerſe times, Burrus ſollicited the diſpatch, and being angrie, preſented the paper vnto Nero: who with a diſcontented countenance, and doing it as againſt his will, he cried out: By my will, I would I could neither write nor reade. See to what end the inſtructions of Seneca ſerued: where I will tell you another ſtorie, although it chaunced a long time after the firſt, to ſhew the credite of the maiſter towards his ſcholer. Nero hauing made a pauilion with eight panes wonderfull ſumptuous, Seneca told him: Thou haſt ſhewed thy ſelfe in this pauilion that thou art poore: for if thou looſe it, thou ſhalt neuer haue the like againe. As it came to paſſe: for the ſhip wherein this pauilion was, was caſt away. And Nero remembring Senecaes words, did beare the loſſe of it more patiently. Furthermore, Seneca accompanied Nero in the aſſemblies of counſell, and oftentimes told him in the field what he ſhould do, according to the occurrences: and in diuerſe orations he procured that Nero made proteſtation of his gentleneſſe before the Senate. The which turned to the praiſe of Seneca, in ſuch ſort notwithſtanding that the people perceiued it, and reioyced at it. So they report that the Emperor Traian was wont to ſay, that all the other Princes were farre from the firſt fiue yeares of the Empire of Nero: as Tacitus and others do teſtifie. In the meane time Nero ſhewed himſelfe very liberall vnto Seneca, and did eſteeme him as much, or more, then any man in ROME at that time: for he made him a preſent of great ſummes of money, vnto three thouſand Seſtertium, which ſome thinke do amount vnto ſeuen millions and 50000 crownes, of the which part of it yeelded him great profite at vſurie: the other part was beſtowed vpon ſumptuous gardens, houſes of pleaſure, lands & poſſeſſions farre off and neare ROME: and furthermore, a pallace in the city, full of all ſorts of precious moueables. For all this Seneca waxed nothing the prowder, but fearing fortune, and remembring his old ſtate and condition, ſought to keepe himſelfe vpright in the middeſt of the great combats which were like to come, hauing vpon his armes the vnconſtant youth of Nero, the which in ſight began to runne to his deſtruction: on the other ſide, the ambition of Agrippina to fight withall and beate downe: this woman being of ſuch a ſpirit, that ſhe could tarry in no place, but ſet her ſelfe and others on worke. But this credite of Burrus and of Seneca, and their great riches alſo, eſpecially of Seneca, made them to be enuied of many, that did blame and accuſe them openly. Wherunto Seneca oppoſed the grauity of his maners, and ſought by diuerſe writings to ſtrengthen himſelfe more and more: as ſome of his workes, ſpecially the diſcourſe of a happy life, ſeemeth to be done by him during theſe alarmes.
            Now the beginning of theſe griefes of Seneca, came partly for that he perceiued Neroes mind ſo corrupted, that he began to be very diſſolute: and partly alſo for that he diſcouered that Agrippina and her minions would ſet vpon him and Burrus alſo, which with time would bring them into many daungers. And though for his owne part he was reſolute againſt all accidents: neuertheleſſe the charge and care he had of the affaires of the Empire, and the loue which he bare vnto Nero his ſcholer, troubled him exceedingly. Neuertheleſſe as hope entertaineth vs in all daungers, attending better: he determined to keepe himſelfe vpright as long as he could poſſible, and to expect ſome other iſſue in the affaires. Nero was enamoured with a bond woman called Acté, which his familiars did indure, alledging they muſt ſuffer one euill, for feare a worſe ſhould happen: and that ſo long as he ſhould ſatisfie himſelfe with her, he ſhould not runne after the Ladies of ROME. But Agrippina that could not beare with this inſolencie, began to take vp her ſonne roundly, thinking ſhe could by her magiſtralitie remedie this well inough. To the contrarie, this was to kindle the fire, and to embrace it altogether in this girle. Nero being waxen great, and counſelled by Otho and Claudius Senecio, who made the meſſages of Loue: he ſnuffed at theſe reprehenſions, and began to deſpiſe his mother: who on the ſudden came to change her ſubtilties. And ſhe had not bene ſo ſharpe before in rebuking, but ſhe was now as gentle in yeelding, and offered her cloſet to her ſonne for the accompliſhing of his deſires. This ſudden chaunge, made Nero and his minions

thinke much of it, in ſo much as they prayed him to beware of the deceipts of this woman, that practiſed in her heart ſome villany. Nero countermining her, preſented his mother with many rich iewels and apparell of great price. But ſhe being ſuſpicious as could be poſſible, gaue them iniurious words that brought them. Wherewith Nero being offended, and knowing that Pallas was the chiefe counſellour of Agrippina, tooke his offices from him which were committed to him by the Emperour Claudius. Agrippina began then to diminiſh in reputation, and to flye off the hookes: and comming to Nero himſelfe, threatned him to take his Empire from him, and to eſtabliſh Britannicus, the lawfull ſucceſſour of Claudius: and hereupon deteſted in expreſſe termes the wickedneſſe ſhe had committed to bring vp a ſonne that was ſo vnthankfull vnto her: adding moreouer that ſhe would go find out the armies with Britannicus: ſo long as they ſhould ſee on the other ſide, this baggage fellow Burrus, and this baniſhed pedanticall companion Seneca (ſo did ſhe qualifie him) barking after he gouernement of the world. Theſe threatnings were accompanied with ſuch ſtrange countenances and imprecations, that they troubled Nero, beſides that Britannicus came now to be fourteene yeares old: and that one day playing, he could ſay aloud before Nero himſelfe, that they had taken his Empire from him. Shortly after Britannicus was poyſoned, and died ſuddenly, to the great aſtoniſhment of Agrippina and of Octauia alſo. Afterwards, Nero deſiſted to conuerſe ſo priuatly with his mother as he did at other times: and began to giue eare vnto them that would ſet them further at oddes: ſo that a certaine foole called Paris, hauing told Nero one night that Agrippina conſpired againſt him: he was reſolued to make his mother be put to death, and to take from Burrus the charge of Captaine of the gards. But Seneca kept him from that, and after ſome reaſons paſſed betweene them, Burrus being ſent for, to put Nero by his choler, he beſought him to let him haue the charge of this buſineſſe, aſſuring him that he would put Agrippina to death, if ſhe were conuinced of any villanie. Notwithſtanding that euerie bodie ſhould be heard ſpeake in their defence, and aboue all, a mother: adding alſo that the accuſers were not preſent, and that there was but one accuſer ſuſpected. And that he could not iuſtifie, that ſuch an important deliberation ſhould be made by night, and at the table: and that all that would ſhew his raſhneſſe and follie more then any other thing. Nero being ſomewhat pacified, they taried till day, that they might go to the mother, to know how theſe accuſations fell out. Burrus was there by expreſſe commiſſion with Seneca, and ſome others, to marke what ſhould be ſayd. But Agrippina could ſo well iuſtifie her ſelfe, that her accuſers were puniſhed: for one of them was put to death, and the reſt baniſhed. From that time forward Nero began to runne riot as is deſcribed by Suetonius, Tacitus, and Dion. But the beginning of new and horrible miſeries, (the other that went before being but light in reſpect of them) was the falling in loue with Sabina Popea, the wife of Otho, who had taken her away from her firſt husband Ruffus Criſpinus, a knight of ROME. Nero did the like vnto this Otho, and tooke from him this minxe that knew the trickes of the occupation. She hauing gained Nero in a little ſpace, preuailed ſo much with him, that he determined to put his mother Agrippina to death. Who hearing of the ill will her ſonne did beare her, ſought by all meanes to get into his fauour againe: euen to preſent her ſelfe ſo ſhamefully vnto him, that I ſhame to be the reporter of that which the hiſtorians ſpeake of her. This notwithſtanding he perſeuered in his determination, and commanded Anicetus Generall of the galleys of MISENE, to ſee her drowned: the which was executed in ſome ſort, yet Agrippina for that time eſcaped being hurt, and got to a houſe of pleaſure of hers. Nero hearing theſe newes, more dead then aliue, thinking he was vndone: ſent preſently for Burrus and Seneca, to haue their aduice: and we cannot tell (ſayth Tacitus) whether they were of counſell and priuie to this fact, or not. Both of them therefore were a great while and ſpake not a word: being afraid they ſhould looſe time, if they ſhould go about to diſſwade Nero from that which he was purpoſed to redouble vpon her: and they knew well that the day was come, that Nero muſt needs dye, if Agrippina were not preuented. Seneca, who vntill this preſent time was euer ready to ſpeake, looked vpon Burrus, as to know of him if he thought good to commaund the men of warre to do this murther. Burrus anſwered, that the PRETORIAN ſouldiers were ſo affectioned to the houſe of the Caeſars, and did ſo much reuerence the memorie of Germanicus, that they would neuer enterpriſe any thing againſt the life of his children: and that Anicetus was to performe his promiſe.

Who without any further thought, demaunded and accepted the commiſſion, which was foorthwith executed, and Agrippina put to death in her houſe, where ſhe thruſting out her body to the Centener, who tooke his ſword in his hand to kill her, ſhe cried out: Ventrem fert, deſiring that the wombe which had borne ſuch a fruit as Nero, ſhould be firſt ſtriken, and runne through. Nero defiled with this execrable murther, added thereto other infinite abhominations, ſpecially the putting away and doing his wife Octauia to death, a vertuous Princeſſe, and that deſerued better. Now this is inough that we haue touched theſe things by they way, becauſe they ſpecially concerne the life of Nero, who payed his maiſter with an euill reward, entangling him in ſuch wicked counſels. On the other ſide alſo it cannot be denied, that Burrus and Seneca yeelded too much to the cruell will of this Parricide. And as for the extremitie they feared, there were meanes inough to haue holpen it: and we muſt neuer do euill, that good may come of it. And what good could come of ſuch an execrable abhomination? For though Agrippina deſerued ſuch a cruell puniſhment, for ſo many wicked deeds as ſhe had done: yet ſhould not her ſonne haue had his hand in it, and his counſellers ſhould not haue conſented vnto it, nor Anicetus haue executed it. As all were much to be blamed for this deed, yet ſome more then other, ſo they had all their turne, as Tacitus and Suetonius do ſhew particularly.
            
               Burrus diſlodged the firſt, and as leaſt to be blamed for ſo many diſorders, he was ſpared, in that he ſaw not the other incredible confuſions that fell out afterwards. His throate ſwelling within, by little and little, he died, his pipes being ſtopped that he could fetch no wind. Many affirmed, ſayth Tacitus, that by the commaundement of Nero, making as though they would helpe him, the pallate of his mouth was rubbed with poyſon, and that Burrus perceiued that wickedneſſe, & when Nero came to ſee him, he wold not vouchſafe to looke on him, but turned on the other ſide. And Nero asking him how he did, he aunſwered onely, I am well. This man was wonderfully lamented of the ROMAINES, becauſe of his vertue, and of the fooliſhneſſe of one of his ſucceſſours, and of the notable villanies of the other called Tigellinus, who was the vtter ruine of Nero. The death of Burrus much impaired the power and authority of Seneca: for that the meanes to do good were weake, as hauing loſt the halfe part of their life: and becauſe that Nero inclined vnto thoſe which held him vp in his wickedneſſe, againſt the which Seneca oppoſed himſelfe as time and occaſion would ſuffer him. But his enemies hauing the Princes eare, they failed not to ſet vpon this honourable perſon, becauſe of his age and the ſeruices he had done to Nero. They did falſly accuſe him, ſayth Tacitus, for that he hauing great riches, and more then was fit for a priuate man, he did ſtill increaſe them, and grew greater: and beſides did gaine and draw the good will of the peoole too much vnto him. That he had goodlier gardens and more ſumptuous houſes of pleaſure, then the Emperor himſelfe. Furthermore, that he imputed all the honour to himſelfe for knowing how to ſpeake excellently well: and that he made verſes oftener then he was wont, after that he perceiued Nero tooke pleaſure to make them himſelfe. That flatly condemning Nero his exerciſes, he mocked him, ſeeing him ride and manage horſes, and laughed at him hearing him ſing. And all this was but to make men beleeue, that nothing was well done in the affaires of the eſtate, that proceeded not from his inuention. Now that Nero was come out of his infancie, and in the flower of his youth, that he ſhould leaue his maiſter, conſidering that his aunceſtours ſhould ſerue him well inough for great and good tutors: Seneca vnderſtanding by the report of thoſe that yet ſomewhat regarded vertue and honour, how theſe lewd incenſers did accuſe him: perceiuing alſo that Nero withdrew himſelfe more and more from his familiaritie, which he had ſhewed in times paſt: he beſought him to heare him, the which hauing obtained, he ſayd thus vnto him: My Lord, it is now fourteene Senecaes Oration vnto Nero.yeres ſince I was firſt called to accompany the great hope that was had of your infancy, & eight yeares ſince you haue bene Emperor: during which time you haue heaped ſo much goods and honor vpon me, that nothing wanteth to my felicity, but to know how to vſe them well. To this purpoſe I wil lay before you notable examples practiſed by men of your quality, not of mine. Auguſtus great father of your grandfathers father, licenſed M. Agrippa to withdraw himſelfe vnto MYTILENE, to leade a priuate life: and to C. Mecaenas to liue at his eaſe within ROME it ſelfe, as in ſome pleaſant remote place farther off. The one of them had accompanied him in his warres, and the other hauing bene beaten and tormented with great tempeſts in ROME, had bone both, to ſpeake the truth, amply recompenced, as alſo the great ſeruice they had done well deſerued it. As for my ſelfe, I brought nothing that deſerued you ſhould be ſo noble and

liberall vnto me, but onely my ſtudies nouriſhed (if I may be ſo bold to ſpeake it) in the ſhadow, and couertly, from whence notwithſtanding all my reputation is proceeded, for as much as it ſeemeth I haue bene in your apprentiſhips: which truly is to me a great reward and rich recompence. But beſides all this, you haue infinitely fauoured me, and preſented me with innumerable goods. In ſo much that I often reaſon thus with my ſelfe: Is it poſſible, that I that am but of a ſimple houſe of Knights (alſo dwelling without ROME) ſhould hold the place of one of the chiefeſt Lords of ROME? and amongſt the moſt noble, and thoſe that are noted to be of ſo great antiquitie, that a new come man as my ſelfe, hath dared to ſhew himſelfe in place? Where is that ſpirit that contented it ſelfe with mediocritie? what meaneth he to haue ſo fine and goodly gardens? What? he walketh by ſuch and ſuch houſes of pleaſure, neare vnto the citie. His lands and poſſeſſions are of ſo great an extent, and his money bringeth him in ſuch a commoditie many wayes, that he is full to the throate. For the which there is nothing to be offered, but a defence for my ſelfe: that I could not refuſe your preſents. Now we haue, both the one and the other, performed our duty: you, in giuing ſo much as a Prince could giue to him that he loueth: and I, in receiuing that which a man in great fauour might haue and take of his Prince. As for my honours and eſtates, Enuie looketh awry vpon me: howbeit (as all other things of the world) ſhe is vnder the feete of your greatneſſe. Yet in the meane time ſhe lighteth vpon me, and therefore I haue need of helpe. And as in warre, or otherwiſe in trauelling abroad, if I were wearie I would require reſt: ſo finding my ſelfe in the trauell of this life now old and very vnmeet for the leaſt office, ſince I can no longer ſupport the burthen of my riches, I do deſire to be diſcharged. Commaund therefore that your receiuers henceforth do take them and put them into your treaſure. I ſhall not therefore become poore, but when I ſhall be rid of thoſe things which blindfold me with their brightneſſe, I ſhall beſtow my time in ſtudie, which I was wont to imploy in my gardens and poſſeſſions. You are young and luſtie, and time hath eſtabliſhed you in the greatneſſe of your eſtate: but we that are your ancient ſeruants haue leaue as it were to repoſe our ſelues. It ſhall be alſo a great honour for you to haue raiſed thoſe to Neroes anſvver to Senecaes oration.great offices, to whom meane things had ſufficed. Vnto this Nero made aunſwer, in manner as followeth: For that on the ſudden I do aunſwer your premeditate Oration, it is becauſe I haue learned it of you, that haue taught me how I ſhould deale, not onely in things ſeene farre off, but alſo in thoſe which are preſented vpon the ſudden vnto me. Augustus my grandfather ſuffered Agrippa and Mecaenas to repoſe themſelues after their trauels: but it was in ſuch an age, that his authoritie might maintaine that, and any thing elſe by him graunted: and yet he did not take from the one nor the other any goods that he had giuen vnto them. They got it in the warres, and with daunger of their liues: for Auguſtus ſpent his youth in warres. I do aſſure my ſelfe that your armes nor hands would haue failed me, if I had gone to the warres: but as the eſtate of my affaires did beare, you haue by reaſon, by counſell, and by inſtructions raiſed vp my infancie and youth. So will I remember all the dayes of my life the good ſeruice I haue receiued at your hands. That which you hold of me, your gardens, money in banke, houſes in the countrey abroad: all that is ſubiect vnto diuerſe accidents. And though all together ſeeme much, yet is it ſo, that many farre ſhort of your deſerts haue poſſeſſed more. I am aſhamed to name bondmen made free, whom men ſee richer then you: and the cauſe that maketh me aſhamed is, that you whom I ſhould cheriſh aboue all others, do not paſſe them in riches and humane greatneſſe. Furthermore, you are yet in good age, to gouerne your lands and reuenewes, and we do but now enter into managing the affaires of the Empire: but it may be that you eſteeme your ſelfe leſſe then Vitellius, three times Conſull: and commend Claudius aboue me, as if I could not by my liberalitie giue you as much goods as Voluſius by long ſparing hath gotten. Moreouer, if our ſlippery and vnconſtant youth ſway on one ſide more then it ought, you reforme it, guiding by your aide and vigilancie that ſmall direction we haue. If you bring your money into my coffers, If you forſake the Prince, they will not ſay it is becauſe you are content with litle, and ſeeke your eaſe: but their talke ſhall be none other, but of my couetouſneſſe, and my cruelty. And although they ſhould much praiſe your moderation in this action, yet it becommeth not an old man to ſeeke honor by doing any thing that ſhould diſhonor his friend. Nero added to this fine ſpeech, many embracements and kiſſes, being made by nature, and brought by cuſtome to couer his malice with falſe and counterfeit kindneſſe. Seneca (as it is the concluſion of a ſpeech holden with him that commaundeth) thanked

him: yet he immediatly changed his accuſtomed manner he was wont to vſe during his former greatneſſe: gaue them leaue to depart that came euery morning in troupes to ſalute him: turned away from others that offered to follow and accompany him: very ſeldome times he went into the city, and ſtirred not out of his houſe, as if he had bene ſicke, or troubled after his ſtudie of Philoſophie. This was the talke betwixt Nero and Seneca, who hauing leiſure to bethinke himſelfe better of the anſwer of Nero, knew very well that his fortune was changed, and that the diſciple was become the maſter: yea and that ſo much more dangerous, for that his cruell courage was wrapped vp in ſo gracious words and countenances, the which a man was conſtrained to truſt, or at the leaſt to make ſhew of it.
            
               Nero being as it were ouercome by Seneca, was as cruell and more then before, counſelled by Tigellinus and Popea. Firſt of all then he began to cut off the heads of Plautus and Sylla, honourable men baniſhed before into ASIA & to MARSEILLES. He refuſed, confined, and finally put to death his wife, the Princeſſe Octauia, vſing an infamous and ſtraunge manner in his proceedings againſt her. He maried the adultereſſe Popea, who brought him a daughter that died ſoone after. He counterfeited the player, alwayes intermixing ſome new cruelty with his paſtimes. Afterwards he being preſent at a banket made by Tigellinus, in the which were committed all ſorts of villanies, and he himſelfe being defiled with naturall and vnnaturall whoredomes and abhominations, within few dayes after (a matter incredible, if ſo many graue hiſtorians, amongſt others Tacitus did not aſſure vs of it) he maried one Pythagoras as his husband, which was of the company of theſe villans, and was ſolemnly maried according to the cuſtome of other mariages. The yellow veile of the maried couple couered Neroes head. Soothſayers were ſent for, the ioynter was aſſigned, the bed of the ſpouſe prepared, the wedding torches were lighted: and to be ſhort, they ſaw that openly which the night hideth, when the queſtion of mariage is in hand with a woman. Thirdly, he ſet fire on a great number of houſes in ROME, ſo as the moſt part were burnt. And to cleare himſelfe of this wickedneſſe, he falſly layd it vpon the Chriſtians, (being a great number at that time in ROME) that they were the authors of this diſorder: in ſomuch that they were ſet vpon with a ſtrange crueltie. And yet as they put them to death, they did a thouſand mockeries vnto them, putting beaſts skins vpon them to be torne in peeces with dogges, or elſe they were hanged vpon the croſſe, or burnt with a litle fire: their wood-houſes, or ſtackes of wood ſerued to giue light in the night. Now though the people of ROME were bloudily bent againſt theſe innocents, yet there were many that had pity of them, ſeeing honeſt men tormented, to ſatisfie the cruell inſolency of Nero: who apparelled like a coach-man, and driuing the horſe himſelfe in the middeſt of theſe confuſions, made the people paſtime. Beſides all this, he forraged and ranſacked all ITALIE with impoſitions and exceſſiue lones, ruining the townes, and not ſparing alſo the temples of ROME, of ASIA, nor of GRECE. It was giuen out abroad, ſaith Tacitus, that Seneca (whom Nero went oftentimes to viſite, to keepe him in breath, and gently to lull him aſleepe) to auoide the ſuſpition that he had bene of counſell with this ſacriledge: had asked leaue to go to ſome houſe of his farre into the countrey. Which being denied him, he kept his chamber, faining to be ſicke of the goute. Some haue written that a bondman of his enfranchiſed called Cleonicus, did prepare to poyſon him by the commandement of Nero: the which he auoided vpon warning giuen him by him, or for that he feared ſuch a thing, liuing meanely, eating ſuch fruits as were brought him out of the country, and being contented to drinke cleare running water if he were athirſt. Such deteſtable wickedneſſe of Nero hauing of long time offended many honorable perſons, which could no longer endure ſuch a maiſter: they reſolued to ſet themſelues at liberty, and conſpired to kill him one day when they ſaw oportunitie. The day being come, one called Millicus, an enfranchiſed bondman of one of the principall conſpirators, went to diſcouer to Nero what they had complotted againſt him. This gaue a ſtraunge alarme to the Emperour, who cauſed them to lay hands of one and other, amongſt which number there was Lucan the nephew of Seneca, that was a party in this conſpiracie, for anger againſt Nero: who was the cauſe that his verſes were not had in that eſtimation they deſerued, and commaunded him not to publiſh them, thinking (but in vaine) that he could make as good. From that time forth they could ſee nothing in ROME but impriſoning of men of qualitie, and preparation for execution which followed.
            
               Seneca, that ſtirred not out of the countrey, was not forgotten of Popea, nor of Tigellinus, which were the ſecret counſellors of Nero in his cruelties. And Nero alſo failed not to take hold

of this occaſion to make away his ſchoole-maiſter, whoſe ſhadow did torment him. It was not for that Seneca was partaker of the counſell with the conſpirators, but Nero was glad to find the meane to diſpatch him with a ſword, ſince he could not do it by poyſon. For one of the conſpirators called Natalis (whom Nero had pardoned) ſayd nothing elſe of him, but that he was ſent to viſite Seneca being ſicke, and to complaine becauſe he thought not good that Piſo (being the head of this enterpriſe, and ſhould be created Emperour after the murther of Nero) ſhould come to ſee him, and that he would confirme their friendſhip, frequenting familiarly together: but that Seneca had anſwered, that their talke and meeting would neither be profitable for the one, nor for the other: and moreouer, that his life depended vpon that of Piſo. Grauius Siluanus Captaine of a band of gards, was commaunded to go to Seneca, to know if he would take any knowledge to haue ſpoken the words confeſſed by Natalis, and the anſwer that he made at that time. By chance, or wittingly, Seneca was come home that very day, and remained in a houſe of his two ſmall miles from ROME. The Captaine came thither about night, and placed his ſouldiers round about the houſe: and afterwards came in, and found Seneca at ſupper with his wife Pompeia Paulina the vviſe of Seneca.
               Pompeia Paulina, and two of his friends. So hauing deliuered his meſſage vnto him, Seneca anſwered ſtraight being nothing moued, that Natalis was indeed ſent vnto him to complaine in the name of Piſo, for that Seneca would not ſuffer him to come and ſee him: and that for himſelfe, he did excuſe himſelfe as well by reaſon of his ſickneſſe, as for the deſire he had to take his eaſe. And for thoſe words: that his life depended vpon that of Piſo, he ſayd he had no occaſion to preferre the preſeruation of another priuate mans life, before his owne. And that furthermore, he gaue not his mind to flatteries, whereof he would haue no better teſtimonie then Nero himſelf, who had oftner knowne that Seneca was a free man, then a ſlaue or a bondman. Siluanus returned vnto Nero, and made report in the preſence of Popea and Tigellinus, who were very deſirous to heare his aunſwer: which being heard, Nero asked him, if Seneca made any ſhew to be willing to dye. The Captaine aſſured him that he perceiued no ſigne of feare nor of ſorow, in the words, nor countenance of Seneca. Thereupon Nero commaunded this Captaine to returne to Seneca againe, and to commaund him to dye. Some thinke that this executioner returned not againe that way he was come, but went another way, to find out Fenius Captaine of the gards, whom after he had acquainted with Neroes commaundement, he asked him if he would execute this commiſſion. Fenius, that was of the number of the conſpirators, neuertheleſſe aduiſed him to obey the Emperours commandement, by a fatall cowardlineſſe of as many as were of them. For Siluanus that had this commiſſion to go to Seneca, was alſo one of the conſpiracie, and yet his hand was readie to increaſe the wickedneſſe of Nero, of the which before he was deſirous and procured to ſee the puniſhment. To hide his offence in ſome ſort, he would not, or durſt not returne into the preſence of Seneca, nor ſpeake to him: but made one of his Centeners go into the houſe to declare the Emperours commandement, which was, that Seneca muſt dye. At that time it was halfe a fauour vnto thoſe that were condemned to looſe their liues, to ſuffer them to be put to death, either by themſelues, or by any of their acquaintance: which was done in diuerſe ſorts. Some pricked their veines and let themſelues bloud, and then went into a hot-houſe where they ended. Others ſwallowed downe poyſon: others ſtabbed themſelues in with their daggers, or their ſwords. It is iudged this was done, that they ſhould not fall into the hands of the hangmen: for when it happened ſo, the bodies of the condemned were not buried, and their goods were forfeited: whereas if they put themſelues to death (of the which the moſt part following the doctrine of the STOICKES were nothing afraid) their bodies ſhould be buried, and their wils and teſtaments good. Sometimes this choice did cut off the griefes of a more ignominious and cruell puniſhment.
            Now to returne to Seneca. Hauing heard the meſſage of the Centener, without changing countenance, and wholly reſolued: he called for his booke of tables, in the which was written his will: which being denied him by the Centener, turning to his friends, he proteſted, that ſince he was let to acknowledge their merites, that he would leaue one onely thing (and notwithſtanding the beſt) yet his, to wit, the image of the example of his life, the which if they remembred, they would carie a commendable reputation of honeſt & vertuous men, for a worthy reward of ſo conſtant a friendſhip. And ſeeing them weepe, he ſought to appeaſe them, or to ſtay their teares, now with ſweete words, by and by with vehemency, as if he would haue reproued them. To conlude, he did encourage them to remaine firme and conſtant, asking them where

was the reſolution they had learned ſo many yeares in the ſchooles and ſtudies of Philoſophie, againſt all the chances of the world. He added further, that euery one knew well what Nero was, what cruelties he had committed: and after that he had ſo wickedly behaued himſelfe to his father in law, to his mother, to his brother, and to his wife: there was nothing left behind for the accompliſhment of his cruelties, but to adde too the murther of his ſchoolemaiſter. After he had diſcourſed ſuch or the like words before them all, and as in generall, he embraced his wife, and hauing a litle emboldened her againſt this blow, he inſtantly prayed her to moderate her griefe, and exhorted her alſo to remember how vertuouſly he had paſſed his life, and gently to beare (and with a heart worthy her ſelfe) the ſorow of the death of her husband. She for her part aſſured him that ſhe was reſolued to die, and bad one of them giue her the blow. Then Seneca, not to depriue himſelf of that honor, and being touched with the loue he did beare her, was contented not to leaue to the mercie of the diſſolution that then raigned, her whom he had moſt dearely loued. I did ſet before you (ſaid he) the ſweetnes of life: but ſince your ſelfe hath choſen rather an honorable death, for my part, I ſhall not be ſorie if you ſhew me the way. Let the conſtancie therfore of ſo coragious a death as ours, be alike to vs both: although the endof your life ſhal be more famous. Immediatly thereupon, they cauſed the veines of their armes to be opened: but becauſe that Seneca had an old bodie, and thin by eating litle, there would no bloud come out but drop by drop: he made the veines of his legs and hams to be cut. Then wearie of ſuch a cruell butcherie, being affraid that his paines would make his wiues heart ſaile her, or that he himſelfe ſhould grow impatient for ſo many torments as he endured: he perſwaded her to withdraw her ſelfe into another chamber: and for himſelfe, hauing to his laſt gaſpe his words at commandement, he cauſed his Secretaries that were wont to write vnder him, to come vnto him, and told them there many notable things in fine termes, the which were publiſhed after his death: but time hath taken them from vs for want of ſtorie-writers: although ſome thinke that that might be kept as well as other writings of Seneca. Others carying ſome enuie to the vertue of this man, haue kept it backe, being loth that the poſteritie ſhould enioy a table, where the viſage of Seneca might be better knowne, then in other places of his works. Nero, that had men comming and going euery minute of an houre from Senecaes houſe to ROME, vnderſtanding how euery thing paſſed, and bearing no particular hatred to Paulina, fearing alſo he ſhould increaſe the blame of his crueltie: he commaunded they ſhould keepe Paulina from dying. Wherefore his ſlaues and freed bondmen, warned by the ſouldiers themſelues, bound vp her armes, and ſtaunched the bloud, not knowing whether ſhe felt any thing or not. For as there are alwaies among the people that take things at the worſt, there wanted not men which thought that ſo long as Paulina ſtood in feare of Neroes anger, ſhe deſired to haue the report that ſhe was a companion of the death of her huſband. But afterwards whē there was a better hope offered her, ſhe was contented to be won with the flatteries of life, vnto the which ſhe added ſome few years with cōmendable memory, and ſorow for her husband: being otherwiſe ſo pale of countenance, that ſhe ſhewed to haue loſt a great deale of bloud and her ſtrength. On the other ſide Seneca ſeeing his death prolonged, he prayed Statius Annaeus (whom he eſteemed much for his faithfull friendſhip he had borne him a long time, and for his skill in Phiſick) to bring him of the like poiſon to that which they keepe by publike ordinance in ATHENS to put offenders to death, whereof he had of long time made prouiſion. So when it was brought him, he ſwallowed it downe without regard, his members bieng cold, and his bodie conſtant againſt the force of the poiſon. In the end, he entred into a bathing tub of hote water, with the which ſprinkling his ſlaues that were about him, he added to it, that he offered this liquor vnto Iupiter the deliuerer. After that being caried into a ſtoue, and hauing through the heat thereof yeelded vp the ghoſt, his bodie was burned without any ſolemnitie of obſequies. He had ſo appointed it by his will made at that time when he was very rich, and of great credit. It was reported that Subrius Flauius, one of the chiefeſt conſpirators, had ſecretly determined with the Centeners (yet not without the priuity of Seneca) that after they had killed Nero by the meanes of Piſo, they ſhould alſo diſpatch Piſo himſelfe, to the end to make Seneca Emperour, as an honeſt man, onely elect and choſen to that greatneſſe for the fame of his vertues. Such was the end of Seneca, that had liued in honourable and publike charges, of Praetor, Quaeſtor and Conſul vnder two Emperours, and was long in credit with the laſt: who ſeeing himſelfe couertly deſpiſed of his maiſter, that could no longer endure ſuch wickedneſſe: ſought the occaſion before mentioned, but with extreame iniuſtice, to rid him out of the way. Furthermore,

               Dion thinketh that Senecaes two brethren were likewiſe put to death. But becauſe he is contented to touch it but in a line, and that that which Tacitus ſaith is to be marked, ſet downe in particular, and with moſt likely circumſtances: we will ſpeake one word more. Shortly after the death of Seneca, he commanded they ſhould put Annaeus Lucanus to death, the ſon of Mela: who feeling his feet and his hands cold whileſt the bloud ran downe, and that by litle and litle his ſpirit parted from the extremities of his body, his heart being yet liuely and his vnderſtanding good, calling certain verſes of Poetrie to mind, in the which here preſented a ſoldier hurt: dying of the ſame death, he recited the ſame verſes, which were the laſt words he ſpake. Altitia, Lucans mother was left aliue, neither being pardoned nor puniſhed. For Iunius Callio, who was a Senator, he was ſo aſtonied at the death of his brother, that before all the Senat he fell down at Neroes feet, beſeeching him to giue him his life. Whereupon another Senator called Alienus Clemens, ſet vpon him with iniurious words, calling him traitor and parricide. But the other Senatours with one conſent made Clement hold his peace, telling him that he ſhould not ſeeke common aduerſities for to reuenge his priuate quarrell, or to draw on the Prince to a new crueltie, who had now by his clemencie quieted and forgotten all. Within a few moneths after Annaeus Mela was diſpatched: he was a knight of ROME, but of the dignitie of a Senatour. And although Seneca and Gallio his brethren were aduanced to greater honor, yet he would neuer purchaſe it by extremitie of ambition: but being come out of SPAINE to ROME, more for the loue of his brethren and of his ſonne then for himſelfe, he was contented to haue this honour, that a knight was euer equal in power and credit with a Conſul. The name of his ſon Lucanus greatly eſteemed of euery bodie, and ſpecially of learned men: had gotten him great reputation. Immediately after his ſons death, he ſeeking ſomwhat too eagerly after his ſons goods, he raiſed againſt him an accuſer called Fabius Romanus, one of Lucanus chiefeſt friends. This man ſhewed counterfeit letters as done by Lucanus, which charged Mela that he was partaker with his ſonne of the complot againſt Nero. 
               death of Annaeus Mela.Though this accuſation was vtterly falſe and fained, yet Nero that thirſted after the riches of Mela, commaunded thoſe letters ſhould be caried to Mela: that was as much to ſay, he muſt die. The which Mela knowing well enough, made his veines to be opened, and followed the way of others. Seneca in his writings yeeldeth great teſtimonie of the conſtancie and vertue of his brethren: and I thinke he was a man that was not giuen to ſpeake lightly. Notwithſtanding, I haue ſimply recited that which Tacitus ſaith, who ſufficiently ſheweth in the example of diuers others, that it is not to be maruelled at if the cruelties of Nero, who leaſt ſpared the great then the ſmall: made the boldeſt hearts of them all quake ſometimes.
            Now there remaineth to tell you ſomething of the Philoſophie and writings of Seneca: for it is in thoſe tables that we muſt looke to ſee him liuely, and ſpeaking with that ſelfe vehemencie of ſpirit that followed him euen to the laſt gaſpe of his life. It is true that the inſolencies of Nero had oftentimes as it were ſtopped his mouth, and hindered that good ſoule to giue free paſſage to his diſcourſes, yea and in ſome places they made him ſtumble. Yet he called himſelfe backe againe to his firſt thoughts, and remained conſtant in the midſt of the cruell raging ſtormes of his time. Now as it is eaſie for men that be on the land, where they do idly behold ſome maſter Pylot ſtriuing with the force and furie of the wind and billowes, to ſay: That man there ſhould guide his ſhip after another faſhion: who if they were in his place, ſhould without all compariſon find themſelues more troubled, or at the leaſt would make a ſorowfull wracke. Euen ſo it happeneth, that Senecaes Philoſophie is deſpiſed of many, that think he could ſpeake Philoſophy but by his booke, and that when he ſhould come to ſhew it indeed, men would ſay he doth like the maiſters of fence, who being in a ſchoole of fence with young youths, they do wonders, and giue mortall vennies at pleaſure: but if they come to any priuate fight at the ſharpe, where it ſtandeth them vpon for their liues: aſſoone as they ſee the gliſtering of the naked ſword, you may perceiue all their flouriſhes and trickes are gone, or changed into a flat running away. I will ſay at one word, that I thinke Seneca as much and more a Philoſopher in deed then in name. His life and his death can ſay it, and in the laſt Chapter hereafter we muſt ſpeake more at large. For this preſent let vs a litle conſider his tongue. Life is a ſweet thing, and all deſire to liue, yea the beaſts themſelues ſeeme to haue a ſingular contentment, for that they haue a being and life. If life be a pleaſant thing, yet is it much more pleaſing and acceptable when it is well gouerned, and tendeth to a good end. So then a quiet and contented life is much better, ſweeter, and more excellent, then a life full of troubles and paſſions. This quietneſſe is none other but felicitie and good

fortune. Furthermore all men do not aſpire to this end, but onely wiſe men, and the true friends of wiſdome. For the moſt part of men whom the earth ſuſtaineth, do run a ſtrange courſe when they ſhould ſet a foot forward to betake them to ſome courſe of life: and all in maner erre, when they ſhould iudge what happie life is. Thoſe that delight in money and to gaine, ſeeke felicitie in riches. The idle and ſlouthfull thinke, that to make great cheare, to liue (as they ſay) in the ſhadow of tables, of pots, of curtaines, and at the eaſe of their bodies, is the onely ſoueragine good. There are another ſort of men greedie of worldly honour, which eſtabliſh an vnſpeakable happineſſe to commaund many, (in what manner, or how deare ſoeuer it be) taking themſelues to be halfe gods, if they may ſee many men, or two or three go vnder their feet. But wiſe men eſtabliſh ſoueraigne good in vertue. And if they be asked, What is a happy life? they anſwer, That it conſiſteth in liuing vertuouſly, and ſeruing God. This was the Philoſophie of Seneca in generall. But becauſe there are certaine clouds of opinions which darken humane felicitie, it is good we looke to examine them briefly. Nature hath diſperſed in vs ſome ſeeds of vertue, and hath giuen vs ſome graines of knowledge and wiſedome, which are borne with vs and take roote (if we may ſay ſo) in our hearts. This notwithſtanding, we muſt manure it, and vertue hath his precepts which openeth the way to attaine to the ſoueraigne good, whereunto the Philoſophie of the Stoickes doth ſummon vs. Foure things are enemies to that good, yea they obſcure it, they corrupt and aboliſh it in an euill diſpoſed heart. The firſt cauſe is death, that is to ſay, the feare and imagination to loſe this earthly and corruptible life. For where there is feare, it cannot be ſaid there is contentment and felicitie, but miſerie: it is not a pleaſant life, but a ſorowfull life, and a torment of the mind. The ſecond, is the bodily griefe, lingering diſeaſes, cruell and ſharpe in a thouſand kinds, the torments and tortures: and briefly a thouſand euils which hurt the contentment of the ſoule. For no man will ſay, that to be troubled in his mind with a burning feauer, to crie out night and day becauſe of the gowte, or for paine of his teeth and the reines, or to be brought to any extraordinarie torment, and to be diſmembred by the hangman: is a thing where there is no apprehenſion that moueth the ſpirit. Beſides all this, there are the griefes of the ſoule: mourning, loſſe of children, of kinsfolks and deare friends: for that afflicteth and eateth our thoughts without ceaſſing, and giueth tragicall Poets ample arguments to write vpon. If the griefe of the bodie affecteth the reſt and contentment of the mind: much more doth the inward griefe and anguiſh. And finally there are paſſions, as ioy and pleaſure, which hinder and aboliſh the feeling of a happie life. Thoſe that are poſſeſſed with an extraordinarie ioy, oftentimes both do and ſay many fond things and ieſtures, in wordes and workes. As if a man be told that land is fallen to him, or that he is raiſed to wiſhed dignitie not looked for: ye ſhall ſee him play the foole and wanton like a child. There are ſome whoſe maners honor chaungeth in ſuch ſort, that from the day till the next morning you ſhall not know them by their face, by their countenances, by their words, nor by their apparell: they will ſtraight diſdaine them that they called before ſeruants or louing friends. Now this vaine pride and fooliſhneſſe are in manner one ſelfe thing: and it may be ſaid that all ambitious men are altogether beſotted, or doubtleſſe they will be ſo. If thou wilt make me ſee a proud man, one that preſumeth to know much, and that looketh vpon his feathers, as they ſay, I will preſently ſhew thee a foole furniſhed at all peeces. There is no ſurer ſigne of fooliſhneſſe then pride: and who will ſay then Pride ſheweth fooliſhneſſe.that the life of ſuch a one is happie? And as for pleaſures, we ſee how a man is caried away, who then is no more himſelfe: but to the contrarie, thinketh that the deſtruction of bodie and ſoule is his ſoueraigne good. Now amongſt all the Philoſophers which haue tried to remedie theſe troubles of the mind, and to maintaine a man in this contentment which they call ſoueraigne: it may be ſaid the Stoickes were the chiefe, and among the Stoicks Seneca. I will not here enter into examination of the doctrine of this ſect, nor declare that which Zeno and Chryſippus haue written, as may be gathered of Laertius and of Plutarch: but ſimply to ſtay my ſelfe vpon my principall purpoſe, which is is of Seneca. And in this place to follow that which many learned men haue gathered of his workes, to ſhew what was his Philoſophie: vnto the which we will adde ſome Summarie of reaſons with the which he helpeth himſelfe, to fight with thoſe paſſions, and to make the ſoule at peace, aſmuch as he himſelfe could apprehend it. This is out of all queſtion, that Seneca was one of the firſt and principall Philoſophers of the Stoickes among the Latines, as he himſelfe doth boaſt in his owne writings. Furthermore, he exalteth this ſect aboue all others, and ſaith, That the Stoickes do make profeſſion of a Philoſophy worthie

of men: foraſmuch as there is difference betwixt them and others, as betwixt males and females. That the other kinds of Philoſophies are made, to heare and to obey: but that the Stoicke is borne to teach and commaund. He being deſirous to preſent ſome perfect Idea of a wiſe man, bringeth foorth Cato: and in the Treatie where he will ſhew that the wiſe man cannot be offended nor outraged, he lifteth vp this man out of the rancke of all other men, and ſpecially commē
               deth him in his death. If he ſpeake of the Stoickes, he calleth them his, and doth make open profeſſion of their inſtructions. Now in many places he diſtinguiſheth Philoſophie into three parts, which he calleth Rationall, Morrall, and Naturall. But after the faſhion of the Stoicks, he reſted more vpon the morall, albeit that all his diſcourſes ſhew that he had a maruellous veine in the rationall. And the bookes of naturall queſtions ſhew that he had a deepe inſight in the ſecrets of nature. So then his principal end was to frame good maners, and to bring men to the knowledge of the contentment of the mind, to deſire and apprehend it. They ſaw him oftentimes exhort Lucilius to the ſtudie of morall Philoſophy, as in the end of his 89. Epiſtle: So ſet down theſe things, ſaith he, to others, that thou thy ſelfe maiſt take pleaſure to comprehend them. Write, to reade afterwards thy writing, referring all things to the reformation of life, and to the meanes of appeaſing the furie of paſſions. Study, not to be wiſer then others, but to be better. On the other ſide, he turned the ſame Lucilius from the ſtudy of Logicke, and from his ſubtill diſputations, in the which they pleaſe themſelues that do but linger after ſillables and words. Leaue (ſaid he to him in the 71. Epiſtle) this occupation and ſifting of letters, to thoſe maiſters that ſhut vp a thing ſo magnificent as Philoſophy is in ſyllables: and do imbaſe, yea bring to nothing, and vtterly deſtroy the mind, in teaching things that are not worth the labour and ſtudy. I am content that thou reſemble wiſe men that haue inuented letters, but not thoſe that teach them. In ſome other places he laugheth at the ſubtilties of theſe ſchoole diſputers, namely, where he ſetteth down one of their faſhions of ſpeech, to wit, in the 48. which is the 49. in the editions not well corrected, vpon theſe words: Mus (that is to ſay a mouſe) is a ſyllable: a mouſe eateth cheeſe, therefore it followeth that a ſyllable eateth cheeſe. But it is not only that he ſetteth vpon Logicke, or rationall Philoſophie, but alſo on the ſciences commonly called the liberal ſciences, and eſpecially when there is queſtion of the Philoſophie of manners. Witneſſe that which he writeth in the foureſcore and eighth Epiſtle worthy to be diligently read of all, but ſpecially of them whom ſuch ſciences do puffe vp, & who for the reſt do litle care to rule their life within the compaſſe of vertue. In ſum, he declareth in a great number of places, that Philoſophie conſiſteth not in the knowledge of theſe things, but that the end thereof is, to giue counſell againſt all the accidents of this life: and that men were wont to repaire vnto Philoſophers, who do ſhew them in the midſt of darkneſſe (wherwith humane ſociety is ſnared) the way they muſt follow not to erre, ſhewing what things are neceſſarie and vnprofitable: how eaſie the lawes of nature are: how ioyfully we liue & at our eaſe, following of the ſame. And to the contrary, that there can be nothing but miſery in the condition of thoſe, which ſuffer themſelues to wander rather by opinion, then by nature and reaſon. I thinke therefore that all the Philoſophie of Seneca looketh vnto that, to eſtabliſh the mind all that may be: to attaine to the which it ſpeaketh of the ſoueraigne good, to the end to draw vs to aſpire vnto it. And becauſe the accidents of this life, namely the cauſes before mentioned, do obſcure this happines: he ſtriueth with infinit diſcourſes and reaſons againſt them. Now it were to make a great volume, if all were put together that he ſpeaketh, & it were better to leaue it to their liberty that ſhall reade the works of this Philoſopher, of the which I will note here ſome heads or rules, on the which he reaſoneth very amply to remedie the griefes before named. The intention therfore of Seneca aboue all in matters moſt important, is to beat downe firſt all corporall and ſpirituall paſſions: to wit, opinion and apprehenſion. He diſcouereth the vanitie, ſheweth the wrong which men of vnderſtanding do, and the errour of their iudgement: who ſee things as in the water, and with a corrupt eye. Which done, he goeth further, and ſeeketh to ſhew, that when that which is called euill is arriued, the wiſe man feeleth it not: as alſo it is as litle trouble to him when one thinketh to touch him, as it is then when one threatened him a far off. For proofe of this, he ſheweth that they cannot hurt a wiſe man any maner of way: and that no man is iniuried or hurt but by himſelf. That the wiſe man bending al his thoughts vnto vertue, cannot be offended, but rather ouercometh all humane accidents, as well for reſpect of himſelfe, as for all others. Hereupon he cometh to this point, to maintaine, that that which they call euill, is good to the wiſe man: who like a good husband maketh his profite of all in ſuch ſort, that there is nothing

in the world but ſerueth his turne, and whereof he is not maiſter with a ſingular contentment. Of theſe rules and Maximes, there riſe many Paradoxes diſperſed in his bookes, the which if a man conſider apart, are very ſtrange and ridiculous withall: but being brought to their originals, they may receiue ſome expoſition. Furthermore, to frame a perfect wiſe man, he will haue nothing pleaſant vnto him but vertue, which conſiſteth in contemning all that the world admireth: and a loue of beautifull things which giue contentment to the ſoule. That all that which is earthly and corruptible, ſhould be eſteemed as much as nothing: that the wiſe man infolding himſelfe in his vertue, ſeeth all the greatneſſe of this world very low vnder him, and as it were troden vnder the feet of his heart. And that in the midſt of all dangers, yea euen in the moſt fierceſt death of all, and when heauen ſhould fall vpon him: he remaineth merie and pleaſed with the felicitie which his vertue bringeth vnto him. Afterwards he reaſoneth particularly againſt the apprehenſions of death: and ſheweth that it is as ineuitable, as it is alſo good and neceſſarie. That the greateſt contentment of a wiſe man is, that he can breake in ſunder the iron chaine that holdeth him, as often and when he thinketh good: and vpon this occaſion treateth in ſome places of the immortalitie of the ſoule, as in the end of the ſeuen and fiftith Epiſtle, in the threeſcore and fift, threeſcore and ſixteenth, and the hundred and ſeuenteenth, in his comfortable diſcourſe vnto Martia, and elſewhere. Touching theſe corporall paines, he ſheweth that they cannot turn a man out of the pathway of vertue, nor from the profeſſion of conſtancie and truth, nor from the reſolution to maintaine a iuſt cauſe. That there is no paine nor griefe ſo ſharpe, that can let a wiſe man to thinke of his duty, and to acquit himſelfe ſo far as his hands may reach. That theſe corporall griefes cannot eclipſe the leaſt of the beames of vertue, and the hope of the immortality of our ſoules, for the which we exchange in the day that our paines comes as it were to haue greateſt ſtrength, all the diſcommodities we apprehend in this tranſitory life. Furthermore, that the troubles which the eſtate of this world doth ſpreade as a vaile before our minds, cannot blindfold them to ſee the perfect beautie of vertue, and to heare the excellent comforts which ſhe propoſeth. Alſo that the wiſe man is ſufficiently defended not to be ouercome by paſſions, which haue no power on him that is in the ordinarie ſafegard and protection of vertue, in poſſeſſion wherof he is already ſo entred, that he ſtill goeth forward euery day more then other, ſhortly to enioy her with perfection. To conclude, that there is no hinderance at all for him whom vertue pleaſeth, and whom ſhe bringeth to immortalitie. And this is a litle touch (me thinketh) which may be particularly noted in Seneca: in the beautie whereof, as in faces better formed, there are ſome ſpots diſcouered as in other Philoſophers, namely the Stoicks. Aboue all, in his portraiture of this wiſe man, he imagineth in this life a thing that is not to be found in a corrupt man giuen ouer to ſenſualitie, which is, vertue and perfection. But let vs refer that to the ignorance of true religion, and conſider this Philoſopher in the limits of his ſect. For other Paradoxes, as of the world, of the ſpirit, of paſſions and affections of vertue, and ſome others borrowed of the ſchoole of his maiſters, that Plutarch hath examined in his booke Of common conceptions, and in that which he entituleth, The contradiction of the Stoickes: that which is euill doth condemne it ſelfe, or excuſeth it ſelfe vnder the queſtions and diſputations, which permit a man to ſay ſomewhat. And for the other, foraſmuch as Seneca made profeſſion to forme maners, he ſeemeth therin to haue giuen way and free paſſage to ſome of his conceptions, and after the example of Painters, to giue ſome ſhadowes vnto his tables, the better to retaine the iudgement of the reader. That which I leaſt allow in him, or rather which I cannot approue, is the exceſſiue praiſe he giueth to his wiſe man, lifting him vp, yea aboue the gods. And afterwards in diuerſe places he would haue this wiſe man put himſelfe to death, and of his authoritie and power diſſolue the bands of this life, without leaue of the ſoueraigne Captaine, and with a teſtimonie of a ſtraunge cowardlineſſe and diſtruſt of the doctrine of the eternall Prouidence: the which would haue vs keepe a ſtedfaſt hope and confidence, yea euen when things ſeeme to be moſt deſperate. And that which he often applyeth vnto the death of Cato, whom he infinitly commendeth, hath bene by vs examined in the compariſon of Cato and of Phocion. Furthermore, Seneca ſtayed not vpon one or two in his diſcourſes he hath left vnto vs, but hath culled out of all the Philoſophers Greekes and Latines which were before him, all that he thought good to ſet downe for the rule and gouernment of our life, according to the end he looked vnto. And as for his writings, all that we haue left concerning morall and naturall Philoſophie, with the pleaſant diſcourſe vpon the death of Claudius, is out of all diſputation vntill this preſent: as the ſtile that is hard, ſhort, ſententious, and in apt

tearmes for that time, and aſter the manner of teaching of the Stoickes, doth ſhew it. But for the bookes entituled, Controuerſiae & Suaſoriae, that is to ſay, pleadings and orations, or declamations, I am of the ſame opinion that diuerſe learned men of our time are, to wit: that theſe bookes are not of Seneca, but of the father of Seneca. And becauſe many other learned men ancient and moderne haue thought the contrarie, we muſt needs ſay ſomewhat for proofe of the opinion which we follow. The authour of theſe collections ſaith, that he heard Ouid and Cicero declame, and that he was familiar with Portius Latro, Valerius Meſſala, and with others that were in the time of Auguſtus. When he heard Cicero, he could be no leſſe then fifteene yeares old: how can that be attributed vnto Seneca, dead in the end of the Empire of Nero, wel-neare ſixe ſcore years after that time? Now, that which Tacitus ſpeaketh in diuers places of the age of Seneca, reacheth not ſo farre: and Nero ſpeaking to Seneca a litle before his death, ſaid that he had yet ſtrength enough to vſe his goods, and gouerne his poſſeſſions. That could not be ſpoken of an old man of a hundred and twelue yeares old. Alſo Seneca ſpeaketh otherwiſe of his age in one of his Epiſtles noted here before, where he telleth that about the fifth yeare of the Empire of Tiberius, he came out of his infancie, of the age of eighteene yeares. Furthermore, Seneca was Praetor, Quaeſtor, and Conſull, as in his diſcourſe to his mother Elbia, the Chronicles, and the Lawyers bookes do make mention. And to the contrarie, his father dedicating his bookes aboue named vnto Seneca, Iunius, and Mela, his three ſons: and ſpeaking to Mela in the Preface of his ſecond booke of pleadings, he exhorteth him to follow the inclination of his mind, and contenting himſelfe with the ſtate of a priuate gentleman, and a ROMAINE knight as his father, the better to warrant his life in the hazards and accidents of this world. That which made Seneca to be eſteemed the authour of thoſe bookes there, is, for that his father did beare that name: and that theſe three, Seneca, Nouatus, (ſurnamed Iunius Gallo) and Mela be brethren, and the ſonnes of one ſelfe father and mother, it appeareth by the hiſtorie of Tacitus, in the fifteenth booke of his Annales, and by the writings of Seneca himſelfe, ſpecially by the diſcourſe to Elbia, where he ſaith amongſt other things: Conſider my brethren, that being ſafe, you haue no cauſe to accuſe fortune: you haue in thē cauſe to reioyce in a diuerſe kind. For the one, through his good wit hath attained to honor, and the other hath wiſely deſpiſed it. Tacitus plainely ſheweth that, as we haue ſeene here before. And whereas commonly they alleadge the age of Seneca to be ſixe ſcore years and aboue, to giue the more authoritie to the pleadings and Orations of his father, that is to ſay, to the fragments which he ſeemeth to haue ſet foorth in the fauour of his children, to frame them betimes one day to practiſe that whereof he made profeſſion, to wit, eloquence: there cannot be ſhewed any ſufficient or authenticke teſtimonie of that which is alleadged, that Seneca had three ſonnes called, Nouatus, Seneca, and Mela. Touching the true bookes of Seneca, the dilgent reading and conſideration of them will incontinently ſhew the profite that may be gathered by them. For a man to ſtand reſolued againſt the diuers and troubleſome euents of this life, to repoſe himſelfe ſweetly vpon the diuine Prouidence, to contemne death, and to deſire the bleſſed immortalitie, for to repreſſe the inſolencie of ſtrange paſſions which do often carie vs too high and too far, and for to enioy a great reſt amongſt ſo many tempeſts and wrackes as happen daily, I know not an Hiſtorian among the Painims, Philoſopher, Orator, or author whatſoeuer, that I would preferre before Seneca: yea, there are few to be compared to him, and the moſt part do follow him farre off.
            This bringeth vs to the conſideratiō of ſome cenſures made of Seneca by diuerſe learned men, as well auncient, as thoſe of this latter age, to the end to induce them that behold Seneca, to looke nearely into him: for if there be any thing wherein humane wit doth giue ſcope and licence, let another iudge that. But that ſpecially is as an ordinarie thing vnto them that make profeſſion ſtudiouſly to thruſt their noſes into bookes, to marke preſently, and ſometime too ſuddenly, that which is before them: to beare others in hand afterwards that things are ſuch as they did imagine them to be. And although I do not acknowledge my ſelfe to be one of the number of them that reade and know paſſably ſomething: yet for all that ere I beware, I am too often attainted with this diſeaſe, which poſſeſſeth thoſe that make many bookes, reprouing and iudging others. But as I do not commend them in any wiſe vnto whom the bookes of ſound erudition are not pleaſing, (like to weake ſtomackes vnto whom meats euill dreſſed and alſo hurtfull, ſeeme to be the moſt ſauorie) but feedes themſelues with their follies, vaine fancies and abhominations, wherewith this latter age is miſerably defiled: ſo would I wiſh that the excellent wits which are yet

in EVROPE were on the one ſide better aduiſed in many reſpects, and in the others more carefull to diſcerne that which is commendable and blameable, certaine or vncertaine in good authors: to note them particularly vnto poſteritie, with two conditions: the one, that it ſhould be done by the ſufficienteſt men, and as it were of purpoſe appointed to that end, by conſent of fame and truth: the other, that all ſcoffes, ſpitefull and ſiniſter paſſions, ſhould be farre from ſuch cenſurers. To come againe to Seneca: I ſee that ſome haue too much axalted him, as I thinke: and others haue imbaſed him more then needed. Which being particularly conſidered, peraduenture it will not miſlike: and if it profite not, I hope it will moue the Reader to ſome thought higher then mine, both to ſearch matters more exactly, as alſo to ſettle his opinion vpon mine with the compaſſe of truth, of mildneſſe, and of vertue. Becauſe Seneca ſpeaketh amply in ſome places of the prouidence and maieſtie of God, before whom he exhorteth vs to walke, and ſomtimes prayeth Lucilius to liue with men as if God ſaw him: and to ſpeake with God, as if men heard him. Alſo that he died in the end of the Empire of Nero, at which time S. Paule the Apoſtle was priſoner at ROME. Some haue thought that Seneca of long time had leaned vnto Chriſtian religion, by reaſon whereof his writings were read as proceeding from a man aduanced in the knowledge of the true God. And otherwiſe he was contented to ſpeake in general, and as vnder a veile of the ignorance of his time, and becauſe he would haue them no more enuied whom the world did altready hate. Briefly, that he was a ſecret diſciple of Chriſt, in the ſchoole of his Apoſtle. In confirmation wherof, they ſhew certaine letters of Seneca vnto Paule, with mutuall anſwers: and they do adde alſo the teſtimonie of a great chriſtian Doctor, who hath placed Seneca in the Catalogue of Saints, whoſe ſoules we beleeue are in glorie with their Sauior. Howbeit certaine learned men of our time haue ſpoken their opinion touching all that, to whom I do agree, to wit: that whether Seneca ſaw the Apoſtle and ſpake with him, whether he diſdained to ſee him, or that he cared not, nor did inquire after him, as I thinke that he thought then of any thing elſe rather then of the doctrine taught by S. Paul: there is nothing in his life, in his writings, nor in his death, that cometh neare to the Chriſtian beleefe and profeſſion. But if we ſhould call all thoſe Chriſtians, in whoſe writings we do reade goodly and true ſentences of wiſedome, iuſtice, and the prouidence of God: it would make a ſtraunge mingling of Scripture with prophane bookes: and further, they wold diſpute if the one ſhould be put in the place of the other. As wee ſee that in the bodies of the bookes which for excellencie we call the Bible, there are two, in the which the name of God is neuer expreſſed: which notwithſtanding are holy, and do containe infinit inſtructions and ſingular conſolations. Seneca hauing written in ſome place, The Godhead is I know not what great thing, yea ſo great, that it paſſeth al mans vnderſtanding. Our life is dedicated to his ſeruice. Let vs take order to be approued of the ſame: for a hidden conſcience is good for nothing: God ſeeth vs. An auncient Doctour ſaid thereupon, Any man that ſhould know God, could he ſet foorth any more certaine veritie, then that which is ſpoken here by the mouth of a man, that knew not what true religion meant? For he repreſenteth the maieſtie of God, ſaying that it is ſo great, that mans vnderſtanding cannot meaſure it: and plainely, the fountaine of veritie: ſhewing that the life of men is not vnprofitable, (as ſome Epicurians think) ſince it is referred to the glorie of the Creator, when they follow iuſtice and pietie. Other diſcourſes of Seneca might be alleaged touching the prouidence of God, againſt idolatrie, ſuperſtition, and impietie: but the conſequence is not ſtable. That he hath therfore knowne any thing of the doctrine of the Goſpell, you ſhall not find one diſcourſe in all his writings, and the doctrine of the Stoickes doth in nothing agree with that, which neither fleſh nor bloud can reueale: and wherof it is not our purpoſe to ſpeake in this place, which requireth not that we ſhold diſcouer the holy things, and much leſſe that we ſhould mingle them with the prophane. As for the letters publiſhed vnder the name of Seneca and of Paule: both the ſtile and the matter ſhew at the firſt ſight, that it is the worke of ſome idle man that thought himſelfe very wiſe, if he diſſembled with thoſe which did not ſift it ſo narrowly. And we ſhall not need here to make a recapitulation of the iuſt and learned cenſures that haue bene made: where you ſhall ſee the madneſſe, repugnancies, and falſhoods hidden in thoſe letters, if they be conferred with the life and doctrine of them vnto whom they were attributed. We do not meet with any thing ſo much in the writings of Seneca, as the conſtancie and contempt of death: how commeth it then that you ſhall not find one word that ſheweth him to be a Chriſtian? That Nero hath not diſcouered or perceiued any thing to charge Seneca with, when he commanded him to die? For that had bene

an ample diſcharge before the people that extreamely hated the Chriſtians. Suetonius and Tacitus, litle fauouring our religion, would not haue forgotten it. But how chaunceth it that in his death he remembred Iupiter, and not Chriſt? Now, in regard of the Catalogue which is alleaged for a buckler: I deſire that learned men do conſider, if they haue not wronged the perſon to whom it is attributed, mingling amongſt his workes this ſcoffe, and others which are no better, forged vpon the like anuile and with the ſelfe ſame hammer, which the letters were before mentioned. Now I thinke, (theſe are the words of a learned man that had well read Seneca) that it is beſt for the reader to take Senecaes bookes, as proceeding from a man ignorant of true religion. For if you reade them as a Pagane, he hath written like a Chriſtian: but if you take him for a Chriſtian, know that it is a Pagane that ſpeaketh. There are many things that may inflame vs with the loue of vertue: they will pricke vs more nearely, if we remēber from whom they come. If we meet with any ſentences that ſeeme to be drawn out of our fountains, they will be ſo much the ſweeter vnto vs: and as for vncertaine and falſe opinions, they will offend vs leſſe, when we ſhall ſay that it is a Pagan that hath ſet them out. Let vs come to the other point, and conſider thoſe that haue too much imbaſed him, either in reſpect of his life, or becauſe of his writings. For his life, ſome (and Dion amongſt others) haue accuſed him of auarice, of ambition, of diſſolution, of adulterie, and of other ſuch like vices: vnto the which I will not vouchſafe to make anſwer, ſince ſo many learned men auncient, and moderne, and the life and death of Seneca do ſay the contrarie. And it were an eaſie thing for one that would cut Dion a gowne of his owne cloth, to diſcouer in him many things impertinent and euill beſeeming the name wherof he maketh profeſſion. But it is better to confute euident ſlaunders by ſilence, then with long diſcourſe. Some other ſpeake not ſo plainely, but ſay that Seneca liued not after his owne precepts. On the contrarie, the honour which he maketh often to Epicurus, ſeemeth to ſhew that he hath mingled the wickedneſſe of the Epicurians with the auſteritie of the Stoickes. I graunt that Seneca hath not in all the parts of his life ſhewed this conſtancie which he requireth of a wiſe man, and I perceiue well that he hath diſſembled too many things in the gouernment of Nero: the which the wiſe Thraſca would neuer haue allowed of the preſence, nor of the word, nor of the deed. But mans infirmitie is ſuch, that that which the mind ſeeth plainely enough, it cannot or dare not effect it, becauſe of the reſiſtance of reaſon and paſſions: or if it dare, it is ſtaid with the leaſt obiect through this naturall faintneſſe that keepeth vs backe, when we ſhould reſolutely follow vertue. Now of this cenſure there followeth no more, but that the Eternall wiſdome doth giue vs knowledge of many notable things vttered by the mouth and teſtimonie of this ſtranger: and in the mean time doth admoniſh vs in no wiſe to ſtay our ſelues vpon him that ſpeaketh: which ſhe doth well in her proper houſe, where ſhe vnderſtandeth that we lend our eares vnto thoſe which go with other feet then they ſhould, ſo that they keepe within the bounds of their commiſſion. And as a Sergeant or Herauld that had but one eye, or were lame, could notwithſtanding deliuer a meſſage of importance in the name of the Prince, and muſt be heard: euen ſo whatſoeuer he be that cometh to vs with the notes of chaſt and faire Veritie, he ought to haue audience, to be beleeued and followed, ſo long as he containeth himſelfe neare to her, and reiecteth all that is contrarie, be it in words or in fact. For Epicurus, Seneca alleageth ſome notable matters of him, wherefore it followeth not that he doth allow of his faults, nor of his ſect, as is alſo to be acknowledged in many places. And there can be nothing obſerued in the life of Seneca, that ſheweth him to be an Epicurian or a Libertine. For euen in the midſt of the abundance and of the great riches he poſſeſſed by the liberalitie of Nero, they ſaw a great moderation witneſſed, alſo in his death: not being forbidden to Noblemen to poſſeſſe gold, ſiluer, earthly goods, and moueables of great value, ſo that ſuch proſperitie do not make them drunke, to cauſe them deſpiſe God and men. As for the laſt, be they auncient or moderne whoſe names I am not content to expreſſe, which very boldly do cenſure the writings of Seneca: and in agreeing to him in ſome excellent thing, they afterwards take licence to thinke him rude in his ſtile, too rigorous a Iudge of other mens labours, a fooliſh ieaſter, affected in his diſcourſes, troubleſome by reaſon of his repetitions, without art, of ſmall iudgment, forgetfull, truſting to his owne wit, curious of light things, and ſeeking I know not how to be particular, becauſe he would not ſeeme to haue borrowed any thing of any man. Theſe be accuſers in the moſt part of ſuch articles, and no competent Iudges, ſauing the honour due to their erudition. For proofe whereof we do exhort the reader to take one whole booke of Seneca which he liketh of beſt, and then to examine it all, if I

ſpeake euill, ſaying, that he had wrong to be ſo toſſed and played vpon. I thinke that there is nothing in his workes, be it in his ſtile, in the method, or in matter that could be better performed. Alſo if they conſider what words he vſeth, how he ioyneth them together, what is the end of his diſcourſes, and what the matters are that he treateth of: they will be leſſe rigorous vnto him. For concluſion, I deſire that Senecaes life, referred to his writings, do teach foure things to my ſelfe, and to all others. The one, that being in meane or baſe condition, we neuer care to clime vp any higher. The other, that if we chaunge a meane eſtate with another greater, we do remember the former, to conuerſe modeſtly with great and ſmall. The third, that we neuer paſſe for any worldly proſperitie, but that we be alwaies afraid of it, vntill we be looſed by the meanes of a happie death. And the laſt, that in our publike and priuate conuerſation, in our thoughts, words, writings, and actions, there ſhine in vs the loue and reuerence of true pietie and iuſtice.
            The end of Senecaes life.
         
         
            
            THE LIVES OF NINE EXCELLENT CHIEFTAINES OF VVAR, TRANSLATED OVT OF LATINE FROM AEMYLIVS PROBVS.
            
               THE LIFE OF Miltiades.
               
               
                  
                     MILTIADES an ATHENLAN, the ſonne of Cimon, being one of the chiefeſt of his citie, as well becauſe of the ancientry of his race, as for his modeſtie ioyned to the glorie of his predeceſſors, after he had attained to that age, which his citizens had occaſion not onely to hope well of him, but alſo to aſſure themſelues that he would be ſuch a one as they iudged him after they knew him: it chaunced that the ATHENIANS reſolued to ſend a Colonie into CHERRONESVS. And becauſe many men prepared themſelues to go thither, and that there was great ſute who ſhold leade them: they choſe ſome to go to DELPHES, to inquire of the Oracle who ſhould be their Captaine: foraſmuch as the THRACIANS at that time did occupie all thoſe parts thereabouts, and they muſt be driuen out by force of armes. The Propheteſſe enioyned the Commiſſioners expreſly to chooſe Miltiades for chiefe of this people or Colonie, the which ſhould proſper in this enterpriſe vnder his conduct. With this anſwer Miltiades accompanied with a choſen companie of men, ſailed vnto CHERRONESVS, and when he came neare to LEMNOS to ſubdue the inhabitants of that Iſland, he ſummoned them without any compulſion. They mocking him, anſwered, That they would then yeeld themſelues when Miltiades ſhould come from ATHENS to LEMNOS with a Northrene wind, which was full in the faces of them that ſhould come from ATHENS to LEMNOS. Miltiades hauing no leyſure to tarie there, hoiſſed ſaile, and arriued in CHERRONESVS. And there hauing in a ſhort time broken all the troupes of the barbarous people, he made himſelf Lord of the whole countrie, built vp ſome fortreſſes, placed his people in the countrey which he had brought with him, & made them rich, by diuerſe attempts againſt the ſelfe ſame countreymen. Wherein he preuailed as much by his wiſedome, as through his good fortune. For after he had through the valiantneſſe of his ſouldiers ouercome the armies of his enemies, he eſtabliſhed his affaires with great equitie, and reſolued to remaine in CHERRONESVS. So he was there as king, although he had not the name, and attained to this degree of honour as much through his vpright adminiſtration of iuſtice, as for his ſufficiencie in warres. This kept him not from doing his dutie vnto the ATHENIANS, from whom he was parted: the which was the occaſion indeed, that as well thoſe which had ſent him thither, as thoſe with whom he was imbarked, were content he ſhould continue there alwaies Gouernor. CHERRONESVS being brought to this order, he came againe to LEMNOS, and according to the promiſe of the inhabitants, he demaunded that they would yeeld vp their citie vnto him: for they promiſed to giue him their hands when he ſhould come vnto them from his countrey by the North wind. Now (ſaid he) that his countrey was in CHERRONESVS. The CARIANS, who held LEMNOS at that time, ſeeing things go otherwiſe then they looked for, and taken not ſo much by their words as by the good fortune of their aduerſaries, durſt not make head, but went ſtraight from thence. So all things proſpering according to his deſire, he brought all the other Iſles called the CYCLADES, to be ſubiect to the ATHENIANS.
               
                  
At the ſame time Darius king of PERSIA hauing paſſed all his armie out of ASIA into EVROPE, determined to make war with the SCYTHIANS, and made a bridge ouer Danuby to paſſe ouer his troupes: the guard of the which in his abſence, was committed vnto the Lords which he had brought with him out of IONIA and AEOLIA, and vnto euery one of the which he had giuen perpetuall power and gouernment ouer their townes. Suppoſing by this policie, eaſily to bring into ſubiection all the GREEKES that dwelt in ASIA, if he gaue the guard of the townes vnto their friends and confederates, that could not eſcape by any meanes if he were oppreſſed. Miltiades was of the number of the guards of this bridge. Newes being brought by diuerſe meſſages that Darius had but ill ſucceſſe, and that the SCYTHIANS held him hard to it: he perſwaded the other guards not to loſe the occaſion that was offered to ſet GRECE at libertie, conſidering that if Darius and his forces he brought with him were ouerthrown, all EVROPE ſhould be in peace, and the naturall GREEKES remaining in ASIA ſhould ſee themſelues out of daunger, and freed from the domination of the PERSIANS. And this might eaſily be done, ſince that by cutting of the bridge, Darius ſhould in few daies be cut in peeces by the enemies, or ſhould die for penurie with all his armie. Many agreed vnto it: but Istiaeus MILESIAN brake the necke of it, ſaying, that the kingdome of Darius vpon whom their authoritie depended, made difference betwixt the good of the affaires of them that commaunded, and the people that was vnder ſubiection and gouernment. That if Darius ſhould happen to die, they ſhould be driuen out and puniſhed by their citizens: and therefore that he was of a contrarie mind to all the reſt, thinking nothing more profitable, then to ſee the kingdome of the PERSIANS eſtabliſhed. The greater part of them being of his mind, Miltiades was affraid, for that there were ſo many witneſſes, that the king ſhould ſoone be aduertiſed of that which was propounded: wherefore he left CHERRONESVS, and returned againe to ATHENS. Now though his counſel tooke no place, yet he was highly commended, hauing ſhewed more regard to the good and libertie of all, then to his owne particular aduancement.
               For Darius, he being returned out of EVROPE into ASIA, his friends counſelled him to ſet vpon GRECE. Whereupon he armed a fleet of fiue hundred galleys vnder the charge of Datis and Artaphernes, giuing them two hundred thouſand footmen, and ten thouſand horſe, ſaying that he would be euen with the ATHENIANS, becauſe that the IONIANS had in fauour of the ATHENIANS forced the citie of SARDIS, and killed his garriſons. Theſe two Lieutenants of Darius being arriued in EVBOEA with their galleys, they preſently wanne ERETRIA, tooke all the inhabitants of the countrey priſoners, and ſent them to the king in ASIA. From thence they went into ATTICA, and camped in the plaine of MARATHON, which is within fiue leagues or thereabouts from ATHENS. The ATHENIANS aſtonied at ſo great a number of enemies, and ſo neare vnto them, knew not of whom to demaund aide, but of the LACEDAEMONIANS, vnto whom they diſpatched a very ſwift footman, a foote Poſt, called Philippides, to aduertiſe them that they had need to ſend them aide, and that preſently. In the meane time they choſe tenne Captaines to commaund and gouerne their troupes: Miltiades was one of them. So there was great diſputation among them, to wit, whether they ſhould keepe the walles of their citie, or they ſhould go meete with their enemies to bid them battell. There was none but Miltiades that reaſoned, that there was no delaying or protracting of time, but they muſt make a campe: and that that would lift vp the hearts of the ATHENIANS, when they ſhould ſee and behold, that they had a good opinion of their vertue and valiantneſſe: and that the enemies hearts would faile them, when they ſhould vnderſtand that ſo few men came reſolutely to fight with them. At that time the ATHENIANS had no aide from any citie but from PLATAEA, which ſent them a thouſand men: who being come, the armie of the GREEKES was compounded but of tenne thouſand men in all, who deſired nothing but to fight: That was the cauſe that Miltiades counſell was preferred aboue all the other Captaines. For the ATHENIANS reſpecting his valor, cauſed their troupes to march into the field, and they camped in a place of aduantage. Then the next morning hauing diſpoſed their footmen at the foote of the mountaine, which they had in flancke, they gaue charge vpon their enemies couragiouſly, with a new and ſure faſhion of fight. For there were trees growing here and there, by meanes whereof they were vnder couert of the rockes, and the trees kept them from being encloſed by the multitude of the enemies horſemen. Now although Datis ſaw that the place did not fauour and affect him, yet becauſe he had ſo many men, all his deſire was to fight, thinking he ſhould win and obtaine much,

if he could ioyne before the aide of the LACEDAEMONIANS came to them. And therefore he made an hundred thouſand footemen and ten thouſand horſe to march againſt them. Then he went to charge the ATHENIANS, who made excellent proofe of their valiantnes, conſidering that they hauing to fight one againſt ten, they made the PERSIANS flie for life, and ſo aſtoniſhed thē, that in ſtead of returning backe to their campe, they ſaued themſelues in their ſhips. See, here was one of the braueſt battels that a man can ſpeake of: for neuer ſuch a handfull of men ouercame ſo great forces. Peraduenture it will not be impertinent to ſhew what reward Miltiades had for obtaining of ſo noble a victorie: to the end that all men may know the better, that all commonweales haue one diſpoſition. As the honours of the people of ROME were in times paſt rare and ſimple, and by conſequent more glorious & to be deſired: and now to the contrarie more diſordered and leſſe eſteemed: the very ſame we find to haue bene practiſed among the ATHENIANS. For all the honour they did vnto this Miltiades, the ſauiour of ATHENS and of all GRECE, was, that the battell of MARATHON hauing bene painted ouer the porch called Poecile, his image was ſet vp the firſt in rancke of all the Captaines, with the countenance of a man ſpeaking to his ſouldiers, and going firſt to fight. The ſame people of ATHENS being come to be of greater power, and corrupted by the gifts of thoſe which ſued for charge and office in the commonwealth, cauſed three hundred ſtatues to be ſet vp for Demetrius the PHALERIAN.
               After this battell, the ATHENIANS gaue a fleet of threeſcore and ten gallies vnto Miltiades, to make war vpon the Iles which had aided the PERSIANS. He cōpelled ſome by ſimple commandements, others by force of arms to yeeld thēſelues. And not being able by any perſwaſiōs to bring the Ile men of PAROS to reaſon (proud becauſe of their riches) he landed his forces, encloſed the town with trenches, and took from the beſieged all meanes either to come by victuals or munition of war: then hauing ſet vp his Gabions and Mantelets, he came neare the wals. He was at the point to win the towne, when one night (not knowne by what miſchaunce) there was a great fire ſeene vpon firme land in a wood which they ſaw from the Iſle. This flame made thoſe that were beſieged, and them that lay at the ſiege thinke that it was a ſigne of the fleet of the PERSIANS, to encourage the PABIANS, and to keepe them from yeelding vp their towne. Herupon Miltiades fearing that Darius army by ſea was at hand, he ſet fire of his Mantelets and Gabions and hoiſſed ſaile towards ATHENS, where he arriued with all the gallies he caried out: wherwith the people were maruellouſly offended. They accuſed him of treaſon, that when he might haue won PAROS by aſſault, he had taken money of the king, and was returned without fighting, or doing any memorable act. At that time he was ſicke of the wounds he had receiued at the ſiege of PAROS: wherefore not being able to defend himſelfe in perſon, his brother Steſagoras pleaded his cauſe, the which hauing bene debated, he was quit for death, yet condemned to pay a fine of thirtie thouſand crownes, to the which they valued the charge of the armie in that iourny. And being vnable to pay ſo great a ſumme, he was committed to the common priſon, and there died. Now this matter of PAROS was but a cloke: and they ſpeake of it thus for another reaſon. For the tyrannie of Piſiſtratus, who had altered the eſtate ſome yeares before, was the cauſe that the ATHENIANS were affraid of their citizens that were in any credit. Miltiades, that had had many great and honorable charges, ſeemed that he could no more be brought to liue as a priuate perſon, conſidering alſo that he was giuen to this deſire to commaund alwaies. For all the time of his abode in CHERRONESVS there was no other Lord but he, and alſo they called him tyrant: but iuſt, becauſe he had not gotten this authoritie by force of armes, but with the conſent of his citizens, and caried himſelfe very modeſtly. Now they take and call them tyrants, which haue a perpetuall power in a commonwealth that was free before. Furthermore, Miltiades was a very gentle perſon, wonderfull affable, and there was not ſo meane a man, but might eaſily come and ſpeake with him. All the townes reſpected him, he was very famous, and they reputed him for one of the braueſt Captaines of GRECE. The people of ATHENS conſidering theſe things, had rather condemne this innocent man in a fine, then to be longer in paine to take heed of him.
               The end of Miltiades life.
            
            
               
               THE LIFE OF Pauſanias.
               
               
                  
                     PAuſanias LACEDAEDONIAN was a great man, but vnconſtant in all the parts of his life, furniſhed with vertues, but ouerwhelmed with vices. It was he that wanne that ſo famous victorie of PLATAEES. For he being Generall of the GREEKE armie, this great Lord Mardonius, a MEDE by nation, and ſonne in law of the king of PERSIA, the moſt wiſe and valiant captaine among all the PERSIANS, folowed with two hundreth thouſand choſen footemen, and twentie thouſand horſe: he was ouercome, the reſt of all his troupes driuen out of GRECE, and himſelfe ſlaine in the field. This victorie raiſed vp Pauſanias heart to ſuch a height, that he beganne to confound the affaires, and to deuiſe great chaunge in his braine. The firſt ſhame he receiued was, that he hauing offered a triuet of gold vnto the temple of DELPHES, of the bootie he had gotten vpon the enemies, with an Epigram containing in ſubſtance, that vnder his conduct the barbarous people had bene ouerthrowne before PLATAEES, and that acknowledging this victorie he made this preſent to Apollo: the LACEDAEMONIANS razed out theſe verſes, and wrote no other thing but the names of the townes, through whoſe aide the PERSIANS had bene ouercome. After this battell they ſent him againe with an armie by ſea of the allies into CYPRVS and HELLESPONT, to expulſe the garriſons of the barbarous people thence. The which he hauing fortunately executed, he then grew to be more inſolent and ambitious then euer.
               For, hauing taken the citie of BYZANCE by force, and made a great number of gentlemen of PERSIA priſoners, among which were manie kinſmen of Xerxes, he ſecretly ſent them to him, and gaue it out that they eſcaped out of priſon. Gongylus ERETRIAN did accompany them carying letters to the king, the effect whereof was this, as Thucydides ſayth: Pauſanias, Captaine of SPARTA, knowing that the priſoners of BYZANCE are thy kinſmen, he ſendeth them vnto thee for a preſent, and deſireth to be of alliance with thee, and prayeth thee to giue him thy daughter in mariage. If thou do it, he promiſeth that by his meanes SPARTA and all GRECE ſhall be brought vnder thy power. Therefore if it pleaſe thee to giue eare vnto it, ſend him a man expreſſely with whom he may conferre. The king very ioyfull and glad for the deliuery of ſo many friends of his, ſent Artabazus preſently to Pauſanias with letters, in the which he commendeth him, and prayeth him to ſpare for nothing to bring his promiſe to paſſe. If he do, that all ſhall be graunted which he demaundeth. Pauſanias vnderſtanding Xerxes mind, reſolued reſolutely to put his hand to this worke: which the LACEDAEMONIANS miſtruſting, hauing ſent for him home, they accuſed him of treaſon: whereof he was quit, and yet condemned to pay a fine. This was the cauſe that they ſent him not againe to the armie: but ſhortly after he returned of his owne mind, and by a raſh and euill grounded Oration, he eaſily diſcouered the thought of his heart. Furthermore, he did not onely chaunge his faſhion of liuing after the LACONIAN maner, but alſo of his diet and apparell. For he had a royall pompe, trayning a long gowne after the faſhion of the MEDES, followed with a troupe of the MEDES and AEGYPTIANS for archers of his gaurd. His table did ſo abound in all kinds of dainties after the maner of the PERSIANS, that no man could away withall. He gaue no acceſſe vnto him but very ſeldome: to them that would ſpeake with him, he anſwered very proudly: and commanded with all cruelty, refuſing to returne any more to SPARTA.
               He went to COLONES, which is a place in the countrey of TROAS, and there plotted all his dangerous practiſes againſt his countrey and himſelfe. When the LACEDAEMONIANS had vnderſtanding of it, they ſent Ambaſſadors vnto him with the Scytala, in the which was written, after their accuſtomed maner, that if he came not into the city, they would condemne him to death. This letter aſtonied him. Yet hoping to eſcape this imminent danger by force of preſents,

and by reaſon of his credite: he went home into his countrey, where being, the Ephores made him to be apprehended, and caſt into priſon: for it is lawfull for one of the Ephores to take the king, and vſe him ſo. Neuertheleſſe Pauſanias looſed himſelfe, being notwithſtanding ſuſpected of euery man: for they had alwayes this opinion of him, that he had intelligence with Xerxes. There are certaine people there called ILOTES, and they are a great number of them, and they plow the lands of the LACEDAEMONIANS, whom they ſerue as ſlaues. It was ſuppoſed he did practiſe with them, vnder promiſe to make them free men. But becauſe they had no pregnant witneſſe to conuince him, they thought they muſt not condemne ſo noble a perſon as he by bare coniectures, but rather to tary till time did reueale it of it ſelfe. In theſe buſineſſes, a young man called Argilius, who in his infancie had ſerued Pauſanius for a Page, hauing receiued letters of him to cary to Artabazus, he doubting leaſt there were ſomewhat therein that might hurt him, for of all thoſe that went into PERSIA about theſe affaires, not one of them came backe againe: he brake open the ſeale, and knew by the contents thereof that if he had caried them, he had died for it: alſo the letter mentioned matters whereof Pauſanias and Xerxes were agreed. Agilius caried theſe letters, and put them into the hands of the Ephores. Here is to be noted the moderation and grauitie of the LACEDAEMONIANS, that would not yet take vantage of this detection, to lay hold vpon Pauſanias: and reſolued not to proceed with rigour, till he firſt diſcouered it himſelfe. And therefore they taught Argilius what they would haue him to do.
               At TAENARE, there is a temple of Neptune, the priuiledge whereof the GREEKES hold for ſacred and inuiolable. Argilius fled thither, and ſate him downe vpon the Altar: neare vnto the which the Ephores made a caue vnder the ground, from whence one might vnderſtand all that any bodie would ſay vnto Argilius. Some of the Ephores hid themſelues within it. Pauſanias vnderſtanding that his man was in the priuiledge of the temple, went thither maruellouſly troubled, and began to aske him how this change happened. Argilius confeſſed he had opened the letters, and ſeene the contents of them. Wherewith Pauſanias more troubled then before, began to pray him to ſay neuer a word, and not to betray him who had done him ſo much good: that if he would do him that fauour to helpe him out of this trouble, he would make him a great man. The Ephores hauing heard all this talke, they iudged that the ſureſt way was to take him in the citie. Whither they being gone, Pauſanias thinking he had appeaſed Argilius, and thereby aſſured his affaires, he returned home to his houſe: and as they were ready to catch him by the coller, he perceiued by the countenance ofone of the Ephores that called him as if he would haue ſpoken with him, that they went about to intrap him. Wherefore doubling his pace ſomewhat faſter then thoſe that followed him, he ſaued himſelfe within the temple of Minerua, called Chalciacos. But becauſe he ſhould not come out, the Ephores cauſed the Church doores preſently to be mured vp, and the roofe of the temple to be pulled downe, that he might dye the ſooner with aire. It is reported that Pauſanias mother, being a very old woman, liued yet at that time: and that ſhe vnderſtanding of the wickedneſſe of her ſonne, her ſelfe brought the firſt ſtone to mure him in there. Behold, how Pauſanias ſtained with a ſhamefull death the great glorie he had obtained in the warres. Being brought halfe dead out of the temple, he died immediatly. Some would haue had his bodie caried to the gibbet: others liked not that opinion, and buried him farre from the place where he died: from whence he was digged vp againe, by commaundement of an Oracle of DELPHES, and put in the ſame place where he died.
               The end of Pauſanias life.
            
            
               
               THE LIFE OF Thraſybulus.
               
               
                  FOr Thraſybulus, he was an ATHENIAN, the ſonne of one called Lycus. If we ſhould conſider his vertue a part, and leaue his fortune behind, it may be we ſhould place him firſt of all others. And to confeſſe a troth, I know no man more faithfull, more conſtant, more nobly minded, and more louing to his countrey, then he. For whereas many haue deſired (and few executed) to free their countrey from the hands of one onely tyrant: it was his fortune to deliuer his countrey from the violence of thirtie tyrants. But it chanced, I know not how, that he which went before all others in vertue, was put downe by many others in chargeand dignitie. In the warres of PELOPONNESVS, Alcibiades did nothing without him, but he on the contrary did many things without Alcibiades, and wanne honour through the goodneſſe and excellency of his nature. This notwithſtanding, all the exploits of warre ought to be deuided amongſt the Chieftaines, ſouldiers, and fortune: for when armies meet, that which hath bene demtermined in counſel, is executed by the force and valiantneſſe of the ſouldiers that fight. Wherfore the ſouldier may pretend right to that which his General hath done: Fortune challengeth the better part, and may ſay that ſhe hath in ſuch a caſe ſtood them in better ſtead then all the wiſdome of the Generall. Euen ſo then, this worthie act of Thraſybulus is proper to himſelfe. For as the thirty tyrants eſtabliſhed by the SPARTANS, that kept the city of ATHENS in ſubiection, had baniſhed part of the citizens eſcaped from the warre, put ſome to death, and forfeited the goods of others: Thraſybulus was the firſt and onely man that began to make warre with them. He was gotten into a ſtrong hold, called PHYLE, in the territorie of ATTICA, hauing but thirtie men with him in all.
               This was the beginning of the health of the ATHENIANS, and the foundation of the liberty vnto the goodlieſt commonwealth of GRECE. And for as much as the tyrants ſcorned him and his company, it was the cauſe of their deſtruction, and of the preſeruation of Thraſybulus: and their not caring to ſet vpon him and his, made them ſtronger by the leiſure they had giuen them. The which ſhould teach all to remember this rule: that we muſt neuer deſpiſe our enemy. And ſo it is not ſpoken in vaine, that the mother of a coward doth neuer weepe. For all his fame that went of him, many did not ioyne with him: for then thoſe that were beſt affected, made warre with the tyrants more with their toungs then with their hands. From PHYLE Thraſibulus went to the port of PYRAEA, and did fortifie the fortreſſe called MVNYCHIA: the which the tyrants did aſſault, but they were repulſed with ſuch ſhame, that they ſuddenly retired to the town with loſſe of armes and baggage. In this action, Thraſybulus ſhewed himſelfe no leſſe wiſe then valiant: for he commaunded his men to touch none that made no reſiſtance, thinking it reaſonable that the citizens ſhould pardon one the other: and there was not a man of them hurt, but thoſe that aſſaulted them. He would ſtrippe none of the dead, nor ſuffer any thing to be taken from them, but their armes and victuals which he needed. Critias, the chiefe of all the tyrants, hauing fought very valiantly againſt Thraſybulus, was ſlaine at the ſecond aſſault. After he was diſpatched, Pauſanias king of SPARTA came to the aide of the ATHENIANS, and made peace betwixt Thraſybulus and thoſe which kept the city: with theſe conditions, that the thirtie tyrants, and the ten new gouernours, which had committed as many cruelties as the tyrants themſelues, ſhould be baniſhed, and their goods forfeited, without touching any other citizens: and that the ſoueraignty and gouernement of the eſtate ſhould be reſto red againe vnto the people.
               It was another fine deuice of Thraſybulus, that after he had pacified all matters, and obtained great credite in the citie, he made a law that no man ſhould be called in queſtion nor troubled for things that were paſt, and that was called Amniſtia, or law of obliuion. But he

was more carefull to keepe it, then to publiſh it. For ſome of his followers in his exile, complotted to kill ſome that were pardoned: but he ſtopped it by open proclamation, and kept his promiſe. To recompence theſe ſo many good deeds of his, the people gaue him a Crowne of two branches of Bayes, the which got him no enuy, but great glory: becauſe he had obtained it through the good will of his citizens, and not by force. It was wiſely ſpoken of Pittacus, one of the ſeuen Sages: when the MITYLENIANS gaue him many thouſand of daies worke of lands, I pray you, ſayd he, giue me not that thing which is enuied of many men, and deſired of all the world: of all thoſe I will onely take but a hundred dayes worke, which ſhall make proofe of my moderation, and of your good affection: for ſmall preſents do continue long, but we are no long time owners of great riches. So then Thraſybulus contenting himſelfe with this Crowne, he ſought for no more, and did thinke that no man was more honored then he. Shortly after he being arriued in SICILIA with a fleete the which he commanded, his ſouldiers were not carefull to keepe good watch in his campe: vpon which occaſion, the barbarous people that were beſieged, hauing by night made a ſally out of the towne vpon him, they ſurpriſed him, and killed him in his tent.
               The end of Thraſybulus life.
            
            
               THE LIFE OF Conon.
               
               
                  DVring the warres of PELOPONNESVS, Conon ATHENIAN began to deale in the affaires of the common wealth, and did great ſeruice: for he was choſen Colonell of the infanterie, then Admirall, in which charge he did many goodly exploits. By meanes whereof he grew to be of ſingular reputation amongſt all men, and had the gouernement of all the Iles: during which time he wanne PHARES a Colony of the LACEDAEMONIANS. Towards the end of the warre of PELOPONNESVS, at what time Lyſander ouercame the army of the ATHENIANS vpon the ſea coaſt which they call the riuer of the Goate, he had then charge of certaine galleys: howbeit he was not at the battell, which was cauſe that all came to naught, for he was a wiſe and valiant Captaine: in ſo much that it was in euery mans mouth, that if he had bene there, the ATHENIANS had not ſuſtained ſuch a loſſe. He ſeeing things brought to ſo poore an eſtate, and vnderſtanding that his citie was beſieged: he ſought not to hide himſelfe to liue I ſafety, but thought how he might helpe his citizens. For this purpoſe he went to Pharnabazus, a kinſman and ſonne in law of the king of PERSIA, and gouernour of IONIA and of LYDIA, into whoſe fauour he inſinuated himſelfe, but with great trouble and much danger. Now when the LACEDAEMONIANS, after they had ſubdued the ATHENIANS, in ſtead of maintaining the alliance made with Artaxerxes, had ſent Ageſilaus to make warre in ASIA, through the perſwaſion of Tiſſaphernes, which had forſaken the king (of whom heretofore he was greatly beloued) and ioyned with the LACEDAEMONIANS: Pharnabazus was appointed Lieutenant generall of the armie of the PERSIANS to make head againſt Ageſilaus. But in truth Conon commaunded all, and nothing was done without his aduice and counſell. It was he that brake the moſt part of all the intentions and attempts of this great Captaine Ageſilaus, being a thing certaine inough, that if Conon had not oppoſed himſelfe, the LACEDAEMONIANS had taken all ASIA from the king, vnto the mountaine Taurus. Hereupon Ageſilaus being ſent for home by the Ephores, becauſe the BOEOTIANS and ATHENIANS had proclaimed warre againſt SPARTA: Conon left not to be euer neare to the Lieutenants of the king of PERSIA, and did them great ſeruice.
               
                  Tiſſaphernes withdrew himſelfe from the court of PERSIA, the which all men perceiued well

inough but the king, with whom he was in great credite and eſtimation, though he was no more his ſeruant. And it is not to be maruelled at if Artaxerxes could beleeue nothing, remembring himſelfe that by Tiſſaphernes meanes he ouercame his brother Cyrus. Conon being ſent by Pharnabazus vnto the king to accuſe this Tiſſaphernes: he being come to the court, came firſt to the Captaine of the guard, called Tithrauſtes, according to the cuſtome of the PERSIANS. He is chiefeſt of all the officers of the kingdome, and no man can be ſuffered to come neare the king to ſpeake with him, without his leaue and licence. He being intreated by Conon to let him go vnto the Prince: I am contented, ſayth he, but conſider firſt if thou be determined to ſpeake with him thy ſelfe, or to deliuer thy mind by writing that thou wouldeſt ſay vnto him. For if thou come to his preſence, thou muſt kneele to the king: and if thou thinke that grieuous vnto thee, thou maieſt execute thy commiſſion by my meanes, as well as by thine owne mouth. As for me, anſwered Conon, it ſhall be not troubleſome thing to me, to do the king that honour that ſhall pleaſe thee: but I am afraid to do my city diſhonor, if I do a thing proper to the barbarous people, & vnfit for that city which was wont to cōmand other nations. So then he deliuered his meſſage in writing: which when the king had ſeene, he was ſo moued with the report of ſo great a perſon, that he iudged Tiſſaphernes his enemy, decreed warre againſt the LACEDAEMONIANS, and ſuffered Conon to make choiſe of ſuch a man as he would, to diſtribute the money neceſſary to defray the charge of this warre. Conon made this anſwer, that this election pertained nothing to him, but to the king, that knew his ſeruants beſt: yet in his opinion, this charge ſhould be beſt beſtowed vpon Pharnabazus. He was ſent backe with great preſents to the maritime townes, to commaund the CYPRIOTS, PHENICIANS, and others dwelling vpon this coaſt to put galleys in readineſſe, and to arme a fleete that might keepe the ſeas the next Sommer, vnder the conduct of Pharnabazus and of Conon, who had ſo required it.
               The LACEDAEMONIANS being aduertiſed thereof, were amazed, perceiuing well that they were to make another maner of warre then with the barbarous people. For they ſaw that they muſt needs come to fight againſt a valiant and wiſe Captaine, hauing the kings treaſure in his hands, and that had aſmuch & better direction and forces then they. With this thought they gathered together great ſtore of ſhipping, & imbarked themſelues vnder the conduct of Piſander. Conon met with them neare vnto CNIDOS, gaue them battell, made them flye, tooke ſtore of galleys, and ſunke a great number of them. By meanes of this victory, ATHENS and all GRECE ſubiect to the dominion of the LACEDAEMONIANS, were ſet at liberty. Conon returned againe to his countrey with part of theſe galleys, built vp againe the wals of ATHENS and of the hauen of PIRAEA, which had bene ouerthrowne by Lyſander, and preſented his citizens with 30000 crownes which Pharnabazus had giuen him. But that which happeneth oftentimes vnto other men, chanced alſo vnto Conon, that is, to haue leſſe courage in proſperity, then in aduerſitie. For now that he had ouercome the fleete of the PELOPONNESIANS, thinking he had taken ſufficient reuenge of the wrongs receiued by his country: he began to embrace in his mind imaginations too high for his cariage: although this was good and commendable in his enterpriſe, that he had rather make his owne countrey great and rich, then the king of PERSIA. Therefore he being now growne into wonderfull credite, not onely amongſt the barbarous people, but alſo amongſt all the cities of GRECE, after this battell of CNIDOS, he began vnderhand to practiſe the meanes to reſtore IONIA and AEOLIA to be ſubiect againe to the common wealth of the ATHENIANS. His practiſes being diſcouered, Tiribazus gouernour of SARDIS, ſent to pray him to come to him, to be ſent in Ambaſſage to the king. Conon ſtraight obeying his commaundement, he was no ſooner arriued, but he was ſtraight clapt vp in priſon, where he remained ſome time. Some write that he was caried to the king, and died in PERSIA. But Dinon the hiſtorian, to whom we giue great credite in that he treateth of the affaires of PERSIA, reporteth that Conon ſaued himſelfe, leauing it in doubt whether Tiribazus was priuy to it, or that he knew not of it.
               The end of Conons life.
            
            
               
               THE LIFE OF Iphicrates.
               
               
                  
                     IPhicrates the ATHENIAN was famous, not ſo much for his diuerſe exploits or for the greatneſſe of them, as for his military diſcipline: for he was ſuch a Chieftaine of warre, that they compared him vnto the braueſt men of his time, and they did not ſet him behind any of thoſe that had gone before him. He had bene in many warres, had commanded armies oftentimes, he neuer had misfortune by his owne fault, he euer ouercame by wiſedome: his vnderſtanding reaching ſo farre, that he brought in many good things neuer ſeene before in the art military: and made ſome of them better that were in vſe. He altered the armes of footmen: and where before him the Captaines did vſe great targets, ſhort partiſans, and litle ſwords: he to the contrarie brought in light bucklers, to the end his men ſhould be lighter to remoue and to runne to giue charge. He made the partiſans greater by halfe, and the ſwords longer. He changed alſo the corſlets, and in ſtead of iron and copper, he made them of canuaſſe well wrought together, which made the ſouldiers much lighter: for being eaſed of that waight, they had meanes to defend themſelues nimbly againſt blowes, and were ready beſides to giue charge vpon the enemy. He made warre with the THRACIANS, and reeſtabliſhed Seuthes againe in his kingdome, an allie of the ATHENIANS. Being at CORINTH, he obſerued ſo good diſcipline in his armie, that they neuer ſaw any ſouldiers in GRECE better diſpoſed, nor more obedient to their Colonell then they were. To be ſhort, he did vſe them to ranke themſelues ſo well in battell, without helpe of the Captaine, ſo ſoone as euer the Generall had giuen them the ſigne to fight: that it ſeemed expreſly as if the moſt expert Chieftaine of warre had imbattelled them.
               With ſuch an army he aſſailed the LACEDAEMONIANS, which was a moſt famous act through all GRECE: and in this warre he put all their forces to flight, which wanne him great honour. And as Artaxerxes was ready to ſet vpon the king of AEGYPT, he demanded of the ATHENIANS Captaine Iphicrates, to be the chiefe leader of all the ſtrangers troupes, to the number of twelue thouſand men. Whom he ſo well trained and diſciplined, that as the FABIAN ſouldiers had bene famous among the ROMAINES, ſo in GRECE they ſpake of none but of Iphicratian ſouldiers. Afterwards being gone to aide the SPARTANS, he ſtayed Epaminondas roundly: and had not he come, the THEBANS would neuer haue returned backe before he had taken and burnt the citie of SPARTA. He was a man of a ſtout heart, and of a high ſtature, hauing the port and countenance of a Soueraigne captaine, ſo that he made all men wonder at him that ſaw him: but he was ſlouthfull and impatient, as Theopompus ſayth, but otherwiſe a good and faithfull citizen, whereof he made proofe among others, eſpecially in keeping Perdiccas and Philip the ſon of Amyntas MACEDONIAN ſafe. For Euridice their mother comming with them for refuge vnto Iphicrates, after the death of Amyntas: he ſpared no meanes of his owne to defend them. He liued a long time, being in good credite with his citizens: ſauing that on a time during the warres of the allies he was criminally accuſed with Timotheus, howbeit he cleared himſelfe, and was quit by iudgement. His wife was Threſſa, daughter of king Cotys: and of her he had a ſonne called Meneſtheus: who being asked which he loued beſt, either his father, or his mother? My mother, ſayd he. Whereat euery man muſing: Maruell not, anſwered he, I haue reaſon to ſay ſo. For my father, as much as was in him, begat me a THRACIAN: and my mother to the contrarie, ſhe made me an ATHENIAN.
               The end of Iphicrates life.
            
            
               
               THE LIFE OF Chabrias.
               
               
                  
                     CHabrias was an ATHENIAN, and was placed in ranck of excellent Captaines. So hath he done many things worthie of memorie. Amongſt others, his ſtratageme he ſhewed at the battell of THEBES is famous, where he was to aide the BOEOTIANS. For, that great Captaine Ageſilaus reioycing becauſe of his victorie, and that he had made all the troupes at the THEBANS pay run away: Chabrias ſtood ſtill with them that were left of his battalion, teaching the ſouldiers to reſiſt the charge of the enemies, caſting downe their pikes, and couering themſelues with their bucklers vpon one knee. Ageſilaus moued with this noueltie, durſt not runne in to them, and made them found the retreat, to keepe his men they ſhould paſſe no further. This act was ſo renowmed through GRECE, that Chabrias cauſed a ſtatue to be made of him in the ſtate aboue mentioned, the which the ATHENIANS ſet vp for him in the great market place. Afterwards the wreſtlers, and other ſuch kind of people followed this faſhion of erection of ſtatues, which they deſerued for their victories. To come againe to Chabrias, he made many warres in EVROPE, in the qualitie of Generall of the ATHENIANS, and went alſo of his voluntarie will to make warre in AEGYPT, in the ſeruice of Nectanebos whom he did ſet againe into his kingdome. He did the like in CYPRVS, whither the ATHENIANS ſent him of purpoſe to helpe Euagoras, and would not depart thence, before he had firſt ſubdued all the Iſle: for the which the ATHENIANS wan great honour. In theſe buſineſſes, warre fell out betwixt the PERSIANS and AEGYPTIANS. They of ATHENS were allies of Artaxerxes, and the SPARTANS tooke part with AEGYPT. King Ageſilaus did greatly inuade the PERSIANS, and caried great booties away. Chabrias conſidering that, and giuing no place to Ageſilaus, went of his owne head to aide the AEGYPTIANS: who made him their Admirall, and gaue the charge of the armie by land vnto Ageſilaus. Then the Lieutenants of the king of PERSIA ſent vnto ATHENS, to complaine that Chabrias made warre with the AEGYPTIANS againſt their king. The ATHENIANS ſent for Chabrias immediatly to appeare in perſon, threatning him to condemne him to death, if he were not there by the day appointed. This meſſage made him to come againe to ATHENS, where he taried no longer then needes he muſt. For the Citizens bare him no great goodwill, becauſe he caried himſelfe ſo ſtately, and would be ſo merie, that the people enuied him. This vice raigneth commonly in thoſe great and free townes, that glorie is euer accompanied with enuie: and they willingly ſpeake ill of them whom they ſee to be great. And to be ſhort, the poore cannot abide wealthie and rich men. Therfore Chabrias did abſent himſelf out of the citie as much as he could poſſible, and he was not alone in that, for almoſt all the chiefeſt of the citie did the like: thinking themſelues ſafe from the teeth of the enuious, ſo long as they were far off from the ſight of their citizens. Therefore Conon liued for the moſt part of his time in the Iſle of CYPRVS, Iphicrates in THRACIA, Timotheus in LESBOS, Cares in SYGEEA. As for Cares, he was not to be likened in any reſpect vnto the others, in exploits, nor in maner of life: and yet he was honoured in the citie of ATHENS, and had great meanes.
               As for Chabrias, he died in the war of the allies in this maner. The ATHENIANS made war with the Iſlanders of CHIO, at what time Chabrias had no charge in the armie by ſea. Notwithſtanding he had more authoritie then all the Captains: and the ſouldiers did eſteeme him more then any other of the commaunders. That was cauſe of his death. For ſtriuing to enter the firſt into the hauen, and commaunding the Pylote to row right thither, it was his deſtruction: for being moored there within, the other ſhips followed him not. Whereupon the enemies compaſſed him in: but as he fought valiantly, his galley being beaten with the ſpurre of another veſſell began to leake, and to ſinke to the bottome. He ſeeing there was no way for him to eſcape, becauſe the fleet of the ATHENIANS was too farre off to receiue him in, if he ſhould haue attempted to haue ſwomme: he had rather die then leaue his armes, and forſake the galley which caried him.

The others, they tooke another courſe, and ſaued themſelues by ſtrength of their armes. But he eſteeming an honeſt death to be more excellent then a ſhamefull life: fighting very neare, was killed by the enemies with darts.
               The end of Chabrias life.
            
            
               THE LIFE OF Timotheus.
               
               
                  
                     TImotheus the ſonne of Conon, a Captaine of ATHENS, did by many vertues amplifie the glorie receiued of his father. For he was an eloquent man, diligent, painefull, expert in militarie diſcipline, and a great Politician. He hath executed great things, whereof the moſt notable are theſe, to wit: he ſubdued the OLYNTHIANS and BYZANTINES: he wanne the citie of SAMOS, the ſiege whereof in the former warres had ſtood the ATHENIANS in the ſumme of twelue hundred talents. He deliuered it vnto the people freely without any charge to them. He made warre with king Cotys, and brought of the bootie he had gotten there vnto the Treaſurie, the like ſumme of twelue hundred talents. He alſo raiſed the ſiege that was before CYZICA, and went with Ageſilaus to the aide of Ariobarzanes, of whom hauing receiued money, he had rather his citizens ſhould buy townes and lands, then to carie it home to his lodging. Therefore he ioyned ERICTHONE and SESTOS to the ſigniorie of ATHENS. Afterwards hauing charge of the armie by ſea, he inuaded PELOPONNESVS, ſpoiled all the territorie of SPARTA, and had all their ſhips in chaſe. He brought the CORCYREANS vnder the ſubiection of the ATHENIANS: and drew into their alliance the EPIROTS, ATHAMANES, and CHAONIANS, and all the people vpon that ſea coaſt. The which made the LACEDAEMONIANS leaue their ſo long old quarrell, and of their owne goodwils let the ATHENIANS haue the principalitie of the ſea: treating peace with theſe conditions, that the ATHENIANS ſhould be Generals vpon the ſea.
               This victorie did ſo pleaſe the ATHENIANS, that there was then firſt of all an altar built to the common peace, and they did ordaine a pillow ſhould be made for that goddeſſe. Furthermore, that ſuch a glorious act ſhould remaine for perpetuitie, they raiſed vp a ſtatue vnto Timotheus in the market place, by ordinance of the people, which was an honour that neuer man receiued before, to wit, that the people hauing graunted a ſtatue for the father, they ſhould alſo giue one to the ſonne. By this meanes the ſtatue of the ſonne ſo freſhly ſet vp, renewed the memorie of the father. Now Timotheus being very old, dealing no more in affaires of the commonwealth, they began afreſh to torment the ATHENIANS of all ſides. SAMOS and HELLESPONT ſhrunke backe and reuolted. Philip king of MACEDON, who began to waxe great, plotted wonderfull things in his head. Chares was ſent againſt him to make head. But they thinking him not ſufficient to repulſe Philip, they therefore ſent Menestheus the ſonne of Iphicrates, ſonne in law to Timotheus, and made him Colonell, gaue him the charge of the affaires of the warres, hauing for his counſellers, his father, and father in law, braue Captaines, wiſe and expert men to direct him with their counſell: their authoritie being ſo great, that euery man hoped that all that was loſt, ſhould be recouered againe by their meanes. They pointing for SAMOS, Chares that had heard newes of it, ſailed vp and downe that coaſt, to the end nothing ſhould be done in his abſence. Drawing neare to the Iſle a ſtorme roſe, and to defend themſelues againſt it, the two old Captaines ſtrake ſaile, and hulled, going no further into the ſea. Chares to the contrarie vpon a head, not reſpecting them that had ſeene more then he, held on his courſe, thinking to haue found an occaſion as he wiſhed, and ſent as well to Timotheus as to Iphicrates, that they ſhould follow him. But hauing had euill ſucceſſe, and loſt many of his ſhippes, he fell backe againe to that very

place frō whence he came, & ſent letters to the people of ATHENS of this effect, that he had eaſily taken SAMOS, if Timotheus and Iphicrates had not forſaken him at his need. Vpon this accuſation they were ſummoned to appeare in perſon by this bold people, ſuſpitious, vnconſtant, enemy and enuious of another mans greatneſſe, and are charged to be traitors vnto the commonwealth. Timotheus was condemned, and a fine ſet vpon his head of ſixty thouſand crowns. Iphicrates conſtrained by the importunitie of his vnthankeful citizens, went for a time to CHALCIS. After Timotheus death, the people repenting their ſentence, abated nine parts of the ſum aboue named, and commaunded Conon, the ſon of the deceaſed, to furniſh ſixe thouſand crownes for the reparation of a pane of the wall. Here is to be noted a wonderfull reuolution of the affaires of this world: for the young ſonne was conſtrained at his owne charges (to the great diſhonour of his houſe) to repaire the wals, the which his grandfather Conon had made vp with the booty gotten of the enemies. We could alleadge many examples of the modeſtie and wiſedome of Timotheus: but we will adde for the end a matter whereby may be eaſily coniectured, how much he was eſteemed of the GREEKES. Being young he was accuſed, and brought before the Iudge: whereupon his friends and familiars came out of all parts into ATHENS to defend him: and amongſt others the tyrant Iaſon, who was at that time the mightieſt Lord of all GRECE. This tyrant was neuer aſſured in his owne countrey without his guard: and yet he came without any traine to ATHENS, eſteeming ſo much his hoſt Timotheus, that he had rather hazard his life, then faile his friend in time of neceſſitie. Notwithſtanding this, ſhortly after Timotheus made warre with Iaſon, by the commaundement of the people: thinking that to obey his countrey, and to maintaine the right of the ſame, is a more deuout thing, then to fauour a priuate friend. After this laſt age, which tooke away Iphicrates, Chabrias, and Timotheus, Captaines of ATHENS: they could neuer find in the Commonwealth after their death, any Chieftaine of war, that deſerueth any memorie of them.
               The end of Timotheus life.
            
            
               THE LIFE OF Datames.
               
               
                  I Preſently enter into the life of a moſt valiant and wiſe Captaine, among all the barbarous: Hamilcar and Hannibal of CARTHAGE excepted. We will ſpeake ſomwhat more amply of this man, for that the moſt part of his exploits are litle known, & becauſe alſo that he had obtained his victories not ſo much by force of armes, as by his wiſedome: a vertue in the which he did ſurpaſſe all the men of his time. But this cannot be iudged, vnleſſe we make him knowne in all particulars. Datames the ſonne of Camiſſares a CARIAN and of a SCHYTIAN, was at the beginning a ſouldier of the guard of the pallace of Artaxerxes. His father Camiſſares, becauſe of his valiantnes and direction in the warres, and for that he had done many good ſeruices vnto the king, was made Gouernour of CILICIA, neare vnto CAPPADOCIA, where the LEVCOSYRIANS dwell. As for Datames, following the warres, he made proofe of his valour in the warre which Artaxerxes had againſt the CADVSIANS: where many men being ſlaine on both ſides, he fought ſo valiantly, that his father being killed, he had his authorie and place of Gouernour of CILICIA. He ſhewed himſelfe no leſſe valiant in warre, then Antophradates did by the kings commaundement vnto thoſe that had rebelled. For, by the direction of Datames, the enemies that were now entred into the PERSIANS campe, were repulſed, and all the armie of the kings in ſaftie: the which was the cauſe of his calling and aduauncement vnto higher charges. There was at that time in PAPHLAGONIA a Gouernour called Thyus, deſcended of an auncient race of one Pylaemenes, whom Homer ſaith, was killed by Patroclus in the warre of TROIA. He not regarding the kings will and commaundements,

who therefore reſolued to make warre with him, and gaue the charge of it vnto Datames, couſin germaine to Thyus. By reaſon of kindred, Datames would prooue by all means he could to draw his kinſinan to ſome conformitie before he tooke armes: he went vnto him without any traine, litle thinking that his friend would haue laid any ambuſh for him: but he had almoſt bene taken tardie, for Thyus ſought to ſurpriſe him, and to cut his throate. Datames mother, Aunt vnto Thyus, being told what was practiſed againſt her ſonne, ſhe did aduertiſe him in ſo good time, that he eſcaped with ſpeed, and proclaimed warre againſt his aduerſarie. And although that in the purſute of this warre, he was forſaken of Ariobarzanes, Gouernour of LYDIA, of IONIA, and of all PHRYGIA, yet he let not to go further: he tooke Thyus priſoner with his wife and children, and then very carefully tooke order that no man but himſelf ſhould carie newes of it to the king. So following that purpoſe, without any mans priuitie he arriued at the Court, and the next morning apparelled Thyus (a tall man and of a terrible grimme looke, being blacke haired, and wearing his haire long) with a rich robe, ſuch as great Lords vſe to weare. He apparelled himſelfe like a countrey man, in a Lion tawnie coate, with a cloke of diuerſe colours, and a hunters hat, hauing in his right hand a club, and in his left hand a leace, vnto the which Thyus was tyed, who went before, as if he had led ſome ſauage beaſt he had taken in the chaſe a hunting. They all ran to ſee this new monſter thus diſguiſed: and thoſe which knew Thyus went preſently and told the king of it: who at the firſt would beleeue nothing, but ſent Pharnabazus to ſee what it was. So when he had told him all what had happened, he made this pompe come in preſently: and the king tooke great pleaſure to ſee it, but ſpecially to ſee ſo mightie a Prince beyond all hope ſo ſubdued.
               Therefore after he had giuen ſumptuous preſents vnto Datames, he ſent him vnto the armie that was leauied vnder the conduct of Pharnabazus and Tithrauſtes, to make warre in AEGYPT, and ordained that he ſhould haue as much authoritie as they. Now after that the king had ſent for Pharnabazus, all the charge of the warres was committed to Datames. Who being greatly occupied about leauies of men to go into AEGYPT, he receiued letters from the king, commanding him to inuade a Lord called Aſpis, who held CATAONIA, a prouince ioyning neare to CAPPADOCIA, beyond CILICIA, a mountaine countrey well furniſhed with fortreſſes, that deſpiſed the king, and made inuaſions vpon the Prouinces thereabouts, ſpoiling victuals and all things elſe that were caried to the king. Though Datames was farre from that place, and had other affaires of greater importance in hand: yet he determined to obey the king, and ſuddenly imbarked himſelfe with a ſmall number of reſolute men, thinking (that which came to paſſe) that with a few men he ſhould ſooner ſurpriſe a man not dreaming of any ſuch matter, then with a great armie to go and aſſaile him. He being arriued in CILICIA, landed, then marched day and night ouer mount Taurus, and came to the place where he would be: he inquireth for Aſpis, and vnderſtandeth that he was not farre off but a hunting. But as he ſtayed for his comming, Aſpis knew that he was come, and immediatly diſpoſed of his PISIDIANS and others of his traine to make head. Datames knowing this reſolution, takes his armes, made his men march, and galloped to the place where Aſpis was: who ſeeing him come with ſuch a furie, he loſt his courage to defend himſelfe, and preſently yeelded. Datames made him to be bound, and ſent him by Mithridates to the king. Hereupon Artaxerxes conſidering better what he had done, drawing his Lieutenant farre from his armie, to ſend him in commiſſion about a matter of leſſe conſequence, being angrie with himſelfe, ſent a meſſenger to the campe, thinking Datames was not yet gone from thence, to tell him that he ſhould not go. But before this meſſenger came to the armie, he met them by the way that brought Aſpis. This ſo ſudden execution wanne Datames the kings good fauour, but made him very much hated of the Courtiers, ſeeing one onely man more made of then all the reſt: which was the cauſe that they all ioyned together to deſtroy him.
               
                  Pandates Treaſurer of the ſpare, and Datames friend, did aduertiſe him by expreſſe letters, that he ſtood in great daunger, if any ſiniſter fortune happened, whileſt he ſhould commaund the armie in AEGYPT: that it is the cuſtome of kings to impute all misfortunes to their ſeruants that chaunce in their affaires, and to attribute the good ſucceſſe vnto themſelues. And this makes them very eaſily incline to the extermination of them, of whom report is made; that they haue not done that which was committed to their charge. And as for him, that he ſhould ſo much more ſtand in feare, becauſe that thoſe which could do moſt with the king, were his greateſt enemies. Datames hauing receiued theſe letters in his campe, and knowing that they caried truth

with them: he reſolued to forſake the king: which doing notwithſtanding he committed no breach of his fidelitie. For he left Androcles MAGNESIAN Generall of the armie. And for himſelfe he went with his men into CAPPADOCIA, afterwards he wan PAPHLAGONIA which was hard by it, without ſhewing himſelfe either friend or enemie of the king. He ſecretly contracted friendſhip with Ariobarzanes, aſſembled forces, and gaue the guard of the townes of warre vnto thoſe he truſted beſt: but the winter did let him that his affaires went not forward. He vnderſtandeth that the PISIDIANS did leauie ſome troupes to ſet vpon him: which cauſed him to ſend his ſonne Aridaeus before with an armie. The young man being killed at an encounter, the father marched right thither with his men, hiding his griefe as much as he could poſſible, becauſe he deſired to meete with his enemies, before thoſe that followed him ſhould heare of his loſſe, being affraid leſt the newes of the death of this yong Lord ſhould kill their hearts. So being come to the place where he pretended, he camped in ſuch ſort that the multitude of his enemies could not encloſe him, nor keepe him from comming to fight when he thought good. He brought with him Mithrobarzanes his father in law, who was Colonell of the horſemen. He perceiuing the affaires of A fine ſtratageme.his ſon in law in ſo poore an eſtate, forſooke him to go yeeld himſelfe to the enemies. Datames being told of it, iudged that his ſouldiers if they once perceiued that his father in law had forſaken him, they would alſo follow his example: wherfore to preuent all, he gaue it out that Mithrobarzanes was gone by his commandement, pretending to yeeld themſelues to the enemies: to the end with more eaſe and aduantage to cut them in peeces. And therefore that there was no reaſon to leaue ſuch a man ſo far from them, but they muſt needes follow him with ſpeed. So that they ſtanding to it luſtily, the enemies could not reſiſt, conſidering they ſhould be charged within and without their campe. So hauing thought that the beſt way in the world, he marcheth into the field with his troupes, and followeth Mithrobarzanes: who did but newly yeeld themſelues to the enemies, when Datames appeared, who put out the ſignall of battell. The PISIDIANS troubled with this ſtraunge ſight, did ſuſpect that Mithrobarzanes and his would betray them, and that they were come of purpoſe to do them ſome miſchiefe. Thereupon they vehemently gaue charge vpon theſe traitors, who not knowing what to think of ſuch a charge, were conſtrained to fight againſt them, vnto whom they had yeelded themſelues: and to returne vnto them whom they had forſaken. But the one and the other not knowing them any whit, in a ſhort time theſe wicked men were cut in peeces. So withal Datames ſetteth vpon the PISIDIANS who made head againſt him, paſſed through them, and brake them at the firſt charge: purſued them that fled, killed a great number of them, and was maſter of their camp. Note here how wiſely (and all done at one time) he puniſhed the traitors, and put his enemies to flight: turning that to good, which was deuiſed for the ouerthrow of him and his. This is the moſt braueſt and moſt ſpeedieſt executed ſtratageme of a Chiefe in wars, that can be found in hiſtories.
               
                  The ſon betrayeth the father. Notwithſtanding that, this great perſon was forſaken of his eldeſt ſon Sciſmas, who went to the king to aduertiſe him that his father was reuolted. This troubled Artaxerxes greatly, knowing that he had to deale with a valiant and a wiſe Captaine, who boldly did ſet vpon any enterpriſe with diſcretion. Thereupon he ſent Autophrodates into CAPPADOCIA, whom Datames tooke paines to go and meete, to preuent him that he ſhould not win the ſtraight of CILICIA. But being long aſſembling his forces, and that hope being fruſtrate, he choſe with thoſe few men that followed him ſuch a place, that his enemies could not encloſe him, nor paſſe, but that he ſhould ſhut them vp in very vnwholeſome places, nor hurt him when he liked to ioyne in fight. Now though Autophradates vnderſtood ſomwhat of that, yet he made account that it was more expedient for him to ioyne then to flee from the liſt, hauing ſo great forces. He had 20000 horſe, and 100000 footmen, which they call GARDATES, with 3000 ſlings of the ſame name. Furthermore, he had 8000 CAPPADOCIANS, 10000 ARMENIANS, 5000 PAPHLAGONIANS, 10000 PHRYGIANS, 5000 LYDIANS, and about 3000 ASPENDIANS and PISIDIANS, 2000 CILICIANS, as many CAPTANIANS, and 3000 GREEKS in pay: beſides a great nūber of men light armed. Againſt this world of forces, Datames could hope no more but in his direction, and in the commodity of the place where he camped: for he had not the twentith part ſo many men. Yet truſting to himſelfe, to the place, and to the valour of his men, he came to fight, and put to the ſword many thouſands of his enemies, hauing loſt of his ſide but one thouſand of his men. For this cauſe he ſet vp the next day in the field a ſigne of triumph where the battell was fought. So being remoued from thence, as he was the weaker in number of men, he to the contrarie remained victor in

all skirmiſhes and fights, and neuer came to hands, but he put his enemies to the worſe: in the which he had oftentimes very good ſucceſſe, becauſe he knew all the waies, and did wiſely conſider his affaires. Antophradates ſeeing the king loſt more in theſe warres then he got, he perſwaded Datames to fall to agreement, and to make his peace with the king. Though Datames had no great truſt in that, yet he accepted the condition, and ſaid he would ſend ambaſſadours vnto Artaxerxes. And thus the warre of the king ended againſt Datames. And for Antophradates, he retired into PHRYGIA.
               But the king being vexed 
                     •
                  o the heart againſt Datames, conſidering that he could not preuaile againſt him by armes, ſought to make him away by treaſon. Datames looked warily to his wayes, and auoided many ambuſhes. As on a time, hauing vnderſtanding that ſome pretending to be his friends, had laid a plot for him: although his enemies had giuen him intelligence of it, yet he thoght that as it was not a thing lightly to be beleeued, ſo was it not altogether to be diſcredited: wherupon he reſolued to trie whether it was a true or falſe report brought him. Therefore he ſet forward to the place where it was told him this ambuſh was laid: but he choſe amongſt his men one that was of his height, he gaue him his furniture, and made him march in the ranck which he was wont to hold. He on the other ſide apparelled like a ſouldier, went with the archers of the guard. Thoſe which lay in ambuſh deceiued by the order and furniture, aſſoone as they ſaw their time, they began to ſet vpon the ſuppoſed Datames. But the right Datames had warned them before with whom he marched, to be readie to do all as he did. He ſeeing then theſe traitors running, he threw darts at them, and ſo did all thoſe that were in his companie, ſo that the other fell to the ground, before they could come neare him whom they would ſurpriſe. Now notwithſtanding all this, this ſo warie and ſubtill Captaine was in the end betrayed by the deceipt of Mithridates 
                  Mithridates ſtratageme againſt Datames.the ſonne of Ariobarzanes, who promiſed the king to do the deed, ſo that he would afterwards ſuffer him to do what he thought good, without being called in queſtion any maner of way. The king conſented vnto it, and gaue his hand vpon it after the cuſtome of the PERSIANS, to make him more aſſured. Mithridates hauing the kings word, made ſhew to be ſworne enemy The maner of Mithridates 
                        〈…〉
                     .vnto Artaxerxes, he gathereth troupes together, and by meanes treateth friendſhip with Datames, he entreth with a maine armie into the kings country, beſiegeth and taketh fortreſſes, carieth away great bootie, he giueth part of it to his ſouldiers, he ſendeth the reſt vnto Datames, and deliuereth many fortreſſes and holds into his hands. So hauing continued his courſe a reaſonable time, Datames began wholly to beleeue that Mithridates had vndertaken a warre which he would neuer leaue, and this traitour gaue him great occaſions to thinke ſo. For fearing leſt Datames would miſtruſt ſome ambuſh, he ſought not to ſpeake with him, nor went about to meete together: but without enterview he entertained his alliance ſo finely, that theſe two men ſeemed both one, not ſo much for mutuall benefite, as for a common hatred conceiued againſt the king. When he ſaw his ſnare well laid, he wrote to Datames that time required they ſhould aſſemble greater forces to make warre againſt the king: and if he thought good, he would appoint a place where they might one ſee another, and conferre together. Datames found this aduice good, and Tim & place appointed for enterview tother.ſo they appointed a day to meete together, and place where they might ſpeake perſonally one with the other. Some daies before Mithridates came to the place, ſeconded with another in whom he put great truſt: he hid poigniards ſeparated in diuerſe places, and did carefully marke the places where they were laid. The day being come of their talking together, both of them ſent men to diſcouer the place, and to ſearch one the other, becauſe they ſhould be without weapons. That being done, they enter into talke, and after they had ſpoken ſome time together, they departed: ſo that Datames was gone a good way off. And as for Mithridates, before he went to his men (to giue no occaſion of ill thought) he cometh to the ſame place againe where they had ſpoken together, and ſate him downe in a place where there was a poigniard hidden, faining to be wearie, and to refreſh himſelfe a litle. Then he ſent for Datames vnder colour that he had forgotten to tell him ſome thing. In the meane time he tooke the poigniard out of the place where it was hidden, drew it, and put it naked vnder his robe. And ſeeing Datames, told him they muſt go a litle aſide, and that he had diſcouered a place directly ouer againſt them very fit to campe in. Datames traiterouſly murdered by Mithridates.He began to ſhew him the place with his finger: and as Datames turned to ſee what it was, this traitour ſtabbed him with his poigniard, and made an end of killing of him before any of his men could come to helpe him. See here how through pretence of friendſhip he was ſurpriſed, who had entrapped ſo many others by his valiant direction, but none by treaſon.
               The end of the life of Datames.
            
            
               
               THE LIFE OF Hamilcar.
               
               
                  
                     HAmilcar the ſonne of Hanniball, ſurnamed Barcas, a CARTHAGINIAN Captaine. being very young began to commaund an army that was in SICILIA, in the end of the firſt warre of AFRICKE. Before his comming thither the CARTHAGINIANS had very ill ſucceſſe both by ſea and land: but ſo ſoone as he led the army, he neuer gaue place to the enemy, and gaue him no aduantage to hurt him. But to the contrary he found many an occaſion to draw them to fight, wherein he had the vantage. Which being done, although the CARTHAGINIANS had well-neare loſt all that they held in SICILIA, yet he kept the city of ERIX ſo well, as it ſeemed that there had neuer bene warre made in that quarter. In the meane time the CARTHAGINIANS hauing loſt a battell at the ſea neare vnto the Iles AEGATES, againſt Catulus Luctatius a ROMAINE Conſull: they determined to leaue armes, and gaue all the charge vnto Hamilcar to treate of peace. For his part he deſired nothing but warre: yet ſeeing his towne in want of money and meanes, and in danger to ſinke vnder their burthen, he concluded that they muſt make peace. Yet ſo notwithſtanding he reſolued with himſelfe, that as ſoone as all matters were pacified, he would make warre againe, and ſet vpon the ROMAINES, either to make them Lords of all, or elſe to compell them to be ſubiect. With this mind he entred into parley of peace, where he ſhewed himſelfe ſo ſtout: that as Catulus declared he would agree to nothing, before Hamilcar and his ſouldiers which had kept ERIX had layd downe their armes, and were gone out of SICILIA, he made anſwer that he would rather dye in the ruines of his countrey, then to returne home with ſuch ſhame: and that honour would not ſuffer him to yeeld vp his armes to his enemies, which his countrey had put into his hands to be imployed againſt them. Catulus let him go with this obſtinate reſolution.
               But when Hamilcar was arriued at CARTHAGE, he ſaw matters go farre otherwiſe then he hoped for. For during the long wars againſt the enemies abroad, there was miſchiefe ſprung vp among them within: which went on ſo fiercely, that GARTHAGE was neuer in ſo great danger but when it was altogether deſtroyed. Firſt of all, the mercenarie ſouldiers that had bene in the warres againſt the ROMAIMES, to the number of 20000 they rebelled, they made all AFRICKE riſe, and they beſieged CARTHAGE. The CARTHAGINIANS being greatly afraid of ſo many euils, they demanded aide of the ROMAINES, which they granted. But in the end, when all was thought to be in a deſperate caſe, they choſe Hamilcar their Captaine generall: who did not onely driue the enemies farre from the towne, which were in number aboue a 100000 fighting men: but he did alſo ſhut them vp in ſuch ſtraights, that the moſt part of them died of famine, and the reſt were ſlaine. Furthermore, he brought the cities which had reuolted, vnder the obedience againe of CARTHAGE, and amongſt others VTICA, and HIPPONA, two of the ſtrongeſt cities of AFRICKE. But not ſtaying there, he extended the limites of the ſigniory of CARTHAGE, and pacified all AFRICKE in ſuch ſort, that it ſeemed there had bene no warre of long time.
               Now hauing done all things according to his mind, he bearing ill will to the ROMAINES, and hoping to be reuenged: to find a more eaſie way to daw them to warre, he practiſed ſo well that he was choſen Generall, and they ſent him with an army into SPAINE, whither he caried with him his ſonne Hanniball nine yeares old, and another faire young gentleman called Haſdruball, whom many iudged to be loued of Hamilcar otherwiſe then was fit for honeſt men. For there were many alwayes that could not containe themſelues from ſpeaking euill of this great Captaine. Which was the cauſe that the gouernour of Haſdruball did forbid him to come no more to Hamilcar, who afterwards gaue him his daughter in mariage, ſo that they began againe to meete together. For by the cuſtome of the countrey they could not forbid a ſonne in

law, to frequent with his father in law. We haue made mention of Haſdruball, becauſe that after Hamilcar was ſlaine, he was made chiefe of the army, which did great exploits vnder his conduct. But ſo he was the firſt, that by preſents and gifts corrupted the ancient maners of the CARTHAGINIANS. After his death, Hanniball had the charge of the army, with the conſent of all the men of warre. As for Hamilcar, he hauing paſſed the ſea, entred into SPAINE, and did great things there with good ſucceſſe. He ſubdued many warlike nations, enriched all AFRICKE with horſes, with armes, with men, and with money. As he had thought to haue tranſported the warre from thence into ITALIE, nine yeares after his comming into SPAINE: he was ſlaine in a battell againſt the VECTONS. The deadly hate he bare vnto the ROMAINES, ſeemeth to haue kindled the ſecond warre with AFRICKE. For his ſonne Hanniball was brought to this paſſe, by the continuall adiurations of his father: that he had rather deſtroy himſelfe, then to faile his helpe againſt the ROMAINES.
               The end of Hamilcars life.
               
            
         
      
   