
      
         
            
            
            The preceptes of warre, ſetforth by James the erle of Purlilia, and trā
               ſlated into englyſh by Peter Betham.
            1544.
            
               Though peace be a vertue, that vertues do the excell.
               yet mayſt thou boldely fyght, in a iuſte quarell.
            
         
         
            
            
            The Epiſtle. To the ryghte honourable ſyr Thomas Audeleye knyght, lorde Audeley of Walden, and lorde Chauncelour of Englande, Peter Betham wiſheth health and cō
               tinuaunce of honour
            
               SOme men peraduē
               ture (right honourable lorde) wyll thynke me blame worthie, bycauſe I haue preſented thys tranſlation to the handes of your lordſhyppe rather then to ſome actyue and valyaūt capitayne, whoſe proweſſe is wytneſſed by his martiall affayres, and bolde enterpriſes, which alſo is thought in ſome mens opynyon by dutye to haue the patronage of all thoſe thynges that appertayne to knyghthode and chiualry. Euen as Lawe wyghtes and Philoſophers,

which take to theyr ſelues ye perfect knowledge of thynges, are iudged amonge all other men (althoughe there be ſome men, whoſe iudgement is no leſſe allowable) mooſte worthye, of whome in maters doubtfull, we ought to aſke coū
               ſayle, and thoſe men ben eſtemed vnwiſe whych debate ſuche cauſes with other, then wyth them, ſyth they haue profeſſed that knowledge: Yet to thoſe whych weye thynges by the outewarde face, breuely I wyl make this anſwere. Lyke as there be many men whych although they haue not theyr beerdes longe, their lockes lyinge on theyr ſhoulders, ne be clothed with the robes of a philoſopher yet for theyr hygh knowledge, they are not vnworthy that name. Euen ſo there be amonge noble men, that be worthye to haue the prayſefull name of a capytayne, not for theyr brode ſhoulders, out ſette breſtes, and knyghtlye feates: But for theyr wyſedome, conueyaunce, and watchefull foreſeinge of all ſuche thynges, whych by any meanes maye anoie

or ouerwhelme the ſtate of the common wealth. For the ſtrength of the bodye is not to be matched wyth wytfulneſſe and fyne vnderſtandynge. And that cytye is not beſt defenced whyche is inuyronned wyth ſtronge walles, and warded with fortreſſes of bulworkes, trenches, and ſuche other lyke, but that whyche wyth wyſe counſaylours is proptvp and ſtrengthed.
            Alſo ryght honourable lorde, lyke as Cicero whyche was choſen Conſull in the ciuyle and inwarde ruffelyng, by the free conſente of good men, was worthely called the father of theyr countrye, defendour of theyr cytye, and mayntayner of theyr liberties, not for his valyauntneſſe in warrely dedes, and that he was the graunde capytayne to leade the Romayne power agaynſte Catilyne, and hys mooſte wycked fellowes, but that throughe hys endeuoure and carefulle dylygence, he ſaued the cytye of Rome from fyre, the virgyns and wyues from rauyſhyng, and the tēples frō ſpoyling,

the Senatours from ſlaughter, and thoughtleſſe for hys owne lyfe, vanquyſhed the curſed conſpiracye of Catiline, with the whole route of ſo many brainſyke hopeloſtes, whych were alied vnto hym. Thys was not done by hys ſtoute fyghtynge, but by hys dilygente carefulneſſe & ſwete orations: by whiche he brought to paſſe all hys attemptates and affayers. Euen ſo ryght honourable lorde, you beyng choſen to this hygh offyce, whyche by you is ſetteforth and honeſted, haue bothe in inwarde commotions, and outward warres, ſhewed your endeuour to defende this royalme, as well from the bloodſheddynge and ſlaughter of it ſelfe, as from the entryes of forayne enemyes, not that you dydde beare harneſſe on youre backe, lodge in the campe, and leade an armye, but that by your aduyſe and counſayle, ſuch thinges haue ben decreed: ſuche enterpryſes fynyſſhed, and weyghtye matters concluded, that thys royalme hath flouryſſhed, all thynges haue luckely chaunced and oure enemyes on euerye parte ſubdued.

This your lordſhyppes wyſdome vnder oure mooſt gracyous, noble, and ſoueraygne prynce Kynge Henrye the tyght, by your ſwete and pleaſaunte orations, haue opened and broughte to paſſe ſuche thynges amonge other the honourable ſenatours, auncient fathers and worthye counſaylours of this royalme, whyche haue auaunced the common profyte, enlarged the marches of this lande, and brought vnder to thys daye all our enemyes. Wherfore the famous and worthye name of a capytayne in ſuche one as you be, rather then in any other is prayſeable, in whome ſo many vertues be linked: whyche you haue gotten by paynefulneſſe, paynefulneſſe hath purchaſed you great renoume, renoume hath auaunced you to honour, honour hath made manye to folowe you, whych folowers with moſt prayſe, do treade the, footeſteppes of ſo auncient and wytfull a capytayne.
            Furthermore yf we cal to remembraūce the Grekes and Troians, and ſearche whych of them deſerued greateſt prayſe

in that longe battayle (amonge whome the feates of chiualrie were mooſt vſed) we ſhall ſone ſe that wyſdome had euer the hygheſt prayſe. For Vliſſes bothe of Homere and other wryters, was moche more prayſed then eyther was Achilles or Aiax, whyche both in ſtrength paſſed all other. For howe many thinges were conueyed by Vliſſes wyſedome, whych the puiſſaunce of Achilles, the ſtrength of Aiax, the ferſeneſſe of Diomede could neuer brynge to paſſe, ne ones attouche Who was ambaſſadoure to Achilles? Vliſſes. Who plucked the Grekes from flyght? Vliſſes. Who cauſed the death of Rheſus? Vliſſes. Who was the deſtruction of Troye? Vliſſes: whyche all were doone by wyſedome, and not by ſtrength of the bodye. For ſtrength ſtryketh, wyſdome refrayneth, ſtrength feareth no perils, wiſdome ſtayeth, ſtrēgth is raſſhe and foolehardye, wyſedome is bolde and puiſſaunt, whyche alone doth ſhape and worke all thynges paſt mans iudgement, for which cauſe in the frame of mans body ſhe is ſet in the hyeſt place

Wyſdome alſo is lykened to ye goddeſſe Pallas, whyche as well among the wil les of ye goddes as mens doynges doth deciſe all thynges. Thys ladye was of the grekes partye, whyche euer was at hande wyth Vliſſes in all weyghty and dowbtefulle matters by whoſe helpe he waded thorough owte all ieoperdyes, whych mought haue ben noyouſe to the whole armye of the grecians.
            Thys one ladye doth guyde al magiſtrates as well in tyme of warre, as of peace. Thys lady in all common weales doeth lyfte vp one, to ben as a ſhynynge ſtarre, & a pure bright glaſſe, yt in one ſhe maye ſhewe forth her hye gyftes, as appeareth by one Annibal, whych by wyſdome dydde almoſte caſte downe the romayne empyre, breke theyr force, & darken the renoume of the noble Senators whych beyng lordes ouer all the worlde in ſtrengthe coulde neuer be matched wt anye forayne prince, but wyth thys one Anniball whome wyſedome dyd guyde. Whyche alſo dyd welknowe that wyſedome woulde mayſter ſtrength.
            
               
Nowe ryghte honorable lorde, none vpryght reader can blame me, that wiſdome is ſo ſet alofte, & enhaūced, which ſo moche ſurmounteth ſtrengthe, whan greater renoume, is due to the polytike counſaylour, then to the ſtronge man of armes. Whyche thynge is daylye ſeen in our warres, & in the noble capytayns of thys realme, whoſe ſtraūge ſleightes and feates of warre, yf any man wyl go abowte to brynge togyther, and make a booke therof: he ſhulde playnely ſhewe that the youthe of Englande doth ſo floryſſhe in warlye knoweleage that they paſſe all other bothe Grekes & Romans to thys daye. Thus whan the laude of chyualdrye, doeth ſo clerelye ſhyne in a wyſe counſaylour: I ſhall deſyre youre lordeſhyppe to take in good worth thys my ſimple doynge, in whyche I haue done my diligence to content your lorde ſhyppe and ſatiſfy the nobilitye and gē
               trye of Englande, as well in the termes as in the ſentences, whome I do moſte hartelye wyſſhe, that thys tranſlation maye pleaſe, the whyche to reade theye

ſhall be the rather drawen, whan that thynge ſhalbe taught here in leſſons, the which is ſhewed to be done in dede, in ye booke of Iulius Frontinus, whyche is tranſlated by the well learned Moriſon a man of ſwete and eloquent ſpekynge, ſo that the feates of war there done and tolde by hyſtories, doo proue theſe precepts of chyualdrye, for the moſt parte in euerye place. That booke is worthye to be red of all thē that be chyualdrous, and couette to wynne renoume in warfare, whych is wyth feate termes adourned, to the euerlyuyng prayſe of the trā
               ſlatour. I ſe it tyme to make an end, leſt my epiſtle waxe ouermoch, yet I wilbe bolde vnder your lordeſhyppes licence, ſomethyng to wander from my fyrſt mattyer, and to ſpeake a lytle of the tranſlatours of thys age, whych after my pore iudgement do marre and miſframe our englyſſhe tounge, through theyr termes vnnedefullye borowed of other languages. For lyke as the carpenter that goth abowte hys worke, doth occupye for the moſt parte hys owne inſtrumentes, and

hath lytle nede to borowe of anye other crafteſman: So I thynke that all tranſlatours ought to vſe the vſuall termes of our englyſſhe tounge, which of it ſelfe is ryche and plentyfull and not to breke wythout all iudgemente in to the boundes of the latyn tounge, to ſteale termes of it, as yf our englyſhe tounge had not in hymſelfe ſuffyſaunce of woordes, to ſet fourth all our ſpeakynges. But ſuche men as do vnaduiſedly deſyre other tōg termes, woulde be taken (to my indgement) as authours of our woordes, therby to enlarge our language (whyche rather they do make poore and barrayne) ſo that manye good mattyers be duſked and defaced, wyth theyr newe borowed ynkehorne termes, and the common people of Englande, do not vnderſtand the wrytynges ne yet the ſpeache of thē, fortheyr trycke termes of theyr owne brayn ſhaped.
            Theſe men thinke all theyr owne doynges woorthye greateſt prayſe whan that but ſome of them be well done.
            
               
Yet lette no man thyncke, that I doo damne all vſuall termes borowed of other tounges, whan I doo well knowe that one tounge is interlaced with an other. But nowe to be ſhorte, I take them beſte englyſhe men, which folowe Chauter, and other olde wryters, in whyche ſtudye the nobles and gentle men of Englande, are worthye to be prayſed, whā they endeuoure to brynge agayne to his owne clennes oure englyſſhe tounge, & playnelye to ſpeake wyth our owne termes, as our others dyd before vs, which men I coulde reherce by name, but that I ſhulde be thought to flatter. The dead I maye well prayſe.
            Wyate was a worthye floure of our tounge, as appereth by the mornefulle ballet made of hys death in Englyſſhe, whyche is mooſte wyttye fyne and eloquent.
            Nowe ones agayne ryght honorable lord, I muſt begge a little pardō to make an aunſwere to ſome euylle ſpeakers, whyche of nature enforced to dyſprayſe

other mens doynges, wyll berke & rage agaynſte thys myne enterpryſe, whyche am thus bolde to take marters of warre in hande, whan that I am no warriour But let them bluſter & ſpitte owte their poyſon wordes: learned and witful mē do knowe, that phiſitians and aſtronymers do come to theyr knowleage, more by great ſtudye and readynge of bookes wyth them ſelfe, than by the teachynge of other menne: ſo I ryghte honorable lorde, chyfelye holpe by moche readynge of bookes and markynge of the ſame, & partlye by the helpe of them, that haue bene in warres, haue (as I truſte) not gone farre amyſſe, as ſhall appere to the gentle reader, whom I deſyre to report as he ſhall ſe. Thys ſayde, I praye god ſhylde your lordſhyppe frō al miſchaūce and contynue your helth and honour to the comforte of poore ſuters, and preferment of them that be honeſte and vertuouſe.
            
               
                  In the moneth of Decembre, 1543.
               
            
         
         
            
            
            Thomas Phayes.
            
               Chyefeſt is peace, but yf by extremitye,
               Thou be enforced to fyght for thyne owne,
               Learne here the ſcience and actes of chyualdrye
               Pollicies, & priuities, to many men vnknowen:
               Wherby thyne enemyes may be ouerthrowen.
               In ſuche a neceſſitie ſhalt thou neuer fynde
               Suche an other treaſure: kepe it wel in mynde.
            
            
               
                  * REX INETERNVM VIVE.
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Fautes eſcaped in the printyng through ouermoche haſte.
            
               In the prologue, the fyrſt page, lyne. 15. rede lawe wryghtes for lawe wyghtes.
               The. 2. page, the. 19. lyne, for that be worthye, reade many that be worthye.
               The. 3. page, the laſt line, leaue out (and)
               The. 11. padge, the. 13. lyne, read mothers for others.
               The. 12. page, the. 3. lyne reade matters for marters.
               In the fyrſte Chapter. 2. padge, 4. lyne, leaue out (not) The. 3. padge, the, 5. lyne, reade truſtyneſſe for truſtye men. In the ſame padge. 21. lyne leaue out (hygh).
               Chapter. 2. the. 7. lyne reade this for his.
               Chap. 5. line. 10. reade lyghter for hygher
               Chap. 7. lyne. 8. reade abode for abyde.
               Chapter. 9. lyne. 10. reade behauyour.
               Cha. 19. lyne. 5. reade agreued for agreed
               Cha. 21. lyne. 7. reade do not ſtray for not ſtraye.
               Chap. 24. lyne. 7. leaue out to.
               Cha. 27. lyne. 2. reade not to be, for to be.
               Cha. 30. lyne. 4. rede recount for to recoūt
               Cha. 36. lyne. 4. rede argument for agrement.
               Cha. 40. lyne. 1. reade this law for lawe,

the. 17. lyne of the ſame chapter, real by manly for manly, leauyng out and in the ſame lyne.
               Cha. 45. lyne. 10. reade euer for neuer.
               Cha. 50. lyne. 6. reade do with ſpedyneſſe, for put in execution.
               Chap. 58. lyne. 10. reade theyr voyage for voyage.
               Chap. 59. lyne. 1. reade wyll gyue none, for wyl none.
               Cha. 61. lyne. 1. reade vnwyllynglye for wyllyngly.
               Chap. 65. lyne. 4. reade thoſe for theſe, the ſeuenth lyne reade ſe for ſet.
               Cha. 67. for ſucceſſed reade ſurceſſed.
               Cha. 72. lyne. 8. reade braggeth for bryngeth.
               Cha. 74. lyne. 4. reade connynge for commynge.
               Chap. 75. lyne. 21. reade prouince for prouynge.
               Cha. 77. lyne. 14. reade flayne for ſhame.
               Chap. 105. lyne. 6. reade to conſtrayne, for conſtrayne.
               Cha. 109. lyne. 11. reade name for men.
               Cha. 117. ye laſt lyne rede badge for lodge.
               Ch. 124. line 13 rede binde them for bynde
               Cha. 142. lyne. 8. reade for ye mooſt parte, ¶ ſtaautes eſcaped in the printyng through ouermoche haſte.

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
ly. 9. rede they be brought, for be brought
               Chap. 143. lyne. 5. rede whome for when.
               Cha. 144. line. 19. for fynges redr fyngers
               Cha. 149. lyne. 15. rede ſinguler for ſiguler
               Cha. 154. lyne. 6. reade ſhulde for do.
               Cha. 157. lyne. 8. for cōmyng rede cōnyng.
               Chap. 158. lyne. 8. reade laye for lye.
               Cha. 170. lyne. 4. reade demeanour for demeanours.
               Cha. 194. lyne. 5. reade wonne for ioyne.
               Cha. 196. lyne. 5. rede diſcouer for to diſco.
               Ch. 1003. lyne. 14 for cōmyng, rede cōning
            
            
               ¶ Fautes eſcaped in the ſeconde boke.
               In the. 36. Chapter, lyne. 5. rede takynge of demeanes, for take demeanes.
               Cha. 38. lyne. 3. reade woad for wood.
               Cha. 40. the laſt lyne ſaue one, rede continuaunce for countynaunce.
               Cha. 41. lyne. 10. reade ſerche for ſeche.
               Cha. 46. lyne. 4. reade foes for force.
               Cha. 47. lyne. 7. for one rede vpon.
               Cha. 51. lyne. 4. rede vnmmanued for vnmaymed. In ye title of. 58. chap. for relyue rede helpe, lyne. 3. ye ſame cha. rede weake for wean.
               In the laſt chapter added of the tranſlatour, lyne. 17. rede of nature, for of our nature, lyne. 35. botye for both.
            
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               BEfore that thou begyn to make battayle, it is nedefull to take aduyſement ones and agayne, whether the cauſe and begynnynge of thy warmakynge be honeſt. But yet that is not a ſuffycient cauſe to gyue battayle, except for thys purpoſe thou do it, to lyue afterwarde peaceable, and in quyete, not wyllynge to ſowe and ſtere vp battayl after battayle, the which thynge is both foolyſhe and cruell.
            But yf thyne enemye can ſatiſfy and content the by ſorowfulnes, or els otherwyſe it were wycked, cruell, and rather beaſtly than manlye, to make battayle agaynſte hym, eyther for the vayne deſyre to beare rule, or for the couetouſneſſe of rycheſſe. And ſo to deſtroye hym by the ſwearde, whome gentle wordes wolde haue vanquyſhed. When I ſpeake of thys ſorowfulneſſe, I meane that which is vnfayned and wythout any doubt or ieopardy, that ſuche wronges vnpuniſhed, ſhulde entiſe thyne enemye, to offre ſemblable trouble, and occations of diſpleaſure. For thē quycly and ſharply punyſhment is to be done.

And if thou abyde any hurte through his wrongfulneſſe, by and by redreſſe it, and the people ſhall therby well iudge and eſteme the. But yf thou be not afrayde that ſome prince either ſtronger or egall in power, wyll make battayle agaynſt the (my counſayle is) Fyrſt to rayſe and ſtyre vp warre agaynſt hym: bycauſe the greater boldneſſe is thought to be in hym that begynneth, then in hym whyche defendeth the aſſaultes of hys enemyes. As to leade out thy ſouldyours fyrſt after winter, thā to ſet them in aray, and ſo to ſet vpō thyne enemyes, is verye profytable. By whych meanes, thou ſhalt brynge thyne enemies to quyet, and repentaunce, and eftſones ſhalt purchaſe peace, whych thou haſt deſyred. And ſo thy feare and dread is a iuſt occation, fyrſte to gyue battayle, and the ſame to put awaye and ende.
            But one thynge do not forget, althoughe thou haue a iuſt occation, to begynne the fray, diligently to foreſee what ſhalbe the ende. For euery man maye begynne war, but to ceaſe and haue an ende ſtandeth in the conquerour his hande Wherfore dyligentlye knowe thyne owne power, and

therwith the ſtrength of thyne enemies before thou begynne battayle. Knowe alſo thy frendes, and learne who be thy foes, and howe greate theyr puiſaunce is. Alſo attempte and proue theyr truſty men in other thynges, leaſte when thou arte troubled in thy warres, ſodeynlye wyth all theyr force and violence, they come vpon the, and ſo do vnto the moche hynderaunce. And brefelye thynke that all men may be thy frendes, and that the ſame maye be thyne enemyes, and what is to be done yf thys or that do chaunce. Remembre alſo all thynges in thy mind whyche may happen in ſo doubtful battayle and daungerfull warres.
            Moreouer p̄pare & make ready all thinges neceſſary for battayle (ſo yt thyne enemies be not priuye to the ſame) before y• byd battayl. For lōg p̄paraūce bryngeth redy victorie, & ſo hygh charges and all other thinges neceſſary ar to be cōſidred For if thou be lyke to haue ye vpperhand, then to want money & treaſure, to be wt
               out inſtrumētes of war, & to lack ꝓuiſiō is ye redy way to purchaſe ſhame & ſclaū
               der, after ſo haſty & vnaduiſed enterpriſe

Wherfore trulye it foloweth, and euen ſo chaunceth, that he whiche raſhlye begynneth battayle, ſone ſhall repent: and after wyth all humbleneſſe, ſhall deſyre peace, not without his greate daunger, and notable reproche.
            
               2 ¶ To choſe the capitayne.
               Choſe ſuch one to be captane of thyne Armye whyche is borne of a noble and valyaunte ſtocke, and fearyng nothynge more then ſhame and reproche, and is wt oute all euyll doynges. For he that ſhall rule other, conuenient it is that he know to maſter hym ſelfe. For where affection ſurmounteth, reaſō is vndertroden and gyueth place, without which men be mē apparent, and not in dede. And therewt comely it is, the captayne not to be defamed wyth lecherye and coueytouſneſſe, which be vyces chefelye to be eſchued & abandoned. For theſe two deteſtable vyces bryng forth diuers effecteis. Lechery forſoth doth ſhame the good fame of the capitaynes, to runne in diſdayne of frēde and foe, and therwith cauſeth the whole Armye, (whiche is moche worſe) to folowe hys fleſhlye vnclenneſſe, throughe

whych the whole Armye wyth the capttayne is vnapte to battayle, and faynte ſtrengthed. And when they doo applye ſuche wanton pleaſures, and gyue them to Venus daliaūce, then they forſake the feates of Armes, and deſpyce the manlye wreſtlynges of Mars. For hys goddas doth deſtroy the courage of ye minde and waſteth the ſtrength of the bodye, & brefely where luxurye raygneth, no vertue wyll appeare. Suche enimitie, ſuche hatefull ſpyte is betwyxt vertue and vncleane lecherie, that no loueday, no hope of peace is at any tyme amonge them.
               But that captayne which is couetous cauſeth hys ſouldyours, whyche bene of them ſelues bolde and ready, agaynſt al daungers, to gyue backe, loth & ſtraūge, to put them in ieopardye, or go vpō any perylles, eyther for the prayſe of theyr capitayne, (whyche is hatefull for hys nygardneſſe) or els to get the victory when they perceyue theyr labour to be ſpente in vayne, truſtyng no rewarde for theyr paynes and daungerfull attemptes.
               But what ſhall it nede to ſpeake of all, when theſe two vyces be the ſpryngwel

and heed of al myſchefe. Moreouer choſe the ſuche a capitayne whyche is luckye. For ſome be ſo vnhappye throughe vnkynde fortune, that theyr chaunce is to be vanquyſſhed, althoughe they haue a great nombre of ſouldyours, and power of men. Therfore luckyneſſe is to be wiſſhed in a good capitayne, whiche frō hys youth hath ben in warfare, vnder a good capitayne, and prayſed for kepynge hys araye, alwayes hyghly taken and regarded of the whole Army. The which alſo hath ſhewed many tokens of wyttyneſſe and in the feactes of Armes preſt and redye to trye maſtryes, felowlyke in apparell, whoſe affayres haue alwayes bene guyded by reaſon, whyche hath not alſo aſſayed any thynges raſhly. I was purpoſed to haue wrytten more of thoffyce of a capitayne, but at large in the other two bookes I am mynded to wryte therof. And in many Chapters enſuynge, I wyll note and ſhewe the maners and cō
                  dycyons of capitaynes.
            
            
               3. ¶ Of ſufferaunce in warre.
               Manye thynges are to be ſuffered in warre, which were to be loked on, in the

pleaſaunt tyme of peace. For it is not expedient out of hande to reuenge all iniuryes and diſpleaſures. But to differ the punyſhment to the ende of the battayle, diſſemblyng ſuche iniurious dedes, left at that tyme we purchaſe ſo many our enemyes, yt we be not able to beare theyr malyce and force. For it is a lyght thyng to ſtyrre vp battayl, but to leaue of with glorye and renoume, is an harde thyng. And lytle ſparkes (whych nothynge we regarde) ſomtyme kendle a great fyre.
            
            
               4. ¶ Of the ſtoute and valiaunt mynde of the captayne.
               A prouidēt capitayne and expert in the knowledge of warre, wyll neuer reſt neyther in hys victorye ne yet ſubdued, but in all ſtates, wyll beare hym ſelfe mooſt ſtoutly, by whych meanes his enemyes ſhall dreade hym, whether he haue ye vpper hande, or vanquiſhed, and ſhal think hym both there and away, to worke and imagine theyr diſcomfiture. Whereby it ſhall chaunce, ſuche a valiaunt captayne eyther to purchaſe honeſt couenauntes, of peace, or elles prayſeable victoryes of hys enemyes.
            
            
               
               5. ¶ Of the ſiege and aſſaulte of a cytye.
               All cyties and townes for the mooſte parte be more wynable on the one ſyde, then on the other. Wherfore cauſe all ye trompettes to blowe vp on yt ſide which is better defenced, whereby thyne enemyes called vp, and feared by the noyſe of the trompettes, maye runne thyther, leauyng the other ſyde of the citie which is vndefenced, and ſo the aſſaulte ſhal be the hygher. For vndoubtedly wyth lytle ſlaughter we may ſcale and clymbe vpō the walles, where fewe be leafte to defende, and leeſt hede is taken. Alſo a lytle nombre, is deſpyſed of many, & ſhortly ouercomen. But thyne enemyes gladly wyll leaue the parte defenced, yf that they ſe the weaker and vndefenced parte to be aſſaulted. Wherfore my counſayle is to take the ſtrongeſt parte of thyne at mye and aſſaulte the ſyde of the cytye defenced, and ſo leeſt doubted, although ye captayne maye vſe his owne aduyſe according to the ſituation of the place, and nombre of hys enemyes.
            
            
               6. ¶ Of a great army of our enemies
               
                  
When the nombre of thyne enemyes is great, then my aduyſe is, to encreaſe thyne Armye, with maryners and ſhypmen: yf thy Nauye be nere at hande, or els ſhortly to pike ſome newe bande and gariſon of men, to match thyne enemies both in power & nōbre of ſoldyours. For many ben a greate feare to fewe, and the multitude of enemies, wil diſmay a litle armye. But when ſodeynly they ſhall ſe thyne Armye renewed, and well furnyſſhed, theyr braggyng courage ſhall fall, and they wyll not matche ne auaunce forwarde, wyth ſuche gladneſſe, as they wolde haue done, yf thy nombre had contynued the ſame: Wherfore an experte capitayne wyll remembre, (ſparyng for no coſtes) ſodeynlye and at a tryſe, to renue hys Armye. Wherby he may be eyther egall, or exceade hys ennemyes in ſtrength and nombre of ſouldyours.
            
            
               7 ¶ Of the reproche of the capitayne that houſeth his Armye in the ſomertyme.
               That capytayne is worthye greate blame and ſclaundre, which lodgeth hys Armye in houſes in ſomer tyme, when ye
                  
feates of Armes and martiall affayers, are chefely to be put in vre. And what other thyng is it (I ſweare by Hercules) when your ſoldyours take vp theyr lodgyng and abyde in wynter tyme, then to make them vnmete to battayle, and vnſufferable of all labour. Therfore let the capitayne diligentlye prouyde, that hys Armye do not ſloudge in ſlouthfull ydleneſſe, but wonte themſelues to dayly labour, wherby they ſhal take all the tyme of warfare, to be a game and ſporte. For what is more then cuſtome, whych cauſeth al intollerable and harde paynes, to ſeme lyght, eaſye and gentle.
            
            
               8. ¶ To ſpye and ſearche a place to fight in
               The capitayne, before that he ioyne in battayle, or fall in handegrypes wyth hys enemyes, ought to viewe wyth hys eyes (whyche be ſure and faythfull iudges) the place where the fyght ſhalbe, & therby ſhortly he ſhall perceyue, what is profytable for hym, and what no, & how to ſet his men in aray, and ordre his battayle, and how to worke by pollicye and craft, & whether hys enemyes can worke any wyles or craftye ſleyghtes agaynſt

hym. But a wyſe captayne wyll remembre, that he do not cary hys hooſte to the felde, before that hys ſpyes and ſcoutewatches haue ſurelye knowen, that hys enemyes do not lye in wayte, but that all thynges be ſure and faulfe.
            
            
               9. ¶ Of the apparell of the capitayne.
               The capitayne ought to be felowlyke in hys garmentes, wherby he ſhall purchaſe the fauour of the cōmons. And declare hys humbleneſſe, auoydynge the name of arrogancie. But in his vertues let hym ſurmount all other. For it becō
                  meth hym that coueyteth to beare rule, euen as he is hygher in dignitie and honour, ſo to blemyſſhe all other wyth hys vertues & gentle behauyou. Otherwyſe he is vnworthy to be called a capitayne whych is more blameworthye then his ſouldiours, and whoſe doinges be moch worſe.
            
            
               10. ¶ To knowe the maner and cōdiciōs of thyne enemies before thou make battayl
               To fyght hande to hande wt thyne enemies, except thou ſurely know theyr maners before is very daungerfull: & great damage therby may chaūce to thy army.

For a captayne experte in the knowlege of warre wyll neuer make battayle, before he knowe the maners of hys enemies. For howe manye dyuerſe countryes there be, ſo many dyuerſe ſortes of fyghtyng there be. And agaynſte euerychone dyuerſely we muſt ſet our arraye, and be ſtowe our ſtrokes. And ſo a prudēt capitayne wyll aduyſe and hede wyth hym ſelfe, the harneys, horſemen, and fotemē of hys enemyes, and beſyde that wyl rekon wyth hymſelfe what is to be done, and what thynges ben expedient.
            
            
               11. ¶ Of the Germaynes and Frenchemen.
               When thou haſt battayle wyth the Germaynes and Frenchemen, prolonge the tyme, before thou come to handeſtrypes. For theyr bodyes be neſſhe, and vnpaynefull, & by hungre and thyrſt moche weakened, that for weryneſſe, they can neyther ſtryke other men, ne yet defende themſelues. And thus whom by ſtrēgth thou canſt not ouercome, by pollicye and crafte, thou ſhalte ſubdue. And by thys ſleygth, the ſoldyours of the Eaſt parte ſhall vanquyſhe and deſtroye, the Italious

men, both ſtrong and better harneſſed then they be.
            
            
               12. ¶ Of ſedicion to be appeaſed amonge an Armye.
               When any trouble or ſedicion is in thyne Armye, the captayne ought wyth gētle and fayre wordes to mitigate and aſwage the fierce hertes of the ſoldiours And when the contention is ones appeated, to punyſh the authours of that factious ſedicion, or els to ſēde them on ſome buſyneſſe, that the correction of a fewe, maye be an example to manye, wherby (other therby feared) wyll not be bolde to ſtyre vp and nouryſh ſuche tumultuous ſedicion, leſt they haue lyke punyſhment.
            
            
               13. ¶ Howe to viewe the Armye of thyne enemyes.
               A capitayne whiche wolde viewe the campe of hys enemyes, muſt feyne and deſyre peace. And vnder that pretence, ſende ſome of hys ſouldyours experte in warres, to ſearche and aduiſe the campe of hys enemyes, the wayes to theyr pauylyons, and in what parte euery capitayne doth lodge, and howe greate theyr

power is. Then by nyght he maye ſette vpon them, and eaſely gyue a noble vyctorye. For it is a lyght thynge to put to flyght and ſlee men vnwares, and halfe deed in wyne and ſlepe.
            
            
               14 ¶ Of peace to be p̄ferred before battayl
               A wyſe captayne wyll not forſake any couenauntes and conditions of peace whych maye turne to hys honoure and profyte, although the maſtrye be in hys handes. Leſt fortune which now appeareth gentle and fauourable, hereafter ſhewe her ſelfe vnkynde and ſtraunge, & he yt euē now reioyſeth as victour, ſhortly after vanquiſhed, may wayle & ſorow
            
            
               15. ¶ Of trompettes and other clamours in an hoſte.
               When the hoſte of thyne enemyes is nere, good it is, to cōmaunde al the fewellers to buylde theyr fyres, the trōpets blowe vp alarum, al the hoſt to make an outcrye, and brefelye to fyll heauen and earth wyth the noyſe and ſounde of trō
                  pettes, and make all on a rore, wherwith thyne enemyes may be afrayed; & thy frē
                  des gladdened, takyng exāple of Pōpeiꝰ, yt through ignoraunce, warned al his

ſoldiours pryuily to go wtout any brute or noyſe makyng: which thyng was the deſtruction of all hys hoſte.
            
            
               16. ¶ Of the rerewarde.
               Let the capitayne ſet in the laſt warde good & ſtrong men. For yf that parte be kept hole and ſaulfe, ye reſt of the Armye may be defended: yea oftentymes the victorie by that warde, is atcheued & gottē bycauſe when other wardes do faynt & waxe feble in fyghtynge, this freſh & deſyrous to graple wt their enemies, fierſelye wyll fyght, and as ſouldiours pyked out of ye whole hoſt, wyll renewe ye battayl more gredely, then the other before them, & be like to ouercom their enemies weried wt longe trauayl & cōtinuaūce of fyght.
            
            
               17. ¶ Of great cyties.
               Great, ryche and welthy cities cā not ſtande long among them ſelues in peace excepte they haue ſome outwarde enemyes. Wherfore ſuche cities whyche be enryched wyth greate lordſhyppes, and haue yerely newe maieſtrates, do ꝓuyde to haue ſome outwarde enemyes, leſte in longe reſte and ydleneſſe, they growe to great, rycheſſe and houge poſſeſſyons:

wherof all thynges that bene yll yſſue and ſpryng. When Carthage dyd with ſtande the people of Rome, then thempyre dyd floryſſhe. But when that Carthage was onerthrowen, Rome wythered, and fell to al kynde of noughtye lyuynge. Wherfore what profyte is in outwarde feare, the thinge doth ſhewe hymſelfe.
            
            
               18. ¶ In campyng thyne Armye what is to be done.
               When the campe is meaſured, the capitayne ought to kepe the ſtronger parte of hys men in harneys, vntyl all the fortreſſes and fences be finyſhed. For it happeneth oftentymes, when thyne Armye diſordrely doeth wandre, in meaſurynge of the campe, thā to be ouercome of their enemyes, and vtterlye deſtroyed. For what greate maſtrye is it for an hooſte harneſſed and prepared to fyght, to encountre wyth thy men which ben vnharneſſed, and bent to the meaſuryng of the campe, and to chaſe them awaye, wyth mooſt bloodſſaughter. The which thing euydentlye doeth appeare by the ſlaughter of the Trentes done by ye Venetians
            
            
               
               19. ¶ To kepe thy frendes.
               When the capytayne neadye and poore can not be beneficiall, and gyue rewardes to hys frendes, yet at the leeſt let hym take punyſhment of theyr aduerſaryes, wyth whome they bene agreed, for that ſhall be a greate example and paterne, that other wyll abyde faythfull and frendly, and therwyth wyll gladly wythſtande the wronges of hys enemyes.
            
            
               20 ¶ Of quyckneſſe in battayle.
               Caſtels and cytyes, with fortreſſes wel defenced, ben oftentymes caſt downe to ye grounde by ſpedy quykneſſe. Wherfore after rype and quycke counſayle takynge, it is profytable to vſe all ſpedyneſſe. For what goodneſſe doeth enſue of forwardneſſe, experience doth ſhewe, and men may playnlyſe.
            
            
               21. ¶ Of the arraye to be kepte.
               The nereſt way to atchyue ye victory is to kepe the ſouldiours in array: wherfore the capitayne muſt warne his ſouldiours, vnder great penalties, not to breake theyr arraye, chefely when we make battayle agaynſt the eaſt country ſouldyours. Who dylygently kepe theyr arraye, & not ſtraye

out of ordre, yf they be guyded by ſome expert warryour, and others that be practyſed in ſuch warly feates. For ſuch men wyll be no leſſe carefull to loke on all thiges, then the graunde capitaynes, & wyll recouer of freſh the battayle agayne, bringynge into arraye the whole hoſte, ſparpled and diſſeuered abrode.
            
            
               22 ¶ Of a lytle multitude in a cytye.
               Where a lytle bande and company of men is in the cytye, my counſayle is, to cō paſſe and inuiron̄e them about garlandwyſe, and holde them in fyght both daye and nyght, inceſſauntly beſiegyng them, that through weryneſſe, they ſhall be enforced to gyue vp. For who is ſo luſtye & ſtronge, that long can lyue without quiete and reſt, yea that is able to ſtande in fyght. Wherfore the capitaynes in the aſſiege of cyties, muſt aduyſedlye ſearche, what company of men be wythin the cytie, and whether they ben able to defende the cytye, daye and nyght, yf he purpoſe to vanquyſh them.
            
            
               23 ¶ Of the hope and truſt of ſedicion.
               
                  
When there is any ſemblaūce or hope of any ſedicion to be in that cytye, whych we purpoſe to beſiege, my counſayl is, to leaue of and differ thaſſaulte for a tyme. For in ſuche ſedicion the cytye is lyke to be taken, wyth lytle laboure, and greate prayſe. Therfore lette the capitayne be watchfull, to foreſee euery occation, leſte by hys vnwaryneſſe, ſome miſchaunce & damage do enſue, euer obſeruynge thys, not at any tyme to gyue battayle, yf any hope or lykelyhode be, that wrathfull ſedicion is ryſen amonge the cytizins.
            
            
               24 What is to be done in tyme of peace.
               When the warres do ſurceaſſe, ſuffre not thy ſouldiours, to diſpende theyr lyfe in ydleneſſe, but occupy them in huſbandrye, that by the profyte and fructe therof, thou mayeſt both nouryſh thyne army wyth wages and vytayles, and by ſuche exercyſe, to kepe theyr bodyes ſtrong and durable. Alſo it ſhal not be vnprofytable at ſuche tyme to ouercome and fence the cytyes with trenches and bulworkes.
            
            
               25. ¶ Of fayned rumours.
               
                  
Fayned rumours in tyme of battayle, bene both profytable and lykewyſe hurtfull. For whych cauſe a capitayne, whych forecaſteth manye thynges, wyll cauſe falſe tales and vayne rumours to be ſpat pled abrode, in the ſtede and place of true tydynges: aſwell amonge hys enemyes, as in hys Armye. For experyence doeth teache, fayned rumours ſometyme to do moche profyte.
            
            
               26. ¶ Of the offyce of the capitayne.
               Let neuer the capitayne commaunde any greater thynge, then he hym ſelfe firſt wyll take in hande. But let hym at thys tyme ſhewe hymſelfe afrayed, & at other tymes diſſemble, to gyue backe and flye. Through which ſleygth the victory doth chaunce.
            
            
               27 ¶ To knowe whether a cytie is thy frende or no.
               When the capitayne doth ſuſpect any cytye to be hys frende (me counſayle is) to deſyre and aſke ſome great requeſt, which wolde not be graunted, but of a frendlye cytye. And by thys meane he ſhal playnly knowe theyre mynde and herte towarde hym. And this counſayle ſhall ſo turne to

hys aduauntage and greate profyte.
            
            
               28 ¶ Of confidence and aſſured hope in battayle.
               Although the warres be very greate, yet muſt not the capitayne diſpayre. For the chaunce of battayle is doubtfull and vncertayne, whoſe ende doth not anſwer to the begynnynge. And in that tyme ladye fortune, nowe doth ſhewe her ſelfe gē
                  tle and bonaire, now cruell and churliſh, ſometyme fauourynge thys parte, efte that parte, after her owne pleaſure.
            
            
               29 ¶ Of the ſituacion of the cytie to be ſearched and knowen by the capitayne hym ſelfe.
               A capitayne ought to beholde with his owne eyes the ſituacion of the place, before he come with hys hoſte to beſiege it, or make any aſſault therto. For more eaſe it is to aſſaulte the cytye on one part, then on an other. Wherfore a witty capitayne wyll viewe and marke the ſituacion in euerye parte, and thereby knowe whyche parte of the cytye maye mooſt eaſelye be beſieged.
            
            
               30. ¶ Of lybertie to be kept and encreaſed of all men.
               
                  
A wyſe capitayne wyll not chaunge the libertie of townes whych he hath ſubdued, but rather encreaſe and kepe them ſaulfe. For nothynge there is, that ſoner ſhall entyſe and allure the captyues, to loue the, and forget theyr olde lorde, then to ſe theyr libertyes and priuyleges vntouched, in whych men ſet all theyr felicitye, and for whyche no reaſonable man wolde forſake to ſuffre mooſte cruell and fearefull death.
            
            
               31. ¶ Of the doubtfull cōmyng of thyne enemyes.
               When we be in doubt, on what partie our enemyes wyll ſet vpon vs, and ſo we knowe not howe to ordre our armie, and ſette our arraye, beſt it is to ſet our araye fourſquare. For in that ſleyght is mooſt ſauftye and ſyckerneſſe, and ſo no parte ſhalbe vndefenced, wherby oure enemies ſhalbe diſceyued, which thought to haue commen vpon vs on the backe ſyde. By which pollicie eyther our enemies ſhalbe put to flyght, or at the leeſt thyne armye ſhalbe ſaulfe and harmeleſſe.
            
            
               32. ¶ When the arraye of thyne enemyes is troubled and out of ordre.
               
                  
When the arraye of thyne enemyes is broken, and they in great feare, the capytayne muſt purſue with hys mooſt valyaūt warryours, before they recouer theyr ſelues, and be delyuered from that feare. For yf they take herte agayne, harde it ſhalbe wythout a great nombre and puiſaunce of men to vanquyſh them.
            
            
               33. ¶ How to make thyne armye ſtronge and luſtye.
               Kepe thyne armye in rough and moū
                  tayne places, to make theyr bodyes ſtyffe and ſtrong. For pleaſaūt places, do cauſe weakeneſſe: wherfore ſouldyours whether they be ſpringalles, or auncient warryours, that longe haue ſludged in ydleneſſe, neades muſt be exercyſed in rough places, that their bodies may be ſtrong & more durable, throughe theyr exercyſe in ſuche rough and hyllye places. For accordyng to theyr exercyſe, ſo ſhall they be in ſtrength and valyauntneſſe. And this is the onely meane to make our army ſtrōg and luſtye. The capitayne may ſomtyme for theyr exercyſe, deuyde his ſouldyours and ordre them in forme and lykeneſſe of a battayle.

But he muſt beware of bloodſheddyng, leſt ſome diſcorde and quarellyng, therof do ryſe, whyche is the deſtruction of an hole hoſte.
            
            
               34. ¶ A policie to be vſed when thy men do forſake the.
               Yf any company of thy ſouldyours, of any euyll mynde and wycked purpoſe, do forſake the, and goo to thyne enemyes, in tyme of battayle, to the entent that other of thy hoſt be not amaſed wyth theyr ſodeyne departure: The capitayne muſt publyſh and noyſe, that thyng to be done by hys aduyſe and counſayle. Therby to delyuer hys cōpany out of feare, and make them more redye to fyght, truſtynge the departure of theyr felowes aduyſedly to be done.
            
            
               35. ¶ To ſearche and boulte out the counſayle of thyne enemyes.
               Sende thoſe that be wyttye, and ther wyth experte warryours, whiche vnder colour that they haue forſaken theyr company maye ſpye and ſearche all the doinges, endeuours, and counſayl of thyne enemyes, and the ſame to recounte to the

capitayne, whych after that all thynge is delated, and diſcuſſed, wyth the wyttyer ſorte of his ſouldiours wyth haſtye and quycke expedition wyll folowe the ſame.
            
            
               36. ¶ Of them that be beſieged.
               They that be beſieged, and ſet aboute wyth theyr enemyes, that they can not yſſue out of the place where they be, muſt ſhewe ſome token and agrement, yt they haue plentye of vytayles, and other thin ges neceſſary, to contynue thaſſaulte.
               Wherby theyr enemies hauyng no hope to wynne the cytye, maye leaue of and retyre homewarde. For by this pollicy and ſleyght many haue ben diſceyued.
            
            
               37. ¶ What is to be done when two hoſtes do vexe and purſue the.
               Yf thyne enemye haue two Armyes of men, and thou alſo other two, to wyth ſtande his force (my counſayle is) to pyke the chefeſt men that thou haſt of the one partie of thyne armye, and then wyth al ſpede to ſet vpon the one hooſte of thyne enemyes, before they bothe come & ioyne togyther. By this pollicye Haſdrubal of Carthage was loſt wyth all his hole hoſt yea then Carthage was deſtroyed for euer.

And the Romaynes empyre dyd floryſh and ſtande.
            
            
               38. ¶ A crafte and pollicye to take a cytye.
               Yf thou be not able to take the cytie by ſtrength, and the ſiege ſemeth longe (my counſayl is) to departe for a tyme, & ſtray this waye and that waye, ſomtyme nye, and ſomtyme aloofe. And then ſodeynly come vppon them. For by ſuche ofte ſtyttyng and remouyng of thyne army, thou ſhalt diſmay them, and ſo to take the citie
            
            
               39. ¶ A place to encreaſe thyne armye wythout great charges.
               Yf when thou art farre from thy coū
                  trye, thou muſt ſet forth mo men, my coū
                  ſayle is to call togyther all the moſt worſhypfull and rycheſt citezins, there aboute dwellynge, and commaunde them bothe well horſed and harneſſed, to be ready at a certayne daye. And when all ſhalbe aſſē
                  bled, wyll them to prepare them ſelues readye, or elles to appoynt ſome in theyr ſtede, whych are ſtronge and luſty. Thys pollicie Scipio Africanus vſed, when he made moſt cruell battayle agaynſt Carthage.
            
            
               
               40. ¶ Of an holſome lawe to be made in the citie.
               Eſtablyſh and ordeyne lawe in the cytye, that the capitayne ſhalbe beheeded, and loſe hys polle, yf hys armye be ouer comen. So eyther ſhall he wynne the victorye, or els valyauntly fyghtynge ſhall dye, deſeruyng immortall prayſe. Alſo he wyll be more carefull to foreſee all thynges, then yf no ſuche lawe hadde bene decreed, ne yet wyll he ſuffre hys armye ydelly to ſludge, but he wyll kepe them occupyed in daylye exerciſe, oftentymes admonyſhyng them to remembre theyr coū
                  trye lawe, whyche is eyther to kylle, or to be kylled: to ſlee or to be ſlayne, therwyth warnynge them, nothynge to be more prayſeworthy, in a good warryour, then manlye fyghtynge and for to obtaynethe victorie fearynge not to dye.
            
            
               41. ¶ Of exceſſe to be eſchued.
               Exceſſe in apparel, meate and drynke doth make feble the vertue of thy mynde and cauſeth the ſtrength of the bodye to decaye. Wherfore wyſe men haue purpoſed, to flye miſtemperaunce, as a peſtiterous and deedly diſeaſe.
            
            
               
               42. ¶ Of wantonneſſe, to be caſt of in wealth.
               Let not the capitayne be wanton and proude in good chaunce and luckyneſſe, but rather beware and remēbre, that in ſuche luckyneſſe men falle to ryot, to their great reproche, and the vtter damage of ye whole hoſte. Therfore lette not the capytayne ſwell and waxe proude in happyneſſe, ne yet yelde and be diſcouraged in aduerſitie but for ye time in both fortunes kepe ane gall & vniforme ſtate of mynde.
            
            
               43 ¶ To throwe downe villages and caſtels vndefenced.
               In countryes be many vyllages and caſtelles, whyche be not defenced at all. Wherfore my counſayl is, to throwe thē downe, and ſette them on fyre, that thyne enemyes may haue there no vytayles, neother thynges neceſſary, to ſuccour them ſelues and theyr horſes. Fyrſte, yf we do leaue them ſtandynge, we gyue to our enemyes a greate occation to trouble vs, by warre. Alſo it is expedyent to waſte all the fodder, and corrupte the fountaynes of waters (yf there be many) ſo that theyr commynge towarde vs, ſhall be to

theyr great charges and anoyaūce to the whole armye. For a gariſon of men, can not longe ſoiourne and tary in one countrye wythoute vytayles, and other thynges neceſſary for theyr lyuyng.
            
            
               44. ¶ How to purchaſe frendes, and to kepe the ſame.
               Euerye wyttye capitayne ought earneſtly to trauayle, to labour, fyrſt to gette frendes, and longe to retayne the ſame. For by frendes realmes be mayntayned and preſerued, and great ſuccour ſtādeth in them, yf they be true. Suche vertue & force is in frendſhyppe, which is the only nouryſher of mankynde, and releue of ſorowe. Wherfore worſe it is for a capytayne, to be wythoute frendes, then to lacke treaſure.
            
            
               45. ¶ To abydeſiege.
               All thynges (yea, be they neuer ſo greuous) are to be ſuffered in a ſore ſiege before we yelde ourſelues to our enemyes. For nothyng is ſo prayſe worthy in men, as vnfayned fayth, the whyche ones being defyled, what is in thoſe men prayſeable? Wherfore honeſt it is, for thē that are beſieged, to kepe theyr foretreſſes, to

the ende and extremitie of theyr lyues, & neuer to put theyr bodyes to mooſt harde paynes. For fortune manye tymes doeth lyft vp men vnwares. Therfore do they abyde in one mynde and fayth, that be beſieged, and gyue theyr bodyes for the ſaulfetie of theyr lorde. For a valyaunte man can do nothyng more worthy euerlaſtyng renoum: then to fyniſhe hys lyfe by kepyng his fayth, and boundē dutye.
            
            
               46 ¶ when it is mete to fyght by eruption.
               It happeneth oftentymes for ye greate aſſaulte of our enemyes, to appoynt our ſelues ſodeynly to burſt out. In whyche caſe, let euery valyaunt capitayne know yt it is not good to fight by eruptiō, but in extreme nede. For yt kynde of fyght is to be refuſed, but in great ieopardy & at low downefall, and when no hope is leaft to defende our tentes: or when our ſouldyours be whole weryed in battayle. The ſame thyng is to be marked in thaſſault of cytyes.
            
            
               47 ¶ To enterclude the paſſage of our enemyes by fyre.
               
                  
Fyre is a great ſuccour and ayde to an hoſte. For when our enemyes ben at hād that wythout great daunger we can not leaue the tentes (my counſayle is) to conueye woodde betwene both the hooſtes, and to ſette it on fyre, and then wyth all haſte to departe into ſome other places, better defenced. For the flame and ſmoke wyll let the proſpecte and foreſeinge of our enemyes, that they can not ſykerlye purſue and folowe vs: wherfore before that the fyre be vtterly quenched, the capitayne maye haue ſpace to goo farre of, wyth hys Armye.
            
            
               48. ¶ A pollicie to ſtoppe the flying of thyne enemyes.
               When thyne enemyes do faſter flye, then thou canſt well folowe wyth thyne Armye, then ſende forth thy horſemen, to let theyr flyght, whych may ſnatch vp and trouble the laſte warde, vntyll the fotemen ſhall approche. For then the battayle more ſykerly and egallye, ſhall be foughten and tryed on bothe ſydes, and the victorie more eaſelye ſhall be gotten, withoute greate loſſe and ſlaughter of men.
            
            
               
               49 ¶ How ſiege is to be layed to cytyes and caſtels, and of them that be beſieged.
               My counſayle is, when thou doeſt be liege any cytye or caſtell, to caſte fyrſte a trenche, then bulworkes, and aboue that buylde many turrettes, that no man can come out of the cyty, ne yet any man may haue free paſſage into the cytie.
               Other wayes you ſhall neuer take any citye or caſtell whych is wel fortifyed. For elles they maye cal vnto them outwarde ayde and ſuccour, and therwith may certify and admonyſh theyr lordes and princes, in what eſtate they be, what vytayles be in the cytye, and howe longe they maye abyde and contynue thaſſaulte.
               And yf thyne enemyes obſtynatlye do defende the cytye, my counſayle is, when the cytye is ones taken eyther by ſleygth or rendrevp, cutte of the handes of them that kepte the citye, ſo toughly that theyr greuous punyſhment, maye be an example to other, not ſo frowardlye to ſtande in theyr owne conceyte, and contynue theyr aſſaultes.
            
            
               
               50. ¶ To auoyde and eſcape traynes.
               Traynes and wyles maye be eſchued aſwell by chaungynge of the place, as by appoyntynge of capitaynes. For in tyme of reſt men haue oportunitie, to inuente wycked counſayle, and the ſame immedyatly to put in execution.
            
            
               51. ¶ Of hoſtages and pledges rather to be taken, then to fyght in open battayle.
               Better it is, and more for thy ſaulfegarde, to take hoſtages of noble mē, and ſo to haue thyne enemyes to yelde, and rendre vp all theyr landes, then in cruell fyght to proue the doubtfull chaunce of battayle: whych oftentymes is varyable and wauering, and cauſeth them to haue the vpper hande, whome ye wolde haue iudged, to haue bene ſubdued. And then tyme it is, to take hede, whē that fortune doeth flatter vs. For ſhe is falſe and deceytfull. Wherfore let vs folowe this cō
                  mune ſaying. Aſſured peace is worthy to be preferred, before doubtfull and hoped victorye.
            
            
               52. ¶ To ſtoppe our hauen.
               
                  
Yf thou wylt ſtoppe an hauen (my coſt ſayle is) to fyll a ſhyppe full of greate ſtones, and then to drowne the ſame ſhyp, ouerth warte in the hauen: wherby other ſhyppes can not well arryue at anye ſtrounde, ne yet go out of the hauen.
            
            
               53. ¶ To make hydde and falſe dytches to betray thyne enemyes.
               They that ccueyte to conueye & leade theyr enemyes into couerte and hyd dytches, my counſayle is, to ſette a bande of men nye vnto them in harneys, whyche ſoftely and priuily maye conuey them ſelues into dytches.
            
            
               54. ¶ To paſſe ouer a water with an Armye.
               Yf thou wylt paſſe ouer a water, that can not be waded, my coūſayl is, to driue an houge nombre of cattel into the vpper parte of the ſtreame, by whyche meane, the ſtreame beneth wyl ronne more gently and ſtyll, and thyne armye maye haue the more free paſſage.
            
            
               55. ¶ To knowe yf thyne enemyes be afrayed.
               
                  
Yf we perceyue the ſtomakes of our enemyes to quayle and waxe faynte, it is good, gredelye to purſue them, that we maye eyther put them to flyght, or elles vtterly ſlee thē before they recouer theyr ſtrength. It is the offyce of an experte warryour to knowe when hys enemyes ben afrayed. But the better to learne the ſame, take this one leſſon of me. Yf thyne enemyes ofte chaunge and pytche theyr tentes, it is a ſygne and token of feare.
               Wherfore a wyſe capitaynes parte, is to aſſayle them wyth bikerynges and rodes to knowe yf they diſſemble, or els wolde trayne vs in theyr trappes.
            
            
               56. ¶ To conſtrayne thyne enemyes to fyght in open battayle, and come to hande ſtrypes.
               Yf thou wylte conſtrayne thyne enemyes, to ſtande in fyght agaynſte the, although the place be vnegal and inconuenyent, my counſayle is, to conueye thyne armye to ſome of theyr cytyes or townes And ſo either wil they ſuffre to take their cytye, or els they wyl fyght with the, and deale ſtrypes.
            
            
               
               57 ¶ A pollicye to ſtye.
               Beſt it is for an hoſt, that purpoſeth to ſtye, to kyndle and buylde many fyres, to faſten manye helmettes, on ſtakes in the toppe of theyr tentes. And thus thyne enemies being ſcorned, and brought into a double, thou mayeſt conuey thyne armie far of, before that it be knowen whether thou be in thy tentes, or fledde awaye.
            
            
               58. ¶ When thyne enemyes ſnatche vp and deſtroye the laſt warde.
               When thy men be ſnatched and diſcō
                  fyted in the laſt warde, my counſayle is, to ſette there the ſtrongeſt men and beſt warryours. Otherwyſe thyne army ſhal haue moche harme, throughe the deſtruction of that warde. Alſo that warde is not able to withſtande the force of thyne enemyes, except it be ſomtyme renued wt good warryours. And by this meane thy hoſte maye frely paſſe on voyage.
            
            
               59. ¶ Of the notable falſehode of the barbarous people.
               A circumſpect capitayne wyll none af fiaunce or truſt to the cruel barbarous aliaūtes. For many due profes of antiquitye, do playnly ſhewe, not without experyence

of the ſame, that no fayth ne loyaltie is in them. Whych examples I wyll ouerſkyppe, deſyryng to be ſhorte. They be men in ſhappe, but brutall beaſtes in fearceneſſe and crueltye, ſubtyl, and craftye, deſyrous and thyrſtyng mans blood in that one thynge, paſſynge all kynde of wylde and ſauage beaſtes. Wherfore a wyſe capitayne wyll beware of theyr diſloyaltie, and villanye, and wyll thynke him ſelfe neuer in ſaulfegarde, from their falſehode and engynnes. I ſpeake of thē that be not Chryſtians.
            
            
               60. ¶ When fewe muſt make battayle wyth many.
               Beſt it is for a lytle hoſte, whych by neceſſitye muſt fyght and make battayle wt a ſtronger Armye, to ſet vpon the chiefe capitayne, and wyth all violence to ſeke meanes to kyll hym: whych beinge ones ſlayne, thyne Armye eyther ſhall atchyue the victorie, or els depart wt egall prayſe of that bickeryng. For the heed being cut of, what ſtrength is in the other membres.
            
            
               61. ¶ Thoffyce of the capitayne.
               The capitayne wyllyngly muſt heare

the complayntes of the ſouldyours, and theyr guydes. But yfhe be dryuen and enforced therunto, let hym ſhewe hym ſelfe to take the thynge in hande agaynſt hys wyll. And by that meanes he ſhall purchaſe theyr fauours, and be taken as a father, rather then a capitayne, whome the ſouldyours wyll haue in great reuerence wythout any feare or dreade.
            
            
               62 ¶ To forbeare holye thynges.
               The capitayne ought to commaunde hys men, to refrayne and forbeare from holy thynges, vnder a greate penaltye. Leſt other his affaiers (the more vnluckelye for ſuche thynges) do chaunce, & God be enuyfull to vs aſwell as man.
            
            
               63 ¶ Of the capitaynes liberalitie when the battayle. is wonne.
               The capitayne ought bountifully and wyth a pleaſaunte countenaunce, to rewarde hys whole hoſt, after that the vyctorye is atchyued. That his ſouldyours by ſuch rewardes enlarged to them, may henceforth be more redye and glad, to enterpriſe

mooſte peryllous daungers. For a faythfull armye wyll ſwallowe vp all parylles, before that ſo lyberall a capytayne, ſhuld haue any ſhame or reproche. Therfore yt capitaynes muſt in ſuch caſe ſhewe them ſelues large in rewardes, wt which not only mē, tut gods alſo be wō
                  derfully reconcyled. Alſo let the capitayrs remembre to ſetforth the doinges of hys ſouldiours with hygheſt prayſe, vſynge ſome oration, eftſones gyuing thē immortall thankes for theyr manfull valiauntneſſe in that battayl: declaring al thinges to be done according to theyr loyall duty and allegeaunce.
            
            
               64 ¶ Of reproche to be eſchued.
               A wyſe capitayne ought to warne his ſouldiours, to regarde and wey nothyng ſomoche as theyr good fame. For who wolde deſyre the fruition of this lyfe, but rather miſerable death, to haue his name ſtayned wt cowardyſe. Therfore the capitayne ought to enforme his whole army that they regarde theyr name, before al other thinges. By this meane he ſhal haue his cōpany fearig nothig more thā ſhame very deſyrous of prayſe, and readye in all

perylles, ſo that he ſhall take none enterpryſe, ne hygh affayre in hande, whyche ſhall not chaunce to hys mynde and wyl.
            
            
               65. ¶ Of the capitaynes offyce in ioynynge of the battayle.
               The dutye and offyce of a good capytayne, is to come into the forewarde and fronte of the battayle, in the ioynynge of the hoſtes, to ſuccour theſe companyes yt begynne to ſtagger and faynte, and furnyſh them agayne that be diſcomfyted. It is fearefull to hys enemyes to ſet the capitayne in the foreward at the fyrſt ioynyng, and to hys owne men an hartyng and boldneſſe. But let not hym longe tarye there, but returne to the other wardes, and knowe what thynges they lack, and what maye be profytable to them, & what noyſome, euer bryngyng freſh and newe men, for them that be wounded, therwyth ſtrengthenyng the forewarde, wyth pyked champyons, which be moſt valyaunte and beſt practyſed in trauayles and feates of warre.
            
            
               66. ¶ How to entreate thyne enemyes, the vyctorie obtayned.
               
                  
The dutye and offyce of a polityke capitayne is, after that the battayle is won and the vyctorie ones atchyued, to ſaue theyr lyues that haue not ben very cruel, and ouer ſtubburne. For what can be thought more vngentle, yea more like to the cruell and fierce brutall beaſtes, then wythout anye mercye and mekeneſſe, to handle thyne enemyes. A capitayne vndoubtedly of ſuche conditions, ſhall kendle the myndes of all men agaynſte hym, that they had leauer to ſuffre all thynges then to be vnder his rule and gouernaūce and proue the chaunce of battayl, then to yelde them ſelues to ſuche a cruell monſter. Wherfore let euery capitayne be gē
                  tle to hys ſouldyours, vſyng all meanes to kepe them bounden to hym, partly by prayſynge theyr valyaunt deades, ſometyme rewardyng them lyberally, remembryng this, where leeſt ieopardy is, there to vſe hys power wyth lyke deſcretion, leſt he be mocked, that in ſuche a lytle buſyneſſe, he doth vſe hys mayneforce and puiſaunce. For that capitayne is iudged rather to be foolyſſhe, then wyſe, that vſeth more fierceneſſe, then is nedefull.

Therfore a wyſe capitayne wyll conſidre the tyme and cauſe, and not folowe hys angre, the compagnion and marowe of cruelneſſe.
            
            
               67 ¶ To kepe leage and promyſſe of peace with our enemyes.
               Whatſoeuer leage of peace the capytayne ſhall make with any cytye, kyng or prince, honeſt it is that he kepe the ſame ſtedfaſtly, and that he do not ſlyppe from it, or ſhewe hym ſelfe diſloyal, for any diſpleaſure done to hym of his enemyes. For howe moche is that capitayne worthy to be regarded, whoſe fayth is attaynted, and whoſe falſehode, is diſdaynfull to euery man? wherfore not onely to our frendes, but alſo to our enemies, fayth is to be kept, and promyſes are ſurely to be perfourmed All wyſe capitaynes haue done this. Yea Scipio Africanus, in the tyme of truce, wyth the cytizins of Carthage, moued dyuerſe wayes, and ſufferyng many rebukes, ſucceſſed to reuenge his wronges, both for the dignitie of the Romayne people, and alſo for hys owne honoure, wyllynge to kepe hys faythe of peace, otherwyſe then the citizins of Carthage,

men notable for theyr falſehode, dyd perfourme towarde hym, knowynge traynes and deceiptes to come rather of a ſeruyle nature, then of honeſt mynde and noble herte.
            
            
               68. ¶ Of the captaynes offyce in accomplyſhyng al thynges.
               The offyce of a carefull capitayne, is to watche, to be ſpedye, to go about al thynges: not plucked awaye for anye ſleape, paynes, or other pleaſures, therwyth redye daye and nyght, to ſeke all occations to noye hys enemyes, and to reliefe hys frendes, whych muſt ſpare for no money to knowe the endeuours of hys enemyes dayly, yea yf he can euery houre. By faith full ſpyes, ſhortly he ſhall knowe that, yf he wyll frely rewarde them, at the begynnyng, and then after lode them wyth greter promyſſes. Thys is the nereſt meane to auoyd hynderaunce, and diſcomfiture of our men, and the beſt pollicye to gette the maſtrye.
            
            
               66. ¶ When thyne enemyes armye prepareth paſſage ouer any water.
               
                  
Yf thou haue pytched thy tentes nygh to anye ryuers ſyde, and thyne ennemyes wolde haue paſſage that waye, ſuffre thē frely to paſſe by, diſſemblynge feare and flyght, and when parte of theyr armye is paſſed ouer, then ſet vpon them, wyth all thy puiſaunce. For at ſuche tymes, the victorye is mooſt eaſely gotten, when thou doeſt fyght agaynſt parte, and not wyth the whole Armye. But ſpare not to dyſcomfyte them that be paſſed ouer, and alſo to ſtoppe and kepe backe thoſe that be on the other ſyde.
            
            
               70. ¶ When thy ſouldyours ben aſtonyſhed and fearefull.
               A capitayne that is redye to fyght, & perceyueth hys Armye fearfull and aſtonyſhed, ought to refrayne for that tyme, feynyng one cauſe or other, that hys purpoſe is ſo ſhortly chaunged. For feare is the readye waye to loſe the victorye, whē on the other part boldneſſe and ſure truſt to ouer throwe all, do cauſe worth ye vyctories. Feare alſo cauſeth moche ſtaughter, of thy men. Therfore a wyſe capitayn wyll not yſſue, wyth hys Armye toward hys enemyes, for feare of diſcomfyture,

when his men be ſo herteleſſe & cowardlike, but wyl forbeare for that tyme, & vſe all meanes to plucke yt feare out of theyr mindes, finiſhing his orations with this concluſion: That the vyctorye is in theyr handes, yf wythout feare they wyl bolden themſelues to matche and encountre wyth theyr enemyes.
            
            
               71. ¶ When ſcarcetie of vytayles is amonge our enemyes.
               When our enemyes lacke vytayles, & ſuffre great ſcarcitie of all thynges, beſt it is, to withdrawe ourſelues, and vtterly refrayne from battayle, that by famyn our enemyes maye ſterue: And then we ſhall get a noble victorye, without blood ſheddyng of our ſouldyours. For an Armye beſieged wyll attempt all thynges, rather then to be famyſhed. But a paynefull capitayne, in al thynges conſydryng the cōmoditie of hys hooſte, in ſuche caſe wyll not gyue open battayle, neyther for iniuryes of hys enemyes, ne yet for the lauaſh wordes of his owne companye. Not conſydryng and weyinge before, the ende of the matter, as it becommeth a wyſe man.
            
            
               
               72 ¶ Battayle is not to be begone but of neceſſitie and conſtraynte.
               Battayle is neuer good to be begone, but eyther of vrgent neceſſitie, or elles of great oportunitie. Although ſome prynces ſhortly ben entyſed to make battayle, when any lyght occation ſhall ſerue, and yet they be not trauayled in knowledge of warre, ne do perceyue the ſlypperneſſe of fortune, which for this tyme bryngeth herſelfe very fauourable. To thintēt ſhe maye ouerthrowe and caſt into myſeryr all her adherentes: whyich thyng Mariꝰ the Romayne emperour dyd wel knowe whiche after he had twyſe dryuen kynge Bocchus to flight, and done moch ſlaughter, vppon his men, yet he denyed not to ſtryke truce wyth hym, although manye of hys petycapitaynes earneſtlye bralled and grudged agaynſt that dede of Mariꝰ whiche dyd remembre the bryckelneſſe of fortune, that at her pleaſure, lifteth vp the oppreſſed, and treadeth vnder ye victours
            
            
               73. ¶ To refrayne from battayle before that we haue deuyſed and layed our traynes.
               
                  
A watchfull capitayne wyl beware to make battayl, before that he haue layed & couertly conueyed his traynes, whych be the chefeſt cauſe of the victorie: wythout whiche (for the mooſt parte) Annibal neuer gat any famous victorye. For when the Romaynes and the Carthaginenſes dyd ioyne togyther in battayle, in open & playne felde, the Romaynes euer preuayled, and gat the vpperhande, wherfore a wylye capitayne wyll choſe a place, to in trappe and betraye his enemyes. For by ſuche traynes he ſhall conquere them eaſely, and otherwayes perchaunce he ſhal be ſhamefully diſcomfited and oppreſſed.
            
            
               74 ¶ What is to be done, that our enemies may be perſwaded, their capitayne to be ſlayne.
               When the hoſtes be ioyned togyther, and god Mars guydeth al, then vſe this pollicye, to caſt thyne enemyes in feare. Sende ſome ſouldiour, cōmyng in theyr language, which may ſowne and crye wt a loude voyce, that they do fyght in vayn for theyr chefe capitayne is ſlayne. Thys muſt be done in that parte, where the capytayne is not.

For there the ſouldyours wyll be more lyght of credence, and ſoner in feare. Yea, and for this cauſe chefelye, that battayle bryngeth this yll with hym, that noman is there borne, or waxeth to any ſtature, but many be ſlayne, yea the ſtrōgeſt and mooſt delyuer men of all. By this meane therfore ſone they do beleue the rumour, and be put in feare, which if it abyde, cauſeth the puiſaunce both of the mynde, & the bodye, to fal and faynte. And they be ready to retrace, offeryng them ſelues to be ſlayne, lyke beaſtes.
            
            
               75 ¶ To kepe whole and ſaulfe territories and townes.
               A foreſeing capitayne ought (yea prouoked to many iniuries) to refrayne, and not to waſt ſuch townes and territories as he purpoſeth to haue vnder his dominyon and rule. For by that meane he ſhal purchaſe the fauour of the countreymen and by ſuche gentleneſſe, he ſhall eſcape the name of crueltie. For certes the men of that prouynce, wyll thynke that that chiefe capitayne doth fauour them: whē he doth forbeare to diſpeople and waſte theyr townes and fieldes, and doeth not

appeare, to ſtryue for theyr goodes and rycheſſe, but for the empyre and lordſhyppes. For no man doeth doubte that realmes be mayntayned and nouryſhed by ye only loue and obeyſaunce of the ſubiects, and not by any Armes of men, or ryche treaſures. Therfore let the capitayne cō
                  maund all hys ſouldiours to vſe no fierceneſſe in that prouyng, whiche entendeth to ſubdue, but to diſmiſſe the noble men and citizins that be taken captyues frely, and with great gyftes, vſyng all meanes to crepe into theyr fauour.
            
            
               76 ¶ That thyne Armye is to be lodged and kept in the marches of thyne enemyes.
               Kepe thy hoſte in the borders or pale of thyne enemyes, for any thynge, & there puruey vytayles for them wyth all dyligence, ſparynge thy frendes. For when thou doſt lodge thyne army, in theyr coū
                  tryes, or nye to theyr campe, thou doeſt breake theyr herte, and moch diſcourage them: eftſones auauncyng and encouragyng the ſtomakes of thy frendes. In example wherof, Annibal the chiefe capytayne of the Carthaginenſes, doth teache

what profite it is to lodge our hoſt in the campe of our enemyes, whych conducted and conueyed hys armye from Hiſpayne by many ieoperſome trauayles, into Italye, whych wholy almooſt he dyd waſte, by fyre and ſworde, & conquered a great part therof. Scipio alſo knowing ye ſame pollicie, brought forthe hys Armye into Afryke, and gat Carthage by rendre and vpgyuynge.
            
            
               77. ¶ What is to be done, when in wynter we muſt fyght.
               Beſt it is in colde wynter, to take mete before we go to fyght. For good meate & drynke, be the nereſt remedyes, to refreſh vs, and put awaye colde. The proffe of which thing, by ye ſlaughter of the romaynes at the ſtoude called Trebea, is playuly ſhewed where the romain power was almooſt loſt and deſtroyed, ye cauſe wher of was, that the capitayne brought forth his ſouldiours whych were wyllynge to fyght, faſtyng and vndyned: wherby the mooſte parte of them clunged for colde, was rather by ſtarkneſſe of meat, thā by ye violence of theyr enemies ſhame. Therfore the capitayne muſt warely foreſee, yt
                  
in wynter tyme he do not iſſue forth with hys men before they be refreſhed wt hote meates and drynkes. By thys meane he ſhall ouergo and ſubdue hys ennemyes, whych by longe fyghtyng ſhall faut and fall downe for hungre, when men refreſſhed wyth hote meates, bene hable to ſuſteyne battayle an whole daye.
            
            
               79 ¶ Of pleaſures to be eſchued of the capitayne, and the hoſte.
               The inuincible Armye of Annibal, doth planly ſetforth before our eyes, that the pleaſures of the bodye be hurtfull to an hooſte of men, to berefte them of theyr wytte, fierſe and fell courage, which win teryng in Capua, loſt theyr ſtrengthes.
               For Capua is the mother cytie of wanton pleaſures, ſo that Anniball dyd often embrayde his men, ſaying: that that hoſt was not hys, whych he had before. The cauſe wherof was the pleaſure of Capua wherby the luſtye myndes of the ſouldyours were neſſhed and made womanlike Therfore the capitaynes ought to be carefull, that theyr men be not vanquyſſhed ſoner of pleaſures, then of theyr enemies

Whyche thynge were ſhamefull and reprocheable. The cytye called Spartana dyd turne the eyes of theyr cytizins from Aſia, bycauſe from thence dydde come all thynges pleaſaunt, which be the deedlye poyſon of the mynde, and of the bodye. They alſo did wel knowe, and were aſſured that men ſoner do fall to wantōneſſe from vertue, then they do forſake pleaſures, and embrace vertue.
            
            
               79. ¶ To choſe a place to fyght in, whē the ſunne and the duſt maye be noyſome to thyne enemyes and in theyr eyes.
               The capitayne ought to choſe a place, mete and cōmodious to fyght in, prouydyng that the ſunne may be in the face of his enemyes. And yf the place be ſandye or drye, for the heate of ſommer, let hym tarye the tyme, that the wynde blowe in the face of his enemyes, and on his ſouldyours backes. For the courſynge of horſes wyll rayſe vp a great duſt, which the wynde wyll carye into the faces of thyne enemyes, and blynde theyr eye ſyght.
               And this was the chefe cauſe of the Romayne ſlaughter at ye towne called Cāne
            
            
               
               80. ¶ Of tyme not to be loſt, or vaynely ſpent.
               Nothyng ought to be more regarded, of a pollityk capitayne, then tyme, which entendeth to enterpryſe greate thynges, worthye euerlyu yng renoume. For ſluggeſhneſſe cauſeth bothe loſſe and ſhame. Wherfore he muſt endeuoure, to fynyſh all thynges wyth care and ſpedyneſſe, after the example of Annibal of Carthage whyche by greate rewardes, purchaſed paſſage into Ytaly, yt theſoner he mought finyſh hys iourney, and ende his voyage. The ſame thyng alſo was done by the romayne capitayne, which embraided and rebuked of his frendes, that he boughte his paſſage derelye, made this anſwere. I regarde not my coſtly iourneye, when I haue redemed the tyme, mooſte dere to them that trauayle and employe theyr wytte about thynges weyghtye, and of greate importaunce.
            
            
               81. ¶ Of good and euyl doinges ſemblable to be rewarded as punyſhed.
               Yfthy men do any faulte in thyne Armye, be ſlowe in theyr punyſhmentes.

But bountyfull in gyuynge rewardes, yf thou haue knowledge, yt they haue done any thing galauntly and well, that other maye be prouoked and ſtyrred vp, at that example to be redye at hande. For valyaunt and luſty warryours be more ſlow when theyr welldoinges dye wythout rewardes, or thankes. Therfore let the capitayne auaunce and ſetforth hymſelfe, by largeſſe the onelye vertue laudable, to knytte and lyme hys men in ſure loue, & the cauſer of all good chaunces, without whych all other thynges decaye, as it ap peareth by the ryche kyng Perſes, which nygardly gapynge after treaſures, was berefte by the Romaynes, bothe of hys kyngdome, and richeſſe, with moſt ſhame and ſclaundre.
            
            
               82. ¶ What is to be done when thy men be lyght and ſpedye.
               He that hath a lyght Armye muſt purſue, and wyth ſpede trace after hys enemyes, whych be loden wythe harneys, & trouble them daye and nyght, wyth contynuall aſſaultes, not ſufferyng them quy etly to take theyr meate and drynke, but brynge them into extreme diſpayre. The

whych thynge was well knowen of Sertorius, an expert warryour and wyſe capitayne, whych dyd ſo diſquyet Pompei, wyth hys lyghte harneſſed men, that he brought hym into vttermooſt diſtruſte & diſcomforte. Wherfore it is a greate pollicy to haue light harneſſed men in thyne Armye. For ſo thou mayeſte diſcomfyte thyne ennemyes, and they not lyke wyſe the. Yf therfore an Armye laden with harneys purſue the, thou doeſt not nede gretly to care, that thy men ſhall be oppreſſed by them, when on the other partye, thou mayeſt nowe and then aſſaulte, and kylle them, when they be weryed, & yet quycklye thou mayeſt retrace backe, and ſkape. It is therfore profytable for the Italyons to fetche manye horſes oute of the eaſt partye, whych be to them a great helpe to deſtroye theyr enemyes.
            
            
               83. ¶ That examples do helpe to encourage ſouldyours.
               Howe moche examples do moue and encourage ſouldiours, Sertorius cōmen of the ſtocke of Senatours, & a valiaunt

capitayne doth wytneſſe, which when he was not able to brydle and rule the fierce violēce of the barbarous aliens (whome then he dyd leade in battayle) after that many of them were ſlayne of the Romaines, and mo wounded, endeuourynge to comfort theyr ſorowfull and heauye hertes, and reſtore theyr olde ſtrength, cauſed two horſes to be brought into the opē fielde of the whole armye, of whyche the one was leane and the other was fatte & luſtye, commaundyng alſo a ſtronge mā to plucke of the tayle of the leane horſe, & a weake man to plucke of the tayle of the fatte horſe. But the ſtronge man went aboute to plucke the whole tayle awaye at one plucke, and yt nothinge auayled. And the weake man that laboured to plucke awaye heere by heere, made all bare to ye ſtompe. Then the army which dyd not knowe, what that example dyd meane, had the thynge declared to them of theyr capitayne. And ſo by that wyttye example he had them euer after buxome, and obedient at his commaundement.
            
            
               84. ¶ That nothyng be done agaynſt the capitaynes commaundement.
               
                  
In the Armye, neyther meate ne drynke ought to be taken, without the cō
                  ſente of the capitayne. But all thynges muſt be done by his aduertyſemente. By thys waye theyr buſyneſſe ſhal more happely come to paſſe.
            
            
               85. ¶ To refrayne thy ſouldyours ſometyme.
               It is a poynte of wyſdome, ſomtyme to holde backe thy ſouldyours from battayle, whyche pollicye is not vnprofytable. For afterwarde they wolde be more gladde to fyght, and more fiercelye wyll go vpon theyr enemyes.
            
            
               86. ¶ It is not tyme to fight when thyne enemyes do diſpayre, and be careleſſe of theyr lyues.
               When we perceyue our enemyes, nothyng to regarde the pleaſure of theyr lyues, but lyke brute beaſtes headlynge, to come vpon vs. It ſhalbe profytable ſomwhat to gyue place to theyr woodneſſe. Yea although we be able to ouermatche them in nombre and force of men. Alſo yf they were cloſed and enuyroned on euery ſyde, beſt it were to open way, and make

a glade for them. For nothing is more folyſh and vayne, then to fyght with them that wyllyngly wolde dye.
            
            
               87. ¶ What is to be done when we miſtruſt our ſouldyours to be afrayed of the ſowne of gūnes and noyſe of them yt wayle.
               Yf any lykeneſſe be, or miſtruſt that thy ſouldyours bene afrayed of the gunſhote and otherwyſe, whereby theyr hertes be lyke to fayle, it is a good pollicye, to ſtop their eares with ſome thing, and ſo with out feare they ſhall fyght, neyther hearyng the wofull waylynges of them that be wounded, ne yet the noyſe of gunnes. Whych pollicye wyl ſerue at theſe dayes agaynſt the Almaynes that vſe a greate nombre of gunnes in theyr armyes.
            
            
               88. ¶ What is to be done when thyne enemyes be mooſt parte archers.
               When our enemyes be for the mooſte part archers, then ſet aganyſt them, men fenced with tergates, whych ſort of ſouldyours be ſometyme in the hoſtes of the Eaſt partie. And by this pollicie thyne army ſhalbe out of theyr daunger.
            
            
               
               89. ¶ What is to be done before the ſiege of a cytye.
               Before we begynne to lay ſiege to any cytie (my counſayle is) fyrſt gently to fall into ſome entreatie with them, and therwyth to prouoke and entyſe them, to rendre vp theyr cytie by large gyftes, & fayre promyſſes, chiefelye yf that people be naturallye deſyrous of ryches. For the renoume of that capitayne whych without bloodſneddyng doth atchyue the victorye is vnmatche able, beſyde that hys men wyth fierce ſtomakes wyl auenture their lyues for hys ſake.
            
            
               09. ¶ Of raſhneſſe to be eſchued of a capitayne.
               It is a thynge vnſittyng to ſe a capytayne or an armye trauayled in warres, to vſe any violence, or vnaduyſed heedyneſſe. Suche a braynſyke and hopeloſte capitayne, is worthye to be forſaken, leſt that by hys follye the whole hoſte be deſtroyed of theyr enemyes lyke ſhepe.
            
            
               91. ¶ A pollicye to take the fotemen.
               
                  
Yf thou purpoſe to brynge forthe the fotemen of thyne enemies, then cauſe thy horſemen to retreate and gyue backe, by lytle and lytle, diſſemblyng feare & flyght that therby the fotemen maye be entyſed to raunge and runne abrode, which kepe them ſelues in ſtrayte, hyllye, and roughe couertes, where the horſemen can haue no eaſye entrie to them. By which meane the fotemen ſhall be taken and ſlayne.
            
            
               92 ¶ A pollicie to diffeate and diſpoynt the gunners, that they ſtande in no ſtede and vſe.
               The Frenchemen and Almaynes, at theſe dayes haue in thēyr armies a great nombre of gunners, which ſore trouble & hyndre theyr enemies. Wherfore my coū ſayle is, that armye (which hath no ſuche ſouldyours) to ſette vpon them in mooſte raynye wether. For at thoſe tymes they be vnſeruyable, and can do no good.
            
            
               93. ¶ Of the offyce of the capitayne in orderyng the affayers of hys armye.
               The graund capitayne ought diſcrete ly to deuyde and poynt in good ordre, the

buſyneſſe of his army among his peticapi taynes. Wherby he may be diſpatched & depeched of al other buſineſſe, but only to ſearche the counſayle and attemptates of hys enemyes, and therewyth he maye ouerſe, that enery man attentyuelye perfourme hys worke and taſke.
            
            
               94. ¶ To refrayne aſwel from the empyre as from the treaſures after the victorie.
               Our aunceſtours noble men, of godlye lyuynge, thought it ynoughe to ouerthrowe theyr enemyes, and only content with the conqueſt, dyd earneſtly refrayne from the empyre, leſt they ſhoulde be iudged rather to fyght for vayne rycheſſe, which be the very cauſe of deathfull battayle, then for euerlyuyng renoume.
               Theſe were men, whoſe doinges ar worthye to be freſſhe and flouryſhynge in the memorie of man, whoſe names are worthye to be ſpred immortall, in euery age, whoſe fame ſhoulde not be ſhutte vp, or hydde in any poſteritie. Theſe maye be a patent and preſident, to all other, and the ſhynyng ymage of vertue, whom al men may beholde and loke for the enforcemēt

of theyr proweſſe, in ſuche lyke affayers. But alas the chryſtian princes and kynges, of this age, be of an other ſort and cō
                  dition (the whyth thing vnneth I can rehearce without teares) whyche ought to caſt downe theyr eyes, with bluſhing coū
                  tenaunce, when they reade or heare the Ethnike princes ſo farre to paſſe them, in theyr doinges, and in all other kyndes of vertue.
            
            
               95. ¶ To conſtrayne thy ſouldyours to fyght.
               When thou doeſt miſtruſt that thy ſoldyours wyll gyue backe and flye, my coū
                  ſayle is, to ſette at theyr backe a ſtronge garryſon of men, whiche maye receyue & take them at theyr retreate, and without mercye kyll them, in the ſight of the other And therfore make this crye and proclamation amonge thy men, that they fyght manfully, puttyng no truſt in runnynge awaye. Whiche opinion of deſparation is the onely remedye for ſuche towardes.
            
            
               96 ¶ To tame fierce people.
               Yf there be any ſorte of people, that be

fierce and noyſome to thy men: Beſt it is to take from them theyr horſes, harneyes and weapons. For what can theyr haulte frowarde, and churlyſfhe ſtomakes preuayle, without theyr weapons. And this pollicie the machomete byſhop, which is called the Soldane, doeth vſe. Or els he coulde neuer kepe vnder and tame, ſo many people with ſo fewe guydes, and vyle ſouldiours, except he had forbydden them the vſe of theyr horſes, harneis and other thynges.
            
            
               97 ¶ To diſſemble retreate.
               Profytable it is ſomtyme, to leaue to thyne enemyes, thy pauilions furnyſhed and replenyſſhed with good wynes, and dayntye meates, and to diſſemble to flye, wyth thy hoſte. And after at mydnyght vnloked for, to aſſayle them, when they be fylled and engorged exceſſiuelye wyth wyne and meates. For certes then thou ſhalte fynde them dronken, and as deed, wyth ſuche intemperaunce, that it ſhalbe eaſye, withoute manſlaughter to ſubdue them. And this pollicye is worthye to be remembred.
            
            
               
               98 ¶ To pyke out for ſouldyours thoſe whych be paynfull.
               When thou doeſt maſter thy men, thā beſt it is to choſe for ſouldyours, thoſe yt be hardye, ſtronge and paynfull. For daſtardes and neſh felowes ben vnfytte for warres, when paynfull and bourlye felowes wyll become good warryours.
            
            
               99. ¶ Of exercyſe.
               The Romayne people (lordes ouer all the worlde) haue taught vs by theyr doinges, to knowe what profyte doth come of exercyſe, whyche as well in tyme of peace, as in warre, dyd occupy theyr chyualerous men, in the feates of warre.
               They of ryght were called lordes. For what ſcience is that whyche can be kepte flouryſhyng without exercyſe, when exercyſe doeth paſſe and ouercome nature, & alſo cauſeth women vnmanly, to be warlyke and bolde? As appeareth by the women called Amazones: which practiſyng theyr ſelues in martiall labours, became princeſſes and empreſſes.
               Therfore a ſkylfulle capytayne ought to dryue hys men to ſome kynde of exercyſe, leſt they be aſtonyſhed, whē tyme is that

they muſt fyght. For this word (exercitꝰ) an hoſte, hath hys name of exercyſe.
            
            
               100. ¶ What is to be done, when our enemyes be conquered.
               Yf it ſhall be thy chaunce to ouercome thyne enemyes, it ſhall be not vnprofytable, to put on theyr armature and apparell, and then wyth all ſpede, to goo and aſſayle theyr cytyes. For peraduenture they being deceyued through the faſhyon of the armatour, and apparell, ſoner may be taken, and alſo diſmayed with the ſodayne chaunce, and being bare of al counſayle, wyll yelde vp theyr cytye, and theyr ſelues.
            
            
               101. ¶ When fewe muſt fyght agaynſt many.
               Oftentymes it chaunceth, that a lytle nombre ſhalbe enforced to fyght agaynſt a great power. Wherfore this is my coū
                  ſayle, in ſuche a caſe, that thou ſette vpon thyne enemyes by nyght, whych contemnyng ſo ſmall and weake a nombre, wyll neglygently kepe watche and warde, at whyche tyme by fortune beinge ladye of warres, which fortune is gentle to them

that beſeche and enſue her helpe, and fauoureth them, that do loſe theyr owne demayns, and after rauen other mens poſſeſſyon, thou mayeſte dyſcomfyte, and ouerthrowe them. By thys pollycye, the fierſe Carthaginenſes, hauynge thre mayne hoſtes, reioyſynge at the death of the Scipions, and at the diſcomfiture of the mooſte parte of the Romayne hooſte, were in one nyght in Spayne ſcattered, dryuen to flyght, and ſlayne wyth ye Romaynes, that remayned alyue, whyche were a very fewe. Whyche deſtruction of the citizyns of Carthage, was the chiefe cauſe that the Romaynes kept ſtyll Hyſpayne, after the vnluckye death of ye Scipions. Therfore this pollicie maye be vſed in greate nede and peryllous daunger.
            
            
               102. ¶ when the ſouldyours muſt ſleape.
               Accuſtome thy ſouldiours to ſlepe with out ſtrawe, that by vſage they maye do that wyllyngly, to the whiche neceſſitye ſhall ſometyme compell them. And what doth more in all thynges, then cuſtome, whyche is the ladymaſtreſſe to putte all

thinges in vre. For nothig can be thought ſharpe or paynefull, to them that wonte theyr ſelues to hardyneſſe. Therfore let men vſe ſufferaunce, in newe and ſtraūge enterpryſes, whych doth brynge al thynges to a perfection.
            
            
               103. ¶ To brynge ſuſpicion of treaſon amonge thyne enemyes.
               Yf any of thyne enemyes whiche hath good ſkyll in warlye buſyneſſe, do diſappoynte the of thoſe thynges yt thou doeſt attempt: It ſhall be profytable for the, to brynge hym in ſuſpicion of treaſon, wyth his prince, or hys citizyns, by ſome crafty deceipt. As in theſe two examples I ſhal teache the. The one is, when thou doeſt waſte other mens fieldes, that then thou forbeare purpoſely, from his, whom thou doeſt couette to brynge into ſuſpition of treaſon. Whych pollicie Annibal of Carthage vſed agaynſt Quintus fabius maximus the Emperour of Rome, yea rather the conſeruatour.
               The other pollicie is, to ſende ſome of thy ſeruauntes that be truſty & ſubtile to him whome thou woldeſt bryng in a ielouſye

of treaſon, to cōmune and talke with him as with his frendes, which thynge ſhall brynge hym both in hatred and ſuſpition of treatorie, agaynſt hys kynge, and cityzins. The which feate the Romaynes vſed agaynſt Annibal. Or els the capitayn maye inuent, beſyde theſe wayes, ſome other craft conſydryng the tyme and place as to fayne letters, in which ſome matter of treaſon, is conteyned and entreated of betwene them, and prouyde that thoſe letters maye be conueyed to the handes of the Emperour. But this ſtratageme neyther I approue, ne yet greatly prayſe excepte it were agreed of the hole deſtruxtion of thempyre.
            
            
               104. ¶ Of outwarde helpe that he ſuſpicious warely to be receyued.
               They that make battayle, are wont to requyre ayde from theyr confederates, & from theyr tributaries, or elles to hyre ſtraunge ſouldyours, which thyng often tymes is the falle and deſtruction, of an whole Armye. For when they haue anye affyaunce, in theyr hyred men, ſharpelye begynnynge to fyght, and reioyſe as vyctours,

eyther ſhortelye the hyred ſouldyours, do ſtagger, and ſtande at a ſtaye, to turne theyr face, or elles the capitayne is dryuen to fyght agaynſte them wyth hys mē. Wherfore do thou not requyre moch outwarde helpe, but of ſuch whoſe faith thou doeſt not ſuſpecte. Theſe hyred and ſtraunge ſouldyours were the deſtructiō of the Scipions in Hiſpayne. For when they truſted and affyed the Spaynyardes, the two brethren deuyded theyr Armye, which being kepet togyther, coulde not haue bene ſubdued. And ſhortly after through theyr falſe helpers, bothe were ſlayne, and all theyr men for the mooſte parte maymed or kylled.
            
            
               105. ¶ Of diſcention to be ſwaged and appeaſed.
               Yf any heynous diſcention be ſtyred amonge thy ſouldyours, whyche oftentymes may happen, for diuiſions ryſyng amōg thē, my coūſayl is, to ſet all thynges in quyet ſtaye, and brynge them agayne to concorde, cōſtrayne them by othes makynge, to forget ſuche wronges, and become good frendes, and felowes agayne cōmaundyng alſo that from thenceforth,

they do not ſhewe anye token or remembraunce of that varyaunce, in deede ne worde.
            
            
               106. ¶ what tyme townes and cities maye be deſpoyled and taken.
               That capitayne is worthie to be hyghly prayſed of hys owne men, and greatly feared of his enemyes, that by his wytte and conueyaunce goth about to take and deſpoyle townes, without bloodſheddig of hys armye, and endeuoureth by pollicie to conquere countries. That capitayn ſhall euer haue his ſouldyours redye and at hande, to ieoparde on thynges harde & daungerous: wherfore it becommeth a prouident capitayne, to proue and aſſaye all thynges, rather by conueyaunce and pollici, then by force of armes. For greater victoryes be wonne and gotten by pollicye, then ſtrength. Therfore by nyght, & when rayne falleth, cytyes and townes are to be taken and deſpoyled.
            
            
               107 ¶ Howe moche the preſence of the graunde capitayne doeth profyte.
               
                  
How neceſſary the preſence of ye graūd capitayn is in the battayl, al men (whoſe wyttes be not on batfoulyng) may clerelye perceyue and ſe. For the ſouldyours, yea and theyr capitaynes, aſwel for feare of ſhame, as ſpecyallye for the preſence of the graunde capitayne, wyll beſtyrre thē
                  ſelues mooſt valyauntly. Manye alſo for truſt of rewarde, and chefely to purchaſſe the Emperours fauour attentyuely wyll exploite and furnyſh all thynges. Oftentymes alſo the battayle ſlowlye and cowardly foughten, is renued and reſtored, manfully by the preſence of the graund capityne, whych doeth not leaue anye feate or trayne vnprouyded, encouragyng hys men now with me nacies, and now with gentle and comfortable wordes. By whyche meane the ſouldyours wyll contende one to paſſe an other in proweſſe, ſo that in the Emperours ſyght, they maye do ſome thynge notable and prayſe worthye. Therfore nothynge worthie perpetuall memorie can be done, yf the Emperour or graund capitayne be not at hand.
            
            
               108. ¶ Of the multitude of enemyes.
               
                  
Yf it chaunce, any great prince to be beſette on euery parte wyth many enemies, ſo that he is not able to beare theyr force and vyolence, myne aduyſe is, that wyth ſome he do make a leage of frendſhyppe, and wyth other he do entreate of peace, And ſo he ſhall eſcape and auoyde ye daungerfull deſtruction of his countrye. For when ſo many go about to get thy kyngdome, it is a lyght thyng, to put of ſome of them, eyther with great promyſes, or wt money, & chefely in this tyme, whē mē do not ſtryue ſomoche for renoume, as they do for ryches, and all the world doth gape for golde and ſyluer.
            
            
               109. ¶ Of enemyes that be humble and treatable.
               Somtyme for a lyght cauſe, greate battayles be begonne amonge men: wherfore yf they agaynſte whome we make our preparaūce, ſhewe them ſelues gētle and tractable, it were not honeſte on the other partye to ſhewe our ſelues vnmercyful. For what can chaunce more ſhame full to any man in hys lyfe, then to be noted and attached wyth tyrrāny. What cā make vs more worthye to be lykened to

the wylde beaſtes, and alſo more doeth hurte the aduauncement of our renoume the encreaſe of our honour, and the wele publike of our realmes, then horryble tyrannie. Wherfore ſuche crueltie ought to be eſchued, no leſſe then the wylde beaſtes.
            
            
               109 ¶ Of daungerfull and peryllous battayles.
               Greuous and daungerfull battayles, do chaunce oftentymes amonge men.
               For whych cauſe a ſage capitayne ought to prouyde for all thynges, with erneſt labours, and cheifely that he haue olde and beaten ſouldyours. For they knowynge the vſe of battayle, doo not feare naked ſwordes, ne yet for ſtrypes, no although they take many depe woundes, they ſtyfly wyl abyde and ſtande to all ieopardies for the kepyng of theyr old men. Alſo they being practyſed in warly knowledge, can diſcerne what is profytable and what is not, euer decreing this with them ſelues, eyther to conquere and ouercome theyr enemyes, or els manfullye to dye, whyche is the trne token and argument of a noble herte and luſtye blood.
            
            
               
               111 ¶ It is mete for yonge men in theyr youth to practyſe martiall feates.
               They whyche wyll become good and experte warriours, ought in theyr youth dilygently to applye and folowe ye ſame. For yf a yongeman wonte hym ſelf quyely to beſtryde and mount vpon his horſe, and lykewyſe to lyght downe, to takevp his horſe with the ſpurres, that he maye praunſe, trauerſe, and flyng wyth the heles, then ſurelye he ſhall become a good warryour. Let hym alſo practiſe to ſhote in hande gunnes, and croſſebowes, to caſt dartes, and chargegunnes, to cary ſwerd and tergate, and ſomtyme with his marrowes to raunge lyke a man of armes, to reſemble a battayle: ✚ that when he commeth ¶ The youth of Englāde doth vſe in theyre playīges a warrelike ſport and reſeble of bat tayl, whiche is called England and Scotlās to mans ſtature, greate experyence ſhall ſhyne and appeare in hym. To ſuch one all labours, whyche be to other men intollerable, be lyght & eaſye, as to lodge on the earth, to ſuffre famyne, and abyde all other mooſte ſowre and trauaylous paynes. Wherfore it is greate profyte to brynge vp youth in ſuche exercyſe, to harden them in greater thynges.
            
            
               
               112 ¶ To encreaſe the nombre of thyne enemyes by a rumour.
               When a rumoure is ſparpled, that a myghtye hoſte of men commeth agaynſt the, augment the ſame rumoure amonge thy ſouldyours, affyrmynge the ſame to be true, by the reporte and acknowledgig of thyne outryders. Therby thou mayeſt be aſſured with what ſtomacke and herte they wyll buckle and bende them ſelues, to withſtande and receyue ſuch an huge nombre of enemyes, yf the nombre were ſo great in dede. When they ſhal come to fyght, and ſe the ſhewe to be abated, and diminiſſhed, forthwyth they wyll gather theyr hertes, with moche more force and vyolence, whych before doubtyng of the victorye, now as victours wyll boldelye fyght, ſteppynge forwarde, wyth cherefull courage, to whome nothynge is ieoperdſome, agaynſte theyr conceipt and opinion of the victorie.
            
            
               113 ¶ To preuent the wylies and traynes of a nobler prince.
               
                  
When thou doeſt feare (and not wythout a cauſe) the trappes and deceiptes, of ſome noble man, leſte that he wyll come vpō the ſodaynly, and bereft ye of thy kyngdome, diſpoyle thy cyties and townes, and thruſte thy lyue: It is not the worſte, in preuentynge hym, to waſte hys kyngdome ſpoyle hys cyties, and ymagyn his death. And ſo ſuche traynes which were prouyded for the, thou ſhalte vſe to ouerthrowe and diſceyue hym, and ſhalt catch hym in the ſame nettes and ſnares, that were layde and ſette for the. For God his lawes, the lawe of man and nature, ſuffre well this, that a man maye turne that to the vndoinge of other men, whyche they layed for hym.
            
            
               114. ¶ Of them that haue longe heere and longe beerdes.
               Men in ſome countryes vſe longe berdes and longe heere, whyche in battayle be troubleſome and vnprofytable. For they be good ſtayes, to holde a man hard and faſt. Wherfore it ſhalbe good to clap them ſhorte. For lytle thynges ſomtymes do moche hurte. And in ſuche caſe al thynges whyche be hurtfull to vs, and profytable

to our faes, are to be put awaye and not vſed.
            
            
               115. ¶ Before we laye ſiege to cytyes, good it is to poſſeſſe the vplande fieldes.
               It is not beſt to laye ſiege to any cyties before that we haue brought the whole demeanes of the cytye, into our handes. For yf the citizins kepe parte of theyr feldes in theyr poſſeſſyon, harde it ſhalbe to get them without the great loſſe of tyme. When other cyties in that tyme mought haue ben ſubdued. Whych pollicie ye women called Amazones, being of a manlye ſpyrite and bolde ſtomake, dyd put in vre: whych wolde neuer aſſaulte any citie, before that the y had taken the vplande villages.
            
            
               116. ¶ Of men wounded and kylled to be conueyed priuily out of the waye.
               Men wounded and kylled, do moche bolden thyne enemyes, and therwith caſt downe the hertes of thyne owne men. Wherfore the capitayne muſt diligentlye prouyde, that he conuey away, and ſente hys flayne men, with thoſe that be wounded

to ſome out place (aſwell vnwares to hys enemyes, as alſo to hys owne hoſt) For Philip of Macedon was moch hyndred therby, whē he left ye ſlayne men in ye ſight of his owne army, and ther wt plainly to be viewed of the outryders of ye Romaynes, wherby the hoſt conceyued ſuche a feare, when they ſawe the wyde dennes and deyntes of the woundes of theyr felowes, that they had rather ſuffre anye diſtreſſe, thā to haue any mo bickerynges wyth the Romaynes. In this thynge the kynge was blamed for hys ygnoraunce, whyche after he dyd acknowledge. The Turkes that bē in theſe dayes, men moſt expert in warre, know this pollicy which do burne theyr ſlayne men, leſt their own men ſhulde haue any diſcomforte, or their enemyes any courage therof.
            
            
               117 ¶ Of the requeſtes of lowe and humble peronages to be herd.
               A mercyfull capitayne ought not to diſ dayne the prayers and peticions of hūble perſonages, but gentlye to hearken theyr

beheſtes and deſires. For what is ſomoch prayſe worthye in a capitayne, as lowlyneſſe and humanitie: wherby he ſhal purchaſe both the fauour of hys owne men, and alſo of hys enemyes. Scipio Africanus warryng in Spayne agaynſt the Carthaginenſes, ſubdued more by hys vnſpekeable hūbleneſſe, then by ye ſworde Alſo the vnprocheable humanitie of Ceſar dyd moche more lyfte vp and auaunce hys renoume, then all his noble actes, & dyd make hym wonderfull, and merueyled at, of all the worlde. Embrace therfore and folowe gentleneſſe, which is the lodge of manhode.
            
            
               118 ¶ To vſe cruelneſſe in the begynnyng of the warres.
               It is not vnhoneſt in the begynnyng of thy warres, to vſe crueltie, whyche is the verye cauſe that cytyes and townes well defenced, many tymes be yelded vp: whych yf they had not feared ſuche crueltye, wolde haue taryed & tryed the doubt full chaunce of warre, whereby moche hinderaunce mought haue chaunced and enſued to the capitayne and his Armye.

This pollicye the wyſe Romayne capytayn Metellus vſed agaynſt Iugurth, in Numidia. But why ſpeake I of Metellꝰ when all wyſe capitaynes vſed this pollicye, and wyll vſe it ſo longe, as they be in deedly warres.
            
            
               119. ¶ How to kepe thy kyngdome by boldneſſe and couragyouſneſſe.
               Brefelye we haue tolde in our boke of the gouernement of an empyre, howe kyngdomes ought to be guyded. But now I wyll recyte one reaſon, not vnprofytable, bycauſe it happeneth oftentymes kyngdome to be ruled by lineall diſcent of heyres, and bycauſe yongemen which be tendre of age, ſometyme doo poſſeſſe the royall authoritie, and themperiall eſtate whych for theyr youth ſake ben aſſaulted of theyr neyghbours, nygh ioynyng and borderynge on them. Therfore my counſayle is, at the begynnyng of theyr gouernaunce, to ſhewe them ſelues ſterne and ſtoute of mynde, therby to encourage the hertes of theyr ſubiectes, and put theyr enemyes in feare. That thyng was well perceyued of Alexandre of Macedon conquerour

of all the worlde, which beynge yonge and tendre of age, takynge the empyre of Philip, kept it agaynſt them that rebelled, by hys luſty courage, braggyng porte and greatneſſe of mynde, although he was otherwayes enfourmed of hys counſaylours.
            
            
               120. ¶ Of chaſtitie in warre.
               Chaſtitie of all wyſemen is hyghlye prayſed, without whych no man is worthye to be called, or to haue the name of a capitayne. For how can he well guyde other men, that is ruled and led by pleaſures and luſtes, which be to man mooſt enuyfull foes. Therfore lette ſuche capitaynes folowe Alexander the mooſt dradde kynge of Macedon, whych not onlye abſtayned from the ſteſhlye pleaſure of the beautyfull doughters of the kyng of Perſia, but alſo from the ſyght of them. Alſo Scipio Africanus the luckie Emperour of the Romaynes, for his mooſt paſſyng chaſtitie deſerued euerlyuing name. And alſo this worde (Caſtra) whiche we call an armye, hath his ſignification, bycauſe men there ſhoulde lyue chaſte. I wyll not ſpeake of the ſclaundre whyche therby capitaynes

do gette, but do you loke on the profytes. Doeth not lecherye make feble and weaken the ſtrength, murther the wytte, hurte the memorie, daſel & blynde the ſyght, and peryſh the hearyng? which all howe neceſſarye they be in battayle, and els where iudge you.
            
            
               121 ¶ Of cauillations to be experienſed in ieopardyes by capitaynes.
               Wyſe capitaynes are wonte in great ieopardyes to vſe cauillations, to delyuer theyr ſouldyours out of care. For in ſo doinge, they appeare lytle to regarde that thynge, whyche theyr men chefelye feare. Wherfore the ſouldyours in ſuche caſe, caſt away al feare, through the brag and confidence of the capitayne, & plucke vp theyr herte and courage. Anniball of Carthage, what tyme he roſe in battayle, agaynſt the Romaynes in Italie vſed cauellations. Alexandre of Macedon vſed alſo ſuche tryfelynges, in the greate battayles, with the king of Perſia. For whē his frende aſked of him why in ſo ieoperd ſome a battayle, he went to ſlepe, he gaue hym this anſwere merely. Doſt thou not

know yt we haue ouercōmē our enemies, whych ſaying was blowen throughoute all the hoſt, wherby they conceyued ſure truſt of the victorie.
            
            
               123. ¶ Of ſouldyours that do ſaye yll by theyr capitayne.
               It chaunceth oftentymes, the ſouldyours, yea thoſe that be valyaunte warryours, to ſpeake yll and backbyte theyr capytayne, when they be not taken and rewarded as they deſerue by their doinges But yet the capitayne muſt take no dyſpleaſure therwyth, but rather ſhewe hym ſelfe liberall and gentle, that afterwarde they maye the more wyllynglye, followe hym at nede, then any other. Yea & gladly to runne through fyre and water, wyth hym, yf the cauſe ſhall requyre. Therfore a forecaſtynge capytayne wyll not caſt of hys ſtronge ſouldyours for lyghte cauſes and tryffelles, but rather by all meanes he wolde entertayne and entreate them gentlye.
            
            
               123. ¶ Wyth what thynges thy ſouldyours ar to be encouraged.
               
                  
Marius the happye capitayne of the Romayne people, doth ſhewe hym ſelfe a paterne and example, that ſouldyours ar to be encouraged by ye doinges of the capitayne, and not by vyolence. Which Marius dyd ſwete in all ſorte of labours and toke great paynes, trauaylyng therby, rather then by violence, to call vp, and quycken the courage of his men. For whē they ſawe theyr capitayne, to take on him ſuch intollerable paynes, they were aſhamed, that they dydde not abyde ſuche lyke labours, yea and moche more vnſufferable. Whych doing of Marius, was worthye to be prayſed. For how can a capitayne yt gyueth hym ſelfe to gluttonye and ſlepe, kendle agd ſtyrre vp the dulneſſe of hys men, to any bolde enterpriſe to watching or ſuche lyke thynges. The ſouldyours wyl alſo ſcorne ſuche a capitayne, that rebuketh other men of ſuch faultes as chefelye appeare in hym worthye to be blamed. That capitayne therfore that wyll guyde & gouerne other men, muſt learne to maſter his owne affections, whych yf he do, no doubt there is, but that the hole armye with glad mynde wyl folowe his

inſtructions, and obeye hys decrees.
            
            
               124. ¶ To purchace the fauour of a ſtraunge countrye.
               The capitayne that weareth the apparell, and vſeth the maners of the coūtrye, where he is, wonderfullye ſhall come in theyr fauour, when he ſhall appeare as a countryeman there borne and of the ſame people. Which policie Alexandre of Macedon vſed after he had ſubdued the king of Perſia, and obtayned the empyre. For he dyd inure and accuſtome hym ſelfe to theyr maners and faſhyons. And ſo he by wearynge theyr kynde of rayment, and by kepynge theyr vſuall cuſtomes, dydde bynde as true liege men, whom before he had conquered in battayle.
            
            
               125. ¶ A capitayne muſt be liberal, and therwith prayſynge the ſtoutneſſe of hys men.
               A capitayne ought to be liberal to hys men accordyng to theyr deſertes, & therwyth to gyue them hye thankes, for their famous enterprices. And when they ſetheyr actes well rewarded and taken, thā all labours ſeme to them eaſy and lyght,

and that they may pleaſe theyr capitayne they wyll not feare to ſhedde and ſpende theyr blood. Therfore nothynge doth ſoner purchaſe the fauour and true hertes, of thy ſouldyours, then liberalite & thankeſgyuyng, which two be nouryſhers of valyauntneſſe. For whych purpoſe a boū
                  tyfull capitayne wyll not ſpare for anye coſt, to ioyne the hertes of hys ſouldiours that thereby he maye haue them readye, and forwarde in all ieopardyes.
            
            
               126. ¶ what is to be done when eruption is feared.
               When we be afrayed of eruption, eyther of our enemyes, or oute of any cytye, beſt it is to caſt bulworkes, wyth turrettes of wood, that our armye maye be defenced and kept in ſaufetye on euery ſyde. For ſodayne outbraſtes do moche diſcom fyte and trouble oure armye, when our enemyes vnloked for do ſette vpon vs.
               Suche is the violence of ſodayne eruptiō which maketh the downeman to become vyctour, and gyueth the victorye to hym that is vnlyke and nye ſubdued.
            
            
               127. ¶ what is to be done of the capitayne,

when hys arme is in extreme peryl and daunger.
               A venturous capitayne in thextreme diſtreſſe & ieopardy of his mē, muſt neglect his owne ſafetie, caſting hym ſelfe in ieopardye, and put hys lyfe in haſarde. For the ſouldyours ſeing the great and daungerous peryll of theyr capitayne, wyl be imboldened to pluck vp theyr force afreſh contemning theyr priuate lyfe. For what comforte can they haue, when theyr capitayne is loſte and ſlayne. Wherfore they then paſt hope, wyll fyght in hope, and deſtitute of all hope, wyll mooſt deſperatlye, and lyke hopeloſtes, runne on theyr enemyes: whych is ſometyme the recouerye of an whole hoſte.
            
            
               128 ¶ Wyth what thynge the mynde of the cōmunaltie is gotten.
               The hertes and good wyll of the rude people is chefelye gotten by bankettynge and rewardes, wherwyth they be moche pleaſed, iudgyng theyr ſelues, not to be regarded ne yet ſethy, excepte they be called to deyntye feaſtes and bankettes. For the cōmeners do not ſeke, what is honeſt, but

what is profytable, and yf no profyte do enſue, theyr frendſhyp and good wyll decayeth. Which thynge was not folowed of Saluſt, that dyd beſtowe and employ hys labour, rather to wryte the hiſtoryes of the Romaynes, then to ſeke and hunt for theyr fauour by feaſtmakyng and ban kettynge.
            
            
               129. ¶ Of the faſhyon to ſende letters.
               Letters maye be conueyed to thy frendes in cyties, campes, or elles where, by byndynge them to arrowes.
            
            
               130. ¶ To allure thyne enemyes to ſlyppe awaye, and fayle theyr capitaynes.
               A wytfull capitayne wyll ſende ſome of hys ſouldyours that be ſubtyle & wyttye, to proue and tempt the mynde of his enemies, and by al meanes to allure ſome of the capitaynes, or experte warryours, to forſake and fayle theyr maſter in tyme of nede, promyſyng to them great rewardes, makyng large profers, and therwith ſettyngforth and practiſyng thaffabilitie and lowlyneſſe of theyr capitayne, ceſſing not to graunt any demaunde, and alſo to promyſſe what thyng ſoeuer ſhalbe pleaſaunt

or acceptable to them.
            
            
               131. ¶ Of the badgies of the ſouldyours.
               All the ſouldyours ought to be knowē by ſome badge, that the better they maye be diſcerned from thyne enemyes, leſt indifferentlye they beate downe and ſtryke theyr frēdes as foes. Whych may chaūce where there is no difference of armature and where thy men can not be diſtinctlye knowen from theyr enemyes, by theyr apparell and cogniſaunce.
            
            
               132. ¶ Of kynges and other princes that kepe not theyr feyth.
               Kynges and other princes, do ſomtymes abuſe the conditiōs of the lawes of warre and peace, to theyr owne commoditie. Yea rather to theyr priuate luſt and pleaſure, and haue not theyr eyes vpō iuſtice, which only they ought to haue in reuerence, and alſo worſhyppe. For what kynge or prince is there now on dayes, ſo iuſt and vncorrupted, whyche wolde not ſeuen tymes in the day, breake the leage of peace (whyche ought to be vndefyled) ſurely truſtyng therby to occupy and enioye the demaynes of hys enemyes, or at

the leſt the beſt parte of hys lordſhyppes, wherfore euer haue thy frendes as well as thy foes ſuſpected, & chefely when thy kingdom is in ſtryfe. For no man is ſoner deceyued then he whych hath affyaunce in all men. Wherfore that prince, which is wyſe, wyll not commyt hys ſecretes to an other prince, but only for his ſafegard The priuities in the herte can not be ſearched. Alſo he wyll not ſuffre anye other prince, to entre into his caſtelles and holdes, whych he hath fenced, that they may viewe and marke them.
            
            
               133 ¶ Of the condicion of the common people.
               The conditions of the common people be very hatefull, whyche couet alwaye to reſorte to them, where they truſt to haue mooſte aduauntage, whych do not ſet by ne regarde any man for his excellent and hygh vertues, yf there be no hope of profyte, to ryſe by hym. Whyche thynge is ſhamefull to be ſpoken of, but chefelye to be done. But therfore we muſt applye vs to ye inconſtaunt nature of ſuch people alluryng and hailyng them, to folowe vs, by feaſtyng and bankettes. As the fyſſhe

is takē with the bayte. Wherfore a wyſe capitayne wyll vſe no leſſe wyſdome, to mayntayne the ſtate of hys kyngdome, then he dyd in gettynge it. By this waye he ſhall kepe vpryght and eſtablyſſhe all thynges. Otherwyſe, he ſhall brynge all to nought, and a wyſer prince ſhal poſſeſſe, and enioye his kyngdome.
            
            
               135 ¶ Of a certayne kynde of defence.
               Charrettes ſet in the earth, before the campe, wyth the wheles dygged depe, & cheyned faſt togyther, be a great defence. And this was chefely vſed among many of the auncient ſouldyours for theyr ſpedyneſſe, whych were wonte to cary with them a great nombre of charettes.
            
            
               135 ¶ Of the ſwetneſſe of aduauntage.
               Aduauntage maketh thoſe that be cowardes, for the mooſt party redye to battayle. Wherfore a wyſe capitayne ought moche to crake of the ſpoyle and pillage, whych wylbe great after ye victorie, with ſuch riches, that pouertie ſhal neuer pinch thē after, if they beſtow thēſelf valiaūtly,

in this one battayle, and beare them lyke men, thys one daye, the laſte daye of all theyr myſerye and labour. Wherfore it is the capitaynes dutye, with ſuche lyke orations to comforte and encourage hys men to be forewarde, fiercelye to fyght, and boldly to ſtande to it.
            
            
               136. ¶ Of a troubleſome and vnrulye multitude.
               A greate multitude of ſouldyours whyche be barbarous and rude, muſt be caryed to longe warres, for feare that ſome ſedition do growe amonge them, whyche manye tymes doeth ouerthrowe whole countries. Wherfore the capitayn hedely muſt foreſee, that all cauſes of ſedicion be taken awaye and plucked vp by the rotes. For yf ſedition be ones kendled the cytie is lyke to be burned, and all the citizins vtterly confounded.
            
            
               137 ¶ Of the dutye of a good capytayne.
               A valyaunte capitayne wyll be aſhamed to be ſene alyue, and all his mē ſlayn For with what countenaunce, dare he be bolde to ſhewe his face, or to preaſe into the cōpany of valyaunt capitaynes, whē
                  
he doth ſuruyue his men being ſlayne. yf the battayle was yll fought, who ſhal be blamed but the capitayne? whiche eyther in an vnegal and inconuenient place dyd pytche his fielde, or elles with a lytle power, raſhly gaue battayle agaynſt his enemies, which were both mo in nombre and more expert in warres, whych thing is not to be done, but in a great ſtrayte, & vrgent neceſſitie.
            
            
               138. ¶ In a newe rendre.
               When any prouince or citye haue newly yelded them ſelues to the capitayne, he ſhall doo well to pardone all burthens, and charges of the cytye, as to open pryſons for them that be in duraunce, and burne bokes of condēnations, and brefely no kynde of humanitie, ne yet of bountyfulneſſe is to be forgotten. Wherby the capytaynes gentleneſſe and good wyll, maye be knowen, and appeare.
            
            
               139. ¶ Of the puniſhment of the capitayne whych forſaketh hys men.
               The capitayne that forſaketh his hoſt, and flyeth away, is worthye to be beheeded, in exāple of al other. For more prayſe

worthye, it is to dye in battayle valyauntly fyghtynge wyth greate glorye and renoume, then after for his cowardiſe with ſhame, and reproche to loſe hys lyfe.
            
            
               140. ¶ To abſtayne from robbyng of temples.
               Commaunde your ſouldyours, that they ſhunne to ſpoyle and robbe temples, leſt God be offended therwyth. For great hurte and damage chaunceth to an army by ſuche vnreuerent ſpoyle of churches, whych for ſuche miſcheuous doinges neuer ſkaped vnpunyſſhed, neyther in oure dayes, ne yet in any tyme out of our mind Therfore commaunde your menne to abſtayne from the robbyng of temples. For no battayle is ſo harde to be ſkaped from as the battayle of God.
            
            
               141. ¶ To purſue thyne enemyes in the chaſe.
               When thyne enemyes do turne theyr face and ſtye, then purſue and chaſe them gredelye, yf there be no ſuſpition of traynes. Do thou not deferre ne yet be ſlacke, leſt they recouer them ſelues, and aſhamed of theyr cowardlye flyght tourne agayne

and cauſe the to recule, recoueryng the battayle, whyche nowe before was loſte. For experyence doeth ſhewe howe vnprofytable it is, not to take tyme, whē tyme doth ſerue.
            
            
               142. ¶ To diſſemble retreate and feare.
               Yf the capitayne ſhall perceyue anye place conuenyente and mete for the diſcō
                  fiture of hys enemies, it ſhalbe not vnpro fytable, to diſſemble retreate and feare, vntyll he haue trayned and ledde his enemyes thyther. And then let hym ſet vpon them, on the foreparte, on the backe, and on bothe wynges. Therfore the mooſte parte be brought into ſuche traynes that tarye in holdes, and abyde thaſſaultes of theyr enemyes, and at the laſt ben enforced for famine, to pyght fielde in open chā
                  pyon grounde.
            
            
               143. ¶ what is to be done when great ieopardyes are to be vndertaken.
               When great ieopardies ben at hande, which we muſt by ſome meane auoyd, thē mete it is, to choſe ſouldyours, whyche

ben vnfearfull and couragious to encoū
                  tre wyth theyr enemyes, when we muſte imbolden wyth rewardes, and fayre promyſſes, that gladly they wyll marche forwarde, and not to ſteppe backe for anye ieopardyes. Alſo they are to be admonyſhed, what prayſe and rycheſſe they ſhall gette of that vyctorie. Beſydes that we muſt earneſtly affirme, that the only truſt and hope of the victorie ſtandeth in them. Wherfore they debatyng all theſe thynges wyth themſelues, and myndefull of theyr former doinges, wyl purpoſe wyth them ſelues, to atchyue the vyctorye, and wynne theyr ſpurres.
            
            
               144 ¶ To abſtayne from treaſon.
               You capitaynes and ſouldyours which loke and clymbe for honour, and wyl not indamage and impayre youre name, beware of treaſon: which is mooſt curſed & hatefull. For fyrſte you ſhall haue them, whom you do betraye your deedly foes, and extreme enemies, and they for whom you worke that treaſon, ſhall feare and ſuſpect you. Yea and at the laſte hate and abhorre the deed, and euer doubtyng, leſt you practyſe ſuche traytorus wylyes agaynſt

them, which you haue vſed for thē Wherfore yfſuche men wyll rebelle, and departe from theyr capitayne, lette them yet beware, to cōmyt ſo heynous a fault, whych in all ages is mooſt abhominable for great hatred is gathered of treaſon, whych faulte is abhorred of all men. The traytour alſo is hated, boked at with fynges, and defamed both alyue and deed. Therfore you maye ſe the frutes of treaſon.
            
            
               120. ¶ Of the ſageneſſe and eloquence of the capitayne in his orations.
               The oration of the capitayne, ſetforth and ſpoken, wyth weyghtye ſentences, & apte wordes, is moche cōmendable, and verye requiſyte. For weyghtye and fete wordes ſhal make hym prayſed of al men and taken as the very ymage of vertue, & wyſdome. Therfore the capitaynes muſt not in the face of al men, folowe theyr merye conceiptes, and vnaduyſedlye ſpeake, but amonge theyr familyers and nyghe frendes: Yea and then not wantonly and foolyſhlye. But theyr wordes oughte to be ſeaſoued wyth ſageneſſe and grauitie,

and eſtemed as the oracles of the goddes.
            
            
               146. ¶ To refrayne from ſpoyle and pillage before thyne enemies be wholye ſubdued.
               Do thou gyue to thyne hooſte a generall commaundement, that they refrayne from ſpoyle and robberye, vntyll thyne enemyes be cōquered, and wholy brought vnder, and a greate penaltie muſt be ſette to the contrarye. For when thy men fall to ſpoyle, and be gyuen to vaūtage, thyne enemyes maye recouer and reſtore theyr ſtrength, and euen now ſubdued, and loſt men ryght agayne, become vyctours. Wherfore ſo longe as one lyueth, and any parte of theyr ſtrength remayneth, for bydde thy men to gape after praye, leſte the myrth of the vyctorie be turned to an heuye and ſodayne ſorowe.
            
            
               147 ¶ To refrayne from burnyng.
               After that the cities be taken, and thyne enemyes vanquyſhed and ſlayne, it were vnprofytable to burne and waſte all. For thou mayeſt leaue thoſe cyties to be inhabyted and kept of thy frendes, and hereafter they wil be a great refuge and ſuccour to the. Althoughe the capitayne conſyderyng

the tyme and place, may folowe the aduertyſement and rede of hys frendes.
            
            
               148 ¶ Of ayde and ſuccour to be ſent to thy neyghbours abborderynge on the.
               Yf thy neyghbours be vexed and tourmoyled on euery ſyde with warres, it is conuenyent and honeſt to ſende them ayd yt the ſorowful war may rather be bewayled of them, then of the. For to quenche ye fyre of thy neyghbours houſe, is the ſafegarde of thyne owne. Therfore mete it is neyghbours to be frēdes, when outward warres do noie them, leſt thy neighbours hurte and damage lyght alſo vpon the.
            
            
               149 ¶ what it is to do ſome valiaunt acte in the ſyght and face of thyne enemyes.
               To ſhewe ſome token of puiſauncie, and do ſome valyaunt acte in the eyes of thyne enemies, is a great helpe, and moch vayleable, to the gettyng of the victorye, whether it be done by the capitayne or any other ſouldiours, and alſo the enuy of hym ſhall enflame & prouoke other of thy men to enterprice lyke thynges, & the courage of thyne enemies therby ſhalbe ſhaked and abated.

And ſo a fewe valyaunt men, oftentymes haue ben the cauſe of all victories. Therfore let the capitaine be ſure to haue ſome man vaileable in feates and ſtrength. Whych in ſiguler ſtryfe, and man to mā is bolde, valiaunt, and couragious.
            
            
               150. ¶ Of lytle power not to be contemned.
               A wyſe capitayne wyll not be careleſſe, and deſpyſe a lytle armye, although it be but weake, and a ſmall power, whē of a lytle ſparke (whyche he wolde not thynke) a great fyre doeth kendle. Wherfore the fyre muſt be quenched before the flame flaſſhe out, and all be ſet on fyre. And lykewyſe we muſte quenche and ouercome, that litle ſtrength and puiſaūce of our enemyes wyth all our endeuoure, leſt it waxe and growe bygger, and then without more ieopardye, it can not be wt
                  ſtande. Wherfore it is great follie to neglecte ſuche thynges, and not in tyme to mete wyth lytle powers, and vtterlye to diſcomfyte them.
            
            
               151. ¶ Of ſlouthfulneſſe to be eſchued of the capitayne and all other.
               
                  
All capitaynes, ſouldyours, and other oughte to flye from ydleneſſe, euen as frō the peſtylence: yea and rather more. For ydleneſſe doth deſtroye the body and the mynde, whych is mooſt hyeſt of al thynges, and drowneth the renoume of men, when the peſtilence deſtroyeth onelye the bodye: wherfore all capitaynes and ſouldyours, do you caſt of that ſluggyſhneſſe both in tyme of peace and warre, and ſtye from it, as from a wylde beaſt, when ſhe ſetteth on you in tyme of proſperitie, gyuyng mooſt deedlye battayle. For cytyes whych neuer coulde haue bene ouerthrowen in tyme of warre, haue bē deſtroyed, by ſlougthfulneſſe in time of peace, which bringeth with her this miſchefe, that not only fooles, but alſo wyſe men be choked vp wyth the ſtynkyng canells of that vice
            
            
               152. ¶ To viewe and know the countryes, before thou cary thyne Armye thyther.
               A good capitayne wyll be ſure diligētly to vewe wyth hys owne eyes, the coū
                  tryes rounde aboute, before that he carye hys armye thyther, and he wyll ſurelye knowe what waye his men may iourney

mooſte ſaufelye, and where that his enemyes may lye in wayte for hym, or els he for them, and what cyties and townes to deſtroye by the waye, it ſhalbe profytable and expedient for him, leſt he be deceyued ſometyme by eſpyes, ſometyme by ignoraunce, ſometyme trapped in theyr traynes and ſnares.
            
            
               153 ¶ Of the encreaſe of thyne empyre.
               The dutye of a ſoueraygne emperour is, in tyme of blyſfull peace, to augment and fence his empyre, with the procurement of newe frendes. Aſdrebal the wyſe kyng of the people of Carthage, was not vnknowen of this. For after the fyrſt battayle that he had in Affrike, he enlarged and encreaſed, the power of Carthage, when he hooked in thoſe that dyd bordre on hym, and purchaſed theyr fauoure. Whych thynge all wyſe Emperours before this tyme, and in this time alſo, haue done and do.
            
            
               154 ¶ The conditions of the capitayne.
               The capitayne ought to be bolde in aduentures, and therewyth wyttye, and of moche counſayle. For what cōmoditye is

it to haue a capitayne bolde, and the ſame foolyſh and without counſayle, whē they both do ioyne and iumpe ſo nere togyther And alſo the one nedeth ſo the helpe of ye other, that for the defaulte of the one, no man is worthye to be called a capitayne, but a verye loute and a lobre, and vnworthye that honourable name, whyche alſo is lyker to haue a maſter, then to be a maſter.
            
            
               155 ¶ What is to be done in the beſiege of cyties.
               It is very profitable in the aſſiege and beatynge downe of cyties, to make thys proclamation amonge the mayne hooſte, by the commaundement of the graunde capitayne, that all the pillage and prayes ſhalbe due to the ſouldyours. Then they allured and enflamed wyth the ſwete deſyre of vauntage, and ſtrengthened with the hope of ryches, wyll not be put backe for anye violence, thoughe it be neuer ſo great, but they wyl ſurely take and beate downe the cytie. Suche deſyre and vnſaciable coueytoſnes of vauntage raygneth amonge men.
            
            
               156. ¶ A pollicie to knowe yf thy ſoldyours be faythfull.
               
                  
Yf thy ſouldyous gently folowe the, from place to place, it is a greattoken and argumente of theyr faythfulneſſe.
            
            
               157. ¶ Of the great and huge couetouſneſſe of the barbarous people.
               As the fyſhes be taken wyth ſwete baytes, ſo the barbarous aliens be plucked and hailed wyth golde, yea & moche ſoner. For they eſteme golde and ſyluer, moche more then any prayſe or renoume, ſo that the Italions haue great hope to ouercome them for theyr gredye deſyre of treaſure, although the commyng of warfare and prayſe therof, hath euer floriſhed and yet doth amonge the ſame Italions.
            
            
               158 ¶ How to cary an armye ouer a water thyne enemyes reſtynge.
               It happeneth oftentymes, that algates thou muſte carye thyne armye ouer ſome ryuer, where thyne enemies do reſiſt and withſtande thy paſſage, in whyche caſe thou muſte gette bootes, yf matter and tyme want to make a brydge. But before that tyme farre from the campe of thyne

enemyes, aboue or beneth thou muſte lye in embuſhment, a bande of good warryours, couertly, which muſt come on thyne enemyes priuilye at theyr backes, and lokyng for no ſuche thyng, when they go about to ſtoppe and lette thy paſſage. And this is the beſt pollicye to carye thyne armye ouer any water.
            
            
               159. ¶ The comfortable wordes of the capitayne, when hys ſouldyours be in diſpayre.
               when thy ſouldyonrs do deſpayre, eyther of the victorie, or of theyr iourneye: A ſtoute capitayne wyll not ceaſſe dylygētly to cōfort them, wherby yt heuyneſſe and feare maye be plucked oute of theyr myndes, and they more preſt and readye, eyther to fyght or to go on theyr iourney.
            
            
               160 ¶ Of thy ſouldiours, worſhypfully to be buryed.
               Yf it happen thy ſouldyours, to be ſlayne, thou ſhalt ſwage and appeace the angrye hertes of the reſt, yf the deed bodyes, be brought worſhipfully to burying whereby they ſhall ſe by the funeralles, that thou purpoſſed not theyr death, and deſtruction, but ye prayſe of that battayle

and victorie, wherby they can not but loue and honour ſo gentle and mercyfull a capitayne that is of ſuche pytie, then which nothynge is more prayſe worthye, ne yet draweth ſoner the myndes of men, mooſt marueylouſly and enterelye to loue hym.
            
            
               161 ¶ When the power of thyne enemyes is moche ſtronger, what thynge is to be done.
               Yf thyne enemyes preuayle both in nō bre and puiſaunce of men, by no meanes do thou come to hande grypes, ne yet appoynt the to fyght hande to hande, ne yet do thou gyue battayle in pyght fielde.
               Neuertheleſſe do thou not ſuffre them to lye quyet, but nyght and daye aſſayle thē buſyly, wyth ſome pyked ſouldyours, makynge roodes and aſſaultes, vnto theyr pale, continually renewyng ſkyrmyſhies wyth them, euer ſhonnynge ioyned battayle. Myne aduyſe alſo is, when thyne enmyes be very many on the lande, then to take the ſee, where thou ſhalte eyther gette the better, or els loſe nothynge.
            
            
               162. ¶ Of hoſtages.
               Receyue hoſtages and pledges of great

men from any countrie or cytie, which eyther be ſent frelye, or by conſtraynte, and chefelye where there is any feare of falſe dealyng and vntruſtyneſſe, whyche be the ſureſt and mooſt faſt bande of theyr loyaltie and faith. For the great loue, which they haue to the pledges, wyl make them to ſtande to theyr promyſſe.
            
            
               163. ¶ To ſtynt the weapynges and ſkrykes of women.
               The ſorowful weapynges of women within the cytie, wyth diligence are to be ſtopped and ſtylled. For ſuche owtecryes and waylefull lamentation of women, lette the ſouldiours that they cannot take anye counſayle of thynges to be doone in ſuche vprore and wepynges.
            
            
               164. ¶ To hyde and couer the ſlaughter.
               A ſkylful capitayn wyl beare in minde to kepe cloſe and layne (to his power) frō the reſte of hys Armye, the ſlaughter of hys men, and tourne all to the beſt, wyth gentle wordes, burnynge them in the night priuyly and vnwares to his army

therwyth ſendyng thoſe that be wounded and maymed, to the cyties thereby which be frendfull to hym, ſparyng nothynge, yt they maye be healed, and may haue theyr ſtrength reſtored. And thoſe men whych be nowe hardened, he ſhall haue in other battayles forwarde, and redye to ieoperd them ſelues mooſt boldlye, at the requeſt of ſo gentle a capitayne.
            
            
               165. ¶ To pacify a ſtronge and valiaunt warryour which is diſpleaſed.
               If it chaunce any of thy valiaunt ſouldyours to be wrongfully vſed, or ſuffre any rebukefull reproche, and therwyth to be diſpleaſed, it is expedyent wyth fayre wordes, to aſſwage hys angre, leſt as he hath ben valiaunt and wytty on thy part ſo ſtyrred by diſpleaſure and vnkyndnes worke moche hurte and harme agaynſte the.
            
            
               166. ¶ Wagies are not to be craued when the treaſures be ſpent and waſted.
               The dutie of a faythfull capitayne is, and alſo of the ſouldyours, when they ſhall perceyue the treaſure to be waſted, to ſurceſſe, and not to deſyre theyr wages

For ſo doing they go about and endeuour them ſelues to betraye theyr lorde. Wher fore they muſt leaue for a tyme to call for theyr moneye, yf they couette and hunte to haue the fauour of theyr prince.
            
            
               167. ¶ To paſſe by lytle thynges that be harde.
               Lytle thynges, euen as great thynges whyche be harde, are to be paſſed by. For the charges be lyke, the praye vnlyke wherfore good it is, to paſſe by ſuch places, where great labours with expenſes muſt of neceſſitie be taken, and the profyt therof is lytle or none.
            
            
               168. ¶ what is to be done of the chiefe capitaynes.
               Many thynges there be, whiche are not to be taken in hande, but after that ye enterpryſe is begon, and the aſſiege attempted, by no meanes they muſt be leafte of. The profe of whiche thynge is playne by the wyſe Romaine Emperours, whyche beſieged the cytie Capua, and ouercame it, tarying there ſo toughly, that they left the defence of theyr owne countrye, to deſtroye and vanquiſh it. Alſo the huge hoſt of Annibal coulde not plucke them away

although they wer brought to vttermoſt deſpayre, yet nothynge doubtyng ne weryed wyth any labours, wolde not gyue ouer thaſſaulte, but conſtauntly continuyng, dyd brynge home a famous victorie with immortall renoume.
            
            
               169. ¶ To kepe the poſſeſſyon of the thyng ones gotten.
               Yf thou haue gotten cities or countries, by any meanes do not leue, ne giue them ouer, but kepe them with all diligence. For greater reproch it is, to loſe lytle thin ges, then at all not tohaue wonne them. Alſo harde it is, to wynne and deſtroye countryes. Wherfore it were no poynt of wyttyneſſe vnaduyſedly to redelyuer vp, that whiche wyth ſo greate labours and charges was gotten.
            
            
               170. ¶ Of the nature and condition of the common people.
               The condition of the baſe and rude people, is piuyſh and mutable, eyther wilye and boundely to ſerue, or elles after a proude and haulte demeanours, to be are rule. Wherfore the multitude neuer iuſtly ne egally can beare rule and offyce thorough theyr arrogaunte, ſtubburne, and

ſtately conditions, whyche vſe all kynde of crueltie, temperyng and meaſuryng all thynges by theyr fancye, and not by reaſon. Therfore no kyngdome longe can ſtande, guyded and gouerned by the commeners and vnſkylfull people.
            
            
               171 ¶ Of a multitude of gunners and croſſebowe ſhoters.
               When for the multitude of gunners, and other ſhoters in croſſebowes, the ſoul dyours can not ſtande ſaulfely on ye walles, myne aduyſe is, to make holes, and ſo diſturbe thyne enemyes with arrowes and dartes.
            
            
               172 ¶ What is to be done when the walles be beaten downe.
               It happeneth oftentymes, the walles of cyties, to be ſhaken and beaten downe wyth gunnes (that deuilyſh inſtrument) then bulworkes wyth all ſpede, to kepe backe our enemyes muſt be made, wyth turrettes of wood, and ouerthwarde trenches fylled vp with ſharpe pyles, wherby thaſſiege on that part may be more harde through the ſtronge munimentes, then it was before.
            
            
               
               173. ¶ What is to be done in the ſlackyng of cities.
               When the citie begynneth to ſlacke, it muſt be vanquyſhed with the ſworde.
            
            
               174. ¶ To ſet vpon the campe of thyne enemyes not warely kepte.
               Beſt it is, thyne enemyes negligentlye kepynge watche and warde, not by daye tyme but by nyght to ſet vpon and inuade them. For then without queſtiō the fyght ſhall not be harde, when thyne enemyes ouerthrowen and halfe deed with ſleape and wyne, whyther to go or what to do, ſodaynlye wakened, ſhall not knowe, ne yet ſhall perceyue the cauſe of that brute and diſturbaunce, before they be ſtrycken downe, taken, and ſlayne.
            
            
               175 ¶ what is to be done in ſlowe and ſlacke ſiege.
               When thy ſouldyours cowardly and wyth hollowe hertes, nothynge freſhlye fyght, plucke the ſtandart from the ſtandart bearer, and flynge it amonge thyne enemyes, then after exhorte and deſyre them, not to ſuffre ſuche a ſhame and reproche, that theyr enemies ſhal kepe thier ſtandart. Then take thou a weapon, and

commaunde the beſt warryours to folow the to wynne agayne theyr ſtandarte, ma kyng a lane wyth moche violence.
            
            
               176 ¶ Of lytle thynges not to be deſpyſed.
               Nothyng is of ſo lytle valewe, which in warre wyll not do ſome ſeruyce. Therfore an expert capitayne wyll contempne nothyng, although it be lytle worth.
            
            
               177. ¶ Of warre on the ſee.
               In warre on the ſee, the full wynde is the great parte of the victorie.
            
            
               178 ¶ Of great perylles ſcaped and auoyded by raſhneſſe and foolehardyneſſe.
               It ſometome chaunceth, thyne armye to be in greate ieopardye, and ſo encloſed and ſet aboute, yt vnpoſſible it is to ſcape away. Then the capitayne muſt vſe ſome ſodayne and vnaduyſed meane, that by raſhneſſe the victorye may be ieoparded, whē wittineſſe can not helpe, whichthing hath luckely chaunced to many capitayns diſcōfited with vttermoſt perilles. Such force is in raſhneſſe.
            
            
               179. ¶ Of a certayne kynde of defence.
               When thy campe can not be wel defē
                  ded for the open bareneſſe of ye place, mine aduiſe is, to make the fortreſſes of fardels

whyche kynde of defence, although it be not good, yet it maketh a face and ſhewe. wherby thyne enemyes for a tyme feared wyth the noueltie of the thynge, wyll recule, and not haſtelye marche forewarde.
            
            
               180 ¶ where thyne enemyes preua yle in horſemen.
               Yf thyne enemyes be wel horſed, and thou woldeſt gladlye make a fraye wyth them moued eyther by ſome profyte, or elles conſtrayned by nede, this is my beſt counſayle, that eche of the horſemen, haue wyth them ſwyfte and nymble fote men, which quycklye, can mount vpon an horſe, and ſo lyuerly lyght downe, ſo that whych to other men appeareth harde, is to them through cuſtome; lyght and but a tryffle. This kynde of fyght was begonne at the ſiege of Capua.
            
            
               181. ¶ To rayſe the ſiege of any cytye.
               Yf thou purpoſe to rayſe and moue the ſiege from thyne owne cytyes, then fierſelye laye ſiege to ſome cytie of thyne enemye. For when they endeuour to ſuccoure and reſcue theyr owne cytye, they

wyl ſone departe from thyne. And ſo they then that be not able to kepe & ayde theyr owne cytyes, by ſtrength, do ſaue them well, by ſiege made to the cytyes, of theyr enemyes.
            
            
               182 ¶ Of cyties yeldynge them ſelues.
               Thoſe cyties whych wyllyngly yelde, and gyue vp thēſelues vnto vs, although we be not able to defende them, it is not conuenyent to ſpoyle and pylle them, or to vexe them with any wronges, but rather with bountyfulneſſe and humanitie, to entreate and vſe them, that althoughe that great gentleneſſe ſhall not moue and tendre theyr ſtomake, yet that deede worthye the memorie of men, ſhall be further knowen. By whyche other cyties moued hereafter, wyll yelde the ſoner.
            
            
               183. ¶ How neceſſarye warly connyng is to ſouldyours.
               The knowledge of martial feates doth moche imboldē and encourage both ſouldyours and their capitaynes. For ſuche men do knowe to helpe theyrſelues, and can take tyme to ſtrycke theyr ennemyes, wythoute hurte.

And except theyr enemyes be ſkylfull and experte, as they be (the battayle not ioyned) they be aſſured of the vyctorye, in whoſe bolde hertes, ſtrength ſo moche encreaſeth, and they ſtyfly ſtande in fight to obtayne the victorie. But this ſcience as it is gotten and aſſured by exercyſe, ſo is it loſt by negligence.
            
            
               184 ¶ Great victories ben eſchued with fewe and expert ſouldiours.
               Yf thou endeuoure thy ſelfe to do famous and valiaunte actes, take to the a fewe, and thoſe pyked ſouldyours, wel exerciſed in warre, and hardened in laboure with whome thou mayeſt diſcomfyte, at thy pleaſure, the vnſkylfull multitude of thyne enemyes. But yf thou truſt to do ye ſame thyng with an huge garriſō, which be rude, and hauing no ſkyll, thou ſhalt be trapped of thy purpoſe, and ſhamefullye deſtroyed, and therewith taken in thyne owne trayne.
            
            
               185 ¶ Of yonge men to be choſen.
               Yonge men ought to be choſen for ſoldyours which be tall and ſtronge, whych can ſuffre hungre, thyrſte, and lye on the grounde, whiche alſo haue a pleaſure, to

handle weapons, to fyght, takyng it for a ſporte and game. Suche fellowes luſtye and ſtronge, be lyke to become valiaunte and expert warryours, whoſe helpe thou mayeſt be aſſured to vſe in great ieopardyes, and all thynges ſhal chaunce to thy deſyre and mynde. Therfore diligent care and wyſedome is requyred in choſynge & takyng vp ſouldyours.
            
            
               186. ¶ What men they ſhoulde be to whome the kepynge of countries and cities is commytted.
               We muſt warely foreſee to what men we cōmyt the kepyng of prouinces, and cityes, and whome we make our lieufetenauntes, and that they be ryche and auncyent cytizins, of our owne cytie, hauyng chyldren thryfty and diſpoſed to vertues For ſuch men vndoubtedly wold be fayth full and loyall, in whome no ſuſpition of treaſon is to be feared, which wolde be reprocheable and ſhamefull to them, and theyr poſteritie, ne yet any falſehode is to be demed or miſtruſt in them.
            
            
               187. ¶ Of the maner of fyghtynge.
               Cauſe thy ſouldyours to foyne contynually, and not lay on downryght, which

force of fyghtynge is moche dreaded of thyne enemyes, cheifelye yf the foynes be caſt at the face. Theſe woundes ben vncurable, and the wounded haue more nede of a preeſte then of a ſurgyon. But yf thy men haue baſtarde ſwordes, or twohanded ſwordes, vſed in the aſt partyes, lette them gyue downryght ſtrokes. For thoſe ſwordes be ſo deedlye, that lyghtlye they wyll ſtryke of the heed, cleaue the bodye, and diſmembre all partes.
            
            
               188. ¶ In what place beſt it is to lodge thyne armye.
               Campe thy ſouldyours ſo nere as thou canſt, in places where fodder, water, and fewel is abundaunt, that thy ſouldiours maye haue plentye, withoute any ſtop or entercourſe of theyr enemyes. Beware al ſo to pitche thy pauilyons and tentes vnder an hyll, leſt thyne enemyes (vnwares to the) take and occupye the hylle, to thy greate diſcomfyture. Do thou alſo forſee that thyne armye, be not lodged in places whyche wyth raynes and brookes wyll be ſhortly ouerflowed, or where the bankes maye be cutout to drowne thyne armye, or at the leeſt thy catall and other vitayles.

Prouyde therwyth not to tarye, and kepe the hoſte, there where is al playnes, and champion grounde, for the daū
                  ger of gūnes. But to be brieue I can gyue no ſure rule where to lodge thyne armye. For the place and tyme muſt chaūge thy purpoſe, in which caſe the wittyneſſe of ye capitayn, & knowledge, is moch requyred
            
            
               189. ¶ How to make ſtronge the campe with fortreſſes, thyne enemyes aſſaultynge the.
               Yf thyne enemyes ben at hande, and nedes the cāpe muſt be fortifyed, ſet abrode a fewe horſemen, and a greater garryſon of fotemen readye to withſtande & dryue awaye thyne enemyes, vntyll thy fences & fortreſſes be wholy done, and then conuey them by lytle and litle into thy campe By whych meane thyne enemyes ſhal be mocked, and thy mē ſhal afterward more ſykerly raunge forth, and thyne enemyes whyche euen now reioyſed as victours, ſhalbe dryuen awaye with ſhame.
            
            
               190 ¶ To take our ſubiectes rather then ſtraungers for ſouldyours.
               Mete it is rather to rayſe and aſſēble an army of thyne owne mē thā of ſtraūgers,

whome thou ſhalt haue faythfull and redye in all peryls, which hauyng theyr coū
                  trye, parentes, chyldren, kynſemen & frendes, in remembraunce, wyl not gyue back ten tymes in the daye to daunger theyr lyues. In whiche mynde all kynges & princes be (excepte the wyſe and ryche Venetians) that they wolde rather take theyr owne men, then outpeople and aliens.
            
            
               191. ¶ What is to be done in thaſſemble and takyng vp of ſouldyours.
               When we purpoſe to make battayle, expedyeut it is to foreſee and ſurely know in what places the thyng is to be done.
               For yf we muſte trauayle in hyllye and rough places, our armye muſt be garnyſſhed, moche more with fotemen, thā horſe men. And the horſemē alſo muſt be lyght harneſſed, that wyth more eaſe they maye clymbe vp, and lykewiſe come downe the hylles, yf neade be to fyght on fote. But yf we muſt warre in playne and champyon countryes, then horſemen be mooſt neceſſarye. For fotemen wyll ſtande in lytle ſteade and vſe. Theſe thynges be ſpoken, not without ſome cōſyderation, whē in ye aſſemblie of an armie kynges and princes

ben at great charges, & ſomyme in vayne.
            
            
               192 ¶ To kepe thyne armye healthfull.
               The health of thyne Armye is mayntayned by exercyſe, by healthſome countrie and ſwete ayers: but chefelye where is plentye and abundaunce of vytayles.
               For of famyne the plage ſometyme doeth come, when men for wante and defaulte of vytayles, be dryuen to eate vnhealthſome and corrupted meates.
            
            
               193. ¶ what is to be done when waters can not be waded ouer.
               Where the water is ſo depe, that neyther fotemen ne yet horſemen dare venture ouer: beſt it is to turne the water into dyches out of the wont courſe, & great ſtreame, by whyche meane the water beinge fallen, thyne armye maye wade and paſſe ouer.
            
            
               194 ¶ To chaſtice and agrieue thyne enemyes hoſte.
               It is a good pollicie by hungre, rather then by weapon and incurtions, to vanquyſſhe thyne enemyes. For nothynge is more profytable, ne yet more prayſe worthye, then by vnbloudye battayle to ioyne the maſtrye. But take hede leſt thyne enemyes,

thus ſterued, and tamed, with hō
                  ger: do prouoke them by ſome dyſpleaſures to battayle. But then lye ſtylle, wyth thyne armye, and refrayne from anye aſſaultes, or bykerynges, vntyl theyr vitayles be whollye ſpent.
            
            
               195. ¶ To knowe yf any ſpyes lurke among thy ſouldiours.
               Although it be verye hard in a greate armie, to knowe the lurkyng ſpies, yet I wylle ſhewe ſome wayes, not vnprofitable, of whych this ſhalbe one. Oftētymes to ſerche and viewe thy regiſtre, & if there be any not regiſtred, and wrytten, it is a great token, thoſe to be ſpyes. And alſo yf any of them that be regeſtred, do carye ty dynges & thy endeuours to thother part, then nedefulle it is, to ſtoppe and beſette wayes, paſſages, and woodes, by nyght and daye, to take and to carye them to the capitayne there to be racked, yea and yf any do wander owte of the campe, the capitayne not commaundyuge, they ſhal be taken gyltye of petitreaſon. It ſhall be therefore, the offyce of a capitayne dayly to beholde aboute hys armie, bothe by hym ſelfe and other truſtye and beleueable

ſouldyers, and marke men by theyre face, by whych policye he ſhall knowe the tyme yf any of hys ſouldyours abode.
               The capitayne alſo muſte commaund al men to take theyre lodgyng by day lyght, and to be in theyre tentes, and yf any ſhal be ſuſpect, than take and impriſon them, by torment alſo conſtraynyng them to tel theyr intentes, cōmandes, and charges.
            
            
               196. ¶ To kepe cloſe theyr counſayles.
               Let the capitayne debate and diſcuſſe, wyth the wytty and experte warryours, nowe and agayne, what is to be done. But what he wyll do, let hym diſcloſe, & to diſcouer that to fewe, depelye wayeng the thynge, wyth hym ſelfe, by whych policie he ſhal neuer attēpte, ne enterpryſe, anye matter voydelye, whan hys endeuours, and affayres be vnknowen, and conceled: but by all wayes he ſhall haue hys owne deſyre.
            
            
               197. ¶ The oration of the capytayne to hys hoſte whā they be marchīgforthe to fyght.
               
                  
The hoſte vauncyng towarde battayl, the capitayne ought to ſpeake theſe wordes: that wyllynglye he wyll ſeke hys owne death, excepte he brynge with hym the victorie, which wordes wonderfully wyll moue and arrayſe theyr hertes, and chiefely yf they loue and haue hym in any reuerence, ſo that for his wont gentlenes and largeſſe, they wyll put theyr lyues in daūger to gette hym the glory & renoume coueytynge theyr death wyth hys death. Wherfore lette the capitayne ſhewe and perſuade to hys companye, that hys lyfe, death, and renoume, doo ſtande in theyr manlyneſſe and handes.
            
            
               198. ¶ To take thyne enemyes by wyles.
               Myne aduyſe is, to ſende forth thyne vnable ſouldyours, ſorye felowes & moſt vnprofytable, to be as a bayte, praye, and vntyſement to thyne enemyes, which prouoked and allured to take them priſoners or elles vtterlye to ſlee them, ryght waye maye be catched and trayned in ſnares. For they then gladſom of the lytle maſtry diſordrelye wyll (as victours) folowe the purſute and chaſe farreof, kepynge none

arraye. By which couyne and trayne, manye haue bene deceyued: whyche pollicye was not vnknowen of the Eaſte ſouldyours, whych dyd let looſe theyr horſes to ſtraye amonge theyr enemyes, and they coueytyng to ſteale the horſes, were takē and ſlayne.
            
            
               199. ¶ What is to be done wyth captyues and priſoners.
               It is not good to kylle the captyues, and priſoners, but to kepe them to tillage and thoſe chefelye that be burlye, carterlyke, and fytte thereto. For what profyte can come of theyr death, when yf they be kepte on lyue, we maye vſe them in huſbandrye: and of theyr labours get greate encreaſe and aduauntage. Which thyng hath bene done of many kynges and princes. And the Turke doeth at this tyme in drugerye and mooſte vyle occupations, kepe as ſlaues and bondmen, a great nō
                  bre of chryſten men (Alas to the reproche and ſhame of Chryſten princes) knowing hys armye can not be nouryſſhed, wythout the frutes of the grounde whyche beinge ſoulde, hys ſouldyours therby haue and receyue theyr wagies, knowyng alſo

famyne to be noyouſe, and worſe then a plage, to hys hoſte: whyche deſſtroyeth cities, countreyes, and townes.
            
            
               1000. ¶ To fynde ſwete water and freſſhe.
               Abowte the ſea bankes, freſſhe water is founde, alſo in the mydde lande, and places farre from the ſea, wher ſhrubbes do growe. Mete it is, the capytayne to haue knowledge of theſe thynges.
            
            
               1001. ¶ Of nyght battayle.
               If thou fyghte, in the nyghte tyme: profytable it is to haue the moone, on thy backe. For ſoo thyne enemyes, ſhall not well warde, ne eſcape the ſtrokes, of thy men. For the lyghte, and alſo for the falſe vmbrage, whych the Moone doth ſhewe fourthe.
            
            
               1002. ¶ Of the dewetye of the capitayne in excerſyſyng hys ſouldyours.
               Nedefulle it is, for a capytayne to knowe, before he come to battayle, that bothe hys horſemen, and alſo hys foote men, rude in the cunnyng of warre, muſt

be daylye exercyſed. For theyr vnſkylfulneſſe is the great deſtructiō, of the whole hoſte, when they knowe not howe for to kepe theyr arraye, nae yet what to do, but lyke men aſtonyſſhed, voyde of all warlye knowledge, and nowe to learne the feates of warre, in whoſe hand the chyfe parte of the battayle doth ſtand, begynne to ſtaye and proffer theyr backes.
            
            
               1003. ¶ Of the dewtye of the graunde capytaynes in battel.
               Kynges and prynces, (the counſayle lours of the weale publyke, for the tyme diſmiſſed) muſte calle vnto them, actyfe, and experte warryoures, and vſe theyr counſayles, in warlye affayres, not doynge anye thynge, raſhlye, agaynſt theyr aduertiſement, of whyche thynge Pompeyus maye be an example, that for hys knowlege of warre, deſerued to be called (magnus) great or noble, which whē he warred agaynſte Ceſar, was coſtrayned by the Senate, to chaunge hys pourpoſe

and to vſe an other waye, then he wyth hym ſelfe had decreed, or elles the commyng of warre requyred: wherby it chaū
                  ced that he was vanquyſſhed wyth hys frendes mooſt ſhamefullye.
            
            
               1004. ¶ Of the fotemen, and ſygne of battayle.
               The tentes redde, beforetokens of battayle to come, and ſygnes of the vyctorye, wyth the bloodſheddyng of thyne enemyes.
            
            
               FINIS libri primi.
         
         
            
            The ſecond boke.
            
               ¶ The Proheme of the ſeconde boke, vnto the lawes of warre.
               
                  IT nowe remayneth, that in fewe wordes we playnelye ſhewe and opē what lawes, the graunde capitaynes and alſo ye peticapitaynes ought to vſe agaynſt the defaultes of their ſouldyours, not onelye in tyme of warre, but alſo of peace. For without mans iuſtice and equitie, not armyes onelye, kyngdomes and lordſhyppes, but alſo lytle countryes can not longe contynue, and kepe theyr egall eſtate, ſuche ſtrength and vertue is in iuſtice and equitie. Therefore it ſhall not be moche vnprofytable, here ſhortly to ſhewe, what I haue founde in the Romayne lawes, and alſo what thinges ben obſerued and vſed nowe in theſe dayes, in the punyſhment of ſouldiours, whyche maye be taken for a lawe, ſo that

there ſhalbe none in the whole army, that can ſaye the capitayne to haue wronged and iniured hym.
            
            
               2. ¶ Of them that yelde theyr ſelues to theyr enemyes.
               Yf any yelde theyr ſelues to thyne enemyes, hauynge no iuſt and vrgent cauſe, the hygher he is in hys degree, the ſorer let hym be punyſſhed. And for this cauſe that the other ſouldyours and theyr capitaynes take none example of hym (the chaunce of the battayle not tryed) to yeld themſelues to theyr enemyes.
            
            
               3. ¶ Of an outſtrayer.
               He that leaueth and ſtrayeth from his owne companye, muſte be punyſſhed by the purſe, or els loſe hys place, or be ſende forth abrode lyke a ſlaue, that he maye be an example to other, not to ſtraye oute of ordre.
            
            
               4. ¶ Of a ſpye or outryder.
               A ſpye whyche wyll be entyſed, at the requeſt of hys enemyes, and ſo leaue hys capitayne, is worthy to be beheeded, and that iuſtlye. For the ſaulfetye and deſtruction of the whole hoſte doeth lye in hym.

Wherfore hys punyſhment muſte be the greater.
            
            
               5. ¶ Of ronneawayes and landeleapers.
               They that ronne to theyr enemyes, & then after returne, muſt be hanged. He alſo that is purpoſed to flye, and in ye meane tyme intertaken, is worthye to be beheeded. Whiche lawe amonge oure ſouldyours now on dayes is put in vre, but not afore.
            
            
               6. ¶ Of them that loſe theyr harneys.
               He that loſeth his harneys in battayl or ſhall alienate them, muſt chaunge hys place, but he that ſtealeth others, muſt be put out of his ſouldyourſhyppe.
            
            
               7. ¶ Of them that do thynges prohybited, and kepe not the lawes and decrees proclaymed.
               He that ſhal do any thyng forbydden of the capitayne, and therwyth doeth not kepe hys commaundementes, muſt be be heeded: although the thynge be not well done. Alſo yf he ſteale into the campe, by walles or ditches, dryuē by no great feare he is worthye the ſame punyſhment.
            
            
               8. ¶ Of them that rayſevp ſedicion.
               
                  
They that ſtyre vp anye ſedition, are mooſt worthye to be beheeded, but yf the ſedicion ſhal come of ſome light cōplaynt then put them out of theyr place of ſouldyourſhyppe, whych fyrſt dyd moue that buſyneſſe.
            
            
               9. ¶ Of a legion reculynge.
               Yf any legion gyue backe, let them loſe the name of chiualrye for euer.
            
            
               10 ¶ Of banyſhed perſonage.
               Banyſhed perſonnes intromyttynge theyr ſelues to be taken vp as ſouldiours muſt be beheaded for the dignitie of chyualrye.
            
            
               11. ¶ Of hym that is ſentforth lyke a ſlaue.
               He that is ſente awaye lyke a drudge, for the glorye of chiualry, muſt not be receyued as a ſouldyour agayne, that the renoume of chiualry therby be not impaired.
            
            
               12. ¶ Of them that be iudged to dye.
               They that be iudged to dye, for ye ſclaū
                  der that runneth on them, muſt not be taken in and receyued.
            
            
               13. Of them that ſteale ye youth of chiualrie
               He that ſhall ſteale yonge ſcholers in ye feates of warre, in tyme of warre, muſte

be exyled, and loſe parte of hys goodes in tyme of peace, he muſt be beaten with ſtanes or kytgels.
            
            
               14. ¶ Of hym that maymeth a yonge ſouldyour.
               He that maymeth a yonge ſouldyour of chiualrie, is worthye banyſhment.
            
            
               15. ¶ Of hym that leaueth hys compagnie.
               An horſeman that leaueth hys companye in tyme of warre, deſerueth heedyng and in tyme of peace to loſe his roume.
            
            
               16. ¶ Of them that rebell.
               He that doeth offre violent handes to any of the capitaynes, is worthy heeding and that fault is augmented by the ſtate and honour of the capitayne.
            
            
               17. ¶ Of diſobedience and ſturdyneſſe.
               Diſobedience agaynſt the graunde capitayne, or peticapitayne, is worthy heedynge.
            
            
               18. ¶ Of hym that flyeth.
               He that fyrſte tourneth his face in the battayle to the example of other, deſerueth heedyng. For by ſuche cowardly and holloweherted felowes, thyne enemyes be comforted and encouraged, and thyne

owne men diſcouraged and afrayed.
               Wherby it happeneth oftentymes, thyne armye retreatynge to be dryuen downe & ſlayne: wherfore this penaltie is iuſtlye ordeyned for ſuche heauye hertes.
            
            
               19. ¶ Of ſpyes and ſcoutwatches.
               Eſpials whych reuele and open thy ſecretes to thyne enemyes, be ranke & hygh traytours. Wherfore to haue theyr heed chopped of, is theyr mete punyſhment. Alſo thoſe whyche diſſemble ſykneſſe, for anye feare, be worthye the ſame punyſhment.
            
            
               20. ¶ Of hym that woundeth hys felowe.
               Choppe of hys heed that woundeth his felowe with a ſworde, and thruſt him out of hys roume, that hurleth a ſtone at hys felowe: leſt of ſuche braulynges ſome ſedicion do ryſe.
            
            
               21. ¶ Of runneawayes and traytours.
               Cauſe ronneawayes and traytours to be racked, before they ſuffre heedynge, to knowe yf they haue not other felowes, priuye and alied to the ſame conſpiracie.
            
            
               22. ¶ In what places thy ſouldyours

ſhalbe forbydden to bye thy bytayles.
               Forbydde and reſtrayne, thy ſouldyours to bye theyr vitayles, in thoſe places where they kepe warre, leſt the countrye men be conſtrayned rather for feare, then for a iuſt price, to ſel theyr wares, and leſt that by dayntye fare, thy ſould yours be flacke in theyr feates of chiualrye.
            
            
               23. ¶ Of them that leaue nyghtwatche.
               Beheede them that leaue the nyghtwatche, whiche punyſhment is nedefull, when not only the capitayne, but alſo the whole armye deepely and ſoundly ſleape, in the eyes of the watche, and the diligēce of the watche, is the foretreſſe and defēce of thyne armye. What thyng therfore is more ſhamefull and cruell then to betray and ſlee the whole army ſlepynge, and takyng theyr reſt after theyr werye trauayles and buſyneſſe.
            
            
               24. ¶ Of them that ſcape out of priſon.
               He that ſcapeth oute of pryſon, is not lykened to ronneawayes. For that was done to ſaue hys lyfe, which thyng nature hath graunted to all beaſtes.
            
            
               25. ¶ Of a ronneagate or ſtrydlande.
               
                  
A ronnegate brought agayne, by hys father, is to be punyſhed more gently, thā by the heed.
            
            
               26. ¶ Of the tyme appoynted by the capitayne.
               He that doeth not repayre to hys companye by the tyme appoynted, without a lawfull excuſe, is to be taken and accompted a ronnegate.
            
            
               27. ¶ Of a diſturber of the peace.
               Punyſſhe by heedyng that ſouldyour, which bringeth thyne army in an vprore
            
            
               28. ¶ When thy ſouldiours be in theyr iourneye.
               Souldiours which be taken vn wares and ſodaynly (theyr former lyfe wel knowen) are worthye pardone.
            
            
               29. ¶ Of them that ſcatre out of the cōpany.
               They that wandre from theyr company are worthy to be kidgelled or loſe their place.
            
            
               30. ¶ Of a captyue.
               Yf any of thy men that is taken priſoner wolde not returne when he mought, decken hym for a ronneawaye, but yf he returne, receyue hym: yf it be ſure that he was taken agaynſt hys wyll, and ranne not thyther.
            
            
               
               31. ¶ Of them that forſake the capytayne.
               He that doth not helpe and defend hys capytayne, whan he maye, or leaueth hym whan he is enuironed & ſet abowte wyth enemyes, is worthye to be hanged on a payre of gallowes.
            
            
               32. ¶ Of gonners on horſebacke.
               It ſhal not be vnprofitable to acquaynten and wount your horſes, as the duchmen do, to ſuffer the ſytter whyche is a gunner and not to be affrayed therof. For no ſorte of ſouldyers, is more profytable thā they nor yet doth more myſchife and hurte. For no man is ſo well harnayſed, that can be ſaulfe from them: ſuch a vyolence is in that warlye inſtrumente.
            
            
               33. Of gunnes called ſerpētines wyth other.
               It ſhall be very profitable to haue many wagons & charettes laden with gons For there is none armye ſo ſtrong, whom they wyll not deſtroye, ſo that horſes & men far of be ſlayne, wyth them. Alſo the great ſounde ſhal ſo feare men, that their ſtrength and courage ſhal fal and decay.
            
            
               
               34. ¶ Of a profitable defence of the campe.
               A greate defeuce for thy campe, ſhalbe to haue manye wagons and carres, ſhod wyth yron, and aboue thoſe turrettes of wood fylled wyth ſerpentines and other kyndes of gonnes, whyche is the ſureſte defence for thy campe.
            
            
               35. ¶ To gyue thankes and prayſe to god after the victorye.
               Becauſe we be pourpoſſed to leaue nothynge in this booke vnto wched, whych is to be requyred, in warlye knowlege, & eke in the connynge of chyualdrie. Therefore comelye it is the head leader of the armye, (the victory ones atchyued and gotten) humblye to rendre and gyue prayſe, euerlaſtynge, wyth hys whole hoſte, to the lyuynge lorde, that he of his vnſpeke able and omniſufficient mercye, in other battayles, wolde be mercyful, and good vnto them, for wythout the helpe ſuccour and ſtrength of the Lorde, mans power is vnable and nothyng. And yf the lyuing god, ſhalbe wyth vs, & fyght on our ſyde, what can the ſwordes of oure ennemyes hurte or harme vs. Therefore the chyefetayne

or graunde capytayne, (no tyme let paſſe, ne no tariaunce made) & his whole armye, wyth a pure ſincere and vnfained herte ought to gyue thankes to the Lord offerynge vp wyth a faythefulle mynde, wherwyth god is pleaſed.
            
            
               36. ¶ Whether it be lawful for chriſten men to make and ſtyr vppe battayle.
               Leaſte that ſome men, readynge thys my booke, ſhoulde doubte whether it be lawful for chriſten men to ſtyrvp battayl whan that man ſlaughter, captiuitye, rauyne, deflowrynge of maydēs, and take demaynes, do folowe thereof. To plucke thys fanſie oute of theyr mynde, let them knowe in fewe woordes that warfare is no ſyn, but he that kepeth batayle, highly pleaſeth the Lorde, whyche thynge doth playnlye apere by holy George, and Dauid the electe prophete of god, and by the battayle & turnamēt of Centurio. I leue of the teſtimonies of ſaynt Gregory, & other ſayntes, which do ſay & affirme, that god is not diſpleſed wt warre. But what ſhal I ſaye of the vndowted, & vnfallible ſayenge of Chryſte, which commaundeth

tribute to be payde to Ceſar, that he may haue to beſtowe on hys ſouldyers, and ſo to kepe the worlde in peace and quyet, the whyche peace, god the rewarder of all faythefull hath lefte here behynde hym, the onlye pawne, and pledge of hys mercyfull goodnes. Shall we therfore dyſproue chryſten warrefare, of whyche we haue ſuche a commoditye? The ſouldyours alſo ought to be content, wyth their wages, and not to craue more than their duetye is. But that ſuche menne, maye wyth greate prayſe and glorye, kepe battayle, mete it is theſe qualityes and vertues, to appere and ſhyne in them.
               ¶ Fyrſte that he be a temporall man, actyue and valiante. For the defence of hys contreye, and iuſtyce, caſtynge no peryls, expert and cunnynge in warlye feates, ſo ber and temperate in lyuynge, prompte to do all thynges, reaſonable, ſowthefaſt and faythfull, wyttye, mercyfull: and of good hope. If theſe thynges ſhalbe in the capitaynes, and rulers, what can be blamed in them? be they not then acceptable vnto god.
            
            
               
               37. They that go on warfare, do leaue theyr iewels behynde at home.
               When we go forth to battayle, good it is to carye nothyuge wyth vs, that is of any valewe, excepte oure horſes, and harnays, no ne yet to leaue any thynge in the campe, and tentes, leaſt oure enemies be thereby ſtrengthed and encouraged to fyghte for the hope & deſyre of that pray. For all men be endewed wyth thys of nature, that for ryches and vauntage ſake, they thynke all perylles lyght and eaſye, all labours a playe and ſporte. Therfore do we leaue our ryches at home, leaſt vnwyllynge we gyue mattyer and occaſyon to our enemyes to fyght, and ſo of daſterdes, make them bolde: of cowardes, coragyouſe.
            
            
               38. ¶ To make the water noyſome and vnhealthſome to thyne enemies.
               If we couet to make the water poiſon full to oure enemyes, it ſhall not be vnprofytable, to caſt a great quantity of wood, broken and bruſed a ſonder, in the vpper

parte of the ſtreame, whereby the water ſhall be bytter to the taſt, that neyther mē
                  ne horſes maye drynke of it.
            
            
               39. ¶ In what place the battayle is to be fought.
               The chyeftayne muſte forſee and prouyde, that hys men maye haue a water behynde theyr backes, to refreſhe and water theyr horſes, and hys ennemies none, by whyche meane forſothe, he ſhall carye away the mayſtry, whan hys enemies, & theyr horſes weryed by longe trauayle, and fyght, can haue no refreſhment.
            
            
               40. ¶ To kepe the citie beſyeged in faythe and conſtancie.
               Oftētymes it chaunceth, cities to be be ſyeged, and therwyth to ſuffer greate famyne and honger (thonly tamer of men) ouer theyr huge & paynfull watchynges in the ſame ſyege, whyche al do cauſe the cities rather and ryght waye to gyue vp, and yelde, except the capitayne by his policie, wyth fayre woordes and exhortacions, do kepe the citizens in ſure fayth and cōſtancie diſſemblynge & faynyng manye thynges. In example and profe whereof I wyll note ſome thynges hereafter that

capitaynes inſtructed wyth my leſſons, maye ſerche mo wayes, to kepe the citie, to theyr kynge or prince, obeyſaūt & fayth full. Wherfore fyrſt the capitayne, ought to feyne letters, ſente from hys lord wher in he is promyſed, in ſhorte ſpace to haue more ayde and ſuccoure. And yf he ſhall perceyue them waueryuge, and bente to yelde vp, he muſte go abowte at ſome tymes, to perſwade them, by orations decked & garnyſhed wt art, and pyked reaſōs to plucke them from ſuch a myſchyfe, promyſyng them all libertye. Than after let hym alſo laboure, that letters faſtened to ſhaftes, maye be cōueyed by nyght, to the batelyng of towres in whyche ſome cityzen is admonyſhed by ſome good frend of hys, in the armye of theyr enemies, not to yelde and gyue vp the citye. For theyr capitayne is diſceyptefull, and worketh all by couyne and craft whych (although his promiſes be fayre) is mynded wyth fiere and ſwoorde, to deſtroye the whole citie. And ſuche other thynges are to be feyned, whyche appere trouthlyke, that the countenaunce of the ſyege, maye not be grenous to the citizens.
            
            
               
               41. ¶ To ſcape oute of a narrowe place.
               It chaunceth of tentymes, thyne army wanderynge in hyllye countryes, to entre into ſome narrowe and ſtrayte place, beſette couertlye, with thyne enemyes. Where, what to do, or whyther to turne, thy men doe not well knowe: wherfore a ſkylful capytayne, muſt thus prouyde, yt yf he be not of power to dryue hys enemies, from thenſe by ſtrength, let hym daye and nyghte ſeche, when they be wythout watch, and then ſodaynlye, and vnloked for, ruſhe vppon them. At other tymes, let hym fayne deſpeyre, and retrace backe in many ſkyrmyſſhes, layenge ſome pyked and actyue warryours, in couerte embuſſhemente.
            
            
               42. ¶ Of bowes.
               Fotemen with bowes, whych englyſh men vſe: do greate ſeruyce in an hoſt. For there is no breſte plate, whyche is able to wythſtand, and holde owte the ſtroke of the arrowes, ſuche force and vyolence is in bowes.
            
            
               43. ¶ Of the owtragyouſe aſſault of thyne enemyes.
               
                  
Yf thyne enemyes that be horſemen, be within a myle, and do come towarde the outragiouſly (the reynes of theyr horſes beinge let ſlacke) ſtaye there. And yf they be fotemen and be within halfe a myle, ſtande ſtyll, and gredelye receyue them, pantyng for weryneſſe, hertynge thy men boldly to fyght, and to gyue manye a ſore ſtroke, which thyng maye be done, when thyne enemyes be weryed.
            
            
               44. ¶ To foreſee the place rounde about, where the battayle ſhall be.
               Beware to gyue battayle, except thou haue before diligently viewed, by thy ſelf and thyne eſpyals, yf there be any ieoper dye of traynes and gyles, leſt thou ouerthrowe thy ſelfe. When thyne enemyes at what tyme thou arte mooſt earneſtlye ſet to fyght, ſhall oppreſſe the ſodaynlye, eyther on thy backe, or elles on thy ſyde: where thou ſhalt yelde thy ſelfe vanquyſhed and taken, bycauſe the defaulte can not be eſcaped ne holpen, and al through thyne vnwareneſſe.
            
            
               45. ¶ To ſet vpon thyne enemyes in theyr iourneye.
               
                  
Yf we can knowe what waye out enemyes wyll take theyr voyage and iourneye, it ſhall not be vnprofytable, ſpedelye to preuent them, and gettynge a place conuenyent to lye in wayte, and ſet vpon them vnwares, lokyng for no ſuch thing For then vndoubtedly, eaſye it is to ouermatche and conquere thyne enemyes.
            
            
               46. ¶ What is to be done when our enemyes ouermatche vs in force.
               It chaunceth to haue ſuche men, oure enemyes whoſe force and ſtrength vneth or not at all we ben able to ſuſteyne: wherfore myne aduyſe is to entreate the force of our enemyes, and beſeche ayde & ſuccour at theyr handes, or to ſeke for helpe of them that bordre on vs, and bene oure neyghbours, warnyng them dyuers wayes of the ieopardye that is at hande of theyr lordſhyppes, and yf the ſoner they do not aide and releue them, they can not but yelde and ſubmyt theyr ſelues, which thyng ſhalbe alſo great damage to them For the downefall and burnynge of thys houſe, is the fyrematche of the nexte.
            
            
               
               47. ¶ what is to be done when we do fyght in ſtraites.
               Yf bothe the hoſtes mete and ioyne in ſtrayte places, and neythet wyll recule, one fote, but ſtyfly endure the fyght, then myne aduyſe is, the cheftayne (takynge a certayne of hys ſtronge and weyghtye ſouldyours) to aſſayle hys enemyes commyng on theyr backe, or one the one wing although the paſſage be daūgerous and longe: whereby certes he ſhall attayne a prayſeworthye victorie, wyth lytle loſſe or none, of his men.
            
            
               48. ¶ Of ouermoche confidence.
               Yf we haue gotten thupper hande, of parte of our enemyes, it is not good to tō tinue the battayle, truſtynge in our puiſſaunce, and ſo hope on a greater victorye, leſt we put in haſarde what we haue gotten, encountrynge with the whole hoſte, whych were fondely and raſhly done.
            
            
               49. ¶ Of the capitaynes cōmaundement that no man take any priſoner.
               Yf we purpoſe and trauayle to gette a notable conqueſt of our enemyes, the capytayne oughte to commaunde, vnder

a greate penaltye, to hys men, that they take no priſoner, ne captyue, vntyl he ſhal gyue ſome token of the ſame, which pollicie is not the worſt. For the ſouldyours ſhall then loſe no tyme, about captyues, but ſhall wyth al theyr force put to flight beate downe, and kylle theyr ennemyes. Whyche done, hereafter the capytayne maye gyue the ſygne of praycatchynge.
            
            
               50. ¶ Not to departe from the place appoynted.
               Peticapitaynes be wonte oftentymes, bycauſe they wolde be iudged valyaunte and ſkylfull, to departe from the place appoynted, in hope of ſome praye, and pyllage: whyche thyng hath ben the cauſe of great ſlaughter, in many battayles, and the loſſe of victorie: wherfore the peticapi taynes muſt learne to be obeyſaunt to the commaundement of theyr capitaynes, & not to ſeme more wytfull then they be.
            
            
               51. ¶ That the tentes be not leafte vndefenced.
               When the capitayne ſhal diſplaye and aduaunce his baners to battayl, let hym beware that he leaue not his campe vndefenced,

and vnmaymed leſt when he is mooſte enforced to fyght, his vytayles be deſpoyled, his campe ſet on fyre, (as it is lyke to be) and after he ſhall haue no ſuch place ſo defenced, vnto his great damage and hynderaunce.
            
            
               52. ¶ Of thyne enemyes fallyng in varyaunce and ſtryfe.
               Yf the capitaynes of thyne enemyes do not well agree, it is then expedyent, before they fall to an onement and concorde intermyttyng no tyme to aſſaulte them. For the mayſtrye then wyll be lyghtlye wonne, when not one, of a ſtubburne ſtomake wyll conſent and agree to thothers aduertyſement. But had leauer to be ſubdued of his enemyes, then cōquere by the pollicie of hys fooe.
            
            
               53. ¶ Let thy men be redye in harneys, thyne enemyes lying at hande.
               Yf the campe of thyne enemyes be pytched nygh vnto the, ſuffre by no meanes, not for anye fayre woordes of thyne enemyes, nor promyſſe of truce and alience, that thy men ben out of harneys (chiefely the beſt part ne yet yt thy ſouldours, neglect watche and warde. For not ſeldome

tymes, it chaunceth in leage of peace, thy men to be beaten downe, ſlayne and conquered, by traynes and wyles, whom ꝓweſſe and manlyneſſe coulde neuer haue ſubdued.
            
            
               54. ¶ Of the beſiegyng of cyties.
               Let not thyne armye doubt to ſetvpon cytis warded with all kyndes of defences yf they ſhall perceyue daſtardes, and vnſcylfull fellowes to kepe the defence. For hygh towres, ſtronge double walles, can not defende thoſe that be cowardes, caytyfes, and rude of all warlye knowledge. Feare doth ſtoppe theyr eares, and daſyll theyr ſyght. Wherfore without taryaūce when thou ſhalt come to ſuche cytyes, ſet vpon them rounde about, thonderyng as heauen, with noyſe and outeryes, whom it ſhall be eaſye to vanqnyſſhe, wythoute moche blooudſheddynge. But beware, thou ſlacke not and abate thyne aſſaulte, vntyll thou haue wonne the cytie, leſte theyr courages and force by ſufferaunce, encreaſe, and ſo the ſiege ſhall be daylye more paynefull and harde.
            
            
               55. ¶ To make brydges wyth ropes.
               
                  
Auncient capitaynes were wonte to caryouer theyr armye (bycauſe bootes and queres were ſcante & daungerous) wyth ioyned brydges made of wood. But bycauſe ſtuffe doth ſomtyme want to make ſuche brydges, and longe it is yer they cā be done, mynd aduyſe is to make brydges wyth ſtronge ropes, caſt ouer the water, knytte faſt to pyles and ſtakes of woodde and in the myddes of the ſtreame, vnderſet with proppes and beames to make them ſtyffe. For the eaſye paſſage of thy men. And ſuche ropes the armye maye alwayes carye with them, that they be not ſtopped at any water.
            
            
               56. ¶ To reuenge our enemyes with lyke anoyaunce.
               It chaunceth oft tymes, eyther for valyaunt proweſſe of our enemyes, or ye multitude of them that thy men doo ſultayne great loſſe and dammage: whych is to be reuenged mooſt fierſely, with ſuche an other lyke, and not to be forgotten and vn payed. For by ſuche diſpleaſures or vyolence ſhoulde ben enflamed to vengeaūce, whereby we ſhall kepe oure dygnytye, and purchaſſe the good opynyon of oure

ſouldyours, and alſo of the communaltie, which ſhalbe a ſtay to kepe the ſame faith full and ſothfaſt.
            
            
               57 ¶ How to conueye the battayl from one place to an other.
               Yf it be more daungerous and noyous vnto the, to gyue battayle in thys place, than in that, vſe thys remeadye. Carye thyne armye vnto the other countryes of thyne ennemyes, beſyegynge theyr cities, burnynge the villages, ſpoylyng and waſtynge the fyeldes, and ſo cauſe them rather to followe the, then thou to followe them. But for all that, do not leaue thyne owne countryes vndefenſed, deſyryng to waſte and deſtroye others.
            
            
               58. ¶ To relyeue the ſcarcenes of water.
               If cities and townes beſyeged, haue ſcarſitye of water, thys remeadye is next Fyrſte to ſende out the baſe people, we
                     •
                  n and vnprofitable, and then to kyll all the cattell, and laye them in ſalte for theyr ſuſtenaunce, that the water whych was ſo waſted by them, may be kepte, by whych meane, they ſhal be able to contynue longer aſſaulte.
            
            
               
               59. ¶ To recouer cities and. townes loſte.
               If we haue loſte in ſommer tyme (oppreſſed wyth the multitude of enemies, deceyued by the defaulte of oure men, or vndermyned wyth ſome trecherye) our cities or townes, lette vs endeuour to reſtaure in winter tyme the ſame cities, that the thynges loſt by the ſlowthefulnes, of oure ſouldyours, in ſommer tyme, maye be recouered wyth ſpedynes, and diligēs in wynter, and that we wynne agayne & reſtore the fame of chiualdrye, by the agayne gettynge of oure loſſes. For good fortune, ſometymes doeth enſue, by the chaunge of tyme.
            
            
               60. ¶ What is to be done whan thou art ouermatched.
               Yf thyne enemies gredely purſue the, ne yet then thow arte not able to defende and wythſtande theyr vyolence: beſt it is to carye thyne armye, to ſome cyties nigh vnto the ſea, bothe for the plentye and aboundance of vytayle, and alſo to refreſh theyr broken ſtrengthe, and wangled bodyes, and chyefty to furnyſſhe thy numbre, that thou mayſte matche thyne ennenyes,

aſwell in noumbre of men, as alſo in valyantnes.
            
            
               91. ¶ To ſet fyere on thyne ennemies pauylions
               If thyne enemyes pauilions be rered vp, and made of dry ſtuffe, trauayle with all, haſte, to ſette them on fyre, and cheefe lye the wynde blowyng harde. By which policie they ſhall be deſpoyled, bothe of theyr cattayle, and other neceſſary implementes. For the fyer taken wt the wynde ſodaynlye wyll ouerburne all the pauilions. And than alſo thowe mayſte haue a good tyme, to ſette vppon them. For whā they be doubtful, what is to be done whether to reſiſte thy force, or to ſaue theyr ryches, (whyche they ſet more by than their lyfe) they maye eaſelye be put to flyghte, and be ſlayne, and ſo then ſhall atchyue the victory wythout much bloodſhedyng
            
            
               62. ¶ What is to be done when we can not atcheue out of a place wyth our armye.
               ¶ We come ſomtymes by chaunce, wt our armye, into ſuche places, where neyther long we can abyde, ne yet ſaufely departe, or yet retreate wythout great daunger,

than what is to be done in ſuch trouble and vttermoſt diſcumfyture, wyth all ſpede we muſte take counſayle, whā that one waye of our ſauftye dothe remayne, that we take truce wyth them for a tyme and Promyſſe ſure couenauntes of peace by wytfull ābaſſadours. Wherby it ſhall be ſure, that thyne enemyes more neglygentlye, wyl kepe watche and ward. And thy tyme ſpyed, it ſhalbe lyght to paſſe by and eſcape eyther by nyght, or els by day, owt of that daungerous place. But ſomtyme perforce thou muſt open a lane, and make a waye, by harde ſtrokes and manfull fyghtynge.
            
            
               63. ¶ To make an aſſemble and ſhewe of horſemen in the face of thyne enemyes.
               ¶ Myne aduiſe is, that the numbre of our ſouldyours maye appere greate and huge, to harneys the lacqueis of our horſmen, and apoynte them, to ſtande farre of lyke a garriſon of men, wyth the poyntes of theyr ſperes vpryght. For ſo thyne ennemyes wyll iudge a bande of horſemen there to appere, whyche ſhall moche affraye theym, that we haue yet ſo greate

a noumbre of ſouldyers at hande, to ſuccour and ayde vs yf nede requyre.
            
            
               64. ¶ To refrayne frō the beſiege of ſuche cities whych haue daylye newe ſuccour.
               Beſt it is to wythdrawe and leaue of the ſyege of ſuche cities, whych fetch vnto them (maugrye our teth and in ſpyte of our hertes) daylye newe ſuccour. For the aſſaulte through theyr new ayde, is hard yea almoſte vnpoſſible, when luſtye and ſtronge men, occupy the rowmes of them that be woūded, and theyr vytayles be ſo plentye, that they fele no lacke nor ſkarſitye. Wherfore we muſt all wayes fyght wyth freſſhe men, newe ſtrengthes, and plentye of vytayles. But yet ſodaynly to breke owte, and beſyege ſuche cities I do not muche dyſalowe.
            
            
               65. ¶ What is moſte expedient for the chyfe capitayne to do at the fyrſt entrye in to countreyes.
               If we make entries in to any countrey wyth an armye, myne aduiſe is, bycauſe it were paynful, & harde, to lay ſyege to euery towne, and aſſaulte euery citie, to

ſende ſage and honeſt perſonages, to promiſſe, for a long tyme, the releaſe of their rentes, and affyrme the ſame wyth fayth and many othes. Yf wyllyngly they wyl yelde and become hys lyeges, and trewe ſubiectes.
            
            
               66. ¶ What is to be done in ye ſyege of bygge cities.
               In the ſyege of greate cities, takyng a bygge compaſſe rounde abowte, we muſt wyth all laboure: make and intercut not farre of the citte, brode and depe trenches defenſed wyth turrettes of woodde, for feare of ſodayne eruption, owte of the citye, whyche is the cauſe of many incommodities, than brode wayes muſt be caſt that thone parte of the hoſte, maye haue courſe and recourſe to helpe the other yf nede be.
            
            
               67. ¶ What is to be done whā oure enemyes ſpyes are taken.
               Yf the ſpyes of oure enemyes chaunce into our handes, myne aduiſement is, to graunt them lyfe, and gyue to them gret ſummes of money, therby to knowe the counſayle of oure enemyes, and their purpoſe,

and ſemblable to tell to them what thynges be mooſte profytable, for vs to knowe. For nothynge is more neceſſary, than to knowe the endeuours, of our ennemyes, whan lytle or nothyng they can hynder what we do pourpoſe. But yf we ſhal ſende theym awaye liberallye, rewarded, demaundynge nothynge of thaffayres, of our enemies, it ſhalbe a great argument of confydence & aſſured boldnes in vs, to the great feae of orur enemyes, But the capitayne may take counſayle of thinges, & performe what he ſhal thinke neceſſarie.
            
            
               68. ¶ Not to haue one eſpye alwayes.
               Do we remembre thys, that it is not conuenient ne yet neceſſarye to vſe one eſpye ſtyll. For they allured and enuegled, with ye hope of great rewardes, do bring oure conueyaunces and affayres, to the eares of our enemyes, and recount to vs ſuche thynges, as be falſe and nothynge neceſſarye, wyth many falſe lyes, wherefore we muſte diligentlye forſee, that neyther of the ſcoute watches, the one know the other, for feare of crafte and trechery whyche thyng ones knowen, to hang thē is nexte remedye.
            
            
               
               69. ¶ To knowe the feare and cowardiſe of thyne ennemies.
               Whan the hoſtes bene at ioynynge, yf we perceyue the ſperes of our ennemyes, to mooue and beate to gyther, that is a great ſygne of theyr waueryng, and hollowe hertes. And it is good ſomtyme to know ſuche tokens of cowardnes.
            
            
               70. Of the duetye of bolde and ſtoute fellowes.
               It becommeth not thoſe that be balyaunt, to feare any ieoperdye, or to be broken wyth the doubtefull chaunge of fortune, when nothynge is ſo vnweldable, that by manlye prowes, and ſufferaunce, maye not be conquered and vndertroden.
            
            
               71. ¶ To recouer the health of thy ſouldyers.
               If thyne armye be troubled wyth any dyſeaſe, & yu doeſt couet to recouer theyre wounte healthe, it ſhall be the beſt, to carye them to open and hyllye places.
            
            
               72. ¶ A policie to diſceyue and defraude our enemyes.
               Eaſy it is to trifle wyth our enemyes, and make them beleue that we be vnharneyſed

yf we couer oure harueys, wyth ſome kynde of rayment, vnder whych coloure and gyle, they wyll come hedlynge to fyght, and wyth fewe raſhlye, wyl ſet vppon vs.
            
            
               73. ¶ To gette the fauour of oure ſouldyers.
               If the capytayne be dyligente to heale them that be wounded, and alſo cheryſſhe the ſycke folke, ſhortleye he ſhall wynne the fauoure of hys ſouldiours, ſo that for the encreaſe of his renowme, they wyll not ſhrynke: to beſtowe and ſpende theyr lyfe.
            
            
               74. ¶ To haue fyere to burne in water.
               It ſhalbe very profitable ī warres on the ſea, to haue an artificiall fyer, whych wyth water canne not be queanched, by whyche policie, the nauye of Sarracena, was deſtroyed at Conſtantinople, and the kynge therby payd yerelye a hundred poundes of golde for tribute.
            
            
               75. ¶ What is to be done whan capytaynes do not a gree in one ſentence.
               
                  
It chaūceth oft times yt mindes of yt capitaynes to be diuerſe & variable, about the beſiege of cities, where beſt it is fyrſte to begyn, and there chefely where the armie is furnyſhed wyth lyke power of dyuers capitaynes. But what is to be doone in ſuche a chaunge of myndes, ſhortlye ſhall you knowe. Wryte the names of the cytie and caſt them into a potte, and the cytye whych ſhal fyrſt by chaunce be taken out ſet vpon that wholye togyther, wyth one force and power, whiche aduertyſement is not the worſte. For through ſuche dyſcorde, the death of an whole armye maye ryſe and come.
            
            
               76. ¶ Of falſe hode to be reuenged.
               Although other iniuryes maye be ſuffered, and to forget them is a token of a noble mynde, yet diſſoyaltye by all meanes is to be reuenged and acquyted.
            
            
               77. ¶ A waye to laye ſiege to cytyes on the ſee ſyde.
               When we may arryue and caſt anker by the walles of the cytye, myne aduyſe is, to dryue thyne enemyes of the walles is this. Fyrſt hard & faſt, to bynde the maſtes of the ſhyppes togyther with the gable

ropes nye ſome ſhore, and ſo to make a brydge, that the gunnes maye ſtande to beate thyne ennemyes from the walles, whych ones dryuen away, it ſhall be eaſy on that ſyde to ſette ladders, and ſcale the walles to the wynnyng of the cytie.
            
            
               78 ¶ Where we haue onely welle water.
               Yf for the greate ſcarcitie of water, we ben enforced to occupye wel water, great hede is it to be taken, that ſuche welles be not poyſoned, by ſome crafte: to the vtter deſtruction of theyr whole hoſte, whyche ſone maye chaunce, yf we take not mooſt dyligent care and hede.
            
            
               79. ¶ To choſe a place to fyght in.
               When our enemyes doo preuayle in force and nombre of men, and we can not auoyd but gyue battayl, beſt it is to choſe a narrowe and ſtrayte place, leſt our enemyes encloſe and compaſſe vs rounde about, wherby we ſhalbe ſone vanquyſhed and ouercomen.
            
            
               78. ¶ To mocke our enemyes.
               Yf we be dryuen to flyght on the hye ſee,

for that we be not able to matche our enemyes, and they make ſayle after vs verye ſwyftly, and ben euen in our tayle, it ſhalbe good to mocke them thus. Fyrſte to cauſe our nauye to ſtryke ſayle, and make a bragge as we wolde fyght, that done, wyll the maryners (at a ſygne gyuen) to hoyſe vp the ſayles, to be readye to flye agayne, the whych thynge when thyne enemyes ſhall perceyue, ſhortly wyll they ſhyppe theyr ores, and take them to theyr harneys, couerynge theyr heedes wyth theyr ſallettes, and brefely prouydyng all thynges whych ſhall be thought neceſſary for battayle. Thē when we ſhal ſe our enemyes harneſſed, and readye to fyght, (the ſygne gyuen) our nauye maye make awaye with all haſte, and flye. And they loden wyth harneys, ſhall not recouer to ouertake vs.
            
            
               81. ¶ When thyne hoſte is in great ieopardye.
               When thyne armie is in great ieoperdie, my coūſayl is yt chiefe capitayne, yea & al yt capitaynes, to lyght downe from theyr horſes, therby to encourage the hertes of their ſouldiours by their bold aduēture &

lyke daunger, and that more ſtoutlye and gredely they maye fyght, ſeing theyr capitaynes beinge in lyke peryll, and fierſelye encountrynge wyth theyr ennemyes, and ſo the ſouldyours caſtynge of all hope to flye, may couſydre this with them ſelues eyther to vanquyſh theyr enemyes, or els to dye with glorye and prayſe.
            
            
               82 ¶ what is to be done when thyne enemyes ben at hande.
               When the hoſtes ben in ioynynge, and both partes redye to fyght, it is the parte of a pollityke and wyttie capitayne, to pmeſſe greate rewardes vnto hys men, yf they beatdowne and ſubdue his enemies wyth whyche hope they greatly gladdened, wyll be more preſt to ſet vpon theyr enemyes and purpoſe wyth them ſelfe neuer to gyue ouer, ne turne theyr faces, vntyll they haue atchyeued the vyctorye, whych aſſured opynyon hath ben ye cauſe of many victoryes.
            
            
               83. ¶ To prouyde that thyne armye maye haue ſuffyſaunce of vytayle.
               The dutye of a carefull capitayne is to foreſee that hys armye haue ſuffycyent

vytayles. For yf they be ſterued for hūgre, vnpoſſible it is that they ſhoulde do anye thynge vyliauntly, when not onlye men, but alſo horſes famyſſhed, doo loſe theyr ſtrength and luſtyneſſe, whereby they be not able to ſtryke theyr enemye, ne yet to defende theyr ſelues.
            
            
               85. ¶ To prouoke thyne enemyes to fyght in ioyned battayle.
               Yf thou deſyre to ioyne in battayl wyth thyne enemyes, and to come to handſtrokes, eyther for the greate commoditie of thyne armie, or for ſome great nede, myne aduyſe is to diſpeople the countries, waſt and deſtroye the fieldes rounde about, to cauſe thyne outryders to raunge, harde to the pale of thyne enemyes, or vſe ſome other kynde of diſpleaſure, wherhy they prouoked, raſhly wyll gyue battayle, and ſo accordyng to thy deſyre, thyne enemies ſhall come forth. But yet remembre neuer to ioyne in battayle, except thou haue before vſed ſome pollicie, or layed thy traynes, to entrappe thyne enemyes, or doo preuayle in an excedyng nombre of men, and force of ſouldyours whiche be bothe act yue and puiſſaunt. Then vndoubtedlye

wythoute anye ſleyghtes in playne fielde ſaufely thou mayeſt encountre and ioyne in battayle with them.
            
            ¶ Thus endeth the boke of James the Erle of Purlilie, dedicated to kynge Ferdinandus, in the peare of our Lorde. M. D. xxvii.
         
         
            
               I Wyll be bolde mooſt gentle readers to put to this one precept of warre. In whiche I wyl ſomewhat to my poore iudgement, ſhewe the nature of Englyſh men, that the capitaynes of Englande may knowe and be warned (which thynge without my warnyuge they do well followe and kepe) although I ſhal do no great hurt to leaue that in wrytynge, whiche they to theyr hygh prayſe forſee in theyr warres, that Engyſh men be not able to continue war, neither at home ne yet in forayne royalmes, without vytayles.
            Wherfore all capitaynes ought to prouyde, that theyr ſouldyours maye haue meate and drynke ynough to fylle theyr bellye, or els they can not ſo fierſely and gredelye contynue warre as they dyd begynne. For Englyſhmen of our nature, be not content with ſo lytle meate and ſcarce foode, as other men borne in the hye countryes be: For whych cauſe, theyr ſtrength is weakened, when that they lacke feedyng, accordyng to the ſaying of Polidore, which ſayth that none armye, neuer ſo great, is able to withſtande a garriſon of Englyſhe men at the fyrſt brounte and begyunynge

of theyr warres. Whych ſaying maye thus way be true, yf they haue not ſuche plentie of vytayles to ſuffyce theyr appetyte and hungre as they had at the begynnyng. For by hungre theyr force and fierceneſſe, doeth ſlake. Alſo all you capitaynes remēbre to prayſe & ſet forth wt mooſt gentle wordes, the doynges of youre ſould yours, and ſometyme to rewarde them freelye, when wyth prayſe they ben encouraged and harted to take in hande any great enterprice, and for hope of rycheſſe at the deuyſion of the pyllage, and bothe they wyll not feare to ieoparde theyr lyues.
            Wherfore they muſt be cōmaunded at the wynnynge of all townes and cyties, fyrſte manlye to fyght and delyuer them ſelues out of al feare of theyr enemyes, and then frelye euery man to get what they canne, and gather all prayes to theyr owne vſe and profyte. Wyth whyche hope they wyll be ſo encouraged, that the power of anye prince, is not able to be are theyr force and violence. For by nature men of the eaſt countrie, be ſharpened to fyght, and encouraged by hope and aduaū
               tage.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ¶ A table contaynynge the chapiters of the fyrſte booke,
               To choſe the capitayne. Cap. 2.
               Of ſufferaunce in warre. ca. 3.
               Of the ſtowte and valyaunt mynde of a capytayne. 4.
               Of the aſſyege and aſſault of a citie. 5.
               Of a gret army of our enemyes. 6.
               Of the reproche of that capytayne which howeſeth hys armye in the ſommer tyme. 7.
               To ſpye and ſerch a place to fyght in 8.
               Of the apparell of the capitayne. 9.
               To knowe the maners and condicions of thyne enemyes, before thowe make Battayle. 10.
               Of the Germaynes & Frenchmen. 11.
               Of ſedition to be appeyſed amonges an armye. 12.
               Howe to viewe the armye of thyne ennemyes. 13.
               Of peace to be p̄ferred before batayle. 14.
               Of tempeſtes and other clamours, in an hoſte. 15.
               Of the rerewarde. 16.
               Of great cities. 17.
               
                  
In campyng thyne armye what is to be done. 18.
               To kepe thy frendes. 19.
               Of quyckneſſe in battayle. 20.
               Of the arraye to be kepte. 21.
               Of a lytle multitude in a cytie. 22.
               Of the hope and truſt of ſedicion. 23.
               What is to be done in tyme of peace. 24.
               Of fayned rumours. 25.
               Of the offyce of the capitayne. 26.
               To knowe whether a citie is thy frende, or no. 27.
               Of cōfidence & aſſured hope in battayl. 28
               Of the ſituation of the citie to be ſearched and knowen by ye capitayne him ſelfe. 29.
               Of libertie to be kept and encreaſed of all men. 30.
               Of the doubtfull commyng of thyne enemyes. 31.
               When the arraye of thyne ennemyes is troubled and out of ordre. 32.
               Howe to make thyne Armye ſtronge and luſtye. 33.
               A pollicie to be vſed when thy men do for ſake the. 34.
               To ſearche and boult out the counſayl of thyne enemyes. 35.
               
                  
Of them that be beſyeged. 36.
               What is to be done whan two hoſtes do vexe and purſue the. 37.
               A crafte & policie to take a cytye. 38.
               A policie to encreaſe thyne armye wythoute great charges. 39.
               Of an healthſome lawe to be made in the citye. 40
               Of exceſſe to ben eſchewed. 41.
               Of wantonnes to be caſt of in welth. 42.
               To throwe downe villages and caſtels vndefenſed. 43.
               Howe to pourchace frendes and to kepe the ſame. 44.
               To abydeſyege. 45
               Whan it is mete to fyght by eruption. 46.
               To interclude ye paſſage of our enemyes, by fyer. 47.
               A policie to ſtoppe the flyeng of our ennemyes. 48
               Howe ſyege is to be layed to cities and caſtels and of them that be beſyeged. 49.
               To auoyde and eſcape traynes. 50.
               Of hoſtages and pledges rather to be taken than to fyght in open battayle. 51.
               To ſtoppe an hauen. 52.
               To make hydde and falſe, dyches to betraye thyne enemyes. 53.
               
                  
To paſſe ouer a water wyth an army. 54.
               To knowe whether thyne enemyes ben afrayde. 55.
               To conſtrayne thyne ennemyes to fyght in open battayle, and to come to handy ſtrokes. 56.
               A policie to flye. 57.
               Whan thyne ennemyes ſnatche vp and deſtroye the laſte warde. 58.
               Of the notable falſhod of the barbarouſe. people. 59.
               When fewe muſte make battayle wyth many. 60
               The offyce of the capitayne. 61.
               To forbere holye thynges. 62.
               Of the capytaynes liberalitye whan the battayle is wonne. 63.
               Of reproche to ben eſchewed. 64.
               Of the capitayns offyce in ioynyng of ye battayle. 65.
               Howe to entreate thyne enemyes, the victorye obteyned. 66.
               To kepe leage & promyſſe of peace wyth our enemyes. 67.
               Of the capitaynes office in accomplyſſhynge all thynges. 68.
               Whan thyne enemyes armye prepareth

paſſage ouer any water. 69.
               Whan thy ſouldyours be aſtonyſſhed & fearefull. 70.
               Whan ſcarſitie of vytayles is amonge oure enemies. 71.
               Battayle is not to be begonne but of neceſſitie and conſtraynte. 72.
               To refrayne frō battayle before we haue deuiſed and layde our traynes. 73.
               What is to be done that oure ennemyes maye be perſwaded theyr capitayne to be ſlayne. 74.
               To kepe whole and ſaufe territories and townes. 75.
               That thyne armye is to be lodged & kept in the marches of thyne enemyes. 76.
               What is to be done whan in wynter we muſte fyght. 77
               Of pleaſures to ben eſchewed of the capitayne and the hoſte. 78
               To choſe a place to fyghte in whan the ſonne and the duſte maye be noyſome to thyne ennemyes and in theyr eyes. 79
               Of tyme not to be looſte, and vaynely. ſpente. 80. 
                     •
                  
               
               Of good and euell doynges ſemblable to be rewarded as punyſhed. 81.
               
                  
What is to be done whē thy men be light and ſpedye. 82.
               That examples do helpe to encowerage ſouldyours. 83.
               That nothynge be done agaynſt the capitayns commaundement. 84.
               To reſtrayne thy ſouldiours ſomtyme. 85
               It is not tyme to fyght whan thyne enemyes doo deſpayre, and be careleſſe of theyr lyfe. 86.
               What is to be done whan we myſtruſte oure ſouldyours to ben afrayde of the ſowne of gonnes and noyſe of them that wayle. 87.
               What is to be done whan thyne ennemyes are moſte parte archers. 88.
               What is to be done before the ſyege of a citye. 89.
               Of raſſhenes to ben eſchewed of a capitayne. 90.
               A policie to take the fotemen. 91.
               A policie to defeate and diſapoynte the gunners that they ſtande in no ſteade and vſe. 92.
               Of the offyce of the capytayne ī ordryng the affayres of hys armye. 93.
               To refrayne aſwell from the empyre as

from the treaſures after ye victorye. 95.
               To conſtrayne thy ſouldyers to fyght, 96
               To tame fyerce people. 97.
               To diſſemble retreate. 98.
               Of exercyſe. 99.
               What is to be done whan our ennemyes be conquered. 100
               Whā fewe muſt fyght agaynſt many. 101
               Whan thy ſouldyours muſt ſleape. 102.
               To brynge ſuſpicion of treaſon emonge thyne enemyes. 103.
               Of outewarde helpe that be ſuſpiciouſe warely to be receyued. 104.
               Of diſcention to be aſwaged and appeaſed. 105.
               What tyme townes and cities may be deſpoyled and taken. 106
               Howe muche the preſence of the graunde capitayne dothe profyt. 107.
               Of the multitude of enemyes. 108.
               Of our enemyes that be humble and tractable. 109.
               ¶ Of daungerfulle and peryllouſe battayle. 110.
               It is mete for young men in theyr youth to practiſe martial feates. 111.
               To encreaſe the noumbre of thyne ennemyes

by a rumour. 112
               To preuent the wyles and traynes of a noble prince. 113.
               Of them that haue longe heare and long berdes. 114.
               Before we laye ſyege to cities, good it is to poſſeſſe the vplande fyeldes. 115.
               Of men wounded and kylled to be conueyed priuilye out of the way. 116.
               Of the requeſtes of lowe and humble per ſonages to be herde. 117
               To vſe cruelnes in the begynnyng of the warres. 118.
               Howe to kepe thy kyndome by boldenes and couragyouſnes. 119
               Of chaſtitye in warre. 120
               Of cauillations to ben experienſed in ieo perdies by capitaynes. 121.
               Of ſouldyers that do ſaye euyll by theyr capitayne. 122.
               Wyth what thynges thy ſouldyours are to be encouraged. 223.
               To pourchace the fauoure of a ſtraunge countrey. 124.
               A capytayne muſte be liberall, and therewyth prayſynge the ſtoutenes of hys men. 125.
               
                  
What is to be doone whan eruption is feared. 126.
               What is to be done of the capitayn whā hys armye is in extreme peryll and dā
                  ger. 127
               Wyth what thynge the mynde of the cō mynaltye is gotten. 128.
               Of the faſhion to ſende letters. 129.
               Howe to allure thyne enemyes to ſlyppe awaye and fayle theyr capitaynes. 130.
               Of the badgeys of the ſouldiours 131.
               Of kynges and other princes, that kepe not theyr faythe. 132.
               Of the vyle condition of the cōmon people. 133.
               Of a certayne kynde of defence. 134.
               Of the ſwetenes of aduauntage. 135.
               Of a troubleſome & vnruly multitude. 136
               Of the dutye of a good capytayne. 137.
               In a newe rendre. 138.
               Of the punyſſhemente of the capytayne, whyche forſaketh hys men. 139
               To abſtayn from robbyng of tēples. 140
               To purſue thyne enemyes in ye chaſe. 141.
               To diſſemble retreate & feare. 142.
               What is to be done whan great ieoperdies ar to ben vndertaken. 143.
               
                  
To abſtayne from treaſon. 144.
               Of the ſageneſſe and eloquence of the capitayne in his orations. 145.
               To refrayne from ſpoyle and pyllage before thine enemies be wholy ſubdued 146
               To refrayne from burnyng. 147.
               Of aide and ſuccoure to be ſende to thy neyghbours abbordryng on the. 148.
               What it is to do ſome valiaunt act in the ſyght and face of thyne enemyes. 149.
               Of a lytle power not to be cōtemned. 150.
               Of ſlouthfulneſſ to be eſchued of the capitayne and all other. 151.
               To viewe and knowe the countryes before thou cary thyne armye there. 152.
               Of the encreaſe of thyne empyre. 153
               The conditions of the capitayne. 154.
               what is to be done ī ye beſiege of cities. 155
               A pollicye to knowe yf thy ſouldyours be faythfull. 156.
               Of the great and huge coueytouſneſſe of the barbarous people. 157.
               Howe to carye an armye ouer a water, thyne enemyes reſyſtyng. 158.
               The cōfortable wordes of the capitayne, when his ſouldyours be in deſpayre. 159.
               Of thy ſouldiours worſhypfully to be buryed. 160.
               
                  
Whē ye power of thyne enemyes is moch ſtronger, what is then to be done. 161.
               Of hoſtages. 162.
               To ſtint ye wepiges & ſcrikes of womē 163
               To hyde and couer the ſlaughter. 164.
               To pacifye a ſtronge and valyaunt warryour which is diſpleaſed. 165.
               Wages ar not to be eraued, when ye treaſures be ſpent and waſted. 166.
               To paſſe by lytle thinges yt be harde. 167.
               what is to be done of ye chefecapitaīs. 168
               To kepe the poſſeſſyon of the thyng ones gotten. 169.
               Of the nature and condition of the common people. 170.
               Of a muititude of gūners and croſſebow ſhoters. 171.
               what is to be done when the walles be beaten downe. 172.
               what is to be done in ye ſlackig of cities 173
               To ſet vpon the campe of thyne enemyes not warely kepte. 174.
               what is to be done in ſlow & ſlak ſiege 175
               Of title thynges not to be deſpyſed. 176.
               Of warre on the ſee. 177.
               Of great perilles ſcaped and auoyded by raſhneſſe and foolehardyneſſe. 178.
               Of a certayne kynde of defence 179.
               where thyne enemies p̄uayl ī horſmē. 180
               
                  
To rayſe the ſiege of any cytie. 181.
               Of cyties yeldyng them ſelues. 182
               How neceſſary warly connyng is to ſouldyours. 183.
               Great victories ben atchieued with fewe and expert ſouldyours. 184.
               Of yonge men to be choſen. 185.
               what men they ſhulde be to whome ye kepyng of coūtries & cities is cōmytted. 186.
               Of the maner of fyghtynge. 187.
               In what places beſt it is to lodge thyne armye. 188.
               Howe to make ſtronge thy campe wt fortreſſes, thyne enemies aſſaultyng the. 189.
               To take our ſubiectes rather then ſtraū
                  gers for ſouldyours. 190.
               What is to be done in the aſſemble and takyng of ſouldyours. 191.
               To kepe thyne armye healthfull. 192.
               what is to be done when waters can not be auoyded. 193.
               To chaſtice and agrieue thyne enemyes hoſte. 194.
               To knowe yf any ſpyes lurke among thy ſouldyours. 195.
               To kepe cloſe thy counſayles. 196.
               The oration of the capitayne to his hoſte when they be marchyngforth to fight 197
               
                  
To take thyne enemyes by wiles. 198.
               what is to be done with captyues and priſoners. 199.
               To fynde ſwete water and freſh. 1000.
               Of nyght battayle. 1001.
               Of the dutye of the capitayne in exercyſyng hys ſouldyours. 1002.
               Of the dutye of the graunde capitaynes in battayle. 1003.
               Of the foretokē and figne of battayl. 1004.
            
            
               ¶ The Chapiters of the ſeconde boke.
               The proeme of the ſeconde boke vnto the lawes of warre. 1.
               Of them that yelde theyr ſelues to theyr enemyes. 2.
               Of an outſtrayer. 3.
               Of a ſpye or outryder. 4.
               Of ronneawayes and landleapers. 5.
               Of them that loſe theyr harneys. 6.
               Of them that do thynges prohybyted, & kepe not the lawes and decrees proclaymed. 7.
               Of them that rayſe vp ſedition. 8.
               Of a legion reculynge. 9
               Of banyſſhed perſonages. 10.
               
                  
Of hym that is ſendforth lyke a ſlaue. 11.
               Of them that be iudged to dye. 12
               Of thē yt ſteale ye youth of chyualdry. 13.
               Of hym yt maymeth a yong ſouldyer. 14.
               Of hym that leaueth hys companye. 15.
               Of them that rebell. 16.
               Of diſobedience and ſturdines. 17
               Of hym that fleeth. 18.
               Of ſpyes and ſcowtewatches. 19.
               Of hym that woundeth hys felowe. 20.
               Of runawayes and traytours. 21.
               In what places the ſouldiours ſhall be forbydden to bye vytayles. 22.
               Of them that leaue nyght watche. 23.
               Of them that ſcape out of priſon. 24.
               Of a ronneagate and ſtrydelande. 25.
               Of ye tyme apoynted by ye capitayne. 26.
               Of a diſturber of the peace. 27.
               Whē thy ſouldiers be ī theyr iourney. 28.
               Of them yt ſkater owt of the cōpany. 29.
               Of a captyne, 30.
               Of them that forſake the capitayne. 31.
               Of gonners on horſebacke. 32.
               Of gonnes called ſerpentines wt other. 33
               Of a profitable defence of the campe. 34.
               To gyue thankes and prayſe to god after the victorye. 35.
               Whether it be lawful for chriſten men to make and ſtyrvp battayle. 36.
               
                  
They that go on warfare do leaue they
                     •
                   iewels at home. 37.
               To make the water noyſome & vnhealthſome to thyne enemyes. 38,
               In what place ye battel is be to fought. 39
               To kepe the citye beſyeged, in faythe and conſtancie. 40.
               To ſcape oute of a narrow place. 41.
               Of bowes. 42.
               Of ye outragious aſſaulte of thyne ennemyes. 43.
               To forſee the place rounde abowt, where battayle ſhall be. 44
               To ſetvpon thyne enemyes in theyr iourneye. 45.
               What is to be done whan oure enemyes ouermatche vs in force. 46.
               What is to be done whan we do fyghte in ſtraytes. 47.
               Of ouer muche confidence. 48.
               Of the capitaines commaundement that no man take any pryſoner. 48.
               Not to depart frō the place apoynted. 50,
               That the tētes be not left vndefenſed. 51.
               Of thyne enemyes fallynge in variaunce and ſtryfe. 52
               Let thy men be readye in harneys, thyne ennemyes lyenge at hande. 53.
               Of the beſyege of cytyes. 54.
               
                  
To make brydges wyth ropes. 55.
               To reuenge our damages wyth lyke annoyaunce. 56.
               Howe to conuaye the battayle from one place to an other. 57
               To relyue the ſcarſenes of water. 58.
               To recouer cities and townes loſt. 59.
               What is to be done whan thow art ouer matched. 60.
               To ſette fyer on thyne ennemyes pauilyous. 61.
               what is to be done whā we can not ſcape out of a place wyth our army. 62.
               To make an aſſemble and ſhewe of horſmen in the face of thyne enemyes. 63.
               To refrayne from the beſyege of ſuch cities whych haue dayly newe ſuccour. 64.
               What is moſte expedyent for the chyefe capytayne to do at the fyrſt entrye into countryes. 65.
               what is to be done in the ſyege of bygge cities. 66
               what is to be done whan oure ennemyes ſpyes be taken. 67.
               Not to haue one eſpye alwayes. 68.
               To knowe the feare and cowardyſe of thyne ennemyes. 69.
               Of the duty of bolde & ſtowte felows. 70
               To recouer ye heath of thy ſouldiours. 71.
               
                  
A policie to deceyue and defraude our ennemyes. 72
               To get the fauour of our ſouldyours. 73.
               To haue fyer to burne in water. 74.
               what is to be done whan the capytaynes do not agree in one ſentence. 75
               Of falſhode to be reuenged. 76.
               A waye to laye ſyege to cities on the ſea ſyde. 77.
               where we haue onlye well water. 78.
               To choſe a place to fyght in. 79
               To mocke our ennemyes. 80.
               when thyne hoſt is in great ieoperdy. 81.
               what is to be done, when thyne enemies be at hande. 82.
               To prouyde that thyne armye may haue ſuffiſaunce of vytayle. 83.
               To prouoke thyne enemyes to fyghte in ioyned battayle. 84.
            
            Finis.
         
         
            ¶ Imprynted at London in the olde Iewery by Edwarde Whytchurche. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendū ſolū.
            ¶ Theſe bookes are to be ſolde at the weſte dore of Pauls, by William Telotſon.
            
         
      
   