
      
         
            
            
            A
DISPVTATION
against the Adoration of
the reliques of Saints departed. WHEREIN NINE PALPAble
abuses are discouvered, committed by the
popish Priests in tbe veneration
thereof. Together with,
The refutation of a Iesuiticall Epistle, and
an Index of the reliques, vvhich euery seuenth
yeere, are shovvne at Avvcon in Germanie vnto
the superstitious people and pilgrimes, compiled
by the Canons of S. Maries
Church An. 1608.
            
               By Iohn Polyander Professour of Divinitie in
the Vniversitie of Leyden in Holland, & translated
by Henry Hexham, out of French
into English.
            
            At Dordrecht.
Printed by George Walters, Anno. 1611.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE TRVEly
religious & honorable
Ladie, The Ladie Vere, spouse vnto
my honorable Lord, Sir Horace Vere knight,
Lord Gouvernour of his Maiesties cautionarie
towne of Briell, & chiefe Commaunder
vnder his Excellencie of the English
forces in the seruice of the most
illustrate Lordes the States
of the Vnited
Provinces.
            
               MAdame: it were in
vaine for mee to seeke
to embelish your christian
graces by a dead
letter: Seeing they are
most lively, & giue a
farre greater lustre in
your selfe, where God
hath planted them, then can be expressed by
the blunt & vnlearned Pen of a Souldier. But
seeing God hath made them so transparent, &
hath kindled in you so holy a flame of loue and
zeale vnto the true & onely worship of his name:

Me thinkes this plaine translation of mine, not
for any worth that is in me, but for the subiects
sake, hath found out a fitt Patronesse, whose person
& practize affordetth a reall confutation of
that superstition which is here vnmasked,
            And so much the more presuming vpon your
Ladiships favour & gentle acceptance: in regard
I dedicated this same Authours former refutation
vpon the invocation of Saincts, vnto my honorable
Lord your husband; so that now, as God
hath made you one, I may make you both equally
interressed in this one subiect (though diversly
handled) striving for that honour, which is due
vnto his name.
            These Popish iuglings cannot bee vnknowne
to your Ladiship, seeing the vnholy blood of Hales
(which did cleere & thicken as the Pilgrims purse
was light or heavie) is of your owne house, & of
so fresh remembrance, whereby your honourable
Auncestours did learne to detest such divelish
cousenage, as the burned bones of your most worthy
Granfather did long agoe witnesse, to all the
worlde.
            Moreover, (Madame) there are also some
abhomiations in this disputation, which I know
made my Authors pen to tremble in copying
of them out, and mine to quake in translating
them: others againe, which may drawe from
your Ladiship a chast smile and a modest blush:

but let the shame light vpon their heads, who are
the authors thereof: & the more they blaspheme
and dishonour our blessed God & Saviour, the
more let vs worship and honour him, and learne
as Bees to sucke honey from banefull weedes, or as
cunning Physicians to extract Antidotes from
poyson, since God turneth the very abhominations
& execrations of the wicked, as exsamples
for the good & edification of his children.
            Here with (Madame) as with the chiefe
end of this labour I ende, beseeching God to blesse
my honourable Lord and you, with all happinesse
and ioy in this world, and euerlasting felicity
and blisse in the world to come. From our
Garnison of Dordrecht this 18. of October.
1611.
            
               Your ladiships in all
dutifull respect.
Henry Hexham.
            
         
         
            
            To the Christian Reader.
            
               WOrthie Reader, for
varietie sake, to employ
my idle time
to some vse, and to
offer my mite vnto
the Church of God,
that the graue and
learned men of our
nation may see, that
the Ministers of other reformed churches,
marche pouldron to pouldron with them
vnto the Lords combate: I haue vndertaken
this translation, free from ostentation:
onely my ambition is (in tracing after the
stepps of my Authour) to haue one flurt at
Antichrist, and one push at the fall of the
great whore of Babylon, and so much the
rather, because mine eyes haue seene some
of her fornicatiōs, which some others haue
but heard.
            But it may seeme strange to some, that
a souldier should vndertake such a taske, as

not appertaining to his profession: as that
man judges me a souldier, so I entreat him
to esteeme me a Christian, and then both
hee and I shalbe consonant.
            Wel then, into whose handes soeuer this
poore translation of mine shall come, whō
God hath alreadie inlightened, let vs sing
an everlasting Halleluiah, & giue praise vnto
that great God, which hath translated vs
out of the kingdome of darknesse into his
merveilous light. And if it fal into the hāds
of anie that are infected with this deadly contagion,
I entreate them to reade it, not to refute
it, for alas they are not able: because it
is grounded and bounded vpon & within
the sacred word of God, and seconded by
the opiniōs of the most holy Fathers. That
were as if they should runne in vpon Gods
two-edged sword. That were as if a falling
and a running ennemy, beaten on all sides
should turne backe vpō a stand of charged
pikes, which are ready to receiue thē. Therefore,
it were better for them to suffer it to
graze vpō their stonie hearts then to resist.
And for my part, I will daylie praye vnto
the Father of lights, to illuminate and water
their soules with the beames and streames
of his Sunne of righteousnesse, that as Eagles
wee maye soare vp onely vnto him with

the wings of our faith, in whom alone is
found the wel-spring of living waters and
noewhere else.
            As concerning the graue & learned Authour
of this litle treatise, it were meere presumptiō
in me, to make an attestatiō of his
worth, whē the noe lesse wise thē H. Lords
of this state, haue abundantly testified the
same to all, by resolving on him, as the sittest
they did know to re-establish the trueth
by his publique profession at Leydē. This I
will only day, that if a few spare houres cold
bring foorth this, we may well expect and
promisse our selves noe small fruit of those
holy labours, which shall hereafter bee vndertaken.
Thus I beseech God to accept
of my weake performance, and giue a blessing
vnto this and them.
            
               Thy loving Countrey-man
H. Hexham.
            
         
         
            
            To the most noble and vertuous Lord,
MONSIEVR
ARNHOVLT
DE
GROENEVELT,
Lord of the Landes and Lordships of F
                  •
               llignies,
Godimont, & Ramegnies in Neufville
lez Sorgnies &c. And ancient Coronell vnto the most illustrate
and mightie Lordes, the States of the
vnited Provinces.
            MONSIEVR:
            
               IT is more then two
yeeres past, since a
marchant of this citie,
one of the members
of our French
Church, came to
shewe mee in my
lodging two coppies
of an Epistle, published by the Canons
of Awcon in Germanie, touching the veneration
due vnto their reliques: which
a friend of his, a zealous lover of the trueth

had sent him, with expresse charge to present
it vnto me in his behalf, & earnestly to
request me, to returne some answere vpon
it. Wherevnto, considering that I could
not so suddenly accomplish his desire, because
of my other employements, hee
thought good not to limit mee any prefixed
time: but that I should vndertake &
finish this worke at my leisure. This is the
cause, that I haue made noe great hast in
composing this treatise, which I haue distributed
into three partes: In the scope there
of, I haue followed the order & the example
of the ancient Prophets and Apostles,
as also their true Successours, and Imitatours,
who haue all maintained with one
common accord, that God onely ought
to be worshipped by his people, & will not
haue this seruice giuen to anie other, by
the authentique, and irreprehensible testimonies
of holy Scripture, the which God
hath armed with an inviolable authoritie,
to the end, that those which feare him,
might make noe scruple to receive it wholy,
and to giue full beliefe therevnto.
            True it is, that I haue annexed vnto it
some attestations of the ancient Fathers,
not to approoue the foolish imagination
of the Romanists, but that the holy Scripture

maye take more force & credit: seeing
she hath receiued it alreadie frō God, who
is the authour thereof: or that the trueth
of it, which is infalliable, should depende
vpon the advise and jugement of our ancestours
& predecessours, which might erre:
but rather to shewe the Doctours of the
Romane church, who relye more vpon the
authority of men, then vpon Gods in the
poincts which concerne our controversies,
that their condēnation is not onely found
in the decrees of divine Law: but also in the
recordes of the pastours of the primitiue
Church: yea euen in theirs whome they
choose for their Iudges and defendaunts.
            I call the Epistle of these Canons Iesuiticall
in the beginning of my disputation:
because after I had conferred it with Bellarmins
booke, the first tutour of these Iesuites
vpon this subject, I finde it is but a
patching together of his argumēts, whereby
he sought to prooue the worshipping
of the reliques of Saincts.
            I meant not to vse in the resutation of
their Epistle anie elegant speech, or anie circumlocution
and readiousnesse in wordes:
because the trueth (without borrowing else
where) hath ornaments enough in her self:
and when shee is simple, and in her naked

robes, shee taketh the more delight in such
as fetts her foorth, & represents her before
the view of al men, in roundnesse and simplicitie.
            Forasmuch then, as wee cannot resist to
much, nor too often the heresies which
daylie multiplie in this wicked worlde: especially
the foolish superstition of those
which would attribute to the reliques of
mortall man, the honour belonging vnto
the sole maiestie of the immortall God: although
that Calvin, Chemnicius and some
other excellent Divines, haue taken penn in
hand to oppose themselues against the first
inventours and advancers of this Idolatrie:
yet I haue also thought it my duty, to giue
foorth this disputation against the new
protecters of this superstition, and in particular
against the Canons of Awcō: because
it may be availeable to the Christiā church
(as S. Augustine saith) that manie bookes
be writtē vpon one subject: prouided that
they be made in diversity of stile, but not in
diuersity of beliefe, seeing that by this
meanes heretickes are the more convicted,
and on the otherside, wee open the more
passages for the Children of God, to escape
from the call, and out of the snares of these
fowlers, & offer them sundry sorts of counterpoysons

to preserue their braines from
the venoume of their Sophistrie.
            As for the rest, there are manie considerations,
which mooued mee to dedicate
this treatise vnto you: For I will not
here speake of that holy zeale, which made
you expose your person and goods, from
your youth, aswel in the defence of our iust
cause at S, Amands, and in some other places
adioyning therevnto, wherein you bore
the brunt of the first persecutiō: as for the
preseruation of our Churches here in these
Vnited Provinces: so long as it pleased the
Lord of Hosts to maintain you in the gouvernement
of the Towne of Sluce, & so long
as your age would permit you to continew
in that of Nemegen, and to follow his Excellencie
with your foote Regiment in manie
feiges, assaults, & admirable recouverings
of manie Townes and fortes, brought vnder
the obedience of our Superiours in the
face of our enemies. Neither, will I speake
of that zeale, and your other virtues which
recommendes you among the gentlemen
of our Common-weale, and in perticular
among vs: for which I must acknowledge
my self indebted, to testifie the same publikly
in the name of the members of our
Church, that for this respect we honor you

and your like, who loues true godlinesse
with their hearts, and seeke to worship with
vs our onely God and heauenly Father in
spirit and trueth. Beside, hauing knowne
in sundrie sortes your singular fauour and
beneuolence towardes mee and mine, for
which I feele my self obliged to present you
with this small gift in acknowledgement
thereof.
            Wherevnto also, your comendable resolution
hath moued me, in consecrating the
rest of your aged daies in the lecture of ecclesiasticall
bookes, and your capacitie in
iudging well of our disputations against
the traditions of the papisticall Doctors,
and cheifly in this, vpon the reliques of the
Saincts departed.
            For as in the daies of your ignorāce, you
haue seen the abuse of this superstition, &
quickly after your conversion manifested
vnto the worlde, that you had it in abhominatiō:
so having as it were this smal treatise
alreadie printed your heart: I assure
my self that yow will approue it, and will
finde that whatsoeuer I haue alledged therin,
is grounded vpon the experience of
trueth, the instruction of the Orthodoxe Fathers,
and the authoritie of the holy Scripture.
            
               
In confidence whereof, I offer vnto you
this memoriall as a token of the affection I
beare to your L. beseeching the Lord, who
after the triall of a daūgerous prisō, noe lesse
couragious, thē a long resistance against the
allarmes & pernicious enterprises of our
adversaries, hath at last trāsported you frō
your gouvernmēt of the Citie of Nemegē
(in which our most illustrate LL. wold willingly
haue held you still) into this Citie of
Dordrecht, to liue here among vs, for the
more tranquility & ease of your agednesse,
overworn & weakened through the travels
and wearisomenesse of the warres, It will
please him.
            MONSIEVR, To establish your
heart in the assurance of his grace, towards
those which reverence him, by the remembrance
of so manie notable deliverances &
victories which he hath giuē in our time to
our Churches, & to fortifie you with constancie,
to perseuer with vs in the sole invocation
of his blessed name, for the repose of
your soule, & the advancemēt of his glory.
From my studie, this 2. of Septem. 1611.
            
               Your most humble servant, and most
affectionate brother in Christ our Souveraine
Lord.
Iohn Polyander.
            
         
         
            
            The Second part of the fifth Psalme,
put into French meeter by Cl. M.
            6 Ta fureurperd & extermine
            Finalementious les menteurs,
            Quant'aux meurtriers & decepteurs,
            Celui qui terre & Ciel domine
            Les abomine.
            7 Mais moien la grand' bonté mainte,
            Laquelle m'as fait sauourer,
            Ira
                  •
               encores t'ado
                  •
               er
            En ton temple, en ta maison saincte,
            Dessous ta crainte,
            8 Mon Dieu guide moi & connoye
            Par ta bonté, que ne soys mis
            Sous la main de mes ennemis,
            Er dresse deuant moi ta voye,
            Que ne fouruoye.
            9 Leut bouche rien de vrain'ame ne,
            Leur coeur est, feint faux & couuert,
            leur gosier vnsepulchre ouuert,
            De flatterie fausse & vaine
            leur langue est pleine.
            10 O Dieu, monstre leur qu'ils mesprenent,
            Ce qu'ils pensent faire, desfaits,
            Chasse les pour leurs grands mesfaits,
            Carc'est contre toiqu'tfs se prennent,
            Tant entreprennent.
            11 Et que tous ceux se resiousissent
            Quien toi ontespoir & foi,
            Ioye autont sans fin deffcus toi,
            Aucc eeux qui ton Nom che
                  •
               issent,
            Et te benissent.
            12 Car de bien faire tu es large
            Al'homme iuste, ô Vrai Sauueur,
            Etle couures de ta faueur,
            Tout ainsi commed vne targe
            Espesse & large.
         
      
      
         
            
            A DISPVTATION
against the worshipping of
the Reliques of Saincts
departed.
            
               OF all the Idolatries in the
world, there is none more
displeasing to God, nor
more hurtfull to a superstitious
man, then that
which he committeth by
the religious worshipping
of the bones and reliques
of the dead. For, if God would never suffer,
that we should worship his living creatures, created
after his owne image & likenesse; noe not
his Angels themselves, which are pure and immortall,
and haue noe participation with our
humane corruptiō: how much lesse wil he permit
vs to attribute that honour due vnto his onely
Maiesty, to the bones & garments of rotten
bodies returned into ashes? Moreover if the

worshippers of the false Gods haue estranged
themselves from our Creator,Ier. 13. 17. 13. who is the fountaine
of living waters, to digg them pitts that
can containe noe water: how much more are
all those gone astray out of the right waie of salvatiō,
which runne after I know not what pieces
of old raggs, in-uented at their pleasure,
and seeke for the light of lyfe, among the shaddowes
of death.
            Now whereas the Canons of Awcon in Germanie,
haue not long since put forth an index
of their relickes, with a Iesu-iticall Epistel stuffed
with false gloses and sophisticall reasons, to
stirt-vp thereby the poore abused people of this
age vnto the visitation of their said reliques, and
to change at an instant, their natural stupiditie
into a self-obstinacie, by preferring the deceitful
shewes of religion, before he service which God
prescribs vs in his holy word. So I desiring to accomplish
the earnest request of some of my freindes,
and also my vocation which bindes mee to
pre-advertise the ignorant to take heed of these
blind-leaders, which leads them vnto perditiō,
haue spent some houres in composing of this
Treatise, that may serue as a preseruative to the
weake, against the venomous errours eontained
in the saide writing, as a morning-watch to
awaken & rouse vp the sluggish, as a Guide to
such as are gone astray out of the path of truth,

and as a spurre to the dull to convert them to
God, & to divert them from the pernicious
adoration of things dead & corruptible, vnto
the wholsome worship of our heauenly Father
the onely God living & incorruptible,
who is a spirit, and loues such as worship him
in spirit & truth.
            Whereunto I will indevour to bring them
by three degrees. First,The deputation divided into three parts. I will lay downe to
them the principall causes for which Christians
are not permitted to doe anye religious
seruice vnto the reliques of the dead.
            Afterward, I will refute the arguments
of the Canons of Awcon, whereby they seeke
to prooue the contrarie.
            Finally, I will advertise the Reader of the
falsities of those reliques specified in their
index.
            I will confirme this my proposition (that
Christians are not permitted to doe any religious service
to the reliques of the dead) by three reasons:
whereof the first shall be, that the tradition of
visiting and reuerencing religiously the reliques
of the departed Saints, hath no foundation
in the holy Scripturs, nor from the example
of those which haue followed invariably
their paterne.
            The second, how some Christians inconstāt in
their waies, hauing learned this superstitious

ceremony in the Schoole of the Gentiles,
haue brought it into the Primitiue Church
about foure hundred yeeres after Christ.
            The third, that the consideratiō of the sundry
abuses, sprung from this wicked custome,
nourished and maintayned yet vnto this present
in the Idolaters Synagogue, ought to
mooue and stirre vp the true worshippers of
God, wholly to banish it frō out of the christian
Church.
            Touching the first poynt of my admonition,
surely we finde in the Byble,The secōd part. that the holy
Patriarckes and their children haue buried
honourably their dead, according to the
ordinance of the Lord,Gen. 3. 19 
               Thou art dust, & to dust
shalt thou returne; but we read not in any place
of it, that they haue torne their bodies, and
trāsported them by peece-meal after their deceasse:
placed their bones in sundrie places,
showne their garments to the vulgar people
with cōmand to worship them, and promisse
that in calling vpon thē they should be heard,
Neither reade wee also in it, that God hath
commanded vs by his auncient prophets, to
goe on pilgrimage to those parts where their
inheritours had carried thē, to offer vp there
vnto them burning tapers and holy candles,
to touch, salute & kisse their bones with great
devotion: Much lesse reade we in it, that God

hath prescribed them to solēnize the memorie
of their reliques by certain convocations
of the people & publicatiōs of solemne fests,
nor yet to load the Churches & Altars with
them, nor to carry them vppon their necks &
shoulders, nor to walke vp & downe with thē
in processions; to the intent to moue every
one to reverence them, with confidence to
obtaine succour from God and his Saincts by
worshipping them.
            And albeit that the Patriarke Iacob, and Ioseph
his son, grounding them-selues vpon the
truth of Gods promisse, that he would giue
for an inheritance to their posterity the land
of Canaan, enioyned their children to transport
them forth of Egypt, when the houre of
their deliuerāce should come into the cōtrey
which God had promissed them: and that
Moses tooke their bones alonge with him
when the children of Israel came forth of Egipt:
notwithstanding he never shewed thē
vnto the people of God in his greatest distresses,
either in his passage through the redd sea,
or in the wildernesse: much lesse did he lift
them vp into the ayre, and sett them vppon a
Perch (as he did the brasen serpent) or ordayned
that any should behold them, with sted
fast assurance that every of them should bee
delivered from their euils by contemplating

them: but contrary wise he kept them secret,
& close in their coffins: and the Elders of the
people that surviued Moses and Ioshua, caused
thē to be buried so soone as they arrived
in the land of Canaan,Ios. 24. 32 in a field which Abraham
& Iacob had bought before time of the
sonns of Hamor the father of Sechem.
            
            Also the Prophet Samuel sheweth vs,2 Sam. 21 13. 14. that K.
Dauid hauing taken the bones of Saul and Ionathan
frō the inhabitants of Gabish Gilead
which had taken them vp from the streete of
Beth-shan, brought them from thence into
the contrey of Beniamin, caused thē to be buried
in the sepulchre of Kis the father of Saul,
and that in the Solemnizatiō of their funeralls
his subjects did all that the King cōmanded
them: but there is no mention made of
any pilgrimage, or any religious seruice: which
they should doe in honour of thē about their
Sepulchre.
            Likewise,2 Kings. 23. 17. in the second booke of kings, the
Authour of this Historie writeth, that King
Iosiah willing to prophane the Altar which
King Ieroboham had caused to be built in Bethel,
and to dishonour eternally the Priests &
other Idolaters, which he had maintained
there; caused the bones of the false priests &
other their confederates to be digged vp, cō
               manding
them to burne thē vppon the same

Altar: But on the contrary espying an other
Tombe in the same Cittie, demanded of the
cittizēs thereof, What title is that which I see? &
hauing vnderstod by their answer, that it was
the sepulchre of the man of God, which before
prophesied the things which the sayde
King came then to doe vpon that very Altar,
to shewe the publick reverence he bore vnto
that man of God even after his buriall, bad
the inhabitants of Bethel Let him alone, let none
remoue his bones, whereto this Historiā addeth,
that the citizens of the said city obeied therein
king Iosiahs commandement.
            Although the holy Scriptures giues vs to
vnderstand, that among all that are borne of
woemē, God hath not raised vp more excellēt
servants of his house, then Moses and Iohn
Baptist: nor a more faithfull Martyr of his son
Christ Iesus then S. Stephē, one of the seaven
deacons of the Apostolique Church, & one of
the first witnesses of Christ persecuted in Ierusalem:
Neueverthelesse their bodies were
presently interred after their departure, that
of Moses by God himself after a miraculous
manner,Deut. 34. 6. in the contrey of Moab, in a place
vnknowne vnto the children of Israel, and inaccessible
for the deuil, to the end, they might
not abuse it by Idolatrie: that of S. Iohn Baptists
by his disciples, and S. Stephens by some

men that feared God,Marc. 6. 29. Act. 8. 2. Iud. ver. 5 as appeareth by the
History of Moses, the Gospel according to
S. Marke, the book of the Acts of the Apostles
and the Epistle of S. Iude.
            
            Among all the auncient Prophets, there is
none whose buriall is more memorable then
that of the Prophet Elishas; in regard it pleased
God to raise vp miraculously by touching
of his dead and buryed bodie: a man which
in great hast for feare of their enemies they
had cast into the grave of this prophet,
as we read in the second booke of Kings &
2. Chap, howbeit the Authour of this historie
addeth not for all that, that the Priests of the
old Testament, haue commanded the people
of God to resort vnto that tombe, to offer vp
their praiers and sacrifices, or that they instituted
any Feasts vpon certain daies in memorie
of this miracle, or enclosed the bones
of this Prophet into a shrine, or chose out any
expresse place to raise vp some altar in his honour,
or did perswade any to resort thither
from all partes, to offer vp there their praiers
and sacrifices in the name of the vulgar people,
as if it were before the face of God himself.
            Morover the prophet Isaiah, hauing respect
vnto the auncient custome of interring the
dead, and hiding them in their graues, compareth

the sepulchres of the righteous vnto
bedds, to shew by this similitude, that wee can
doe noe greater pleasure to God, nor a greater
honour to his wel-beloved Sainctes after
their departure, then to wrap vp their bodies
in the beddes of the Earth, to rest there from
their labours vntil the day of their resurrection,
in which Christ wil come to awaken & call
them vnto him, & bring them into the possession
of life eternall.
            I say moreover, that the greatest hypocrits
among the last Doctors of Israel, to wit, the
Scribes and Pharises, who through hypocrisie
and vaine glorie buylt vp the sepulchres
of the prophets, and repaired the tombles of
the righteous, stoned & massacred to death
by their auncestors did not deterre their corpses
to dismember them, and shew their bones
vnto the meaner sort of people, or to adorne
the Altars of the Tempel of Ierusalem with
them, but suffered thē to rest in their graues,
as Christ himself witnesseth in the 23. Chap.
of S. Mathews Gospel, the 27. verse and the
next following.
            Touching the Apostles & disciples of our
Saviour Christ, the historie of his burial shews
vs, that S. Peter & S. Iohn approching neere
vnto his sepulchre, to see whether he was truly
risen or noe, found there his kerchief with

his linen clothes laied aside, but the Euāgelist
S. Iohn noteth more expresly, that they came
thither one after another, to behold the more
earnestly his hand-kerchief and linnē which
he had left behinde him after his resurrectiō,
addeth not (which neverthelesse would have
ben soo much the more remarkeable) that
they either handled thē, or bore awaie those
reliques with them, to shewe them vnto their
con-disciples, or put them into any shrine or
boxe, which with out all doubt they would
haue done, if they had receued any such charg
frō ther Mr. or if they could haue gathered by
any of his familliar speeches he had with thē
before, that such a collection & transportatiō
of his reliques would haue pleased him after
his resurrection, & haue ben as a fitt meanes,
to confirme their bretheren in the Christian
faith.
            As for S. Luke who discribs vnto vs all the
memorable acts of the Apostles, since the assention
of Christ, vntil the second yeere of S.
Pauls imprisonment at Rome, to the intent
they might serue as a miror and exsample to
all our actions, he makes no recitall, nor reckons
vp in his second booke any of Christs
reliques, his Parents or faithful Martyrs, collected
by his Apostles, or giuen into the custody
of their frends: but hee shewes that the

christians of his time perseuered with the Apostles
in the sincere doctrine of the H. Gospell,
and in breaking of bread, the true reliquaries
and memorialls of the instructions &Act. 2. 42
suffrances of our sole Redeemer Iesus Christ.
            In like manner the Apostle S. Peter while
he was living, would not promisse the faithfull
dispersed throughout Pontus, Galatia,
Capadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, to leave after
his death any other reliques behinde him, thē
his Epistles which he wrote vnto them, as him
self declareth by these wordes, that he wold endevour
alwaies (to wit,2 Pet. 1. 15. by his writings) that they
also might bee able to haue rememberance of those
things after his departure.
            
            I could here alleadg for this purpose many
excellent admonitions, and notable examples
of the auncient Fathers, and true successours
of the Apostles: by which they shew
vs, that they vnderstood right well, that the
last degree of honour, and charitable office
which survivours are bound to yeild vnto the
dead, according to the rule of holy Scripture,
and the custome of the chiefest fathers, aswel
of the olde, as of the niew Testament, consisteth
in burying of their corpses: but for this
present I will onely recite that which Origen
writeth thereof in his disputations against
Celsus, S. Augustin in his firste booke of the

Cittie of God, S. Athan. in the life of S. Anthony,
Eusebius in his history of Policarpus martyrdome,
and what Prudentius the Poet saith
thereof in his verses vpon the death of one of
his frendes.
            Humane bodies (saith Origen) hauing once ben
the soules mansion,Origen. ought not to be cast awaie after
their death:Cont. cōsidering that through the permission of
good Lawes,Celsus lib. 5. & 8 wee must doe them that honour, as is
befitting them in laying them into the Earth. We
haue learned to honour the reasonable soule, and to
burie honorablie the Corps, which is the instrument
thereof.
            
               According to which S. Augustine saieth,
that we ought not to dishonour and reiect the bodies
of the departed, especially those of the faithfull, which
the H. Ghost vsed as vessells & instruments vnto
all good workes. For if our affection hath ben
great towards our Parents, the more pleasing is their
garment or ringe vnto posterity, their corps which
touch vs more neerly; and with whom wee haue
more familiarity, ought in noe wise to bee dispised,
sith they serue not onely for an aide & ornament,
but also partly vnto humane Nature. From hence
it proceedeth that through a seruiceable piety they
haue heretofore taken care for the buriall of the
righteous, solemnized their funeralls, and prouided
for their interring.Tob. 12. 13. As for Tobie hee obtained
that speciall grace of God to burie the dead, as the

Angel witnesseth.Ioh. 12. 3 Moreover, our Lord which was
to rise againe, commendeth the good worke of the religious
woeman that had cast the costly oyntment
vpon his body, commandeth to divulge it abroad because
she had done it for the preparation of his sepulchre.Matt. 27. 57.
The like honourable mention is made of
those which tooke downe his body from the Crosse,
and were carefull to burie it honourably.Marc. 15. 42. So then
all thiese testimonies teach vs,Luk. 23. 50. though there be noe
sence in the dead bodies; yet they fortifie vs in the
beleefe of our refurrection,Ioh. 19. 38. and shewes vs that these
bodies appertaines also vnto the prouidence of God, &
that such Godly offices are pleasing vnto him.
            
               S. Athanasius reporteth, that S. Anthony
tould his frendes a while before his death,
               Athana. in the life of S. Anthonie. let
none (saith he) carry my reliques into Egipt: least
my body be honoured with a false honour, and least
the solenities and obsequies, which so many tymes I
haue condemned (as you know) should be practised
vpon me. For the shuning thereof am I chiefly come
hiether. Couuer then with earth this poore corps
of your Father, and hide him, forgetting not this
commandement from me your aged Father.Eusebe lib. 4. 15. & 5. 1.
            
            
               Eusebius hauing in his historie commended
the zeale of the Christians of his time, which
with the daunger of their lives had gathered
vp the most precious ashes of Policarpus the
Martyr, to bury them: complaineth afterward
of the Tyrants of that age, which commanded
their hang-men to cast the bodies

of those holy maryrs to their ravēous curres,
appoynting besides certaine guardes to restraine
& keep back the faithfull from taking
vp the torne peeces of their corpses, gnawne
by the dogges, and from laying thē into the
earth.
            
               Prudentius comparing the Church-yeard
wherein they went to burie one of his frends
vnto a Mother that imbraceth her childe,Prudent. and
fouldeth him vp in her armes. as if she would
put him again in to her belly, crieth out.
            
               Nunc suscipe, terra fovendū
               
               Gremioque hunc suspice molli:
               Hominis tibi mēbra sequestro
               Generosa & fragmina credo.
            
            That is.
            
               O earth receaue & wrappe,
               Within thy gentle lappe
               
                  
The members of this man:
               To the bequeath I than,
               And to thy imbracements
               Theis generous remnants.
            
            We must not forgett also how Bellarmin
himself confesseth,Rob. Bellarmin li. 2. de Eccl. trium. c. 3 & lib. 2. de purgat c. 19. that God being willing to
honour the body of Moses his faithfull servant,
buried it with his owne handes, & that
to laie abroad dead corpses in the ayre & before
the view of the worlde, is the way to dishonour
them: whereas on the contrarie to
interr them, is to vse them honestly & to doe
them honour. Prima vtilitas (saith he) quae
mortuis accedit ex sepultura, est quòd consulitur honori
eornm adhuc in hominum memorijs viventium.
Non enim caret ignomina quadam,
quòd faeditas nostri corporis aliorum conspectibus pateat,
that is to say, The first benefit that befalleth
the dead from their buriall. is, that we haue respect
vnto their honours which are yet living in the memories
of men. For it is not without some shame
that the foulenesse of our bodies should stincke before
the sight of others. A most true saying where
by this Cardinall condēneth the impudencie

of theis Porters of reliques. and imitatours
of Ham, who vncouver before their bretheren
the nakednesse and shame of their fathers, &
are not ashamed in some places to shewe the
navel and fore-skinne of our blessed Saviour,
and at Rheimes in Campania the print
of his buttockes. True it is, that in those
daies some of the imitatours of the Gentiles,
begann (as we shall vnderstand hereafter) to
attribute more honour vnto the Martyrs thē
in times past, and to solemnize the constancie
of their faith and other christian vertues, with
the like pompe and solemnity, as the Athenians
did, which yeerely assembled about the
graues of the Grecians to call there to minde,
and to extoll to the Heauens the valour of
those which had resisted couragiously the army
of Xerxes, and who for the good of their
contrey had lost their lives in the battell of
Marathon. Neverthelesse, their principall advocate
S. Ierom alleadgeth for their excuse,
that the ceremonies which they did about the
tombes of the Martyrs, was neither superstitious
nor contrarie to that onely adoration
due to the name of God.Hierone in his dispute against Vigilantius. 
               Who is he (saith hee
in his dispute against Vigilantius) which hath ever
worshipped the Martyrs? who ever hath thoguht
man to be God? O brainelesse head Paul & Barnabas
did they not ren
                     •
                   their cloths, and said they

were even men, when the Lyconians hold them
for Iupiter and Mercurius, and would have
offered thē sacrifices? So farre is it thē, that the
Chistians of his time should bee so debauched,
as to transferre the worship due vnto
God, vnto the ashes of their Martyrs, that
contrari-wise he denieth, that they did not
once thinke to worship any other creature,
which he preferreth before the reliques of
Saincts, by this manner of speech following.
We neither serue nor worship, I say not
onely the reliques of Saincts, but also the Sonne
and Moone, neither Angels nor Archangels,
neither Cherubines, nor Seraphins, nor any name
which is named, either in this world, or in that
which is to come: Least we should rather serue
the creature, then God, who is blessed for euermore.
Now we honour the reliques of the Martyrs,
to worship him whose Martyrs they are.
From whence it appeareth plainely, that
the collection and religious seruice which
those of the Papacie doe vnto the reliques
of such as God hath with-drawne long
since out of this world, being not grounded
vpon any commande of the Lord, nor
from the' exsample of any of the true worshippers
of his diuine Majesty,Col. 2. 23 can neither
be acceptable to God, nor available vnto
those superstitious men which giue themselves

to this Idolatrie through a voluntary
devotion, without faith or assurance
that God doth approove it in his holy
word, which is the light of our faith, the
rule of our religion, the measure of all our
devotion, the guide of our conversation, &
a lawe for all our workes,Rom. 14 23 He. 11. 6 1. Sam. 15. 22. without which
all our actions & intentions are but sinne,
displeasing to our Souveraigne Lord, who
had rather that we should obay, and be attentiue
to his voice, then to offer sacrifice.
Now if there were noe other consideratiō,
then this which I haue expressed, it were
sufficient enough to make them renounce
this errour: but the perversity and obstinacie
of such, as take for a light their foollish
imaginations, for a rule their false traditions,
for a law their absolute will, for a
guide their old customs, and for a paterne
the exsample of their predecessors, constraines
me to proceede forward vnto the
second point of my discourse, and to proue
that the Christians in time past haue learned
this superstitious veneration of the reliques
of the departed, in the Gentils schole,
and since haue followed it, and brought
it into the primatiue Church by certaine
steps and degrees, to the great heart
breake of their faithfull teachers, and lawfull

successours of the sacred and holy Apostles.
            I say, that this corruption is entred into
the Christian Church by certaine stepps;The secōd part.
because that heretofore the source and begining
thereof was but small and simple:
whereof Eusebius and some other Historians
propounds vs a cleare exsample in the
life of Constantine the Emperour: For they
all confesse with one accord, that this Emperour
thought good to coūcell the Christiās
to immitate many sumptuous ceremonies,
which the gentiles vsed in solemnizing
the funeralls of their ancestours, especially
in tansporting the dead corps of illustrate
personnages, and men of great renoume
in their Contrey, out of base and
vnknowne places into Church-yeards, and
others that were more publique, to make
the memory of the Martyrs & other faithfull
servants of God the more comēdable,
and the Christiā religiō so much the more
pleasing vnto all sorts of men.
            But they witnesse in noe place, that hee
commanded his Bishops to lock them vp
in their Church-Coffers, niether to transport
them by mamockes into diuerse places,
to represent them vpon feastiuall daies
vnto the vulgar sort of people, with an exhortation

that they should salute and kisse
them: but on the contrarie enjoyned his
subjects to burie them honorably, and lay
them in the Earth. Notwithstand
                  •
               ng the
Devill taking hold and making vse of the
Carnal wisedome of this Emperour turned
it litle by litle into a cēsurable superstition.
For since that time many Christians haue
suffred them-selues to bee carryed away
through there in considerate Zeale from
one vanity vnto another, imagining with
them-selues, that the bodies of the faithfull
deserued more, or asmuch seruice after
their departure as the infidels: were not
onely contented to remoue them from farr
and remote places of their countreies, into
there Church-yardes, wherein they ordinarily
assembled in those days to watch &
pray, and to doe therein some others rites
of religion, because then they had no Churches.
And euen thus sought to eternize
the memorie of their vertues, by building
them Sumptuous tombes, & solemnising,
their funeralls with too excessiue praises.
            
               To shew then to euery man, that Sathan
the Athenians Law giver and other Idolaters,
instituted this Ceremonie, I wil onely
alledg without reciting the testimonies of
other Historians, what Plutarke writeth

thereof in his discourse vpon the interring
of Theseus and Cimon. His wordes are
these, that when Cimon by fore of armes had
conquered the Ile of Scycros, bee remembred
with himself, that the auncient Theseus sonne
vnto Ageus, flying from Athens came into
that Ileland, where Lycomedes for some bad suspition
hee had of him, caused him to be slayne
by tresaon. Now by all meanes hee laboured to
finde out his graue, in regard the Athenians
had receaved before an or Oracle or prophesie
from Apollo (or to speake more properly
from the Deuill,) by which hee commaunded
them to bring backe to Athens the bones and
ashes of Theseus, & to honour him as a Demy-God:
but hee knew not where they had enterred
him, because the inhabitants of that Ile kept his
graue secret and vnknowen, and would suffer
no man to seeke it out: Howbeit; Cimon vsing
all expedition to search it out, espied by chance
an Aegle, which strook the ground with her
beake and talents, in a place some what higher
then the rest, whereupō it came into his minde,
(as it were by divine inspiration) to cause that
place to be digged, where they found the graue of
some great corps, and the poynt of a brasen lance
with a sworde. In such sorte, that hauing at last
found the tombe, he tooke forth Theseus bones,
and brought them into the Admirall-Galley

somptuously adorned, and transported them presently
into his Contrey foure hundred yeeres after
Thesius had departed from thence. For this
seruice the people receaued him with great ioy
and he gott thereby the good will of the Athenians,
which receaved theise reliques with great
Applause, with somptuous sacrifices, & processions,
as if Thesius himself had ben liuing, and
had returned back again into the Citie. And his
reliques are in the midst of the Towne, yet vnto
this day, neere vnto the Parcke where the young
mē resort together for the excercising of their bodies,
& where is freedom both for slaues and
all poore a
                  •
               flicted ones.
            
               More-ouer, the Sepulchres which yet vnto
this day are called Cimonia testefie that Cimon
                  •
               
bones & ashes were brought back againe into
Attica. Notwithstanding the inhabitants of the
towne of Citium honour still a certaine Tombe
which they affirme should be Cimons, because
that in the time of a great dearth & famine they
had an oracle (that is an answere from the
Deuill) which commaunded them to haue a care
vnto Cimon, and not to neglect him, but to honour
and reverence him as a God, as Nancicrates
the Orator hath recorded it in writting. The
like hee saith also of Demetrius and Phocyon
in the storie of their death whereunto for
breuitie sake I will send the Reader.
            
            
               
Now al-be it that the Christians & members
of the primitiue Church, were borne
away with the torrent of this heathenish
custome, wherevnto the Emperour Constantine
had opened the sluces, passing
beyond the boundes of Christian puretie &
simplicity: yet the honour which they did
about the graues & bons of their Martyrs,
was in noe wise comparable, nor so superstitious
as that was of the Athenians, and
other pagans, nor like to that which
at this day is committed amongst the Idolaters
of the Romane Church. For let vs
consider what S. Augustine saith thereof in
his 8. booke of the cittye of God. Wee neither
(saith hee) build Temples,
               August. 1. 8. ciuitat. Dei. c. 27 
               nor make priesthood
nor sacrifies, nor any other diuine seruice, as
a religion to the Martyrs. For they are not
our Gods, but their God is ours. Truth it is,
that wee honour their memorie, as the holy men
of God. Which haue fought valiantly for the
truth euen vnto the death of their bodies, to the
end, that true religion might bee knowne & the
false convicted. What man is it amonge the
faithfull that ever heard a preist say standing before
an Altar, built vppon the corps of Some
Martyre to the honour and seruice of God, Peter,
Paul or Cyprian I offer thee Sacrifice, seing
that in memorie of them wee offer vp vnto God

who hath made them both men and martyrs, &
hath conioyned them through a celestiall glorie
vnto his angels, that in the assembly of the people,
wee might giue thankes vnto the true God for
their victories, and by the remembrance of their
crownes & palmes, might exhort others vnto the
imitation of their vertues. The funeralls then
which the religious solemnize by the monumēts
of the Martyrs, are noe other-wise then ornaments
of their memorialls, & noe sacrifices which
they doe offer vnto the dead as vnto Gods. These
are S. Augustins wordes, by which hee testifieth,
that notwith-standing the ouverture,
which the Christiās of his time made vnto
this paganish superstition, in solemnising
the Martyrs feastes: yet true pietie & the
right invocation of the name of God bore
some sway and aucthority amonge them.
But if S. August. and his fellow-souldiers,
could haue ben able to haue prevented the
euils and mischiefs that this superstition
drew after her taile, they would then haue
redoubled their forces and fell vppon her
with all their might, to haue hindred her
from winning so many countryes in Christendome.
            So then it is my duty to excuse them,
considering they opposed thēselfs against
her, both by word and writing.
            
               
To begin with S. Ambrose, S. Augustin
giues him this testimonie,Aug. li. 6. de cōfess. cap. 2. that hee did disswade
his Mother, and some other of his
frendes, from frequenting of those publique
feasts, which the Christians solemnized
yeerely in praise of their Martyrs, & that
for sundry reasons, among others, Quia illa
quasi parentalia superstitioni Gentilium essent
simillima, (that is to say) because that theise
funerall banquets, and solemne feasts, held
in honour of their neerest kinred, was almost
like vnto the superstition of the
Gentils.
            As for S. Augustin himself, he plainely
cōdemns it in his eight booke of the Citie
of God, wherein hee doth not coulour it,
but saies that such as brought their victualls
vnto the sepulchres of the Martyrs, to
solemnize there their feastes, were not of
the better sort of Christians.
            The same authour returning an answere
vnto the reproch which the Manicheans
made against him, to wit, that those which
vaunt themselues so much at the name of
Christians, worshipped notwithstanding the
Tombes of Martyrs, following therein the
exsample of the Heathen, saith (Pick mee
not out from among the Christian name; those
which neither know, nor follow the vertue of

their profession? seeke me not out the troupes
of ignorant men which are superstitious, euen in
the true religion, and so much giuen ouer vnto
their pleasures, that they haue forgotten what
they promised vnto God. I know (saith hee)
that there are many which adore the monuments
& pictures. &c. and among so great a multitude
of people it is no wonder. Cease then I pray you
at last from slandering the Catholique Church,
in blaming the fashion of those, which her self
condemneth and hath evermore sought to correct
as wicked childeren.
            
            Also hee complaineth in his Epistle hee
wrote vnto Ianuarius. That they had overladē
mens consciences with seruil burdens,
and addeth thereunto, that the condition
of the Iewes was more tollerable then that
of the Christians, because men had made
them subject onely to the burdens of the
Lawe: but Christians vnto humane presumptiōs,
that is, according to the opiniōs
taken among them-selues, obstinatly to
maintaine them to prejudice the truth. He
confesseth likewise therein, that the church
of God being plāted amonge much chaffe
& daernell tolerated many things which
neuer-the-lese her self did niether doc, approue,
nor conceale. Also hee plainely signifies
in that Epistle, that hee could not

allowe of diuerse things which they had
instituted in the Church of God, ouer and
besides the aunciēt custome of the fathers,
of the old Testament, as if it were the observation
of a Sacrement, which yet not-with-standing
he confesseth, on th'other
side, hee durst not so freely reject for avoyding
the scandall of some persons, wherof
some were holy and others seditious,
where vpon hee openeth his minde more
clearely by the distinction which hee propoundes
against Faustus saying, One thing
is that which wee support,
               August. contra Faustus. Lib. 20. cap. 21. 
               another that which wee
are commaunded to teach, & another that which
wee are commaunded to amend; and constrayned
to beare with, vntill wee haue amended it.
            
            If S. Augustin hauing conceaued some
hope, sought to cure his auditorie of this
contagious maladie, rather by gentlenesse
then by seuerity. Not-with-standing called
them wicked Children, superstitious euen
in the true religion, giuen ouer to their delights,
forgetfull of that which they had
promissed to God, and finally that they
were not of the better sort of Christians,
would hee not crie out with greater vehemencie,
against the Idolaters of the Romish
Church, who scornefully and obstinately,
refuse the fit remedies which should purge

them of their bad humours, being laden
with so many corruptiōs almost incurable?
would he not cry out louder, and tell them
that they are not of the better sort of Christians,
but of the wickedest? would hee not
call them with the Prophet Esaye a sinfull
nation:Esa. 1. a people ladē with iniquitie, a seede
of the wicked, corrupt childrē: which haue
forsaken the Lord, and haue provoked the
holy one of Israel to anger?
            I could here produce many other testimonies
to the like effect, were not these sufficient
to conuict all contradictours, and
to shewe the ignorant, that S. Augustin &
his fellow labourers (which liued foure hun
dred yeeres after Christ) perceiued noe sooner
the bitter fruit of this dāgerous plant,
which Sathā the wicked spirit had brought
from the Athenian Schole into their churches,
but they laboured with all their power
to root it vp; & hew downe the braunches
thereof. From whence necessarely
we may inferre, that these Canons of Awcon,
which anone wee will refute more perticularly,
bragg of the antiquity of this traditiō
with false brauadoes, since God who is
the auncient of dayes, hath never taught
it to our Fathers, in the first dayes of his
grace, by his auncient Prophets, nor in the

beginning of the latter by his Sonne Christ
Iesus and his Apostles, nor for some hundred
yeeres after their time by their true
successours: but on the contrarie, raised vp
holy and faithfull Doctors to resist & contradict
it. So that the title of Heretiques
which they so vsually giue vs in all occurrē
               ces,
may by a good consequence be returned
vpon them. And here-upon I entreat
the vnpassionate Reader, to censure whether
this reproch which S. Tertullian made
heretofore vnto their predecessours, who
alwaies had antiquety in their mouths and
noveltie in their braines, may not justly be
appropriated to them.Tertul. in Apog. cap. 6. 
               Where is the religion?
where is the reuerence you owe vnto your
ancestours? you haue renounced the custome of
your Graundsirs in education, in apparell, in
sence & in speech it self: You euermore praise anti
quity & liue frō daie to daie after nouelty, wherby
it is euident, seing that of your selues you forsake
the good institutions of your predecessours, you
remember & keepe the things which you ought
not, and obserue not those which you should.
            
            Now resteth the lait part of our disputation,The discouerie of nine seuerall abuses.
that this law and custome of going
to salute the reliques of the dead, ought to
be abolished & banished out of the Christiā
church, because of the manie-fold abuses

which heretofore haue ben committed, &
which they yet committ vnto this daye in
Christendome by obseruing them.The first abuse. The
first is, It withdraweth the hearts & spirits
of men, frō the right waie by which it hath
pleased God to draw vs to the knowledge,
and enioying the benefits of his son Christ
Iesus. For in stead that God commandeth
vs to seeke his son in his word and sacraments,
& in th' assemly of the liuing, which
worship him in spirit and truth, amongst
whom he is found. It perswadeth vs the
contrarie to seeke him among the shrines
and reliques of the dead, and in the compagny
of those which dwell in the dust of
the earth,Luc. 24. 5. where hee forbids them by his
Angel to seeke him. Againe, instead that
the Apostle exhorteth vs to seeke Christ in
Heauen where he sitteth at the right hand2 Cor. 5. 7. 16. Col. 3. 1. 2.
of God his Father, and learnes vs to know
him after the spirit and to assend vp vnto
him in the high Places with the feete of our
faith, it councels vs the contrarie, to seeke
him and knowe him after the flesh, to seeke
him now here, and now there, some-times
by pilgrimages from one Contrey into an
other, and sometimes to descend into the
caues of the earth,Mat. 24. 23. 24. to contemplate there
the reliques of his bodie, directly against

his owne expresse prohibition quoted by
S. Mathew in the 24. Chap. of his Gospel.
            The second abuse is, that they haue
transported the reliques of Saincts into diverse
places, and admonished everie one to
resort thether vpon feastiuall daies dedicated
to their memory, and so they intoxicate
the simple with this false opinion, that
not only the saints but God himself taketh
delight in such pilgrimages, and that their
prayers made neere to the theise religious
reliques, are sooner heard of the Saincts, &
of God himself, then when they are made
else where, as appeareth by the decree of
the Councell of Trent, and the praiers
which are forged by the Priests of the Romane
Church, according to the tenour
thereof.
            The decree of the Trent Coūcell is this.The decree of the Councell of Trent touching reliques.
               Mandat sancta Synodus omnibus Episcopis &
caeteris docendi munus curamqué sustinentibus,
ut iuxta Catholicae & Apostolicae Ecclesiae
usum à primaevis Christianae Religionis temporibus
receptum, sanctorumqué Patrum consensionem
& sacrorum Conciliorum decreta de
sanctorum inter cessione, invecatione, reliquarum
honore & legitimo imaginū usu fidelis diligenter
instruant, docentes eos sanctorum Martyrum
& aliorum cúm Christo vivētium sancta corpora,

quae viva membra fuerunt Christi &
templa Spiritus sancti, ab ipso ad vitam aeternam
suscitanda & glorificanda, á fidelibus veneranda
esse, per quae multa beneficia à Deo 
                     •
                  ominibus
praestantur: ita ut affirmantes Sanctorum reliquijs
venerationem atque honorem non deberi,
vel eas aliaquè sacra monumenta à fidelibus
inutiliter honorari, atque cornm opis impetrandae
causa, Sanctorum memorias frustra frequentari,
omnino damnandos esse, prout jampridem eos
dānavit & nūcetiā dānat Ecc. that is, The holy
Counsel enioyneth all Bishops & others, to whom
the charge and care of teaching is committed,
that (according to the vse of the Catholique and
Apostolique Church, receiued from the first age
of Christian Religion, the consent of holy Fathers,
and the decrees of sacred Counsels) they
diligently instruct the faithfull in the Doctrine
of the interecssion and invocation of Saincts, in
honouring their reliques, and in the Lawfull vse
of images, admonishing them touching the reliques,
that the holy Boddies of the Martyrs &
other Saincts living with Christ, who while they
liued in this worlde were his liuely members &
temples of the holy Ghost, whome one day hee
will raise vp and glorifie vnto eternall life, ought
to be reuerenced by the faithfull, because GOD
bestowes many benefits one men through those
reliques. So that those which maintaine that

their reliques are neither to be reuerenced, nor honoured,
& that the faithfull reverence them, and
other holy memorials to noe end. More-ouer
that they in vaine frequent the places, wherein
such reliques are, to obtaine succour from the
Saincts, ought expresly to be comdemned, as for a
longe time the Church hath condemned them,
and condemns them yet vnto this present.
            
            The first prayer consormable to this decree
made by their Presbiters is this.
            
               Domine, nerespicias piccatanostra, sed respice
ad deprecationem genitricis tuae Mariae, &
perejus sancta merita, & perintercessionem sanctorum
tuorum Apostolorum Petri & Pauli,
atque omnium Sanctorum tuorum, quorum
reliquiae sunt in isto loco, adiuva nos, sicut tuvides
necessitatem nostram.
            
            That is to say,
            
               Behold not our Sinns ô Lord, but behold the
Prayer of thy mother Marie, and through her
holy Merits, and through the mediation of thy
holy Apostles Peter and Paul, and of all thy
Saincts, whose reliques are in this place, help vs
according to our necessitie.
            
            
               The second is.
            
               Deus, qui ex omni coaptatione Sanctorum
aeternum tibi condis habitaculum, da aedificationi
tuae incrementa caelestia, vt quorum hic reliquias
pio amore complectimur, eorum semper meritis
adiuvemur.
            
            That is to say.
            
               O God! which through the Sainets that thou
hast appropriated to thy self, buildest thee an everlasting
Tabernacle, giue celestiall augmentations
to thy building, that alwaies we may be succoured
by the merrits of those, whose reliques wee here
embrase with a holy affection.
            
            The third is,
            
               Propitiare nobis, quaesumus Domine, famulis
tuis per horum sanctorum tuorū N. & N. atque
aliorum, qui in praesentirequiescunt Ecclesia, merita
gloriosa, vt eorum pia intercessione ab omnibus
semper protegamur adversis.
            
            That is to say.
            
               O Lord, be fauourable vnto vs thy servants, for

the glorio us merits of these Saincts. N. & N.
and of all others which rest here in this Church,
to the end, that through their Godly intercession,
wee may evermore bee preserved in all our adversities.
            
            I maintaine that this opinion is false,
that God heareth soner our Prayers neere
vnto the reliques of the dead, then else
where; because it is grounded on principles
directly contrarie to the infallible instructions
of holy Scripture, where of the
first is. That Christians are permitted to invocate
the departed Saincts, and to honour
religiously their reliques. The second,
that the deceased Saincts know whatsoeuer
is done vnder the Sunne, and consequently
vnderstand the Prayers of those which crie
vnto them in this world. The third, that
the Saincts after their departure, should regard
the seruice of such as salute, kisse, and
honour their reliques, by way of religion.
Fourthly, that God hath instituted the pilgrimages
which they obserue in the Romane
Church, and had rather be worshipped
in a place, wherein there is some reliques,
or memorials of the Saints, thē where
there is none.
            Now inregard they haue not long agoe

reimprinted at Sedan my refutation against
the invocation of Saincts, by which I haue
represented vnto the reader the falshoode
of the three first principles, I will send the
Reader vnto it. But for the latter, I will
set downe before him, that which S. Gregorie
Nyssene iudgeth thereof in his Epistle against
the pilgrims, that went to Ierusalem,
to see the sepulchre of Christ, and the most
remarkeable memoriall of our Redeemer.
            When the Lord (saith Gregorie Nyssene)Gregorie Nyssene.
calleth the blessed into the inheritance of the kingdome
of Heaven, he places not amonge the number
of their workes which brings them thither,
the pilgrimage vnto Ierusalem, neither maketh
hee anie mention of such a worke, amonge the
number of the Blessed. And why should men
employ their time then, in doing that which neither
makes them happie, nor is available vnto the
Kingdome of Heauen? Wherein cann that
man advantage himself, which should come into
those parts, as if more abundance of the holy
Ghost were there, and that his grace were more
ample in that place? If Grace were more abounding
in Ierusalem, then sinne would not bee so
rife amonge those that inhabit there: but at this
present, there is noe manner of wickednesse which
is left vncommitted amonge them. Let our
exsample offend noe man, but let rather our perswasion

finde beliefe, seing wee diswade them from
that which wee haue seene with our eyes. As
for vs, before and after wee came thither, wee alwaies
confessed that Christ is true God, and our
faith was neither impaired, nor engmented therby.
This good I haue gathered by it, that by the conference
I haue had therof, I must alwaies acknowledge,
that there is more sanctitie in vs, which
dwell fardest from it. You then which feare
God, praise him at home in the places were you
make your abode, for the alteration of the place
makes not God to come the neerer vnto you: But
wheresoeuer thou shall be, he wil come vnto the, if
he finds the Lodging of thy soule readie to entertaine
him. But if the inward man bee laden
with wicked thoughts, thou shalt not receiue
Christ, though thou wert in Golgotha, in
mount olivers, or in the tombe of his resurrection.
Perswade the Bretheren then, that they goe on
pilgrimage out of their Bodies vnto the Lord, &
not out of Cappadocia into Palestina. If that
which was done there in the beginning did last
still, the holy Ghost dispensing his gifts in the likenesse
of fire, then would it behooue vs all to be present
there, where he maketh such distribution to
all: But if the Spirit bloweth where it pleaseth
him, those which haue beleeved there, are made
partakers of his diuine gift, according to the
proportion of their faith, and not according

to their pilgrimage vnto Ierusalem.
            I could here likewise coppie out S. Chrisost.
admonition,Chrys. ad Philem. hom. 1. that to obtaine pardon
for his sinnes, he needed not to make any
long iourneis into farre Countries, neither
to spend his mony.August. serm. 3. de 
                     •
                  art. Also that of S. Aug.
that God commaunds vs not to goe into
the East, nor to saile into the West to seek
out righteousnesse: likewise that of S. Bernards,
               Bernard. serm. 1. de advēt.
that to finde the Lord it behooues
vs not to passe the Seas, and Alpes, but that
euerie man should goe vnto God within
himself: & many other instructions of the
true Doctours & Fathers of the primitiue
Church, conformable to those of Christ &
his Apostle S. Paul, that God wil bee worshipped
by vs in al places, in Spirit & truth;
if I feared not to abuse the Readers patiēce,
and knew moreouer, that our adversaires
makes no account of the Doctrine of the
Orthodoxe Fathers, whēsoeuer it refelleth
their inventions, & is repugnant vnto the
authority of their Pope, whome they preferre,
as wee can proue by their writtings,
before a thousand Chrysostomes, Augustins,
Bernards, and Gregories.
            
            The third abuse is, that through the visiting
of these reliques, the hearts of superstitious
men are moued, to transferre that

worship which is due onely vnto the liuing
and incorruptible God, to dead & corruptible
things. For as in the time of S. Ierom
S. Christostom, & S. Augustin, the Christiās
were adicted vnto this ceremonie, of going
to visite the sepulchres and monuments of
the Martyrs, and other holy men, and to
solemnize yeerely certaine solemne feastes
in memorie of them. So ever since, their
foolish Imitatours, haue buylt Temples &
Altars in honor of their reliques, lighted
vp Candles about them, and haue craued
succour and help by their praiers, not onely
of God himself and his saincts, but also
from these dead an insensible things, which
neuer had any communion with humane
life, neither could in any wise vnderstand
them, nor neuer shalbe capable of hauing
participation in the knowledg of our God,
and of that eternall life, which he hath promised
vnto his children.
            For confirmatiō whereof, I wil not here
speake of the Monkes, which in time past
worshipped the arme of S. Maurus, nor of
some other Idolaters which praied to the
bones of their Saincts; nor of those which
adore our Sauiours crosse vnto this day,
onely for the present, I will but re
                  •
               ite the
praier, which the Monkes of the Abbey of

Fons make ordinarily vnto the table-cloth
vpon which, & according to their tradition,
they saie our Sauiour and Lord Iesus
Christ hath celebrated the holy Sacrament
with his disciples. And those which the
Monkes of Cahors sing vsually going in
procession, in honour of his kerchiefe, and
to the great dishonor of the person of our
blessed Sauiour, and onely mediator Iesus
Christ.
            The Monkes of Fons, esteeming more
of an olde and false table-cloth, then of our
Lord Iesus Christ, the authour of truth and
niewnesse of life, call vpon it for aide in this
manner, Sanctissima Dei mappa ora pro nobis,
O most holy table-cloth of God pray for vs.
            
            The Monkes of Cahors addressing thē
               selves
rather vnto the Napkin or kerchief,
which our Redeemer left behinde him to
rot in his sepulchre, thē vnto this high Priest
who shortly after his resurrection was takē
vp by his Father into Heavē, to make there
continuall intercession for vs, cryes vnto it
singing in this manner Sancte Sudari ora pro
nobis that is, O holy handkerchiefe pray for vs.
againe, Sudarium Christi liberet nos a peste &
morte tristi. that is, O kerchiefe of Christ deliver
vs from plague and a heavie death. Moreover,
they cr
                  •
               ue that for his kerchiefes sake

representing the face of Christ by picture,
it would please him to let them behold his
face aboue in Heauen.
            
               Omnipotens sempiterne Deus, qui in memoriam
passionis vnigeniti Filij tui, sanctam eius
sindonem, cum expressaipsius effigie venerandam
reliquistiin terris, tribue, quaesumus, vt per virtutem
eius sanctae sindonis faciem tuam contemplari
mereamur in coelis:
            
            That is to say.
            
               O Almightie and Eternall God, which in
memorie of the passiō of thy only begottē son, hast
left behinde him on earth his holy Sindon with
his shape printed vpon it, graunt that through
the vertue of this holy lunen wee maye merrit to
contemplate thy face in Heaven.
            
            O Lord how long wilt thou endure this
idolatrie?Ier. 4. 13. ô poore Superstitious men, how
long will yee continue on, in seeking our
Lord Iesus Christ, who is all in all of vs, in
things that are nothing worth?
            The fourth abuse consisteth,THE fourth abuse. in the adoration
of false reliques, so artifcially counterfeited
and invented by the one, as foolishly
beleeved and receiued by the other.

The cause why S. Augustine complaineth
in his treatise,Augus. de Labore Mon. c. 28. touching the travelling
Monkes, that Sathan had dispersed throwout
Christendome, many Hypocrites vnder
the habit of vagabond Monkes, straggling
vp & downe through countries not
sent, neuer still, nor never setled, whereof
some of them made Marchandise of the
members of the Martyrs, which made him
to doubt & suspect, that they were not the
right members of the Martyrs.
            To this purpose Socrates reporteth in
the 14. Chap. and 7. booke of his Historie,Socrates l. 7. c. 14.
that the Christians for some time honoured
through ignorance, the dead carkiese
of a seditious Monke called Ammomus,
thinking it had bene the body of some holy
Martyr.
            Also, Erasmus of Rotterdam reporteth
in his Conferences,
               Eras. coll. de pilgri. that two Pilgrims arriving
at Canterburie, the one of them was so
amazed, at the impudencie and deceit of
those, which presented before them al sorts
of reliques to be worshipped, and amonge
the rest an Arme bleeding with the flesh vpō
it, that they seemed thereat to be horribly
affrighted, & flying back would not kisse it.
            
               Gregorie surnamed Turonensis, and diverse
other Historians affirme,Gregory Turonensis. that in the shrine

of a departed Sainct, they found the roots
of sundry plantes, the teeth of Moses, the
bones of Mice, and the feete of foxes, in
stead of the true reliques of his bodie.
            It is most manifest, that presently after
the reformatiō of the Churches in France,
Helvetia, Germanie, and some other adjoyning
places, they founde in the shrines
& chestes of the papall reliques, the bones
of diverse Beasts, pieces of brickes, spriggs
of trees, cordes, and manie other trifles, &
small trash, which these superstitious men
had worshipped, during the night of their
ignorance, & the thicke darknesse of their
idolatries.
            
               Calvin noteth in his admonitiō against
the reliques of the Romish Church,Calvin. that
they found at Geneve the taile of a Hart,
which these Superstitious people had often
times kissed, imagining that it had ben
S. Anthonies Arme: and a pumeise stone
saluted by these Doltes besotted with this
opinion, that it was S. Peters braines.
            
               Theodorus Besa proueth by the testimonie
of more then fiftie eye-witnesses,Theodorus Bela. in
his Apologie against the calumnies of a
certaine Apostate, by name Francis Bauldwin,
that at Bourges they found a
wheele turning about vpon a staff adorned

with this laciuious and magicall verse written
vpon a scrole of parchment.

                  Quand ceste roue tournera,
                  Celle que saime, m'aimera.
               
            
            That is to say,
            When this wheele shall
turne about,
Shee whome I loue, shall
loue mee.
            And at Tours a Card which gamesters
call the knaue of Dyamants, with a bawdie
and villennous song written vppon it
by some whoremonger, & put into a silver
Arme. And after that a silver crosse besett
with many precious perles, and with an
Agath, wherevpon was engravē the picture
of Venus bewailing the death of Adonis her
Louer lying by her, which the vulgar sort

of people adored vpō the day of the death
and passion of our Lord Iesus Christ.
            Rodulphus Hospaniā attesteth likewise,Rodolphus Hospinian.
in his recitall of the originall of Reliques,
that in the shrines & treasuries of the Catholique
Church at Zurich, they foūd some
of the ribs of a Cat, or some such like creature
with a cord twelue ells long, which before
the reformation of the said Church,
was worshipped by the blinde people there
perswaded there-vnto by the guilfull gloses
of their pastours, that they were the reliques
of Felix, and of some other holy
Martyr.
            Although these Testimonies are worthy
of beliefe, and approved by every man
without contradiction: yet I assure myself,
that our adversaries will take a small
occasion, at the very name of these Authours,
to quarrell at the Title of their
bookes, & to call them in question and reject
them.
            I feare I shall not get much more, by inserting
here the wordes of George Cassander
one of their chiefest writers,Cassander. whereby he admonisheth
the Emperours Ferdinand and
Maximilian, that this abuse began to
thrust vp her head litle by litle through the
often visiting of the monuments of the renownedst

Martyrs, that in S. Augustins and
S. Ambroses time, the custome of bringing
victualls in memorie of the martyrs, was
forbidden by S. Ambrose himself: that in
the ages ensuing, they haue attributed too
much honour vnto the memorie of the
Saincts, that some men of noe note, had
perswaded the simple, to place a false confidence
in a superfluous & fond seruice, and
had added many other euils vnto it, to
wit, that the priestes & monkes coveteous
of dishonest gaine, haue counterfeited reliques,
& preached false miracles, to nourish
superstition in the hearts of men, and drew
them, rather vnto the admiration of their
miracles, then vnto the imitation of the
Saincts. Finally, that the Devill making
vse of the superstition of these men, reuealed
euery day new reliques, when he saw
that the Bishops of the Romish church, were
so earnestly giuen to enquire foorth the
inventers and promoters of those reliques,
and they should finde therein (as he saith)
abuses, & deceits, as great and as abhominable,
as that was which S. Martyn discouvered,
who passing by the sepulchre &
reliquaire of a Martyr greatly renowned in
his Countrey, & having vnderstood (after
hee was throughly and seriously informed

thereof) that it was the tombe of a Murderer,
caused it to be demolished, and cast
downe, that noe more mention might bee
made thereof, nor that they might vse it
any more after that superstitious manner. I
say, I shall not get much more, by repeating
Cassanders wordes vpon this matter, because
the Iesuites who dommineere at this
present in the Romaine Church, approue
not all what this Catholique Doctour hath
writ, but according to the authority which
was giuen them by the Council of Trent,
commaunds al Readers to cancel & deface
the best sentēces in his writtings, extracted
from the holy Scripture, and from the true
fathers and successours of the Apostles. As
for example, they commaund in their index
which they tearme purgatiue, printed
at Antwerp by Chrystopher Plantine Anno.
1521. to purge his writtings of that, which
hee teacheth in thē, of the true & naturall
signification of the word Merit, and of the
ancient custome of the Fathers & Apostolique
Doctors, concerning the administration
of the holy Sacrament of the Lordes
supper, vnder the two signes of bread and
wine, vsed for more then a thousand yeeres
after the comming of Christ. Likewise they
cōdemne therein his booke intituled Preces

ecclesiasticae, that is ecclesiasticall Prayers;
and his exhortation touching the extenuation
of the invocation of Saincts, and al his
Disputations vpon their merits. Now if
these Physitions make noe conscience, to
prescribe vnto Christians, that they should
apply their expurgatorie index vnto Cassander
books, to draw from them the pure blood
and vitall sappe, & leaue nothing in them
but the corrupt and badd humours: haue
not I then just occasion to suspect the like
answere vpon the allegation of his testimonie,
and that they will say Cassander passed
the limits of their rules and traditions in
his discourse abouesaid, & so consequently
they ought to cutt of what-soever they
judge therein vicious and superfluous?
Not-with-standing, there is the bodye of
a whole Council, called the Council of the
auncient Bishops, which their cheifest Doctours
hold for perfectly found, and can in
no manner bee stayned with any corruption,
and wherein they can finde nothing
that is worthie of purging and correcting,
whereby wee can shew them, that manie
ages agoe, the reliques of Saints haue bē suspected
by their predecessours, assembled
in the ancient Councils.
            Wee reade then in the 14. Canon of the

5. Council of Carthage, that Aurelius Bishop
of the Carthagian Church, accompanied
with two and seventy Byshops of the neighbouring
Churches, reprooved therein certaine
reliques, counterfeited by some falsifiers,
& priuily brought into the primitive
Church, for loe, the Contents of the Canon
rune thus.
            
               Placuit vt altaria quae passim per agros aut
vias tanquam memoriae Martyrum constituuntur,
in quibus nullum corpusaut reliquae Martyrum
conditae probantur, ab Episcopis qui cisdem
locis praesunt (si fieri potest) evertantur. Si
autem hoc propter tumultus popularis non sinitur,
plebis tamen admoneantur ne illa loca frequentent,
vt qui recta sapiunt, nulla tibi supestitione
devincti teneantur: Et omninò nulla tibi memoria
Martyrum probabiliter acceptetur, nisi aut
ibi corpus, aut aliquae certae reliquiae sint, aut vbi
origo alicuius habitationis, vel possessionis, vel passionis
fidelissimâ origine traditur. Nam quae per
somnia & per manes quasi revelationes quorum
libet hominum vbique constituntur altaria, omnino
reprobent
                     •
                  r.
            
            That is to say.
            
               It hath pleased vs (to decree in this Councill)

that the Altars which are built vp and
downe in feilds, and by the way sides, as in memorie
of the Martyrs, In which one cannot
finde, that there hath ben enclossed the Bodies or
reliques of the Martyrs, should be cast downe if
it be possible by the Bishops of those places. But
if they cannot doe it because of the popular tumult,
Let them never-the-lesse admonish the people,
not to frequent such places, to the end, that those
which be wise, may not be carryed away with superstition.
And let them receiue noe where,
any memorie of the Martyrs, but in those places
wherein their is some corps, and certaine reliques,
or some tradition of the sure originall, of the abode
of some Martyr, or of his suffring: For wee haue
thought it good, that they wholly cast downe the
Altars, established by the dreames and revelations
of all sort of persons.
            
            By these wordes it appeareth then, that
wee are not the first which haue warned the
superstitious, first, that the simplicity of
their ancestours, and their naturall inclination
in giving eare vnto the dreames and
lies of all sort of Doters, hath opened the
way vnto many false reliques. Secondly,
that their foolish devotion made them lay
them vnder, and afterward neere vnto Altars.
Thirdly, that their obstinacie hath

by all force, with-held the good Bishops
from purging the Churches of them, mentioned
in the Canon already cited.
            More-over, we could here copie out the
decrees of some other Counsells, especially
that of Lions, whereby their Pries
                  •
               s in former
times haue ben advertised of this abuse,
and exhorted to seeke remedy for it.
We could also produce many sentences of
the Fathers, conformable to them: But in
doing it, we should offend the Romanists,
who beleeue that Counsells cannot erre, to
alledge thē for a proofe vnto the said Cannon,
approoued long agoe by their predecessours,
and which they holde still for authentique.
            The fift abuse testifies,THE fifth abuse. that one superstition
hath drawne many others after her.
For as the Prelats of the Romane Church
make noe conscience to allure the silly people
vnto the adoration of their reliques: So
to induce them the more, to put their confidence
therein, they promisse indulgences
and pardons, to such as will kisse them, &
permits their Idolaters to carrie them vpon
their neckes, & to sweare by them, trampling
vnderfoot by this meanes, the second
and third commaundement of the diuine
Lawe, and maliciously contradicting the

Doctrine of the auncient Prophets & Apostles,
who teach vs all with one common
accord, that no man ought not to vnderprop
his faith vpon any other, then vppon
God himself, nor to sweare by any other,
then by him, nor to seeke the remission of
his sinnes in any other, then in our onely
Saviour Iesus Christ. Therefore, these Sacrilegious
persons, wilbe so much the more
inexcusable before God, at the day of judgment,
because they are not ignorant, that
God threatens with a Curse, by his Prophet
Ieremiah the man that trusteth in man,
and maketh flesh his arme.
               Ier. 17. 5. For if the Lord,
which in his word permitteth vs, to craue
the assistance of living mē, as those whome
hee hath ordained dispensators of his blessings,
to relieue vs in our necessities, condemneth
not-with-standing those which
assure themselues of the help which they
expect from mortal men, hath he not farre
greater reasō to curse those Idolaters, which
put their confidence in the bones and garments
of the dead,Deut. 18. 11. to whom hee forbids vs
to goe to enquire, or to haue any recourse
vnto them, to aske their Counsell or help
in our distresses?
            Also, they haue read for the most part,
that the marke whereby God discerneth

the way of his people from strangers, who
are not yet cōverted vnto him, is, according
as the same Prophet Ieremiah propounds it,
that the people of God sweare by his name,
to wit,Ier. 12. 16. 
               The Lord liveth: but the idolatrous
people which haue noe communior. with
him, sweare by Baal.
            
            Beside, they are not ignorant that the
Apostle. S. Paul (according to the translation
of the two & seauentie interpretours)
translateth in his Epistle the word swearing
which the Prophet Isaiah vseth in the 45.
Chapter of his prophesie, for a Confession,
from which exposition of the Apostles,
euerie man of a sounde judgment may discerne
by a necessary consequence, that as
the Apostle, calleth the swearing, made by
the name of God, a confession, and an acknowledgment
of his divine Maiestie, and
of the Souveraine authority he hath ouer
all his Creatures: So on the contrary, wee
may tearme a deniall, and abiuration from
his name, euery oath which is sworne in the
name of the departed Saincts, or of their
reliques.
            But this is not all. For euen by their
owne consciences they are convicted. First,
by that testimonie which S. Peter giues vs,
in the booke of the Actes of the Apostles,

that there is noe saluation in any other thē
in Christ,Act. 4. 12. neither is there any other name
vnder Heaven giuen vnto men, whereby
wee must bee saued. Secondly, by that of
S. Pauls in his Epistle to the Hebrewes, that
by the onely Sacrifice of Christ,Heb. 9. 12. wee haue
full deliverance, & remission of our sinnes.
Thirdly,Iam. 4. 12 by that of S. Iames in the fourth
Chapter of his Epistle, that there is but one
Law giuer, (to wit God) which is able to
saue, and to destroy. Who can then excuse
the malice and impietie of these Doctours,
which with holding the trueth in vnrighteousnesse,
attribute to their Pope this diuine
aucthority, of forgiving and binding the
sinnes of men, according to his Law and
will, & to the rotten reliques of dead boddies,
the incommunicable power, onely
proper to Christ, who is able perfectly to
saue them, that come vnto God by him,
seeing he euer-liveth, to make intercession
for them? And how is it possible, that God
should bee so gentle and full of long suffrance,
as to endure these sacriledges so
longe?
            The sixt abuse is, that the Monkes and
Priests of the papacy, more zealous in keeping
a good fire in their kitchin, then the
ashes of the Martyrs and other deceased

Saincts to make their reliques the more to
be respected, haue attributed to them the
power of doing many miracles, after the
manner and imitation of the Sorcerers, &
false Prophets of the Heathen. For, as S.
Augustine reporteth in the one and twentith,
and two and twentith booke of the
citie of God, that the Heathenish Sorcerers,
maintained heretofore night & day (throw
a diabolicall slight, admirable to the eyes
of the ignorant) the light of Venus lampe, &
bragged because they had the reliques of
Hercules, Romulus, and Bacchus, which had
done some miracles in the temples dedicated
to their memory: so before that the
auncient pagans, went oftentimes on pilgrimage
out of Egypt (witnesse Epiphanus)
vnto the Prophet Ieremias sepulchre, because
their Diviners made them beleeue, that
their Gods had revealed, that the bones of
this Prophet could preserue them from the
stinging of Aspes, and Crocodils. And that
Ptolomeus their king, was perswaded to
haue the corps of Alexander the great transported
into Aegypt, through the prediction
of Aristander, who tould them, that the
Countrey wherein the body of king Alexander
rested, should abounde in all riches,
and should bee preserved from the oppression

of their ennemies, as Aelian gives vs
to vnderstand in the 12. booke of his sundry
Histories.
            If the Priestes of the Romane Church
vsed but this in comon with the abouesaid
Sorcerers and sooth sayers, that manie miracles
haue bene done, by touching and
worshipping the reliques of some great
personnages, renowned in their Countreys:
then they would not be so much offended
with vs; because wee make noe reckoning
of them. But they proceede further:
for some of their Sorcerers haue also
done miracles & cured many diseases with
the braines of a Cat, the head of a Raven, &
such like reliques of dead beastes, as Bodin
proueth in his third booke of Sorcerers, by
the testimonie of Idocus Damhouder of
Bruges, and other credible Historians. So
that there is noe more likelihood of truth,
in the one sort of miracles, thē in the other,
seeing that the former haue ben done with
asmuch shewe of devotion towards the departed
Saincts, and their reliques, as those
which at this present are so much esteemed
in the papacy. For Bodin reporteth in the
same booke, and second Chapter, how a
Sorceresse of Bruges cured an infinit number
of diseases, and that shee tould such as

came vnto her, that they must steadfastly beleeue,
that she had the power to help them
of their sicknesses. Afterward, shee commaunded
them to fast, and then to repeate
ouer certaine times a Pater-noster, or that
they should goe on pilgrimage to S. Iames
or to S. Arnoult.
            
            
               What an impudencie is it then, in these
Boasters of reliques, to bragg and vaunt
themselues, at there miracles, wherein often
times hath bene discouuered many deceits
and illusions. For behold how S. Augustin
answered the miraclers of his time, especially
the disciples of Donat,August. l, de Vnit. Eccl. cap. 16. Let not the Donatist
(saith hee) tell mee that this or that is true,
because that Donat, Pontius, or some other,
hath done such and such like miracles, or because
some men, which pray vnto the memory of our
dead, are heard, or because that vpon it, there
comes to passe such and such like things, or that
this our sister hath seene waking such a vission, or
dreaming hath dreamed such a dreame. Away
with all these fictions of lying men, or shewers of
guilfull Spirits. For either that which they say
is false, or if the Heretiques doe some wonders, so
much the more ought we to take heede of thē, because
the Lord after he had said, that there should
come many deceivers, which in shewing great
signes and wonders, should deceiue the Elect, If

it were possible, addeth therevnto worthy of great
commandations, Behold, I haue tould you before.
            It were an endlesse labour then, to vtter
all the falacy and guiles, whereby they deceiue
the people, yea, which their owne Doctours
haue found out & amonge others,
that which Nicolas Lyra, heretofore perceived
in the miracles, which the Priests of his
age feigned (as this writter speaketh) for
temporall gaine.
            
            Now these jugling trickes of the ministers
of Antichrist, are so much the more detestable;
in regard they attribute not onely
the power of doing miracles to the reliques
of Christ, of the virgin Mary, of the
Apostles, of the holy Martyrs, and other
excellent personnages, renowned for their
good life & purenesse in doctrine, but also
to the reliques of the greatest deceivers of
the world.
            To begin then with the reliques of S.
Francis, (who for his impiety was condemned
by Pope Iohn the 22. as a pervertour of
the Christian religion,) it is written in the
booke of Conformities, that a woman troubled
with the bloody flix for the space of
thirteene yeeres, was cured thereof by touching
the hemme of his gowne, and that a

blinde man recouvered his sight by touching
of his hoode.
            S. Gregory also rehearseth in the first
booke of his Dialogues, & second Chapter,
That a provost of the monasterie of Funda
in Italie called Libertinus, having drawne
on a stocking of the Abbot S. Honorats,
mett a woeman that went to burie her
Sonne, who importuned him with many
prayers to raise him from the dead, & this
good prouost graunting her her request,
laid the stocking ouer her said son, and put
life into him againe through the vertue
thereof.
            He likewise reporteth in the third booke
of his Dialogues, that in the time of a
drought, the Citizens of Spoleta made great
store of raine to fall vpon their Soile, by lifting
vp towards heauen the gowne of S.
Eutychus.
            
            Wee knowe also that some woemē with
Child, following the Counsell of their
Monkes, haue kissed S. Ioostlings breeches in
Flaunders, others lifted vp S. Arnoults—,
others haue stradled ouer S. Guerchilous
image, hoping by this meanes to bee the
more safely deliuered of their children.
            Wee are not ignorant likewise, that
many Idiots of the Romane Church, beleeue,

that there is in the citie of Orleans
some residue of the marriage wine, of Cana
in Galile, which never diminisheth although
they drinke oftentimes thereof. And in our
Ladies Church at Rome, and at S. Salvader
in Spaine, some of the morcells of those
Loaues, wherewith Christ fed fiue thousand
persons in the wildernesse, which
neuer lesseneth, although they oftentimes
eate their bellies full thereof.
            Moreouer they beleeue, that the Prelates
of Rome haue in some of their Churches,
diverse reliques of a wonderfull force
and vertue, as at S. Iohn Latrans, the wastcoate
of the Apostle S. Iohn, which being
heretofore laid ouer three dead bodies,
made them to rise vp a liue in the field.
            At S. Pauls, that crucifix which spake
vnto S. Brigit, Queene of Sweethland, whē
shee came to pray in that place.
            At S. Iohn del' Isle, that image of the virgin
Maries, which at the overflowing of the
Tiber, could not be spoiled, nor her lampe
put out with the water.
            At S. Francis the bodie of S. Lodovica, a
a Romaine lady, which doth many miracles.
            At S. Maries Trāspontina a cruci
                  •
               ix, which
spake heretofore to S. Peter & S. Paul.
            
            
               
To S. Mary en voy large, a small picture
of the virgin Maries, which hath wrought
many miracles.
            At S. Maries laneufve, an other small
picture of the virgin Maries, which was miraculously
preserved in the midst of a great
fire, which burned the other ornaments
of this Church.
            At S. Augustins, an image of the virgin
Maries, painted by S. Luke, which did also
many miracles in the time of pope Innocent
the eight.
            At S. Martins, a gowne which the virgin
Mary made for her sonne Christ Iesus in his
minority, which miraculously groweth to
the same stature as himself grew.
            In S. Pontials Church-yeard an host consecrated
by a Priest, singing masse in the
Chappel, which because he doubted, whether
it was the body of Christ, sprung out
of his hand in a wonderfull manner; and
falling vppon the ground made a marke of
blood which is to be seene within a litle
grate of iron yet vnto this day. A jest not
vnlike to that of the Iesuits, and advocats
of that horrible conspiracie of Garnet, and
of his complices, against the Crowne of the
King of great Britanie, who were so impudent
(as this wise King accuseth them,

thereof, in the preface of his Apologie dedicated
to the Emperour, & all other Princes
in Christendō) that thy were not ashamed
to say and write, that after the execution of
that Traitor, quartered with his cōfederats
in London, a woman found a straw tinctured
with a dropp of bloode which sprunge
from the body of of this traitour, and was
miraculously metamorphosed into the
resemblance of his head chopt off, with a
crowne set vpon it. But as this deceit was
soone after discouvered, and manifested to
the world, aswell by the penn of this King
and Solomon of our age, as by the art of his
painters, who according to his Maiesties desire,
drew a picture vpon a straw and a drop
of blood taken from some other body like
vnto the same in all things: So, I beseech
God, that it will please him by this exsample
and advertisment, to awaken all other
Christian Kings, to sift out and examine
more deligentlie then they haue done in
times past, the other jugling trickes of the
forgers of reliques, and lying wonders.
            This is that (Gentle Reader,) which our Iosiah
my dread Souverain (vpon whose sacred person,
the Lord hath experimented his preservations
from their damnable treasons: because he dwelleth
in the secret of the most hie,Psal. 91. and shall abide in the

shadow of the Almighty; he will cover thee vnder
his wings, & thou shalt be sure vnder his feathers:
A thousand shall fall at thy side, and tenn
thousand at thy right hand, but it shall not come
neere thee,) toucheth in his premonition as in a
passage, having reference to that straw, which the
fathers the Iesuites would haue fathered vpō 
               Garnet
their auricular-traitour, but as my Authour
saith, his Maiesty ingeniously found out as cunning
a Parrahsius in his great Ile of Britanie, as
a Zeuxes in Italie.
            At S. Maries de la consolation an image of
the virgin Maries, which hath done many
miracles.
            In S. Vitus Church an oyle drawne from
the reliques of that Sainct, which being
mixed with them, healeth the byting of
madd doggs.
            At S. Sabinaes a huge blacke stone, chained
to the great Altar, which the Divel
threw at S. Dominicus to overwhelme him
while he prayed in that place: but it chaunced,
that this stone burst miraculously, &
that S. Dominicus was not hurt therewith.
            At S. Iulians a water distilled with the reliques
of S. Iulian whi
                  •
               h helpeth al manner
of-fevers and diseases.
            In the same Church an Image of the virgin

               Maries, brought from the citie of Edessa,
which vpon a day, seing the holy man
S. Alexis comming towards her, after his
wonted manner to say his prayers, and
hearing him knock at one of the Church-doores
spake twise together vnto the Sexten,
Open, and let in that holy man of God S.
Alexis, for he hath merited Heaven.
            
            In S. B
                     •
                  bians Church-yeard an herbe
which shee herself planted, thar cureth the
falling sicknesse.
            At S. Anastases a pillar wherevpon they
cut of S. Pauls head, which being falne from
his body, gaue three jumpes, and at euery
jump sprang forth three fountains a miraculous-lie,
which (if you will beleeue it) are
to be seene there yet vnto this day.
            At S. Maries de la voy, an Image of the
virgin Maries, which hath done diuerse
miracles.
            By the Church of the Abbey of Save, a
fountaine, which cureth many diseases, but
especially the bloody flix.
            Also they approue the fallacy of the parisian
Priests, who say, that the Crucifix,
which they keepe in S. Denis Church, spake
in time past to testifie that this Church was
dedicated vnto him: and other Deceiuers
which maintaine that their Crucifixes haue

wept heretofore, and that they still haue
of their teares.
            They approue also that palpable jest of
their Doctours, that the speare of Pilates
souldier called Lonchè, was trāsformed into
a blinde man, which they call Longin, and
that being advanced from a souldier to a
Captaine, recouvered his sight after he had
washed his eyes with the water and blood,
which issued foorth of Christs side, which
himself had wounded, and through this
miracle, was mooued to make profession
of the Christian religion, & to seale it with
his owne martyredome.
            But who is able to reckon vp all the false
miracles, which the Quacksalvers of the
Romane Church, attribute to the gownes,
dubblets, hose, jackets, shirts, smocks, girdles,
and other ragges of the departed? And
who dares make any questiō of it, but that
the Pope, who at this present liveth in
Rome, & maketh himself to be worshipped
as a God,2 Thes. 2 hath receiued this power of
doing signes and lying wonders, seeing it is
found in the reliques of the dead, and especially
in theirs, who while they liued in this
world, would not suffer none to worship
thē,Act. 10. 25. 26. but acknowledged themselues alwaies
to be but dust & putrefaction? Who would

not wonder at their Priests, which no soner
swallow downe their litle God, which to
their thinking is the very bodie of Christ,
but presently after it they doe some new
signe or wonder to solace and 
                  •
               ase those
which daily frequent them, seeing those
which at some times doe onely behold
but his garments, which is of a farre lesser
price thē his body: & also diverse others,
which salute his Mothers image, or touch
the hoode of some Monke, or the gowne
of some departed Nune, receiue some ease
for their grevances.
            The seauēth abuse is worthier of laughing
then of refuting.The 7. abuse. For these Gypsians
rancks in the nomber of their reliques one
of the feathers of Gabriel the Archangel,
as though hee had appeared to the virgin
Mary in the likenesse of foule. An another
of the H. Ghosts, as if the holy Ghost
descending vpon Christ in the likenes of a
doue, had let falne one of his feathers in
Iorden, to be taken vp, and to be enclossed
into a reliquarie in memorie of his lighting
vpon our Saviour, & of his apparition
to S. Iohn Baptist.
            
            They also put amonge the pieces of
their reliques, things invisible and imposible
to be showne, as the sounde of the bells

in the Temple of Ierusalem, the puffing of
Ioseph when he cloue woode, which they
keepe al Court-cheverni.
            
            They giue likewise to the Angels and invisible
Spirits, corporall and visible armes.
As for example, they glory at Carcassonnae
& at S. Iulian de Tours for having S. Michels
buckler and poinyard.
            Also they shew with them the taile of
that asse that carryed out Lord Iesus Christ
into Ierusalem when he made his royall entrie
therein: The feathers of the chickins
pro
                  •
               reated by the Cock which crew when
S. Peter denied his master: and a morcell of
the broiled fish which S. P
                     •
                  ter presented to
Christ after his resurrection, whē he appeared
vnto them by the Zea side, which hath
lasted ever since without rotting, and cann
be better preserued from corruption, then
Christs flesh, which notwithstanding the
Consecration of the host, which s
                  •
               rueth
him as a couver
                  •
               ed, spoileth if the priest
keepe it too longe in his boxe.
            Beside all this, they shewe at Rome the
impression of Christs feete, which is to be
seene in S. Laurences Church, where our Saviour
meeting with S. Peter after his ascention,
tould him that hee should suffer at
Rome.
            
               
And who would not mocke at these &
such like reliques of these cōnicatchers, whē
they themselues mock at one another, and
take delight in deceiuing each other, and
sporting some crafty devise or another vppon
the poore ignorant people, which
attend and waite with great devotion for
the representation and sight of them?
Whereof we finde sundry examples in our
moderne Histories, of which I will onely,
alledge two, which are so abhominable
that noe man that feareth God and is pure
in heart, cann consider them, without disdaine
and horrour.
            So then, Martinus Chemnicius reporteth
in his treatise of reliques, made against
the decree of the Counsell of Trent, touching
the veneration of them, That a certaine
Orator & porter of the popes bulls,
vaunted vpon a day, that amonge other of
his reliques, hee had some of the feathers
of the holy Ghost, now a chiefe companiō
of his consort, over hearing him, picked
cuningly his boxe and taking away his feathers,
laid coales into it in stead of thē. On
the morrow this Oratour was to make a
longe Sermon and discourse vpon the feathers
of the holy Ghost, and seing the people
falne downe vpon their mariebones to

behold & worship them, opening his boxe
to pull foorth his feathers, found coales in
it, whereat he neither blushed nor was put
out of countenance, but presently chaunging
his discourse, was so expect in his art
of lying, that he tould them he had mistaken
his boxe, & that those were the coales
taken vp from vnder the gridyron, wherevpon
S. Laurence had bene carbinadood.
            Another Germaine Divine named Iacobus
Herbrandus, auoucheth in his disputation
de Sceloatriae, that a certaine priest of Rotenborough
neare vnto Nicre, called Pfaff
Isele, hauing bene at Rome and created the
popes Indulgentiar, returned from thence
into his Countrey furnished with diverse
reliques, amonge others one of the winges
of Michael the Archangel: Now to make
it the more beneficiall vnto him, he extolled
the vertues thereof in all his Sermons.
But vpon a Sunday, being loged in an Inn,
within the village of Altingue, and being
overcome with wine, he kept not his boxe
of reliques so carefully as hee had done
before. So that through this mischance,
his reliques were stolne: On the morrow
being got vp, & perceiving the theft, spake
not a worde thereof to his Hostis, because
hee suspected that shee knew it: but went

and fott a handfull of haye out of the next
cratch in the stable, & laying it in his boxe,
called his Hostis and tould her. See, here
are my reliques, whereat she begann to laugh,
notwithstanding hee tould her, that when
shee came to church, to bee an assistant in
the holy service, shee should also kisse those
reliques, shee replyed vpon it shee would
not, but hee wagered that shee should. After
this coming to Church, this priest begann
to preach of the admirable vertues
of his reliques, and to declare vnto the people,
that he had a handfull of the hay of the
stable in Bethelem, wherevpon our Redeemer
Iesus Christ had oftentimes slept, whē
hee was a babe, which had the power to
preserue from the plague (wherewith Germanie
was then infected) all those which
did but kisse it, and to driue away all Adulterers
and Adulteresses which came neere
vnto it: Now his Hostis that knewe full
well the deceit of this shamelesse Priest, seeking
on the side to spare her monie, and
fearing on the other side to lose wholly her
good name, because her chastitie was called
into question before, choose rather at
last after longe deliberation, to cast away
her money, then to bring her reputation
into a furder danger, so that shee was the

very last that came to kisse the reliques of
her owne stable, and the priest tould her in
her eare, What, art thou come too?
            
            The same Doctour annexeth vnto this
storie, that many Germanies having heard
say of the vertue of his reliques, ranne in al
hast vnto this Priest to kisse them, but for
all that, they were not preserued from the
plague, but miserable a
                  ••
               icted therewith.
            Beside, that Duke Everhard being advertised
of the cossenning trickes of this
Priest, commaunded the Divines of Tubinque
to call him in question before them
into their Vniversitie, to reprooue him
therefore: but hee too well vnderstanding
his craft, answered them impudentlie, that
he neither had lied, nor beguiled any man.
In fine, after a serious warning, which these
Divines gaue him, that it was more then
mainfest to all the world, that many which
had kissed his reliques, were notwithstanding
dead of the plague, he replyed in a
flouting manner at those poore superstitious
people, that they had not kissed his reliques;
but the glasse onely wherein he had
putt them.
            The eight abuse is noted in that they
place in the Catalogue of their religious
reliques, as worthy of Adoration the instruments

and meanes which the ennemies
of our Lord vsed to intrapp, crucifie, and
perce him, as the lanterne which Iudas carryed
to lighten the Sergeants that sought
his Master: the money which he had received
of the hie-Priest to betray him: The
Crowne of thornes which they put vppon
his head, and the nailes and speare of Pilates
hangman, vnto which they pray in this
manner.
            Felix hasta, nos amore per te fixi sauciae,
            That is,
            Happie speare, wound vs with his loue, whome
thou hast pearced.
            To which also they add the Crosse, where
vnto Pilates souldiers had nailed the body
of our Lord Iesus Christ, which they blesse
and call vpon in this manner.
            
               O crux, lignum triumphale!
               Mundi vera salus, vale,
               Inter ligna nullum tale
               Fronde, flore, germine.
               Medicina Christiana,
               Sanes salva, aegros sana,
               
                  
Quodnon valet vis humana,
               Fit 
                     •
                  n tuo nomine.
               Assistentes crucis laudi;
               Consecrator crucis audi.
               Atque servos tuae crucis,
               Post hanc vitam, verae lucis
               Transfer ad palatia.
               Quos tormento vis servire
               Fac tormenta non sentire,
               Sed cum dies erit irae,
               Nobis confer & largire
               Sempiterna gaudia. Amen.
            
            That is,
            
               O crosse triumphant wood! Al haile worlds true
health! amonge all the trees in the woode, thers
not thy like for blossome, bough, and budd. Christians
Physick, saue the sounde and heale the sick.
That which no humane power can doe, is done
in thy name. O consecrator of thy crosse! hearken
vnto the assistants thereof, and transport after this
life, the servants of thy Crosse into the palace of
thy true light. Graunt that those whome thou
hast commaunded should suffer torment, maye
feele noe torments, but when the day of thy
wrath shall come, graunt vs eternall ioy.
Amen.
            
            
               Againe.
            
               O crux ave! spes unica
               Hoc passionis tempore
               Qua carne, carnis conditor
               Suspensus est patibulo,
               Auge pijs iustitiam
               Reijsque dona veniam.
            
            That is to say.
            
               Al haile ô Crosse our onely hope in the time of
this passion, on which gibit the Creatour of all
flesh, according to his flesh was hung. Encrease
righteousnes in the Devote, & pardon the guilty.
            
            And againe,
            
               Dulce lignum, dulces clavos
               Dulcia ferens pondera,
               Quae sola fuisti digna sustinere
               Regem coelorum & Dominium,
            
            That is to say.
            
               O sweete woode, bearing the nailes & sweete burthens,
which alone hast bene worthy to beare the
King and Lord of Heaven.
            
            
               
And although at some time they addresse
their prayers to God himself, or to
his son our Redeemer; yet they attribute
not onely to the crosse, whereto Christ was
nailed, but also to the signe thereof, made
by the hand of man, the vertue of purchasing
vs his grace, and maintaining vs therein,
which cannot be attributed to anie other
(without Idolatrie) then to the very
person of our Saviour, heretofore crucified,
and now sitteth at the right hand of God
his father, to make intercession for vs, and
to intreate him to be merciful & fauorable
vnto vs.
            First they craue of Christ by this prayer.
            
               Concede nobis, Domine, vt qui ad sanctam crucem
tuam adorandam vemunt, nexibus peccatorum
liberentur.
            
            That is to say.
            
               O Lord graunt, that they which come to worship
thy holy Crosse, maye bee deliuered from the
bandes of their sinnes.
            
            By the Second,
            
               O crux gloriosa! o crux adorandi! o lignum

pretiosum! & admirabile signum! Christe, Rex
pijssime, huius crucis signaculo, horis & momentis
omnibus munire nos non abnuas.
            
            That is to say,
            
               O glorious crosse! o crosse worthie of adoration!
o most precious wood and admirable signe!
Christ! most godly Kinge, refuse not to preserue vs
at all howers and moments, by the signe of this
crosse.
            
            The third.
            
               Redemptor mundi, signo crucis ab omni adversitate
custodi, qui salvasti Petrum in mari,
miserere nobis,
            
            That is to say,
            
               Redeemer of the world, preserue vs in all adversitie
by the signe of this crosse, and thou which
sauedst Peter in the Sea, haue mercie on vs.
            
            The first prayer they addresse
to God the Father is,
            
               Deus qui vnigeniti Filij tui pretioso sanguine
vivificae crueis vexillum sanctificare voluisti,
concede, quaesumus, eos qui eiusdem sanctae

crucis gaudent honore, tua quoque vbique protectione
gaudere.
            
            That is to say.
            
               O God which was willing to sanctifie the signe
of the crosse, quickning it by the precious blood of
thy onely begotten sonne, graunt vs wee pray thee,
that those which reioyce in the honour of the signe
of this holy crosse, may reioyce in all places with
thy protection.
            
            The Second.
            
               Protege, Domine, plebem tuam par signum
sanctae crucis ab omnibus in
                     •
                  idijs inimicorum
omnium, vt tibi gratam exhibeamus servitutem,
& acceptabile tibifiat sacrificium nostrum.
            
            That is,
            
               Lord protect thy people by the signe of this
crosse, from all ambushments of their ennemies,
that we may yeild the acceptable seruice, and that
our sacrifice may please thee,
            
            But yet this is worse, For they attribute
more honour to the crosse, then to Christs
resurrectiō, saying in their prayer to Christ,

               
                  Crucem tuam adoramus, Domine, resurrectionem
tuam sanctam glorificamus.
               
            
            That is,
            
               Lord wee worship thy crosse, and glorifie thy
resurrection. 
               And to the one, & to the other:
               Ecce lignum crucis in quo salus pependit, venite,
adoremus.
            
            That is,
            
               Behold the woode of the crosse, whereon salvation
hath hunge, come, let vs worship it.
            
            Is not this then to seeke in rotten wood
which serues christiās for no vse that which
cannot be founde; but in that immaculate
Lambe Christ Iesus, which is without blemish,
who was taught vnto vs by our Fathers,
who hath redeemed vs from our
vaine conversation, not with corruptible
things, as silver and golde, or by the woode
of the crosse, but with his most precious
bloode,1 Pet. 1. 18. 19. as the Apostle S. Peter witnesseth
in the first Chapter of his first Epistle? Is
not this to attribute as much honour to a
creature dead & insensible, whervnto none
of vs would willingly resemble, as to the
living God the creatour of heauē & earth?
            
               
The last abuse is daylie seene, in the sundry
opinions,The 9. abuse. and disputes, which the one
hold directly contrarie to the other, touching
the right place, and the true Gardians,
and keepers of these reliques, whereby
one lie overthroweth another: For it is
not possible for 
                  •
               hem, to agree without giving
each other the lie, and without giving
to the Saincts, more bodies and members,
after their departure, then they had while
they were liuing.
            Which is easie to bee showne by their
owne writings, and the inventories of their
reliques.
            To begin with the reliques of Christ, as
our aduersaires are not ashamed to maintaine,
that the body of Christ, (which is assended
vp into Heaven, to remaine there,
vntill the restauration of all things,Act 3. 21 which
God hath spoken by the mouth of his holy
Prophets) is also here beneath on earth,
in all the hosts consecrated by their Priests,
which administer the sacrifice of the masse:
so they make no conscience to affrme, that
they haue the foreskinn & navell of Christ
in diverse places, which they keepe and adorne
with this fine verse,
            
               Circumcisa caro Christi, sandalia clera
               Atque vmbilici viget hîc praecisio clara.
            
            
               That is to say.
            
               The foreskinne of Christ, his pantofles also
With his Navill, are inclossed within this
place.
            
            For they haue showne heretofore the
first foreskinn of our Lord Iesus Christ in
our Ladies Church at Awcon, which wee
shall come to speake of more amply in the
third part of our disputation. The second,
in our Ladies Church at Anwerpe. The
third at Hildesham in Germanie. The fourth
is to be seene yet according to their saying
at Rome in S. Iohn Latrans church. The fifth
in the citie of Byzanson in the free-Countie:
and the sixt in the Abbey of Charroux in
France. So that by this reckoning, they
would make Christ Iesus not a man, like vnto
vs in all things, saue in sinne, but in stead
of a small skinn of his circumcision, hee
should haue six, and consequently as manie
bodies.
            Also S. Iohn Baptist, according to their
tradition hath had manie heads & visages:
For notwithstanding that the Monkes of
Rome, glory in that they haue his whole
head in the Cloister of S. Sylvester, those of
Malta vaunt that they haue the hinderpart,

and they of Amiens with those of S.
Iohn Angelique for having the forepart
with the gash of a knife, which Herodias
should giue him ouerthwart the eye, as the
hangman brought her his head, to present
it by her daughter in a platter to Herode &
his frends, invited to the feast of his nativity
But who would not thinke it strange and
incredible, that the Euangelists, which haue
represented vnto vs in their historie, all the
markes, which could bee perceiued in this
incestuous strumpet of a cruell heart, thirsting
after the innocent bloode of S. Iohn
Baptist, should haue forgotten to shewe vs
this last, which if it had bene true, would
haue bene more remarkeable then all the
rest.
            And although that Eusebius, and some
other Historians attest, that the body of
this Fore-runner of Christ, was burned to
ashes, yet: these forgers of reliques, would
make the Idolaters of the papacie beleeue,
that the finger wherewith Sainct Iohn Baptist
showed our LORD Iesus Christ
vnto his Disciples, in saying: Behold the
Lambe of God which taketh away the sinnes
of the world, was miraculously preserved
by the providence of the Lord, & multiplyed
into so manie fingers, that their at

least six of them found, to wit, one at Lions,
another at Bourges, the third at Bezanson in
S. Iohn the greats Church, The fourth at S.
Fortuits, the fifth at Thoulouse, and the sixt
at Florence.
            
            As for the Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul.
Albeit the Prelates of Rome say, that they
keepe in S. Iohn Latrans church their whole
heads, & their bodies parted in the midst,
weighed, and divided in to equall shares by
S. Sylvester in S. Pauls Church: yet those of
Poitiers seeke to perswade the comon people,
that they haue S. Peters chinn and his
beard, those of Argenton in Berri, that
they haue one of S. Pauls shoulders, those
of Trier that they haue manie of the bones
of these two Disciples of our Lord Iesus
Christ.
            Likewise those of Thoulouse shew one body
of S. Andrews, and those of melphe another.
            The Priests of Rome also wrangle with
those of Trier and Padoua for S. Matthias
body; because euerie one of these three
townes, thinke they haue his corps in his
owne Church.
            The same presbiters striue for the body
of S. Iames the yonger, S. Phillips, S. Symons,
and S. Iudes, with those of Thoulouse, which

maintaine aswell on the one side, as on the
other, that they haue in their Churches the
same bodies of these Apostles aboue said.
            The Romanists shew besides, two seueral
bodies of two other Saints in two other
places, as the body of S. Anne mother vnto
the virgin Marie, and Magdalenes sister
vnto Lazarus, the wise men of the East, S. Denises,
S. Anthonies S. Petronelles, S. Susannas,
S. Hilaries, S. Honorats, S. Gilses, S. Williams,
and S. Ferreols. For they shew one of S.
Anns bodies at Apt in Provence, and another
at our Ladies de 
                     •
                  isle at Lions. Then one
of Magdalenes corps at Vezelè by Auxerna,
and another at S. Maximnis in Provence.
Likewise the bodies of the three wise men
of the East, both at Milan, and Cologne S.
Denises at S. Denis in France, and at Regesbourgh
in Almaine, S. Anthonies at Arles
and at Vienna, S. Petronels daughter vnto S.
Peter at Rome, and at Mans in the Iacobins
Covent: S. Susannas at Rome and at Tholose:
S. Hilaires at Poitiers, & in two other churches▪
the one in that which the Canons of
that place dedicated vnto him, & the other
in the Monkes Church at Sella: moreouer,
S. Honorats bodie at Arles, and in the Ile of
Lyrnis nere vnto Anti
                     •
                  ou: S. Gilses in a
towne in Languedoc, which beareth his

name, and at Tholose: S. Williams at an Abbey
in Languedoc called S. William vppon the
desert, and in a towne in Anssoy called
Ecrichen: S. Ferrcels at Vses in Languedoc &
al Breienda in Auvergne: and S. Longins transformed
from a speare by a monstrous meta
morphesie into a blinde man, both in our
Ladies church de l'isle by Lions, and at Mantoua
in Italie.
            
            Vpon others they bestowe three bodies,
as to S. Matthias, to Lazarus, to S. Gervis,
to S. Protis, and to S. Wolfe. For they shew
the corps of S. Matthias at Rome, at Padova
and at Trier. S. Lazuruses, at Marseille, at
Authun, and at Avalon: S. Gervises and S.
Protises at Milan, at Brisac, and at Bysanson:
S. Wolfes at Lyons, at Senes and at Ausserre.
            
            To some others they attribute foure, as
to S. Sebastian whereof the one is nigh vnto
Narbonna, in the place of his nativitie,
the second at Rome in S. Laurences Church,
the third at Soissons, and the fourth at Piligni
neare vnto Nantes.
            
            They attribute to Matthias foure heads,
whereof one is to bee seene at Padoua, an
other at Tryer, and the other two at Rome:
and also seaven armes, three at Rome, two
at Tryer, and two at Padoua.
            
            To S. Andrew, three heads, one at Thoulouse,
               
and other at Melphe, and the third at
Rome: and fiue armes, two at Thoulouse, two
at Melphe, and one at Rome: then fiue feete,
one at Awcon in Provence, two at Thoulouse
and the other two at Melphe.
            
            To S. Barthelmew fiue handes, one at Pisa,
two at Rome, and two in the kingdome of
Naples.
            
            To S. Phillip three feete, one at Rome, and
two at Thoulouse.
            
            To S. Stephen two heads, one at Arles, an
other in his owne Church at Rome.
            
            To S. Laurence three armes, two at Rome
in his owne church another in the church
surnamed Palisperna.
            
            To S. Anthonie fiue knees, one in S. Augustins
Church of Albi, two at Arles, and two
at Vienna.
            
            To S. Sebastian twelue armes, one at
Mombrison in Forest, an other at S. Servins
de Tholose, an other at Case-Dieu in Auvergne
an other at Angers, two at Soissons, two at Piligni,
two in the place where he was borne,
and two at Rome.
            
            To S. Lambert two heads, one at Tryer,
and an other at Leige.
            
            To S. Anne fiue heads, one at Lions, an
other at Apt in Provence, the third at S.
Annes in Turingue, the fourth at Duran in

               Iuilliers, and the fifth at Trier.
            
            To S. Vrsell two, one at S. Iohn Angeliques,
an other at Cologne.
            
            Likewise to S. Hilarie two, one with his
Corps at Venise, the other separated from
his bodie at Cologne.
            
            Moreover, they shew the blood of Christ
in so many places, and in so many goble
                  •
               s,
that on maye plainely see, they mock at the
effusion of the most precious bloode of
our Redeemer, and willingly are ignorant,
that the bloode of Christ could not
bee sheade in such an abundance, as th
                  •
               y
showe, in diverse of their Chur
                  •
               hes, neither
was it taken vp so fluently, by some of the
Apostles, or friends of Christ, when his
hands and fe
                  •
               te were nailed, and his breast
wounded with the push of the speare.
            To conclude, I could heare speake of the
multiplication of the virgin Maries milke,
through the craft of these Alcumists, of
her smockes, kerchiefes, phillits, girdles,
gownes, pantofles, combes, Needles,
Des kes, Linnen, pictures, and jewells: Likewise,
of the garments of Christ, of his
teares, of the Cupp, out of which hee
dran ke with his Disciples, of the linnen
girdle, wherewith hee girded himself when
hee washed their feete, of his purple garment,

of his speare, which wounded his
side, of the dice which in those daies were
not in request, of the stone pichers of Cana
in Galile: of the miraculous Loanes wherewith
our Saviour fed fiue thousand persons,
of his garment without seame, of the
reede which they put into his handes in
steade of a Scepter, of the spunge wherewith
they put gal into his mouth, of the
Crown of Thornes they set vpon his head,
of the pillar whervnto (according to their
tradition) they bound him to scourg him,
of the Staires of the Sessions-house of Pontius
Pilate, besprinckled with the drops of
the bloode which fell from his body. In
like manner, of the bones, ashes, garments,
chaines, and other reliques of the Apostles
and Martyrs of Christ: but who is able to
number vp all the inventions of the olde
raggs found out in the shopps of the brocards
of the Romane church? For albeit
Calvin hath made a booke expressely against
them, yet he confesseth therein, that
the number of them is innumerable.
            I entreat therefore the Reader to content
himself at this present with the proofs
of these brasen-fac'd inventors of reliques,
which I haue vttered, and to consider thē
without passion.
            
               
By meanes whereof, I assure my selfe
hee will judge, that wee haue just reason,
to haue in abhomination these deceiuers
of the ignorant, and to hold the adoration
of their reliques for a heathenish superstition
and Idolatrie, condemned and forbidden
by the Lord, and not to be
tollerated by those whose eyes God
hath opened to see the
abuses thereof.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
               
               A
Iesuiticall Epistle
TOVCHING
THE SAINCTS
RELIQVES, WHICH OF
late they haue showne at Awcon vnto
the Superstitious people, from the
10. of Iuly, vntill the 24. of the
same Month, Anno.
1608.
               Published by the Canons of Awcon: translated
out of Latin into French
and brieflie refuted,
               By Iohn Polyander, Professour in the
Vniversitie of Leyden.
               
               And since
Turned out of French into English,
by Henry Hexham, 1611.
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
            
            
               
               S. Augustine in the preface
of his Hypognostiques
against the 
                     ••
                  elagians.
               WHen the Adversaires of the Catholique
faith, seeke to impugne the rule of trueth,
through diabolicall armes, they make vs the more
vigilant and carefull to answere them: and when
they lurke in hypocrisie to annoy vs, they a waken
vs, as it were out of a Slumber, to the intent that
taking the buckler of trueth, wee maye watch
with hearts, resisting their falshood: the
Trumpet of God sounding in our
Eares, Watch, and pray,
that ye enter not into
tentation.
               
            
            
               
               THE INSCRIPTION
AND PREFACE OF
THIS IESVITICALL EPISTLE,
touching the visitation of the holy reliques
which are to bee seene in our Ladies
Church at Awcon, put foorth
by the Canons of the
said Church.
               The Provest, Deane, and Chapiter, of the royall
Church of our B. V. Marie at AW
                     •
                  on, wish
all health and happinesse vnto the godly and
Benevolent Reader.
               
                  IT was ordained in
holy writt, (benevolēt
reader) that
the devote & lovers of religion,
should spend their
limited weekes, not onely
for a certaine number of

daies, but of yeeres, & tha
                     •
                  
during the same time, as
wel those of their own
contrey as strāgers, shoul
                     •
                  
rest from their labours &
kepe a feast, watching afte
                     •
                  
an extraordinarie fashio
                     •
                  
to the praises of the Lord
The which our an cestor
                     •
                  
here at Awcō, & in som
                     •
                  
other places throw a godly
ceremony haue brogh
                     •
                  
into a custome, and many
yeers agoe, began to ope
                     •
                  
every seaventh yeere th
                     •
                  
sacred and most preciou
                     •
                  
                  
treasurie of their holy Reliques,
& to lay thē abroad
for certaine daies vnto the
view of all sorts of people,
to moue thē by the contē
                  plation
therof to reverēce
them. In which times,
but especially before the
warres & dangeros waies,
people resorted not onely
frō adjoyning places, but
also from farre, as out of
Hungary, Germany, France
& the Lowcontries, in such

                     •
                  n abundance, that this
semed not an (obscure) citie,

but rather an assembli
                     •
                  
of manie provinces an
                     •
                  
kingdomes together.
               
                  Refutation.
                  The inscription of this Epistle shewe
                        •
                     
that these Canōs are of the same hum
                        ••
                     
and complexion, as the Scribes & Phari
                        •
                     
were in the time of Christ, & his Apost
                        ••
                     
who gloried in them-selves for being 
                        〈◊〉
                     
pillars of the church. There is this difere
                        •
                     
betweē the swelling Titles, whi
                        •
                     h the Scr
                        ••
                     
& Pharises attributed to thēselves, to rep
                        ••
                     sent
their dignity to the comō people▪ 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
they were some what Ecclesiasticall; in 
                        〈◊〉
                     
of these, that the Canons of the Sy
                        •
                     gogue
of Awcon assume to themselve
which are rather politique.
                  The preface of this Epistle demons
                        •
                     teth,
that these new Scribes and Phari
                        •
                     
would faine constraine the Christians
our age to judaisme, and obserue the
customes of the ceremonial law, long 
                        〈◊〉
                     
abolished by our Lord Iesus Christ, 
                        〈◊〉
                     
hath purchased vs the freedome, to ass
                        ••
                     ble
our selues euery day in his name, and

worship him in all places, after th' example
of his Apostles, and other Christians well
instructed in the faith, which accounted all
dayes a like,Rom. 14. 5. & the one as the other,
and reprooued the Superstition of those
which condemned their bretheren in the
distinctiō of a holy-day,Col 2. 16. of the new Moone,
or of the Sabbath.Hier. in Com. ad Gal. 2. 4. Wherevnto, S. Hierome
having respect, acknowledged euery day
was alike, and that Christ was crucified, not
onely vpon the day of the preparation, or
rise againe vpon the Sunday: but ads that
his resurrection is alwaies, and that alwaies
we may liue by the flesh of Christ. He addeth
morover, that after the decease of the
Apostles, some wise men instituted certaine
daies, for fasting and convocation, to the
intent, that such as waited more vpon the
worlde, then vpon God, who could not, or
at least would not assemble them-selves so
much as one day in their lives, to come &
offer vp vnto God the sacrifices of their
praiers & humane actions, might watch &
pray vpon those daies if they would.
                  Whereby it appeareth painely, that the
observation of the Iudiciall feasts were not
instituted by our Lord Iesus Christ, or his
Apostles, but by the Doctors of the primitiue
Church, to expresse and record more

clearely vnto the common sort of people,
the principal benefits of our Redeemer Iesus
Christ, and to accustome them, to employ
some extraordinarie dayes in meditating
vpon them. Wherevnto this testimonie
of Socrates may serue, as a sufficient
proofe, whereby he declareth, that neither
Christ nor his Apostles was of meaning, to
suspend their judgements touching Easterday,
or any other feast: nor instituted any
lawes for them, that they should bee kept,
nor yet denounced any condemnation against
such as did not obserue them, or did
lay any cursse or penalty vpon them, as the
law of Moses vsually did: but the marke
whereat they aimed, was to recommend to
euery one that vertue and life, which was
pleasing to God.
                  And what an impudencie is it, in these
Canons of Awcon, to appropriate their
abuse vnto the feasts of the old Testament:
seing there is asmuch difference, betweene
their seventh yeeres Sabbath, & that of the
Iewes, as is betweene light and darknesse
                        •
                     
                     ▪
For, that of the Iewes was neither consecrated
nor employed but onely to the glorie
of God: whereas that of the Canons of
Awcon and their pilgrims, is dedicated
to the honour of the bones and raggs of
mortall men.
                  
                     
Touching their pilgrimages vnto the reliques
of the departed Saincts, they are in
noe wise grounded vpon any institution of
our Lord: neither from any example of the
aue Iewes: nor from the doctrine of the
Apostles, and first Doctours of the primitiue
Church. For Iesus Christ our Redeemer
was so farr from commaunding his
disciples to transport themselves from one
place to another, to adore the ashes of their
predecessours, that on the contrarie, speaking
vnto the Samaritanish woeman, hee
told her that the hower immediatly should
come, whē strangers should not come any
more vnto the temple of Ierusalem,
                     Iohn. 4. 23. to worship
God his Father: but that the true worshippers
should worship him in Spirit and
truth at home in their owne Countrey.
                  As for the Iewes the true Children of
Abraham, as it cannot be proued by holy
Scripture, that God enjoyned them to goe
into any forraine Countrey, to visite the
reliques of the Saincts departed: so they never
resorted any whether, but where God
onely was invocated in all puretie: shuning
all other places into which they had transferred
the honour of God to his creatures

                        •
                     ead and insensible, following therein the

                        •
                     ropher Hoseas exhortation, Though thou

playest the Harlot 
                           •
                         Israell, at the least let not Iudah
sinne: come not ye vnto Gilgal, neither goe 
                           〈◊〉
                        
vp to Beth-avan.
                     Hosea. 4. 15.
                  
                  I acknowledg that some of the ancient
                        •
                     
Fathers, traveled to Ierusalem to behold
                        •
                     
the sepulchre of our Redeemer Iesus Christ,
and some other monuments of the Saincts
departed: but I add thereto, that in the beginning
they went not thither to worship
their reliques, but God onely, neither had
they any such, foolish imagination, as once
to think, that the grace of God, was tyed
more to one place then to an other, but
their onely desire was, to consider the remarkeable
signes of Christs redemption, &
the place of his abode with his disciples▪
Herevpon S. Hierom speaking of S. Hilarions,
journey to Ierusalem, rebuketh such:
thought that any thing was wāting in the
faith, who had not seene Ierusalem, and

                        ••
                     steemed others that had ben there, mo
                        ••
                     
holy then they which had not. The kingdom
of God (saith he) is among you, The pal
                           ••
                        
of God is as accessible in Britainie, as in
Ierusalem. Anthony & the Monkes of 
                           •
                        
                        gipt
saw not Ierusalem, and yet notwithstand
                           •••
                        
found the gate open. While S. Hilariō
                     
                        
                           •••
                        in Palestina, he went and saw Ierusalem, 
                           •••
                        cause
he would not dispise the holy places in su
                           •••
                        
                        
a iourney: neuerthelesse, he remained there but for
a day, because it should not seeme he ment to shutt
vp the Lorde into a certaine place From hence
it followeth, that these Canons of Awcon
and their predecessors, takes for an example
the Iewish ceremonies, and ancient customes
which some Christians through a superstitious
imitation, introduced into the
primitiue church by some of their hirelings
onely to encrease their dishonest gaine, but
let vs proceed to the first parte of their Epistle,
wherby they shew the reasons, where
fore many superstitious men in times past
haue visited the Reliques, which are to bee
seene in their Church.
               
            
            
               The first parte of this
Iesuiticall Epistle.
               They perceived what
great benefites God hath
imparted to mortall men,
through those holy Reliques,
and how many sundry

sorts of miracles haue
bene wrought by them,
through a supernaturall
force. For, not onely the
wordes of the Saincts (as
S. Chrysostome saith) but al
so the garmēts of their bodies,Hom 8. 
                        •
                     d popul. & 
                        •
                     6. de virt & vir.
are more manificent
then any other possession.2 King. 2 8.
For the cloke of Eliah
made of the skinn of a Lyon
diuided the waters of
Iorden heither and thither.Dan. 3. 25.
The shooes of the
three yong men marched
through the midest of the

fire, the wood of Elisha,
was able to change the nature
of the water,2 King. 
                        •
                     
                   & force
it to beare the yron of the
Axe vpon the face thereof,
as if it had bene vpon
their backe.Exo. 14 
                  Moses divided
the Sea with his rodd,Nom. 20
& brake assūder the rock.
The garments of S. Paul,
                  Act. 19. 12.
chased awaie diseases, S.
Peters shadow droue thē
awaie. The ashes of Martirs
haue cast out Deuils,
Yea, God himself did a
singular honour to Moses
                  
when he buried him with
his own handes, as S. Hierom
saith, Christ comendeth
the womās faith who
was trobled with an issue
of blood, whereby she beleeved
she should recover
her health, if shee did but
touch the hemme of his
garment.
               
                  Refutation.
                  I haue already proued by the sixt abuse
of reliques, that the miracles done by thē,
are noe otherwise, then the illusions of Sathan
& the jugling trickes of the hireling
                        •
                     
of Antichrist, which tend to this euil end to
prouoke their Idolaters, to the adoration
of bones & rotten garments: which are o
                        •
                     
                     
afarre basser rancke, then the desceased
Saincts, which God neuerthelesse forbids
vs to invocate.
                  I say moreover, that if our fathers haue
not adored the true things, wherewith our
Lord Iesus Christ, & some other holy men
of God haue wrought true signes and miracles:
much lesse are Christians bound to
worship those, by which the Romish priests
feigne to doe their lying wonders?
                  So then, the holy Scripture makes noe
mention of any adoration, which our Fathers
should doe in honour of Moses rodd,
of Elias cloke, of Elishas wood, of S. Peters
shadow, or of S. Pauls garments. For these
holy men, were so farre from suffring the
vulgar people to worship their garments,
or shadowes,Act. 10. 26. that contrariwise even S. Peter
himself, for bad Cornelius the Captaine to
worship his person. S. Paul and Barnabas
would not suffer the Priest of Lystra to offer
them Sacrifices. S. Peter by commaunding
Cornelius, who was falne done at his feete, to
stande vp, & shewing him that hee was b
                        •
                     t
a man as he was. S. Paul and Barnabas by
renting their clothes, and crying out in the
midest of the throng, O men why doe ye
these things?
                     Act. 14. 14. 15. 
                     wee are men subiect to the like passions
that ye be, & preach vnto you, that ye should

turne from these vaine things vnto the living God,
which made Heaven & Earth, and the Sea, &
all things that in them are.
                  
                  Then their power of doing miracles, proceeded
not from their garments, or shadowes,
nor from their humaine nature, but
onely from the divine might which really
was in Christ, & accompanied in old time
his faithfull servants after an extraordinarie
manner. For as the three first Euangelists
averre, that Christ of himself di
                        ••
                     
acknowledge that vertue that issued forth
of him, to cure the woman that was troubled
with the issue of blood, by touching
the hemme of his garment: So wee read
also in the third Chapter of the Acts of the
Apostles, that S. Peter & S. Iohn, seeing the
people astonied and amazed, because▪ they
had healed a man which had ben a creep
                        ••
                     
from his mothers wombe, S. Peter sheweth
thē, that this miracle was not done throgh
their owne power or sanctity, but through
faith in the name of Iesus Christ.
                  As for S. Chrysostom, though at some
                        •
                     times
hee extolleth (through the art of his
Rethorique) the reliques of the departed
Saincts too excessiuelie: yet notwithstanding
the Canons of Awcon, or rather their
Schoolmasters which haue dictated them

this Epistle falsifie his wordes, and wrest
them into a sence cōtrary to his meaning:
For in the text which they cite of S. Chrysostomes,
hee speaketh not there of any miracles,
which it pleased God to worke by the
garments of any of the holy Fathers after
their departure, but whilst they were living,
to shew by this argument, that their
very garments which to the outward appearance
of men, were base and contemtible,
were more precious in the sight of
God, then all the sumptuous rayment of
Achab and other infidell kings.
                  Touching the honour which it pleased
God to doe vno Moses his servant, by interring
him, (as S. Hierom saith) with his
owne handes, whosoever hath but any jott
of judgment or reason, will conclude from
this interrment of Moses corps, the cleane
contrary to that, which the Canons of
Awcon here inferre, to wit, that God himself
intended to hide his bones in a place
vnknowne vnto the children of Israel, to
hinder them from taking them vp, & least
they should abuse them with Idolatrie, even
as the superstitious men of the Romish
church doe, who worship the bones, which
in times past haue bene taken out of the
graves of their ancestours.
                  
                     
Concerning that which they alledge of
our Lord Iesus Christ, for commending
the faith of the woeman which was troubled
with the issue of bloode, because shee
said to her self, If I may touch but his garment
onely, I shall be whole: I answere that
although her faith was so weake, that shee
quaked for feare when shee came neere vnto
Christ, to confesse that shee had touched
the hemme of his garment, and by that
meanes was comforted by our Saviour
who commaunded her to bee of a good
courage, yet neverthelesse her faith was not
defiled with such a superstition as that of
the Romanists is. For when shee came
trembling towards our Saviour, shee fell
not done before him to kisse the hemme of
his garment, but to worship his person, &
to shew him before all the people, for what
cause she had touched him, and how shee
was made whole immeadiately vpon it.
                  Now resteth the second part of this Epistle,
by which they rebuke the censours of
the Superstitious veneration of their reliques,
and applaude the Adorers thereof.
               
            
            
               
               The second parte of this
Epistle abovesaid.
               From the reasons above
said we may gather, with
what spirit aswell the olde
Heretikes (namely, Eunomius,
Vigilantius & Eustachius,
as many other new
Innovators of Religion
in France) haue bene inspired,
who haue heretofore
burned the precious
Reliques of the Apostles
of that Kingdome, to wit,
S. Hilaries at Poitiers, S. Ireneus
at Lyons, & S. Martins

at Tours, giuing hereby
sufficiētly to vnderstād
that they were not of that
ranck, nor of that Religiō,
as they were whom they
detested with so great a hatred
& ill wil, nor so worthy
as their holy asshes, &
some other holy memorialls
of faith & piety, which
rested there. The first
founders of the Catholique
Church did not so,
neither those doctors tha
                     •
                  
deliuered as it were from
hand to hand, vnto their

posterity the Catholique
faith: as they receiued it
from Christ, much more
pure, more sincere, and
lesse corrupted then it is at
this present, as most euidētly
is seene in the books
of the Easterne Doctours,
and Historians, that hee
which would goe about,
to proue it by any other
testimonies, should seeme
to add brightnesse vnto
the Sunne at noone
day.
               
                  
                  Charles truely great for
his piety, & eminent deeds
or rather thrise most great
Emperour and excellent
Founder of this Church,
imitating herein the steps
of those holy personages,
was amongst other his graces
and virtues, worthy a
Christian Emperour indued
with this, that his only
desire was, to gather fro
                     •
                  
all partes whatsoeuer, a
                     •
                  
sortes of holy Reliques 
                     〈◊〉
                  
our Lord Iesus Christ,
of his holy mothers, and

of the other Saincts: and
after he had made them to
bee transported from all
countreys, caused them al
so to be honoured & adored
religiously, as we may
conclude from his Acts,
the signes whereof are yet
to be seene.
               Now the notablest &
remarkeablest of them all
is, the priuiledge which is
found in the auncient monuments
of our Church,
by which he ordayned in
a generall assemblie of the

whole Empire, that this
Citie of Awcon should be
enriched with many immunities,
and established
for his royall Seat on this
side the Alpes. The priueledge
contayneth these
words. I haue in this place
built the monasterie of S.
Marie, the mother of our
Lord Iesus Christ: with
asmuch labour and expence
as I could, and haue
adorned it with many precious
stones & with marble.
&c. Therefore the

                  
                     •••••
                  lent workmanship of this
great royall church, being
fully finished, not onely
according to my wished
desire, but also through
diuine grace, I haue collected
together (from diuerse
Countreys & kingdomes,
but especiall out of
Greece) sundry signes &
markes, of the Apostles, of
the Martyrs, of the Confessours,
of the virgins, &
haue brought them into
this holy place, that the
Kingdome might be established

thereby & the remission
of sinnes be graunted
through their suffrings.
               The same care & desire
flowed downeward vpon
and with his paternall inheritance,
and posteretie,
vntill the glorie of the
French (who had taken
their Source and growth
through Godlinesse, being
distitute of his vnderprop
                     •
                  ping
and foundation) begann
to decay litle by litle
as S. Sigebert Gemblacensis
testifieth, by the very

wordes of the french historie
it self in his treatise and
translation of S. Vit, and
Modestia. For this cause,
al the most famous Cities,
all Kingdomes and principallities,
endeuored by
all meanes to obtaine some
bodie of some one Sainct
or another, as their principall
Patron and Protector,
or at least some small
reliques from some whole
corps to assure & confirme
their cōmō wealth throgh
help thereof, trusting to

the great liberallity of the
great miracles which God
had wont to worke, for the
loue he bore vnto those holy
reliques.
               
                  Refutation.
                  I finde in this discourse many faults,
the first is, that in accusing the Condemners
of this superstitious adoration of Reliques,
they place in the first ranck of them
Eumonius, Vigilantius and Eustachius, who
were not so wel grounded in the reprehension
of this Idolatrie, as wee are in ours.
For proofe whereof, because I will not bee
too teadious, I onely will alledge Vigilantius
censure vpon it, & S. Hieromes answere vnto
it. Vigilantius censure then, as S. Hierome
propounds it was this. What needeth this,
not onely to honour with such a reverence, but
also to worship I knowe not what, caryed vp and
downe and enclossed within a small vessell? Wee
may se, that the pagans custome is almost brought

into the Church, vnder the color of religion, and
that while the sunne shineth, they still light vp a
great nomber of Candells, and that some of them
kisse and worship a litle dust, wrapped vp in a
costly sheete, and putt into a litle vessell.
                  
                  Let vs see on the other side, what answere
S. Hierome gaue him, Who hath euer worshipped
the Martyrs? Who hath euer thought
man to be God, ô brainelesse head! If the Romanists
should answere vs in that manner,
at this daye, Who hath euer worshipped
the Martyrs? Who hath euer thought man
to be God? may not wee justly reply, they
are euen your Doctours, who haue seduced
you, not onely to adore the Martyrs themselues,
but also their bones and reliques.
                  The second fault is, they ranck Vigilantius
in the catalogue of their Heretickes,
who by S. Hierome his owne adversairy, was
called Holy Father, who feeling himselfe
mooued with the same zeale, as S. Chrysostome
was, condemned the vnprofitable expence,
which was employed about the
garnishing of tombes and the reliques of
Saincts departed.Epist ad Paulin For as Vigilantius tearmeth,
this ceremonie of kissing the reliques
of the Saincts, and lighting vp of Candells
about them, a heathenish custome introduced
into the Church vnder a falsse pretext of religion:
                     
So S. Chrysostom calleth it in his 12. Setmon
vpon the first Epistle to the Corinthians,Chris. Hom. 12 1. Cor. 
                     a
foolish devotion, a devillish observation, maintayned
by the corrupt iugments of senselesse men
that did but suck, therefore, to turne them
from this superstition hee sheweth them,
that the Martyrs take no delight to be honoured
with their money, for which the
poore cry out, in that they did not rather
employ it for their reliefe, & that the consideration
of our Lords resurrection, who
rise naked from death, ought to learne thē
to leaue of from the foolish expence of funeralls.
For whereto is it good (saith hee)
seing it bringeth but losse to such as doe it,Chrys. Hom. 84 in Euang. Iohn.
and noe benefit to the dead, but rather
harme.
                  The third fault is, they liken our Doctours
vnto Eunomius, Vigilantius, and Eustachius,
wherein they are in noe wise to bee
compared. For the Eunomians were by the
holy fathers taxed of Heresie, because they
made it a difficult matter to enter into the
Churches of the Apostles & Martyrs, who
haue taught in time past, that Christ is true
God & equall to the Father: whereof they
cannot reproue our Doctours, seeing they
preach in the Churches, adorned with the
names of S. Peter & S. Stephen, & other of

the Apostles and Martyrs, & seing besides,
that they maintaine the doctrine of the
Godhead of our Lord Iesus Christ, against
the disciples of Eunomius.
                  Neither cann they charge our Diuines
(vnlesse wronfully) with that Crime where
with S. Hierome attached Vigilantius, (to
wit,) because he held vncleane the bones
of the Saincts departed, and would haue
had their ashes ignominiously cast vpon a
dunghill, to the end that he alone (though
drunck and a sleepe) might be adored, but
ours teach the cleane contrarie, that their
bodies ought to be buried honorably.
                  The fourth fault is, they accuse our Predecessours
for hauing burned in France
the reliques of some departed Saincts, as
those of S. Ireneus, S. Hilaires, and S. Martins:
yet they cite not so much as one witnesse,
herein they doe not imitate their Cardinal
Bellarmin, who to giue some color and shew
of truth vpon this false calumniation, alledgeth
in his treatise of Reliques, the A
                        •
                     estation
of a certaine Monke, called Surius,
which many Papists thēselues beleeue not,
because another gray Fryer, named Feu-ardant,
speaking of the boddie of S. Ireneus in
his preface vnto his latin Irenea, denieth
that S. Ireneues corps was burned at Lyon
                        •
                     ,

or that his ashes were cast into the Rosne.
                  
                  I say againe, that this accusatiō of theirs
it false; because they impute to the first Reformers
of our age (whom wronfully they
tearme Innovators of religion) the insolences
committed by some vndiscreet
souldiers, in the beginning of the
troubles without their councel or avouchment.
For they were so farre from exhorting
thē to burne the bodies of the Saints,
or to throw their ashes into riuers, that cō
                     trariwise,
they preached against such outrages,
and admonished their anditorie,
therein to followe the example of the auncient
Fathers, and that euery man was obliged
to lay them into the Earth, and honorably
to burie the bones and ashes of those
whom God had taken out of this world.
                  The fift fault is, they ranck amonge the
nomber of the first founders of their Catholique
religion, the Emperor Charles the
great, who approoued not all the point
                        •
                     
thereof. For sundty Historians, yea, and his
booke which he wrot, against the second
Councell of Nice, shewes euidently, that
hee condemned the decree of that Councell
for the worshipping of images, calling
it, a most impudent tradition, and a foolish
and prophane invention, comming

neere vnto that infidelitie, which alwaies
keeps her Adorers in errour.
                  Touching their allegation of the double
diligence, which many towns & provinces
vsed in searching out, and in honoring the
reliques of the deceased Saincts, wee reply,
that wee are not bound to follow the customes
of men, but onely the rule of diuine
law, which neither hath enjoyned vs, nor
our fathers vnto any such superstitious
worshipping of reliques.
                  Let vs now proceed forward to see what
these Canons of Awcon cann say vnto vs
in the third part of their Epistle.
               
            
            
               The third parte of this
Iesuiticall Epistle.
               This abundant liberalitie
of God (say they) seemeth
noe new thing to
those that are read in holy
writ, and Historie: because

they know, that by S. Peters
shadow (though nothing
seemeth more vain)
and by the kerchiefs and
hād kerchiefs, which they
brought frō S. Pauls body
all sorts of griefs presently
& most happily haue be
                     •
                  
driuen from diseased boddies,
& the infernal Spirit
                     •
                  
cast foorth of their Soules▪
From which example, th
                     •
                  
Godly custome of our ancestours
proceeded, tha
                     •
                  
in immitating Ioseph of

                     
                        ••
                     rimathea, & Nicodemu
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                  
                  
represented by the bodies
of our Lord Iesus Christ,
and S. Stephen: they vsually
wrapped vp the most
precious reliques of their
Church in silken clothes,
which they called (Sāctuaires)
of holy coverleds as
ecclesiasticall historiās write
the which they haue since
distributed, & sent abroad
according to the anciēt custom
of the church, to such
as through piety and loue
vnto religiō desired thē, in
such sort, that the Romane

church, hath not bestowed
noe other reliques vppon
Emperours, or any other
great personnages, whatsoeuer,
thā such sanctuaires
and Couverleds, as appeareth
by the letters pope
(Hormisda) wrote vnto
his Embassadours, and vnto
Iustinian the Emperour.
And to the end,
those Sanctuaires might
bee in the greater request,
amonge vs, it pleased the
diuine goodnesse (as it euidēt
to māy of our church)

to illustrate & manifest thē
through the operation of
many great miracles, & so
much the more, because
that without this meanes,
they could not satiate the
pietie, which was kindled
in many. Now this custōe
of going on pilgrimage, towards
thee places renowned
for their reliques, and
other memorialls of the
Saincts, was brought vp in
Christēdō, frō 
                  the first age
of the Catholique church,
& in that time, whē she had

some rest from the oppression
of Tyrants, and other
perverse Ennemies of the
faith. And because we wil
not here speake of the Ceremonies
of the anciēt law
wherby euery one was enjoyned
to goe yearely on
pilgrimage to the feasts, as
God himself had cōmāded
it, & many other most religious
personages, yea Chris
                        •
                     
                  
himself & his most holy parēts,
accomplished it with
so great a zeale of going
on pilgrimage, principally

vnto the holy places of the
land of Iudea, which zeale
was kindled also in the
hearts of mē after Christs
death, in immitating their
ancestours, as the testimonie
of diuine write, and S.
Hierome also speaking vpon
this matter doth auouche,
that all the wordes
in the holy Scripture recommend
to vs this godly
worke. And in another
place they runne hither:
(saith he) from al the corners
of the Earth, the citie

is full of all sorts of people
&c. But chiefly with those
which hold the highest degrees
of honour in this
world meet here with one
accord. And verely our
Patron Charles of most holy
and famous memorie,
withour producing any other
examples at this present,
of any other Emperours,
& most noble parsonages,
who were so much
giuen vnto the exercise of
these holy pilgrimmages,
that oftentimes they went

a foote to Rome, onely to
excercise thēselves in this
godly worke. And haue
attributed so▪ great honor
vnto S. Peters Cathedrall
church at Rome, as they
haue kissed the very stares
thereof one after another.
So that one may say of
him, & these Emperours,
that which Austin heretofore
obiected against the Idolaters
of Madaure, ye se
that the highest dignity of
the most noble Empire,
supplicates with an humble

crowne by the Sepulchre
of S. Peter the fisher.
               The like also haue ben
found in Englād, Dēmarke,
Frāce & Splayne, who being
touched with this desire of
pilgrimages, discharging
thēselfs for the present fro
                     •
                  
al the affaires of their earthly
kingdomes, transported
themselfes thither-wards
through a long, daungerous,
& weary some way▪
to honour there their hevenly
King after the example
of the three Kings▪
                  
which came to honour
the cradell of our Lord
Iesus Christ.
               Also many other Christians
haue done the same,
whose ordinarie custome
was, eftsoones to visite the
places, which were destined
for the holy memorials
& sepuleres, to the end
(that as it is written of the
virgin marie) their inward
loue might be nourished
by holy signes, & inflamed
with the more loue of devotion,
through the most

joyfull contemplation of
the Saincts tombes, & reliques.
For this hath alwaies
ben found by experience,
& confirmed by the testimony
of all antiquity, that
through these pilgrimages,
through this great flocking
and godlynes of the
people, a new zeale began
to kindle in our spirits, togeather
with the piety &
reverēce we bore to these
holy things, and also new
desires to liue well, and to
immitate the Saints in our

life and manners.
               And loe, next vnto the
glory of God, the chiefest
ende of our pilgrimages,
which God so specially demādeth
of vs, was, because
as S. Augustin saith, the bodies
of the Martirs haue
ben giuen vs, to awaken vs
vnto the excercise of devotion,
through the admonition
of the places, & by
the presence of these holy
pledgs. For the holy place
(as this Father exhorteth
vs) reneweth & encreaseth

our former affections,
whē as through the advertisment
of the places, it is
manifested, & raiseth it self
vp by wheating our charitie,
aswell towards those
whome we are to imitate,
as towards those, through
whose assistāce we doe it.
               And therefore it hapned
perchance (as it were by diuine
disposition & prouidence)
that almost all the
holy bodies of the holy Apostles,
& principall Doctours
of the East, haue

ben transported into the
West, before the Turks
tyrannie: which sought to
abolish and wholly root
out the memorie of the
Christian religion. And
indeed, wee must acknowledge,
that whatsoeuer is
most precious and of the
greatest importance in
our treasurie of Reliques,
was brought from beyōd
sea, out of those countries,
through the great pietie,
industrie, & deligence of
Charles the great, as hath

ben showen before, by the
auncient charter of our
Church, and shall hereafter
appeare by our Index.
               
                  Refutation.
                  This third part of their Epistle, stuffed
with vaine repetitions & insufficient proofes,
needs noe long refutation. As for th
                        ••
                     
which they alledg againe, concerning the
miracles done by S. Peters shadow, and by
the kerchiefs & hād kerchiefs they brought
from S. Paules bodie, it hath ben sufficiently
answered in the first part of their Epistle
as also that which they rehearse againe
touching the pilgrimages which our F
                        ••
                     thers
did to the holy places of Iudea, int
                        •
                     
refuting of their preface: by which we ha
                        ••
                     
refuted all those, which through a foo
                        •
                     
devotion seeke to tye the seruice of G
                        ••
                     
more to one place thā to another. Wher
                        •
                     
vpon S. Chrysostomes admonitiō may se
                        ••
                     
                     that to obtaine pardon for our transgressions, 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        
neede not spend any money, neither is it necessaire
to doe any such thing, onely the integretie of a good
will sufficeth. It is in vaine to take any iourneys
into farre-countries, or to seeke vnto other nations
farre from vs, or to endure daungers and perils,
onely the will is enough. In like manner that
of S. Augustins, God commandeth vs not to
goe into the East, to seeke out righteousnesse, nor to
saile into the West to obtaine pardon, forgiue thy
ennemy, and it shall be forgiuen thee, seeke nothing
of thy self out of thy self. Likewise S. Bernards,
Oman thou needest not passe the seas, nor penetrate
the Cloudes, thou behoouest not to passe the
Alps, neither hast thou need, that any should
shew the any longe way, Goe before God into thy
selfe.
                  
                  As for their proofs of the ancient custome
of their fathers, in wrapping vp in
cloaths the reliques of the departed Saints,
of the donation of those clothes, to al sorts
of people (but especially to Emperours, &
great parsonnages) of the miracles done
by touching them, I call them insufficent
because this custome is not grounded vppon
the worde of God, nor from the example
of the Disciples of our Lord Iesus
Christ. For so farre was Ioseph of Aremathia,
and Nicodemus, who wrapped vp the
body of Christ in a sheete (whom they

make mētiō of in their fine discourse) from
showing it, or giving it to some religious
men, that on the contrarie, they buryed it
with Christs bodie and sought to keepe it
from the sight of men. And suppose that
some miracles haue bene done, by the touching
of such like clothes of the dead, wee
are not to wonder at it, seeing Sathan, when
it pleaseth God to lett loose his reignes, &
permitt him to deceiue men with stronge
illusions & errours, hath oftentimes done
the like miracles by touching the reliques
of dead beasts, as wee haue amply declared
in our disputation, in the discouvering it
the sixt abuse of reliques.
                  I could here convict the Canons of Awcon
by the testimonie of holy Scripture, 
                        〈◊〉
                     
that the wise men of the East, which ca
                        ••
                     
out of their owne Countries into the La
                        ••
                     
of Bethlem to worship our Sauiour Christ
and to present him their gifts specified by
the Euangelist S. Mathew in his second
Chapter, were no Kings but Philosophers
Secondly, that this deed was extraordin
                        •
                     
                     ry,
and ought not to bee brought into▪
law and Custome in Christenstome, b
                        •
                     
cause our true Iosiah and fore-runner Iesus
Christ is not, as he was then here beneath
on Earth: but sitteth now aboue in Heauen

on the right hand of the Majesty of God
his Father: but my desire is not to surpasse
the limitts of our disputation, therefore, I
will at this present rest contented with
that I haue already said, touching the pilgrimages
of the ancient Fathers.
                  Yet resteth the refutation of the index
of the reliques of their Saincts departed,
but before I enter into it, I will conclude
my former refutation with the same exhortation
which the Apostle S. Peter gaue vnto
all Christians vpon the end of his second
Epistle generall, who had obtained faith at
the same price with vs through he righteousnesse
of our God and Saviour Iesus
Christ.
                  
                     My Beloued, seeing ye know these things before
by the discouverie of the falsifications
of so many texts of the Bible, contained in
the aboue said Epistle of the Canons of
Awcon, that these vnlearned & vnstable pervert
the holy Scriptures vnto their owne distruction,
beware, lest ye bee also plucked away with the errour
of the wicked, and fall from your owne stedfastnesse.
But grow in grace, and in the knowledge
of our Lord Iesus Christ, to him bee
glory both now and for euermore
                  
                  Amen.
               
            
         
         
            
               
               The Refutation
OF AN INDEX
OF THE RELIQVES,
WHICH EVERY SEVENTH
yeare ae showne at Awcon, vnto
the poore and ignorant pilgrims
of the Romane
Church.
               
                  By
Iohn Polyander.
            
            
               
               
                  Tertullian in the booke of
his praescriptions against
Heretiques.
               
               THe Doctrine of Heritiques (saith hee) compared
with that of the Apostles, will shew
by the diversitie and contrarietie thereof, that it
hath for authour, neither any Apostle, nor Apostolique
Doctour: because that as the Apostles
haue not taught sundry Doctrines, repugnant one
to another: So the Apostolique Doctours haue
not vttered Doctrines, contrary vnto that of the
Apostles, but those which are falne away from
the institutions of the Apostles, and haue taught
after another manner.
            
            
               
               AN INDEX OF
THE VIRGIN MARIES
RELIQVES, OF CHRISTS
of S. Iohn Baptists, & some other Saincts
departed, composed and published
by the Canons of Awcon,
Anno. 1608.
               
                  1THE smocke
which the
most blesse
virgin Ma
                        ••
                     
wore, whē shee was deliuere
                        •
                     
of our Saviour Iesus Christ.
                  2 Two swadling bands
wherewith the Son of Go
                        •
                     
was swadled, presently aft
                        ••
                     
hee was borne.
                  
                     
3 The linnen cloth which
couvered the most holy boddie
of Christ, and which
was besprinkled with his saving
bloode.
                  4 The sheete wherevpon
Saint Iohn Baptist kneeled
in the prison, when his head
was cutt of by the commaundement
of the adulterous
King.
                  5 The girdle wherewith
our Lord Iesus Christ trussed
vp his garment.
                  6 The Cord with which
they bound his sacred hands,

when they led him as an innocent
Lambe before many
iudges.
                  7 A peece of one of the
nailes, wherewith they nailed
him to the crosse.
                  8 Two great peeces of the
holy crosse.
                  9 Some of the peeces of th
                        •
                     
Sponge, & Christs kerchiefe.
                  10 The most blessed virgin
Maryes girdle, with some
of her haire, and her picture
paynted by the Euangelist S
Luke.
                  
                  11 A piece of the chaine

wherevnto Sainct Peter was
bound, while he was in prison.
                  12 One of Simions armes
wherewith hee imbrassed the
babe Iesus Christ in the tēple,
being but fortie dayes olde.
                  13 The bones and blood of
the first Martyr S. Stephen,
wherevpon the king of the
Romans ordinarily doth take
his oath in our Chapiter.
                  14 S. Leoparts Corps.
                  15 The head and arme
of the Emperour S. Charles
the great, and his whole
corps.
                  
                     16 The celestiall manna,
and S. Catherins oyle.
               
               
                  The Refutation of this Index.
                  If the poore ignorant people of the Romish
Church, were but permitted to read
the holy Scriptures in their mother tong;
they would quickly perceiue with vs, th
                        ••
                     
the reliques, which the Canons of Awcon
attribute in their Index to Iesus Christ, 
                        〈◊〉
                     
his Mother, to S. Iohn Baptist, to Simion
                           •
                        
                     
S. Peter & to S. Stephen are falsly invente
                        •
                     
by some juglars, & in noe wise grounde
                        •
                     
vpon the Historie of the holy Euangelists
For the Euangelists and Authentique witnesses
of Christ, elected by God his Fathe
                        •
                     ,
to record vnto vs all the memorable 
                        〈◊〉
                     
of our Sauiours Conversation, and of 
                        〈◊〉
                     
friends in this world, and to leaue behind
them a faithful Index vnto posterity, mak
                        ••
                     
no mention therein of any smock of 
                        〈◊〉
                     
virgin Maries, of anie of her haire, or of 
                        〈◊〉
                     
image painted by S. Luke, who was noe p
                        •••
                     ter,
but rather a Phycisian as Eusebius and

some other Historians affirme,Col. 4. 14. and prooue
it by the fourth Chapter of S. Pauls Epistle
written to the Colossians.
                  Neither speake they therein of anie
girdle of Christs, nor of any cloth within
which his bodie was wrapped, when they
nailed him to the Crosse: but one the contrarie,
all of them witnesse, that he was crucified
stark naked, and that foure souldiers
snared his garments amonge them.
                  Nor speake they word of any sheete
which Herod should commaund his Sariant
to lay vnder Iohn Baptists knees, before he
beheaded him, nor of any chopping of, or
any separation (which should be done vnto
Simeens arme wherewith he had imbrased
our Saviour Iesus Christ in the temple
of Ierusalem) from his other members, or
that it should be kept as a reliquaire by the
Christians.
                  Neither finde wee in the discription of
S. Stephens stoneing and burial, that S. Luke
should reporte, that those Godly men
which buried him, tooke vp any of this
Martyrs blood,Act. 8. 2. to deliuer it to the church,
but caried it away with his bodie to be buried.
                  The hirelings of Awcon cannot prooue
by their Historie, nor any other authour

worthy of beleefe, that the Virgin Marie
was so curious as to keepe her ragged
swadling bāds, where with shee had bound
vp the bodie of her litle babe Iesus Christ,
or that shee gaue them to the Euangelist S.
Iohn to keepe the wel beloued Disciple of
her son Iesus Christ, with exhortation to
recommend them after her departure to
the doctors of the primitiue Church, or
that shee did commaund, that they should
be locked vp in any place, to bee showne at
some times to the vulgar sort of people in
memorie of the nativity of our Redeemer.
                  Much lesse can they proue, that the Souldiers
of Pōtius Pilate solde to the Apostles,
or any of their Successours, the corde where
with they bounde the handes of our Saviour
Iesus Christ, or any of his garmēt they
parted among them, or the crosse wherevnto
they nailed him, or any pieces of the
sponge they filled with vineger when as he
cried I thirst: But all these old ragges haue
bene gathered, & patched together by the
Fathers of these botchers, & polished with
the name of Antiquity, to transforme the
liuely simplicitie of the Sacraments, and
true memorialls of Christ, into a motley
religion, disguised with a million of crafty
devises.
                  
                     
And whosoever will but conferre the Index
of these Canons of Awcon, with some
other registers of the Romane Church: they
shall soone perceiue how they contradict
one another. For those of Charters maintaine,
that they haue the same smock which
the virgin Marie had on, when shee was
delivered of our sauiour Iesus Christ, which
(according as men reporte that haue seene
it) is too long for a woman of a midle stature
as the Virgin Marie was, and as Nicephorus
witnesseth, that the hose of Ioseph
her husband, were too short for a man of
the same shape. For the Virgin Maries
smocke, which they shew at Awcon vnto
the ignorāt & credulous people, is so long
& wide, that if shee had bene a Gyantesse
(as Calvin noteth in his treatise of relikes)
shee could scarcely haue worne it. One
the contrarie, Iosephs hose (which the Cannons
of Awcon haue forgott to put into
their Index) are so short and straight that
they will not serue a dwarfe, or a litle boy.
                  Besides these Chap-men of Rome, and
Salvadour in Spayne wrangle obstinately
with those of Awcon, which of them shold
haue the Swadling-bande where-with the
Virgin Marie swadled vp her litle Babe
Iesus Christ.
                  
                     
But yet there is a farre greater contention
betweene the Huckstars of the Romane
church for the peeces of Christs crosse.
For there is almost not one Abbey or Cloister
in the world, which makes not a bravado
& a superstitious showe therewith: albeit
that Eusebius showes vs, in the life of
Constantin the Emperour, that Helena his
mother having found the same crosse, sent
one peece of it vnto the Byshop of Ierusalem,
and the other vnto her son Constatine,
who adorned his caske with the secōd,
& with the third, made a bitt for his horse,
the hire
                        •
                     ings of Antichrist haue forged &
multiplied them into so manie, that they
shewe a great number of whole ones, besides
manie peeces in diverse Countries of
Christendome.
                  Morover, there are sundry Townes which
affirm, that they haue the whole Sweating
cloth of our Lorde Iesus Christ: But
especially they of Rome, Byzanzon, and
Cadoin in Lymos. Is it not then a great
impudence in these Canons of Awcon, to
maintaine against thē, that they haue some
of the peeces of it? And if other Townes
haue likewise some peeces of this Swearing
cloth (as they vant they haue) what aud audaciousnesse
is it in those townes which I haue

named to maintaine at this day, that they
haue his whole Sweating-cloth with the
impression of all the parts of Christs body
stāped into the same cloth frō the crowne
of his head, vnto the sole of his foot: seeing
wee cann prooue the contrarie by the ceremonie
which the jewes vsed in burying of
their dead, and also by a text of the Euangelist
S. Iohns in his 20. Chapter and sixt &
seuenth verses, that this sweating cloth, was
but the kerchief which Ioseph of Aremathea
and Nicodemus had bound about his head,
and lay in a place by it felfe, from the other
linnē clothes, wherewith his body had ben
wrapped vp by his two difciples Iohn and
Peter.
                  
                  As for the rest, if the Prelates of Rome
haue the whole chaine wherevnto S. Peter
was chained in his prison, doe not those canons
of Awcon bragg falsly▪ that they
haue a peece of it.
                  If they of Rome haue also the whole
body of S. Stephen, with all his bones, what
an impudencie is it in those of Awcon and
some Canons of other churches to say, as
it were in dispite of one another, that every
one of them haue in his owne church,
the bones and blood of this first Martyr of
of Christs.
                  
                     
Concerning the Emperour Charles the
great, we confesse that the Historians of his
time witnesse, that he was buried at Awcon
in Germany: howbeit wee wonder much,
because they mingle the reliques of a politique
man, who was giuen to whoredome (as
the Apostate Iohn de Serres withnesseth in
his Invētorie) with those of Christs, the Vngin
Maries, and other holy personages
which led a blamelesse life in this worlde.
                  Furthermore, If the most holy place be
at Rome in S. Iohn Laterans church, and if
the Byshope of Roome keepeth there-in
Aarons rod and the Heauenly Manna, doe
not the Canons of Awcon deserue to bee
controled, in that they attribute the propriety
of these reliques, and call their shoppe
furnished with all maner of false marchandize,
the most holy place of the Virgin Maries
Temple? For like as vnder the old Testament,
there was but one Tabernacle, one
Temple, and consequently one most holy
place, vntil the first coming of Iesus Christ.
So could it not represent vnto our Fathers
but one Temple of the God-head of Christ,
which is his body, & one most holy place,
which is the Heauen into which this Souveraine
and onely sacrificer hath tansported
his body by his assention. Now suppose

that that should be false (as it is not)
which the Apostle declareth in his Epistle
to the Ebrewes, to wit, that the Tabernacle
and Sanctuarie of the old Testament were
but figures of the true Tabernacle, and of
the true holy places, which are not made
with mēs hands (but is the body of Christ
& the Kingdome of Heauen) & that these
figures ought not to last but vntil the time
of their corectiō & accomplishmēt, throgh
the death & passion of our Redeemer Iesus
Christ: yet notwithstanding, to showe the
correspondence between the shadowes &
the bodie which is founde in Christ, the
Doctors of the Romane church, ought but
to name vnto vs one Temple, & one most
holy place, heretofore figured vnto our Fathers,
first by the Tabernacle, & afterward
by the Temple of Ierusalem: in lieu of so
many Temples & most holy places, which
in these later daies they shewe to the poore
ignorant people, to learne them to Iudaisme
and observe the Ceremonies abolish
                        •
                     d
long since through he sacrifice of Christ
Iesus, & condemned by the doctrine of his
Apostles.
                  As for the rest, either there is noe likelyhood
of truth, that the auncestors of these
Canons of Awcon, haue had and showne

heretofore vnto the common people the
true fore-skinne of Iesus Christ, or that
these canons their successours hauing received
it from them, haue not kept it so faithfully
as the garments of our Sauiour Christ,
and the instrumēts wherewith Pilates souldiers
serued their turnes to crucifie him,
seeing that they dare not name his foreskinne
in their Index, nor place it in the
ranck of his other reliques afore mentioned.
                  And that which they make vp their tale
withall, concerning S. Catherins Oyle, and
S. Leopards corps, it is of the same coigning
as their inventoire is of the bones of the
ten thousand Martyrs, which maye not be
touched but onely seene vnder the altar of
the Church at Rome, called the Heauens
Ladder: and the eleuen thousand virgins
whereof they of Coullen gathered vp more
then a hundred carte loades. For euery
man of vnderstanding having regard to
that which these churchmen of Awcon report
of their S. Catherine, and compare it
with that which those of Rome say (who
maintaine they haue one of her fingers in
the temple of the holy Ghost, and in the
temple dedicated vnto her the milke which
gushed foorth of her necke, when shee was

beheaded, & the oyle which sprang foorth
of her graue) will finde as much fraude and
deceit therein, as in that which they recite
of their Idol S. Christopher, to wit, that this
Gyant hauing bene a theese in his youth,
at last forsooke that wicked course of life, &
to doe a publique penāce for his sinnes, vn
dertooke to carie such as was desiours to
passe ouer a great water, from one banck
side to the other: Now vpon this occasion
Iesus being willing to try his faith & obedience,
came & presented himself with the
rest (as hee was readie to take them vp) in
the likenesse of a litle boy, and talking with
him, prayed him to carie him ouer as hee
did the others, the which this theefe presently
agreed vnto, but after hee had sett
him vpon his shoulders hee found him so
heavie, that being in the midst of the river
he tould him that hee neuer had borne so
heauie a burden: and that hee should sinke
vnder him, if he did not presently ease him:
Now euer since they haue called Christofle,
or rather Christophorus that is, Christ bearer,
from which fable euery man may gather,
that these fine Doctours feede their wreched
disciples, but with lies & illusions, where
of I haue discovered a great number in
these three litle Treatises, with assurance

that the vnpassionate Reader, and louer of
the trueth, opening his eyes & eares to see
and heare them, will not onely be mooued
through this my advertisement to reiect
them, but also to assist me on his behalf, to
perswade these silly superstitious mē, to take
heede vnto the seruice of Idoles invented
by these latter priests of Ball, full of all
deceit, and to worship with vs
our onely God and heavenly
Father in spirit
& trueth.
                  FINIS.
                  
               
            
         
      
   