
      
         
            
            A
SERMON
PREACHED IN SAINT MARIES
IN OXFORD,
BY
THOMAS POWELL.
1613.
            
               AT OXFORD,
Printed by Ioseph Barnes, 1613.
         
         
            
            
            ORNATISSIMO VIRO D. D. SINGLETONO
S. THEOLOGIAE DOCTORI,
COLLEGII AENEI-NASI PRINCIpali,
& Academiae Oxoniensis Vice-cancellario
dignissimo.
            
               ORnatissime vir, nimis forsan superfluus
indicabor, qui hanc meā conciunculam
in lucem edo,Plautus. 
               scriptorum
enim plus est hodie quam
olim muscarum cum caletur
maxime.
            
            Sed lingua nulla est mihi, quae
negem quicquid tu roges; non sum
nescius quin futuri sunt quamplurimi 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
otiosi nimis homines, qui suis vestimentis & cibis alienas
res curant, quibus ad reprehendenda mea dicta,Salust ad Caes. 
               vix
satis apertum os, vix satis lingua prompta videbitur.
            
            At
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                hic in primis Tragoediam mihi for san excitabunt
opiniastri nonnulli si quid adferetur quod discrepet à saliua
quam imbiberint Sed si me immeritum imperitus vllus
Carpat, quid tum?
            Istis maxima displicere laus estBeza in epigr. P. Valerius cos: vir populares Publicola Arctus: Plut: in Pub: & 
                     •
                  . Livi
                     ••
                  l. 2. R
                     •
                  hist▪
               
            
            
               Publicolae c
                  •
               rent scilicet qui solummodo viris (ad istorū normam)
bonis placere student. Ego non magnopere indignabor
si quisquam sit qui de meis malè loquatur; satis

est enim si hoc habemus ne quis nobis male facere possit
Rectè pius Antistes.Augustus ad Tiberium▪ Suet. in Augusto. Augustinus cō
                  tra Pet. 3. Quis quis volens detrahit famae mea
nolens addit mercedi meae: ego sane equos & magnas bestias
imitari cupio, qui oblatrantes caniculos cum contemptu
praetereunt. Ea lege & conditione & meipsum & has
primitias laboris mei tuo Patrocinio commendo qua olim
Augustus filios suos populo commendare solebat; si merebuntur.
            
            
               Collegij per prudentiam tuam optime
gubernati olim alumnus▪
THOMAS POWELVS
Cambrobritannus.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               EXOD. 28. 34.
               A golden bell and a pomegranate, a golden bell and a
pomegranate in the skirts of the robe round about.
            
            
               
                  HE that loues the law of God,
               Qui
                     •
                  dei
                     •
                   legem diligit, etiam eaquae non intelligit honorat. August. in Psal. 119. Con. 31. 
               honoureth
the things that hee vnderstands
not, as that heavenly Doctor
writes vpō the 119. Psalm.
For here is no superfluous iod,
every circumstance hath some
pith, and the supposed barren
places of the scripture cōtaine
in them great fertility of wisedome.
            And this would better appeare if some skilfull Zenas
               Tit 3. 13.
among you had the expounding of this present
chapter, that describeth the ministeriall garments of
the priests: for my part, I presume not aboue the
skirts of the robe, If I touch but the hemme of the
garment soundly, it shalbe vnto me sufficient contentment.
            When great Alexander marched with his army against
Ierusalem, hee was so amazed at the sight of the
high sacrificer in his pontificall robes (as the Iewish antiquary
recordeth) that he reuoked his purpose,Ioseph lib. 11. Antiq. cap. 8. hee
turned his hostility into veneration, he spared the citty,
and hee graunted vnto the Iewes all their requests▪
               
And yet Alexander saw but the out side of these holy
vestiments, the misteries that are folded vp in them
never entred into the thoughts of a meere Aristotelean
Prince.
            The ceremoniall law (which was a shaddow of future
good things)Heb. 10. 1. is a booke written within & on the backside
(as Hugo Card.
               Hugo Card. saith in his preface to the book of
Numbers) intus mysterium, foris historia, within is the
mistery, on the outside is the history.
            
            You heard the sound of the words, I make hast to
the sense of the matter, after some short analytical resolution
of the text.
            In this chapter the first canonicall scribe of the holy
Ghost describeth the ministeriall garments of the
priests, and they are of three sorts.
            
               1 Some are proper to the high priest alone.
               2 Some are proper to the inferiour Priests alone.
               3 Some are common to both.The Priest must beare in his breast the care of right iudgement.
               
            
            The proper ornamentes of the high priestes are
foure.
            
               1 The robe of the Ephod.
               2 The Ephod.
               3 The breastplate of iudgement.
               4 The miter with the golden plate.
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
               
            
            The robe of the Ephod is described

                  à causis.
                  ab adiunctis.
                  ornamentis.
               
               
                  By the causes
                  By the adjuncts.
               
            
            
               The causes are of two sorts

                  externall
                  internall.
               
            
            The externall causes are
                  efficient 
                  finall.
               
            
            The internall
                  matter.
                  forme.
               
The matter of this robe was 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               tekeleth which (as
Munster observeth by the vniversall consent of the
Iewes was some kind of silke.Munster
            
            
               Arias Montanus, Iunius & Tremel: & our English
bibles mention here the colour without the stuffe.
            Concerning the forme of this robe the greeke
word which the 70 Iewish Rabbins vse here, giueth
some light.70 Interpret.
            
            Their word is 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , which signifieth a garment
to the foot.
            In few words then this robe was a blew habit of
tekeleth which came downe to the foote of the high
Priest.
            The proper ornaments of this robe, were of 2 sorts,
golden bels and pomegranats.
            
            And concerning these two with the assistance of
God, and by your Christiam patience, I intend this
subsequent discourse: and first concerning the bels.
            When Moses spake vnto the people hee covered his
face with a vaile,
               Exod. 34, 35. signifying by that type, the obscurity
of the law,Compared with 2. Cor. 3. according to the anagogicall interpretatiō
of the Apostle in the second to the Corinthians & the
third Chapter.
            Here is solid meat that requireth much chewing

of the cud,Scriptura in locis obscurioribus quasi cibus qui manduc
                     •
                  ndo glutitur, in locis apertioribus quasi potus qui itasorbetur, sicut invenitur. Greg. Mag. lib 1. Moral, c. 21. Idem in epist. ad leand. Mare est script. divina habens in sesensus profundus. Ambrosius in ep. 44▪ ad Const. Gregor. Mag. part. 2. curae pastoral. c. 4. Cyrillus de sacerdotio.
                by spirituall meditation before we can
digest it. Here is that ocean in which the Elephant
may swimme, diue you into it who can, wading peradventure
is a fitter tearme for my shallow passage.
Yet now with Peter I cast my selfe into the sea. The
law threatneth death to the Priest, if hee make not a
sound with his bells. And this (by the generall consent
of interpretors vpon this place) importeth danger
to the dumbe Minister, if wee compare the type
with the antitype, and the ceremony with the signification.
And here among the rest Gregorius Magnus
taketh away the vayle from the face of Moses in the
second part of his pastorals at the fourth Chapter, in
these words. Iram contra se occulti iudicis exigit, qui sine
sonitu praedicationis incedit. Hee provoketh the anger
of the secret iudge against himselfe, that insisteth
not in the sound of preaching. And with him
forteth well the Archbishop of Alexandria in his
booke de Sacerdotio where hee speakes thus. Impendebat
mortis metus ijs qui sacerdotis munere in tabernaculo
fungebantur nisi tintinabula maxime circumstreperent:
est ergo silentium doctoribus in primis periculosum
id
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   perspicue illud est quod Paulus ait vae mihi si nō
Evangelizavero: they that executed the office of the
Priests in the tabernacle were in daunger of death if
the bels made not a noise. Therefore (saith he) silence
is dangerous in a doctor and this is that which Saint
Paule affirmeth in plaine termes Wo vnto me if I preach
not the gospell.
               Vetus testamē
                  tum in novo revelatum & in veteri novum uelatum, Aug. in Psal. 105. And thus as the new testament is vailed
in the old, so the old testament is revealed in the

new. Consonant vnto the former is the exposition
of Calvin vpon this place, although he be commonly
a close adherent vnto the letter of the text.
            
            
               Morte dignus est sacerdos à quo vox praedicationis nō
auditur.
               Calvin Exod. 28▪
                That priest is worthy to die from whom
the voice of preaching is not heard. This is a harde
saying, if peradventure he meane not by preaching any
publishing of the truth and so is the word taken in
the 8. of Luke at the 39. verse,Luk. 8. 39. the man out of whom
the divels were departed went into his owne house,

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . and he went away preaching
through the whole citty, how great things Iesus did
for him: howsoever his meaning is, in this I am confident
with Bernard,
               Bernard. 
               Nobis tacere non licet quibus ex
officio incumbit peccantes arguere. Silence is intollerable
in vs, who by our office are bound to reproue offenders. If
you affected multiplicity of language it were easie to
paralell this text with many plaine places of scripture
but I referre you to the 56. of Esay at the 10. verse,Esay 56. 10. and
to the second of the Actes where the holy Ghost commeth
downe vpon the Apostles in the likenesse of fiery
tongues,Act 2. Sic fere Greg quia omnes quos miserit & ardentes pariter &
loquentes facit: because all that are sent of God vpon this
message haue their mouthes opened and their tongues fired
from heaven. And here by your patience we may
taxe negligēce in some, who although they haue the
tong
                  •
               es of the learned yet they minister no word of
comfort to the afflicted.1. Cor. 9. 13. 
               They eate of the sacrifices but
they minister not at the altar.
            
            Is not the pastor resembled in scripture to the Oxe,
               1 Cor 9. 9. Rev. 4.
               
which is a symboll of painefulnesse. For Theseus marked
his coine with the stampe of an Oxe, and in so doing
(as Plutarch recordeth in the life of Theseus) hee
provoked his cittizens to industrious diligence in
their callings.
                  Plut. in Thes. Origeni Adamantini cognomen inditum pr
                     •
                  pter indefatigatam studii tolerantiam, Eras. Chil.
            
            Are not the disciples compared to salt which melteth
away by seasoning other things. And was not
Iohn Baptist a burning candle because hee consumed
himselfe by giving light to others.
            Secondly this maketh way vnto a iust complaint
against the ignorāce of others, the first sort want that
fidelity, the second sort want that wisedome that is required
in a good steward, who is a faithful and a wise
steward: si non fuerit fidelis fraudabit, si non fuerit prudens
fraudabitur.
            
            The first sort resēble the Estridges that haue wings
but they fly not.Sernard: ad hoc de
                     •
                  ium dantur pennae vt currentem adiuvēt caetero non sunt volucres nec à terra tolluntur Plin. nat hist. lib. 10. cap. 1. Plutarch.
            
            The second sort resemble the lapwings that runne
away with some part of the shell vpon their heads.
            The virgin vestals vowed chastity for the space of
30. yeares, in the first 10. they learned their duties, in
the second 10. they did that which they learned, in
the last 10. they taught yong novices.
            Our course is preposterous, we begin at the last: &
here I accuse my selfe in the first place with Ambrose,
               Ambros. offic. 
                     •
                  ib. 1. cap. 1.
               factum est ut prius docere inciperem quam discere: I began
to teach others before I was taught my selfe. And this I
may second with the wordes of the Spowse in the
Canticles, at the 5. verse, the sonnes of my mother made
me the keeper of the vines, but I kept not mine owne vine,
               
or with the words of the mellifluous doctor vpon that
place, ego huius loci occasione meipsum reprehendere soleo,
               Bernard. serm. 30. in Cant.
               quod animarum susceperim curam, qui non meam sufficerem
custodire. I tooke vpon me the cure of soules, before
I was sufficient to watch over mine owne.
            
            The breast, and the shoulder were appointed vnto
the Priests vnder the law,Pectus et armi sacerdoiibus dā
                  tur, qui & consilio populum regere, & ingēs onus gubernationis Ecclesiae sustinere debent Sic Origen. hom 5. in Levit. 7. Moses, enim 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Theod. quaest. 27 in Levit. The Romans sent 3 Embassadors to the Realme of Bithinia, the one had the gout, the other had his head ful of gashes, the 3 was a foole. Of these 3 Cato said merily mittit Populus R. legationem quae nec caput nec cor, nec pedes habet. Plutarc in Cat. not without some misterie,
because they must haue a breast for counsell, and a
shoulder to beare the burthen of care for the flock, &
therefore no man dischargeth the part of a good Pastor,
vnlesse he haue a breast for counsell, and a shoulder
to beare that heavy burthen. By the law of Moses
they were vncapable of the Priesthood that had any
outward blemishes in their bodyes Levit. 21. 17, 18, 19
20. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               these are our types, these outward deformitis
in the body, resembled inward imperfectiōs
in the soule that make men vncapeable of ministeriall
function in the Church vnder the new Testament.
At vtinam viveres Cato, If Cato maior were now living,
here is matter of laughing for him: for now the
people of Rome sent forth Embassadours (like vnto
thē that went into the Realme of Bithinia) that haue
neither head nor heart, nor feet. Nemo egregium & munus
maximum per indignam mittit personam, no man
sendeth the greatest present of all by the hand of an vnworthy
person, saith Ambrose vpon the third to the Ephesians:
and therefore if any send such, they haue the greater
sinne, and yet on the other side, if any refuse the
sacraments at their hands that haue the outward calling
of the Church, this is zeale out of his wits. Notably

doth the hammer of haereticks beat down thesurging
pride of the Donatists.
               August. Malleus heretrcorum in this point in his third
booke contra Cresconium grammaticum: per ministros
dispares Dei munus aequale. By Minist
                     •
                  rs of vnequall gifts
the gift of God is of equall worth. The best gifts are to be
desired (if they may be had) yet the want of them nullifieth
neither the calling, nor the ministeriall actions
of the minister. St Paul to Timothy requireth many
things to the commendable being of a Pastour,Mr Cl
                     •
                  in his manu
                     •
                  l. yet
they are not all necessary to his essentiall being: Plato
draweth forth a Common wealth, and Cicero describeth
an orator, at such a pitch of perfection, that no
man ever yet saw the like, and yet if any inferre this
conclusion vpon the premises: therefore there was
never any true orator &c. Every yesterdaies sophister
denies readily the sequell: And so from the bells I
come to the golden bells.
            In a golden bell I note two things
                  matter 
                  sound.
               
               
                  1 Precio valet.
                  2 Dulce sonat.
               
               
                  3 It is precious in estimation.
                  2 The sound is pleasant to the eare.
               
               Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit vtile dulci.
            
            He beereth away the golden bell that delivereth a
profitable story in a pleasant style. Good matter slubbered
vp in rude tearmes becommeth loathsome to
the hearers: and elegancy of words without soundnes
of matter, is but a nice vanitie. To both these the Psalmist
hath respect, Psal. 45. at the first verse 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                my heart bubbleth vp a good matter, or
a good word for dabor tob signifieth both: his meaning
then as I conceaue him is this:Praedicatores Ecclesiae bene labia sponsae di 
                     ••
                  ntnr quia per eos populis loquitur: Greg. Mag. in Cant. deliciosa ad saporem, solida ad nutrimentum. 
               my heart inditeth
a good matter in good words. The lippes of the spouse (they
are the preacher: of the Church) droppe downe honycombes.
Koheleth (as al the other Prophets) hath words
of delight and Scripture of right words of truth, hee
matcheth 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               dibre Kephets words of delight, &

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               dibre Aemeth, words of truth together. A
preacher must haue words of truth, hee must not make
the pulpit a chaire of falshood,Eloquentia expe
                     •
                  s sapientiae calore & succo, sapientia eloquentiae expers colore & cultucarere videtur ex Bensii erat. 169 and hee must haue
words of delight for divine truth is a graue matron that
abhorres wanton daliances, but she loues comlinesse.
They that pranke her vp in vaine fashions, offer vnto
her great indignitie, and so doe they that cloath her in
ragges. In the 11 of Math. Christ compareth himselfe
to a Master of musicke We haue piped vnto you because
his preaching was musicke to the eare,D. H. Verbu Dei mel in ore Melos in aure, iubilus in corde. 
               grace was powred
into his lippes all men wondred at the gracious word
th
                     •
                  t proceeded out of his mouth: and by the confession of
his very enimies, never man spake as this man: mulcendi
sunt auditores sermonis dulcedine,
               Gulielm. quem Martinus D. 
                     •
                  . Riocitat in 
                     〈◊〉
                   4. Psal. 147. 1. 
               ne vt ilia invtiliter
audiant: such is our nature we are soone weary
of good things vnlesse we take pleasure in them &
therefore the Psalmist exhorteth the church to the
praising of God. First because it is a good thing to sing
vnto our God, and secondly because it is a pleasant
thing.
               1 Su
                     ••
                   quaedam 
                     〈…〉
                   patientia, disciplina.
            
            1. Some things are good but they are not pleasant
as Correction, Heb. 12, 11. no chastising for the present

seemeth to be ioyous.
            
            2 Some things are pleasant but they are not good:

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               :2. Sunt quaedam iucunda & non bona, voluptas. durty speeches, foolish talking
and scurrilous iesting condemned in the 5. to the Ephesians:
at the fourth.
            3 Some things bring neither profit nor pleasure as
envy,3. Sunt quaedam nec bona nec iucundat invidia, tristitia. and worldly sorrow and swearing: Basilicon
doron.
            
            4 Some things are both good and pleasant and they
affect vs most.4. Sunt quaedam bona & iucunda: honestas: charitas, puritas. Bernard.
            
            In a golden bell, there is good matter artificially
handled, & both these are commended by S. Paule to
Timothy in the second epistle 2. chapter. & at the 15.
verse, study to shew thy selfe approved vnto God, a workeman
that needeth not to be ashamed 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
rightly dividing the word of truth: the worde
of truth rightly divided, is a good matter artificiallie
handled.
            And here there are three sorts of workemen, that
offend against this rule.
            1 Some deceitfull workemen contrary to the Canon
in the 19.Doctrina falsa verae non admiscenda, Pelargus. of Leviticus at the 19. verse, sow the field
with mingled seed by sowing tares among the wheate
I meane hereticall opinions among some catholicke
points of doctrine, these men among many good
hearbs cast some deadly colloquintida into the pot and
of this sort were the Pharises that taught many sound
fundamentall points, but they had their leaven.
            2 The second sort are vnprofitable workemen that
beat the aire to no purpose, and they make anagrams

vpon the text and fond defcants vpon every letter as
if the scripture were but a rattle for children to make
sport withall, these so presse the breasts of the scriptures
the old and the new testament, that insteede of
milke they draw forth nothing but blood: they moūt
aloft now and then in great words, but their words
are like vnto the cypresse trees,Malac. 2. 7. which are high, & lofty,
but they beare no fruit. The Priests lips saith the
prophet Malachy preserue knowledge and the people shall
seeke the law at his mouth not toyes or fables. Wel said
sweet S. Bernard, In ore secularis nugae, nugae sunt, in ore
sacerdotis blasphemiae, toyes are toyes out of the mouth of a
secular man, but out of mouth of the priest they are blasphemies.
            
            3 The third sort are vnskilfull workemen, who because
they want their knife, I meane their art, and method,
divide not aright the word of truth.Plin. nat. hist. l▪ 10 c 65. Apud Persas pregnantes & in vtero parentis reperiuntur mures. And yet
these sermocinators imitate the Persian Mice which
as Plinius secundus recordeth, multiply in so great nū
               ber
that the tale hazards the credit of the reporter,
for as hee saith the yong ones are found with yong
while they are yet in the belly of the damme, so they
multiply sermon vpon sermon, and the conception
of the one preventeth the birth of the other. As these
men please themselues with so little learning as may
be, so (hauing to neere affinitie with those spirits
whom St 
               Iude taxeth) they speake evill of the things
which they vnderstand not.
               Iud. 10. They condemne the vse of
arts, and sciences in the pulpit, together with the ringing
sentences of the fathers (as they speake) not perceaving

how through the sides of our learned divines
the Apostle is goared,Act. 17 28. 1. Cor. 25 33. Tit 1. 12. Quaecu
                     •
                  
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   bene & rationabiliter dicta invenimus apud immicos n
                     •
                  stros opor
                     •
                  et nos mundare & resecare omne quod em
                     ••
                  tuū & inane est. hoc enim sunt omnes capilli capiti
                     •
                  , & vngulae mulieris ex inimic
                     •
                  rum spoliis assump
                     •
                  ae Origen. hom. 7. in Levit. 10. Philosophi si qua vera & fi
                     •
                  l
                     •
                  i nostrae accommoda dixerunt non solum form
                     •
                  danda non sun
                     •
                  sed ab iis etiam 
                     ••
                  nquam ab 
                     〈…〉
                  oribus in vsū nostrum vendicanda. Aug. de doct Chr. lib 3 who citeth three severall sentences
out of profane Poets; The truth is, the profitable
inventions of the heathen may bee sparingly vsed by
Christians. And this was the iudgement of Origen in
his 7. Hom. vpon the 10. of Levit. When any of Israel
tooke a maid in battaile, he first pared her nayles,
and he shaved her head before he married her: so wee
must pare away in humane learning all things noxious
before we captiue it to the vse of the Christian
religion, and with him agreeth Augustin in his second
booke de doctrina Christiana, at the 40. Chapter: Wee
robbe the Egyptians of their iewels, when we cōvert
arts and sciences and humane learning to the vse of
Theology. 
               Nec aranea um sanc textus id 
                     •
                   m
                     •
                  lior quia ex se sila gignunt, nec noster vilior quia ex alienis libamus vt apes 
                     〈◊〉
                   in not ad Pelit. lib. 1.The spider is never the more commendable
because he weaueth his webbe out of his owne bowels.
neither is the bee despised because shee gathereth
her hony out of divers flowers.
            Whatsoever some pretend yet many (I say not al)
condemne the vse of learning in the pulpit, that men
may not take notice of their ignorance. And here the
Apologie of the craftie fox (that by some mischance
lost his taile) may take place, he comming into the assembly
of beasts of that kind, exhorted them all to cut
of their tayles, alleaging the vnprofitablenesse, & the
cumbersomnes of it. And this he did for the covering
of his owne deformitie; the application is easie. I goe
forward to the next point.
            The golden bels were about the skirts of the robe.
            Concerning this circumstance Ierom to Fabiola
               
hath a witty observation:Hieron. ad Fab. circa finem. the golden bels hanged about
the skirts of the robe, quia ipse vestitus sacerdotis
debet esse v
                     •
                  cilis, because the garments of the Priests
must be a lowd preacher to the people. As Iohn Baptist
preached the doctrine of repentance to the eare
by voice, so his garment of Camels haire preached
sobrietie to the eye in hieroglyphick manner by a sensible
signe. Adam had coats of skinnes,Moneantur 
                     •
                  io divites, ne in nimium vesti
                     •
                   ē
                  
                     •
                  iornatum plurimum insumant Pelarg. in Gen. 3 Venturae mortis signa: Lyse
                     •
                  us in Genes. 3. and they preached
frugalitie: they were the skinnes of slaine beasts,
and so they preached mortalitie to the beholders. The
second Adam had a coat without seame, & that preached
vnitie. So our apparell must preach modesty &
sobrietie: for a Bishop must be sober in speech, in behaviour,
in diet, in apparell.
            And here I cannot passe further without shouldring
of some that stand in my way on both sides, and they
are of two sorts: First they of the new faction; secondly
they of the new fashion.
            The ordinary garments of the factions which they
vse publikely in the celebration of divine service, and
in the administration of the sacraments, are indeed
lowd preachers vnto the people; but what doe they
preach?
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                
               disobedience to superiours, singularitie in opiniō,
and desire of contention. But from the Salamanders that
delight in the fire of contention, I turne: my selfe on
the other hand to the Chameleons,
               M
                     •
                  tat nam
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , Chamaeleon colorem suum & oculis & caud
                     •
                   & toto carp
                     •
                  re Plin. nat. hist. lib. 8. c, 33. that transforme
themselues into all fashions. Their swaggering in the
fashion, and their swearing in the fashion proclaime
vnto all men the impiety, and vanitie of their mindes:
for true is that observation of Bernard, forma haec vestium

deformitatis mentium indicium est: this forme of
apparell argueth a worse deformitie in the heart.
               Eccles. 19. 28. 
               A mans
attyre, excessiue laughter, and going, shew what he is: these
three make a commentary vpon the heart. And so
from the golden bels in the skirts of the robe, I come
to the Pomegranates, that were matched with them.
            The pomegranate, which is an excellent fruit, was
a symbol of good workes, as Gregorius affirmeth, nee
desunt malogranata, sicum linguae sonitu bona opera coniūgas,
he wanteth not pomegranates to his bels, that ioineth
teaching, and doing together. Both these are ioined together
in the 5 of Mathew at the 19. verse. Whosoever
shall doe and teach them, he shall bee great in the kingdome
of heaven.
               Act. 1. 1. 
               S. Luke reduceth the history of Christ into
two heads: teaching, and doing. Moses wisheth vnto
Levi Vrim and Thummim,
               Vult lex Pontificem in operibꝰ ornatum, nec sufficit sola scientia. Origen: de indumentis pontificis hom. 6. in Levit. 
               the light of knowledge, & the
integritie of conversation, and our Saviour commendeth
to his Disciples, the wisdome of the serpent, & the
innocency of the doue.
            
            A Church minister must be in verbis Vlysses, infactis
Achilles, or rather because we are accused for bringing
the vnciscumcised Greekes into the Temple, Acts
21. 28. he must be in verbis Chrysostomus, in factis Polycarpus.
The Scribes and Pharises are sharply reproved
Mat. 23. for putting asunder the things, which God
ioineth together, I meane, saying, and doing, they say
but they doe not.
            
            And this light shined in darknesse for the Romanes
accused Publicola for praising Brutus in word, when he
followed Tarquinius in deed.
               Plut. in Public. B
                     •
                  rnard. 
               Multi sunt Catholic 
                     〈◊〉
                  .

dicando, qui tamen sunt haeretici operando: many are Catholickes
in their doctrines, which are heretickes in their
liues,
               Multi habent Christum in codicibus sed non in cordibus Aug lib. de spiritu & animi. c. 62. saith Bernard. They confute their sermons, with
their evill liues. They resēble the file, that smootheth
other things, but it selfe remaineth rough. These are
mercuriales statuae, that point at the way to others, but
they stand still.
            
               But how can they so boldly reproue others, that
are so badly reformed in thēselues? Who laughes not
at the Cynicke Philosopher trampling vpon the pride
of Plato with a greater pride.
               Bernard. Monstruosares est sedes
prima, & vita im
                  •
               , gradus summus, & animus infimus,
lingud magniloqua, & manus otiosa, sermo multꝰ, & fructus
nullus. These are monstrous things (saith the devout
Abbot, de consid. ad Eugen.) the highest seate and the basest
life, a busie tongue and an idle hand, much talking, & little
good walking: here are bels without pomegranats,
               Mat. 5. Ergo vitae suae diligentem rationem habeant pastores, vtpote in quos omnes spectant in quibus exiguus lapsus foedi criminis instar crit. Ferus in Mat. Minoris aestimatur offensa, quae ab  vno aliquo populari, quà
                     •
                   quae à sacerdot
                     •
                   acciderit, Iunius in 
                     •
                  xp. Analyt. in Levit. 4, Rev. 1▪ 6.
               which is a plaine transgression of the law.
            
            Brethren we play our part vpon the open stage of
the whole world, and therefore we must vse the greater
circumspection. The law in the 4. of Leviticus appointeth
a he-goat for the sinne-offring of the Priest
& a lesser sacrifice for the offring of a private man; because
God is more highly displeased with the sin of
the Priest (and so he is with the sin of all governours)
then with the sinne of a private man, Levit. 10. 3.
            Lastly, this text containeth instruction for all Christians,
for we are all Priests to God the father.
            
            God therefore by ioining togither bels, & pomegranats
in the skirts of the robe, requireth 2. things

at the hand of every Christian.
            
               1 Profession.
               2 Practise.
            
            
               First he requireth profession; as we beleeue with the heart
vnto righteousnesse, so wee must confesse with the mouth
vnto salvation, Rom. 10. 10.
            
               And secondly he requireth practise, not every one that
saith vnto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdome of
heaven, but he that doth the will of my father, which is in
heaven. Mat. 7▪ 21.
            
               Concerning the first our Saviour speaks in the 10.
of Matthew at the 32. verse, Whosoever shall confesse me
before men, him will I also confesse before my father which
is in heaven. But whosoever shall deny me before men, him
will I also deny before my father which is in heauen.
            Here is a coūterpoysō against the deadly doctrine
of the Nicodemites, who deny the faith in time of
persecution, vnder pretence of keeping their heartes
vnto God. As the law threatneth death to the priest,
if he make not a sound with his bels, so Christ here
requireth publike profession of the faith vnder paine
of eternall death. And yet profession in word is not
sufficient, without good workes.
            The Church is compared to a woman in the Canticles,
propter foecunditatem bonorum operum, for her fruit
fulnesse in good workes, as Beda noteth. And the Christian
is compared to the vine, which is most fruitfull
of all plants. Augustine writing vpon the 103. Psalme,Psal 103.
speaks occasionally of the 8. of Iohn, where our Saviour
writeth with his finger vpon the ground, In lapide legem

scripserat significans duritiam Iudaeorū; hie in terra
scribit significans fructum Christianorum, He wrote the
law to the Iewes in stone, signifying the hardnesse of their
hearts; here he writeth vpon the ground signifying that
fruitfulnesse that is to be expected at the hands of Christians.
And here I might take occasion to fight a combate
with verball professors, that professe in word the
knowledge of God, but in deed they deny him, Titus 1. 16.
Non rectè sanè,
               Bernard. 
               sed impiè, linguam Christo, & animam
dedisti diabolo: wisely done indeed! for so thou givest
thy tongue to God, and thy soule to the devill.
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . These
men haue the smooth voice of Iacob & the rough hands
of Esau. They are good linguists, but they are bad
reallistes.
               Vt poma in Iudaea non poma nascuntur, quae contacta in fumum abeunt, talis verbosa illa pietas, sine vitaeli hoc operum succo; Lips. in po
                     •
                   Sobriè quantum ad nos, iustè quantum ad proximos, piè quantum ad deum: Bernard. They resemble the faire apples that grow
by the lake Asphaltites, which (as Iosephus saith) vanish
away into smoak when they come to handling.
These men abuse the doctrine of free iustification by
faith, by turning the grace of God into wantonnesse,
and so with good food they poison themselues.
            But the grace of God teacheth vs to deny vngodlinesse, and wordly lusts, & to liue soberly, righteously
and godly in this present world, soberly in respect of
our s
                  •
               lues, righteously in respect of our neighbours, &
godly in respect of God.
            FINIS.
         
      
   