
      
         
            
            
            THE PRAISE OF MVSICKE: Wherein beſides the antiquitie, dignitie, delectation, & vſe thereof in ciuill matters, is alſo declared the ſober and lawfull vſe of the ſame in the congregation and Church of God.
            
               Hieron. in Pſal. 64.
               
                  Matutinis Veſpertinisque hymnis Eccleſiae delectatur Deus per animam fidelem, quae relicto inanium ſuperſtitionum ritu, eum deuotè laudauerit.
               
               God is delighted with the morning & euening hymns of the church, in a faithfull ſoul, which reiecting the ceremonies of vaine ſuperſtition, praiſeth him deuoutly.
            
            Printed at Oxenford by IOSEPH BARNES Printer to the Vniuerſitie, Anno 1586.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR WALTER RAWLEY KNIGHT.
            
               RIght worſhipful, I am glad that I haue any ſmall occaſion to reuiue that ſtudie which laie, as dead, for a time: and I would bee as glad to haue it cōtinue in good credit & liking after it is once reuiued. For which cauſe I requeſt your worſhip in al humility to become a patrone of this ſmal work, worthy to be takē into your hand when your worſhip ſhall haue any reſpit frō your weightier affaires,

and pleaſant to be read, becauſe it is an Orphan of one of Lady Muſickes children. It is commended to me by men of good iudgement and learning, and it will be the better commended hereafter if it may go out vnder your worſhips protection: which I requeſt again moſt humbly, wiſhing your worſhip as much happineſſe as I can conceiue, and conceiuing as much as your worſhip can wiſh.
            
               From OXENFORD.
               Your worſhips moſt humble at commandement, IOSEPH BARNES.
            
         
         
            
            The preface to the Reader.
            TRue it is,
                  Ariſt. eth. 9. which is reported of Poets and Muſitions, that they are no otherwiſe affected toward their own deuiſes, than parents toward their children. And ſurely (gentle reader) I willingly confeſſe vnto thee, that I am glad I haue ſome skill in muſicke, which is ſo ſweete, ſo good, ſo vertuous, ſo comely a matrone among other artes. Wherefore I ſhal not iuſtly blame thee, if thou think, that loue and affection hath preuailed much with me in publiſhing of this pamphlet: for therein thou ſhalt giue teſtimonie vnto me, that I haue perfourmed the part of a kinde and gratefull ſonne, in beſtowing the beſt of mine abilitie, to the aduancing of ſo gratious a mother. Neither would I haue thee ſo much to ſtand vpon this conceit, as if reaſon had no place in this action: conſidering that affection without reaſon, is a blind and vniuſt iudge of any matter. May it therefore pleaſe thee, no otherwiſe to iudge of my labour, than the reaſons therein alleaged ſhall giue thee iuſt occaſion: and if it happen thou come to the viewe hereof with a preiudice, yet conſider that nature hath therfore giuen thee two eares, that thou ſhouldeſt aſwell applie the one to the defendant, as the other to the plaintife. For as in ciuill matters, ſo in this,

                  
                     Seneca.Qui ſtatuit aliquid parte inaudita altera,
                  Aequum licet ſtatuerit, haud aequus fuit:
                  Who ſo defines a thing he doth not know,
                  Though iuſt his verdit be, he is not ſo.
               
            
            If then I bring not only reaſon, but teſtimonie alſo for mine aſſertion, I ſhall deſire the auerſe Reader, not to condemne me without ground, nor with a phā
               taſticall preiudice to ſet light by that, which perhaps, he will not be able to gainſay. For as the Poet ſaid in

an other matter,

                  
                     Terent.Qui hunc accuſant, Naeuium, Plautum, Ennium.
                  Accuſant, quos hic noſter auiores habet.
               
            
            So I make anſwere to them that paſſe their ſentences of condemnation vpon me, that they do in no wiſe diſgrace me, but Hierome, Ambroſe, Auguſtine, Baſil▪ Gregorie Nazianzen, and the holy Fathers of the primitiue Church, whoſe authorities are here alleadged men farre better than themſelues, and not worthy to be condemned vnder a ſeſſion of their pieres. I know a blemiſh is ſooneſt perceiued in a comely body, and the greater the man is that doth offend, the greater ſeemeth his offence. Becauſe one ſmale wart is a ſtain to be a beautifull face, and ſome litle fault committed, that might otherwiſe ſeem tollerable in a mā of mean eſtate, is inexcuſeable in a greater perſonage: So fareth it with muſick, which becauſe it is excellēt, & for that naturally ſubiect to the enuie and malice of many, is therfore ill ſpoken of, becauſe it falleth out, that ſhee is oftentimes blemiſhed with the faults of them, that profeſſe to haue ſome knowledge in hir. Hence it commeth to paſſe, that the faults of the perſons are attributed to the art, and that whatſoeuer is amiſſe in this or that lewd muſicion, is ſaid to proceed from hir, which ought by better reaſon to obſcure and ouerſhadowe the fouleſt blottes which are incident to men, than ſhe by them ſhould be diſgraced. Becauſe the Pierides in pride of their skill prouoked the Muſes, or Marſyas and Pan in opinion of their own excellency, Apollo: this generall collection is made, that muſicke cauſeth pride and ambition. If there bee any ſuch fooliſh muſicions as Arcabius was, hauing that fault whereof Horace ſpeaketh,

                  Vt nunquam inducant animum cantare, rogati,
                  Iniuſſi nunquam deſiſtant:
                  
                     That being praid to ſing and ſhew their skil,
                  Cannot induced be, ſay what thou liſt:
                  But vnrequeſted keepe a chaunting ſtil,
                  And from their folly neuer will deſiſt.
               
ſtraightwaie muſicke is wayward and troubleſome, 
                  •
               unning men are either dangerous or phantaſticall, as if to be skilfull, were a fault, or to be cunning, wor
               
                  •
               hy reprehenſion.
            Great occaſion & aduantage of inueighing againſt his art, is taken of that ſaying which King Philip of Macedon vſed to his ſonne Alexander when he rebu
               
                  •
               ed him, for that he could ſing ſo well and cunningly: as if we did allow the importunitie of Nero, which is ſaid, all a long ſōmers day, to haue ſitten in the Theatre, playing on his Harp: or did not rather thinke, that muſicke is ſo to be vſed of Noble & Gentlemen, as Achilles did in Homer:
                  Iliad.
                who after that bitter contention between him and Agamemnon, taking to him his 
                  •
               harp, (whereon hee had learned to play of Chiron 
                  •
               he Centaure, who alſo taught him feates of armes, with Phiſicke and ſurgerie) and playing thereon,
                  Eliot. lib. 1. cap. 7. ſang 
                  •
               he martial acts of the Princes of Grece, as Hercules, Perſeus, Peritheus, Theſeus, & his coſen Iaſon, & was 
                  •
               herewith aſſwaged of his fury and reduced into his 
                  •
               irſt eſta
                  •
               e of reaſon. And this in him was ſo commē
               
               
                  •
               able, th
                  ••
                Alexander himſelfe, after he had vanqui
               
                  •
               hed Ilion, oeing demanded of one, if he would ſee the 
                  •
               arp of Paris, who rauiſhed Helena: there at gently 
                  •
               miling anſwerd, it was not the thing he much deſired, but had rather ſee the harp of Achilles, wherewith 
                  •
               e ſang not the illecebrous delectations of Venus, but 
                  •
               he valiant acts & noble affaires of excellent princes.
            Some, I doubt not, will exult to drawe a reproch of his art from the ancient Greekes, with whom it was 
                  •
               t the firſt in greateſt eſtimation: & therefore will triumph

that Minerua ſhould haue caſt away her Recorder from her in diſdaine,
                  Ariſt. 8. pol. cap. 6. not as ſome ſay, becauſe th
                  •
                vſing thereof made her cheekes ſwell and puffed, bu
                  •
                as Ariſtotle rather thought, becauſe the playing on 
                  〈◊〉
                Recorder doth neither auail the mind, nor help knowledge any thing at al: whereas we aſcribe art & knowlege to Minerua. But I would not haue any mā ſuppoſe that my purpoſe is in this treatiſe, otherwiſe to ſpeake of this ſciēce, than ſo, as that it may ſeem both worthy priuate delectation, for a mans proper ſolace: and alſo publikely cōmodious in matters both ciuill & eccleſiaſticall as in the proceſſe ſhalbe declared. And therefore I refer the Reader, for the decēt vſe hereof in gentlemen, to the 8. booke of Ariſtotles politiques, & the 7. chapter of Sir Thomas Eliots firſt booke of his Gouernour. From whom he ſhall ſufficiently gather, wha
                  •
                the proper and ſober vſe hereof is, and ought to bee Touching the other vſe, I mean the Eccleſiaſtical, becauſe that is a matter in controuerſie, I ſhal deſire the gentle reader, ſo long to ſuſpend his iudgement, till hauing read the treatiſe, hee ſhall alſo conſider of the ſtrength & firmeneſſe of the reaſons. And I do no
                  •
                doubt, but as I without bitternes ſpeak of theſe things ſo he peraduenture, that is moſt auerſe, ſhall take ſome profit & fruit of theſe my labours. If thou be skilfull and learned, I know thou wilt not condemne me at a bluſh: if vnskilful and ignorant, think that I wil
                  •
                not ſo mildely anſwer thee as Stratonicus anſwered King Ptolomy, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . A ſcepter o King is one thing, and an inſtrumen
                  •
                another: but rather that which is more agreeable to thy perſon, which the ſame man alſo is ſaid to haue anſwered a ſmith, which maliciouſly reuiled him: Sir, 
                  〈◊〉
                pray you deale not aboue your hammer.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE ANTIQVITIE AND ORIGINAL OF MVSICKE: FIRST GEnerally, then more particularlie ſet downe. CHAPTER I.
            
               IT were but loſt labour to write any thing of Muſick, being an Arte of more vſe than credit, more knowen than acknowledged, were it not that more indifferencie is to be looked for of the eye, to whoſe view and ouerſight ſhee betaketh her ſelfe, than hath heretofore beene ſhewen by the eare, whoſe itching ſenſe ſhee hardly contented. But fulneſſe perhaps breeds loathing: And the eye which in a manner hath beene kept hungry from theſe things, may by ſight and reading hereof, both ſatisfie her ſelfe, and teach her vngratefull neighbour the eare to thinke better of ſo comfortable a treaſure. The commendation whereof as it ariſeth from many heades, namely her parentage,

auncientrie, dignitie, her both pleaſant and profitable ſeruice, with other as many & no whit meaner arguments of her praiſe, all which iointly fill vp a perfect meaſure of more than common honour, ſo her birth and antiquitie maketh not leaſt to the ſetting foorth of her beautie.
            And although it is for poore men to recken their cattel, becauſe rich mēs ſtore groweth out of number, & for yonglings to account their yeares,
                  Iuſtinus,
                becauſe antiquities wax out of mind (wherupon the Arcadians leaſt they might come in queſtion of iuniority wc any other country would needs be elder thā the moone) yet the caſting of her natiuity cā in no wiſe preiudice ſo anciēt a ſciēce, whoſe continuance is great but not defined, her birth day ancient but not dated. For time cānot ſay that hee was before her, or nature that ſhe wrought wtout her. To proue this looke vpon the frame, & workmanſhip of the whole worlde, whether there be not aboue, an harmony between the ſpheares,
                  Muſica mundana. Cor. Agrippa.
                beneath a ſimboliſme between the elements. Looke vpon a man, whō the Philoſophers termed a litle world, whether the parts accord not one to the other by conſent and vnity. And

who can blame nature in any reaſon for vſing her owne inuention?
                  Polydor. Virg. 1. lib. cap. 14.
                Doth the nightingale record by Art or by nature? Although the Romane taught his crow this one leſſon with much adoe, All haile Caeſar, and the Carthaginian his birdes hardly enough to ſing this one plaine ſong, Hannon is god, yet it is I am ſure beſides the cuſtome, and perhaps beyond the cunning of any man, to inſtruct the nightingale in ſo pleaſant and variable notes, being as cunningly deliuered as ſpeedily learned. But to leaue nature and come to Art (which then is at her beſt when ſhee is neereſt this maiſtreſſe) who can be ignorant that nature hath giuen her the ground worke, whereon ſhee a long time hath flouriſhed? As for her infancy, let vs burie it in ſilence, and wrap vp as it were in her ſwathing cloutes. For no doubt ſhee was not enquired, talked, or written of till ſhee waxed and grewe in yeares, that is in perfection and ripeneſſe. At what time being
Iam plenis nubilis annis,
fitte to wedde mens eares and heartes vnto her, ſhee beganne euen with greedineſſe to be receiued, cōmended, practiſed, to exerciſe

their wits, poſſeſſe their mindes, occupie their tongues, fill their bookes and writings. Forthwith ſhee was ſo chalenged by this nation and that countrie, ſo claimed by this man and that God, that it was doubtfull in ſuch variety of iudgement, to whom ſhe was moſt beholding for her birthright. Whereof what ſhall I ſay els, but that as the contention of ſeuen cities about Homer that famous & renowmed Poet, & earneſt plea of each of them to be his natiue ſoile did implie his excellency: ſo theſe many lands & Iſlands, men and weomen, gods and goddeſſes, and (if I may ſo ſpeake) heauen and earth being at ods and variance about this ſcience, argue her to be no baſe borne child, but ſuch a one as both commends him that inuented her, and honeſteth them which intertaine her.
            
               
                  Cornelius Agrippa.
               But becauſe ſhe is as pregnant as Libia alwaies breeding ſome new thing, for ſo it pleaſed Anaxilas long agoe to make compariſon, it wilbe the harder in ſuch fruitfulnes of iſſu to father euery child aright, & to aſſigne to euery one his proper and peculiar inuention. Firſt the Muſes lay chalenge vnto her for their ofſpring, as may appeare

by chriſtening her Muſicke after their owne name. If we from hence deriue her linage, what one thing is amiſſe? Iupiter, that is dexteritie and quickneſſe of witte her grandfather:
                  Natal. Comes
                memorie that aged and reuerend Miſtreſſe of all ſciences her grandmother, her mother many in ſteede of one (for how could ordinary parēts haue conceiued ſuch extraordinarie perfection?) and yet but one in many, for all is but Harmonie. Exception may bee taken againſt theſe things as fables and fantaſies of the Poetes: yet if we drawe the vaile aſide, and looke neerer into that, which nowe wee doe but glimpſe at, what elſe is ment but that Muſike is and ought to be accounted donum & inuentum deorum: the gift and inuentiō of the gods, and therefore ordained to good vſe and purpoſe? Now if Muſicke can find no fauour by alleadging theſe parentes,
                  Pol. Virg. ibid.
                let vs ſearch other mens regiſters, and ſee if happily ſhee be more gracious for the graces ſake. Whoſe handes being faſt claſpt without ſeuering, their faces amiable withoutfrouning, their youth freſh & green without waining, their garmentes looſe without-girding, and their chaſtitie perpetuall

without violating expreſſe in ſenſe & meaning nothing elſe, but concorde without breach, mirth without ſadneſſe, continuance without end, liberty without cōſtraint, and finally pureneſſe without taint or corruption. And can a graceleſſe fruite come of ſo gracious a ſtock? For proofe hereof may ſerue the image of Apollo which ſtoode at Delos, bearing in the one hande his bowe and arrowes as being God of the archers, in the other the three graces with ſeuerall inſtruments as hauing ſoueraintie ouer the Muſitians.
                  Idem ibid.
                I would not leaue Bacchus out of this catalogue: were it not that his name nowe adayes is in ſome diſgrace amōgſt vs, & thoſe dronken euohes and howlinges togither with confuſe hammering of timbrels vſed in his Bacchanalles feaſtes and ſomnities might ſeeme to indaunger the credit of this art. Howbeit if we take him not as hee is imagined, but as hee was indeede, I meane an heroicall perſon, his finding out of wine and Muſike is or ought to be as famous, as his victories and triumphes in India were glorious.
            But becauſe as the rainebowe being not of one colour is therefore more ſightly

to the eye, ſo Muſicke being not of one kinde is therfore more welcome to the eare, it ſhal not be amiſſe to conſider the ſpecialities, & lay by it ſelfe each mans helpe and furtherance in this ſcience. And firſt to begin as beſt beſeemeth, with vocall Muſicke,
                  Vocal Muſick
                being ſounded with a liuely inſtrument the toung of mā who wil not fly with birds of his own feather & profeſſe that both the nature of mā is beautified with ſo excellent a quality, and the quality credited with ſo excellent a nature. For if we ioine euen with heathē Philoſophers & maſters in this point, & confeſſe with Pythagoras that mā is a great miracle, wt 
               Mercury a ſecōd god, wt 
               Phauorinus a mortal god, with Abdala the Sarracene another Proteus apt to receiue any form, wt others a litle world, & with others omnia, all in al
               : as taking part with angels, part with plantes, & part with brute beaſtes, it were moſt iniurious to make better account of an inſtrument framed by art, than made by nature, the one being without vs, the other lyuing & growing within vs. But what neede I cal the light of the Sun in queſtion? Let each of theſe ſorts receiue her due commendation, neyther let contention about the

mayſtrie make to the diſgracing of either of them, but rather proue howe happye and rich wee are, that can finde no worſe quarelling matter, than to diſpute of two good thinges, whether is the better. The antiquitie of this kinde hath more neede of diſciding than the ſoueraigntie, both becauſe the times are not eaſilie remembred, and the opinions of men hardlie reconciled. For ſome aſcribe ſinging to Iupiter, as Diodorus of Sicilie: ſome to Mercurie, as Heraclides of Pontus: reſt in whether of theſe two verdicts we liſt,
deus eſt in vtroque parente,
each of their authors was deified by the heauen for principall vertues. Furthermore as all the Muſes were reported at the mariage of Cadmus and Hermione to haue ſung a ditie of the neere alliance betwixt friendſhip & honeſtie, ſo ſpecially amongeſt the reſt Calliope had beene miſcalled but for the goodneſſe of her voice, and Melpomene nicknamed but for ſetting of ſonges. But in ſuch caſes wee canonize for Authors, aſwell thoſe that make perfect, as thoſe which firſt inuent: not for deuiſing

that which was not before, but for bettering that which was worſe before. Doeth no manne build but hee which layes the foundation? no man paint but hee which ſhadowes? no man wade but hee which firſt breaketh the yce? If it were ſo, in what caſe had all our Artes & ſciences bin? They had beene monumentes as one ſpeaketh adorandae rubiginis, and nothing elſe, well we might haue reuerēced their anciēt ruſtines, but neither had their faces bin halfe ſo wel fauoured, neither their knowledge halfe ſo much practiſed.
                  Diod. Sicul.
                Nowe then by this accompt Oſiris muſt bee remembred for one whom the Muſes were ſaide to attend vpon. To ſignifie that he was his craftsmaiſter, hauing the art at will, and throughly ſtored with all the giftes of ſo notable a knowlege.
                  Rauiſ.
                Next Tiſias otherwiſe Steſichorus commended euen from his cradle to this ſcience by the ominous ſitting of a nightingale vpon his tender lippes. Beſides theſe Chryſogonus which made a perfect conſorte betweene his owne voice and Mariners oares, obſeruing a delectable tune in the one, and proportionable a time in the other.
                  Volaterranus
                What ſhall I ſpeake of Simon and

               Lyſias, which being offended with the olde Muſicke as too too harſh for their ſmooth and delicate eares, caſt it once and againe as it were in a new mould, neither ſuffered ſo much as the former name to remaine vnchanged. Theſe & many the like whoſe memorie is freſh in hiſtories though paſſed by mee in ſilence, either for ſetting vs on work by their examples, or for inſtructing vs by their precepts, or for poliſhing other mens rough hewen worke by their ſkilfulneſſe cā deſerue no leſſe at our handes than to bee held and reputed for authors. But why doe I pleade for their priuilege and authorizement, who haue founde no age hitherto ſo vngratefull as not to offer it? He that will not giue ſeconds and thirds a firſt place in theſe matters thinkes it eaſie perhaps to builde Rome in one day, & poſſible enough to make a ſcience perfect euen at one inſtant. Albeit we know that euen Mercurie himſelfe called amongeſt the Aegyptians by a name of prerogatiue, Ter maximus, as being in three ſpeciall thinges, eſpeciall and chiefeſt could not acquite himſelfe ſo handſomely in this ſcience, as not to haue neede of bettering in ſucceeding ages. His

Muſicke of three parts,
                  Pol. Virg. ibidem.
                ſet and proportio
               
                  •
               ed to the three times of the yeare, the baſe 
                  •
               o winter, the treble to ſommer, the meane 
                  •
               o the ſpring, being a midle ſeaſon between ſommer and winter, was bare and naked til other partes came in to helpe and ſupply it. So that as a queſtiō is made whether Theſeus his ſhippe being kept among the Athenians for a monument, and by continuall reparation euen from the hatches to the keele quite altered bee nowe Theſeus his ſhippe or no: ſo it might be diſputed were it not iniurious to the good deſeruings of our predeceſſours, whether this our Muſicke after the newe faſhioning, and working of ſo many mē in ſo many ages be the ſame muſicke which was retained in former times? For ſtring hath beene added to ſtring, part vnto part, precept vnto precept, one thing to an other ſo long til at length no one thing ſo much as variety hath made muſick a perfit & vniform body. Nowe beſides al this who knowes not that as generally ſo many men ſo many minds, ſo ſpecially ſundry muſiciās driue ſundry crotchets, & diuerſity of maiſters maks diuerſity of methods. Timotheꝰ one for al (though one ſwalow be no ſufficiēt

warrant of the ſpring) yet ſtanding in for 
                  〈◊〉
                of many witneſſes, as being borne out b
                  •
                common ſenſe and practiſe of our dayes required a double fee of other mens ſcholers: one to make them forgette what the
                  •
                had taught thē, another to make thē learn
                  •
                what he himſelfe would teach them. S
                  •
                then if both the matter taught, and the maner of teaching haue ſeene as many alterations, as almoſt ages, who can imagin
                  •
                that ſo great a diſſent of the kindes can ſtā
               
                  •
                without as great diuerſitie of the authors?
            
               
                  Inſtrumental muſicke.
               But to come neerer home, and to ſpeak
                  •
                of the other ſort of Muſicke, which hath a while beene preuented by this needeleſſe digreſſion, although we be nowe adaies fallen into a kind of intemperancie and wantonneſſe, eſpecially in the framing of inſtrumentes, in ſo much that the diuiſing of them is not ſo great a trouble as their naming, yet antiquitie the mother of ſimplicitie and ſingleneſſe in the greateſt part of artificiall thinges, both contented her ſelfe with meaner choice, & incombred her ſelfe with ſmaller buſines. In thoſe times three colours did ſerue for painting, and three inſtruments for playing. Nowe the Painters

               
                  ••
               op may vie with the rainebow for colors, 
                  •
               art hath almoſt gone beyond it ſelfe for in
               
                  ••
               ruments. But to leaue both the greater & 
                  ••
               e later number of them which are made 
                  〈◊〉
                the imitation of the former, there is no 
                  •
               ueſtion but as the dignity of theſe three 
                  •
               boue the reſt is to be maintained, ſo their 
                  ••
               der amongeſt them-ſelues not to bee 
                  •
               eglected.
                  The harpe.
                For by the iudgemēt of Alcibia
                  
                     •
                  es the harpe is to be preferred before the whiſtling pipe or pſhalms, becauſe it leaues 
                  〈◊〉
                roume for the voice, wheras the other poſ
               
                  •
               eſſing the whole wind and breath of man 
                  •
               iſpoſſeſſe him of that ſeruice.
            Touching the original hereof it is repor
               
                  •
               ed that when Nilus had ouer-waſhed the countrie of Aegypt & afterwards drank in 
                  •
               is waters againe into his ſeuen mouthes being ſo many ſtreames or chanels,
                  Polydor. Virg.
                amōgſt many other fiſhes which periſhed on the dry lād being in a ſort betraied by that element wherein their nature is preſerued the Tortuiſe alſo came ſhort. Mercury coaſting along that way toke vppe one of them, and finding nothing thereon but a fewe of parched or withered ſinewes tied them with his fingers, wherewith they made ſome

offer of a muſicall noiſe. The experiment is wel known lippis & tonſoribus, to the meaneſt and ſimpleir perſons amongeſt vs. For euerie childe holding a threede or haire in his mouth, and ſtriking it with his finger ſhall finde the like partly by the motion of his finger wherthrough the ſolid is cauſed, and partly by the hollowneſſe of the mouth whereby it is tuned. Mercurie hauing gotten this hold tooke occaſiō to ſet abroch his cunning. For he faſhioned a peece of wood proportionable to the ſhel of a fiſh, and put thereon three ſtrings diſtinct in ſounds, anſwerable to the three ſeaſōs. After this firſt onſet which for the moſt part carieth both the greateſt daunger, and the greateſt creditte, Terpander made vppe ſeauen ſtringes in honor of the ſeuen Atlantides which go vnder the name of our ſeuē ſtars: Simonides and Timotheus brought them to nine in reuerēce of the nine Muſes.
                  Ibidem.
                Thus Mercuries handſell ſet the market in a good & happy forwardnes. This inſtrumēt being as wel for the nouelty as excellencie ſtrange was preſented by report of ſome to Apollo: in lue whereof he recōpenſed Mercurie wt his heraulds rod called Caduceus.
            
            
               
               Hoc animas ille euocat orco
               Pallentes, alias ſub triſtia Tartara mittit.
            
            
               Herewith he calles ſome ſoules from Hel,
               And ſends down others there to dwell.Ouid.
               
            
            By witneſſe of others it was giuen to Orpheus, wherewith he brought euen ſenſleſſe thinges to a ſenſe and feeling of his ſweetnes, and lifeleſſe creatures to a liuely ſtirring & motion of their vnarticulate bodies. And when Orpheus was torne in pieces by the drunken Bacchides, his head and harpe ſwam downe the riuer Hebrus, and were taken vp at Lesbos: where they buried the one, and hung vp the other in the temple to their gods. Thus the harpe liued after Orpheus was dead, and made a manifeſt proofe how highly it diſdained to be handled by vnskilful & prophane fingers, reuenging euen vnto the death a preſumptuous act cō
               mitted by Naearchꝰ. This yong man being the king of Miteleus ſon bargained with the prieſtes of the tēple for Orpheus his harpe, becauſe as the practiſe of muſick was cōmē
               dable amongeſt them, ſo the greater euery mans skill was the better was his recompēce. Now Naearchus hauing a mind to the beſt game, and putting more affiance in the

vertue of the harpe than his owne cunning, gotte by night into the ſuburbes, and there iangled the ſtringes ſo long, till at length he was rent aſunder by dogges. Thus was his Muſicke vnſauerie, thus was his death vntimely.
            But to proceede, the firſt that euer ſang to the harp which is either the only or chiefe reaſon why it is preferred before wind inſtrumentes, was Linus. Whoſe vngracious ſcholer Hercules being controlled by him for his rawnes made ſuch vntoward Muſike betwixt his Maiſters harpe and his head, that he beat out the ſides of the one, and the braines of the other. Although ſome diſplace him from the honour of this inuention,
                  Polydor. Vir.
                and aſcribe it rather to Amphion.
            
            
               
                  The Pſhalme.
               Nowe among the winde inſtrumentes the Pſhalme was deuiſed either by Euterpe one of the nine Muſes, or elſe by Ardalus Vulcans ſonne, made at the firſt of the ſhāke bones of cranes, and therefore called Tibia by the Latines.
                  Caelius Rhod
                Although afterwardes it was framed of the baytree in Lybia, of box in Phrygia, of the boans of hinds in Thebes in Scythia of rauēs & eagles, in Aegypt of barly ſtalks, & ſo accordingly at other times

& in other places of other matters. But the moſt voices run vppon Minerua the daughter of Iupiter, and one who for her wiſedom is ſaid to be borne of Iupiters braine. And becauſe euerie artificer loueth his owne worke, Minerua was delighted with her pipe, and vſed euen in the aſſemblie of the gods very much to winde it: till ſuch time till both they draue her both from her Muſike and their preſence by laughing at her blowen cheekes. Shee to make triall of the matter went down to a riuer ſide, & beholding her ſwelling face in Neptunes glas bid her pipe farewell in a great choler, loathing & diſgracing the ſame as much as it diſfigured her. This pipe left not ſo good a Miſtreſſe, but it lighted on as bad a Maſter Marſias by name: whom it cauſed ſo to ſwel not in face but in heart,
                  Ouid.
                that hee chalenged & prouoked Apollo to a muſical combate: and being ouercom loſt the beſt and neareſt coate to his back, hauing his skinne pluckt ouer his eares for attempting ſo bold an enterpriſe. The vſe and effect of this as alſo other inſtrumēts I referre to their places. In the meane while I followe my purpoſe.
            
               
               
                  The whiſtling Pipe.
               Touching the whiſtling pipes which were made, for the moſt part, of reedes, though ſome aſſigne them to Silenus the foſter father of Bacchus: on whome he alwaies attended riding vpon an Aſſe, yet the greater part agree in Pan the God of ſheepheardes.
            The occaſion was this: It chaunced that he fell in loue with Sirinxe a nimph of Arcadie,
               
                  Ouid.
                who would neither giue her head as they ſay for the waſhing, nor her virginitie for the asking. And therefore when he firſt came to commenſe his ſute ſhee tooke her courſe from him towarde the riuer Ladon. Where her iourney being at an end vppon requeſt made vnto the nimphes, ſhee was deliuered by them from that ruſticke paramoure by tranſforming her into water reedes. Thoſe hee tooke for loue of her, and made them inſtruments to vtter forth his complaintes. Howſoeuer other thinges in this hiſtorie be feigned, ſure it is that it carieth with it an other drift than to proue Pan the author of that inſtrument. And if it be ſo, howe could ſo grounded a worke-man, being made as

they ſay to the imitation of nature and expreſſing by his hornes the ſunne beames,
                  Natal. Comes.
                by his redde face the coulour of the ſkies, by his rough and heary thigh the trees and hearbs vpon the face of the earth, by his goats feete the ſoliditie and ſteedfaſtnes of the ſame, be the maſter of a vaine and fruteleſſe worke? What ſhall I ſpeak of the Lute, Citterne, Violle, Rebeck, Gittorne, Pandore, Dulcimer, Organes, Virginals, Flute, Fife, Recorders, of the Trumpet, Cornet, Sackbut, and infinite other ſortes ſo excellent & pleaſant in their ſundrie kinds, that if art be any way faultie for them, it is for being too too riotous and ſuperfluous. For hauing as it were wearied and ouergone her ſelfe in choiſe of new ſortes, ſhee hath deuiſed a kind of newnes euen out of the old, by ioyning & compacting many in one, which theſe later times may by right chalenge for their inuē
               tion. But to leaue al other hiſtoriographers diſſenting ſome of them far in opinions that hiſtorie which indeed is the witnes of times & light of the trueth written by the finger of God ſets downe Iubal ſonne of Lamech & Ada to be the Father of all ſuch as handle harpe and inſtruments.
                  Geneſ. & Ioſeph.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE DIGNITIE OF MVSICKE PROVED BOTH by the rewardes and practiſe of many and moſt excellent men. Chap. 2.
            
            
               THus hauing ſtoode vpon the antiquitie and originall of muſick being ſo neerly linked togither that they could not wel be ſeuered, it foloweth by order that I ſpeake ſomwhat of her honor. A needleſſe treatiſe, were it not for the affectionat iudgemēts of ſome men, which making more reckening of the ſhadowe than the bodie accompt neither vertues nor ſciences worthie the taking vp for their own faire faces, vnleſſe they come furniſhed with good & ſufficient doweries.
            
               Ipſe licet venias Muſis comitatus Homere,
               Si nihil attuleris ibis Homere foras.
            
            
               Come Homer if thou liſt & bring the muſes crue
               Yet Homer if thou bring naught els but thē adue.
            
            Notwithſtanding to ſatiſfie thoſe which like indifferently well of this ſcience not ſo much for her owne laudable nature as her profitable accidents, let them knowe that her profeſſors & practiſers were not rewarded

heretofore (as they ſpeake in reproch) wt meate, drink & mony, which they cal fidlers wages, but admitted into the preſence and familiaritie of kings, ſought vnto by whole cities and countries, & diſmiſſed with rich and honourable rewards. I am ſory that I am forced to ſeeke thoſe kind of arguments, being fitter to quiet the common people thā the learned and wiſe: who looking into the things themſelues, wey thē by themſelues, valuing at an higher price the goodneſſe where-with they are endowed, than the goods and commodities where-with they are enriched. But to approue muſicke vnto both thoſe ſortes of men, to the vpright & wel minded for her own ſake, to the others for the things which they doe moſt eſtimate I intend both by variety and trueth of hiſtorie to make manifeſt declaration in euerie reſpect of her dignitie.
                  Alexander ab Alexandro.
                Who was more accepted of Periander King of Corinth than Arion? of Hieron King of Sicil than Simonides? of Perdicchas than Menalippides? of Alexander the great than Timotheus & Zenophontus who could make him both giue an alarum, and ſound retrait at their pleaſures? Who in better fauor with Agamemnon
               
than Demodochus to whom hee committed his wife Clitemneſtra for the time of his long & vnfortunat voiage? with Themiſtocles than Exicles whom he made his daily and houſholde gueſt? with M. Antonius than Anaxenor to whom he gaue the tribute of four Cities? with Iulius Caeſar than Hermogenes? with Nero than Ferionus? with Veſpaſian than Diodorus? with Galba than Canus? Who more tendered of Ariſtratus king of Syciō
                than Theleſtus, whom he countenanced being aliue with al kind of preferment, and honoured being dead with a coſtly monument?
                  Muſicke mollifieth crueltie.
                Nay the cunning of ſome hath ſo farre rebated the edge of moſt cruel and hard harted tirants, that they haue beene willing, as they ſay perforce to put vp iniuries and wrongs at their hands. Pyttachus of Mytilen let go ſcotfree Alcaeus his ſworne enimie, notwithſtāding he had both diſgraced him and taken armes againſt him. The like did Phalaris the Agrigentine by Tiſias his mortall foe, albeit hee tooke as much pleaſure in murdering as in banqueting, and had oftē euen with greedines diſlodged the ſoules of many innocents from their harmles

bodies. Thus Muſick led him farder thā euer humanity could draw him. What need I ad water to the ſea,
                  Theat. vitae.
                & after al theſe ſpeak of Terpander in a dangerous tumult of the Lacedemoniās appointed by the oracle & required by the countrey to appeaſe their vprores? A preſident ſo much the more to bee heeded, by how much the iudgement of a whole countrey than of any priuate perſō is the rather eſteemed. And is Lacedemō
                ſingular in this caſe? haue not Rome & Greece ioyned hands with her, the former inſtituting a College of Minſtrels, the later by ordeining that the ſame men ſhould bee their ſages, prophets and muſicians? Plenty makes me ſcant both by reſtraining me to choice, & by withdrawing me from tediouſnes: for how eaſie a thing wer it in ſuch abū
               dāce to tire & weary euen ye patienteſt ears? Notwithſtanding becauſe I am to cōuince theſe iudgements which look no farder than the outſide, & harkē rather to the honor cōferred otherwiſe, thā the honeſty & goodnes incidēt to the things thēſelues, let them ad to the fauour and acceptation of thoſe roiall perſons aboue named their practiſe and induſtrie which they haue exerciſed.
            
               I omit the muſes, graces, gods and goddeſes before mentioned. Colworts twiſe ſodde are harmeful, and tales twiſe tolde vngratefull. This next pageant ſhall bee filled with Emperours, Kings and Captaines, men both of courage and experience not content to go by heareſay and teſtimonie of others,
                  The practiſe of Muſicke in great and Noble men.
                but adioining them vnto their owne vſe and practiſe. Nero Emperour of Rome wanne and ware the garland to the great admiration and ſhouting of the people for victorie ouer the harpers. Alexāder the great made a great iewel of Achilles his harp. Choraebus the Lydian prince was as ſoueraign in muſick as in authoritie. Cimon of Athens and Epaminondas of Thebes no worſe muſicians than Captaines. Gregorie the great, Biſhoppe of Rome ended his life and muſicke togither, and the quier at this day is a witneſſe of his pains. Yea Socrates himſelfe as great a king in wiſdome, as they in iuriſdiction: whoſe ſtay and moderatiō of life let Xantippe his wife and ſcourge witnes, and let enuie it ſelfe iudge of his other qualities, being farre ſtricken in yeares, and hauing in a manner one foote in the graue, yet of an old maſter

became a young ſcholer vnto Conus for the attaining of this ſcience. And being charged therewt as a wantō toy vnfitting to his gray hayres made this apology,
                  Cael. Rhod.
                
               It is more ſhameful in the wain & decreaſe of our life to be ignorant of any good & cōmendable property. Thus he put on muſick as the liſt & vppermoſt garment, wherwith his wiſdom, grauity and age, might bee adorned, & euen the whole race of his life perfited, a garment no dout that is wel worn, & of ſeemly perſonages better worth the wearing thā the ſofteſt raimēt in kings houſē.
                  Muſicke good in it ſelfe.
                You may cloath an Ape in golde, and an Infant in Hercules armour: doth an infant therfore chaunge his age, or an Ape forgoe his nature? or is there leſſe price in the gold, or viler eſtimation of the armour? This is to miſuſe the right vſe of things neither fitting the perſons, and farre vnfitting the garments. The deepeſt dye may be ſtained, and the beſt gift abuſed. The tuning of the voice and ſtrings may turne to the iarre and diſcord of manners, as well as Rhetoricke may plead vntruethes, and Logicke proue impoſſibilities. So that I maruel the leſſe if Diogenes the cynick Philoſopher amongeſt other

his dogtrickes put vp a formal bil of inditement againſt the muſicians in open and ordinarie court, for ſhewing greater ſkill in concordes and vniſons of their notes, thā vnitie and conſent of manners: whoſe ſute or action, being in all caſes and with all perſons a reſolute and peremptorie man and litle caring where or how he faſtned his teeth ſo he faſtned them, may ſeeme approueable in reſpect of thoſe vniuſt and euer repining plaintiffes which attemper euery thing to their diſtemperate humor, and in their proceedings make not reaſon their aduocate, but either the weaknes, ſtrāgenes, or vndiſcreetnes, of their owne nature. Now if a bleareeied man ſhould giue ſentence of the ſunne beames, no doubt he would iudge thē to be ſhut vp into euerlaſting cloudes, leaſt at any time they might be offenſiue to his ſore eies. If a feuerſicke palate ſhould be iudge of taſts and reliſhes, what vnmerciful doome would it award to the holeſomeſt reſtoratiues? Aſke the Satire what ſhall becom of the fire for ſwealing his beard being ouerſawcie in embracing it, I warrant you he wil curſe Prometheus for euer troubling the earth wt it. A melancholick man and one

that is fitter to liue in Trophonius his den, than in ciuill ſocietie will trowne vpon muſicke, if for no other cauſe, yet at the leaſt to ſhewe him ſelfe ſeruiceable to his melancholie. Thus we ſhall haue the brighteſt eye of the world euen the ſunne pluckt out of heauen, the beſt meate out of our mouthes, and the neceſſarieſt element out of the nature of things, yea all vertues and ſciences vtterly raced out, as the occaſiōs ſomtimes (though neuer the cauſes) of ſome inconueniences, if euery brainſicke, hareblind, and froward man may iudge and determine in thoſe caſes.
                  Cael. Rhod.
                Now then as oft as we ſhall heare Archidamus or any the like ſectarie of his make better accompt of a Cater thā a Singer (mihi bonus cantor, bonus cupediarius) what ſhall we ſay of him but that animus erat in patinis: His belly was his idol,
                  Terent.
                & the belly hauing no ears is vnfit to meddle with ſoundes? If Anteas the Scythiā
                at the ſinging of Iſmenias the Thebā
                for want of better gods ſware by the wind & his fauchin, he had rather hear the neieng of an horſe thā ye ſinging of Iſmen. let his words as they are indeed ſo go but for winde, & if his ſworde be the beſt argumēt that he hath to auouch

it let vs wound him againe but with this onely blow, Quis tumidum guttur miretur in alpibus, Who can looke for a white skine in Aethiopia, or an vpright iudgement in Scythia? Albeit beſides the vnciuilitie and brutiſhnes of his countrie, he was no doubt fitter to handle a curriecombe than iudge of ſinging, who in the midſt of his royaltie made boaſtes that he vſed to rubbe horſes heeles. But if Antiſthenes ſhal go a note aboue Anteas & giue this or the like vncharitable cenſure of Iſmenias, as indeed he is reported to haue done,
                  Cael. Rhod.
                
               he is a naughtie mā: if he were honeſt he would neuer be a muſiciā, we may ſay with ſome indifferent reuerence of his philoſophers beard & gowne, yt as he was generally reputed to be Auitus magis quàm eruditus his wit being too headſtrōg for his wiſdom,
                  Tullius ad Articum.
                ſo particularly in this matter he had not ſufficiētly learned how to define honeſtie.
                  Muſicke not to be blamed for the lewdneſſe of ſome Muſicians.
                For although many good muſicians bee as many bad men, yet ſo farre is it off that muſick ſhould be blamed as the cauſe of ſuch an effect, that rather if they bee otherwiſe bad men ſhee weanes and withdrawes them from their corruption. For warrant hereof the neceſſitie of the art to be

ſette downe in a latter treatiſe maie yeeld ſufficiēt argument: meane while thus much I ſay, that a precious ſtone may be ſet in ledde, and a good qualitie placed in an euill ſubiect. In which caſes wee haue more cauſe to pittie their vnfortunate houſerome, than accuſe their vnſeemely demeanour. But to loſe the bitte a litle farther and to giue thē euen their own aſking, muſicke, as many other good bleſſings hath beene made the inſtrument of many diſorders. What need I recite them? other are eagle eied and quick ſighted enough to eſpie thē. I confeſſe this to be true, but in ſuch ſort as glorie becomes the fuell & occaſion vnto enuy, peace to ſecurity, beautie to pride, learning to inſolencie, good lawes to enormitie, meates and drinkes to ſurfeting, and finally the faireſt gifts an edge & intiſement to the fouleſt faults. Wher notwithſtāding the wel natured things themſelues are not chargeable wt thoſe crimes, but the euil diſpoſed perſons. If thou canſt not moderate & ſchoole thy ſelf in beholding, plucke out thy eies as Democritus did, if not in hearing ſtoppe thy eares with waxe as Vliſſes his companiōs did, if not in eating lay thy teeth aſide as

thoſe Graeae of Scythia did, if not in ſpeaking bite off thy tong as Zeno Eleates did. For by as good reaſon maiſt thou do the one as the other, ſeeing the diſliking of theſe and the like good things ſtands in the immoderation & intemperancie of theſe men which abuſe them. Now if it be vnciuil to liue wt
               out vertue and knowledge, if vnnaturall wtout meats & drinks, if vnreaſonable without eyes, teeth & tongues, although perhaps they haue many vnſufferable conſequentes, then blame not the hatchet for the Carpenters fault: but eſteeme worthily of good things for their owne natures, & fauorably deale with them for other mens offences.
            
               
                  Muſick not to be blamed for ſome muſicians vnſkilfulneſſe.
               Nowe beſides this they that cannot eſpie an hoale in the muſicians coate for their looſeneſſe & effeminatnes of manners ſeeke to bring muſicke in contempt by reaſon of their vnſkilfulnes. As if the huſbandmans reaſoning à baculo ad angulum ſhould condēn Logicke, or Tom fooles telling his geeſe Arythmeticke. There are infantes in all arts, & I grant none ſo very a babe in muſicke as was Babys. Minerua to begge his pardon for offending therein vſed this frindly interceſſion to Apollo,
               
                  Theat.
                
               abiectior eſt & infaelicius

canit quàm vt dignus ſit ſupplicio. Caſt not away chaſtiſement vpon ſo baſe and vnexpert a perſon. And ſure he was worth nothing (ſay I) if he were not worth the puniſhing. Diogenes was troubled with the like moone calfe, whom as often as he mette him welcomed with this ſalutation, Salue galle, God ſpeed cock, the other demaunding him why he miſtermed him, Quia cantu tuo excitas omnes, Thou diſeaſeſt quoth he euery mā wt thy vnſeaſonable crowing. And Demoſt. was plain on the other ſide wt an harper of ye ſame ſtāpe, wt whō he euer cōditioned to tie vp his pipes before he would once ſet foot wt in his dores. There are a great many cocks & to vſe a domeſticall prouerb, a great many aſſes at the harp who becauſe they haue emploied thēſelues at ye trade dijs tratis,
               
                  Eraſ. Perſius.
                
               genio
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ſiniſtro againſt the hair as they cōmōly ſpeak & euē in deſpite of Apol. & nature, haue made themſelues a by-word & ſkorne in al places. Our alehouſe, vagabōd & beging minſtrelſie I defēd not, liberal ſciences are for liberall men, whoſe dexteritie and aptnes of nature hath forwarded their art, & both theſe being conioyned haue made the men cōmendable & of good report. For thē is the medly good whē art & nature haue met with each other.
            
               But I leaue this reaſon to be refuted by the weakenes and ſimplicitie of it ſelfe. I come to another vaine which hath neede of a litle opening,
                  Daintie mē.
                leaſt the neglecting of it make it in time ſomwhat more troubleſom. I meane thoſe men, who, as if they came of ſome finer mould, like well inough of muſicke in others, but cannot away with it themſelues. They are delighted for examples ſake wt the wel proportioned pictures of Iupiter, Iuno, and Venus, but yet would not be Phidias, Policletꝰ or Praxiteles. Examin their reaſons they areas rare as black ſwannes, vnles perchaunce they anſwere as children and fooles are wont. They will not for their mindes ſake. And why not they as well as other men? They are belike of a better broode. Be it ſo, let them plead their priuilege, but ſo farre foorth as they ſeeke not to diſhonour things as honorable as themſelues. In mechanical artes I beare with them. Tractent fabrilia Fabri. Courſer meates may ſerue ſiner mouthes. What cardes can they ſhew to diſcarde literal ſciences? If euery mans wil were a rule in ſuch caſes there is no doubt but that ſome 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                the whole corpſe and body

of ſciēces would quite be extinguiſhed. For euen amongſt the nobler ſort which ſtand vppon their gentry, and in conſideration only of their better fortune, condemne better natures than their own, there are manie aureae pecudes, goldē ſheep ſuch as Iunius Brutus was better clad than taught, which cannot conceaue the excellencie of good faculties, many monſtra hominum ſtrange natured men ſuch as Licinius the emperor was, not ſo princely borne, as peſtilently minded, which call learning the poiſon & plague of a commonwealth. Howbeit ſome there are better enclined than theſe which do it not ſo much of deſpite as of daintines, for they are well enough content to take all the pleaſure they can by it, & yet take as great pleaſure to diſcontent thoſe that afford it.
            In whoſe fauor notwithſtanding I will ſpeak thus much,
                  Ariſtotle.
                & my ſpeach is abetted by good authors that both a choice of muſicke is to be made, and a moderation therein retained. Minerua as before caſt away hir pſhawlme 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                for very ſhame. And amongeſt vs euery one will not blow a bagpipe, that wil finger the Lute or Virginals. And as in one banquet all viandes,

though all very good, pleaſe not alike euery mans diet, ſo in Muſick there are ſundrie & delectable ſorts, which vnleſſe they be ordered wt good diſcretiō wil not ſute al times & perſons. The which two things time & perſons ſerue principally to make limitation of that meaſure which I mentioned before. There is a time of breathing & a time of buſines, a time of mirth & a time of ſadnes. If thou be remiſſe or mery vſe for thy recreatiō ſome kind of melodie. Albeit indeed wt Muſick no times are amiſſe. For we know that life is as it were put into the deadſt ſorows by inflexion & modulation of voice. And they whoſe heartes euen yearne for very greefe ſometimes fall on ſinging not to ſeeke comfort therein (for the beſt ſeeming comfort in ſuch caſes is to be comfortles) but rather to ſet the more on flote that penſiuenes wherwith they are perplexed. Similitudo parit amicitiam ſaith Boetius, & ſorowe findes ſomewhat in Muſick worthie his acquaintance, If not, how chance they haue ſpecified three originals or cauſes of Muſick?
                  Cael. Rhod.
                the firſt pleaſure of which there is no queſtion, the next grief, & the laſt Enthuſiaſmū
                ſom diuine & heuēly inſpiratiō. Surely affectiōs dance after

pipes & being thēſelues but motions do by a naturall kind of propenſion apply thēſelues to Muſick, whoſe efficacy ſtāds wholy vpon motiōs. But I returne to my purpoſe. The chiefe end of Muſicke is to delight, howſoeuer ſorow vſeth it ſomtimes for an aduātage as knowing how forcible & effectual it is to help forward al purpoſes. Therfore in time of vacācy & remiſſiō whē there is a mutiny of wars & a calm of other the like trobleſom affaires, the place being not moleſted, the people being not diſquieted, thē hath muſick euermore had the beſt audience. For otherwiſe if you light vpō 
               Pirrhus & aſk him whether is the better pſalmiſt Pythō
                or Chariſius, he wil anſwere you Polyſperches. And why? In prōptu cauſa eſt, a blind mā may hit his ſtaff at this mark, his mind forſooth ran vpō captaines & not muſitiōs: bring an harp or other good inſtrumēt to Lacedemō, they wil cry away wt it. Nō eſt Laconicū nugari, Trifling is not our vocatiō. And do we maruel at thē? Pirrhus as if he had bin hūgerſterued & ſtifled in his poor kingdō of Epirꝰ had laid a platform in his head of vſurping the whole world. The Lacedemoniās (to ſpeak wtout exceptiō of ſex, age or cōdition) as hard

harted as if they had beene borne of Adamāt or nurſed vp with Lions milke. I bely them not, their ſtoicall Apothegs and reſolute exploites deliuered vnto vs by faithfull authoritie are plentifull witneſſes hereof. But to ende this point, the dignity of Muſicke is great if we do not partially and vnequally burthē her with thoſe faults wherof ſhee is guiltleſſe, the artificer may offend, mens affections are corrupt, times vnſeaſonable, places inconuenient, the art it ſelfe notwithſtanding in her owne proper & lawfull vſe innocent and harmeleſſe.
         
         
            THE SVAVITIE OF MVSICKE. CHAP. III.
            
               ALthough both the Authors of this moſt diuine ſcience, and antiquitie therof, and eſtimation which it hath had in times paſt, may ſufficiētly credit the ſame: yet I doe not deſire any mā hardly affectioned in this point, to be moued by this treatiſe, vnleſſe

both the ſweeteneſſe and neceſſity, and operation of it, be declared to be ſuch, as neither ought careleſly, or cā worthily be neglected. For as in thoſe things which are both pleaſant and profitable, that which is profitable ought moſt earneſtly to be followed: ſo the pleaſure which is ioyned with the commodity, is not to be contemned. Wherefore, ſeeing that poetrie, which is but a part of Muſicke, as Plutarch doth teſtifie, hath this commendation of Horace,
               
                  Aut prodeſſe volunt, aut delectare Poetae,
                  Aut ſimul & iucunda, & idonea dicere vitae.
               
               
                  Poets of pleaſure, or of profit great,
                  Or elſe of both moſt decently intreate.
               
we may ſafely pronounce of the whole, that it hath both delectation to allure, and profit to perſwade men to thoſe thinges, wherewith mans life is beautified and adorned. I will firſt therefore ſpeake of the ſweetenes and delectation of Muſick: and afterwards of the vſe and neceſſity thereof. Concerning the pleaſure and delight, I will firſt ſhew it by that affinity and congruity which Muſicke hath with the nature of liuing creatures: Secondly by the effectes and operation, which it worketh in the hearers.

Touching the firſt:
                  Ariſt. 8. Polit.
                as the teſtimony of Muſaeus in Ariſtotle: Res ſuauiſima cantus eſt mortalibus, ſinging is a moſt pleaſant thing to men: & daily experience doeth proue vnto vs, that not only men but all other liuing creatures, are delighted with the ſweet harmony & concent of Muſicke: ſo if there were no other thing els, yet that proper fiction of the Grāmarians,
               
                  Onito parchꝰ in princ.ꝰ lib. 3. ſuae muſicae.
                might fully ſatiſfie any mā in this point. Sonus, ſay they, the king of Harmony had two ſonnes. The one of them was called Concentus, the other Accentus: of Grammatica he begat Accentus, but Concentus was borne vnto him of the nymphe Muſica. Whom when their father perceiued to be both equal in the gifts of the minde, and that neither was inferior to other in any kind of knowledge, and himſelf now well ſtriken in yeares to waxe euery day neerer and neerer to his death: hee fell into a ſerious cogitation with himſelf, whether of them two, hee ſhould leaue his ſucceſſour in his kingdome: and therefore hee began more narrowly to marke the maners and behauiours of them both: nowe Accentus was the elder of the two: and hee was graue and eloquent, but auſtere, and therefore

leſſe beloued of the people: But Concentus was verie merrie, pleaſaunt, amiable, louelie, curteous, acceptable vnto all menne, and cleane contrarie to the diſpoſition of his brother, thinking it more glorious to bee beloued than feared. Whereby hee did not only get the loue and liking of all his Subiectes, but alſo putte his Father into a greater doubt which of them hee ſhoulde inſtitute inheritour of his Scepter. Therefore appointing a ſolemne meeting, hee asked the Counſell of the Nobles and Princes of his Lande, as Muſitians, Poettes, Oratours, Philoſophers and Diuines: and in concluſion their conſultation had this iſſue, that neyther ſhoulde be preferred before other, but both ſhould equally inherite their Fathers Scepter and Dominions. Whereof I gather (omitting all other circumſtaunces) that as Accentus which is Grammar ought not to be diſinherited, becauſe of the neceſſitie therof in ſpeech: ſo Concentus which is Muſicke, coulde not but bee eſteemed as woorthie of preheminence, for his pleaſure and delectation. And for as much

as that was the iudgemēt and determinatiō both of Muſicians, Poets, Orators, Philoſophers, both Moral & Natural, and Diuines: ſo much the more is to be aſcribed to the ſweetneſſe of Muſicke, as theſe Profeſſours are of better iudgement than other men. But I will not ground the commendation of that on fictions and conceipts: which neither in it ſelf needeth the colour & ſhadowes of imaginations, being aboue all conceiptes: nor in the pleaſure thereof any externall ornament: being ſweeter than canne be counterfeited by fictions, or expreſſed by fantaſies. Wherefore leauing theſe, I will as neerely as I can, declare the reaſon of that delight which Muſicke yeeldeth. And this firſt is euident, that Muſicke whether it be in the voyce only as Socrates thought, or both in the voyce and motion of the body as Ariſtoxenus ſuppoſed: or as Theophraſtus was of opinion not only in the voyce and motion of the body, but alſo in the agitation of the minde: hath a certaine diuine influence into the ſoules of men, whereby our cogitations and thoughts (ſay Epicurus what he will) are brought into a celeſtiall acknowledging of their natures.

For as the Platonicks & Pythagoriās think al 
                  〈◊〉
                of mē, are at the recordatiō of that celeſtial Muſicke, whereof they were partakers in heauen, before they entred into their bodies ſo wōderfuly delighted, that no mā cā be found ſo harde harted which is not exceedingly alured with the ſweetnes therof. And therfore ſome of the antiēt Philoſophers attribute this to an hiddē diuine vertue, which they ſuppoſe naturally to be ingenerated in our minds, & for this cauſe ſome other of thē as Herophilus & Ariſtoxenus which was alſo a Muſician, thought that the ſoule was nothing elſe, but a Muſical motiō, cauſed of the nature & figure of the whole body, gathering thereof 
                  〈◊〉
                neceſſary concluſion, that wheras things that are of like natures, haue mutual & eaſy action & paſſiō betweene thē
               ſelues, it muſt needs be,
                  Cic. Tuſc. quaeſt.
                that Muſical cōcent being like that Harmonical motion which he calleth the ſoule, doth moſt wonderfullie allure, & as it were rauiſh our ſenſes & cogitatiōs. But this which I haue ſaid may ſeem peraduenture to be too profoundly handled: I will therefore confirme it by naturall experience & examples. And firſt generally (as I ſaid before) there is neither man, nor any

other liuing creature exempt from the participation of the pleaſure of Muſicke.
            As for man let vs begin with him euen from his cradell, and ſo take a view of his whole life:
                  Man naturally delighted with muſicke.
                and we ſhall ſee, that euen euerie particular actiō of his, is ſeaſoned with this delight: firſt in his infancy, whiles he is yet wholy deſtitute of the vſe of reaſon, wee ſee that the child is ſtilled, and allured to ſleepe, with the ſweete ſonges and lullabyes of his Nurſe: although the griefe of his tender limmes be ſuch, as is able to breede impatience in a ſtronger body. And for this cauſe is it, that children are ſo delighted and allured with rattels and bels, and ſuch like toies as make a ſound. Now as ſtrength & iudgement increaſe in man, ſo Muſicke pleaſeth and delighteth him more and more: ſo that whether he be noble or ignoble, yet the ſame delight of minde groweth to perfection togither with the body.
                  Ariſt. Polit. 8. cap. 3.
                And therfore Ariſtotle in his Politiques, coūſelleth that childrē be inſtructed in muſick, eſpecially if they be of noble parētage: not ſo much for the profit & cōmodity therof, as becauſe it is agreable to nature being in it ſelfe both liberal & honeſt: for in al matters to propoſe profit as the only

end, is neither ye part of a liberal nature nor of a gētlemālike diſpoſitiō. Again in baſe & in ignoble perſons, the very ſenſes & ſpirits are wōderfully inflamed, wt the rural ſongs of Phillis & Amaryllis: inſomuch that euen the ploughmā & cartar, are by the inſtinct of their harmonicall ſoules cōpelled to frame their breath into a whiſtle, thereby not only pleaſing thēſelues, but alſo diminiſhing the tediouſnes of their labors. And therefore moſt naturall is that which Virgil vſeth in deſcribing of a good houſewife.

                  longum cantu ſolata laborem
                  Arguto coniux percurrit pectine telas.
                        1. Geor.
                     
                  
               
               
                  The huſwifes ſpinning makes her labour long
                  Seeme light with ſinging of ſome merrie ſong.
               
as alſo that other ſpokē of ye pruner of trees:
                  Eclog. 1.
               
               
                  Alta ſubrupe canit frondator ad auras.
               
               
                  The lopper ſinging from the craggy rocke
                  The bowes & leaues beats down with many a knocke.
               
and that of the ſheepeheards:
                  Eclog. 5.
               
               
                  Cur non Mopſe (boni quoniā conuenimus ambo
                  Tu calamos inflare leues, ego dicere verſus)
                  Hic corilis inter mixtas conſedimus vlmos?
               
               
                  Mopſus my friend, ſeeing our skill is great
                  Thine for the tune, mine for the pleaſant rime.
                  In th'haſell bower why take we not our ſeate,
                  In mirth and ſinging there to ſpend the time?
               
               
And hence it is, that wayfaring men, ſolace thēſelues with ſongs, & eaſe the weariſomnes of their iourney, cōſidering that Muſick as a pleaſant cōpanion,
               
                  Comes facū
                     dus eſtpro vehiculo in via.
                
               is vnto thē in ſteed of a wagō on the way. And hence it is, that manual labourers, and Mechanicall artificers of all ſorts, keepe ſuch a chaunting and ſinging in their ſhoppes, the Tailor on his bulk, the Shomaker at his laſt, the Maſon at his wal, the ſhipboy at his oare, the Tinker at his pan, & the Tylor on the houſe top. And therefore wel ſaith Quintilian, that euery troubleſom & laborious occupation, vſeth Muſick for a ſolace & recreatiō: wherof that perhaps may be the cauſe, which Gyraldus noteth. The ſymphony & concent of Muſicke (ſaith he) agreeth with the interior parts & affections of the ſoule. For as there are three partes or faculties of mans ſoule, the firſt and worthieſt the part reaſonable, which is euer chiefe, & neuer in ſubiectiō to the other, the ſecond iraſcible, which, as it is ruled of the former, ſo ruleth the latter, and the laſt cōcupiſcible, which euer obeieth, & neuer ruleth: ſo if we cōpare the ſymphony of Muſicke, with theſe powers of the ſoule, we ſhal find great conueniencie and affinity

between them. For looke what proportion is betweene the parts reaſonable, & iraſcible, ſuch is there in Muſicke between that ſtring which is called hypate, & that which is termed Meſe, cauſing the melody called diateſſaron: and looke what proportion is between the parts of iraſcible & cōcupiſcible, ſuch is there between Meſe & Nete making that ſound which is named Diapente: ſo that as thoſe three partes of the ſoule conſenting in one, make an abſolute and perfect action: ſo of theſe three in Muſicke, is cauſed a pleaſant and delectable Diapaſon. And therfore no maruell if according to the mixture of theſe ſounds diuerſe men be diuerſely affected, with ſeuerall Muſicke: inſomuch, that almoſt euery peculiar nation and people, be in their wars delighted with proper inſtrumentes: as in former times, the Cretenſes with the harpe, the Lacones with Cornets, the Amazones with Flutes, the Cibarites with Shalmes, the Lydians with Whiſtles & Pipes, the Latines with trompettes, the Getes with the Cytheron and Flute: ſo in theſe later daies, and more nice times of the world, al nations with compound and mixt Muſick, and with

ſundrie kinds of inſtrumentes, as Cornets, Wayts, Shagboyts, Trūpets, Drūb & fife.
            Neither do I here ſo attribute this delectation vnto man,
                  1 Beaſts delighted with Muſicke.
                as denying it to other creatures, for I am verily perſuaded, that the plowmā & cartar of whō I ſpake before do not ſo much pleaſe thēſelues wt their whiſtling, as they are delightſom to their oxē & horſes.
                  Polyd. Virgil.
                Again the warhorſe is ſo inflamed wt the ſoūd of the trūpet, that he cannot keepe his ſtāding, but maketh an open way to his rider, through the midſt of his thickeſt enimies.
                  Horſes delighted with Muſicke.
                And here may it pleaſe the reader for his recreatiō, to call to mind one ſpeciall hiſtory of the Sibarits: whoſe horſes were not only delighted with Muſick, but alſo taught to dāce to the inſtrumēt: inſomuch that one of their muſitiōs at a certaine time, hauing ſome diſcurteſy & iniury offred him took occaſiō to forſake his coūtry,
                  Policianus Miſcellaniorū 15.
                & fled to the Crotoniats, which were enimies to the Sibarits, foraſmuch as not long before that time the Sibarits had giuē thē the ouerthrow in battle. This tibicē, or plaier on the ſhalm, comming amōg the crotoniats, made his ſpeech vnto thē to this purpoſe & effect, that if they could afford him credit, he wold work ſuch

a deuice, as they ſhold eaſily obtain the conqueſt of the Sibarits horſmē. Credit was giuē vnto his tale, & he ordained captain of the war,
                  Sybaritarum mollicies prou.
                inſtructed all the fluters & ſhalmers of the Crotoniates, what note they ſhold play, and how they ſhould addreſſe themſelues againſt their enimies. Now the Sibarites on the other ſide being inſolent, & hauing taken hart a grace & courage vnto them by reaſon of their former victory, prepare thēſelues to meete their enimies in the field. Wherefore the Shalmers of whome I ſpake before hauing receiued a watchworde of the Captaine, on a ſuddaine ſounded their Flutes and Shalmes. The horſes of the Sibarites hearing their country Muſicke, wherunto they had beene accuſtomed, reared themſelues on their hinder feete, caſt their riders, and as they were wont to daunce at home, ſo now they did it in the ſkirmiſh, and by this policy, the Crotoniats wan the victory of the Sibarits. Wherby may be gathered not onely how pernicious clandeſtine treaſon is to a cōmonwealth, but alſo what ſtrange & incredible delight muſick impreſſeth euen in theſe dumbe and vnreaſonable creatures. So mules are wōderfully alured

with the ſound of bels: & ſheepe follow their ſheepeheards whiſtle. And it is recorded alſo, that the Hart and other wilde beaſtes are by ſweete and pleaſant notes drawen into the toiles and gins of the hunteſman. AElianus in his varia hiſtoria teſtifieth, that Pythocaris a muſition playing vpon his Cornet, mitigated the fierce and rauenous nature of wolues, and that the mares of Libia and Oliphantes of India woulde followe the ſound of Organes and diuers other inſtruments.
                  2 Fiſhes delighted with Muſicke. Plutarch in conuiuio 7. Sap. Herodotus in Clio. Cic. Tuſc. 1. Ouid. 2. Faſt.
                Now as theſe terreſtriall beaſts haue their peculiar and proper delightes, ſo aquaticall creatures alſo liuing in another element, offer themſelues voluntarily to the ſound of Muſicke: ſo, as Martianus recordeth, certaine fiſhes in the poole of Alexandria are with the noice of inſtruments inticed to the bankes ſide, offering themſelues to mens handes, ſo long as the melody endureth. Wonderfull are thoſe thinges, which in good authors are related of the dolphin: but for our purpoſe, none ſo fit, as that of Arion: whoſe excellent ſkill in Muſicke, giueth teſtimony aſwell againſt the ſauage and barbarous cruelty of thoſe vnnaturall ſhipmen, which ſought to take

away his life: as to the gentle and kinde nature of the dolphin, which is both a louer of men, and an earneſt follower of muſicke. Arion ſeeing no way to eſcape the furie of his cruel enemies, tooke his Citterne in his hand, and to his inſtrument ſang his laſt ſong, where-with not only the dolphines flocked in multitudes about the ſhip readie to receiue him on their backes, but euen the ſea that rude and barbarous element, being before roughe and tempeſtuous, ſeemed to allay his choler, waxing calme on a ſodaine, as if it had beene to giue Arion quiet paſſage through the waues.
            There is alſo a third kinde of liuing creatures, which by the Philoſophers are called 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , becauſe they liue both on the land & in the waters. Of theſe,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                I wil only name the Swanne, which bird is therefore ſaide to bee vnder the patronage of Apollo, not only for that ſhee is allured with the ſweet notes and mellodious concent of muſicke, following them which plaie vppon inſtruments on the water: but more eſpecially becauſe ſhe ſeemeth to haue ſom diuination from him, whereby ſhe foreſeing what good is in death, by a naturall inſtinct, finiſheth

her life with ſinging and with ioy.
            
               Sic vbi fata vocant vdis abiectis in herbis,
               Ad vada Maeandri concinit albus olor:
            
            
               When death the ſwanne aſſaies,
               Laid proſtrate on the ground,
               Her ſong doth make Maeanders bankes
               her dolors to reſounde.
            
            
               
                  4 Birds delighted with muſicke.
               As for thoſe other creatures which liue in the aire, I do not think that the fouler could euer haue made ſuch ſpoil & hauock of them, beeing ſo far out of his reach & iuriſdiction, had not nature told him, that they aboue all creatures vnder the heauēs, are as moſt delited, ſo ſooneſt intangled & allured with his ſongs. Wherfore when thou ſeeſt, each foul in his kind, the Linet, the Nightingale & the Lark, to mount aloft, & ſing their notes vnto the skies, ſhewe thy ſelfe docill in theſe two thinges, firſt in acknowledging the delight which both thou takeſt in thē, & they in muſick: & ſecondly learn by their exāple, what thy duty is & ought to be in grateful ſinging of pſalms and ſongs to him that made thee.
            
               
                  Semidei.
               Laſtly, yt I may not omit thoſe which the heathniſh poets & wiſe mē counted inferior indeed to the gods: but better thā men (how worthily I will not heere ſtand to debate)

euen they teſtifie alſo of thē, yt they take infinite pleaſure in muſik. As whē 
               Silenus ſang his ſong of the beginning of the world vnto Chronis, Mnaſilus & Aegle yt faire nimphe.
            
               Tū vero in numerū Faunos Satyroſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   videres
               Ludere, tū regidas motare cacumina quercus.
            
            
               Then mightſt thou ſee the Faunes
               and ſatyres daunces lead,
               The Cypreſſe trees to ſhake,
               and ſturdie okes their head.
            
            So when Pan & Apollo ſtroue whether of them was the better Muſitian.
            
               Deſeruere ſui nimphae vineta Timoli,
               Deſeruere ſuas nimphae pactolides vndas.
            
            
               When Pan for lawrell branche
               in ſong with faire Apollo ſtroue,
               Pactolus nimphes forſook their ſtream
               and Tmolus nimphes their groue.
            
            
               Homer is not afraid to aſcēd a litle higher, ſhewing that euē the gods & Iupiter himſelf are content to giue a patiēt eare to muſical concent: & therupon in that banquet of ye gods where Vulcan plaid the skinker, hee maketh Apollo & the Muſes ſinging a ſong.
                  Iliad. 
                  
                     •
                  .
            
            
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
            
            
               
                  Thus they in banquetting conſumde the day:
               Nor faire nor mirth was wanting to their will
               While faire Apollo on his harpe did play,
               The Muſes anſwering with aequal skil.
            
            
               Pithagoras and his ſectatours, thought that the world did not conſiſt without muſical proportion and concent. And therefore both he & the beſt philoſophers aſcribe vnto euery Celeſtiall ſphere, one Goddeſſe or Muſe, which is the gouernes & ruler therof: & becauſe there are eight of thoſe ſpheres, the ſeuen planets, and the eight which is called the firmament, therefore they made 8. peculiar Muſes, attributing to Luna the muſe Clio: to Mercurius, Euterpe: to Venus, Thalia: to Sol, Melpomene: to Mars, Terpſichore: to Iupiter, Erato: to Saturne, Polymnia, to the firmamēt or coelum ſtellatum, Vrania;
                and becauſe of eight particular ſoundes or voices, keeping due proportion and time, muſt needes ariſe an harmony or concent, which is made by them all, therefore that ſound which al theſe make is

called Calliope. And hence is that pleaſant harmony of the celeſtial globes cauſed, which Pythagoras ſo much ſpeaketh of. If then both Gods and men, and vnreaſonable creatures of what kind ſoeuer, be allured and mitigated with muſicke, we may ſafely conclude that this proceedeth from that hidden vertue, which is between our ſoules and muſicke: and be bold with Pindarus to affirme, that 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               &c. Al thoſe things that Iupiter doth not loue, do only contemne the ſongs of the Muſes.
            
         
         
            THE EFFECTS AND OPERATION OF MVSICKE. Chap. 4.
            
            
               IN the former chapter was gathered a proofe and demonſtration of the ſweetneſſe of Muſick, proceeding frō the cauſes to the effects. Now I meane by the contrarie demonſtration, to proue the delectation thereof from the effects to the cauſes. For it cannot be but that as the conueniēce

and agreement which muſicke hath with our nature, is the cauſe of the delectation thereof: So the pleaſure and delectation is alſo the cauſe of thoſe effectes which it worketh as well in the minds as bodies of them that heare it. Muſick being in it ſelfe wholly moſt effectuall, importeth much of his force and efficacie, euen to the peculiar partes and portions thereof. And therevpon auncient writers make the diſtinction of ſongs and notes in muſicke, according to the operations which they worke in their hearers: calling ſom of them chaſt and temperate: ſome amarous and light, otherſome warlike, others peaceable, ſome melancholicke and dolefull, other pleaſant and delightfull. And yet this diuiſion is not ſo auncient as that other which was in vſe in Orpheus & Terpanders time: for Plutarck in his treatiſe of muſick recordeth that Modi Muſici were alſo diſtinguiſhed by the names of nations: ſuch were principally theſe foure, Modus Dorius, Modus Phrygius, Modus Lydius, and Modus Myxolydius. Hereunto were added as collaterall other three Hypodorius, Hypoludius, and Hypophrygius: making ſeuen in number,

aunſwerable to the 7. planets: whereunto Ptolomaeus addeth an 8. which is called Hypermyxolydius, ſharpeſt of them al and attributed to the firmament. Theſe ſeuerall diſtinctions of notes in muſicke do not ſo farre diſſent in name and appellation, as they do neerely accord in effects and operation. For Modus Dorius, beeing a graue and ſtaied part of muſicke, aunſwereth to that which I called chaſt and temperate. Modus Lydius vſed in comedies, in former times, being more lighter and wanton than Dorius, anſwereth to that which I termed amarous and delightſome. Modus Phrygius diſtracting the mind variably, alſo called Bacchicus for his great force & violence aunſwereth to that which I called warlik, And Myxolydius moſt vſed in tragedies expreſſing in melodie thoſe lamentable affections which are in tragedies repreſented, aunſwereth to that which before I named Melancholike and dolefull. As for thoſe other, Hypodorius, Hypolydius, Hypophrygius, & Hypermyxolydius, there is no doubt, but that they being collaterall and aſſiſtants to theſe, moue ſuch like affection as their principall.
            
               
               
                  Macrob. in Som. Scip. lib. 2.
               
               Macrobius in effect ſaith aſmuch in theſe wordes: 
                  Ʋt viſus colorum, ſic ſonorum varietate delectatur auditus: Modus Dorius prudentiaelargitor eſt & caſtitatis effector: Phrigius pugnas excitat & votum furoris inflāmat: Aeolius animi temperiem tranquillat, ſomnumque iam placatis tribuit. Lydius intellectum obtuſis acuit, & terreno deſiderio grauatis caeleſtium appetentiam inducit, bonorum operator eximius. That is, As the eye is delited with the variety of coulours, ſo is the eare, with the diuerſitie of ſounds. Modus Dorius is a giuer of wiſdome, and a cauſer of chaſtitie. Modus Phrygius prouoketh to fight, and maketh couragious. Aeolius quieteth the mind, & giueth ſleepe to the pacified ſēſes. Lydius ſharpneth dul wits, & to men oppreſſed with earthly cares, it bringeth a deſire of heauenly things: being a wonderfull worker of good motiōs. So that the effects of muſicke generally are theſe. To make haſt to incite and ſtirre vp mens courages, to allay & pacifie anger, to moue pittie and compasſion, and to make pleaſant and delightſome: Nay yet I will go farther: & doubt not but to proue by good authority, that muſick hath brought madde

men into their perfect wits & ſenſes, that it hath cured diſeaſes, driuē away euil ſpirits, yea and alſo abandoned the peſtilence from men & cities.
                  Muſick maketh chaſt.
                Touching the firſt effects of muſick we read that Agamemnon going to the war of Troy left behind him Demodocus, an excellent muſician,
                  Dydimus Homeri interpr. in 2. Odyſſ.
                skilfull in Modo Dorio, to keep chaſt his wife Clitemneſtra, whom he nicely had in ſuſpition of wantonnes and leuity with Aegiſtus. Wherevpon it is recorded that as long as Demodocus liued, Clytemneſtra remayned faithfull to her husband: but when Aegiſtus, for that purpoſe had murthered him, ſhee gaue ouer her ſelfe to ſatiſfie his adulterous appetite. So did Vliſſes leaue Phenius an other muſician, with Penelope, whom Vliſſes returning home at twentie yeares end, founde to haue wrought ſo effectually with his wife, that both he deſerued great commendation for his acts, and ſhe is regiſtred as a moſt perfect & abſolute example of chaſtitie: neither do I attribute ſo much to Homer the author hereof, as to Dydimus his interpreter, who giueth this as a reaſon thereof, becauſe in thoſe dayes, Muſicians were the cheefeſt profeſſours of philoſophie. I doubt

not but that thoſe,
                  Obiection.
                which are glad to take any occaſion to ſpeake againſt muſicke, will thinke the contrarie: and affirme that it maketh men effeminate, and too much ſubiect vnto pleaſure.
                  Anſwer.
                But whome I praie you, doth it make effeminate? Surely none but ſuch as without it would bee wanton: it is indeede as fire to flaxe, and as wine to a drunkarde, if flaxe be eaſilie inflamed, is the fault in the fire? or if a drunkard, be eaſily ouercom with wine, is the fault in the wine? So likewiſe if the ſunne harden claie and mollifie waxe: the diuerſitie of theſe effects is by reaſon of the diuerſitie of thoſe ſubiects: euen ſo the ſame muſicke which mollifieth ſome men, moueth ſome other nothing at all: ſo that the fault is not in muſicke, which of it ſelfe is good: but in the corrupt nature, & euil diſpoſition of light perſons, which of themſelues are prone to wantonnes.
                  Muſicke maketh couragious
                As for the 2. effect which is cauſed by Modus Phrygius, as I ſaide before, it ſhal ſuffice to confirm it by example. The Athenians hauing receiued great hurt and loſſe, by ſeeking to recouer the Iland Salamis, made a law that whoſoeuer ſhould make mentiō of any more recouering thereof

ſhould die the death.
                  Plutar. in Solone.
                But Solon perceiuing this lawe to bee hurtfull to the common wealthe, faigned him-ſelfe to bee madde, and running into the cheefeſt places of the Citie, ſang a certaine Elegie, which hee for that purpoſe had made ſhewing how eaſily the Iland might bee redeemed, and how pernitious a law that was, which had beene made in that behalfe. With whoſe ſweet ſong Plutarche doth record the Athenians to haue beene ſo incenſed, that immediately they armed themſelues, and with good ſucceſſe recouered Salamis. To this purpoſe ſerueth alſo that which is recorded of a certaine yong man of Taurominum, which Boetius reporteth,
                  Boetius.
                was incited wt the ſounde of Modus Phrygius, to ſet a fier an houſe, wherein a harlot was intertained, But a moſt manifeſt proof hereof is that, which is ſaide of Alexander the great, who ſitting at a banquet amongſt his friends, was neuertheles by the excelent skil of Timotheus a famous muſician ſo inflamed with the fury of Modus Orthius,
               
                  Gyrald. lib. 1. Poet.
                or as ſom ſay of Dorius, that he called for his ſpear & target as if he would preſently haue addreſſed himſelf to war. Neither is this a

more apparent proof for this part than that which folowed is for the next.
                  3 Muſicke allayoth anger.
                The ſame Timotheus ſeeing Alexander thus incenſed, only with the changing of a note, pacified this moode of his, & as it were with a more mild ſound mollified & aſſwaged his former violence. Chameleon Ponticus reporteth of a certaine man called Clinias Pithagoricus, that he being a man giuen to ſeueritie, if at any time he perceiued himſelfe to haue beene melancholik, took his Citterne in his hand & profeſſed that he tooke eaſe thereby. And Homer witneſſeth of Achilles that of all the ſpoiles of Etion he only tooke for him ſelfe a Lute, wherewith hee might aſſwage his wrath in his extremitie.
                  2. Kings. 3.
                So a minſtrell pacified Elizeus when Iehoram came to aske counſell of him,
                  4 Muſicke moueth pittie.
                and quieted his mind when he was ſore offended. As the 4. effect may by many examples bee confirmed, ſo the ſtory of Lodouicus pius the Emperor doth make it moſt euident. For when Theodolphus the Biſhop, had by his counſell and deuiſe cauſed Lotharius not only to depriue his father Lodouicus of his empire but to caſt him into priſon, who can iuſtly accuſe the Emperour, if he being reſtored

to his imperiall dignitie againe, did fully purpoſe to chaſtiſe the biſhoppe with death? Yet neuertheleſſe ſuch was the force of Muſicke, that the Emperour parſing by the priſon wall, and hearing the Biſhop ſing an Hymne moſt pleaſantly which hee had made in priſon for his ſolace, was mooued wt compasſion, to be ſauourable to that man, which had dealt diſloially with himſelfe, and reſtored him to his former dignity and eſtimation. As for the fifthe,
                  5 Muſike maketh pleaſāt.
                we dayly prooue it in our ſelues: vſing Muſicke as a medicine for our ſorrowe, and a remedie for our griefe: for as euerie diſeaſe is cured by his contrarie, ſo muſicke is as an Antipharmacon to ſorrowe: abandoning penſiue and heauie cogitations, as the ſunne beames do the lightſome vapors.
                  6 Muſicke reſtoreth madmen to their wits.
                Greater are thoſe other properties of this art, which I wil in this place rather touch, than dilate with examples. Muſicke aſwageth and eaſeth the inordinate perturbations and euill affections of the mind. For Pithagoras with the changing of the ſound of his inſtrument, cauſed a young man ouercome with the impatience of loue to change his affection alſo, wholly taking

away the extremitie of his paſſion.
                  Baptiſt. Port. Magiae naturalis, lib. 2. cap. 25.
                So Empedocles wt his skilful playing on the Citterne hindred a madde man, ready to ſlea himſelfe: yea Zenocrates alſo and Aſclepiades,
               
                  7 Muſick cureth diſeaſes.
                are ſaide by this only medicine, to haue reſtored a lunatike perſon, into his perfect ſenſes. If it bee ſo that muſicke can helpe the outrages of the mind, it will not ſeeme vncredible that it ſhould cure the diſeaſes of the body. By the help of muſicke Iſmenias a Theban muſician, reſtored men ſicke of an ague, to their former health, and Aſclepiades by the ſound of a trumpet cauſed a deafe man to heare. Theophraſtus alſo teſtifieth of the Iſchiaſy, that their ſickneſſes are cured, if a man play the Phrygian note vnto them.
            
               
                  8 Muſick driueth away euil ſpirits. 1. Sam. 16.
               It is alſo a preſent remedie againſt euil ſpirits: which as it is proued by that one example of Saul from whom the euil ſpirit departed when Dauid plaied on his Harp: ſo hauing ſo ſufficient authoritie,
                  9 Muſick medicinable againſt the plague.
                for the confirmation thereof, I ſhall not neede to ſtand vppon it any longer. Laſtly wee read alſo of muſicke that it hath deliuered both men and Cities, from the noyſome infection of the peſtilence. As Gyraldus
               
in the place aboue incited, recordeth. Terpander and Arion, ſaieth he, with their muſicke deliuered the Leſbians & Ioues, from moſt contagious infections. And Thales a muſician of Creet, with the ſweetnes of his harmonie, baniſhed the plague from his citie. I durſt in no wiſe affirme the laſt effect & operation of this worthie arte,
                  10 Muſicke preſerueth or ouerthroweth cōmonweals.
                were it not that Plato with his credite and authoritie did embolden me: Mutati muſicae moduli (ſaieth hee) ſtatus publici mutationem afferūt: The chaunging of Muſicall notes, hath cauſed an alteratiō of the common ſtate.
                The reaſon hereof can be no other than this, Becauſe by the force of Muſicke as well thoſe of leſſe heart & courage are ſtirred vp, as thoſe of greater ſtomack weakened & vnabled to any excelent enterpriſe. Whereupō he alſo inferreth, that ſuch are the maners of young men, as are the notes and tunes they are accuſtomed to, in their tender yeares.
            Now if theſe my proofes & authorities ſhal to ſom 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                & vnmoueable perſon ether ſeeme too weak, or the things attributed to muſicke too hyperbolical: he ſhall bewray either his ignorance in not hauing read ancient writers, in whom, as of al other ſciences,

ſo of this eſpecially, as moſt admirable, condigne praiſes are comprehended: or els his malice, in derogating from this art, thoſe properties which hee can neither deny other men haue giuen, nor conuince, ought not by good reaſon to be attributed thereunto. For as I do not ſtand on the ſufficiencie of theſe allegations, meaning in this part only to ſhew what hath beene aſcribed vnto muſick in former tymes: ſo is it not enough for any malicious Muſomaſtix, to take his pen and write I ly, vnleſſe he can by ſufficient reaſon declare, that theſe authors by mee cited haue erred heretofore: which if he ſhall not be able to performe, then let him giue ſome reaſon why muſicke in theſe daies, is not the ſame, it hath beene heretofore: or why Muſicke hath rather loſt any of her former excellency, than increaſed in perfection from time to time, conſidering that time is the perfecter and increaſer of all artes? But I will not willingly entangle my ſelfe, with the vaine and fantaſticall deuiſes of this ſort of men. Only I conclude this point, with that cōmon ſaying of the learned: Scientia neminem habet inimicum niſi ignorantē.

                  None are ſo great enimies to knowledge as they that know nothing at all.
               
            
            Likewiſe in Apulia when anie man is bitten of the Tarrantula,
               
                  Balthaſ. Caſtalion. Auli
                        •
                      lib. 1.
                which is a certain kinde of flie, verie venimous and full of daunger, they finde out the nature and ſympathie of the ſickneſſe or humor, with playing on inſtrumentes, and with diuerſitie of Muſicke, neither doe they ceaſe frō playing, vntill the often motion and agitation, haue driuen the diſeaſe away.
         
         
            THE NECESSITIE OF MVSICKE. CHAP. V.
            BVt what of all theſe thinges before rehearſed, if Muſick haue neither profit or neceſſity? or to what end ſhold a mā beſtow his trauel & induſtry in that wherof there is no vſe? Can an Art be vnneceſſary, or can any thing be good for ſo many purpoſes as haue bin declared, & not be needefull? yea can any thing be ſo profitable and haue no vſe? Eaſier is it for water not to moiſtē, & for fire not to giue heat, thā for an art liberal to be vnneceſſary, or for ſo precious a ſcience to haue no vſe. And therfore moſt memorable

iudgement of Galene, which will not ſuffer that to be called an Art, that bringeth no profitte to our life. Wherefore before I enter into that which is the marke whereat I aime, I meane, the vſe of Muſicke in the church, I muſt adde to theſe former commendations, ſomething, as of the neceſſity of it in fewer wordes, ſo of ciuil vſe thereof more at large. And firſt concerning the neceſſity: I confeſſe, that Muſicke is not ſo neceſſary for man, as meates are for the preſeruatiō of life, and clothing for the defence of the body: (for ſo he were not a man, that were not a muſicion:) but as in meates ſome are courſe, and others delicate, which both neuertheleſſe are neceſſary, the one to thoſe of meaner, the other to thē of higher degree: and as laboring men vſe meane apparell only to defend their bodies from the violēce of the weather, and gentlemen finer, not only ſo, but for an ornament alſo, which both are neceſſary, to diſtinguiſh callinges: ſo Muſicke is as the more delicate meates, and as the finer apparell: not in deede neceſſary ſimply, but profitablie neceſſary for the comlineſſe of life. And therefore Socrates & Plato, & all the Pythagoreans inſtructed

their yong men and maydes in the knowledge of Muſicke, not to the prouocation of wantonneſſe, but to the reſtraining and bridling their affections, vnder the rule and moderation of reaſon. For they, becauſe youth naturally is moueable, & deſirous of delight, & yet vnfit to receiue any ſeuere diſcipline, thought it conuenient & neceſſarie, to acquaint their children with an honeſt oblectation of Muſicke in their youth, that being brought vppe in that liberall delectation, they might learne to refraine from other illiberall and inordinate pleaſures. And Ariſtotle in the eight booke of his Politiques, which is wholy of that argument, giueth counſell that noble men & gentlemē be inſtructed with Muſicke,
                  Ariſt. Polit. 8. cap. 3.
                firſt to auoide idleneſſe, becauſe the idle time which is in a mans life, doth require to be buſied in the knowledge & learning of ſome profitable thing: ſecondly becauſe Muſicke after a ſort belongeth vnto vertue.
                  Cap. 4.
                For as that exerciſe which is called Gymnaſtica doth ſtrengthen and confirme the body: ſo Muſick refreſheth the wearied mind with honeſt delectation. Thirdly for that it hath great force in the wel ordring and good inſtitutiō of life. And

therefore Pythagoras his Scholers, as Tullie recordeth,
                  Tuſc. 4.
                were woont, both to giue certaine hidden and ſecrete precepts in verſes, and to with-drawe their mindes from intentiue and deepe cogitations, with ſinging and with inſtrumentes: yea and manie of the auncient Grecians among whome this Art was in highe eſtimation, inſtructed their children in Muſicke, as profitable to the correction of life and manners, that thereby they might bee incited to temperance and honeſtie: for it is the property of liberall Sciences, to ingenerate a gentle, and liberal action in their hearers. Wherupon Ariſtotle, in the ſame place doth infer, that albeit arts are to be learned not for any vain pleaſure or oſtentation, but for ſome good and profitable vſe, yet if muſicke were neither neceſſarie nor profitable at all, it ought to be accōpted of & embraced, for that it is liberall. And yet Ariſtotle doth not ſo far cōmend Muſicke to noble men, that he would rather wiſhe them the practiſe, than the ſpeculation and knowledge thereof: But as he would haue none but thoſe that profeſſe it to be the practiſers of it: ſo hee counſelleth

noble men rather to vſe it for their priuate ſolace, than publike oſtentation, and rather to bee able to iudge of other mens cunning, than willing to ſhewe their owne. For the Lacedaemonians, ſaith he, a warlike and noble people, haue this as a ſinguler commendation, that although they ſeemed not to haue any ſkill in Muſicke, yet they could eaſily diſcerne, which ſound agreed or diſagreed moſt. And he maketh it a generall obſeruation, that in all poets of any credit and name, Iupiter is neuer made to ſing, or to plaie vpon any inſtrument, although they deny him not moſt exact knowledge and iudgement.
                  Suetonius.
                And indeed who doth not confeſſe an abuſe of this art in Nero, which would ſit whole daies togeather plaing in the Theater? or in Archabius that fooliſh muſition, of whom it is written, that his auditors were woont to giue him more money to ende his ſong, than to begin. Pope Iohn the 22. of that name which was himſelf a good muſicion, & wrote a booke thereof: in the ſecond chapter of his booke attributeth thus much therunto. Great is the neceſſity of Muſicke, and the vſe thereof not to be contemned: for it maketh him that is ſkilful

therin, able to iudge of that which he heareth, to amend that which is amiſſe, and to make a newe. And thus much he aſcribeth to the neceſſity of the art. Neuertheleſſe the neceſſity which wee meane, is, that it doeth bridle and nurture our inordinate affections, as not only Ariſtotle taught vs before, but Strabo alſo, calling muſicions the maſters and correctors of maners. Homer in the ſame ſenſe termeth them Sophroniſtas, that is to ſay, Moderators or teachers of Temperance. And for the like cauſe as I ſuppoſe, was Muſicke firſt brought into the church, and vſed in diuine ſeruice: for Iſidore teſtifieth, that Propter Carnales in Eccleſia,
               
                  Iſidor. Eccle. off. lib. 1. cap. 5.
                
               non propter ſpirituales, conſuetudo eſt inſtituta canendi, vt qui a verbis non compunguntur, ſuauitate modulaminis moueantur. The cuſtome of ſinging in the church, was inſtituted for the carnall, not for the ſpirituall, that they whome the wordes doe not pierce might bee moued with the ſweetneſſe of the note. S. Auguſtine
                alſo is of opinion,
                  Confeſ. lib. 10. cap. 33.
                that Muſicke is neceſſary in the church of god, vt per oblectamē
                  ta aurium, infirmior animus in affectum pietatis ſurgat: that by the delight of the eares,

the weake ſoule may bee ſtirred vp into a feeling of godlineſſe:
                and his reaſon is: Omnes affectus ſpiritus noſtri pro ſuaui diuerſitate ſentio habere proprios modos in voce atque cantu, quorum neſcio qua occulta familiaritate excitentur. I perceiue, that all the affections of our ſpirites, haue certaine proper motions in the voice and ſong, according to the ſweete diuerſitie thereof, which (with I know not what hidden familiarity) are excited and ſtirred vp.
               
               
                  Ariſt. Polit. 8. cap. 5.
                In a word Ariſtotles reſolution touching the ciuil neceſſity is, that muſick hath relation to theſe three things, to delectatiō, to diſcipline, and to an happy life. To delectation, becauſe Muſicke with the ſweetneſſe thereof, doeth refreſh the minde and make it better able to greater labours. To diſcipline, becauſe it is a cauſe of breeding in vs chaſtitie, temperance, and other morall vertues. To an happy life, becauſe that cannot conſiſt without iudgement and liberall delectations, whereof Muſicke is the chiefeſt.
         
         
            
            THE VSE OF MVSICK GENERALLIE IN THE courſe of our life. CHAP. VI.
            
               PHiloſophy & experiēce haue taught vs that omne bonum quo communius eo melius, the goodnes of euery good thing ſtāds chiefly vpō the vſe. If the myſteries & ſecretes of nature touching plantes, ſpringes, metals, ſtones, & the like had laine alwaies ſmothered & ſuppreſt within her boſom, doubtleſſe we had wanted much of her bleſſings, & ſhe aſmuch of our cōmendation.
                  Plutarch.
                Howe vile a thing were golde amongſt vs, if for lacke of better vſe we vſed it as we read of the Scythians to manacle & ſhackle our priſoners? ſkarlet is no color to him that ſees it not, an Emeraul not precious to him that knowes it not. But Muſicke God bee thanked is no nightbird, ſhe hath flown through the whole world in the opē face & ſight of al mē. And ye ſun hath not had a larger theater wherin to diſplay his beams thē muſick to lay opē her ſweetnes. Look into al ages, ſhe hath grown

vp with thē. Look into al places, ſhe hath infranchiced her ſelf within them: look into al eſtates, ſhee hath no ſooner come, but welcome vnto them. Antiquitie which nowe adayes euerie greene head will needes ſet to ſchoole, and make ſubiect to the ouerlaſhing pregnancy of his yong wit, deriues her euen from Saturnes time, when the worlde was ſkant ſheld:

                  
                     
                        Iuuenal.
                     Tum cum virguncula Iuno
                  Et priuat us adhuc Idaeis Iupiter antris.
               
               
                  When Iuno was a girle as yet,
                  And Iupiter not weand from teat.
               
Then did the prieſts of Cybele ſing an happy lullabie for him,
                  Pol. Virgil.
                whoſe crying if they had not drowned of purpoſe with their ſinging and tabering, his mercileſſe father Saturne had deuoured him. But what neede theſe broken ſtaues? Nature which in deede was when nothing elſe was can beare the beſt record in theſe caſes: and what euidēce giues ſhe? When I made the firmament I eſtabliſhed it by concent. When I made the elements I qualified them with proportions. When I made man I gaue him a ſoule either harmony it ſelfe, or at leaſt harmonicall. Nay beſides this, Non eſt

harmonicè compoſitus qui Muſica non delectatur. If I made any one which cannot brook or fancy Muſicke, ſurely I erred and made a monſter. For how is it credible, if beaſts haue bin ſnared, birdes allured, fiſhes baited, ſerpentes charmed, yea and rent in ſunder with Muſicke, that her ſtrength ſhould become weakeneſſe in the wiſeſt and moſt reaſonable creature, without an infallible preiudice of a moſt vntoward nature? If there be any ſuch flintlike and ſenſeleſſe mā, let vs leaue him as a deſperate patient vnrecouerable, to the courſe of his owne hatefull conſtellation: which if it had not vowed to trie an experiment, and make one in all degrees worſe than Timon of Athens, a mā euen wholy reſolued and done into ſpitefulneſſe, how could it poſſibly haue harbored within his breſt ſuch an vnnatural loathing towards ſo excellent a ſcience? I ſpeak this but in iealouſie: for I neuer hearde of any though ſeated & planted in the verie hart of Barbarie, which euer did abhorre it, or was not ſometimes greedy to imbrace it.
                  Muſicke a Delphian ſword.
                The rather becauſe it is gladius Delphicus, hauing an edge on all ſides, for it is made meate and drinke to melancholy, a great

horſe to choler, a full tide to greife, a fire to pleaſure, a right hand to prodigality, a main ſea to drunkennes, and finally a forſt friend to all maner of affections and vices. So then if good diſpoſitions loue hir for hir own ſake, the bad for their paſſions ſake, as whereby they back and ſtrengthen themſelues in their vngratiouſnes, I hope I may ſafely conclude an vniuerſality touching hir vſe and ſeruice. In this diſcourſe plentie would haue ouerwhelmed me, had not a former tract of her ſuauitie and effectes forſtalled this place. For to omit the court with her conſortes, corporations with their waites, and other places both of greater countenance and frequency, wherin Muſick may ſeeme by more authoritie to claime acquaintance, & to looke but with halfe an eie into the country, wherein toiling & as they call it good huſbandrie ſhould exclude all pleaſurable recreation, howe hartily doth the pooreſt ſwaine both pleaſe himſelf, and flatter his beaſt with whiſtling & ſingings? Alas what pleaſure could they take at the whippe and ploughtaile in ſo often and vnceſſāt labours, ſuch bitter weather beatings ſomtimes benūmed with cold, otherwhiles

melted with heat, euermore pāting & ſcarcely drawing breath vnder their burthenous trauels, vnleſſe they quieted & euē brought a ſleep their painfulnes, with this their homely, yet comfortable & ſelfe pleaſing exerciſe? That as the woman in Plutarch ſang, Mole piſtrinum, mole, nam & Pittachus molit Rex magnae Mytilenae: grinde mil, grinde: for euē Pittachus grindes the great king of Mytilen
                (otherwiſe were it not for his grinders his belly would take but poore tole) ſo thoſe with a light hart make their plough go lighter, & while they vſe the ſolace of their natural inſtruments both quicken themſelues and incourage forward their ouerlaboured horſes. What ſhall I ſpeake of that petie & coūterfait Muſick which cartars make wt their whips, hempknockers wt their beetels, ſpinners wt their wheels, barbers with their ſizzers, ſmithes with their hāmers? where me thinkes the maſterſmith with his treble hāmer ſings deſkāt whileſt the greater buz vpō the plainſong: who doth not ſtraitwaies imagin vpō muſick whē he hears his maids either at ye woolhurdle, or the milking pail? good God what diſtinct intētiō & remiſſiō is there of their ſtrokes? what orderly diuiding

of their ſtraines? what artificial pitching of their ſtops? If thē the bare imitatiō of Muſick in cōpariſon of the other being dombe & liueleſſe, hee notwithſtanding ſo auaileable as to cheriſh ouerdulled ſpirites, and euen by ſtelth to carrie awaie the labourſomeſt drudgeries, what malicious and ſworne frowardneſſe is it againſt nature, ſenſe, and reaſon by a commiſſion onely of Sic volumus, Sic iubemus, to diſcommon that which is the principall, and by all reaſon of the greater force? Where-in becauſe experience doth preuent examples (for what neede I alleadge Parrhaſius and Nicias two notable painters by their owne confeſſion ſtrengthened hereby and euen ſteeled in their infinite labours?) I will reduce all to one monument of antiquitie, not priuate to any one either perſon, houſehold, colonie, or towne, but generally put in vre by a whole nation. The auncientes of Creete (a realme renowmed ſometimes for no fewer than an hundred beautifull cities) as they were religious in their lawes,
                  AElianus.
                being the very ſinewes and ioyntes of euery wel-gouerned commonwealth, ſo they were as carefull to plant them in their childrens

heades. But theſe lawes being matters of ſtate and gouernment, and therefore too hard meate for ſuch yong ſtomackes to digeſt, and deeper leſſons than to match their ſhalow capacities, they vſed Muſicke therin as a Schoolemaiſter, by faire meanes and gentle allurements to mitigate the difficultie of their taſkes. Which if it bee ſo vnprofitable as it is made now adayes, why was it accepted in ſo famous and populous a countrie? why borne out and maintained by ſo graue authority? why admitted to thinges of ſo great importance? wherein ſtandeth the life and ſoule of all Kingdoms? why inſtilled to youth for pliableneſſe of nature eaſily corrupted, and for their hope the beſt ſeede of the next harueſt? But henceforward becauſe theſe ſullein ſtoickes do meaſure not their good liking of good Artes by ſuch hard and niggardly ſkantlings I will learne to bee more liberall to my ſelfe, and preſume vpon that foregranted, which as I know not ſo I care not whether euer they will graunt or no. Muſicke is not at their ſtinting: her charter (how large let al the world iudge) was graunted by nature, confirmed by preſcription of time out of mind,

and eſtabliſhed by the vſe of all places, perſons and conditions. For better aſſurance whereof I wil deſcende more particularly to her vſe, and ſpeake of it partly as it is ciuill in time of peace and quietneſſe, partly as warlike in times of commotion.
         
         
            THE PARTICVLER VSE OF MVSICKE IN CIuill matters, eſpecially in ſacrifices, feaſts, mariages and Burials. CHAP. VII.
            
               NOw the ciuil vſe, to let paſſe all generalities which I touched before with a wet finger, may beſt be collected out of theſe ſolemn either actions or aſſemblies, which are frequented in al politique ſtates, & may be liſted for breuities ſake within the compaſſe of theſe foure things, to wit, ſacrifices, feaſts, mariages and burials. For I dare not ſpeake of dauncing or theatrall ſpectacles, leaſt I pull whole ſwarmes of enimies vpon me. Albeit Lesbonax of Mytilen, honeſtus plane vir & bonus,
               
                  Cael. Rhod.
                a man I

am ſure, aſwell titled, as the curiouſly minded called dauncers 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , men teaching wiſdome euen with their hands, & oftē went to theaters, giuing this teſtimony of them, that he euer returnd home the better by thē. I confeſſe I am acceſſory to their iniurie againſt Muſick in bereauing it of theſe two ſo ample & notable prouinces, bicauſe I doe not by open reſiſtance hinder their riot. For howſoeuer obcenity may bring the ſtage in ſuſpicion of vnchaſtnes and incontinency, make dauncing diſfauorable & odious, I am ſure that neither of them keeping them ſelues vnder ſaile, that is not ouerreaching their honeſt and lawfull circumſtances, can want either good groundes to authorize them,
                  1 In ſacrifices.
                or ſufficient patronage to maintaine thē. As for theſe ſacred or rather prophane churchrites vſed amōgſt the heathē & pagās in reuerence of their ſuppoſed gods, let that ſorting of Muſicke into Sophroniſticè applied to Sobriety and Temperance,
                  Cael. Rhod.
                
               Encomiaſticè to praiſes, Orchematicè to dancings, Threneticè to calamities, & Paeanicè to ſacrifices be ſufficient to diſcharge me of farther paines.
                  Ibidem.
                Notwithſtanding becauſe exāples ſtick deeper than precepts, & both theſe will

ſkāt ſerue to win ſome mēs credence, let thē call to minde what the prieſtes of Rhea in Creete called Curetes or theſe Corybantes in Phrygia did. What kinde of ſeruice Apollo founde in Delos, or the Sunne amongſt the Indians, in what manner thoſe gadding huſwiues of Thrace worſhipped Bacchus. And if one Proctor Antoninus the Emperour may not ſerue to anſwere throughly enough in behalfe of Rome, who in ſacrificing to Heliogabalus appointed Carthaginian Dames to daunce, and make melodie about the altars, let the whole clergie of Mars called Salij (perhaps as ſome haue geſſed of dancing and leaping) inſtruct them what the vſage, and faſhion was amongeſt the Romanes.
            Touching banquets,
                  2 In banquets.
                let no man I would aduiſe him exclude pleaſure and recreation from thence, vnleſſe he haue a forehead to ſet againſt the whole world, and a face to be at defiance with all countries. For otherwiſe why haue the feaſtmakers prouided meates for the mouth, ſightes for the eye; perfumes for the noſe, yea why haue they ſtrowed Violets and Roſes for the feete to walke vpon, but to allure and detaine their

gueſtes with all maner of delectation? And muſt the eare ſleepe al this while? No, there are queſtions of nature, of policy, or maners to be diſputed on as amongſt the Perſians. There are riddles and myſtical ſpeeches to be explicated (for examples ſake, A man and yet no man of an Eunuch, a ſtone and yet no ſtone of a pumeiſe, a birde and yet no bird of a reremouſe) as amongſt the Grecians. You may eate bookes in time of meals as did Alexander Seuerus: you may giue eare to tragical & comical Poets as did Hadrianus. Or if ſuch table talke be too graue for your light humour, bring in young children to find you occupied with their apiſh pratling as amongſt the Abydens. Bring in fooles and ieſters (the very ſkornes and reproches of nature) to delite you with their toies as amongſt the Romans. And I praie why not Muſicke as wel as al theſe? ſure if I were priuy to any reaſons of yours, which either are few & wil ſhrink in the nūbering, or light & wil vaniſh in ye weighing, I wold neuer ſuffer my pen to belie my hart: either I would bend al my force to conuince them, or if I could not, vtterly forſake the defence of Muſick. In the meantime if I erre I am

glad that my error is not yong or ſelfwilled but ſprong euē frō the moſt anciēt & beſt approued maners of many countries. The Arcadians (what ſpeake I of the Arcadians?) veteres: The anciēts (for ſo in Athenaeus the patents are general, and concerne other places) were enioined by vertue of their lawes and ſtatutes in time of feaſting to ſing forth praiſes vnto their gods. Cato his originals for ought I knowe are not extant amongſt vs. Howbeit if wee will be tried by one of Cato his peeres,
                  Tull. in Brut.
                
               Tullie can tell vs that euery gueſt was bound in muſicall ſort to expreſſe the feates of armes and chiualrie attempted and performed by thier noble captaines. I am bolde to ſay they were bound,
                  Stuckius.
                for their Feaſtes in thoſe dayes repreſented euen the whole body of a Common-wealth. They had Regem & Legem, their King and their lawes, & euery inferiour vpon paine of ſome mulct or other ſworne to alleagiance. Now amōgſt theſe decrees one was that a Lawrel or mirtle bough ſhold paſſe through out the table from hand to hande as an enſigne or ſtandard for each man in his time & courſe to ſing vnder. Afterward they were put to the harp, & he that refuſed it ſped no

better than we read Themiſtocles did. For Habilis eſt indoctior.
               
                  Tuſcul.
                Hee was condemned of ignorance and vnkilfulneſſe. What neede I ſpecifie Lacedaemō
                or Athens? we neede not trauell farre to bee ſeene in their antiquities. Euerie Hiſtoriographer eſpecially in this argument, hath matter enough to cloy and ouercharge the hungrieſt mind. And that one ſong in commēdation of Harmodius and Ariſtogiton for rooting out the tyranny and memory of Piſiſtratus 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               :
                  Cael. Rhod.
                
               Thou art not yet dead ſweete Harmodius (for his name was reuiued in euerie banquet) makes it a cleare caſe touching the Athenians. The Sibarits beſides all variety of minſtrelſie brought in horſes at their times of feaſting, to tread the meaſures. But to ſet the Sunne againſt the leſſer ſtarres, I meane the ſonne of Sirach againſt all prophane authors (for how can I but confound my ſelf and the readers in ſo ample a maze of authorityes?) he compares Muſicke in a feaſt to an emerauld or carbuncle ſet in gold: if it be perillous why doth the wiſeman commend it to vs in his writings? if vile why doth he match it with two ſo excellent & precious ſtones? But his

bare word is to me a better warrant for the ratifieng of it than al their peeuiſhe & ſcarce colorable wrāgling to reproue it. I come to mariages,
                  3 In mariages.
                wherin as our anceſtors (I do willingly harp vpon this ſtring that our yonger wits may know they ſtand vnder correctiō of elder iudgemēts) did fondly,
                  Plutarch.
                & with a kind of doting maintaine many rites & ceremonies, ſome whereof were either ſhadowes or abodements of a pleaſant life to come, as the eating of a quince peare, to be a preparatiue of ſweete & delightfull dayes betweene the maried perſons, the ioyning of Mercury and Venus togither, as a token that loue muſt bee preſerued & foſtered by curteous ſpeeches, with other not vnlike: ſo in the time of ſolemniſing the ſame they had choiſe & ſet ſongs appointed for the purpoſe.
                  In auibus.
                The Grecians generally by report of Ariſtophanes one of their Poets ſang Hymen, O Hymaenaee, O Hymen. Calling vpon the name of him whom they made their chiefe ſuperintendent ouer ſuch matters. And Plato in his booke intitled Gorgias makes mention of this dittie as peculiarly belonging to thoſe feſtiual times. Formoſum eſſe, & diuitē, & bene valere, ſummū exiſtimatur bonū.
               
                  
                  Wilt thou be bleſſed and happie indeede?
                  Be faire, rich and healthy, if thou wilt ſpeede.
               
The Atheniās one of ye beſt flours in greece ſang incōditū carmen, perhaps ſome blacke ſaunt wtout order or diſtinction, & it is reported to be this: Bonos ama, timidos repelle, ſcimus enim timidorū paruā eſſe vbi
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   gratiā.
            
            
                
                  Embrace & loue the good, the carpet knights repel,
               
               
                  How litle fauor they haue foūd elſwhere who knowes not  wel? 
               
            
            
               
                  4 In funerals.
               I wil end wt death the end of al mortality, which though it be the diſſolutiō of nature, & parting of the ſoul frō the body, terrible in it ſelf to fleſh & blood, & amplified wt a nūber of diſpleaſant, & vncōfortable accidents, as the ſhauing of the head, howling, mourning apparel, funeral boughes of yeu, box, cipreſſe, & the like, yet we ſhal find by reſorting to antiquities, that muſick hath had a ſhare amōgſt them, as being vnſeaſonable at no time. I let paſſe the Thraciās with their triūphes & iubilies for the happy eſtate of their deceaſed friēds & kinſfolk.
                  Theat.
                The Lybiās moſt honorable mētion of thoſe principally which were ſlain either by elephāts or other wild beaſts or ſpēt their blood & liuelihood in ye field for maintenāce of their coūtry, I cānot omit wt
               out iniury to their thākfulnes & mine owne cauſe. The rather ſith ye cauſe which moued thē to theſe exigēts cānot be vngrateful to any

loial & wel diſpoſed eares. Autumn winds are not ſo cōmon as authorities if I would vſe thē. Euery grāmer ſcholer that openeth but an orator, poet, or hiſtoriographer ſhal ſee trumpets, pſhalms, & ſingings attributed to funerals. And to reduce al vains to the hart, & al autorities to one head, if there were no ſuch remēbring of the dead, why haue they deified a goddes of theſe ſongs,
                  Varro Terentius.
                that as Ianꝰ amōgeſt them was the firſt god to open the dore & entrāce of their liues, ſo Maenia ſhold be the laſt to do them any ſeruice, by quickning them after their deathes, and raiſing vp a ſecond life, by a wailful and yet muſical commemoration of their laudable deſerts.
         
         
            THE PARTICVLER VSE of muſicke in warlike matters. CHAP. VIII.
            NOw becauſe muſick is reported to be, belli & pacis alūna vel comes,
               
                  Stuckius.
                either the daughter or cōpaniō both of war & peace, I wil ſet the palm & oliue togither: & as I haue bin ſhort in declaring her peaceable vſe, ſo I will take the neereſt courſe that may bee in this warlik treatiſe. Though painters & Poets are commonly allowed to ly,
                  Pliny.
                yet I am ſure Theon expreſſed no more colours than is true in life when he drewe an armed

man in compleat harneſſe ready to make excurſion vppon his enimies, and to all mens thinking animated and incouraged therunto by the clamorous ſoundes of a Muſitian. I appeale not now to mens integritie, and vprightneſſe of iudgementes. I make prouocation to them as they are men. Let them ſpeake if the drum, fife, & trumpet do not excite their ſpirits, & make their hearts euen to ſwel to the ouerthrow of their enimies.
                  Alexan. ab Alexandr.
                The kings of Perſia firſt ſang a ſong to Caſter & Pollux, & then made incounter with their aduerſaries. The Lacedaemonians vſed Pſhalms: whoſe captain Ageſilaus being demanded of one not ſo wiſe as curious (I will not ſay hee was a ringleader to our froward queſtioniſts now adayes to what end & purpoſe be did it) made anſwere that hereby he was aſſured of euery mans minde & courage. For if his paſes were conſonant and according to meaſures, then it argued he was not appalled. If diſagreeing, it argued that he was faint harted. Now if it be expedient for a captaine to knowe whether his ſouldiers be harts or Lions, whoſe good & cheerful harts are the firſt ſtep to the winning of the field, then it is conſequent, that

Muſicke ſhould be a Lydius lapis, the right touchſtone to try their minds.
            Nowe beſides the aduertiſement giuen hereby to the captaine,
                  Muſicke encourageth our own parts and terrifieth the aduerſe. Alex. ab Alex. & Clemens Alexand.
                our own ſide is incited, the aduerſe parts amaſed & aſtoniſhed. For which cauſes all nations ciuil & barbarous though in diuerſe ſorts, yet vpon one & the ſelfe ſame ground haue made euen the earth ſhake, & the heauens ring either with outcries, braying, howling, ſinging, & clattering of their armour as the old Germanes and frenchmen, or with tabering vpon their wagon pelts, as the Cimbrians, or with drums, & great iron hāmers, as the Parthians, or with a gentler and remiſſer kind of Muſicke, with their harping, or piping, or winding the cornets, or ſounding trumpets, or tinkling their cimbals, as the Lydians, Hetrurians, Arcadians, Cicilians, Corinthians, Syrians, Troians, Aegyptians, Arabians, and to ſpeake in one word, no one word ſo true, al countries. Amongſt which Athens the mother & nurſe of the beſt literature was accuſtomed to ſing hymns to Apollo and Iupiter, for the better ſpeeding of their doubtful voiages. And Rome the lady & Queene of al other cities (if they may be

credited in their own cauſe, vſed firſt an oxe horne til Tyrrhenus had deuiſed the braſen trūpet, prouided notwithſtanding that in any expeditiō of ſilēce, they gaue but a watch word only without any ſoūd of inſtrumēts.
         
         
            THE LAVVFVL VSE OF MVSICKE IN THE CHVRCH confirmed by the practiſe of the church. CHAP. IX.
            
               NOw although there be none but few men ſo ſenſeleſſe & blockiſh by nature, or of diſpoſitiō ſo peuiſh, & waiward, that taking no delight in Muſick thēſelues, & meaſuring ye worth & price therof, by their own affectiōs, do accoūt of it as a thing either vain & vnlawful, or idle & vnprofitable, yet there be many, who albeit they allow a moderate, & ſober vſe of it, in ciuil matters: do notwithſtanding caſt it out of the church, as an vncleane thing, & will vouchſafe it no place in the ſeruice of God. But if the vſe thereof be proued to be not lawfull only in the church, but profitable alſo and decent, by the practiſe of the church at all times, the opinion of

the beſt learned in all ages, and the authority of the Scriptures themſelues in many places: I truſt that theſe men will reforme their opinions from thinking ſo baſely of it, or refraine their tounges from inueighing ſo bitterly againſt it.
            And firſt as touching the practiſe of the church, they are not ignorant, that the moſt anciēt church of the Iewes (which receiued the doctrine of truth, which it beleeued, the precepts of life, which it obſerued, the order of diſcipline, which it practiſed from God himſelf) vſed no one ſpirituall exerciſe more than ſinging vnto the Lord. When the Ark (which was vnto them a viſible ſigne of Gods preſence amōg them, and vnto which they reſorted to aſke counſell of the Lord, & to poure out their praiers, as wee do vnto the church) was brought into the citie of Dauid,
               
                  1. Chron. 23.5. 2. Sam. 6.4.
                not only the foure thouſand Leuits whom Dauid had aſſigned this office to praiſe the Lord with inſtruments which he had made, ſong & made melody, but Dauid himſelf alſo ſang, reioiced, & daunced before it. Afterward when the Temple was buylded by Solomon, and the Arke, with other thinges dedicated thereunto by

               Dauid, were brought into the tēple, the Leuits according vnto their office, ſang vnto the lord, ſongs of praiſe and thankesgiuing, lifting vp their voices with trumpets and Cimbals, & wt inſtrumēts of Muſick: which ſeruice the Lorde did ſo gratefully accept, that hee vouchſaued his viſible preſence,
                  2. Chron. 29.25.26.
                and filled the temple with his glory. And whē as Ezechias opened the temple which had been ſhut, & reeſtabliſhed the ſeruice of the lord, which had beene intermitted by the wickednes of Ahas among other thinges, there is eſpeciall mention, that he reſtored this exerciſe: for he appointed the Leuits in the houſe of the Lord, with cimbals and vials, and with harpes, according to the commaundement of Dauid, and Gad the kings ſeer,
                  Iſid. de offic. Eccle. lib. 2. cap. 13.
                and Nathan the prophet: for the commaundement was by the hand of the lord, & by the handes of his prophets. And his holy ordinance, which the lord himſelfe had ſanctified, cōtinued in that church as other parts of his ſeruice did, though corrupted, euen vnto the comming of Chriſt in the fleſh. Neither was it then, as a bodily and vnprofitable exerciſe, aboliſhed, but retained as a ſpirituall ſeruice vnto the Lord, albeit not

in that order and forme as before. And Iſidor teſtifieth that Ad antiquum morem Pſalmiſtarum in veteri eccleſia Iudaeorum, &c. of the auncient cuſtome of ſingers in the old church of the Iewes, the primitiue church tooke example, to nooriſh ſingers, by whoſe ſongs the minds of ye hearers, might be ſtirred vp to god. And ye pſalmiſtor ſinger ought to be moſt excelēt both in voice & art, that he may the better delight the hearers with the ſweetneſſe of his Muſicke, yea euen our ſauiour Chriſt vſed this diuine exerciſe, for when he had eaten the paſſouer with his diſciples, S. Mathew addeth,
                  Math. 29 30.
                & when he had ſong a pſalme they went out into the mount of Oliues. As for the times wherin the apoſtles themſelues liued, it cannot bee denied, but that this exerciſe was vſed in the churches which they planted: for many exhortations are by them made in their epiſtles, as it ſhall after appeare, vnto their churches that then flouriſhed, cōcerning this matter, and I truſt their practiſe then was agreeable to their exhortatiōs.
                  Plin. in epiſt. ad Tra. epiſt. li. 10. & Euſeb. lib. 3. eccl. hiſt. cap. 30.
                
               Plinie in an epiſtle he writeth to Troian the Emperor (whiles yet S. Iohn was liuing) teſtifieth that it was the cuſtome of the Chriſtians to ſing

himnes vnto their Chriſt in their aſſembles before day: for they could not freely come togither by day, for the perſecutions that thē raged againſt them. Afterwarde when the church of Chriſt had a breathing time, and might freely ſerue their God, they did that openly in their churches, which before they vſed ſecretly in their aſſemblies. Look vpon the Eaſt & the Weſt, the Greeke & Latine Churches, & you ſhall finde this to be true. It had his beginning in the Eaſt Church, and from thence being deriued vnto the Weſt, ſpredde it ſelfe vnto all Churches, as Sainct Auguſtine reporteth in his confeſſions.
                  Lib. 3. cap. 7.
               
            
            It were too long to runne ouer all the particular Churches, which frequented this exerciſe,
                  Lib. 2. cap. 24.
                it ſhall bee ſufficient to take a view of the patriarchall ſeates, by whome the others were to bee directed in matters of doctrine and diſcipline.
                  1 Antioch in Syria vnder Flauian and Ignatius.
                
               Theodoret reporteth that Flauianus and Diodorus ordayned in the Church of Antioch that the Pſalmes of Dauid ſhoulde bee ſong interchangeably by a quire of ſinging men, diuided into partes, firſt at the monumentes of Martyrs, and afterwardes in

the Church, & hortabantur, ſayeth hee, ſocios ſui miniſterij vt in Eccleſia ſanctiſſimum Dominum noſtrum hymnis celebrarent, And they exhorted their fellowe Miniſters, to prayſe their holie Lorde Chriſt, with hymnes and ſonges.
               
               
                  Ibidem.
                The which order once begunne at Antioche was deryued farther and farther euen vnto the vtmoſt partes of the worlde. In Zozomenus likewiſe it is recorded,
                  Zozom. lib. 7. cap. 23. & Niceph. lib. 12. cap. 43.
                that when the people of Antioch had intelligence, that the Emperour Theodoſius was incenſed againſt them for a ſedition rayſed in their Citie, they made their prayers vnto GOD, to allay and mitigate his rage, vſing thereunto mournfull ſonges and melodie. The which when Flauianus the Biſhoppe had cauſed to bee ſong before the Emperour, as hee ſatte at meate, the ſtorie ſayeth, that Theodoſius was thereat not onely mooued to pytty, but forgaue the offence alſo, and himſelfe with teares encreaſed their lamentations.
                  Zozom. lib. 3. cap. 29.
                And in another place he ſayth, that the Cleargy & people of Antioch diuiding themſelues into two parts, did according to their accuſtomed maner,

praiſe God with himnes and ſonges. To theſe former autorities accordeth Socrates, who although he attribute not the originall of this ſinging of Antiphones and pſalmes in the church of Antioche, to Flauianus and Diodorus as Theodoret both, but vnto Ignatius one auncienter than they (for he was the third biſhope of that place after Peter, and was very conuerſant with the Apoſtles themſelues) yet he agreeth with him in the veritie of the matter wherof I ſpeake, affirming that Ignatius,
               
                  Socrat. lib. 9. cap. 8.
                hauing ſeene a viſion of Angels lauding the holy Trinitie with himnes interchangeably ſung, conſtituted in the church of Antioche that forme and maner of ſinging, which had beene manifeſted vnto him in that viſion. And albeit this may ſeeme ſome what fabulous (as perhaps it is,
                  Cent. 2. cap. 6. de pub. congreſ.
                and as the Magdeburgenſes are of opiniō, ſaying that this is not a matter of ſo great moment, that therefore Angels ſhould come downe from heauen & appeare ſinging:) yet this clauſe which they ad, eſpecially becauſe the church in thoſe daies wanted neither pſalmes nor himnes, is a ſufficient proofe of mine aſſertion.
            Now concerning the church of Alexādria
               
as I doe confeſſe,
                  2 Alexandria in Africa vnder Athanaſius. Tripart. hiſt. lib. 4. cap. 11. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 4.
                this exerciſe was not ſo much vſed there as in Antioch: ſo muſt I needes ſay that ſometimes it was there alſo frequented: for proofe whereof I referre the reader to Socrates and the tripartite hiſtorie, where they declare how Athanaſius the Biſhop of Alexandria being by the Arrians depriued of his Biſhoprick, eſcaped out of the hands of Sirianus, the Captaine of that armie, who came with a band of 3000. ſouldiers, beſide the ayd of the Arrians which were in the citie, as well to place Gregorius in that ſea as to apprehend Athanaſius. For the hiſtorie ſaith thus: The euening grewe on, and the people watched all night, becauſe they looked for a communion. The Captaine placed his ſouldiers round about the Church: the which when Athanaſius perceiued, all his care was, that for his ſake the people might receiue no harme. Wherefore he willed the Deacon to end his praiers, & commanded they ſhould ſing a Pſalm. Now while the Pſalm was ſinging, with ſweet and pleaſant concent, the whole congregation went out at one dore: all this while, the ſouldiers were ſilent, and made no vprore: but Athanaſius
               
in the midſt of the throng ſcaped the rage of his enemies without harm. Whereof I gather that as in other churches, ſo alſo in this of Alexādria they vſed this diuine exerciſe: which alſo S.
                  Confeſ. lib. 10 p. 33.
                
               Auguſtine teſtifieth, though not in ſo ful manner, when he wiſheth, that ye order of ſinging were vſed in the Church where he was, which Athanaſiꝰ obſerued in the Church of Alexandria who cōmanded him that read the ſcriptures, that hee ſhould ſo tēperate & moderate his voice, yt he might rather ſeem to ſpeake treatably than to ſing, to the end he might be the better vnderſtood of the people. And yet neuertheles S. Auſtē
                calling to mind, how wonderfully himſelfe had been moued wt the ſinging of the church at his conuerſion to the faith, & what operation it worketh in the hearers, although doubting, confeſſeth in the ſame place, that he doth allow ſinging in the church, that by the delight thereof the weake minde might be brought into a feeling of Religion.
            
            As for the Church of Ieruſalem, I think it a matter needleſſe to ſtand long in proofe of that,
                  3 Ieruſalem in Paleſtina.
                which no man can deny, eſpecially ſeeing this exerciſe was in vſe among the Apoſtles themſelues (as may appeare by that

of Paul, I wil ſing with the ſpirit,
               
                  1. Cor. 14.15.
                
               but I wil ſing with the vnderſtanding alſo) and none were biſhops of that ſea, but ſuch as were either Apoſtles themſelues, or ſcholers of the Apoſtles. Yet leaſt I ſhould ſeeme to ſay nothing in ſo large a matter,
                  Niceph. lib. 3. ca. 25.
                I wil alleage only one teſtimonie for confirmation hereof. There is extant among the epiſtles of S. Hierom, one of S. Hieroms own making:
                  Hieron. in epiſt. Paulae & Euſtochij ad Marcel. tom. 1.
                but vnder the name of Paula & Euſtochius written to Marcella, the argument whereof is to intreate Marcella which was then at Rome, to come vnto Ieruſalem where Paula & Euſtochius remayned. Among many cōmendations of the place, & diuers reaſons to perſwade her, this is one, Hic vox quidem diſſona, ſed vna religio, tot Pſallentium chori, quot gentiū diuerſitates: Here, ſay they, are diuers lāguages, but one religiō, & ſo many quiers of ſingers, as there is diuerſities of nations.
                And in the ſame epiſtle they ad, In chriſti villula, Here in chriſt his village, is no pride but al plainnes, and beſides the ſinging of Pſalms, nothing but ſilēce. The husbandman holding the plough ſingeth Alleluia, the harueſt man ſweating at his labour doth ſolace himſelfe with Pſalms▪
                     
and hee which cutteth the vines ſingeth ſome Pſalme of Dauid. Theſe are our verſes in this countrie, theſe are our amarous ſongs. Theſe be the tunes of our ſhepheards, & theſe be the inſtruments of our husbandrie,
               
               
                  4. Conſtant. in Thracia vnder Chryſoſtome. Socrat. li. 6. cap. 8.
                
               &c. The fourth patriarchal ſeate was Conſtantinople, wherein as in a place conſecrated to the ſeruice of god, was to be heard the moſt ſweet & pleaſant voice of the Church, ſinging Pſalmes & Hymnes vnto the Lorde. For Socrates reporteth that Chryſoſtome ordayned in the Church of Conſtantinople, the manner of ſinging by courſe, that is, quiers interchangeably ſinging, which hee did by emulation of the Arrians,
               
                  Zozome. lib. 8. cap. 8.
                which in their meetings and aſſemblies without the Cittie, vſed this kinde of ſinging with a great ſhew of holines and deuotion. The which order once begun vpon this occaſion, continued, as Zozomenus noteth, a perpetuall cuſtome in that Church.
                  Hilar. in Pſal. 64.
                Inſomuch, that S. Hilarie in his Cōmentaries vpon the Pſalmes giueth this teſtimony to the Church of Conſtantinople. They beganne (ſaith he) the day in praiers vnto God, they ended the day with Hymnes to him in the Church: and

againe:
                  In Pſal. 65.
                
               Let him which is with-out the Church heare the voice of the people making their praiers, let him conſider the excellent ſound of their Hymnes.
               
                  Niceph. lib. 17 cap. 27. & 28.
                We read alſo that Iuſtinian the Emperour, in the 8. yeare of his raigne after the fifth generall Councel at Conſtantinople, wherein were 165. Fathers aſſembled, to condemne the errours of the Origeniſts, made a ſong, the beginning whereof was, The only begotten ſonne, and word of God, and gaue it to the church of Conſtantinople to be ſong. They were alſo woont to ſing the Pſalmes of Dauid, and certaine Letames, which they did at the commandement of Anaſtaſius the gouernour of the Citie, to the end they might take heed of ſedition, wherewith the Citie was often times moleſted. Many mo teſtimonies might be alleaged to proue the frequentation of this exerciſe in their patriarchal ſeats, but that I iudge theſe are ſufficient, & my purpoſe is to ſhew, that as this cuſtome begun in theſe chiefe & mother Churches of the Eaſt: ſo it flowed from them as from fountaines, not only into all other inferiour Churches of the Eaſt, but as if it had taken force in the courſe thereof, deriued

it ſelf vnto their ſiſter church of Rome & al other chriſtiā cōgregations in the weſt.
            And firſt concerning the other eaſt churches:
                  Edeſſa in Syria vnder Ephraim.
                we read of the church of Edeſſa, where Ephraim a Syrian (a man commended and had in admiration of S. Baſil for his excellent knowlege and learning) was Deacon: that there in his time this diuine exerciſe was imbraced. For when Harmonius an heretike,
                  Theod. li. 4. cap. 27. & Zozome. lib. 3. ca. 15. & Niceph. lib. 9. cap. 18.
                had ſet wicked & impious ſongs to moſt pleaſant & delectable tunes, & thereby had allured the minds of many: this Ephraim is ſaid to haue made holy & godly ditties, & to haue applied them to the ſweet notes & tunes of Harmoniꝰ: wherby it came to paſſe that afterwards the Syrians his countrimē ſang in their aſſēblies the ſongs of Ephraim, obſeruing therwt the muſical conſēt of Harmoniꝰ, which was to thē not only moſt pleaſant,
                  Neocaeſaria vnder Baſil.
                but wonderful profitable & cōmodious. And this cuſtom preuailed alſo in ye Church of Neocaeſaria. In the time of Baſil, who in an epiſtle he writeth to certaine of the clergie of Neocaeſaria, aunſwereth the reproches of Sabellius & Marcellꝰ, which found fault wt the ſinging vſed in their church, and for that cauſe had ſeparated thēſelues from the congregation, his words be theſe: De nocte

populus conſurgens, &c.
               
                  Baſil in epiſt. ad clericos Neocaeſ. epiſt. 63.
                
               The people riſe before day, and hie them to the houſe of praier, & there after that in mourning & in heauines, & in continuall teares, they haue cōfeſſed themſelues vnto god, ſtanding vp from their praiers they beginne the Pſalmodie, and being diuided into 2.
               
                  Conſuetudo Aſiaticar. & African.
                
               parts, they ſing together the one part anſwering the other: whereby they ſtrengthē thēſelues in the exerciſe & meditatiō of the word of god: & being attētiue with their harts, confirm their minds, reiecting al vain & friuolous cogitations, & ſo with varietie of pſalms, & diuerſitie of praiers, ſometimes ſinging, & ſomtimes praying, they ſpend the night. Aſſoone as the day appeareth, altogether as it were with one mouth, & with one hart, offer a pſalm vnto the lord: if for theſe things ye auoid our cōpanie, ye muſt auoid likewiſe the churches of Aegypt, of Lybia, them of Thebes & alſo of Paleſtina, of Arabia, of Phaenicea, of Syria, & al thoſe that border vpō the riuer Euphrates, where the vſe of ſinging pſalms is frequented. Where I note, that though I ſhould haue held my peace, yet S. Baſil prooueth for mee the generalitie of this practiſe, ſeeing in his laſt wordes

he affirmeth, that this order was agreeable to al the other Churches of God. For the churches in Aegypt, I haue not only S. Baſils bare aſſertion (as in this place appeareth,
                  Aegyptus vnder Nepos. Dionyſ. Alex. li. de promiſ. 2.
                which neuertheleſſe were ſufficient for my purpoſe) but alſo the teſtimonies of ancient writers. Dionyſius Alexandrinus, as Euſebius reporteth, in his 2. booke De promiſſionibus commendeth Nepos a Biſhop of Aegypt, Propter fidem, ſedulitatem & exercitium in ſcripturis, & propter multam ipſius pſalmodiam, qua etiamnum multi ex fratribus delectētur:
               
               
                  Euſeb. eccle. lib. 7. cap. 19. & Niceph. lib. 6. Cap. 21.
                That is, for his faith, for his diligence in preaching, and for his exerciſe in the Scripture, and for his making and ſetting of diuers Pſalmes and Hymnes, wherewith euen til that day, many of the brethren were delighted. The ſame Euſebius citeth out of Philo this teſtimonie, for the vſe of this exerciſe in the churches of Aegypt.
               
                  Euſeb. eccle. lib. ſecundo ca. 16.
                
               Non contemplationi ſe ſolúm, &c. They do not only giue themſelues to cō
                     tēplation
                (for thereof he had ſpoken before) but they make alſo, Songs and Hymnes, with moſt exact qualities and meaſures of verſes, which they ſing in the honor & praiſe of god. Time wil not ſuffer me to

ſpeak of thoſe churches ſeuerally which are mentioned in S. Baſils catalog: wherefore I wil content my ſelfe with his authoritie, thinking his aſſertion as forceable to perſwade the reader, as my proofes and allegations. And to conclude this former part concerning the practiſe of the Eaſt Churches, I verily perſwade my ſelfe, that the churches of Corinth, of Coloſſa,
               
                  Cor. Coloſ. Epheſus.
                of Epheſus and the reſt vſed this exerciſe in their diuine ſeruice. In which opinion, I am the more confirmed, for that ſo often mention,
                  1. Cor. 14.15. Coloſſ. 3.16. Epheſ. 5.18.
                and ſo many exhortations hereof are extant in the epiſtles of the holy Apoſtle to theſe congregations.
            As Italy and the weſterne parts in former times were beholding to Greece for humane learning:
                  The weſt Churches.
                ſo at the firſt propagatiō of the goſpel, they were much more boūd to the greeks and eaſt regions for the knowledge of God, and true religion. The ſubſtance whereof, as they receiued pure and vndefiled at the firſt, and altogither vnſpotted with mens traditions, as a treaſure deliuered vnto them vy the Apoſtles themſelues: ſo withall they receiued alſo the holy ceremonies and cuſtomes of the ſame, ſo

as they & the holy Ghoſt had thought it moſt conuenient. And foraſmuch, as nothing of price is begū & perfected at once, but increaſing by litle and litle afterward groweth to a ful & abſolute perfection: therefore it is recorded that the weſt and latin churches, firſt receiued the ſubſtance of religion, as the fū
               dation, & afterward the rites & ceremonies thereof, as beautiful adiuncts & ornaments of the building. For whereas the doctrine of Chriſt had continued in theſe parts euer ſince the preaching of the Apoſtles, we read that this part of diuine ſeruice was not intertained into the Latine churches before ye time of S.
                  The church of Millen vnder S. Ambroſe.
                
               Ambros biſhop of Millen, which was after Peters death at Rome almoſt 300. years. So that of al the churches in the weſt, the church of Millen was the firſt that vſed this ſolemnitie, & that in the dayes of Ambroſe the holy man of God, by whoſe meanes & aduiſe it was receiued. Whereof we haue the teſtimonies as wel of Sygibertus & Iuo in his chronicle,
                  Magdeb. cent 4. cap. 6.
                which attribute ye firſt inſtitution of ſinging of Anthems and Hymnes in the latine Churches vnto Ambroſe, as the writers of Magdeburge iuſtifie: as of Auſten alſo, who affirmeth that at

what time Iuſtina the mother of Valētinian the emperor,
                  Aug. confeſ. lib. 9. cap. 7.
                fauoring the hereſie of the Arrians, perſecuted the true Church of Chriſt, the maner of ſinging Pſalms, which was vſed in the eaſt churches, begun to be frequē
               ted in the church of Millen by the counſel of Ambroſe, leaſt the people being in cōtinual watchings & labor ſhould faint & pine away for ſorow. The which vſe he ſaith, was not only retayned there, but was alſo receiued & imbraced, of al the churches & cōgregations of chriſt throughout the weſt. To theſe former authorities agreeth Iſidorꝰ, who ſpeaking of Ambroſe recordeth that he not only made Hymnes himſelf which were ſong in the church of Millen,
               
                  Iſidor. de eccl offic. lib. 1. cap. 6. Hymni. Ambr.
                & called Ambroſiani after his name, but alſo was the firſt, that inſtituted the ſinging of Anthems in his church to the example of the greeks, who diuided aquier of ſinging mē into 2. parts, which ſhuld ſing by courſe, like the 2. Seraphins, or the 2. teſtamēts anſwering one another in order, adding alſo, Cuius celebritat is deuotio poſtea per totius occidentis eccleſias obſeruabatur.
               
                  The church of Rome vnder Damaſus.
               
            
            I thinke it a matter of more labour than neceſſitie to goe about to ſhew the frequentation

of this ſolemnitie in the Church of Rome, I meane not that which now is, but that which was in the time of the primatiue Church, eſpecially ſeeing that as that was the place, whither all nations made great recourſe: ſo nothing was there omitted which might in any reſpect make to the ſetting forth of the Goſpell & diuine ſeruice of GOD. Neuertheleſſe leaſt I ſhould ſeeme to ſpeake only by gheſſes and coniectures, I will alleadge antiquitie for my proofe.
                  Iſidor. lib. 10. eccle. offic. cap. 8. Antiphonae. Reſponſoriae.
                
               Iſidorus Archbiſhop of Hiſpalis in Spaine of whome I ſpake before, maketh a difference & diſtinction betweene Anthems and Reſponſories: for Anthems he ſaid as I affirmed before, that Ambroſe was the firſt that tranſlated them from the Greeke into the Latine Church: but for Reſponſories hee ſheweth that they were long before that time vſed in the Churches of Italy, and were ſo called becauſe when one ſang, the quire anſwered him ſinging alſo, & then it was the vſe either that euery mā ſhuld ſing by himſelf, or ſometime one alone, or at ſome other times two or three together, the quier for the moſt part making anſwere. Pontianus
               
likewiſe the ſixt biſhop of Rome, which was long before S. Ambroſe, ordayned, that in all churthes pſalms ſhould bee ſong night & day, as Faſciculus temporum hath obſerued.
                  Cent. 2. cap. 6.
                Now as I eaſilie confeſſe that this was not that exquiſite kind of muſicke which afterward was in vſe: ſo it cannot be denied, that they imbraced the other alſo. Damaſus wrot vnto S. Hierom then beeing at Ieruſalem by Bonifacius a prieſt,
                  Epiſt. Damaſ. ad Hieron.
                that he would ſend him Pſallentiū Graecorum, the maner of ſinging of the Greeks in the Eaſt. He complaineth alſo in that epiſtle of the ſimplicitie of the Roman Church, that there was on the ſunday but one epiſtle of the Apoſtle and one Chapter of the goſpel rehearſed, and that there was no ſinging with the voice, nor cōlines of hymnes knowē among thē. Whereupon S.
                  Reſcripſit Hieronymus ad Damaſ.
                
               Hierome in his anſwere ſent him that, which he requeſted, and beſides that counſelled him, that at the end of euery Pſalme, he ſhould cauſe to be ſong, Glory be to the father, &c. Wherefore for certaintie of this matter, we haue the affirmation of Platina, who recordeth that Damaſus was the firſt which cauſed the Pſalmes to be ſong Alternatim,
               
                  Platina in v
                        •
                     
                     ta Damaſ. 1.
                by courſe

interchaungeably in the Church of Rome. The which when M. Harding alleadged againſt Biſhop Iewell, ſo as he would therby confirme, either ſinging in an vnknowen toung, or that the quier only ſong in the primitiue Church: the Biſhop anſwereth vnto by denial,
                  Biſhop Iewels anſwere to maſter Harding, fol. 159.
                not of the thing: for he graunted they vſed ſinging, but of the illations: for although they vſed ſinging (ſaith he) yet they vſed it not in an vnknowen toung, & though they vſed ſinging interchangeably by ſides: yet the quier or ſides ſong not alone but the people alſo, which he cōfirmeth out of the decrees of Gregorie,
               
                  Diſt. 92.
                
               diſtinct. 92. who forbad the prieſt that ſaid ſeruice to ſing, & in the end addeth this concluſion. Hereof we may gather (ſaith he) that Damaſus diuided the whole people into 2. parts, & willed them to ſing the pſalms in their own toung, the one part making anſwer by courſe to the other. Now here me thinks I perceiue ſome exult as if they had gotten confitētē reum, becauſe I confeſſe, the quiers did not only ſing in ye primatiue church, but the people: & ye verily I do confeſſe, neither is it my purpoſe to denie any manifeſt trueth, and I doubt not, but to reconcile theſe contrarieties in their

proper place ſufficiently, where I ſhall anſwer al obiections fully that can in any reſpect be alleadged againſt this exerciſe. In the mean ſeaſon I haue got hereby ſo much as I deſired in this place, namely that this part of Gods ſeruice was vſed in the Romane church and other congregations of Italy.
            
            Neither did this ſeruice containe it ſelfe only within the boundes of Italy,
               
                  Poyters in Fraunce vnder S. Hilar.
                but took roote alſo in the churches of Fraunce and Germany, and other places. For in the time of Saint Hylary Biſhoppe of Poyters in Fraunce, it is teſtified by Iſidorus that this cuſtome was confirmed in the church.
                  Iſid. de eccl. offic. li. 2. ca. 6. Hymni Hilar.
                In ſomuch that Hylary himſelfe a man of wonderful eloquence, made Hymnes which were ſong in his church & called after his name Hylariani. The ſame may be ſaide of the churches of Africa as Carthage,
               
                  The churches of Africa. Carthage. Auſt. retract. lib. 2. cap. 11.
                & Hyppo: for the church of Carthage S. Auſten ſaith thus much: Hylarius quidā vir. tribunitius, &c. A certaine man called Hilarie, being incenſed, I know not vpon what occaſion, againſt the miniſters of god, did reuile with cōtumelious ſpeeches, wherſoeuer he came, that cuſtome of ſinging

Hymnes at the Altar out of the booke of Pſalmes, either before the offering, or after that which was offered was diſtributed to the people, which was begunne in Carthage, ſaying that it ought not ſo to be. To him did I make anſwere, ſaith S. Auguſtine, being commaunded ſo to doe by the brethren.
            
            
               
                  Cent. 5. cap. 6.
               So Victor in his hiſtorie de Vand. perſecutione ſaith: That at Carthage in the feaſt of Eaſter the people aſſemble themſelues togither in the pallace of Fauſtus, and there ſing Hymnes in the night ſeaſon in honor of the time.
                  Hippo.
                As for the church of Hippo where S. Auguſtine himſelfe was ruler & chiefe Biſhop, it is not likely that he would defend the vſe of that againſt Hylarie which he would not allowe in his Church: eſpecially ſeeing himſelfe was not only wonderfully therewith delighted: but in his conuerſion (as was noted before) had the effectual working thereof in himſelfe. It were an infinite and endles labor to rehearſe euery particular Church after this order, conſidering that euen the verie names of them are infinite: neuertheleſſe if theſe particulars will not ſuffice, harken to the generall voice of

the Doctors, who with one conſent agree, that nothing was more frequent in the aſſemblies of the faithful: Firſt S. Hierom hath theſe words:
                  Hier. in Pſalm 64.
                
               Matutinis veſpertinisque hymnis eccleſiae delectatur Deus, per animam fidelem, quae relicto inanium ſuperſtitionum ritu eum deuotè laudauerit. God is delighted with the morning & euening hymnes of the church by a faithfull ſoule, which reiecting the ceremonies of vaine ſuperſtitiō praiſeth him deuoutly.
               
               
                  Euſeb. lib. 10. cap. 3.
                And Euſebius writing the exerciſes of ye Chriſtiās in their meetinges maketh this catalogue. They vſed prayers, ſinging of Pſalmes, celebration of the Sacramēts, and thanksgiuing. To whom agreeth S. Baſil,
               
                  Baſil. in Pſal. 114.
                
               templa Martyribus dedicarunt, &c. They dedicated churches to the holy Martyrs with hymnes & giuing of thankes, whereunto they came togither euen at midnight as then their maner was.
                And in the ſame place, Interdū concionandi materia ex Pſalmis illis deſumpta eſt quos prius decantarunt. Somtimes the arguments and texts of their Sermons were taken out of the Pſalmes which they had ſung before.
               
               
                  Euſeb. lib. 5. cap. 27. Niceph. lib. 4. cap. 21.
                So Euſebius and Nicephorus againſt the cauils of Theodotus & Artemon
               
and other heretiques make mention of Pſalmes and ſonges which faithfull men had made, attributing therein to Chriſt, diuine Godhead, and prayſing him with ſweete concent. And it may eaſilie bee gathered out of Sainct Auguſtine,
               
                  Auguſt. de ciuitat. Dei lib. 22 cap 8. Theodor. lib. 3 cap. 27.
                that godly men in their aſſemblies ſang prayſes vnto GOD, and made their prayers to their Lorde. So Theodoret maketh mention of dauncings and bāquets, which chriſtians were woont to vſe in their merry meetinges after any notable and ſtrange deliuerance.
                  Epiphan. contra haereſ. lib. 3. tomo 2. in fine, in cap de fide catholic.
                And Epiphanius to this purpoſe ſpeaketh: Morning hymnes are continually ſong in the church, and euening prayers, yea both Pſalmes and prayers by candle light. But moſt euident is that teſtimony of Rabbi Samuell, who writing to Iſaac the Iſraelite hath theſe wordes:
                  Rabb. Samuel in lib. de aduentu Meſſiae ſect. 24.
                
               Paueo, mi domine, quod dictū eſt de Apoſtolis illud Eſaiae, &c. I am afraide (Sir) of that which Eſaias ſpeaketh of the Apoſtles: they ſhall declare the holy one of Iacob, and preach the God of Iſraell: the ignorant ſhall receiue knowledge, and Muſicions ſhall knowe the Lawes. We manifeſtly ſee that ignorant

men and Muſicions teach our Lawe: And who are theſe ignorant men, but the Gentiles? and who are theſe Muſicions, ſinging our Pſalter and our Prophetes in their Churches, but the chriſtians?
                And a litle after, His omnibus conſideratis, &c. All theſe thinges conſidered, me thinks,
               
               
                  Sect. 25.
                
               wee do amis in iudging of the ſacrifice of their praiſe which they offer in the church of God, ſinging: eſpecially ſeeing we finde both commandement for it in the law of God, and the example of Dauid. For commandement it is ſaid, Praiſe him with Virginals & organs, praiſe him with cimbals,
               
                  Pſalme. 150.
                
               praiſe him with high ſoūding cimbals, let euerie thing that hath breath praiſe the Lord Ieſus Chriſt. For example we reade that Dauid daūced before the ark,
               
                  2. King. 6.
                
               whō his fooliſh wife Michol did therefore reprehend, but he anſwered, O fooliſh woman, wil God ſuffer me in his ſeruice to be deſpiſed? And all the children of Iſraell ſounded the trumpet as they caried the Arke. Nowe what are wee which laugh at the ſolemnities of theſe ſingers but fooliſh Michols? and who are theſe that ſing, but the chriſtians dancing & ſinging

to God in humbleneſſe of heart as Dauid did? But for concluſion of this point, my laſt proofe ſhall bee out of Iſidore which ſpeaketh moſt plainely to this effect.
                  Iſidor. de eccl. off. lib. 1. cap. 5
                
               Dauidis Pſalterium idcirco cum melodia cantilenarum ſuauium ab eccleſia frequentatur, quo facilius ad compunctionem flectantur. The Pſalter of Dauid is therefore accuſtomed to be ſong in the church with the melodie of pleaſant ſongs, that men may the more eaſily thereby be brought to a remorſe of conſcience and ſorrowe for their ſinnes.
               
            
         
         
            THE LAVVFVLL VSE OF CHVRCH MVSICKE proued by authorities out of the Doctours. CHAP. X.
            
               TO the praciſe of the church, it may ſeeme ſuperfluous to ad the opiniōs of the fathers for that it is likely, that they which vſed Muſicke in their churches, allowed it in their opiniōs. And yet becauſe the fathers ſet down the vſe therof in eccleſiaſtical matters,

that we may leaue no place of cauil for the aduerſary, I think it not amiſſe, though in few words, to adde their particular ſpeeches to this purpoſe. Iuſtinus Martyr, who flouriſhed about the yeare of our Lord 164. in his queſtions, which the Gentils propoſed to the Chriſtians, mouing a queſtion touching this matter maketh aunſwere thereunto. His queſtion he putteth down in this form. If verſes and ſongs were inuented by them which deteſted religion,
               
                  Iuſtin. Martyr Quaeſt. 107. Quaeſt. à Gēt. chriſtian. propoſitarum.
                
               purpoſely to deceiue, & were cōmended to them which liued vnder the law for their weakeneſſe only, & becauſe they were to be trained vp as childrē: why ſhould they which haue receiued perfect giftes of grace, and different from thoſe meanes which we haue ſpoken of, vſe ſinging in their churches, to the imitation of thoſe which were vnder the law as children & infants? His anſwere is this: To ſing doth not at all become children, but to ſing with dumbe inſtruments, and with dauncing and cimbals. Therfore the vſe of ſuch inſtrumentes and others which are fit for children, is thruſt out, and expelled the church, and ſinging onely is retained: for

it inflameth the heart with a feruent deſire of that which in ſinging delighteth vs, it ſubdueth the motions of the fleſh, it driueth away thoſe wicked cogitations, which our inuiſible enimies put into our mindes, it watereth the mind, and cauſeth it to bring forth fruite of heauenly things, it armeth and ſtrengthneth the reuerencers of religion with patience in aduerſitie, it miniſtreth a remedie vnto the godlie againſt thoſe moleſtations which ſpring of worldly affections. This Saint Paul calleth the ſworde of the ſpirite, where-with hee furniſheth chriſtian ſoldiers, againſt their ſpiritual enimies: for the word of God is that, which being meditated vppon, ſong, and ſounded out, chaſeth away and putteth to flight the diuels themſelues. It is of force to adorn the minde with chriſtian vertues, which ſpring vp in them that reuerence religion with eccleſiaſtical ſonges. Thus farre Iuſtinus Martyr. Of which wordes being in themſelues ſo cleare and euident to proue the lawfull vſe of Muſicke in the church, I ſay nothing but this, that as hee plainely alloweth ſinging, ſo he excludeth

not all Muſicall inſtrumentes, but ſuch as are fit for children. Athanaſius Biſhop of Alexandria in Africa, who liued about the yeare of our Lord 329.
               
                  Athan. ad Marcel. de int. pſal.
                writing to Marcellinus of the interpretation of the Pſalmes, among other thinges which he ſpeaketh in the commendation of this excellent gift of God, ſheweth why it pleaſed God to ordaine the vſe thereof. As we do vtter (ſaith he) and deliuer our inward thoughtes by our words: ſo god willing to haue the melody of our words to be a ſigne of the ſpirituall cōſent which is in our minds, Pſalmos vt modulis canerentur inſtituit, & cū huiuſmodi harmonia recitari voluit, ordained that Pſalms ſhold be ſong with Muſick & would haue thē recited with ſuch harmony: Vt inde cōcinnitas animorū, &c. That therby the quietnes of the mind which is weldiſpoſed may be known as it is writtē, If any mā be ſorowful let him ſing And a litle after ſpeaking of inſtrumental muſick he vſeth theſe words: to praiſe god vpō the wel tuned cymbals, vpon the harp & pſaltery of ten ſtrings, is a note & ſignificatiō that there is ſuch a conſent between the parts of the body, as there is among the ſtrings.
               
And ſure this his ſaying is proued by experience: for as euen our ſenſes witneſſe vnto vs,
                  Baptiſt. Port. Magiae Natur lib. 2.
                that if we ſtrike onely one ſtring of any inſtrument the reſt of that tone alſo giue a certaine kind of ſound, as if the ſtriking of one partained to thē all: ſo in our bodie, if any thing be pleaſāt or grieuous to any part, it is alſo pleaſant or grieuous to the whole. Good reaſon therfore that the toūg profeſſe in diuine ſeruice, yt which ye heart beleeueth: & what both hart beleeueth, & toūg cōfeſſeth, good reaſon that both hand and whole body teſtifie to their power.
                  Aug. in praefat. in Pſalm.
                The like hath S. Auſten in the prologue he writeth before his enarrations of the Pſalmes. Becauſe (ſaith hee) that the holy Ghoſt did ſee that mans mind by nature did forſake the way of vertue and incline to the delightes of this life, and that it might be incited and ſtirred vp to tread the pathes of vertue by ſweete harmony, he mingled the efficacy of ſinging with his doctrine: that whiles the eares are delighted with the ſweeteneſſe of the verſe, the profit of the worde of God might by little and litle diſtill into their mindes: much like vnto a skilfull Phyſition: who when he wil miniſter anie

ſharp or bitter potiō to his patient vſeth to annoint the mouth of the cup with hony: leaſt the diſeaſed or ſicke perſon, ſhold refuſe the profit for the bitternes therof. And leaſt we ſhould thinke that he ſpeaketh not this of the Muſicke in the church, he defineth a Pſalme to bee one voice of the whole church: whereupon in the ſame place breaking into a wonderfull commendation of Pſalmes, he addeth, Pſalmus tranquillitas animarum eſt, &c. A Pſalme is the quietneſſe of ſouls, the ſtādard bearer of peace, a reſtrainer of the perturbations and rage of our cogitatiōs, repreſſing wrath, brideling wantonnſſe, inciting to ſobriety, making friendſhip, bringing thoſe to cōcord which were at variance, and a reconciler of vtter enimies.
                And in another place telling firſt how he became a chriſtian, he vſeth theſe words, Quantū fleui in cāticis tuis, &c.
               
                  Augu. confeſſ. lib. 9. cap. 6.
                
               Howe great aboundance of teares did I ſhed at the hearing of thy hymnes and Pſalmes, and how inwardly was I moued with the voice of thy ſweete ſinging congregation?
               
                  Greg. Nazia. in funeb. orat.
                Among other vertues Gregory Nazianzen commendeth this one in his ſiſter Gorgonia, that ſhe was skilful in ſinging,

and vſed it verie often. And ſurely no maruel, ſeeing Chryſoſtome attributeth theſe diuine properties thereunto. Muſica, ſaith he,
                  Chryſoſt. in Pſalm. 148. in principio.
                
               
                  mentem e terra abducit, &c. Muſicke doth withdraw our mindes from earthly cogitatiōs, lifteth vp our ſpirites into heauen, maketh them light and celeſtial. And therefore it is that Tertullian giueth this generall exhortation, ſonent inter duos Pſalmi,
               
                  Tertul. lib. 2. ad vxorem loquitur de viro & coniuge.
                
               
                  &c. Let Pſalmes and hymnes be ſong euen of two, and let them prouoke one an other, whether of them can ſing better to his God. Athanaſius in the place aboue cited giueth this reaſon, why we ſhould not onely ſing, but alſo ſing cunningly and artificially to our maker: Modulatim recitare Pſalmos,
               
                  Athan. de interp. Pſal. ad Marcellinum.
                
               
                  &c. To ſing Pſalmes artificially is not to make a ſhew of cūning Muſick, but an argument, that the cogitations of our mindes do aptly agree with our muſicke, & that reading, which obſerueth the lawe of feete & numbers, is a ſigne of a ſober & quiet affection in the minde. For both to praiſe God vpon well ſounding cymbals, & vpō the harp & pſalterity often ſtrings, is a note and ſignification that the partes of our body are ſo conioyned and linked

together as be the ſtringes &c. To the ſame purpoſe ſpeaketh Athanaſius at large in the ſame place, and his meaning is as well to ſhewe how good and comely an ornament Muſicke is in the churche, (which as in thoſe daies it was not doubted of, nor once called in queſtion, ſo needed no exquiſite apologie) as to declare the profitte and vſe which it hath euen in priuate meditations: for ſaith he, they that ſing ſo, as the melody of wordes with the quantitie of them, may agree with the harmony of the ſpirit, bee thoſe which ſing with the tung & with vnderſtanding alſo, neither do they delight thē
                  ſelues only, but alſo bring wonderful help to thoſe that heare thē. For he that ſingeth well doth frame his minde to his ſong, & bringeth it, as it were, frō an inequality to a certain equality & proportiō, not that he is moued by any thing, but rather that he doeth perceiue thereby the affections and imaginations of good things, & ſtirreth vp in his mind a greater deſire to do good afterwardes. For the ſoule being intentiue to the wordes doeth forgette the affections & perturbations: & being made

merie with the pleaſant ſound is brought to a ſenſe and feeling of Chriſt, and moſt excellēt and heauenly cogitations. To their former authorities, it were an eaſie matter to adde more innumerably: but I will content my ſelfe and the reader with a few.
                  Euſeb. praepar. Euang. 12. ca. 14. ex Platon.
                
               Euſebius in his twelft booke de praepatione euangelica vſeth theſe wordes: 
                  vt pueri animus legem ita ſequatur, vt vnà cum ea &c. To the end that the mindes of children may ſo follow the law, that they may together therwith reioice and be ſorowfull, let them learne and ſing often ſuch odes and ſonges as containe the praiſes and diſpraiſes of thoſe things which the law doth praiſe and diſcommend: and he addeth this reaſon: 
                  Quoniam teneriores animi rationem virtutis non ſuſcipiunt, ludo atque cantu praeparantur: Iure igitur apud nos prophetarum odae a pueris addicuntur. For the tender mindes of children are therefore to be prepared, with daliance and mirth, becauſe they cannot conceaue the reaſon of vertue at the firſt. Good therfore is that vſe amōgſt vs, that the Pſalms of the Prophets ſhould be learned by children. And S.
                  Chryſoſt. in Pſal. 134. ver. 3
                
               Chryſoſtom vpon theſe wordes of the

               134. Pſalme, Pſallite nomini eius quia ſuaue eſt: hath this ſentence, Hoc dicit, oſtendens rem ipſam habere quandam vel per ſe voluptatem vnà cum vtilitate, &c. This he ſaieth to ſhew that the thing it ſelfe hath of it ſelfe, a certaine pleaſure with profitte: for the principall gaine thereof, is, to ſing himnes vnto God, to purge the ſoule, to lift our cogitations on high, to learne true and exquiſite knowledge, to argue of things preſent & things to come. Beſides theſe thinges it hath alſo by melody great pleaſure and ſome comfort, and recreation, and maketh him that ſingeth graue and reuerend. And that it maketh men ſuch, it is manifeſt, in as much as one interpreter ſaith, it is a comely thing, and an other, it is a pleaſant thing: for both ſay true: for although he that ſingeth be neuer ſo outragious, yet while he doth reuerence the pſalme, he doth pacifie the tiranny of his outrage. Although he be ouerwhelmed with miſcheifes, and ouercome with the heauines of his ſoule: yet while he taketh pleaſure in ſinging he eaſeth his hart, extolleth his cogitations, and lifteth vp his mind on hie.
               
            
            
               This part might wonderfully be amplified as with the ſpeaches of auncient fathers: ſo alſo with the practiſe and example, not only of themſelues, as is before declared, but alſo of moſt noble and renowned Emperours: as of Conſtantine the great, Iuſtinian, Theodoſius the yonger, Valens the emperour, and Carolus Magnus: which may be confirmed by the teſtimones of Euſebius, Nicephorus, Gregory Nazianzen, & Carion in his thronologie.
                  Euſeb. lib. 4. de vita Conſtan.
                
               Euſebius thus teſtifieth of Conſtantine: Cantare primus incaepit, vnà orauit, conciones ſacras reuerenter audiit: adeo vt rogatus vt conſideret, reſpōderit: fas non eſſe dogmata de Deo remiſſe & ſegniter audiri. He firſt began the pſalme, praied together with the people, heard holy ſermons with reuerence, inſomuch that being deſired to ſit downe, he anſwered, it was not meete that thoſe thinges which were declared concerning God ſhould be heard remiſly and negligently. Nicephorus ſpeaking of Iuſtinian ſayeth,
                  Nicepho. lib. 17. chap. 28.
                
               
                  Iuſtinianus imperator octauo ſui imperii anno, conſtituit vt in concionibus eccleſiaſticis concineretur illud: Vnigenitus filius & verbum dei &c. Iuſtinian the emperour in the eight

yeare of his raigne, inſtituted that that ditty, the only begotten ſonne & word of God &c. ſhould be ſong in eccleſiaſticall meetings. And of Theodoſius the yonger,
                  Niceph. lib. 14 cap. 3.
                
               Theodoſius minor imperator, cum tota eccleſia ſupplicationem fecit pro ſerenitate, & ipſe quidem medius hymnis canendis praeiuit priuati habitu incedens, Theodoſius the emperour made his ſupplications with the whole churche for faire wether, and went in the middeſt before them in the habite of a priuate perſon while they ſong their hymnes.
                So Nazianzen ſpeaketh of Valens. When the emperour Valens entred into the churche where Saint Baſil preached 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
               
                  Greg. Nazian. in funebre orat. de Baſilio. Cario. chro. li. 4.
                
               hearing the ſound of the pſalms was ſtriken as if it had beene with thunder. So doeth the hiſtorie recorde of Charles the great. Quandocunque fuit in vrbibus acceſſit ad pſalmodiam, &c. When ſo euer he came to anie cittie hee went to the Pſalmody and ſang him-ſelfe, appointing vnto his ſonnes and his other Princes, Leſſons to bee ſong, and ioyned his earneſt prayer with the godly.
               
            
            
               The epiſtle of the biſhops, which were of the counſell of Antioch againſt Paulus Samoſatenus the heretik, among other things laieth this to his charge,
                  Euſeb. eccles. hiſt. lib 7. cap. 24. epiſc. epiſt.
                
               quòd pſalmos & cantus, qui ad honorem Domini noſtri Ieſu Chriſti decantari ſolent, tāquam recentiores, & a viris recentioris memoriae editos exploſerit. That the hath thruſt out of the church as newe and made by mē of late memory thoſe pſalms and ſonges which were woont to bee ſong in the honor of our lord Ieſus Chriſt.
                Wherby it may appeare that as al the reuerent aſſembly diſliked of the attēpt of Paulus in aboliſhing the vſe of ſinging, ſo alſo they thought it a meete ceremonie and ornament for their churches. To theſe antiquities of former times, it ſhall not bee vnneedful to ad the opinions of later writers: as of Bullinger, Peter Martyr, Caluine, Wolphius, Beza and others; who all with one conſent (although ſome I confeſſe bee earneſt againſt prickeſong and artificiall muſicke in the church) yet make this reſolution, that as all other thinges, which of themſelues be good, may be both wel & euil vſed: ſo Muſicke likewiſe hath doubtleſſe a good and profitable vſe in the church, howſoeuer

in the time of popery, the right and lawfull vſe thereof hath been quite extinguiſhed and forgotten. And ſurely if any man thinke that I haue in this treatiſe, taken vpon me the defence of the vnlawfull vſe thereof, he may well take iuſt occaſion of offence. But I am ſo farre from allowing of the abuſe, and of popiſh church Muſicke, that I deteſt both the one & the other. Looke vpon the ſeuerall tractes of theſe men, whō I laſt mentioned, Bullinger in his 5. Decad and 5. Sermon: Peter Martyr vpon the 5. chap. of the Iudges: Caluin in his Inſtitutions & in his cōmentaries vpon the Pſalms, namely vpon the 4.48.67. and 98. Pſalms: Wolphius vpon the 12. chap. of Nehemiah: Beza vpon the 3. chapter to the Coloſſians, & in diuerſe other places, and you ſhal finde all the contention to be againſt the abuſe: no one word againſt the right and lawfull vſe therof.
                  Brentius Homilia 14.
                Here I willingly omit Brentius & al the Lutherans: with whom I ſee no reaſon why in this point wee ſhould not moſt conſtantly agree: ſo that all thinges be done to edifieng and to the praiſe of God. Wherfore I will conclude this part with that ſaying of S. Ambroſe in his Hexameron: Quis

ſenſum hominis gerens, non erubeſcat ſine pſalmorum celebritate diem claudere, cum etiam aues minutiſſimae ſolēni deuotione & dulci carmine orius dierum ac noctium perſequantur: Who is he bearing the ſēſe of a mā which is not aſhamed to ende the day without the ſinging of Pſalms,
               
                  Ambr. Hex. lib. 5. cap. 12.
                
               ſeeing euen the litle birdes with ſolemn deuotion & ſweet notes do both begin and end the daie?
            
         
         
            Sentences of the Scripture, for the vſe of Church Muſick. Chap. 11.
            
               BEcauſe it may ſeem a matter impertinent, to heape a great number of teſtimonies of the Scripture, for the proofe of that, which can by no reaſon be denied, I meane, after ſome fewe teſtimonies and groūds of the Scripture alleaged, to touch the point and quicke of this controuerſie. For aſmuch therefore as I haue hitherto ſufficiently proued by the practiſe of the Church, and authoritie of Fathers, that there is a lawfull vſe of Muſicke in the Church, I wil content my ſelfe with theſe

ſentences of Scripture which I ſhall here cote, for confirmation of the ſame, meaning in one concluſion, to proue thoſe two things which are in queſtion: that aſwell artificial as alſo inſtrumentall Muſicke may be vſed in Gods congregation. My grounds therefore are theſe: firſt the teſtimonies in the old Teſtament, whereof I will cite ſome, becauſe all are infinite. Pſal. 33. Reioice in the Lord O ye righteous:
               
                  Pſalm. 33.
                
               for praiſe becommeth well the iuſt: praiſe the Lorde with harpe, ſing vnto him with viall and inſtrument of ten ſtringes: ſing vnto him a new ſong, ſing cheerefully with a loude voice, &c. Likewiſe in the laſt pſalm: praiſe him in the ſoūd of the trumpet, praiſe him vpon the viall & harp, praiſe ye him,
               
                  Pſalm. 150.
                
               with timbrell & flute, praiſe ye him, with Virginals & organs, praiſe ye him, with ſounding cymbals, praiſe ye him vpō the high ſoūding cimbals: let euery thing that hath breath praiſe the Lord. Ad hitherto Pſal. 81. the 5. firſt verſes: ſing we ioyfully vnto God our ſtrēgth, &c. I willingly for breuities ſake omit al other ſpeches of the pſal. Read beſides theſe the particular examples of Miriam, Exod. 15. of Debora & Baruck,
               
                  Exod. 15. Iudges 5.
               
               
of Anna the mother of Samuel, 1. Sam. 2. of all the tribes of Iſrael, Nehem. the 12. 2. Chron. 5. 1. Eſdras 3. and infinite more? Whereof I gather not onely precept, as in the former places out of the Pſalmes: but alſo example and practiſe as out of theſe places laſt alleaged. And ſurely conſidering that Muſicke is no ceremoniall thing, and therefore not aboliſhed with thoſe thinges that are ceremoniall, I ſee no ſufficient cauſe, why that which was ſo excellent an ornamēt to diuine ſeruice in thoſe times, ſhold now in theſe latter daies, be caſt out as an vnclean thing, and haue no place, nor vſe in Gods Church.
            Neither is this practiſe & ſeruice of God, a thing either vnuſed in the Primatiue church,
                  Coloſſ. 3.6.
                or not heard of in the new teſtamēt: which is manifeſt by theſe teſtimonies. Let the word of God dwell in you plenteouſly, in all kind of wiſedom, teaching & admoniſhing your own ſelues, in Pſalms & hymnes & ſpiritual ſonges, ſinging with a grace in your heartes to the Lord. And again,
                  Epheſ. 5.19.
                
               ſpeaking vnto your ſelues in pſalms & hymnes & ſpirituall ſonges, ſinging & making melody to the Lord in your harts

&c. Hitherto ioyne alſo the examples of Chriſt and his diſciples, Mat. 26. of Zacharias and the virgin Marie, Luke the 1. and tell me, why both the commendation of this exerciſe, giuen by the Apoſtle, (for I wil not cal it precept) and the example, both of our Sauiour, and other bleſſed Saincts of God may not bee a ſufficient warrant for vs, to practiſe that in our Churches, which they performed in former ages. And ſurely if euery action of Chriſt be our inſtruction, and an example, wherunto we ſhould frame our ſelues: why ſhould Chriſt haue bin author of that which he allowed in himſelfe, & in his Apoſtles: if hee were not willing, that wee ſhould take example therby to imitate both thē & him? Now if we conſider to what end the cuſtome of ſinging was vſed: wee ſhall perceiue, that it was not ſo vſed, as that ſinging & the ſoūding of organs, ſhold be a deed meritorious, to obtaine remiſſion of ſinnes and life eternall (as the Iewes imagine of their ſongs, and the heathē of their ſonnets) or as the hypocriticall Monkes and Friers ſang their ſeuen canonicall houres that the doing of that work, whether wt vnderſtanding, or wtout vnderſtanding, it was not material,

yet the bare performance of it, ſhould be meritorious for the ſinnes of the quicke & the dead: But ſo, that the Lord might decently be praiſed, whether with humble and harty prayer, as in the time of heauineſſe, when griefe oppreſſeth: or with ſinging of Pſalmes, and playing on inſtrumentes, as in the time of ioy and mirth, according to that counſell of the Apoſtle, If any man bee afflicted let him pray, and if any man bee merry,
               
                  Iames 5.13.
                
               let him ſing Pſalmes.
            
            In mine opinion, excellent is that interpretation of Maiſter Caluine, vppon theſe words in Luke,
               
                  Caluin. in Lu. cap. 2. verſ. 13.14.
                
               Then was with the angell a multitude of heauenly ſouldiers praiſing & ſinging, glory be to God on high. The Lord ſaith he by the example of this heauē
               ly melodie, would commend vnto vs, the vnity of faith, and ſtir vs vp here on earth, to ſing the praiſes of our God &c. Wherefore a good argument may be gathered out of diuerſe places in the Reuelatiō: That for aſmuch as our life here on earth ſhould with all induſtry and indeuor, apply it ſelfe to bee like that heauenly life which the angels liue aboue, where the 24. Elders fall down before the Lamb,
                  Reuel. 5.8.
                hauing euery one harpes, &

goulden viols in their handes.
                  Re. 14. ver. 23.
                The voice of which harpers, harping with their harpes, Iohn himſelfe teſtifieth hee hearde, and that they ſang as it were a new ſong before the throne, &c. We therefore ought not to omit any part of that ſeruice, which may either ſtir vs vp in deuotion, or make to the teſtifieng of our earneſt & harty ſetting foorth of diuine ſeruice, and beautifieng of the church of God. And ſurely in the praiſing of God, whome ſhould the Church militant follow, rather than the Church triumphant? And whome ſhoulde the Sainctes on earth imitate rather than the Sainctes in heauen? who behould the Lord face to face,
               
                  1 Cor. 13.12.
                
               and knowe euen as they are knowen.
            
            Doubtleſſe there can be no greater comfort for a penſiue ſoule, than to thinke, that he is partaker of the ſame ſaluation, with the Sainctes. And no one thing can pierce deeper into the heart of manne than that hee is called, to the ſame ſtate of prayſing and lauding GOD, with the holie Angelles. Howbeit becauſe I would diſpleaſe no man, nor giue iuſt occaſion of offence vnto any: I put this as a principle: that as nothing is to be taught,

ſo nothing to bee ſong in the Church, but either that, which is ſet downe in the expreſſe word of God, or that may certainly be ſhewed to be collected out of it. For I profeſſe that rotten rythmes of popery, & ſuperſtitious inuocation or praying vnto Saints doth not giue greater cauſe of vomit to any man than to my ſelfe: & al either vnwritten, or vnwarrātable verities, I ſo far abhor, as that I iudge thē fitter for Grocers ſhops, & fiſhmongers ſtals,
                  Perſius
                than for Gods congregatiō. So that I thus far agree with the greateſt aduerſaryes of our profeſſion, that I would not admit any other matter, than is contained in the written word of God, or conſonable therunto: only herein we differ, that they would haue no great exquiſite art or cunning thereunto, neither the noiſe of dumbe inſtruments, to fil vp the meaſure of the praiſes of god: & I alow of both. Wherin if I be not too much affectioned, me thinks they do great iniurie to the word of God, in that they can contentedly permit it to bee ſong plainly, denying the outward helpes & ornamēts of art, to adde more grace & dignity thereunto. And truly if in all other faculties, it be not only lawfull, but commendable

alſo, as in painting & ſpeaking, to ſet out their matters with coulors & eloquence of words: I ſee no reaſon, why to adde more grace to the ditty, with the exquiſitenes of Muſick, ſhould be condēnable in the church. Wherfore I am of opinion that few of our aduerſaries can anſwere this reaſon, which ſeemeth to me a general rule, & infallible demonſtration for the allowing aſwell of the cunning & exquiſite art of ſinging, as of the vſe of organs and dumbe inſtruments. The Pſalmes may bee vſed in the church as the authour of them appointed: But the holy Ghoſt, the author of the Pſalms, appointed and commanded them by the Prophet Dauid, to be ſong, and to be ſong moſt cunningly, and to be ſong with diuerſe artificiall inſtruments of Muſick, and to bee ſong with ſundry, ſeuerall, and moſt excellent notes & tunes: Therefore in our Engliſh church, the pſalmes may be ſong, and ſong moſt cū
               ningly, and with diuerſe artificiall inſtruments of Muſick, and ſong with ſundry ſeuerall and moſt excellent notes. For proofe that the holy Ghoſt would haue them ſong, hee calleth diuerſe Pſalmes by the name of the Hebrew word Shir, which is a ſong, and

ſuch a ſong, as ought of neceſſity to be ſong: as Pſalme 7. and 120. That he would haue them ſong moſt cunningly, hee directeth many Pſalmes eſpecially and by name Lamnazzeath, that is, to the ſkilfull chanter, or to him that excelleth in Muſicke, as Pſalm 4, &c. That he would haue them ſong, with diuerſe artificial inſtruments of Muſick, gittith and neginoth, and diuerſe other kinds of muſicall inſtruments are expreſſed in the titles of certaine Pſalmes, as Pſalm 6. & 8. That he would haue thē ſong with ſundry ſeuerall and moſt excellent notes and varietie of tunes, in diuerſe parts and places of ſundry Pſalmes, it is to bee ſeene by the word Sela ſet downe in ſundry places, as Pſalme 77. &c. which Hebrewe word properly ſignifieth, now change your voice and that cunningly, now lift vp your voice, and that with an other excellent tune, that the people may be more attentiue; and the word Sela is neuer written, but where the matter of the Pſalme is moſt notable.
         
         
            
            A REFVTATION OF OBIECTIONS AGAINST the lawful vſe of Muſicke in the Church. CHAP. XII.
            
               IN this laſt part of my treatiſe I might ſeem to vndertake a matter far aboue my ability: were it not that either their obiections were too weake to proue theyr purpoſes: or thoſe which are of any force, miſtaken and grounded vpon falſe principles. Neuertheleſſe that I may proceede orderly therein, it ſhall not be amiſſe, to ſee what diuerſity of opinions are concerning this matter:  Some miſlike not all kinde of ſinging, but that which is ſong by the Miniſters alone, or by ſinging men duputed for that purpoſe: and theſe are they, which canot away with exquiſite and cunning Muſicke, nor with the ſounde of inſtruments in the Church, but meaſuring all thinges by their owne humors, thinke plaine ſong farre more meete for Gods congregation.  Others there bee that diſallowe all kinde

of Muſick in the church.  And we do not only permit ſinging contrary to the latter, but alſo cunning and exquiſite ſinging cleane repugnant to the former. My meaning is therefore, firſt to ſee what reaſonable anſwere may be made, aſwell to thoſe which are againſt exquiſite muſick, which by yeelding ſomthing, make a great ſhew of probability, as thoſe which wholy baniſh all Muſicke out of diuine ſeruice: who therefore cā
               not auoid ſuſpition of ſtomacke and malice, becauſe they bee ſo earneſt againſt that, which was neuer hitherto condēned. To the former, which diſlike not al kind of muſick, but that which is ſong by certaine men ordained to that purpoſe,
                  Ob. Exquiſite Muſick not to be vſed, becauſe all the congregation cannot ſing together. Anſwer.
                alleaging, that they would haue all the people ſing togither: I anſwere, that if all could it were not amiſſe, but becauſe it cānot be I ſee no reaſon, why the people may not take as good edification by the ſinging which others ſing, as by the prayers that others read, eſpecially, if they ſo ſing as they may be vnderſtood.
                  2. Obiect. Exquiſit Muſick confuſed and hard to be vnderſtoode.
                Yea but (ſay they) this cūning and exquiſite muſick, wherein the baſe and contratenors, & other parts ſing wt full quier, with often repetitiō of the ſame things, is ſo confuſe & vndiſtinct,

that the very ditty cannot be vnderſtood, much leſſe any edification taken. If any thing will ſatisfie theſe men,
                  Anſwer.
                me thinks this which I ſhall ſay may bee in ſteede of a reaſonable anſwere: That the ſinging of ſo many parts togither, cauſeth the ditty not to be vnderſtood, it is vitium hominū non artis, the fault is in them that ſo ſing, and not in the art. For no doubt but a full quire of good & diſtinct voices, may be aſwel vnderſtood, as two or three pronouncing the ſame thing. Againe, becauſe in deede this obſcuritie can hardly be auoided, it hath bin wel prouided for in the church, that nothing ſhould ſo be ſong, but ſuch things, as are very familiar and known vnto the people. And whereas they obiect the often repetition of the ſame thing, as a fault, me thinks they blame that, which by their own reaſon ſhould rather be commended. For if ſome things by the nū
               ber of the voices bee hardly vnderſtood at once, then ſurely the 2.3. or 4. repetition is a mean to cauſe it to be vnderſtood the better: neither if it bee vnderſtoode at the firſt is it therefore a fault to repeat it againe, becauſe the often ingeminating and ſounding the ſame thing in our eares doth cauſe the thing

repeated to take deepe roote, and worke effectually in our hearts. The third reaſon is, becauſe exquiſite Muſick maketh vs more intētiue to the note,
                  3. Ob. Cunning Muſicke pleaſeth more with the note thā the matter. Confeſſ. lib. 10. cap. 13.
                than to the matter. And to this purpoſe, they alleadge the place of S. Auguſtine, where he ſaieth, that he did ſinne mortally when he was more moued with the melody, than with the ditty, that was ſong.
               
                  Anſwer.
                Verily I do in no wiſe allowe that mē at the reading of the chapters ſhold walke in the bodie of the church, and when the Organs play, giue attentiue heede thereunto: as if the whole and better part of ſeruice did conſiſt in Muſicke. For this is a wōderful abuſe. But if they would learne to lay the fault where the fault is, they might eaſily learne to ſatisfie themſelues herein: For it is not the fault of muſicke if thou bee too much therwith allured, but thine own. And Sainct Auguſtine in that place doth not condemne Muſick for the ſweete ſound thereof, but his owne fraile and weake nature, which tooke occaſion of offence at that, which in it ſelfe was good. Againe, as it carieth awaie ſome men, with the pleaſure of the note: ſo for a recompence, it cauſeth ſome other, to giue greater

heede and attention to the matter: euen as the ſound of the trumpet in the warre is to the daſtardly, and white liuered knight, a cauſe of feare, but to the valiaunt ſouldier, a hartening and incouragement. Wherefore for a finall aunſwere vnto theſe, mee thinkes a man out of their owne wordes, may gather this good collection againſt thē. Singing in the church they allow: whereupon I inferre: If the worſt ſort of ſinging be allowable in the church, then the better much rather. But artificiall ſinging is farre better than their plain Muſicke, for it ſtriketh deeper, and worketh more effectually in the hearers: Therefore much rather to bee allowed in Gods congregation.
            Touching the ſeconde opinion, which excludeth Muſicke wholy without exception, I meane ſeuerally to make aunſwere to ſuch their obiections, as ſeeme to bee of greateſt importaunce.
                  1. Obiection.
                The firſt obiection beareth great ſhewe of trueth, affirming (which wee can by no meanes denie) that GOD is a ſpirite, and will bee worſhipped in ſpirite and trueth, and requireth not the outwarde actions and ſeruice of

the body, but the inwarde motions of the heart: the which as it is true indeed, ſo it is alſo declared by the teſtimony of Gregory: who in diſt.
               
                  Decret. Gregor. Pont. diſt. 92. In Sancta Romana.
                
               92. in ſancta Romana, cōplaineth that it falleth out oftentimes, vt dum blanda vox quaeritur, cōgrua vita negligatur, & cantor miniſter Deum moribus ſtimulet, cum populū vocibus delectat. That while a pleaſant voice is ſought, honeſt life is neglected, & that the ſinging mā oftentimes offendeth God, while he indeuoreth to delight the people with his voice
               : adding in the ſame place thoſe common verſes,

                  Non vox ſed votum, nō cordula muſica ſed cor,
                  Non clamans ſed amans cantat in aure Dei.
               
            
            And hereupon the fathers in the 4. Coū
               cell of Carthage decreed, that when the chaunter of any place was choſen, he ſhould ſay: Vide vt quod ore cantas, corde credas: & quod corde credis, opere comprobes. See that thou beleeue that with thy heart, which thou ſingeſt with thy mouth: and that thou performe that in worke, which thou beleeueſt with thine heart.
                Al which teſtimonies as they ſeeme to make againſt vs, ſo cary they the greater force with them, becauſe they are grounded vppon a trueth.

But the ſame aunſwere afore,
                  Anſwere.
                to that obiection out of Saint Auguſtine may ſatisfie theſe. For what if many men be more caried away with the pleaſure of the ſound then with the thing and ditty, is this Muſickes fault? or is it not rather the fault of them, which by that which is good, take occaſion of euill? If ſome intemperate perſon, take ſurfeit of pleaſant and holſome meates, are the meates to be reprehended, or the man? And although God bee a ſpirite, and will bee worſhipped in Spirite and trueth, yet foraſmuch as hee hath made both the ſoule and the bodie: as well the faculties of the one, as the partes of the other are to bee referred to his glorie. For what kinde of collection is this? God is to bee worſhipped in Spirite and trueth: There-fore wee muſte not indeuour to pleaſe and worſhippe him with our outwarde and bodilie actions. Or, the inwarde ſeruice of the hearte is accepted, therefore the outwarde ſeruice of the bodie may bee omitted? When wee therefore commende the outwarde ſeruice of God, wee doe not denie the inward. But wee require that they which doe ſing, ſing

               with the toung & with the vnderſtanding alſo:
               
                  Atha. ad Marcellinum de inter. Pſalmi.
                Now they which ſo ſing as the melody of words by the ſinging of voices may agree with the harmony of the ſpirite be thoſe which ſing with the tongue and vnderſtanding alſo, and profit not onely thē
                  ſelues but others,
               
                  2. Obiection.
                as before was declared out of Athanaſius. Secondly they vrge vs, that becauſe prickſong is not verbally nor literally cōmāded in the Goſpell it may not therefore be allowed. Whereunto I anſwere,
                  Anſwere.
                that being not ceremoniall, it is ſufficient for any chriſtian being cleare & free from the Manichees opinion, that the olde Teſtament hath approued it. Again, grant that it hath no commaundement, in either the old or new Teſtament, is it therefore without all aduiſe and conſideration to bee reiected? Verily many thinges haue beene very acceptable vnto God, which haue had no expreſſe commandement in the Scriptures: As the gold, incenſe, & mirre, which the three wiſemen offered vnto Chriſt, the precious box of ſpiknard, wherewith Marie Magdalen annointed his bleſſed feete, the coſtly oders,
                  Mat. 2. Luke. 7. Iohn. 19.
                wherewt 
               Nicodemus did embalm his glorious body, the bowes of trees &

garments, which the people broke down,
                  Marke 11.
                & ſpred in the way, as he went to Hieruſalē, & infinite other more, which were done without any warrant of holy Scripture. Wherfore as in the building of the temple the ſeruice of them, which brought lime and morter and other baſe thinges, and as in the beautifieng of Chriſtes bodie, theſe thinges of ſmall price and value were acceptable vnto the Lord: ſo no doubt but the ſonges of the faithful may be as a ſweete odor of incenſe vnto him, and moſt gratefull in his ſight.
            Thirdly,
                  3. Obiection.
                this vſe of ſinging is a ceremoniall thing,, and if there were no other, yet this were a ſufficient cauſe, why it ſhoulde be excluded out of the church. I aunſwere, that Muſicke was no ceremony:
                  Anſwere.
                for euerie ceremony in the time of the law was a type and figure of ſomwhat, the ſubſtance wherof comming in place, the ceremony was aboliſhed: Nowe becauſe we finde nothing in the Goſpell, which anſwereth to Muſick in a certain agreement of ſimilitude, as vnto his type and figure: we may therfore ſafely pronounce, that Muſick was neither ceremoniall in the time of the Law, nor to be

aboliſhed out of the church in the time of the Goſpell. Many other reaſons of ſmal momēt, may be brought againſt vs: but ſeeing ſo litle force in the ſtronger, I thought it an vnneceſſarie point to trouble my paper, and the reader with the weaker.
            And ſurely I do not miſlike the good coū
               ſel & indeuor of any wel diſpoſed man, that is earneſt in correcting abuſes, and in ſeparating that which is good, from that which is euill. But me thinks it is a deſperate remedy, for ſome few abuſes, and inconueniences, which might be better amended, to roote out al Muſick from the church.
                  Val. Max.
                Much like the counſaile of Fabritius and other ſenators of Rome, which by aboliſhing gold & ſiluer, or at leaſtwiſe the vſe therof, thought to take away couetouſnes and ambitiō.
                  Plu. in Lycur.
                Or the deuiſe of Lycurgus among the Lacedaemonians, who for hatred of drūkennes cauſed all the vines in the country to be digged vp by the rootes. Now as theſe men being otherwiſe wiſe and politique, as diuerſe others their actions teſtifie, tooke not herein a right courſe of reforming thoſe faultes which were amiſſe, becauſe they might better haue taken order againſt couetouſneſſe,

and drunkenneſſe, by permitting a lawfull and decent vſe of mony and wine, than by quite aboliſhing of them: euen ſo thoſe which reprehende certayne thinges in Church Muſicke, may better reforme them in permitting a moderate vſe, than in plucking it vppe by the rootes: For as a manne may bee couetous without monie, and drunken without wine: ſo a fraile and weake minde, will finde other prouocations to call it from the dittie, though Muſicke ſhoulde bee wanting. Wherefore for concluſion of this matter, as I eaſily graunt to Maſter Bullinger, that this is no good argument: The Eaſt Churches vſe ſinging, the Weſt Churches vſe not ſinging: Therefore the Weſt Churches are no Churches.
                  Dec. 5. cap. 5.
                So I hope Maiſter Bullinger, and anie other good man whatſoeuer will graunt as much to mee, that this is as falſe a collection: The Weſt Churches vſe not ſinging, the Eaſt Churches doe vſe ſinging, therefore the Eaſt church is no church. Seeing then, that there is no precept in the newe Teſtament, whereby Church-Muſicke is eyther commanded or forbiddē,

as it is apparant, that as thoſe Churches which vſed it not, cannot be compelled to receiue it: ſo thoſe churches which doe vſe it can by no place of the Scripture therefore be condemned. And this is the reſolutiō of al our late diuines, Bucer, Bullinger, Caluin and the reſt, which with one conſent agree, that it is an indifferent thing, hauing no hurt, but rather much good in it, if it bee diſcreetly and ſoberly vſed. Why then is it not as lawful for me to incline to this part, that it ſhould or may be vſed, as it is for thē to incline to the contrary, that it ſhould not or may not in any wiſe be vſed, conſidering that neither my ſinging maketh me leſſe the ſeruaunt of God, nor their not ſinging them the more holy and deuoute men?
            Laſtly therefore it remayneth that hauing anſwered the chiefeſt arguments that make againſt vs, I now bring certaine reaſons for my poſitiō.  Firſt therefore Muſick is rather to bee vſed in the church than not, becauſe it is the excellent inuention and gift of God himſelfe, ordained to the honor and glory of God: neither doth their cauill auaile any thing at all, which ſaie, that if this reaſon were good, then all the liberall

ſciences & the knowledge of the ciuill law, and all good and honeſt artes, might by as good reaſon be vſed in ye church becauſe they are alſo the inuention & good gift of God. For if they knew, howe to refer euerie of theſe things to their neat & proper end, they might perceiue that as the end of thoſe other ſciences, is firſt to know, and then to ſerue to the glory of God, ſo the vent and only end of muſicke is immediatly the ſetting foorth of Gods praiſe and honour.  A ſecond reaſon of mine aſſertion is, becauſe muſick with the concinnitie of her ſound, and the excellency of harmony, doth as it were knit & ioyne vs vnto God, putting vs in mind of our maker and of that mutuall vnitie & conſent, which ought to bee as of voices ſo of mindes in Gods church and congregatiōs.  Thirdly if there were no other reaſon, yet this were of ſufficiēt force to perſwade the lawful vſe of Muſicke: in that as a pleaſant bait, it doeth both allure mē into the church which otherwiſe would not come, & cauſeth thē which are there to continue till the diuine ſeruice bee ended.  Fourthly men doe more willingly heare, & more firmely cary away with them, thoſe thinges which they heare

ſong than thoſe which they hear barely ſpoken and pronounced.  Laſtly the vſe thereof is ancient and of great continuance, for it was vſed in Traian his time as I before ſhewed, and it was tranſlated from the religious of the heathen, which in hymnes and ſonges, yeelded all reuerence and honor to their gods of wood & ſtone. And ſurely if there be any one thing in man, more excellent than another, that is Muſicke: and therefore good reaſon, that hee which hath made vs, & the world, and preſerueth both vs & it, ſhould be worſhipped & honored with that thing which is moſt excellent in man, diuiding as it were his ſoule from his body, and lifting vp his cogitations aboue himſelfe. Such was the zeale and feruencie of the kingly prophet Dauid,
               
                  2. Sam. 23.1.
                that he was therfore called by the title not only of the annointed of the God of Iacob, but alſo of the ſweet ſinger of Iſraell. And S. Auſten ſaith of himſelfe, That the voices, of the ſingers,
               
                  Aug. confeſ. lib. 9. cap. 6.
                
               did pierce into his eares, & Gods truth did diſtil into his hart, & that thēce was inflamed in him an affectiō of godlines which cauſed tears to iſſue from him ſo that he felt himſelf to be in a moſt bleſſed & happy ſtate.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   