
      
         
            
            
            A Praier
very Comfortable and neceſsary to be vſed of all Chriſtians
euery Morning and Euening, amongſt their Families, that it would pleaſe the
Lord God to be appeaſed in his wrath, and to withdraw his heauy
hand and greeuous viſitation from among vs.
            
               O Almighty, Omnipotent, and eternall God, moſt iuſt, and yet moſt mercifull
Father in Chriſt Ieſus. We moſt wretched and miſerable ſinners, acknowledge,
that in regard of our manifolde ſinnes, it is no maruaile that wee bee
afflicted with ſundrie kindes of miſeries, grief
                  •
               s, and extraordinarie viſitations.
If we ſhould goe about to reckon vp our perteculer ſinnes, we know not
wher to begin, or how to make an end, they are more in number then the haires
of our heads, they are farre more then we can poſſible féele or knew: For whoe
knoweth the heigth or depth of his corruptions? Whoe knoweth how oft he offendeth?
We acknowledge (O Lorde) that our ſinnes haue greeuouſlie prouoked thée, not onelie
to take vengeance of our bodies and goodes, but euen alſo to ſeperate both our bodies and Soules
from thee to euerlaſting deſtruction of both. It is no maruaile therefore
(nay it were to be maruailed at) in reſpect of our monſterous ſinnes, that thou ſhouldſt not ſpeake
vnto vs by thy ſtrange Iudgements: that thou ſhouldſt not viſit vs with ſtormes and tempeſtes:
that thou ſhouldſt not ſtrike vs with thunder and lightning: the earth alſo to quake and ſhake vnder
vs, and out of the bellie and bowels thereof, to ſend forth ſuch ſtrong exhalations & brethings,
as may ſo infect ye ayre, as ſhal breed amongſt vs ye murren & peſtilence. And not without iuſt cauſe,
for we haue abuſed all thy good guiftes, and ouerburthended the Earth with our ſinnes and tranſgreſſions.
The very waters, the ayre and all the creatures are infected and corrupted with our
vncleaneſſe, wherein we wallow like Swine in the myre, neuer entring into conſideration, either
of thy mercies, or our owne miſeries. And therefore it is thy iudgment, that all thinges ſhoulde
be armed by thée againſt vs. And although we like rebellious Traytors, yeild no obedience vnto
thee, yet are they raady to doe thy will in puniſhing vs: O Lord, if we did but looke a little backe,
to behold thy late loue and abundant mercy beſtowed vpon vs (the people of England) yea euen
when to the eyes of the World we were bereft of all helpe or hope of helpe (our Conſciences accuſing
vs) expecting nothing but wrack both of our ſoul, body & goods. O Lord, we canot but acknowledge
thy exceeding great mercie, that in ſtead of warre, thou haſt ſent vs peace: in ſtead of ſcarſity,
plenty: in ſtead of Popery, thy Goſpell ſtill eſtabliſhed amongſt vs, to our euerlaſting comfort:
and in ſtead of all curſſes which we haue iuſtly deſerued, thou ſendeſt all bleſſings which we
haue not deſerued. Al which mercies conſidered, might long ſince haue moued vs to a greater
meaſure of thankfulneſſe and obedience, then we haue any way performed vnto thee: For like ſhe
dog to his vomit, and the ſwine to the myre, doe we from fulneſſe, returne to filthineſſe: from faſting,
to feaſting: from bleſſing, to curſſing: and from all religious exerciſes, to all irreligious
practiſes. So that we can iuſtly expect nothing but fearfull Iudgments to be powred downe vpon
vs. Wherefore we beſéech thee (O Lorde) that yet at laſt we may fall down vnder thy hand, and
profit by thy chaſtiſements: that we may tremble before thée when thou doeſt roare, and ſubmit
our ſelues, when thou ſendeſt out thine armies againſt vs.
            O Lorde teach vs that wee may denie the worlde, and conſidering that all is but vanitie, our deſires
may bee drawne vp to that life and happines which is for euer. Wee humbly beſéech thée, in
the middeſt of thy wrath, to bee mindefull of thy mercy, make thine anger to ceaſe, and powre out
thy iudgements vpon the wicked. Cleare vs from the contagion of ſinne, and we ſhall be cleered
from the infection of the peſtilence, ſo that it ſhall not hurt vs. But this (good Father) belongeth
vnto thee, and thou muſt doe both the one and the other. Thou canſt deliuer our ſpirits from the
venome of that dragon the deuill. And alſo thou canſt kéepe our bodyes in ſafetie from the other infection
wherwith that Baſiliſke the plague doth inſect vs. Our helpe (O Lord) is onely in thee, other
men of the world (who haue their pleaſure altogether in the vaine things of this life) th
                  •
               nke to
eſcape by ſuch meanes as fleſhe and blood do preſcribe vnto them, and therefore all their hope is in
the preſeruatiues of Phiſicians, in ſhifting of places, in Magicall cunning, and ſuch other vnlawfull
witcheries: but contrarywiſe, wée (howſoeuer wée uſe the remedyes that are fitte one conuenient,
to ſhew our obedience vnto thée) yet flée wee vnto thee alone, and knowe that thy good bleſſing
can onely make the meanes profitable vnto vs. Thy hand we knowe cannot be auoyded, for
if thou wilt reach vs, thou canſt finde vs out whereſoeuer wee be. There is no ſafety but in thy preſence.
Be at hand therefore O Lord to helpe vs. Take away (O Lord) the filthy infections of
ſinne, which cleaueth as an infection vppon the whole face of this land, and dam vp the peſtiferous
pits of corruption, that haue aſcended vp, euen vp to heauen: and turne vs, O Lorde, vnto thee,
and we ſhall be turned, and when we ſhall be turned vnto thee, thy wrath ſhall ceaſe. If we ſhall
humble our ſelues, and meete thee with true faith, and vnfained repentance, with hartye teares,
and true faſting in Sack-cloath and Aſhes, then thou ſhall call in again thy meſſengers, and ſhew
mercy vpon vs. If wee ſhall feare thy iudgements, and loue thy commandements, deteſt ſinne,
and fight againſt the corruption of our hearts: if wee ſhall aduance righteouſneſſe, and preferre
obedience before our liues, then ſhalt thou purifie both our ſoules and bodies, and prepare vs to
that euerlaſting kingdome and glory, which thou haſt purchaſed for vs, by the blood of Ieſus Chrſt,
thine onely begotten Sonne, our Lord and Sauiour, Amen.
         
      
      
         
            Printed for T. Pauyer, and are to be ſold at his ſhop entring into the Exchange.
         
      
   