
      
         
            
            
            
               LOrde omnipotent and moſte mercyfull father, gyue vs remiſſyon of
our ſynne, and graunt vs delyueraunce from all oure iniquitie. Gyue vs thy moſt holye
ſpirite, with thy blyſſed and mercyfull fauour, that he may lead vs to euerlaſtynge lyfe
through thyne onely ſonne Ieſus Chriſt our ſaniour and only ſatiſfaccion. For whome
gracious father & almyghtye God, we moſt humbly thanke the, for all thyne haboundaunre
benefites, with the whiche thou haſte hyther vnto haboundantlye indued vs.
And that it hath pleaſed the, the yere nowe paſt, to preſerue vs: And broughte vs to
the begynnynge of thys yere: thou haſte noryſhed vs, taught vs, and defended vs,
bothe in body and ſoule. We wholly beſeche thyne ineffable pitie, and clemencye, to pardon vs, whatſoeuer
hether vnto we haue offended agaynſte the, and that thou wylte replenyſhe vs with thyne moſte holye
ſpirite, whiche maye thys yere and for euer teache and gouerne vs, that whatſoeuer bee done by vs, it
may redounde to the glory of thy name, and to the edifiynge of thy churche. Oh pitiful father, and God full
of compaſſion, beholde thy congregation or churches, and delyuer them frome Woulfes, and hyryd
ſeruauntes, & giue them trewe ſhepherdes, that may ſtudie to gather together thy flocke, ſo myſerablye diſparſed
abrode vnto thy deare beloued ſonne, our onely ſheparde: & geue grace that they maye paſture vnder
him in ye paſtures yt leadeth to eternal lyfe. Vnto our moſt noble Kynge, Edwarde ye vi. his moſt honourable
Syſters, his gracious, and honourable Councellers, to all the Magiſtrates and gouernours of this realme
and others, ſende the feare of thy holye name. And graunte moſt benigne and mercyfull God that they may
ſtudye and take paynes to gouerne thy people and theyr ſubiectes after thy holy law and good wyl, ſo that
they thus beynge delyuered from all ydolatrye and wickednes maye haue forſe and ſtrengthe to defende
theirs from the enemyes of thy holye name.
            To all thoſe that be ignoraunt and not yet come to the vnderſtandynge of thyne onlye truthe: make
the goſpell to ſhyne vnto them, and drawe them vnto the right knowledge of thy dere ſonne: that they alſo
with vs in him, maye optayne eternal ſaluacion. To all troubled, afflicted, and miſerable perſons, ſende
ſuccoure good Lorde and couſolacion from heauen, and geue them all grace, vnfarnedly, hollye to turne
them ſelues vnto the, that iuſtlye ſtrykeſt them. So that in caſe any in their trouble departe, yet let not thy
mercye ſuffre them to doute, but that they do in Chriſte paſſe from deathe to lyfe. Vnto all other Lorde
graunte we praye the that this preſente caſtigacion and punyſhmente maye be to the amendement of theyr
lyfes. Vnto thyne one, and vniuerſall churche, into the whiche thy ſo
                  •
               e mercye and grace hathe called and
appoynted vs, vnto all vertues and godlye Scoles, whiche inyndethe to promote, and auaunce thy glory,
vnto this moſte noble Citie of London, and vnto all other, as well within this realme as without: in the
which thy myſerable and perſecuted ſeruauntes hathe entreteynement, lodgynge, and conſolacion, vnto all
ſuche as by office and dewtye peculiarlye are commended vnto vs: whiche prayethe vnto the for vs, and for
whome alſo we be bounde to praye. Vnto theſe good Lorde and vnto vs all thy miſerable creatures, and
ſubiectes of this realme geue grace, that we maye farther entre into a knowledge of oure ſelfes, and more
depely vnderſtande oure ſynnes, and infirmites, and more dilygentlye ſtudye to amende them. Graunte
good Lorde that the mercye thou haſte promyſed vs in Chriſte, we maye with an vnfayned hearte ſeke for,
and with a ſured and ſtedfaſt faithe vndoutedlye applye it vnto vs. So that from daye to daye euer mordyinge
to oure ſelues we maye more lyue vnto the. And thus puttynge of, the olde
man, we maye by the, put on the newe man whiche is created vnto thy
licknes throughe our Lorde Ieſus Chriſte, thy onely ſonne. For
whoſe ſake good Lorde defende and kepe vs
this yere and for euer. So be it.
         
      
      
         
            ¶Imprinted at London by Rycharde Iugge, dwellynge in
Paules churche yarde at the ſygne of the Bible.
         
      
   