
      
         
            
            
            HONORS FAME IN TRIVMPH RIDING.
            OR, THE LIFE AND DEATH OF THE LATE HONORABLE EARLE OF ESSEX.
            LONDON, Printed by R. B. for Roger Iackson, and are to be solde at his Shoppe in Fleet-streete, neere the Conduit. 1604.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE EARLES OF SOVTHHAMPTON and Deuonshire, and the Lord KNOVLES, Baron of Grayes, R. P. wisheth all increase of honor, and endlesse happinesse.
            
               RIght honorable, and worthily renowmed Lords, such is the mutabilitye of times vnconstant motion: as that things wel done cannot challenge, to themselues, the certainty of their euent, nor without suspect of euill (misconstrued inputation) build their hope. And when the wel meaning actions of mighty men cannot (in permanent stability) stand cleared from the after-rays'd-vp misty Meteors which may encomber them: what then shoulde I expect (being no other then pouerty it selfe) but that this work, by me aduentured should with my self dangerously run vpon vncertaine hopes? although the vprightnes of my conscience vowes, I haue not herunto bin lead by any particular inuectiue spleen or turbulent affection: only a priuate consideration made me thinke, that it might now be a time in which the praise of honours worthines might haue his place, and not any longer by a violent imposition be taxed with vndeserued euill. It were inhumane tyranny, to forbid the vertues of the dead to be cōmended: and no lesse cruelty to charge the deceased with vncōmitted offences. There are certain polititians in this age, not vnlike the Grecian Orators, which Diogenes called 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , thrise double men: their tongues and pens are miserably valiant: they may well

be tearmed three times thrise double minded men: theyr ayery statiōs tottering stands aloft; like windmils placed vppon a mountayns top, whose sayles can turne themselues to imbrace the benefit of each variable blast: but, being climbd vnto an extraordinary height, are oft times by an vnexpected storme sodainly throwne headlong downe, and broken at the mountains foote: leauing their recuerlesse ruines to remayne vnmoaned monuments of their presumptuous mounting. Some goulden mony mouthed eloquence, that vseth a detractors Oratry, may stop the vnequall current of his fine wits most grosse ingendred flux, by fetching from the Tyrant Nero a very wel prescribed documēt. For plainly thus his affirmation sayth: that it is no part of a wise man thence to drawe credit to himselfe, from whence proceedeth discredit to his friend. Is it not maruell that a rhetoricall politician should be lesse wise then wicked Nero was? & that his sentence shoulde directly call him foole? yet thus it happeneth, when with the change of time, Time seruers vse to say, Hac non successit: alia aggrediendum est via.
            
            When honor and vnstaind nobility, by ill aduise and inconsiderate thoughts, vntimely falls into some daungerous accident: then though the lawe, in robes of iustice armd, with quick pursuite doth follow euils amisse: yet should no minde on such dependance dwell: as if his wisht▪ for time of triumph were imbrac't, when he might glory in honored vertues fall: and like a lumpe of proude degenerate brasen insolence, euen in the gall of enuie, hate, and malice steept, scornefully impugne the honor of a Lands renowmed noblenesse. God, with my soule, an vncontrowled witnes beare: I not desire to speake against the iustice of the lawe, nor any honorable magistrate in place of Councel or of gouernment: only my words may neerly glance at such whose proud demeanour, & insulting

violence, made to the world an apparant demonstration that they were most ioyfull actors in a mournefull tragedy: but now the iustice of the heauens decree hath most iustly throwne themselues vnto the stroke of the selfe same iudgement. And now, my honorable Lords, when I looke back vnto my owne vnworthinesse, my Muse doth sound retrayte, and bids me stay the further occurrence of some other thinges, which wold most willingly be issuing forth. And for this little worke already done by me, with lowe submission I intreate your pardon: and do solemnly protest, that the vnfained loue I beare vnto the late Honorable, and yet still honored Earle of Essex, hath with an ineuitable force caused me to make this briefe description of his life and death. And though I desire to be freed from a Poets name; yet because the musick of a mourning verse doth best consort with sorrowes passion, I haue made choyse thereof, in hope your L L. will be pleased to excuse my vnpolisht, rough, vnsmoothed Poetry. My greatest studie with religious care hath sought to build my words vpon the ground of truth: & hauing brought my labor to an end, I knew not better vnto whome to dedicate the same, then to your Honors. Not for my sake then, but for his, whose vertues I desire should liue, be pleased to receiue this well meaning worke into your loues protection: and thus, with all submissiue humblenesse, a souldier humbly throwes his liues seruice at your Honors feet.
            
               Yours, in all dutifull obedience, R. P.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader, health.
            
               ALthough, right courteous Reader, my former writings haue not so imbouldned me, as that I should againe aduenture to bring my selfe vnto so miserable a punishment, as the third time to indure the presse: yet choosing rather to dy, then not to manifest my loue vnto an honorable deceased Earle, I haue, out of the affectiō of an honest mind, desired to set before your eyes the fame of honor, in his Triumph riding: and doe hope, that for his sake, whose liuing vertues I labour to commende, this worke of mine shall bring it selfe into your kinde acceptance. And as you desire that the plants of honor, now established, shoulde florish with a glorious dignity, doe not choose out any one particular, whose fame and prayse you will desire to follow, with the generality of a popular estimation: nor inuolue the person of a noble man in the ayerie cloudes of your intemperate Aue: least the honour, which you most desire to preserue, bee vntimely poysoned by your breath: of which euent, this after following briefe description contaynes a mournefull spectacle. Reade therefore with re▪ spectiue diligence, and haue greate regarde, you do no iniurie, by setting any imposition in his wrong place: which you shall directly doe, if you beare my wordes against any, which doe now continue in place of honour, honorablye deseruing: for vnto them the Authour doth ascribe all honourable estimation. Thus the good opinion of eache well affected reader he desireth, whose hearte preferreth theyr content before his owne, whose life is readie in a souldiers place, vnto the last article of death, to manifest the vnfayned loue he beareth vnto his countries publick benefite. Vale.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Honors fame, in Triumph riding.
            
               FRom forth the dust, my lines desire to rayse
                bright honors fame, in triūphs state to ride,
               Whose liuing worth did so adorne his prayse,
                as that his glory shall to the world abide
               The only Mirror of a valiant mind,
               Whose Honors thoughts, not to base wealth inclin'd,
               Doe make him liue, though long since dead,
               And crownes with bayes his buried head.
            
            
               Whil'st breath gaue strength, vnto his warlike arme,
                he did vphould the pompe of Englands state:
               He stroue to shield his natiue soyle from harme,
                and did the pride of proudest foes abate:
               A kingdomes eyes once sawe his faithfull trust,
               And did accompt his actions wise and iust:
               Greate Maiestie, and wisedomes Queene,
               Would say his like was neuer seene.
            
            
               Euen from his youth, till yeares of riper strength,
                in vertues schoole, a studious life he spent:
               His Honors thoughts desir'd & gain'd, at length,
                
                  Mineruaes food the sweet of his content:
               
                  Apollo deckt his Muse in siluers shine,
               And wrapt in gold his goulden thoughts diuine:
               Honours wonder, wisedoms mirror,
               In his braue breast liued together.
            
            
               
                  When creeping time had brought to manhoods yeers
                this honored bud al glorious in his spring,
               Then as the sunne from forth a cloude appears,
                and doth his light with greater brightnes bring:
               So did this prince: his thoughts maiesticall
               Made him to be great Lesters Generall;
               Braue troupes of horse he brauely led,
               And thus at first his fame was spred.
            
            
               But when to Frāce his warlike mind had brought
                him selfe, well arm'd, vpon baye Traces back:
               The king and Lords his loue and fauor sought,
                nor gold nor coyn that valiāt prince could lack.
               I sawe his sword all bath'd in Foemans bloud,
               A broken lance in Traces breast there stood:
               French king and Peers did dignifie
               This Peerlesse warriers Cheualry.
            
            
               But when he went to fruitfull Portingale,
               
                for to inthroane a mournefull bannisht king,
               How did his deeds his prayse to heauen exhale!
                his honors worth you sacred Muses sing.
               Spaines Chronicle, and Lisborne gates can tell,
               His warlike arme deserued wondrous well:
               His foes themselues keepe in record,
               That none durst combat with that Lord.
            
            
               
                  When Sun-burnt Spaine in heate of angers toyle,
                Did with his Lords in sollome counsell set:
               Vowing to worke faire Albions vtter spoile,
                Against whose state his brest with spleene did fret:
               This newes no sooner vnto Albian came,
               But this braue prince, was thought the worthiest man:
               And as Spaine ment to worke our woe,
               He thither went, and vsed them so.
            
            
               Let Cales tell forth the honor of his deeds,
                His valiant prowes, and his iustice such:
               As who so but their owne description reed,
                Will say of truth, that he deseru'd as much
               As euer any noble Conquerer did,
               His Conquering sword was with such mercie led:
               As datelesse time shall speake his fame,
               And blaze the honor of his name.
            
            
               In field, in Court, in peace, in war, he stood
                Inuironed with honor and desart:
               From him did flow the streames of vertues flood,
                He doubtles had a sound and faithfull hart,
               To Prince and States, and for the publike weale,
               The things amisse he alwaies sought to heale:
               Thus did he stand belou'd of all,
               And yet the Fates decreed his fall.
            
            
               
                  Vnhappie time that sent him from this land,
                Vnhappie warres that his imployment sought:
               Vnhappie broiles rais'd by rebellious hand,
                Vnhappie cause that fowle suspition wrought:
               Vnhappie all, for all vnhappie be,
               Vnhappie those that wisht his miserie:
               Vnhappie meanes that did direct,
               The cause to worke vntrue suspect.
            
            
               His noble selfe, had he bene fortunate,
                
                  Irelands peace had well effected bin:
               Without mistrust of danger to the state,
                But when to march his armie did begin,
               Some misse there was, directions all not kept,
               Enuie rous'd vp, that winkt but neuer slept:
               Aduantage tooke, when harmeles thought,
               To good effect would all haue brought.
            
            
               In course of warre, a Prince both wise and iust,
                Must not by booke his march and battells make:
               To each occasion turne his hand he must,
                And as offence is giuen, so wisely take
               Aduantage of the cause, the time and place,
               Precribed rules will else procure disgrace:
               These paper plots wantes iudgement right,
               To teach an army how to fight.
            
            
               
                  But this I thinke, and heauens me witnesse beare,
                Though ill successe vpon his Troopes did wait
               His honours minde, still kept a princely care
                Warres worke to doe without corrupt deceit,
               And willingly he neuer did intend
               His force against his countries good to bend:
               But seeming ill was ill approu'd
               By them who not his honour lou'd.
            
            
               Harmelesse in thought when he a peace had made,
                He back returnes to his beloued Queene,
               Thinking to rest secure vnder her shade,
                To whome she had a gratious mistris beene:
               But wanting warrant for his back returne,
               Displeased anger softly gan to burne:
               And some that did a flame desire,
               Threw flax and oyle into the fire.
            
            
               This action thus when it at first begun,
                And he restraind from Court a prisoner sent:
               In Ireland shinde faire Englands golden Sun,
                Whose valiant minde to vertuous actions bent:
               With wisdomes care and honoured labor sought,
               The meanes whereby rebellions land was brought:
               Vnto that peace which first was framde,
               By him whome some vniustly blamde.
            
            
               
                  The Queene of iustice hearing what was done,
                That perfite honour with an humble minde:
               With low submission to her Throne did runne,
                And crau'd he might her mercies fauour finde:
               Her Princely heart contentments ioy imbrac'd,
               And in her loue, loues Lord againe was plac'd:
               Then was there hope rhat shortly he,
               To place in Court restorde should be.
            
            
               But Enuie, why didst thou againe conspire?
                Abusde occasion, why didst thou displease?
               Suspition, why didst thou inflame new fire?
                Were all agreed bright honours crest to seaze?
               What secret action did inact the thing,
               That discontent to Mercies Queene did bring?
               She was appeasde, what new sowne seede,
               Brought forth such fruite her wrath to breede.
            
            
               Was all things well, and all things ill so soone?
                Was no mistrust, and now mistrust abounding:
               Wa'st then a time to light a torch at noone?
                Was honour thē self-honors course confounding?
               Why this was strange, from Court to keepe him still,
               T'was not amisse to doubt some farther ill:
               Such worshippers of policie,
               Commits most fowle idolatrie.
            
            
               
                  But by this meanes true honour was restrainde,
                From her the mistris of his life and death:
               He found himselfe of base-bred groomes disdainde,
                In passion then he sight forth sorrowes breath:
               The presēce of his Queene whose sight most ioyd him,
               Had giuen him life, the want thereof destroid him.
               Oh that a Loyall heart should be,
               Shut from his Soueraignes clemencie.
            
            
               Let but the man of honour and renowne,
                That is adorned with his Soueraignes loue:
               Whose heart is sound vnto the State and Crowne,
                Whose thoughts do alwaies faithfull motions moue:
               If exilde from his King he should remaine,
               And as a Traitor beare dishonours staine:
               What would he thinke, or what course take?
               Let noble mindes the answere make.
            
            
               From hence at last greefes boundlesse Ocian flowes,
                Turning woes streames into a flood of sorrow:
               And to such height sad discontentment growes,
                As that it seekes some meanes of helpe to borrow:
               Hope tells a course, thats crost, an other sought,
               This vrg'd occasion his confusion wrought:
               Still to his Queene he striues to goe,
               Kept back afresh, begins his woe.
            
            
               
                  Thus monthes and yeares in restles harbour tost, 
               A patient hope indures a raging storme:
               Bright honors ship did find it selfe neare lost,
                His Cable burst, and all his tacklings torne:
               Through rockes, through cliffes, through walls of brasse,
               His noble minde did then resolue to passe:
               For if to Thetis get he could,
               Saue life, and men, and ship he should.
            
            
               Thence did proceed the rigor of that day,
                VVhen haples life to liue did helpeles striue:
               Dispaire inrag'd did beare too great a sway,
                Hope could not at his wish for hauen arriue:
               Reuenge, mistrust and hate, preuention wrought,
               VVith bloody mouthes, they his destruction sought
               From euill to worse, poore Earle he fled,
               So was he to the slaughter led.
            
            
               Guarded with friends, vntimely forth he goes,
                To raise a force so strong his part to take:
               As that he might remoue his setled foes,
                And to his Queene a quiet passage make:
               But faithles hate did presently deuise,
               Proclayme him traytor, out aloude he cries;
               The name of traytor kild him dead,
               So he aliue was murthered.
            
            
               
                  Doubtles I thinke he had no Traytors hart,
                'Gainst Queene and State he did no treason plot;
               No more did they that then did take his part:
                He onely stroue 'gainst them that lou'd him not:
               But yet the Lawe their act did treason make.
               Such hostile armes no subiects vp must take.
               Thus when he thought an euill to shun,
               A greater euill by him was done.
            
            
               The Law hath past, Iustice his stroke hath strooke,
                And he is dead, yet shal he still suruiue:
               Vpon his honoured Vertues will I looke,
                And make them liue as were himselfe aliue:
               He dyde for treason; yet no Traytor. Why?
               The Treason done, he did it ignorantly.
               Intent and purpose in the act,
               Is that which makes a Traytors fact.
            
            
               But God forbid such Action should be good,
                As rashly into rude Combustion throwes
               A Kingdomes State, and wraps her brest in blood;
                Where peace in pomp with glorious plenty growes.
               And for this cause, I thinke that Iustice ment,
               To make his death a mournfull President:
               His tryall could example giue.
               Why did not Mercy let him liue?
            
            
               
                  Because that Mercy not arightly knew
                His heart, whom she disloyall did account,
               Report did feed her taste with Gall and Rue;
                For by his fall, some other vp must mount,
               And so they haue the Gallowes top vnto;
               For euer so may such like Mounters doe:
               But God is iust, so shall they finde,
               That lay their plots with bloudy minde.
            
            
               With humble lynes to Englands honored State,
                A Souldiers passion doeth desire to flye,
               Who neuer sought that Lord to ruinate,
                Nor chase him with bloud-thirsty cruelty.
               True honour? No, some baser stuffe it was,
               That sought to bring that stratageme to passe:
               For in that time Peeres were no men,
               They walkt about like shaddowes then▪
               
            
            
               Yet in the ranke of Honour, Honours grace,
                Reuerend, renowm'd, religious, vertuous, learn'd,
               Graue, sober, chaste, vpheld a Primates place,
                Whose godly wisdome Englands eyes discearnd,
               His soule diuine was to that Earle a friend,
               Whom froward fate bequeath'd to fatall end:
               But now their soules in purest loue,
               Liue with their Christ in heauens aboue.
            
            
               
                  Then Honours Seat, and Wisdomes fountayne pure,
                Iudgemēt approu'd, the rule of Conscience sound,
               His grieued thoughts did woes extreme endure,
                As did his loue: so did his griefes abound.
               A Iustice Chiefe, an equall loue preferres:
               No kingdome hath two worthyer Iusticers:
               
               Both these did mourne when Honour fell;
               For both were knowne to wish him well.
            
            
               And in my mind of Lords & Earles I view
                A mourning troup, whose looks all downward thrown,
               Told to the world, that they were mourners true;
                They reapt the fruit that sorrowes seed had sown:
               Ladies wise, fayre, and chaste, they weeping went,
               Sad time sad cause procur'd their discontent:
               Though Law strict course of Iustice kept,
               The most and best of all sorts wept.
            
            
               Then Noble minds wil help my Muse to mourne
                The losse of him, whom Honour did aduance,
               In their sad thoughts, haue Sable robes bin worne,
                They sigh to thinke of that sinister chance,
               Whose bloudy hād with fatal death snatcht hence
               That honored Earle, true Honours Excellence.
               Doe him this right, and Honour gayne,
               Pluck from his Hearse false rumors stayne.
            
            
               
                  Oh how I grieue! Report doeth wound my soule:
                So many treasons 'gainst that Earle obiected,
               Who whilst he liu'd, could those reports cōtroule;
                And but in one, that last, and least detected:
               Kill him no more, too well we know hee's dead,
               Whose life would now a ioyes content haue bred.
               No paper-powder rays'd vp smoke,
               Can Fames true honored vertues choke.
            
            
               It's false, to say, hee would a King haue bin:
                From faith & honor he made no such digression:
               His heart was cleare from such so foule a sin,
                He alwayes stood for this approu'd Succession,
               Which happily doeth now the Throne possesse:
               Heauens mighty God protect his Mightinesse.
               Dead Earle, amidst bright Angels wings,
               
                  Amen thy heauenly Spirit sings.
            
            
               Damme vp your mouthes, foule Enuies insolence,
                Fil not the world with monstrous mouthed lies,
               Of hate and malice you are the Instruments,
               Though smoothly you can closely temporize:
               Wrong not the dead, nor liuing honor wound:
               Let not one fault all vertues worth confound.
               To make the best of things misdone,
               Hath alwayes greatest honour wonne.
            
            
               
                  No cause there was, that in his lucklesse fall,
                So proudly some should triumph as they did,
               Against an Earle to spit impoysoned gall:
                But bloudy thoughts were made in bloud so red
               As heat and rage too much himselfe forgot,
               And boldly spake, he car'd not how, nor what.
               No vp-start groome sprung from the Cart,
               Should braue the honour of a lands desart.
            
            
               So vse base minds in greatnesse to forget 
               The place whence first they their beginning had,
               Their proud disdayne the noblest brest would hit:
                The fall of honour makes them wondrous glad.
               So was't: or else he rather would haue wept,
               Then proudly such a ruffling coyle haue kept:
               In this I ioy, his Prophecy
               The time hath turn'd to foolery.
            
            
               He was not last, though last that so shall end.
                We haue a Bud, sprung frō that honored Branch:
               God, in thy loue doe thou that Earle defend,
                And so his state by vertues steps aduance,
               As he may grow an honour to his King,
               Whose mercy did his youth to honor bring:
               And he that drest his fathers dish,
               Lord, let his end be worse then his.
            
            
               
                  England, beare witnesse, deceased Honour dyde
                Rich in thy Loue, his Loue was pure to thee,
               Not for his gayne; but for thy good he tryde,
                To doe what might become his Dignity:
               He hated Bribes, Extortion he defide,
               Gayne by thy losse, his noble heart denyde:
               To doe thee good, he spent his wealth,
               His Ioy consisted in thy health.
            
            
               The Church of God, Diuine religious Grace 
               Was grac'd by him, his heauenly sanctity,
               Vnto the written Truth of God gaue place,
                His heart did loue the reuerend Ministery:
               All Popish trash, and Romes inuentions vilde,
               Were from his Soule, as hatefull things exilde.
               Good men from foes hee did protect,
               The poore he neuer did reiect.
            
            
               He was no Churle, nor wretch-like couetous,
                His noble Brest, as drosse, base gold esteemd,
               Valiant, Liberall, Wise and Vertuous,
                His honor more then all worlds wealth he deemd.
               Some could in print his honored Bounty scorne,
               That largely bare frō him great sheaues of corne.
               Such tricks as these Time-seruers vse.
               What Vertue will they not abuse?
            
            
               
                  He faythfull was and constant to his friend,
                In Loue and Iustice alwayes permanent,
               His Honours Word, who did thereon depend,
                Found, that true Action with his Promise went,
               No purse nor pocket could that Lord contayne
               Who giues most. Fy, he scorn'd such hateful gain.
               No partiall eye made bad things good;
               T'wixt both, that Prince vprightly stood.
            
            
               He was not hollow, like the Vaults of hell,
                His soundnesse fled from base hypocrisy,
               He fetcht no rules from hel-borne Machiauel,
               
                His learning was diuine Philosophy,
               His word and deed without a false intending,
               In Honors Lyst went on, the Truth commending;
               His vertues steps to Truth enclinde,
               Close subtile falshood vnderminde.
            
            
               In deeds of Warre, he was a Souldier tryde,
                True Fortitude dwelt in his valiant brest,
               The hope of England on his Sword relyde,
                Amongst our Worthies let him stand for best:
               When he was armde in warres Habilliments,
               His Glorie seemde a matchlesse Excellence;
               His person, as his vertues rare,
               Might Peerelesse with the world compare.
            
            
               
                  His Wisdome, Learning and his Eloquence,
                His well-grac't speech and flowing vtterance,
               His quicke conceit and Wisdomes comprehence:
                All these rare Gifts his honour did aduance,
               And made him liue the Mirrour of our time,
               Beyōd whose worth, no worthier step could clime.
               God and Nature did consent,
               To make his Substance excellent.
            
            
               He was not proud, but humble, courteous, meeke:
                Ambitious then, who rightly terme him can?
               From Articke Pole to the Antartike seeke,
                But neuer finde a brauer Gentleman:
               Crosse all the Zoans, and in no Clymate dwells
               A Vertue, that his Vertues worth excells:
               But he is dead, yet shall he liue,
               Fame to his praise shall honor giue.
            
            
               Where's now the heart of Flint or Marble stone,
                That mournes not for the losse of him so deare?
               The Flower of a Kingdomes pride is gone:
                No Time, no land brought foorth a worthyer Peere:
               No King nor Queen a better seruant had,
               No Subiect more did make his countrey glad:
               And for his fault, to mourne with mee,
               Millions of weeping eyes I see.
            
            
               
                  Who so beheld the choise of natures arte,
                with noble presence and Maiestick steps,
               When from his chamber honor did depart,
                to place preparde a fatall death to fetch,
               Might there haue seene shine in a princely eye,
               The beames of honour and nobilitie:
               Valiant prowesse, resolution rare,
               Vndanted thoughts to death did beare.
            
            
               He like himselfe in roabes of honor clad,
                with countnance cleare and lookes heroicall,
               Went on as if in heart he had beene glad,
                to meete his friends at some great feastiuall.
               His noble minde the path of death did tread,
               As if it did vnto some triumph lead.
               And thus by this thinke in thy thought,
               Thou see'st him to the scaffold brought.
            
            
               Nay weepe not yet, reade on, an Earle behold,
                as constant as is heauens celestiall frame:
               See how he mounts with valiant courage bold,
                in bloud to write the letters of his fame.
               Vpon the scaffold see him walking now,
               To deaths spectators doth he humbly bow:
               Oh her's a sight yet comes a worse,
               To make the world that time to curse.
            
            
               
                  The oracle of godly wisdome then,
                with siluer sound, these speeches forth did send:
               My Lords, and all you worthy Gentlemen,
                that comes to see the period of my end.
               I not denie, but this confesse I must,
               My triall hath beene honourably, iust:
               And so the lawe my cause did trie,
               As iustice doom'd me thus to die.
            
            
               Yet in the presence of that all Creators sight,
                before whose throne I presently shall stand:
               Against the state I neuer bent my might,
                nor gainst my soueraigne reard a traitors hand,
               Some priuate foes my sword would haue displast,
               By whom I thought my honour was disgrast:
               From that intent grew my amis,
               For which offence death welcome is.
            
            
               With things below I haue not now to deale,
                my peace twixt God and conscience must I make▪
               
               And that my Christ his woūds my woūds may heale
                pray all with me that God for Christ his sake,
               Would in his death intombe my sinnes most vilde,
               That dying, I may dye his faithfull childe:
               So kneeling downe, zeale, sorrow, faith,
               To God a heauenly praier saith.
            
            
               
                  Not any tongue more heauenly graces spake,
                not any hart more godly sorrow felt:
               Not any Prince a wiser prayer could make,
                not any soule with God and conscience delt
               More plainely, nor made better testament,
               That from this world his soule to glorie went,
               With gracious spirit he begins,
               And gratiously his prayer ends.
            
            
               Then rising vp, with vnstainde glorie still,
                he doth himselfe for stroake of death prepare:
               Off goes his gowne, and with an humble will,
                his band throwne hence, his neck holeaueth bare.
               His doublet next, his honoured selfe layes by,
               with smiling lookes, and cheerefull maiestie,
               To read, and weep, is order kept,
               With him that sigh'd, and writ, and wept.
            
            
               The hand that then should send him to his graue,
                he calles to see, feare playes the hangmans part,
               But Noblenesse, a noble welcome gaue,
                my friend said he, why faints thou in thy hart.
               Resolue to doe thy office cheerefully,
               The deaths man kneeling, doth for pardon crye.
               Honor bids rise, why shouldst thou feare,
               Thou art but Iustice minister.
            
            
               
                  Thus nobly did the life of honors breath,
                a conqueror like all worldes respects subdue:
               So did he triumph in the gates of death,
                as if he then no such like danger knew.
               Oh let his fame vnto the world be spred,
               Whose fortitude was neuer conquered:
               Let thy conceit his action see,
               And reade, and sigh, and weepe with me.
            
            
               Now takes heleaue of all the standers by,
                his comely grace was vertues ornament:
               Griefe then drownd vp each sad beholders eye,
                whilst his blest soule was wrapt in sweet content.
               Then kneeling downe, all prostrate flat he lies,
               With neck on block, his bloud to sacrifice,
               And to his deaths man say he did,
               Strike when thou seest my armes are spred.
            
            
               There might you see how Honour downe was throwne,
                and yet his eyes from earth to heauen ascends:
               His youth was like a lofty Ceder growne,
                but now his death his soule to heauen cōmends.
               My Christ saith he, I come, thy armes vnfolde,
               My soule do thou in thy imbracements holde:
               And thus he bids the world adue,
               And then his armes abroad he threw.
            
            
               
                  Stay, pawse, thinke, sigh, weepe first, & then read on,
                now comes a sight to rend woes hart in sunder:
               No mournefull eye did euer looke vpon
                a wofull worke perform'd with greater wonder.
               Resolued honour now perceiue you may,
               All fearles for the stroake of death doth stay:
               His eyes, his lookes to heauen commends,
               The place to which his soule intends.
            
            
               Base wretch, whose hand true honors bloud should spill,
                deaths axe did first into his shoulder strike:
               Vpreard againe he strikes a blow as ill,
                nor one nor other were directed right.
               Honor ne're moou'd, a third blow did deuide
               The body from the worlds admired pride:
               Was that the way to lose a head,
               To haue an Earle so butchered?
            
            
               From gaping wounds pure streames of bloud gusht forth
                from azurd vaines the foode of life distild:
               Wisedome, loue, faith, renowne and honor both,
                were all at once thus hackt, thus chopt, thus kild.
               There was a sight to send forth sorrowes floud,
               A Swanny whitenes wrapt in robes of bloud:
               But thinke you saw him, and for his sake,
               Then let your teares woes period make.
            
            
               
                  Thus masacard in strength of lusty youth,
                was Englands Earle, whose worth the world admir'd
               His life till now had prou'd his honors truth,
                vntimely was his fatall death conspir'd.
               If any read, whose hand was stain'd therein,
               Let some vild death, make known his damned sin,
               The rest that mourne, let sorrowes tide
               Make honors fame in triumph ride.
            
            
               Go to the Courts of Denmarke, France & Spaine,
                and sadly tell his dolefull tragicke seane:
               And marke what sighs your words will entertaine,
                and see what teares from honored eies will streame
               In any place within earths compasse round,
               This tale but told, may sighs and teares be sound:
               Faire Ladies they with drownd vp eies
               To honors fame will sacrifice.
            
            
               And when report hath tolde his sorrowes story,
                his life and death, and actions done by him:
               Then reard vp hands will wonder at his glory,
                each hearer seemes in sorrowes flouds to swim,
               And then they say, would not his Queene forgiue
               His fault that such a peerelesse prince might liue?
               Yes, had she knowne asmuch as they,
               He had not then beene cast away.
            
            
               
                  Her Royall brest was falsly oft accusde, 
               of cruell deeds but She was mercies childe
               For honors death She well may be excus'd,
                by priuate tales rough worke was smoathly filde.
               Could he but once Her glories sight haue gaind,
               And vnto Her, his wrongs and woes complaind:
               Then had he liu'd, and that they knew,
               Whose hate her hart from him withdrew.
            
            
               But could her eyes these weeping lines peruse,
                her princely teares would show hir sorrows griefe:
               Her selfe would say, they did hir grace abuse
               , that in that action were the actors chiefe.
               And truth to say, I thinke her Maiesty:
               
               Was chiefest mourner in that tragedy,
               Though now a fluent nimble wit,
               Can bouldly play the polliticke.
            
            
               I doe not striue Inuectiuely to speake,
                nor haue I will, a wilfull harme to doe:
               A peace confirm'd I would by no meanes breake,
                yet can I not like fawning flatterers woe.
               Let truth be truth, and free the dead from wrong,
               And blame him not that sings this sorrowes song,
               For him who did a souldier loue,
               Whose death a souldiers griefe doeth moue.
            
            
               Vnto his Country, his honours bloud he gaue,
                which for his Country, more better had bin spent:
               Vnkinde his Country, that worthy bloud to craue,
                which was for her, and for her seruice bent.
               
                  His mother England hauing slaine her sonne,
               The world will say it was vnkindly done:
               Though iustice may with this dispence,
               It wanted mercies influence.
            
            
               This Yron world hath Angell mercy left,
                worlds worldlings they that vertue hence haue driuen:
               This rotten age is of that grace bereft,
                that mercy now is onely plac'd in heauen.
               And thither is the ghost of honor fled,
               Through ayerie orbes by heauenly angels led,
               Vnto that place where ioye excels,
               And there the soule of honour dwels:
            
            
               Where God and Christ, and holy ghost combinde, 
               inuironde are with glory more, then if
               Ten hundred thousand sunnes at once all shinde,
                and clearly should their radient splendence guise.
               Amidst that glory the soule of Essex stands,
               In endlesse ioy vpheld by Angels hands,
               Then mourne no more, heauen hath his spirit,
               Whose life on earth such praise did merit.
            
            
               But now heauens God, King, Queene & Prince and state,
                inuiron roūd within thy loues protection:
               Let Britons Monarch like the worlds triumphe rate,
                rule still in peace, rulde by thy lawes direction.
               His Nobles blesse, and let no priuate hate,
               Procure the meanes our peace to ruinate:
               And thus my Muse his farewell giues,
               And tels the world Fames honour liues.
            
         
         
            
            Upon the Author and his subiect.
            
               THou that true Honor from the graue doest raise,
               And on Fames golden wings doest make it flie:
               Who with thy Pen the neuer dying praise,
               From ground doest lift vp to the Starrie skie,
               Of that braue Earle, whose life the greatest glory,
               Whose death to Britaine yeeldes the saddest storie.
            
            
               Oh giue me leaue thy faithfull hart t'admire.
               Which suffrest not thy loue with him to dye:
               But with thy Muse doest make affections fire
               To shine most bright, now he intomb'd doth lye.
               And as thy sword while he inioy'd his breath,
               So now thy Pen doth serue him after death.
            
            
               Thy worke I cannot say doth match his worth,
               For heauen and earth doth equall that no more:
               Tis praise for Prickets Pen, if it pricke forth
               Some gowned Muse his fortunes to deplore.
               Schollers and Souldiers both were to him bound,
               Why should they not be both like thankefull found:
            
            
               All those braue Romaines whom the world admir'd
               So much for their high magnanimitie,
               With morrall vertues were not more inspir'd,
               Besides his cleere light of Diuinitie.
               All his lifes morne he like a Romaine led,
               At noone like a Diuine went to deaths bed.
            
            
               
                  Epita. There sleepes great Essex, dearling of mankinde,
               Faire Honors lampe, foule Enuies pray, Artes fame,
               Natures pride, Vertues bulwarke, lure of minde,
               Wisdomes flower, Valoures tower, Fortunes shame:
               
                  Englands sunne, Belgias light, Frances star, Spaines thūder,
               
                  Lysbones lightning, Irelands clowde, the whole worlds wonder.
            
            
               Ch. Best. Arm.
            
            
            
         
      
   