
      
         
            
            
            A
SERMON
PREACHED AT
THE FVNERALL OF
Mr. IOSIAH REYNEL
Esquire, the 13. of August
1614. in East-Ogwell in
DEVON.
            By Iohn Preston Minister of Gods
word in East-Ogwell.
            
               LONDON,
Printed by Nicholas Okes, for Richard Boulton, and are
to be sold at his shop in Chancery-lane.
1615.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
WORSIPFVL SIR THOMAS
REYNEL, SIR GEORGE
REYNEL, SIR CAREW REYNEL,
KNIGHTS: Mr. RICHARD REYNEL
Esquire, Grace, Mercy and Peace in the
blessed LORD IESVS.
            
               RIGHT WORSHIPFVL,
            
            
               IT may seeme strange that I haue
ioyned you all together in one Inscription,
when euery one of you
seuerally are worthy of a better
gift then here is exhibited, or by
me can be giuen; yet herein I haue
done no more then nature, brotherly
affection, and Christianity hath
done. That I haue clothed this in the liuery of your Patronages,
I might haue giuen many reasons: First, for
that you are louers of true religion, and fauourers of all
true professors. Secondly, because it was preached at the
interring of your deere brother. Thirdly, because I had
rtaher the whole world shold condemne me as vniust, &
the curious and captious carpe at me, then you should
so much as thinke me vnthankfull. I owe vnto you all a
double debt, of Loue, and of Seruice. Of loue, the
more I pay, the more I owe; though a debt once paid, be

no more due, yet loue being paid, is still due. Seruice I
will bee ready to pay to the vttermost, though it come
short of your great deserts, and of my manifold desires: I
that yeeld to all in learning, will yeeld to none in loue
and seruice to you. But to you right worshipful and worthy
Patron, I owe a treble debt, of Loue, of Seruice, and
Thankfulnesse: Of loue, for your extraordinary kindnesse
in preferring me, and for that countenance you
haue continually giuen to my weake Ministerie: Of seruice,
such as I can performe, I will not faile; daily beseeching
God for the increase of his spirituall graces here,
and eternal glory hereafter, both to your selfe, and al such
as are d
                  •
               ere vnto you. Of thankfulnesse, in patronizing
me being absent, kindly entreating me present, and for
affecting me long before I was by you preferred. Of some
I shall be hardly censured, of others thought ambitious in
seeking mens fauours. For this I care not, so the well-affected
Christian may think of the shortnesse of his life,
and thereby prepare to dye; and being ready, to bee willing
to dye, and you be pleasd to procure a quiet passage
vnder your patronages for those few indigested meditations,
which were by Gods permission, and his assisting
Spirit, first preached, and now published: I ascribe the
patronage to you, the vse to the godly, and the successe to
God. The God of peace giue you the peace of God which
passeth all humane vnderstanding, and affoord you many
comforts and ioyes in this life to the end, and in the
next his ioy without end.
            
               Your worships in all faithfull
seruice,
IOHN PRESTON.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A SERMON PREACHED
AT THE FVNERALL OF
Mr. IOSIAH REYNEL Esquire, the 13.
of Aprill 1614. in East-Ogwell
in Deuon.
            
               PSAL. 39. 5.
               Behold, thou hast made my dayes as an hand bredth, and
mine age is nothing in respect of thee: surely euery
man in his best state is altogether vanity.
            
            
               THE Princely Prophet Dauid,
who was a man after Gods owne
heart, 1. Sam. 13. 14.1. Sam. 13. 14. The chosen
of God, Psa. 78. 70.Psal. 78. 70. A man gratious
with God, Act. 7. 46Acts 7. 46. The seruant
of God, Ps 89. 20.Psalm. 89. 20. The type
of Christ. Acts 2. 25.Acts 2. 25. Nay Christ
is called the son of Dauid, Math.
1. 1.Math 1. 1. The sweet singer of Israel,2. Sam. 23. 1. a man that had tasted
the full cup of Gods mercies, and had beene
plunged in many troubles, insomuch as hee said:Psalm. 34. 19.
               Great are the troubles of the righteous, Psa. 34. 19. Hee
doth often complaine of his troubles, and that with
great griefe and bitternesse of minde, and chiefly in
this place. This Psalme is partly narratiue, partly

precatiue: In the first part Dauid declareth how hee
had purposed with himselfe to take need of murmuring
against God, which might arise through the
iniuries of men. In the second part he desireth that
God would certifie him of the vanitie of this life,
and therefore he saith:Psalme 39. 4. 
               Lord let me know my 
                     ••
                  d, and
the measure of my dayes what it is: let mee know how
long I haue to liue. Psal. 39. 4. In another place hee
saith:Psalm 90. 12. 
               Teach vs so to number our dayes, that we may apply
our hearts vnto wisdome. Psa. 90. 12. Dauid in these
words doth not desire death, but he requesteth that
he may be brought to a serious consideration of his
mortality, as is euident by the words, Let me know
my end: that is, the end of my naturall life, of my
daies, which by thy decree I must liue in this world,
and then he saith; Behold, thou hast made my dayes as
an hand breadth, and mine age is nothing in respect of
thee: surely euery man in his best estate is altogether vanity.
            
            Here note
4 things. 
                  1 A note of attention, Behold.
                  
                  2 A confession, thou hast made my dayes
as an hand bredth.
                  3 An asseueration: surely,
                  
                  4 An amplification, euery man in his best
estate is altogether vanitie.
               
            
            It is as much as if the Prophet had said; Behold,
I will shew and declare vnto you by a twofold comparison,
that the Lord hath made my dayes short;
for they are but as an hand bredth, which is one of
the shortest measures, and the time of my life is as
nothing, or like to nothing; and surely euery man,
not onely such as are of base condition, but the

mighty and the noble are vanity.
            
               [Behold,] This word behold, consisteth of few
letters, lesse sillables, yet very significant: Sometimes
it is a badge of admiration, as Behold a Virgine
shall conceiue and beare a sonne, and thou shalt call his
name Immanuel, Esay 7. 14.Esay 7. 14. Sometimes a signe of alteration,Reuelat. 21. 5.
as Behold I will make all things new. Reu. 21.
5. Sometimes a token of gladnesse; Behold, I bring
you tydings of great ioy that shall be to all people,
               Luk. 2. 10. 
               Luke
2. 10. Sometimes a point of demonstration, Behold
the place where they haue laid him. Mark. 16. 6.Marke 16. 6. Sometimes
it shewes a thing vnknowne, Behold I will
send you Eliah the Prophet, Mal. 4. 5.Mal. 4 5. Sometimes it is
taken scornefully, Behold the man that tooke not God
for his strength, but trusted in the multitude of his riches,
and put his strength in his malice.
               Psalme 52. 7. 
               Psalm. 52. 7.
Sometimes it is a note of attention, Behold I stand
at the dore and knocke, &c. Reu. 3. 20.Reuelat. 3. 20. Declaring his
loue to the Laodiceans. In this one word behold,
here is comfort for such as faint, and Gods loue is
shewed towards such as repent. In this place it is a
note of attention, to put vs in minde of the breuity
and shortnesse of our liues.
            Here obserue,Doctr. that euery word in the Scripture
is remarkeable, and this word behold is not a word
of course, but a note to stirre vp our attention. It is
like the sounding of a Trumpet before some waighty
Proclamation, or like the ringing of a great Bell,
before the Sermon of a famous Preacher: it is set
downe to moue vs to attention to heare for afterward.
Esay 42. 23.Esay 42. 23. One figure may stand for many
hundreds, one counter for many pounds, one little
boxe may containe many iewels: So one word of

the Scripture may point out vnto vs many things
worthy our obseruation, and what can bee greater
then to heare, to learne, and to learne to know how
short our life is. Let him that hath an eare heare.
Reuel. 3. 6.Reuel. 3. 6.
            
            The vse may reproue such as will not be warned,Vse 1.
by any marke or note, nor stirred vp to heare, but
become voluntary deafe Adders, refusing the voyce
of the charmer, though he be most expert in charming,
Psal. 58. 4. 5.Psalme 58, 4. 5. They will not heare Christ crucified,
Gal. 3. 1.Gal. 3. 1. They are enemies of the crosse of
Christ, Phil. 3. 18.Phillip. 3. 18. who is able to kill our sinnes, and
quicken our soules. When the balme tree is cut in
summer, that the sweete liquour drop forth, the
inhabitants preserue it in viols: when the Word,
which is the spirituall baulme, is diuided by preaching,2. Tim. 2. 15.
               2. Tim. 2. 15. the people should bring empty
pitchers with them, as the widdow did at the command
of Elisha, 2. King. 4. 5.2. King. 4. 5. the empty pitchers
should be attentiue eares; but either they are without
mouthes, or without bottomes; without
mouthes to let in one drop of grace, or without bottomes
that when we haue put it in and looke to see
it againe in your liues, behold it is runne throughout,
as water through a siue, and scarce leaues any
wet behind it. It is not enough to eate meate, vnlesse
the stomacke retaine it; so it is not enough to
heare, vnlesse men lay it vp in their hearts, as Mary
kept the sayings of Christ in her heart, Luk. 2. 51.Luk. 2. 51.
We must haue eares of atention, and hearts of retention.
In vaine doth the Preacher open his mouth,
vnlesse God open the heart, when God opened
Lidiaes heart, then she attended to the things which

               Paul spake,Acts 16. 14. 
               Act. 16. 14. As men come so they speed,
and as the affection is, so is the profite: If they bring
empty pitchers they may be filled, but if their vessels
be full of wickednesse, they can neuer be filled with
goodnesse: As we do Gods workes to holinesse,
so we shall finde comfort to holinesse: It is to bee
feared, least many go home with vnfallowed Hos.
10. 12.Hos. 10. 12. nay with vnhallowed hearts.
            Secondly, for instruction to vs, where God is an 
admonisher, there let vs be admonished; where hee
is a Teacher, there let vs be schollers; and if he haue
made our daies as an hand bredth, then let vs resolue
to die, and prepare for death. It is decreed
in the high Court of Parliament, that all shall die,
euen in heauen,Heb. 9. 27. 
               Heb. 9. 27. for we must die, and wee
are as water spilt on the ground.2. Sam. 14. 14. 
               2. Sam. 14. 14.
which cannot bee taken vp againe. Wise Salomon,
godly Dauid, religious Iosiah, faithfull Abraham, iust
Lot, righteous Noah, zealous Moses, trusty Ionathan,
dilligent Peter, and carefull Paul, haue dyed; it is certaine
we shall die, but the time vncertaine, and the
place. The time is vncertaine, God came to Dauids
child in his infancy. 2. Sam. 12. 18.2. Sam. 12. 18. to the widdowes
sonne in his yourh,Luk. 7. 12. 
               Luk. 7. 12. to Iacob in his old age.
Gen. 49. 33.Gen. 49. 33. God hath ordained and limited to euery
liuing creature his appointed time wherein to
liue and grow, and next to decrease and die; and as
it pleaseth God to prolong or abridge their liues,
so he disposeth of the second causes, and meanes
whereby he will haue it brought to passe, and so
euery one hath his certaine limits and terme of life
set him. Iob saith, Is there not an appointed time to man
vpon earth, and are not his daies as the daies of an

hireling. Iob. 7. 1.Iob. 7. 1. Againe, Are not mans daies determined,
the number of his months are with thee, thou
hast appointed his bounds which hee cannot passe?
Iob. 14. 5.Iob. 14. 5. In the same chapter, All the daies of my
appointed time will I waite till my changing shall
 come. 14. God hath appointed how long euery
man shall liue, and though foure score yeares be no
long course, yet there are but few which hold out to
the vttermost end thereof, in regard of thē that stay
by the way. Some are cut off euen before they haue
begunne their course, and some in the mid-way, and
that through so many sorts of sickenesses, with other
inconueniences and accidents, that a man cannot
possibly comprehend, or conceiue them all. As
death spares not any person, so it respects not any
place. A man may be murthered in the field as Abel
was, Gen. 4. 8.Gen. 4. 8. A man may fall backeward sitting quietly
in his chaire, and breake his necke as Eli did.
1. Sam. 4. 18.1. Sam. 4. 18. Or dye in the Temple as Senaherib did
Esay 37. 37.Esay 37. 37. Or at the Altar as Ioab 1. King. 2. 34.
While Iobs sonnes were feasting,1. King. 2. 34. the house fals vpon
them Iob. 1. 19.Iob. 1. 19. While the scoffing boyes were
mocking, Beares came from the wildernesse and
deuoured them 2. King. 2. 24.2. King. 2. 24. While Corah and his
company were contending, the earth opened and
swallowed them vp Numb. 16. 31. 32.Num. 16. 31. 32 While the
Captaines and their fifties were fetching the Prophet
perforce to the King, fire fals from heauen and
consumes them. 2. King. 1. 10.2. King▪ 1. 10. Thus death doth follow
vs wheresoeuer we goe, and is ready to ceize
vpon vs wheresoeuer we are.
            
               Thou hast made my daies as an hands bredth. Some
say thou hast set my daies short, some thou hast

made my daies mourning; some, thou hast made my
daies of foure fingers wide, Taphat signifieth the
measure of the palme of the hand, which is of foure
fingers. The meaning of the Prophet is this: Thou
Lord hast made my life short, like the palme of an
hand, which is of foure fingars, which is one of the
shortest measures.
            Seeing the life of man is but as an hand bredth,Doctr. it
affoordeth this doctrine, that mans life is short, and
of no long continuance. Our life is compared to
grasse Esay 40. 6.Esa. 40. 6. which withereth. To a shadow
which passeth Psalme 102. 11.Psal. 102. 11. To smoake that vanisheth,
Hos. 13. 3.Hos. 13. 3. To a bubble that is dissolued: To a
weauers shuttle for swiftnesse, Iob. 7. 6.Iob. 7. 6. To a spiders
web which is soone swept away. To a cloud that goeth
away. Iob. 7. 9.Iob. 7. 9. To a flower that fadeth, Iob 14. 2.Iob. 14. 2.
To a vapour which is soone dispearsed, Iam. 4. 14.Iames 4. 14.
Remember that my life is but a winde Iob. 7. 7.Iob. 7. 7. No
meruaile if when the winde bloweth the leafe fall,
if when the death appeareth, the night end. There
is one saith, our life is an heauy sleepe, fed with
false and imaginary dreames, and he calleth it a Comedy,
or rather in our daies a Tragedy of transitory
shewes and disguised persones. Sometimes to a
birds nest made of straw and dung, that the winter
soone dissolueth. There is another calleth it a childs
game, that buildeth houses of sand on the shore,
where euery waue washeth them away. Is our life so
short? then it is better to die then to liue, and the
day of death is better then the day of birth. Eccles.
7. 3.Eccles. 7. 3. The day of death is not a perishing but a parting.
The soule is not lost to the body, but onely
sent before it to ioy. If the soule bee painefully laid

off, it is ioyfully laid vp.Per natiuitatem ad stadium per mort
                     •
                  m ad breuium peruenimus. Through our natiuity wee
come to the race, through death to the reward:
through birth to the floud, through death to the hauen;
through birth to the fight, through death to
the victory; through birth to labour, through death
to rest; by birth to sorrow, by death to ioy; by birth
to life, which is full of all sorrowes and troubles, by
death to life eternall which is free from all sorrows.
Death is rather the flight of sinne, then the detriment
of man dying, because to the iust death is not
the end of nature, but of sinne, as a Father saith. To
leaue this world and inherite a better should seeme
nothing. Death is a passage from sinne and corruption
to glory and immortality, from this earth to
heauen, from the company of sinners, to the company
of Saints; from sorrow, to solace; from paine,
to peace; from sicknesse, to safety; from persecution,
to triumph; from the bondage of Pharoah, to the liberty
of the sons of God. The consideration heereof
made Salomon, who for wisedome might seeme a
God, for gouernement deseruedly might be King,
and for learning might bee a Prophet, to say; All
things vnder the Sunne are vanity and vexation of spirit.
Eccl. 2. 11.Eccles. 2. 11. Seeing all things in the world are vanity,
better is a good death then a bad life, and the
day of death better then the day of birth. When we
are borne wee are mortall, but when wee shall rise againe,
wee shall bee immortall: wee are aliue in the
wombe, to die in the world, but dead in the graue
to liue in heauen. Our life is not compared to an
ell or yard, to a pace or to a cubite, to a mile or to a
furlong, to a fathome or to a foote, but to an hand
bredth, a very short measure. Man that is borne of

woman is of short continuance. Iob. 14. 1.Iob. 14. 1. 
               Few and euill
haue the daies of my life bene. Gen. 47. 9.Gen. 47. 9. 
               The time of
our life is three score yeares and ten,
               Psal. 90. 10. if a man come to
foure score, then there is nothing but weaknesse. As
Ionah his gourd was soone come and soone vanished,
Ionah 4. 6.Ionah 4. 6. 7. so man is soone borne and soone dead.
This world is as a Stage, and man as an Actor, when
he hath plaid his part hee is gone. Our liues shorten
as if the booke of our daies were by the pen-knife of
Gods iudgement cut lesse. Before the Floud they
were in Folio, they liued almost a thousand yeares,
Methushelah liued nine hundred sixty and nine
yeares, Gen. 5. 27.Gen. 5. 27. the whole chapter will shew vs
how long the men liued before the Floud. After the
Floud in Quarto, then they liued an hundred and
twenty, and an hundred and seuenty. Gen. 25. 7.Gen. 25. 7. In
Dauids time in Octauo, three score and foure score
yeares, but with vs in the daies of the Gospell, in
Decimo sexto in the least volume, now at forty, fifty,
or sixty yeares, old men, and so we are dying almost
so soone as we beginne to liue. The Elements
are more mixed, drossie, and confused, our new sins
call for new plagues; the aire is more infected and
contagious, and our sinnes of drunkennesse and surfeiting
do not want to second all the rest: we may
obserue that neither planers aboue, nor plants below,
yeeld vs expected comfort. So God for our
sinnes doth cause the heauen to be as Brasse, and the
earth as Iron, and the aire with the winds to bee
tempestuous, and so almost euery thing which was
created for mans vse is become his enemy, and all
because wee turne all things to vices corruption,
which were giuen for natures protection: and therefore

what wee haue diuerted to wickednesse, God
hath reuerted to our reuenge. Wee are sicke of
sinne, and therefore the world is sicke of vs. How
soone doth the sand runne downe in the houre-glasse,
how quickely doth the Sunne beginne to set?
so speedily doth our time passe away. Future things
are alwaies beginning, present things alwaies ending,
and things past are dead and gone; while wee
liue we die, and then we leaue dying, when we leaue
liuing: Better it is therefore to die to life, then to liue
to death, because our mortall life is nothing but a
liuing death, and life continually flyeth from vs and
cannot be with-held, and death hourely commeth
vpon vs and cannot be with-stood: No armour resisteth,
no threatning preuaileth, nor no entreaty
profiteth, against deaths assault. If all perils spare
our life, yet time and age in the end will consume it.
As a riuer that riseth in the Forrest passeth by many
rockes, runneth and tumbleth, and maketh a noise,
yet in the end entreth into the sea: so fareth it with
mans life, he commeth into the world with paine,
and beginneth his course with pittifull cries, and is
daily molested with sicknesses, and neuer ceaseth
running, till in the end he fall into the sea of death:
As euery man hath his Genesis, so hee must haue his
Exodus, and as we are borne to liue, so we are borne
to die. Our dying on earth is but the taking of our
iourney to heauen: Why are we vnwilling to loose
that, which cannot be kept? The good Pilot sitteth
at the sterne to guide his ship; and so a good Christian
to direct his life must thinke on death: death is
the dore whereby we must go out of bondage, and
therefore as he that is in prison taketh great comfort

to sit vpon the threshold, that when the doore is
opened, he may the sooner get out: so we must alwayes
haue our mindes fixed vpon death, for passe
wee must, but how or when wee know not. Emosinarius
hauing his Tombe in building, commaunded
that it should bee left imperfect, and
that his seruants euery day should put him in minde
to finish the same, that so hee might prepare to
dye.
            The vse of this doctrine is,Vse 1. forasmuch as our life
is short, and nothing almost shorter, let vs prepare
for death,Luke. 12. 40. for we must dye. Bee yee prepared, for the
sonne of man will come at an houre when yee thinke not,
Luk. 12. 40. All estates of men are exhorted to prepare,
old and young, rich and poore, Prince and
Peasant: the danger is great, if men be found vnprepared:
as death leaueth men, so the day of iudgement
shall finde them. If the tree fall toward the
South,Eccles. 11. 3. or toward the North, in the place that the
tree falleth, there it shall be. Ec
                     •
                  le. 11. 3. As Ishbosheth
being found asleepe,2 Sam. 4. 6. 7. was killed by Rechab & Baanah,
2. Sam. 4. 6. 7. euen so if we be asleepe in sin, and vnprepared,
we shall be killed by Sathan. Because the
fiue foolish virgins had not oyle to maintaine their
lampes,Matth. 25. 12. the Bridegroome said, I know you not. Mat.
25. 12. Because the man which came to the wedding
was not prepared,Matth. 22. 13. he was cast into vtter darknesse,
Mat. 22. 13. As he is left behind that is vnprepared
when the winde serueth, and the ship vnder saile, euen
so he is left in damnation that is not prepared
for the Lord when death commeth. Many men prepare
for life which is vncertaine, and forget death
which is certaine.Marke 13. 37. 
               I say vnto all men, Watch, Mark. 13

37. The day of the Lord will come as a thiefe in the
night. 2. Pet. 3. 10.2. Pet. 3. 10. a thiefe as well for stealing on vs,
as stealing from vs: he comes in the darke when no
body sees, treades on wooll, that no body heares,
watcheth an houre that no body knowes. It may be
he will come when men are banqueting, as on the
old world,Luke. 17. 27. 
               Luk. 17. 27. Or when they are drunken, as
on Belshazzer, Dan. 5. 25.Daniel. 5. 25. Or when they are committing
filthinesse,Numb. 25. 8. as on the Israelitish man, and the
Moabitish woman. Num, 25. 8. Or when they are
coueting,Luke 12. 20. as on the rich man, Luk. 12. 20. Or when
they are gormandising,Luke 16. 22. as on the glutton, Luke. 16.
22. Or when they are lying,Acts 5. 5. as on Ananias, Acts 5. 5.
No thunder now can beat into them a feare of that
which then no power shall ease them of. We know
Christ will come, let vs prepare for his welcome.
We are all housholders, our bodies are our houses,
our soules our goods, our sences are the doores and
windowes, the lockes are faith and prayer. The day
of our death will come as a thiefe; a thiefe commeth
when men do not looke for him: so the day of death
commeth suddenly. A thiefe commeth not when
the maister of the house is watching, but when he is
asleepe: so many times the day of the Lord commeth
on men, not when they seeme to watch, but
when they are secure and carelesse: let our repentance
watch, let it neuer sleepe, least we perish. But
men now put farre away the euill day,Amos 6. 3. and
they flatter themselues with the remotenesse, the
vision that he seeth, is for many dayes to come, and
he prophesieth of the times that are farre off,Ezek. 12. 27. 
               Ezek.
12. 27. Surely there is no peace to the wicked, Esa.
57. 21.Esay. 57. 21. Their rose buds are not withered, their dances

are not done, sleepe conscience, lye still repentance,
they will not prepare for death. God made
garments for Adam of dead beasts skins,Genes. 3. 21. 
               Gen. 3. 21.
to put him in minde that he was condemned to dye,
and to make the remembrance of death familiar vnto
him, that the losse of life might not affright him,
who alwayes ware the liuery of death vpon him: so
we feed daily vpon dead creatures, this should teach
vs to prepare to feed dumbe creatures.
            Secondly,Reuel. 14. 13. because our liues are short and sinfull,
it should worke in vs a willingnesse to dye. Blessed
are they which die in the Lord. Reu. 14. 13. First, they are
blessed in respect of the place: for if we consider the
world wherein we liue, it is a vale of misery, a prison,
and a place of vexation and trouble, as the Apostle
saith,Rom. 8. 22. 
               Wee know that euery creature groaneth with vs
also, and trauelleth in paine together vnto this present,
Rom. 18. 22. But heauen is a place of ioy, rest, and of
comfort. This place is of no certaine continuance,
here we haue no abiding Citty, but wee looke for
one to come, Heb. 13. 14.Hebr. 13. 14. But heauen is of continuance:
for the foundation thereof is God. Secondly,
they are blessed in regard of their company: for here
we liue among the wicked and sinfull men▪ but there
we shal enioy the company of innumerable Angles,
Heb. 12. 22.Hebr. 12. 22. It was an excellent change when Dauid
was called from a Sheepheard to be a King: so was
it an excellent change in Saul when hee was called
from seeking his fathers Asses, to be a King; yet this
is nothing in respect of their estate which are called
from this world to heauen, where there is light without
darknesse, wisedome without ignorance, vnderstanding
without error, reason without obscuritie,

memory without obliuion, and ioy without sorrow,
where, whatsoeuer shall be desired, shall be present;
neither shall any thing bee desired which is not
comely: where God shall be seene without end, loued
without lothing, and praised without wearying.
Thirdly, in regard of their condition they are blessed,
for they rest from all their labours: for they
which dye in the Lord, or for the Lord, are with the
Lord. Paul desireth to be dissolued, and to be with
Christ, Phil. 1. 23.Philip. 1. 23. Death considerd in Christ, and
ioyned with a good life, is to Gods elect an aduantage,
Phil. 1. 21.Philip. 1. 21. nothing else but a bridge ouer this
tempestuous sea to Paradice, Gods mercy made it
so; not by making death in it selfe good, but an instrument
of good to his. Why is any man vnwilling
to dye? Death doth not separate vs from God,
but it maketh vs draw neere to God: then doe wee
draw neere to God, when we are separated from the
body.Genes. 40. 21. As Pharaohs Butler could not see the face of
the king when hee was in prison, but beeing loosed
from his bonds, he both saw him, and gaue the cup
into Pharaohs hand, Gen. 40. 21. So as long as we are
in the prison of our bodies, we cannot see the face
of God; but being loosed, we shall see God face to
face, 1. Cor. 13. 12.1. Cor. 13. 12. and enioy that vnspeakable good
which God hath prepared for them that loue him. 1.
Cor. 2. 9.1. Cor. 2. 9. Hast thou feared God in life? then do not
feare death: for the sting of death is taken away by
Christ, so that as hony is not truely hony when it
hath lost its sweetnesse; nor vinegar truely vinigar,
when it hath lost its tartnesse; nor Aloes truly
Aloes, when it hath lost its bitternesse: so the death
of the righteous is not truly death, hauing lost his

sting, fearfulnesse and terrors in the godly. The dying
out of this world is not a death, but a life rather,
and therefore as Iulian said to Christ;Vicisti Galilae. O Galilean,
thou hast ouercome me: so may death say to them,
O Christian thou hast ouercome me.Vicisti Christiane. What is death
that thou fearest it? it is a departure from this wicked
world, a dissolution of the bodies of the godly from
bonds, that they may be with Christ; it is a returning
to our heauenly Countrey from this pilgrimage, it
is a deliuerance from the misery of the world, it is a
returne from banishment to our fathers house, it is a
preparation for the glory of the resurrection. Why
dost thou feare death? Death hath onely the name of
death, not the sting of death.Numb. 21. 9. As the brazen serpent
in the wildernesse had the forme and shape of a
serpent, but not the life a serpent, nor the sting of a
serpent, Num. 21. 9. So death hath the likenesse and
semblance of death, but it hath no sting, it hath no
venome, it hath no poyson. If a Bee sting a dead
carkasse, she looseth not her sting; but if she sting a
liuing man, she looseth her sting: so death stinging
vs which were as dead flesh, did not loose his sting;
but stinging Christ, he hath lost his sting: therefore
we may now say;1. Cor. 15. 55. 
               O death where is thy sting. 1. Cor. 15.
55. Thy sting is no sting vnto vs, but a crowne of reioycing.
1. Thess. 2. 19.1. Thess. 2. 19. It is a Midwife to bring vs
out of the wombe of this world, into the land of the
liuing,Psalm. 27. 13. 
               Psa. 27. 13. Death is as a ship wherby we faile
from earth to heauen. Do not feare the graue: for
thou sowest but a carnall and corruptible body, to
reape an incorruptible and spirituall in the resurrection.
Be willing to change drosse for gold, and corruption
for incorruption. If one enemy finde fauour

at another enemies hand, why should a dutiful
child feare to go home to his heauenly father, a penitent
soule to his sweete Sauiour, and an obedient
member to be ioyned with his head? If he came into
this world to redeeme vs, why should we doubt but
at our death he will receiue vs. He that accepteth his
enemies, will hee reiect his friends? He that bought
vs so deere, will he refuse his penyworth? If he affected
our company so much on earth, (as that hee
sayd) My delight is to be with the children of men, Pro.
8. 31. Hath he now so forgotten his old loue,Prou. 8. 31. as not
to admit vs into his company in heauen. Hee came
hither to buy vs an inheritance, and hee went from
hence to prepare it for vs. Ioh. 14. 2.Iohn. 14. 2. And when wee
are to enter into possession, will he exclude vs? No,
no:Psal. 32. 18. 19. 
               The eyes of the Lord are vpon them that feare him,
to deliuer their soules from death.
               Psalm. 116. 15. Psa. 32. 18. 19. Pretious
in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints,
Psal. 116. 15. Pretious, as the end of labours, as the
consummation of victory, as the gate of life, and the
ingresse of perfect security. Let vs remember his
loue in adopting, his truth in promising, and his power
in performing, and our feare of death wil soone
be altered into a desire of the same. He come to open
heauen gates, and what meant he, but that wee
should enter in? He came to vs on earth to innite vs
to him, and why departed he from the earth, but to
haue vs follow him? He abandoneth none, but abandoned
by them. Hee is easily found where hee hath
been carefully sought. Well, death to the good is
counted a quiet hauen, and to the bad it is counted
shipwracke, The wayfaring man doth willingly demand
where his mansion and stay shall be. The seruant

doth often account when his yeare is ended, the
husbandman doth alway expect haruest, and a woman
with childe doth wait for her time of deliuery:
so the seruants of God do thinke of their death, & so
looke where their treasure is,Matth. 6. 21. there will their heart
be also. Math. 6. 21. If a Prince should command a
Beggar to cast off all his ragges, and bid him prepare
himselfe to come into his presence, and liue
daily in his company, would the beggar delay, or be
sorry because hee shall enioy the company of a
Prince? Much lesse should wee delay, or bee sorry,
when God, the Prince of Princes, calleth vs by
death into his priuy chamber of heauen. Therefore
let beasts, and heathen, adulterers, and murtherers
feare death, because they thinke, and it is certaine,
that all their ioy ends with their death; and let not
Gods children feare death, because it is an entrance
into ioy, and eternall felicity in heauen.
            
               And my age is nothing in respect of thee. Some read
it age, some substance, some life; in the originall,
My time is nothing in respect of thee; nor this life nothing
in respect of the life to come. It is some thing in
the eyes of men, which see onely things present; but
before God, which seeth things to come, which is
eternity, which wanteth all measure, it is altogether
nothing.
            This teacheth vs,Doctr. that our life, how long soeuer
it be, being compared with the eternity of God, is as
nothing; and worldly prosperity beeing compared
with eternall felicity, is as nothing. God is infinite,
and our life is finite: it were a most vnequall valuation
to compare, and much more to preferre things
which are in no proportion of goodnesse to the

things which are vnder-valued; for betweene temporall
and eternall, heauenly and earthly things,
can be no proportion. One day with the Lord is as a
thousand yeares, and a thousand yeares as one day.
2. Pet. 3. 8.2. Pet. 3. 8. 
               I am Alpha and Omega (saith God) Reu. 1.
11. the first,
               Reuelat. 1. 11. 
               and the last, without beginning and without
end. But man had beginning, for hee was made
of the dust of the earth,Gen 2. 7. 
               Gen. 2. 7. and man shall haue
an end of his time, for hee shall returne to dust,
Gen. 3. 19.Gen. 3. 19. What proportion is there betweene
God and man? God is the Creator, man the creature:
God is Immortall, man mortall; God the Maker,
man made by God; God the Potter, man the
vessell of earth; God is mighty, man is weake. If persecution
happen, saint not, God is mighty; if pouerty,
shrinke not, God is wealthy; if thy conscience
grieue thee, runne to God hee is mercifull; if
thy ignorance dismay thee, run to God hee is wisedome:
Worldly prosperity is of short continuance,
but heauenly happinesse shall continue for euer.
            This serues to instruct vs to preferre the life to
come before this life,Vse 1. for in the world to come there
is life without death, rest without labour, health
without griefe, light without darkenesse, day without
night, and happinesse without end. The eye hath
not seene, the eare hath not heard, neither came into
mans heart, what God hath prepared for them that loue
him. 1. Cor. 2. 9.1. Cor. 2. 9. In heauen there is no sickenesse nor
sorrow,Reuel. 31. 23. no crying out nor complainig. There is no
neede of the Sunne, neither of the Moone to shine in it,
for the glory of God did light it, and the Lambe is the
light of it.
               24 
               And the people which are saued shall walke
in the light of it, and the Kings of the earth shall bring

their honour and glory vnto it:25 And the gates of it shall
not be shut by day, for there shall be no night there. Reu.
21. 23. 24. 25. As God is our light heere, so hee will
be in heauen, Hee is the Sun which borroweth not
light from another. Hee is the Way. Ioh. 14. 6.Ioh. 14. 6. The
Dore, Ioh. 10. 9.Ioh. 10. 9. The Vine, Ioh. 15. 1.Ioh. 15. 1. The liuing
Bread. Ioh. 6. 51.Ioh. 6. 51. Hee is the light by participatton
here, and by fruition in heauen. Our Sauiour said, I
will be with you to the end of the world, Math. 28. 20.Math. 28. 20.
that is, hee will be with the godly, as long as any be
on earth, and hee will be with them for euer in heauen.
Christ will not be light to the wicked in this
life, and therefore he will be no light to them in the
life to come. Hee will bee life to none that are appointed
to death, nor the bread of life, to such as
had rather the Onions and Garlicke of Aegypt,
then Milke and Hony in the heauenly Canaan. To
whom God doth giue the light of Grace heere, to
them hee will giue the light of glory in heauen; to
whom hee denyeth the one, hee will neuer giue the
other: If God make vs partakers of Christs Ignominy,
he will make vs pertakers of his Glory.
            Secondly,2 seeing all things are mutable in this
world, let vs lay vp our rest in the world to come.
There is nothing vnder the Sunne which is perpetuall,
but all subiect to diuers mutations: kingdomes
are subiect to mutability, as we may see by Israel and
Iudah, how did they flourish for a time, now they
are gone, and their Kingdomes possessed by others?
How often hath the gouernement of Rome beene
changed? Famous Citties haue come to nought.
One Generation passeth,
               Eccles. 1. 4. 
               and another succedeth. Eccl. 1.
4.
               Eccles. 11. 7. In another place he saith: Surely the light is a pleasant

thing, and it is a good thing to the eyes to see the 
Sunne. Though a man liue many yeares, and in them
all he reioyce, yet hee shall remember the daies of darkenesse,
because they are many, all that commeth is vanity,
Eccl. 11. 7. 8. Man is not perpetuall, for man is
borne to die, as we see daily by experience: Houses
built with great cost and charge become ruinous:
Trees haue but a time and then wither. What is
there vnder the Sunne that is perpetuall? The light
of our eyes is but for a time, but the happinesse of
the godly lasteth for euer. The rich man can haue
his riches but for a time, nor the great man his honours,
nor the King his Crowne, nor the wanton
his pleasures, but the godly mans happinesse lasteth
for euer. The true difference betweene earthly
things and heauenly consisteth in this, earthly
things are much desired, but being obtained they
content little, heauenly things are desired little, but
once gained, satisfie much; and therefore lay not vp
treasure vpon earth, where the moth and canker corrupt,
and where theeues dig through and steale.
               Math. 6. 20. 
               Math. 6. 20.
            [Surely, euery man in his best state is altogether vanity.]
Euery man of what sort or fashion so euer hee
bee is vanity.Eccles. 1. 2. 
               Salomon saith, All is vanity: Eccl. 1. 2.
and Dauid saith, The children of men are vanity, the
chiefe men are lies; to lay them vpon a ballance they are
altogether lighter then vanity.
               Psal. 62. 9. Psal. 62. 9. And man is
like to vanity▪
               
               Psal. 144 4. Psal. 144. 4. That is vaine which is subiect
to diuers changes, which is mutable, fraile, and
passing away; so euery man, rich, and poore, noble,
and ignoble, Prince, and people, are changeable,
like a bubble made of vanity.
            This doth teach vs that all sorts of men,Doctr. and all

sexes are fraile and changeable: To day liuing, to
morrow dead, as some of our neighbours round
about vs, to day rich to morrow poore, as Iob. 1. 21.Iob. 1. 21.
To day in honour, to morrow in the dust. One cryeth
mine head,2. King. 4. 19. as the Shunamites child did. 2. Kin. 4.
19. another is sick with a fall,2. King. 1. 2. as Ahaziah was, 2. Kin.
1. 2. Another cryeth in his feet as Asa. 2. Chro. 16. 12.2 Chr. 16. 12.
Another sicke to death,Esay 38. 1. as Hezekiah, Esa. 38. 1. Anothers
soule panteth,Psalme 42. 1. as Dauids did, Ps. 42. 1. As that
part of the wheele which is highest, is presently lowest
againe: so that man which the world lifteth vp
one while, anone after casteth downe againe, so mutable
is the estate of euery man. All things in the
world wil either leaue vs or else we must leaue them.
They will leaue vs; Riches taketh her to her wings, as
an eagle. Pro. 23. 5. Honours leaue many,Prouerb. 23. 5. as Haman;
dignities, as Bellisarius. We leaue them, As the Partridge
gathereth the yong which shee hath not brought
forth: so he that getteth riches, and not by right, shall
leaue them in the middes of his daies, and at his end shall
be a foole.
               Ier. 17. 11. Ier. 17. 11.
            The vse of this doctrine serues to humble all sorts
and sexes,Vse. that they wax not proud. Art thou a king,
thou art subiect to mutability? thou art vanity. Art
thou noble, art thou rich, thou art but vanity? like a
Venice glasse soone broken, thy daies are but as an
hand bredth; thy time is nothing, if it be compared
with the eternity of God, and thou in thy best estate,
whether youthfull, or in prosperity, thou art fraile
and subiect to diuerse mutabilities and changes,
thou art mortall and thou must die.
            And now (beloued) least I should tire my selfe,
and your Christian patience, I will but lap with Gideons
               
souldiers,Iudg. 7. 6. 
               Iudges. 7. 6. and touch the hony
as Ionathan,
               1. Sam. 14. 43. with the tip of my rod. 1. Sam. 14. 43.
and so brifly will speake as the present occasion, and
your expectation requireth: that as I haue hitherto
spoken of death, so now I may say something also of
this dead subiect presented here before your eyes.
This worshipfull Gentleman,Discent. descended from worshipfull
parents, who were well knowne to many liuing
among vs.Education. His education was in learning, first
in schooles in the countrey; then to Oxford, where
he became so studious, that he excelled many of his
ranke. From thence hee was sent to the Innes of
Court; there he made such proceedings, that hee
might haue been inferior in nothing to such as are
right honorable, if he had continued; but he chose
rather to liue priuately with contentation, then in
great places where contentment is hardly to bee
found. I will speake with your fouourable patience,
somthing of his learning, of his life, and so of his
death.
            First touching his learning,Learning. he was a good Grammarian,
he did both write and speake good latine:
touching his writing, his booke written in latine, dedicated
to the Kings Maiesty, will testifie the truth
thereof. Touching his speaking of latine readily,
such as haue conferred with him, can relate. He was
a good Phylosopher, a good Historian, some Grecian,
a man well read in Physicke: and for distillations,
and secrets; few can second him. Touching diuinity,
he had read the Bible, and expositors thereon,
both old and new, ancient and moderne. Diuinity
was his study now for the most part, wherein he
did so busie himselfe, that he intended (if it had pleased

God) to haue printed a booke of the grounds of
Christian religion, collected in latine, wherein hee
shewed great reading, good iudgement, and multiplicity
of knowledge. It were to be lamented, were
it not that the good pleasure of Almighty God was
such, that so much learning should goe to the graue,
and such good parts as were in him, should be buried
in the earth.
            Secondly, his life was answerable to his learning,Life.
he was sober in his carriage, affable in company, gentle,
and of an humble spirit towards all; not couetous,
for he was dead to the world; not proud, no
quarreller, no drunkard; and for any thing I can
speake (or any other charitable Christian) blamelesse
from all great, enormous, and scandalous offences;
being full of the workes of the spirit: he was a peacemaker,
he would perswade such as did contend, and
take paines to compose strife: he would giue of his
owne to end that which malice had begunne: hee
was charitable to the poore, and pittifull to the distressed.
His brethren & sisters haue lost for a time,
the company of a deere and comfortable brother:
his kindred a good Counseller, the poore an almesgiuer;
and other Ministers & my selfe, a kind friend,
and I doubt not but God hath receiued his soule.
Lastly,Death. touching his sicknes & death, his sicknes was
Morbus haereditarius (as himselfe would call it) accompanied
with a feuer.The stone. In his sicknes he was patient,
& willing to leaue this miserable world. And as
his life was quiet, so he died quietly. Now the Lord
grant vs grace so to spend all our dayes in his feare,
that at length we may dye in his fauour, and receiue
the reward of euerlasting life.
            FINIS.
         
      
   