
      
         
            
            VNTO THE
MOST HIGH AND MIGHTIE Prince, his Soueraigne Lord
King IAMES. A poore Subiect
sendeth, A Souldiors Resolution;
humbly to waite vpon
his Maiestie.
            IN THIS LITTLE
Booke the godly Vertues of our
Mighty King are specified, with disscription
of our late Queene, (and still renowned)
ELIZAS Gouernement: The Pope and Papists are in their colours set forth, their
purposes laid open, and their hopes
dissolued, the happie peace of England
is well described, and the long
continuance thereof humbly
prayed for.
            
               LONDON
Printed by Iohn Windet, for Walter Burre, dwelling
in Paules Churchyeard at the Signe of the Crane.
1603.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE MOST
High and Mighty Prince IAMES
by the grace of God, King of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, defender
of the Faith, &c.
            
               MAY it please your Maiestie,
when I consider my owne vnworthines,
I checke my selfe
for my presumption, in that I
haue aduentured to write vnto
a Prince of so great power
and wisedom, as is your kingly
selfe: but when I do remember that your Highnes
desireth to be approued a good poore mans
King: then in the hope of your gratious acceptance,
I not repent the little labour that I haue
bestowed: in which the clearenes of my conscience
beares me vp, and makes me hope, that in my
vpright course, I shall not in the least sort displease
the mightines of your great maiestie. I haue

like a Soldier hent my selfe against your publike
enemies, and the foes of Christ, in the iustice of
which course my resolution hath resolued in life
and death to doe your Highnes faithfull and obedient
seruice: your poorest subict, my renowned
Soueraign, humbly entreateth that you would
be pleased gratiousely for to accept this his trifeling
gift, and with your mercies eye to view the
lines vnto your princelie selfe directed, and if
they shall procure your content, your seruant then
receiues the fulnes of his ioy, and gaines vnto himselfe
his most desired recompence, with all submission
he referreth himselfe, and this his worke
to be censured by your Maiestie, vnto whome he
wisheth Salomons wisedome, Dauids heart,
and Ioshuas courage, with al the best cōmended
vertues which did attend on them: that Englands
king may be a mirror to the world, and that the
nations of the earth may wonder at the long continuance
of your most happy and princely gouernment.
            
               Your Maiesties poorest
Subiect
ROBERT PRICKET
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A SOVLDIERS
Resolution.
            
               MOst mightie Prince: the Angelicall
graces wherewith
your kingly spirit is indued
the diuine excellencie of
whose vertues worthinesse,
your royal hand hath in heauenly
lines vnto the worlde
commended, as an apparant
testimonie of your sound belief, arightly grounded
vpon the corner stone Christ Iesus: by the grace of
whose asistance your sacred Maiestie is made to be
the worlds chiefe Christian king: so that in all the
kingdomes of the earth, that doth homage to the
name of Christ, there is not any Prince of so absolute
a power, being arightly incorporated in the
proper strength of his owne inheritance, that can
cōpare with the greatnes of your Magnificence, nor
is their any king vnder the heauens great Canopie,
that standeth like your royall selfe, so clearly sequestred
from the Romane Antichristian leprosie: the
demonstration of which apparant truth doeth vndoubtedly
prognosticate that God hath raisde your
highnesse vp vnto the throne of royall dignitie, that

by the happines of your godly gouernment, you
may encrease & beautifie the glorious kindgom of
his blessed Son. And that your Maiestie like a most
valiant, victorious, and triumphant captaine vnder
the banner of the worlds Redeemer Christ, should
with maiesticke power confront, and vnderneath
your princely foote treade downe all oppositions,
that by ſecret plots of diuelish treacherie, or publike
force of hostile armes, dares but presume by their tirannicall
aspiring menaces to threaten the ruine of
the house of God. And as the Church in Englande
hath for these last precedent foure and fortie yeares,
beene ruled by a godly religious maiden Queene,
renownde Elizabeth of famous memorie, vnto the
glorie of whose vertuous gouernment,Reuel. cap. 12. may with a
Christian consideration be ascribed the long-agoe
prophetical wonder seene in heauen: Of a woman
cloathed with the Sunne, in whome the Church
was figured, compassed about with the illustrate
and shining beames of the Gospell of Iesus Christ.
And vnderneath her feet the wauering and vnconstant
Moone was put. For by her meanes from forth
the Church was cast the vaine inconstant mutabilities
of Romes inuented straunge traditions. And
vppon her head a crowne of twelue starres stoode,
which did foreshew, as was by her made manifest,
that from the doctrine of the twelue Apostles
should deriued be, the forme and order of her gouernment,
the brightnesse of whose illuminating
light shoulde with an vncontrolled power: from
forth her kingdome driue, the loathsome darknesse

of that soules poysoning contagious smoke which
flies from forth that hell-borne pit, the gulfe of Antichrist.
And in despite of that great red Dragon, hauing
seuen heades, and ten hornes, & seuen crownes
vpon his heades. By which is mentioned the diuel,
the Pope, Spaine, Monkes, Friers, Iesuites and Seminaries,
with the rabblement of that Antichristian
power, burning with furie agaynst the Spouse of
Christ, hauing made themselues red with the effusion
of those streames of bloud, which their cruelties
caused to gush forth from the innocent bodies
of thousād martired Saints: yet maugre the force of
al their hellish tyrannising rage, diuine Eliza during
all the time of her most happy, blessed, peaceful, and
victorious raigne, trauelled in the desire of her religious
care to be a gratious mother, and a tender
nurse vnto the children of the Church of God, and
in the continuance of her now out dated, and yet
datelesse time: her subiects being fed with the Nectar
and Ambrosia of a heauenly diet, by the ministry
of that euer-enduring truth contained in the canonicall
Scriptures of the olde and new testament:
many thousandes were begoten vnto Christ and
taught arightly how to ground their faith, vpō the al
and onely sufficient sure foundation of their redeemers
loue. That plain and simple people in her land
could with diuine and godly wisedome maintaine
the argument of their faithes beliefe, against the
cunning coosening sophistry of a pernicious Popish
Priest.
            But now that our late mayden Queene, whose

sanctified soule vnto her God, brought forth so many
Saints, hath left this earth to bee a Saint in heauen,
whither should my eyes returne themselues
with ioy, vnlesse to looke vpon your Maiestie. And
in this thought my soule is rauished with a priuate
meditation, my Countrey England hath stoode as a
glorious Cittie built vppon a Mountaines toppe,
whose beautie, wealth, strength, and gouernment,
hath lifted vp it selfe with admiration to the world;
the temple of the house of God was from mount
Sion brought and placed in the midst of Englandes
territories.VVere the gouernment of Rome now as then it was when England was conuerted there should be no Pope as now the
                     •
                  e is, nor Masse, nor Purgatcrie, nor approbation, to any of their erronious constitutions, Ethelderius brought with him none of their new blasphemous doctrine Ioseph of Aramatheus before him was a stranger therevnto. And since this Island first conuerted was
from Pagan Athisme, it neuer stoode so dignified
by the true profession of a sound religion as now it
did, by the instrumentall meanes of heauens Elizabeth:
And when this glorious England seemed to
feare if selfe being mourner-like wrapde vp in
sable blackenesse, and timerous mindes speaking to
themselues that their best dayes were past, and dangerous
times were neare at hand, the sillie Lambes
that feared the tyrannie of the Romane Woolfe,
wept in their thoughts, and did this question aske:
Where shall we sing our songs of Sionnow: The
Woolfes they met in flockes togither, hoping that
their long wishde for time was come, when they againe
should glut themselues with bloud, the rich
did feare to loose their wealth, the poor did feare to
loose their liues, the vilder sort did hope to liue vp
on their countries spoile. And when this cloude of
danger had brought it selfe euen vnto the strength
of his supposde combustion, then as a vapor into

ayre dissolued were all the meateors that did seeme
prodegious for the liuing mistres of our happines,Our late Qu
                     •
                   did in the time of her sicknesse bequeath her crown vnto our now king, affirming it (as in in deed it is) his proper right.
did in her life time bequeath her crowne to him
whose right it was, and when her soule was vnto
heauen ascended, forth with heauens God, into the
mouth of Englandes nobles put, the name of him
who by their Queene was named to be their soueraigne,
and they togither with vnited loue, did vnto
Englands commons straight praclaim that great
King Iames was made their lawful king, Then Englande
did vnto her selfe retaine, the vigor of her
former strength, and the beautie of her glorie was
presently sequestred from all occasions that might
diminish, extinguish or in the least ſorte eclipse the
Sunne-shine of her precedent dignitie, neuer was
a land to God more bounde then England is for
this aboundant mercie, who hath vnto vs raysde a
King, not onely heyre vnto Elizaes Crowne, but
also an inheritor of all those gracious vertues wherwith
her righteous soule is crowned. And now my
soueraigne Lord from saint Elisa to your godly selfe
discended is her kingdoms gouernment, and all the
Saints on earth, within the limits of your large and
spacious confines, doe humbly wayte vpon the assurance
of your blessed hope. And for your royall
hand hath manifested that your princely heart obeyeth
the precepts of heauens written worde:
what should I say, but certainly resolue your royall
selfe, descending from a race of Kings, and from
that mightie King, whose euerconquering arme,
at first did breake the heade of Romes vsurpde

authoritie, that now the mightie God of heauen,
whose wrath hath alwayes threatned the destruction
of that Babilonian Whoore, hath raysed vp
your regall Maiestie to breake the necke and
backe of that soule deuouring beast:Reuel. cap, 12. ver. 8. 9. so as the Dragon,
and his Angels shall no longer rule in Christendome,
nor shall the nations of the earth continue
to be deceiued with the infectious Locusts of
their lyes and heresies, but his kingdome shall bee
razed to the earth, and the worlde shall wonder at
his destructions, ouerthrow (sure I am) this truth
must come to passe before the second comming of
the king Christ Iesus, since whose being vpon the
earth, vntill this present time, there neuer was a true
beleeuing king (remooued from the Popes authoritie,
and yeelding to the gouernment of Christ)
that was of so absolute a power, to bring to passe, the
prophecies against the Citie of Rome, as is your maiestie
vndoubtedly, my soueraigne Lord, this relying
age is leaning to the latter ende of time, and all
the signes forerunniug the day of iudgement, haue
put themselues into a perfect view, the reuolution
of the heauens, being so shaken as that the planets
are remoued from their wonted stations, one hauing
stept into an others place, and this massy globe
of earth, hath oft with fearefull earthquakes trembled,
the seuenth and last Angell in the Reuelation
specified, hath (as it well was calculated by a reuerend
and learned minister in your Scotlands kingdome)
beene sounding the last generall summons
for this already fiftie fiue yeares past:Reue, 11. ver. 9 and time it selfe

hath almost brought his course vnto a whole vnited
period, whereby is threatned more then ordinarie
change. And at this present your kingly selfe, hauing
as it were by miracle been vntil this time preserued,
and now being created Gods great Lieutenant vpon
earth, and the onely warriour and chiefe Champion
for his Iesus Christ, why should not euery
Christian souldier then resolue that your magnanimious
spirit, and glorious race from you proceeding,
shall be the guard vnto the Church of God, &
bring confusion vpon all her enemies. For as from
the roote of righteous Iesse did proceede the liniall
race whence Christ himselfe descended: so vnto me
it seemeth that heauens eternall King in his secrete
wisdome, knowing the worlde is measured with a
little length, hath raysde you vppe (most mightie
Prince) that from your righteous selfe might spring
a glorious ranke of godly and religious Kinges,
and Queenes, that might vnto the Nations of the
earth, maintaine the glorie of his heauenly name,
vntill himselfe shall in the Cloudes appeare, and
summon all the world vnto a generall iudgement.
            Worlds peerelesse Prince, and my renowned
Soueraigne, the consideration of these things before
discribed, haue compasde me within a heauen
of ioy. And though I am the vnwoorthiest of
manie thousandes that in your Englande liues, and
farre vnfitte to vndertake this waightie businesse,
hauing beene alwayes trayned vp in the
exercise of Armes, yet for I know there is nothing

dignifieth a Souldiers sword so much, as well to
vnderstand the iustice of the cause for which hee
fights, I haue in the hope of your Maiesties acceptance,
aduentured to make this little worke, the armour
of a Christian Souldiers Resolution, and doe
resolue for God, and for his truth, in life and death,
to vow my selfe a faithfull seruant to you my soueraigne
Lord: the earths most godly and chiefe Christian
king. And so much the more haue I tasked
my weake and shallow vnderstanding muse, to this
performance, because I must confesse vnto your Maiestie;
that in a zealous loues affection to your highnesse,
I haue before this time aduentured to let a little
Pamphlet,A booke intituled, A Souldiers wish vnto his Soueraigne Lord King Iames.
                passe vnto a publike view, which hath
drawne vnto it selfe, a partial iudgement from some
opinions, as I thinke, not worthy any great respect,
for by the idlenes of their inuectiue wordes, they
seeme to proue, that I deserued blame, because I
dealt so roundly with the sea of Rome, which vaine
imagination found some shewe of cause to ground
it self vpon, the present times incertaintie, feeming as
if they desired to make a doubt,The Papists deſire to make a doubt of the certaine continuance of our religion in the forme which now it doth. whether Religion
should stand in that same forme, which now it doth
or whither it should be brought vnto a more neare
affinitie with Gehenna, the Antichristian church of
Rome. When this I heard, I could not choose, my
soueraign Lord, but secōd that my foregoing work,
with this my named Resolution: For when I with
my self considered how Rome was figured by your
owne disoription, and sawe with what feruencie of

spirite your diuine and sanctified heart did oppose
it selfe against that worldes disceiuing, irreligious,
pernicious, blasphemous monstrous Pope; I could
not but in my soule resolue with a Souldiers Resolution,
to follow your kingly Maiestie in your
vertues steppes, and not to suffer a little Monkish
Mowle hill heape of tongues, that rides vpon the
skirt of Peeuish Popery, to derogate from your
kingly name, the glory due vnto the honour of
your faithes profession, nor suffer that the godlie
people in your land (whose heartes prepareth, as
befitteth loyall, faithfull and obedient Subiectes, to
bid your Highnes welcome to your Kingdomes
Crowne) that the ioy which they conceiue in the
excellencie of your great Maiestie should be eclipsed
by the inftigation of any secret Papisticall obiected
doubt,The doctrine of Rome and Spaine poysoneth both body and souls, but helpeth neyther. what should let my resolution to
speake plainely to my King, whole Highnes knoweth
what drudges are sent from Rome, and therefore
will not take Phisicke for his soule from their
impoysoned proiected potions.Boniface 3. by the leaue of Phocas the foolish Emperour, did first write himselfe papa, and then presently begā the ruine of the Church, the ful effect whereof was concluded by Adrian. since whose time as saith planlina in the life of popes, there was neuer any Emperour of might, nor pope of any vertue. The Chronicles
with innumerable Tragike scenes, haue made discription
of the Roman regement, shewing to the
world, that not any king nor Queene, nor Prince
in Christendome, that euer did displease that proud
vsurping Bishop, since he rulde alone, and gainde
vnto himselfe, the name of Papa; but they were all
of them eyther poysoned, murdered, or otherwise
betrayed, or their lands inuaded, or their Subiects
moued to rebellion, or many times nearly brought
in danger of those euils, eyther by Monkes, Fryers,

Iesuites, Seminaries, or some other villanous minded
slaues, sent from the Popes diuelishnes (but mis
named Holines, to put in execution those three
damned purposes, Bohemia, Lombardy, Germany,
France, & bleeding Belgia haue bought their to true
experience, with a deare and bloudy prise. And
though that Spaine be Romes chiefe Champion, yet
king Philips eldest sonne, euen in his Fathers sight,
must bleed to death, when he displeasde the Pope:
England hath had a hard experience of his Tyranny,
and in the dayes of Queene Elizabeth, the
multiplisity of trayterous plottes laide against her
life, all wrought by Romes confederates, were
to long to specifie: and for your Scotlandes
Kingdome, (Mighty Soueraigne) neyther your
royall person, nor your publike state, haue stoode
exempt from their most vilde attemptes: and assuredly
(my Soueraigne Lorde, no other then such
like strategems are to be expected from their hands
who by their oathes haue sworne and vowed allegiance
to the Sea of Rome; yet among them, but not
of them,Some seeme as if they were papistes, but indeede are not. is there some, that giues themselues vnto
the vse of ceremoniall customes, first brought in
by Rome and yet no doubt they see the hellish euils
that springes from thence: but what they do, is
done for fashion, & for custom sake, and peraduenture
with some religious obseruation, yet in
their heartes I verily belieue they hate the proudnes
of the Popes supremacie, and grieues to
see the Villanies wrought by his Workemanshippe,
and such as these I thinke are nothing

dangerous, for I haue obserued in them a due obedience
to your Englandes lawes: but for the
former sort, your Maiestie knoweth, the daunger
of their euill effects, for be they but once reconciled
to the Pope, so as they dare not like louing and obedient
Subiectes,VVhat maner of Subiectes, papists were vnto the Queen, & now what hope there is of them. take their oath to your supremacie;
it cannot be but their intentions must be dangerous,
they cannot in their harts endure to be your
subiects, but as they lately were her Maiesties, in cō
               tinuall
hope of change, nor doe I wonder at their
minds in this, for their subiection hath vowed it self
an other way, and vpon the pain of deadly sin, their
consciences are tied vnto the lawes of Antichrist, &
they are taught by the doctrine of Rome, & Romane
dispensations, to suppose, that vnto you belongeth
no obedience; then vnto them I am sure there belonges
no trust:The Schooles of Rome and Spaine, are the nurseries of treason. And for the schollers, that the
scholes of Rome & Spaine brings vp, your kingly self
and al your kingdoms, haue by an often taught experience
learnd the true vnderstāding of their traiterous
documents: Iesuites, Seminaries, and Popish
Priests, I do resolue, will neuer be thought to loue
your Maiestie, nor cā they at any time deceiue your
Highnes, when they are at no time trusted, & surely
no trust to them belongeth, that are the empoysoned
branches, sprong from the venomous heade
of earthes corruption. And because I would not
haue the Papists thinke, I speake by gesse, but want
authority whereon to ground my selfe, I haue to
that end set downe some of the dangerous decrees
made by the lawes of their misbeleeuing church,

for the Pope to establish his diuelish authority hath
thus decreed.
            First,Dist 40, etsi papa, 9. q. 6. ea cuncta. that no man may iudge the Pope, nor giue
sentence about his iudgement, for he is to iudge al
men vpon earth.
            2 That the seat of Rome,
               30 q. 1 Cap. giueth strength & might
vnto all lawes, but it is subiect to none.
            3 That hee hath authority to breake all oathes,In 6. lib. 2. de sen.
bondes, and obligations made betwixt any man of
high or low degree.
            4 That he hath power to interprete,26. q. cap. Quouenc. declare and
lay forth the holy scriptures, according to his own
will, and to suffer no man to expound it contrary to
his owne pleasure.
            5 That he is a God vpon earth,In. 6. lib. de sent. Apostelatus in verb continetur. ouer all heauenly,
earthly, ghostly and worldly, and no man may say
vnto him, what doest thou.
            6 That he hath authority to dissolue subiectes
from their obedience to their Lordes and Princes,In 6. lib. 2. de sen.
and that he hath power to depose kings.King Herold exiled Robert Archbishop of Canter. Ro. gat him to Williā 
                  D of Norm. Pope Alexander to he reuenged of King Herold, sent vnto duke W. a banner to go and conquere England, and eleane remissiō of sins both a pena & a culpa, to all that would follow the banncr, & by this means was England the last time conquered.
            
            7 That he may giue cleane remission vnto whom
he will, both a pena, & a culpa, & he whom he forgiueth
must needs be the child of saluation: for he
hath absolute power to bind & to loose vpon earth,
and saith he, the holy Church hath so determined
and the force thereof (as faith his lying blasphemy)
is greater then the canonicall scriptures.
            From the authority of these lawes doth this effect
proceed, that so soone as any Prince displeafeth
Rome, he is presently by the pope cursed, excōmunicated

& proclaimed no right inheritor, & that it is
not lawfull for to hold of him, his subiects are absolued
frō their true alegāce & blessings, with clean remissiō
of sins sent to all those that wil inuade, spoile,
or conquer the land of any kingdom or Prince, with
whom the Pope shall be displeased, And the beter to
effect these his often performed deeds of charitie, he
sendeth his leaden Bulles, vnto whome hee listeth,
thereby giuing authoritie vnto subiects, to resist
their kings; and lustely to take vp armes against
them, when by the Pope they shall be commaunded.
Their oathes for their allegiance are dispensed
with, so as although a subiect betray, murder,
or by any meanes kill his lawfull Prince,Perpetual malses apointed to be sūg in Swin fted Abbey for the Monk which poysoned king Iohn. So is it now in Rome for him which slew the Prince of Orringe, & for the Frier which kild the French King. and Gods
annoynted king, yet shall not their accounted very
honest executioner, bee adiudged a traytor, but rather
a holy man, for that hee hath done, it on the
Popes behalfe, and in that respect, his acte shall bee
registred for a heauen purchasing meritorious
deede, and after the death of such a one, there shall
be diuers misnamed holy, but vnhallowed Masses,
sung by a company of blacke, white, gray, and pibal
asses, for the redeeming of his soule, out of their
fooles inuented purgatory. And although this
monstrous euil be against al laws of God, and godly
men, yet doth the brasē, impudēt, & shameles pope,
with al the multitude of his masse-monging shauelings,
striue to maintain the lawfulnes therof, against
the writē word of the eternal law of God: affirming
that on earth, al power is giuen vnto him, & that his
seat is established by general counsels (which as he

sayth cannot erre:Declectio et Significatio, Panormitanus saith that councels may erre, as they haue done inter raptorem et raptā Hierom, 39. q. 2. tria: doth affirme as much and August. de bap. lib. 2. ch 3. contra Donatistas.) And therefore what the Pope
decre
                  •
               th, must stand of force against all authorities,
for saith his law,Dist. 19. 51. Ro. er enim vero et nulli facit cap. 5. omnes. What the Sea of Rome doth decrce,
must needes be allowed: And what she reproueth,
must be of no strength: For so must the decrees
of the Sea of Rome be accepted, as if they were
spoken by the godly mouth of Peter himselfe. And
the more to approue his presumptuious blasphemy,
the Pope hath prouided that himselfe may be avillaine,
both to God and men; and yet himselfe not to
be found falt with. For, sayth his law, Distinction the
40. Who doubteth but the Pope is holy, the which
is exalted vnto so great a dignity, in whome though
good workes of his owne merits bee wanting, yet
were those good works sufficient, which were done
by his predecessors. And therefore hath his lawe,
in the place before recited, thus decreed, that
though the Pope sinne neuer so grieuously, and
draw with him to hell, by his example, thousandes
innumerable: yet let no man be so hardy to rebuke
him: For he is head ouer al, and none ouer him. And
by this vsurped authoritie, is that 7. headed beast,
approued the very open and reuealed Antichrist, of
our time, who by the trecherous and diuellish authoritie
of his Antichristian lawe, hath giuen vnto
hsmselfe a power, to set vp and at his pleasure to cast
downe kings,Pope. Celestinus. 4 crowned the Emperour Henricus 6. with his secte. and with his fowle vngodly hel-path
treading feete, to set the Crowne vpon an Emperors
head, and vpon an Emperours necke to tread, when
he displeaseth him: And vnto such a base subiection
hath he brought the mighty Princes of the earth as

that they thinke it no small honour, to kisse the stinking
feete of that inhumane monster.A true descrip- of Rome, as is declared in the Reuela, ch. 17. 
               This is the
rich and wealthie whore, bedeckt with Iewels and ornaments
of gola: Whose Scarlet robes, are dyed in Christians
bloud: Whose variable garments, betokens diuers
liueries of religious orders: Holding in her hand, a
cup full of abhominations: the Popes decrees, Bulles,
dispensations, suspensations, and cursings: And the
beast she sitteth vpon, is the papall sea of Rome: And
with this whore the nations of the earth hane committed
filthinesse.
            
            But now sith that the the light from darkenes is
distinguished by the glorious ministrie of saluations
Gospell, and that Romes Idolatrous whore dome, is
made knowne vnto the world. Oh that any Prince
should desire to contaminate his soule with her vncleannesse,
or endure to rest himselfe in the serpentike
bosome of such daungerous wickednes. But
Rome thy pacht vp Iron legs are broken, and like a
haulting cripple, thou standest reeling in thy weakned
strength: Thy nakednesse is made a publicke
scorne, and but a verie few (to what had wont to be)
are left to stand on thy pernicious part: Thou maist
perceiue how God doth by degrees r
                  ••
               e downe the
kingdome of thy Sathans Sinagogue. I wil not labor
to aduertise thee, Fury, wrath, and indignatiō is thy
portion, thou art throwne out vnto a fierce & strong
destruction. And in thy day till which it is not
long, thou shalt not finde any meanes for to preuent
the fearefull stroke of thy all confounding iudgement,
vnto which I leaue thee: bee thou an heire

vnto thy prepared inheritance.
            This truth discribed, I know my Lord and king,
is rightly knowne vnto your Maiestie, your selfe
haue drawne the portrature, of Romes Antichristian
beast, and layd him open in his full discription.
And in your Scotlands kingdome, all the time of
your most blessed gouernment, hauing once
growne past the yeares of your minoritie: your
highnesse, did religiously maintaine a reuerent, learned,
wise, and godly ministrie, whose labour was
to cast Romes Kingdome downe, and in true
forme, for to erect and gouerne the house of God,
and Church of Iesus Christ. And should I bee so
vilde to thinke,The Authors Resolution doth in this place resolue vpon sufficient reason that the King hath no affection vnto papists. that now your Maiestie would let
a Tyrant loose, or lend an eare to helles inchaunting
charmes, or please to loue, or in weighty
cause, to trust the daungerous Imps, by oath ingrafte
into the Romaine stocke, whose heartes
hath vowed alleageance to the Sea of Rome, by
whose vilde lawes, a seeming iust authoritie is
giuen, to execute the deedes of villainie, and vnder
pretext whereof, so many haue beene made
approued villaynes, thrusting themselues into the
speedy execution of bloudy trecherous strange inhumane
stratagems, accounting as if in them they
had performed honest & Christiā like meritorious
deeds: Or that your Maiestie would suffer a popish
tolleration, to bring forth thornes, whose
poyntes will turne themselues against your life,
and strine to worke your kingdomes ouerthrow.
No, no, my soueraigne, my Resolution shall in life

and death, resolue that your Kingly Maiestie, hath
not a thought, that bendes it selfe to such little purposes:
Your highnesse hath already ioynd vnto
your Maiestie, a company of honourable, valiant,
graue, prudent, wise, godly, and religious
Councellers: whose foreseeing prouidence, in the
time of our late Queene, and euer renowned Elizabeth,
did at all times worthily preuent the euill effecting
policies of Rome.
            And when of late the house of Dagon, was in
it selfe diuided: Secular Priestes and Iesuites, beeing
each to other,The Church of Rome is in it selfe diuided, secular priests and sesuits being at a desperate variance. in apparent opposition, the
Priestes by printed Pamphlets, proued that the
Iesuites were the Arch Traytours of the worlde:
and that by them were complotted all the treasons,
against the Maiestie of our late Queene: The
Priestes thinking by this their accusation, to gayne
vnto themselues a fauourable opinion, and by that
meanes,The reasō why the priests did accuse the Iesuites and what their labor did vnto them procure. in time to win the minds of men vnto their
loue: then presentlie the wisedom of our Queene,
with those your now honoured Councellors, perceiuing
both sortes to bee no lesse, then dangerous
Traytours to the publike state: did forthwith requite
their cunning, with proclaymed banishment,
annexing thereunto the penalty of death to bee inflicted
vpon all those that by their wilfull staying,
should exceede the time limitted in the Proclamation.
            And should I thinke your Maiestie would not
now commaund the performance of the selfe-same

course, against those, who by their continuall
practises, haue alwayes sought the vtter ruing of
the house of God, the murdering of Gods annointed,
and the subuersion of all your kingdomes: In
this for to resolue the doubts of men too timerous,
thus much assuredly, my Resolution knowes, that
the obseruatiō your kingly self haue made of Romes
performed trecherous tyranous and tragicke massikers,
will giue warning to your Maiestie, with prudent
wisedome, to preuent their mischiefes, and
were they not altogether in their vaine expectatiōs,
meerly reasonlesse: I wonder what shewe of hope,
could giue occasion to suspect that nowe the reine
of iustice, which did gouerne them, should bee let
slip, and they turnd loose vnto a daungerous liberty,The name of iudifferenttolleration could not be endured in the dayes of Qu. Elizabeth.
when in the time of our late Queene, the smoath
coynd name of indifferent tolleration, was alwayes
counted in it selfe to hold a threatned desolation to
the publik state. And frō time to time the Lords and
Peeres of England assembled in high court of Parliament,
did with one consent ioyne with our Soueraigne,
to enact those lawes and Statutes, which
alwayes did suppresse the least raisde vppe shewe
of an Antichristian head: And when they were
thus confronted by a Mayden Queene, and such
course taken during the happy time of a womans
gouernment, vpon whose Sexe a smal perswation
is sayd to worke with an accounted greatest
force, and yet in all those times they could neuer
bring to passe the effecting of the leaste materiall

substance vpon the gound,The papists in the time of our late Qu. were alwayes ouerthrowne in the least occation of their hope. whereof their weakest
hopes were flattered, and yet now a swarme of
droanes, which desires to liue vpon the spoile of the
labouring bees sweete hiue, flyes bussing vp and
downe, and sends a whispering noise vnto the eares
of men, and tels that now they hope the time of
their deliuerance draweth neere, and that forsooth
they shall be smilde vpon with gracious fauour, and
their long (as they say) continued hard restraint shal
now be pitied,The hope of the papists, & the effects therof. and that their (supposed holy) but
vnhallowed patcht together seamerent sacraments,
shall be quietly amongst themselues administred:
for either an alteration (which desires freely to feed
vpon the foode of blaspemie, and fat it selfe with this
landes confusion) or a tolleration secretly bending
it selfe to such like purposes, shall now, say they, assuredly
be accomplished.
            But as the mightie God of heauen doth in derision
laugh their hopes to scorne,The God of heauen & our godly king on earth, doe despise the secret imaginations of the Papists. 1. Sam. chap. 15. ver. 32. 33. so doth the great
King Iames, Englands God on earth, in the priuacie
of his meditation smile, to see a rablement,
of trayterous mindes and soule deuouring murtherers,
expect to reape kinde fauours from his kingly
hande, but so fare they all, as did Agag,
at the handes of Samuel, who came smyling
forth in the expectation of his supposed libertie.
            So shall it bee vnto them all, my Soueraigne
Lorde, for my Christian Resolution telles
my soule, that your Highnes is in the zeale of

your faithfull thoughts resolued, neuer in the least
sort to leane vnto their vilde profession. And against
the aduersaries of God and of his Christ,The sword of iustice cannot take to strike a course againgst the enemie, of God. the
sword of iustice, cannot take too strict a course that
valiant Ioshua the first, & worthiest Worthy, stood
alwayes cleared from a tyrants name, although his
powerfull arme did euer execute a strong austere
seuerity vpon the heads & harts of them, that were
the foes to God and to his truth, the sword of Ioshua
in a glorious battell offered vp a pleasing sacrifice
vnto the eye of heauen, the sight whereof so pleasd
the heauens Creator, that he gaue power vnto Ioshuas
tonge, that by his word he did command the
Sunne against the nature of her fiery swiftest course
to stand and giue him light, till he had slaine his enemies,
fiue mighty kings he trāpled vnder foot, &
was loath to leaue the smalest remnant of their seed.
            Your Maiestie may still bee mercifull, as late
our Queene Eliza was,Parsons and Sanders, on the behalfe of the Papists haue in their printed books affirmed that ourlate Queen was a cruell tyrant, & they affirm that Q Mary was more merciful to the protestants, then E. vnto their named Catholikes. and for your labour reape
her recompence from those your enemies, vnto
whome your mercy chiefly doth extend it selfe:
Her Maiestie was by the Papistes in printed
bookes accounted farre more tyrannous, then was
Dioclesian, or that murthering Nero: Parsons and
Sanders in their trayterous libels, did liberally affirme
so much: And I know a Papist, ye aliue in
England, that did verifie vnto my face, that Queen
Mary was farre more mercifull vnto the Protestants,
during her raigne, then was Elizabeth vnto
the Catholikes, what thanks your gratious lenity

shall reape from such like minded men: Your Maiestie
can with best commended wisedom iudge:
how they affect the right of your succession, their
Dolmans Booke doth plainly specifie, in which with
cunning shews, strange deriued pedegrees, & vprearde
mountaine-lyes, they haue intituled the
Infant of Spaine to your inheritance,The Papistes haue intituled the infant of Spaine vnto the crown: of England. and striued
with a diuels inuented policie to dispossesse your
Maiestie of your lawfull right; this course they
tooke before you were their king, and since that
time, as by a truth which my selfe reueald vnto the
Lords of your most Honourable Priuie Councell,
it seemeth that your Englands Papists haue amongst
themselues aduentured to calculate the number of
your dayes on earth,The secret intention of the Papistes is meerely trecherous both vnto the king and publike state. if your Highnes shall deny to
graunt one of the two before deseribed dangerous
extreams, which are either alteration or tolleration
in religion: so as what loyalty is to be expected frō
their hands, more then by constraint, your Maiesty
may directlie iudge. And therefore because I know
the remnant of these Roman Moabites, will be the cō
               tinuall
sowers of seditious seed, and dangerous dissturbers
of your Englands publike weale▪ I could be
contēt to wish for Gods glory, my countries good,
the safty of your royall selfe, and security of all your
princely progeny: that the whole packe of Papists
were sent vnto their Holy father the Pope, that they
euen in his Citty Rome might stand together
vnder the safe protection of the Popes abhominable
blessing, meane while during their stay,
if so they dare but once beginne to stirre, I doubt

not, but al the argumentes wherewith they finely
vse to pleade, will bring themselues to bee deuided
into fiue seuerall partes, which deuision will
in England worke Romes dissolution, and in time
I hope the gates of Rome will all bee ramparde vp,
so as we shall no more be troubled with his stragling
runnagates, but that the Pope shall bee enforced
to liue within himselfe, and onely take the profite
that his town allowes, his contributary whores can
pay him 30. thousand pounds a yeare, and no doubt
he hath many other such like honest helpes. Assuredly,
the times will shortly come, when all the true
religious kinges in Christendome will ioyne together,
and fire his sinke of sin about his eares.
            
            And thus my soueraigne Lord with further ioyfull
hope, then is as yet reuealde by mee: vnto the
vnstaynde beauty of your princely Maiestie, my
resolution humbly bringes it selfe, and though perhaps
the Diuell will shortly roare, and send abroad
his instrumentes to holde his kingdome vppe.
            Yet most puisant and valuorous minded
Prince, I know your kingly heart being indued,
as it is, with true prowes, and perfect fortitude, can
not endure the operation of timerous effectes, but
your kingly wisedome will prudently preuent all
the occasions, whence those monsters are begoten▪
stand fast therefore & God frō heauen wil giue vnto
your maiestie a powerfull & vncontrouled strēgth.
And by the best cōmended ordinary meanes, the
better to protect your safety, I make no doubt, but
your highnes shalbe continually attended with honorable,

valiant, wise, & faithfull gentlemen, whose
loyall harts will carefully defend the safety of your
royal person: & sure I am, the subiects of your kingdom
generally,All well affected people do reioyce in the establishing of our now renowned king. vnles some few scattered cōpanies
of Romā
                straglers, do in their soules reioice that God
hath raysde your royall vertuous selfe to bee their
righteous king: millions of thousands in your England
liues, whose spirites by the instinct of nature
giues themselues to loue the lawfull exercise of
Armes, & they with ioyfull willingnes, will waite
vpon the summons of their kinges commaund, and
spend their liues, their lands, their goods in the performance
of faithfull and obedient seruice: your
England hath for these many yeares obserued the
maner of your neighbor bordering kingdoms gouernment:
& with what prudēt wisedom your maiesty
did protect the safety of your land, the continued
true report of your renowned vertues fed your
Englands people with delightfull ioy, and to their
hearts it did a comfort giue, when as they thought
vpon that blessed hope, which built it selfe vpon
the well known right of your succession, & though
in christian policie. A publike note was taken from
the vulgar view, yet all the world may witnes that
our late Queenerenownde Elizabeth, did with her
Lordes and honoured Councellers long ago decree
to yeeld vnto your Maiestie, the proper right
of your inheritance, and that the people of your
kingdom did expect no lesse, was certainely approued
by that ioyful & general applause, whichal your
Englands subiects gaue, when as they heard king

               Iames proclaimde to be their Soueraigne.
            And now (most mightie Prince) sith that in despite
of Rome, the God of heauen hath established
your name on earth, and made you greater
then euer yet was any Christian king, and hath in
peace confirmed the regall seate of your imperiall
throne, I make no doubt but your Maiestie, with a
Christian constancie, and religious care, will confirme
the strength thereof, by the inuisible force of
a prudent, wise & godly gouernment, which doth
vnto two speciall poynts direct it selfe,The well ordering of diuine things is chiefely to be respected in a kingdomes gouernment. which is vnto
the well ordering of diuine and humane things,
wherein the obedience vnto God belonging, doth
challenge to it selfe a title Capital, the celestiall dignitie
whereof, is first before all other things in the
chiefest place to be preferred.
            Diuine regiment doeth therefore take vnto it
selfe the matter of Religion onely, and the ordināces
to be vsed in the church; which in the time of
the Law, were commanded by God himselfe vnto
his seruant Moses, and hee by the appointment of
God, committed the principall charge thereof vnto
Aaron, and his sonnes, and the tribe of Leui: but
now in the time of the Gospell, they were taught
and commaunded by Iesus Christ himselfe, and by
him left vnto his Apostles: and from them the principall
charge thereof is committed vnto the Bishops
and Pastors of the Church.
            And as in the time of the Law,Aaronthough he were the high Priest vn to God, yet was he subiect vnto Moses vnto whom was reserued the supremacy of kingly honou: for he was vnto Aaron in the stead of God. Exod. 4. ver. 6. 
               Aaron though
he were the high priest vnto God, and had chiefe
authoritie in diuine things, yet was not he the king,

Prince, or supreme Magistrate ouer the people of
God, but that supremacie of kingly honour, was
giuen vnto Moses, who was vnto Aaron in the stead
of God, and therefore next vnder God. Aaron and
his sonnes were accounted subiects vnto Moses.
So in the time of the Gospell, though Bishops and
Pastors haue the chiefe authoritie to deale with the
administration of diuine and holy things, yet they,
nor any of them are the kings, princes, or supreme
Magistrates ouer the people of God, and Church of
Iesus Christ. But that supremacie of kingly honour is
giuen vnto Kings, and Princes in their seuarall kingdomes,
who are vnto Bishops and Pastors, in the stead
of God. And therefore all Bishops and Pastors, are to
be accounted subiects vnto their seuerall Kings and
Princes.
            And as Moses in the diuine ordinances concerning
the law of God,Kings & princes in cause diuine, should not command vnto their subiects thinges contrary vnto the word of God. did commaund nothing vnto
Aaron, and the tribe of Leui; but that he had expresly
receyued from the mouth of God. So Kings and
Princes in the diuine ordinance of the Gospel of Iesus
Christ, are not to commaund vnto their Bishops
and Pastors, any other thing then can bee expressely
warranted by the doctrine of Christ himselfe, or his
Apostles:
            
            Lastly▪ as in the time of the Law; the Kings and
Princes of Israel, and their Priests, and Leuits, did
bring on them and their posterity,Disobedience vnto the word of God bringeth confusion vpon prince and people. the eternall curse
of God, when they fled from the obedience of the
Law, written by Moses in the old testament of God.
Euen so in the time of Gospel, shall Kings & Princes

with their Bishops & Pastors bring vpō themselues &
their posteritie the eternall curse of God, when they
shall flie from the obedience of the Gospel written
by the Apostles and Euangelifts, and left vnto vs in
the new Testament of Iesus Christ, in which is contained
the freedome, libertie, and iustification of our
best esteemed, and most blessed peace. And from
the obedience therevnto,The peace of Englands happinnesse hath beene continued by the ministrie of the Gospel. hath proceeded the long
continuance of Englands peacefull quietnes: and
by the meanes thereof (most mightie soueraigne)
your royall person, and your Scotlands kingdome
(from euery threatned danger) haue vntill this time
most safely beene preserued. And for from hence
must spring the firme continuance of your royall
state, and kingdomes blessednesse, your righteous
soule, no doubt, will most desire that things diuine
be chiefly lookde vnto. and because there neuer
was a church so rightly ordered,Kings & princes in their seuerall kingdomes haue authoritie to reforme those things that are amisse in the Church of God. but that some errors
were therein remaining, the reformation whereof
did belong vnto the kings, vnto whose charge the
gouernment thereof in their seuerall kingdoms was
principally committed, it now therefore remaineth
euident, that your religious vnderstanding, wise,
diuine, and sanctifyed heart will in the beginning
of your most happie raigne, looke first amiddest
your Englandes kingdome with godly care to
beautifie the Spouses of Iesus Christ. My Soueraigne
Lorde, I doubt not, but your highnesse will
be pleased to obserue the order giuen vnto your
princely son the happie comfort of your Englands hope,
and account it for your greatest honour, to see
the Church of God well gouerned. I am a souldier

(my most mighty king) and my dutie is (when
iust cause requires) to fight for God and for his
Church, and for you my soueraigne, next vnder
God, within the compasse of your kingdomes confines,
the onely supreme heade and gouernour. Be
then (most mightie Prince) vnder your captaine
Christ, a glorious instrument, as to that ende you
were ordained,Salomons song. ca. 6. ver. 10. 11. and aboue all things chiefly see his
Church to be well ordered. O then let your Maiestie
vouchsafe with Salomon, To walke downe into the
Garden of Nuts, The Sinagogues & congregations in
England, and see the fruit of the valley, see if the Vine
buddeth, and looke if the Pomegranets flourish. Beholde
what profite hath proceeded from the doctrine of
the Law & the Prophets, and in many Congregations
see nothing that your highnesse can take knowledge
of, but onely ignorance, disobedience, and rebellion.
The fearefull daunger of whose desperate estate is
principally occasioned, by the want of Pastors, able
to teach them to vnderstand that peace in whome
the lawe and the Prophets is fulfilled, and then from
the loue of those vngodly guides, which taketh vp
the place bequeathed to better men: let your diuine
and heauenly soule, as swiftly flie as did the
Princes of Salomon in their Chariots, and them remouing,
commaund that in their place be set the
siluer-sounding voyce of godly, reuerend, learned,
wise and preaching Ministers, who by the power of
their ministerie, may cause the true vnderstanding
of the peace of Iesus Christ, to shew it selfe vnto the
ignorant people of your land;, and that the onely

light procuring beames of the most glorious Gospell,
may with a sweete reflexion beautifully shine,
and goldlike richly gilde all your poore and desolate,
darke, and desart townes and villages, that
thereby all your English people may with ioy behold
the beautie of Zion, and glorie of Ierusalem,
shining in the Church.
            This defect in Englands ministrie hath long
go beene seene, but not amended: and our late
godly Queene was in her time a straunger vnto this
corruption, & that which in the Church did chiefly
holde, the too long continuance of some things
amisse, was the worde Improprio, from whence Impropriations
were deriued,Improptiatiōs are the hinderance of a learned ministery. which were they backe returnd
vnto their proper forme, your Maiesty should
quickely see a glorious Ministrie, and till in this
poynt reformation bee, that men of godly knowledge
and honest life may go before the flocke, vnto
their charge committed, and by example teach
the true performance of a Christian doctrine, your
Englands people will neglect the duties due vnto
their faythes profession. For though I know good
workes can claime no merit:Faith doth onely iustifie before God, but good works doth iustifie our faith before men. yet as faith onely doth
iustifie vs before the God of heauen: so good works
should serue to iustifie the soundnesse of our faith
on earth, agaynst all tongues that would desire to
frame obiections against the puritie thereof. And
vndoubtedly (most mightie Soueraigne) in your
Englande there is nothing of more strength, that
giues a powerfull libertie vnto the exercises of sin,
then the vilde example of vngodly Ministers. Begin

therefore (most mighty Prince) at the first with
them, and purge the Sanctuarie, let it please your
highnes not to suffer prophane and irreligious men
in the place of Ministers, to haue to deale with the
administration of diuine and holy things, nor once
with their vncleane handes to touch the seales and
Sacraments of our saluation.
            For indeed they are no other then wormeaten
trees;Iude. v. 12. 13. Isa. 56. v. 10. 11 Eze. cap. 13. 4. Ier. c. 23. v. 1. 2 clouds without raine, dumbe dogges, foxes,
wolues, deceiuers, & destroiers, which haue thrust
thēselues into the church by some vnlawfull means:
their owne consciences can beare them witnes that
in them their resteth no sufficient power to teach
the church the way vnto the bridegromes loue: for
they rather make deuorcement betwixt the bridegroome
& his spouse, they haue no right, no vnderstanding,
no knowledge, nor wisdoms skil, to marry
them togither in the vnitie of peace, themselues are
of all others merely strangers thereunto, they are in
deed the vngodly number of those intrusiue flocks,
which proudly and vniustly haue made themselues
to seeme, as if they were the brides companions, but
did the Church arightly know them as they are, she
would not then of thē enquire the way which leads
vnto the place where her souls beloued feedeth, nor
would she endure any longer to be led, by their deceiuing,
dissembling, and destroying, painted ignorance,
she would not assuredly be as one that turnes
her selfe aside vnto the wickednes of their vngodly
cōpany.A description of vngodly▪ ministers But whither am I led with such like words
as these, to speake against their grosse impieties.

Strange thing it is, that such should be the watchmē
in the house of God, that better knoweth what an
Alehouse meaneth, and more delighteth to watch
whole nights at dice and cardes, then to spend one
houre in the studie of diuine and heauenly things, a
paire of true rūning bowles, are more esteemd with
them, then all those truth teaching bookes, which
should be the weapons for men of their profession,
Come honest neighbors, and my good friends (in such like
wordes consisteth all the smoothnesse of their eloquence)
Let vs in a merry humor go drinke halfe a doozen
pots of Beare (this is the pith of their perswasion)
at the signe of the Cocke, or some other place directly
knowne vnto them: There is say they▪ as good heartwarming
liquor as a man would desire to drinke (and in
this is comprehended the whole argument of their
diuinitie. Whereupon being once at their place appointed
togither met, they set them downe and fall
to reasoning, and all their bare-barly proofs, being
brought in pots, they vse of them so many, that at
last growing all togither reasonlesse, they are plainly
ouerthrowne in the dust, by the force of their owne
argument: in as modest order as I can (most mightie
soueraigne) I haue described the manner of their
immodest brutishnesse, I will forbeare to speake of
worse vncleannesse done by many of them. But it
would make a Christian heart to rend it selfe with
griefe in the consideration of that iniurious wrong,
which is done by them vnto the church of god: but
now in the loue your Maiestie beareth vnto Iesus
Christ, let thē all be turned out that they may learne

to vse their seuerall occupations, & find some means
to liue without feeding vpon the soules of men.
            For my owne part (mighty soueraigne) I affect
not Browne,
               The author doth professe himselfe to be no Brownest. 
               Barrow, Penry, nor the schismes by them
inuented, I am a Protestant pro Deostans, and do in
my heart accord vnto your Englands gouernment,
by our late godly Queene established, and doe account
that the reuerend Bishops in your land, are
worthy instruments for the glorie of God, and benefite
of his Church, so farre forth as they will with
a religious care striue in their places to beautifie the
Spouse of Christ, by a conscionable and religious
gouernment, to which ende they are vndoubtedly
ordained, and there authorities approued lawfull:
for the Apostle Peter which commandeth that men
of their calling should not rule as Lords ouer Gods heritage,
               1. Pet. ca. 5. v. 3▪
               
doeth not say, neyther shall you accept of any
such titles, nor indure to be called Lordes ouer
the flocke of Christ, no though the Church of
God shal in the loue and reuerence that they beare
vnto you for their masters sake, cal you their Lords,
their gouernors and teachers in diuine and heauenly
things. Surely out of the Apostle Peters words, to
me appeareth no such kinde of doctrine. For I haue
reason to resolue, that the Apostle could not teach
it to be a thing vnlawfull for himselfe, or any other
of the apostles or minister after thē, to receiue liuing
or honor at their handes, vnto whom they should
administer in the Lord. For the Apostle Paule in his
Epistle to the Corint. and 9. chapter, doth plainly approue
the lawfulnes thereof. And howsoeuer he did

forbeare to exercise his power for the good of the
Church, then being in her infant age, yet notwithstanding
it appeareth euidently, that hee left that
libertie of power to bee vsed in the Church. And
therefore, if the Bishoppes since the time of the
Apostles, haue by their lawfull libertie of power,
wherof Paul speaketh, receiued as giuen vnto them
by the Church,Oecumenius in. t. a. Tim. cap. 1. 2. idem in 4. vnto whom they administred greater
titles, riches and honor, then T. & Titus had (who
were the5. Pri matii praefatio in 1. ad Tit. Bishops in the primitiue Church, of which
sort there must bee a continuall succession,
               1. Tim. 6. 14▪ S. Ambrose in 1. ad Tim. c. 3. 
               euen vntill the
comming of the Lord Iesus, yet notwithstanding, if the
Bishops now do execute no other office, and that in
no other sort then Timothie and Titus did, then their
titles, riches and honours being but externall things
lawfully giuen, and lawfully receiued do, not preiudice
the worthines of their calling. And about this
the mēbers of the church of God ought not to contend.That the members of the church should not contend about the titles of bishops
For it is the zealous▪ godly, & religious care in
the execution of their office, which doth onely dignifie
the approbation of their calling. And if they
fail in the performāce of those godly duties to their
place belonging, then in the abuse of their titles, riches,
and honors, the fault consisteth. And whereas
many in these our times do take offence against the
names, titles, wealthes, and honors, which our Bishops
haue on them bestowed, thinking that all such
things at first proceeded from the Pope of Rome, they
are therin deceiued: for since the time that christian
Emperors, kings, & Queens became the nursing fathers
and mothers of the Church, both titles, riches, and
honors, were by them bestowed vpon the Bishops

in the Church who were notwithstanding obediēt
subiects vnto their Emperours, Kings and Queenes,
and were approued glorious ministers of the Gospell
of Christ Iesus, and all this was done before the
Bishop of Rome did make himselfe the beast of
Rome, which now he is, by vsurping vnto himselfe
the sole authoritie ouer al the kingdoms in Christen
dome:The maner how and cause why the Pope refused to bee ruled by the word of God. Since which time, both the Pope himselfe
and all the Bishops vnder his Antichristian sea, haue
fled from the approued authoritie of Timothie and
Titus, in not being desirous to administer vnto the
church, but like tyrannicall Lords to rule and ouer
rule the same, and by their ouerruling vtterly to ouerthrow
the church, by extinguishing the purity of
that light, which shined in the same, placing in
stead thereof the traditions of men, by their approbation
of vnwritten verities. And thus being desirous
to raise themselues vnto a higher height, then
vnto them was limitted, they lest to seeke the glory
of God, & onely sought by peruerting the Scriptures,
to glorifie themselues aboue all the kingdoms
of the earth, and by this his pride, the Pope hath
made himself to be the open & reuealed Antichrist,
as is before described.
            But now my hope is, that not any will continue
to contend about the estate of Bishops as now they
stand, sith by their lawfull liberty of power, they may
receiue dignities, on them bestowed by those vnto
whō they administer, which example was obserud
by many christian Emperors, & kings, & many holy
and reuerent Bishops, long before the Pope was

knowne to be that diuell, which now he is. And
therfore let not any so contend about these things as
if they thought the abuse of the Antichristian sea
could extinguish or race out the lawfull liberty of
power,Eusebeus lib. 7 cap 3▪ he deriueth the successiōs of Bishops in the 4. principall churches of the world. Ierusalem, Antioch, Rome, & Alexandria, from the Apostles age, vnto the counsell of Nice. A. 320 which was by the Apostles of Iesus Christ,
left vnto the godly Bishops in the church. This may
it please your Maiestie, I haue aduentured to speake
because I know some few vnlearned people in your
land do desire to striue to much in this contention.
And though the authority of bishops be approued
lawful, yet al within the cōpas of your highnes kingdoms,
are your subiects, and in their harts no doubt
they vnfainedly desire to be so, and do in their souls
reioyce because they are so: and your Maiestie shall
find them reuerent, godly, wife & learned men: yet if
there be negligent defects in any,The reason why the author hopeth that the defects in the Church wil be amended. they will assuredly,
perceiuing that your highnes do looke into their
course, speedily by your directiō amend, the things
amisse, & henceforth not suffer that such vnworthy
guides as are before described, should by the laying
on of hands, be admitted to the ministry, nor alow
of any Nisi probatus vel Episcoporum examine,
               1. Con Carth. 3. cap. 22. 
               vel populi
testimonia, Vnlesse he be allowed by the examination
of the Bishops, or testimonie of the people.
And the better to direct this course, no doubt our
Bishops will obserue the saying of S. Ambrose, who
speaketh thus in his exposition of Paules Epistle vnto
Timothie:
               S. Ambrose in 1. ad Tim. ca. 6▪
                
               Paul Chargeth Timothie before God the
Father, and Christ the Sonne, and the elect angels: Vnder
this charge be commaundeth those things to be kept,
which pertaine to ordination in the Church, least easily any

man should get an Ecclesiasticall dignitie, but inquisition
be first had of his life and maners, that a meete and
approued minister or Priest may be appointed: neither any
to be ordayned: whose faults deserue suspition, for hee
sinneth, which or dayneth and trieth not.
            
            This course obserued, then shall your Maiestie
ioyfully behold your Englands famous vniuersities:
send forth worthy men,A description of godly ministers. faithfully to labour in that
worthiest work: then should your highnes see your
England furnished with the blessed number of those
preaching pastors, whose heauenly minds diuinely
sanctified, will iustifie the approbation of their calling,
by the inward testimony of the spirit of God:
Whose mouthes are touched with an hote coale, taken
from the fire of the Altar: Whereby they are purged
that the worke of God may be done by them with a
pure performāce, the approbatiō of whose ministry
shall for euer ground it selfe, vpon the foundation
of that written truth, contained in the holy Scriptures,
by the authority whereof, they will like faithfull
ministers, truly teach the church of God, arightly
to vnderstand the worthines of hir peace in Iesus
Christ, vpon which corner stone the truth of their
doctrine being established, it will manifest vnto the
world, that they are sent of God, and by the power
of the holy Ghost, are called to be the preaching
ministers of saluation vnto all beleeuers. Such as
these are those of whome the Prophet Esay with admiration
speaketh. Oh how beautifull are the feete of
those that declareth and publisheth peace: that declareth
good tidings, and publisheth saluation, saying vnto Sion,

thy God liueth. These are the well commended
watchmen, which do continually with carefull diligence
attend and waite vpon the Church, & giueth
warning when the enemie approacheth neere vnto
it, or vnto any member of the same, and so well
they know all the publike and priuate enemies that
they can describe the power, likenesse, craftes, and
policies by which, and vnder pretext whereof, The
diuell with all his boares, and beares, and wolues and foxes,
seeketh to deface the beauty of the Church, & vtterly
to destroy the same, & so wise these godly watch
men are, that they can prescribe and teach the true
and perfect vse of euery powerfull meanes whereby
the euent of each dangerous opposition shall
soundly & securely be preuented, so that the church
notwithstanding, the force of all occasions, shall at al
times know how to enioy the safety of her peace.
            These are the faithfull sheapheards, who being
desirous not to lose a sheepe, without hauing any
chiefe respect vnto the fleece, carefully and conscionably
in the aboundancie of humilitie, loue & zeale,
do wholy betake themselues to feede the flocke in
the sweete and pleasant pastures of Gods eternall
grace, warily keeping and protecting them, that they
might not eate nor taste of any rotten or infectious
foode. These are indeede the Stewardes of the
house of God, greatly dignified with the fauour of
the Bridegroomes loue, and these can inuite the
soule vnto a most delicious and spirituall banquet
and feede it with the bread of euerlasting life, and
can open vnto it the rich treasury of the heauenly

paradise & shew vnto it the celestial glories, which
are prepared for all those that serue and feare the liuing
God. And these are those that should be exercised
in the ministrie, and to the number of them
now in England, I doubt not, but by the assistance
of your Maiestie, there shall bee added a glorious
companie: that then your highnesse may speake as
the Prophet Esay did:Esay, cap. 62 v 6. 7. 
               I haue set watch-men vpon thy
walles, O Ierusalem, which all the day, and all the night
shall not cease, yee that are mindfull of the Lord: and keep
not silence, and giue him no rest, till he repayre, and vntill
he set vp Ierusalem, the prayse of the world.
               A godly, reuerent, wise, and learned ministry is the beauty of the church Then shall
the beauty of the Church appeare in the sanctitie
of her perfection, and all Gods people shall reioyce
to see their godly and religious king, to dignifie
honour, and adorne the sanctuary of Iesus Christ
and then no doubt, many that are now fallen off,
will with ioyfull and obedient loue, yeeld themselues
vnto your blessed gouernment, and then
your people being taught to vnderstand the word,
will proue themselues to be a chosen flocke of heauenly
Lambes, by yeelding true obedience to the
truth-teaching shepheardes voyce: by meanes
whereof they shal be brought with christian fruits,
to shew the glory of that faith, which they haue
built vpon that once for all, for euer sacrificed spotlesse
Lambe Christ Iesus.
            And thus when by your Maiestie, the Ministerie
shall bee refined, and corruption taken from
forth the Church of God; Your Highnes then shal
see, that for you first did seeke the thinges to heauen

belonging, all things else shall be administred,
and the house of your royall kingdome, shall be
built vpon a rocke immoueable, and the strength
thereof shall bee of force impregnable, & on your
throne there shall for euer sit, a godly King or
Queene, lineally discending, in the glorious issue
of your royall bloud. And in your dayes (and to
your posterity,) your kingdome England shall retaine
a long continued happy peace.
            Although I am a Souldier, yet peace is it I
wish vnto your Maiestie;A well minded Souldier neuer wisheth warre vnto his countries preiudice, nor peace vnto his kinges dishonor. for safe and calme contented
smiling peace, is the gratious Mistresse of a
glorious and golden gouernment, the glory of a
kingdome is to rule her state in peace, and plenty
doth attend her regiment, when peace is with a
conscionable and religious vertue ioynde, reason,
vnderstanding, and wisedome being made her
Councellers, then with a heauenly Souerainety,
she beares her selfe, and dignifies the land in which
she rules, with a most celestial happines. For where
such a peace commandes,A discription of our Englands peace. iustice beares the sword,
good lawes are made, and duely executed, within
the compas of her sway, each doth possesse his own
and wealth so rulde, as that the rich, relieues the
poore mans want, where she protecteth, riots are
supprest, and robberies, doe not goe vnpunished,
complaints are duely heard, the poore mans cause
not wantes to be considered, right is done, where
wrong hath iniured, from such a peace, oppression
is exilde, and quietly, not being hurt by warre,
peace moweth, soweth, and reapes her fruit in ioy:

this was the happie state of England in the time of
our late (and now most blessed) Queene: and by
your Maiestie, shall increased be, the vndoubted
hope of Englands further happinesse, and what by
chance had stolne without the compas of sufficient
care, in the time of righteous Asa (now deceased)
shall in the dayes of our Iehosaphat bee brought to
light, and Church and common welth shall be purged
from corruptions blemish, that after ages shal
in their worldes induring Chronicles report, how
happie England was by the gouernement of a maiden
Queen, and how much more happy by a godly
king, that vertuous Queene succeeding. Oh
England let all thy well disposed people with one
consent together clap their hands with ioy, & laude
the mighty God of heauen,An admonision vnto England generaly. whose mercies prouidence,
hath in Ioue prouided for thy publike weale
so farre beyond the compas of thy own vnworthynes,
God; chosen people the tribes of Israell did
not receiue more mercie from his hand, then thou
hast done: Iudea did endure a stronger scourge for
her iniquitie, then thou as yet hast felte of, for
thy worse impieties, no longer now prouoke thy
louing God, but turne thy selfe vnto his statutes
with obedient thoughts, redeeme the time by thy
repentant care, and scape the iudgement of thy sins
desert▪ behold thy king whose godly Presedent, shal
leade thee on in pathes of godlines: ioyne with his
righteous selfe, and let the world behold thy righteousnes,
so shall Romes mouth bee damde vp, that
speakes inuectiue wordes against the manner of thy

carelesse liuing, and for thou dost professe the Son
of God to be thy king, and gouernour, ioyn with
thy Soueraigne Lord, Gods great Lieutenant vpon
earth, and giue thy selfe with an vnfained heart to
yeeld a true obedience to his gouernement, then
shall the beautie of thy state like a lofty Cedar florish
and thou shalt stand a glorious spectacle vnto
the world,The happy estate of Eng. if her people shall obey the lawes of God. & make the nations of the earth to wonder
at the fame of thy admired Worthines: thy
land shal be enuironde with a Wall of brasse, no foe
mans foote shall once inuade the same, but it shall
be a peaceful habitation to thee and to thy children
whilest the world endureth, in all which time the
glorious gospell shall adorne thy peace, and with
power and triumphant victorie on earth, thy happiest
gouernment shall deriued bee, from the lineal
race, gloriously proceeding from thy now vpraisde
most mighty and religious King, this blessing God
vnto our England grant, and let the brightnes of
Englands Maiestie confirme in vs the full assurance
of this happines, that king and people may together
liue and walke before their God in righteousnesse
and holines of life, then shall our Church bee the
spouse of Christ, and he will come and lodge and
dwell with vs: and all the blessinges that can make
a kingdome happie, shall vnto vs be giuen, vnto the
fulnesse of our ioyes content, and when this humaine
course shall haue his ende, the vncomprehē
               ded
glory of eternall life shall be our recompence.
Thus England with a reioysing faithfull arme, in
all aboundant loue embrace thy mighty king (for

next vnto Christ) only by his meanes vnto thee is
brought, the full confirmation of thy happiest
happines.
            And because most mighty Soueraigne your Englands
nation hath in times past,English men haue beene admired and feared for their deeds in warre. been accounted famous
in the exercise of Armes, and your people,
for their magnanimious valour in warlike cheualry
haue, not onely beene admired, but feared of
all the kingdoms in Christendome, and beyonde
those bounds, fayre Englands force hath marched
with a conquering arrne, so as the glorious renowne
of honourable deedes being brought vnto
this present age (by the golden▪ trumpet of fames
true report) dooth make such deepe impression in
your Subiectes hearts, as that I cannot but suppose
the flower of your Englāds youth desireth to be accounted
souldiers, especially now that they are the
subiects vnto a mighty king, lineally descended frō
the royal bloud of Englands mightiest kings: yet vnto
them whose hearts desires the exercise of armes,
my resolution thus much speaketh,Warre is the shield of iustice, & ought not to be vsed, but when iustice puts it on and sayth, it is a
thing conuenient for them to consider, that warre
being the shield of iustice, is not to bee vsed, but
when iustice dooth commaunde the vse thereof:
and that peace with safety to the publike state, is in
this christian common wealth before warre to bee
preferred, And therefore those that would arightly
be, true valiant minded men: ought thus to vse
the exercise of martiall discipline, not thereby within
your Maiesties vnited kingdoms, to infringe the
happines of a long continued peace, but that by

their experience in the vse of warre, they may become
the most commended 
                  〈…〉
                is to maintaine
the dignitie thereof, against all occasions and
powers, that shall seeke to disturbe or ouer throw
the same.Peace ought to be the mother, and the nurse vnto the child of warre▪ and so bring vp wars children vnderh as that they might be able to defend their mothers right when iust occasion cals for them. And in regard the Church of God, your
maiesties royal person, your princely progeny, your
kingdomes, and your Highnes 
                  〈◊〉
                are all to be
defended by the sword of warre, when forraine
foes, or priuate enemies shall with force in opposition
riser: no doubte but your Maieste will command
such course to be taken, as that your Subiects
shall be taught the rudiments of warre: so as they
shall be familiarly aqvainted with the thinges belonging
thereunto: And that a souldiers hand shal
by your Highnes gratious fauour, be employedstd,
Tac, liber, 6. in assisting those your Maiesties fa
                  •
               thful friends
and true beleuing Protestants, whose country, and
whose people, God in his aboundant mercy, hath wondrously delivered from the tyranny of Rome,
& bloudy Spannish Inquisition▪ and for they fight
against the Beast, and those that on their foreheads
beares his marke.The state of Holland from Rome and Spaine deliuered, God hath iustified their proceedinees with coutinuall blessings God hath with honour crownd
the actions done by the 
                  〈◊〉
                and dignified their attempts
in warre with glorious victories the iustice
of their cause (notwithstanding, the coynde obiections
made by Spaine, is and hath beene by tho hand of
God approued: as may vnto the world be witnessed,
and your Highnes by assisting them doth (as it
was thought by our late Queene, and stil renownd
Elizabeth, giue a strong security vnto the safety of
your Englands peace: for the maintenance wherof

when your Maiesty shall see your people trayned
vp with actiue skil to vse their weapons fit for fight,
and well to vnderstand the ordering of their Files
and rankes, and seuerall standinges in a pitcht
Battalia, that all to bee commaunded may
sodainely with speedy execution, know how to
make a true performance,The Romanes taught their children how to fight and did euery 101. yeares, with great solemnity record the actions by their people done in haughty deedes of armes. Horace. Certus vndenos decies per Annos. Orbis vt cantus referat quaeludos. according to directions
giuen: and that not any may commaunders bee,
but such whose wise & valiant courage, with tride
experience ioynd, shall make them worthy of their
place, and then al these throughout your kingdoms
gouernment, being by a godly ministery taught to
vnderstand the iustice of their cause. More deeds
of honour shall then in time to come by the conquering
hand of Englands king be done, then euer
yet disciphered was by the Chronicle description
of precedent time: for now the foes to God and to
his truth, shall feare the name of English men, and
your kingly Maiestie with the glory of your succeding
princelie race, shall be a terror to the enemies
of Christ. For this a Souldier prayeth, and all this
to defend (being by his king commaunded) he hath
his sword in readines. And thus most mightie
Prince, and my renowned Soueraine, A poore
Souldiers resolution humbly offereth vp
his liues employment at your princely
foote.
            FINIS.
         
      
   