
      
         
            
            
            
            
            THE FIRST BOOKE OF PRIMALEON of Greece.
            Deſcribing the knightly deeds of Armes, as alſo the memorable aduentures of Prince Edward of England.
            And continuing the former Hiſtorie of Palmendos, brother to the fortunate Prince Primaleon.
            
            LONDON, Printed for Cuthbert Burby, and are to be ſolde at his ſhop by the Roiall Exchange. 1595.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The firſt Booke of Primaleon of Greece: Deſcribing his Knightly deedes of Armes, as alſo the memorable aduentures of Prince Edward of England. And continuing the former Hiſtory of Palmendos, Brother to the fortunate Prince Primaleon. &c.
            
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  How the Ambaſſadours of Fraunce came to Constantinople, where they were Honourablie receaued by the Emperour, who hauing heard the effect of their Ambaſſage, and conſerred theron with the Prince Arnedes: affianced him immediatlie to his Daughter Philocrista, by whoſe hand the Ambaſſadours preſented the Letters of credence from the King their Maiſter.
               
               
                  IN the Hiſtorie of Palmendos, after which this Booke of Primaleon followeth, you haue hearde of the Loue betweene the Prince Arnedes 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   
                  Philocriſta, Daughter 
                     〈…〉
                   Emperour Palmerin, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   a Courtier was ſent to aduertiſe the 
                     •
                  ing his Father thereof: That hee might 
                     •
                  n
                  
                     •
                  ay the like good fortune, 
                     •
                  s Palmendos had done with his

miſtreſſe Francelina, and thereby confirme a generall reioyſing. The meſſenger béeing carefull to diſpatch this buſineſſe, made ſuch haſte in his iourney, as in ſhort time be arriued at the famous Cittie of Paris, where the King vnderſtanding the will of his Sonne, quicklie reſolued to conclude theſe aſſures: Electing as chiefe in this Ambaſſage, the Duke of Orleaunce, a verie wiſe & prudent Lord, commanding alſo that the Marqueſſe of Oliuet, & the Countie Peter (one of the boſt knightes in his Court) ſhould be are him companie, with manie other Barrons ſo ſumptuouſlie accouſtred, as euidentli declared, how far the French excéeded al other Nations in magnificence and good partes, whereof at this time wee haue no leyſure to ſpeake. The King hauing giuen them his Letters of credence, and inſtructions concerning the ſumme of their charge: he deliuered them ſundry precious gifts, which he ſent to Philochriſta and the Prince Arnedes. But before their departure, there came a Knight to the Court from the King of Caſtile, to aduertiſe Recinde, howe his Brother béeing deceaſed without iſſue, all the people verſe much reioyced, that the Scepter of the Kingdome ſhould fall to a Prince ſo valiant.
               When the King of Fraunce heard theſe newes by the gentleman of Spaine named Pinedo, be made anſwere, how Recinde was gone with his Son Arnedes to Conſtantinople, where (as hee heard by credible intelligence) hee daylie wonne great honour and renowne. Hereupon, Pinedo determined to paſſe into Greece with the Ambaſſadors, and comming to Tolloain Prouence, they embarqued them ſelues on the Mediteranean Sea; where ſayling with winde at will, it was not long before they arriued at Conſtantinople, euen at ſuch time as Arnedes was in his wonted paſſions of loue. No ſooner were they entred the Porte and bad caſt Anker, but the Duke of Orleaunce commaunded a generall iouyſance, in applauding heauen for their happie nanigation: whereof the Emperour béeing aduertiſed, he ſent to know the cauſe of this reioyſing. When he heard the arriuall of the French Ambaſſadors, he was right glad thereof, hoping Arnedes woulde

now recouer health by ſome good tidinges: and therefore ſent ſpéedily to acquainte him therewith, intreating him to bee of good courage, ſéeing the Lordes of his Countrie were come ſo happilie. It were needleſſe to demaund if Arnedes were wel pleaſed with theſe tydinges, conſidering the preſent cure hee found in one moment hée reby, which ſhewed, that herein conſiſted the onelie medicine for his malladie: this made him leaue his bed, and goe with Primaleon to the Emperour, who ſéeing him come ſo 
                     〈…〉
                  , was not a little glad of his good recouerie, and ſaid: Me thinks Sir Arnedes that the arriuall of theſe French Gentlemen, hath reuiued and verie well ſtrengthened you. Well haue you ſaide my Lorde (anſwered Arnedes) becauſe it is the onlie meanes of my reſtoring. Philocriſta (who knew full well the depth of his amorous deſiers) reioyced maruellouſlie at this fortunate occurrence, ſo that by outward view of her countenance, might eaſilie bee diſcerned the inward content of her bart, and whence procéeded this alteration: wherein (by ſilence) ſhee bewrayed to the French Prince, what boldlie ſhe durſt not vtter in ſpéech, and whereof he néeded no interpreter, but with like ſignes returned thankfull requitall, minding to goe preſentlie to the Porte, to ſée by whome the King his Father had ſent this long expected meſſage. The Emperour commaunded manie of his Barrons with him, for more Honourable accompanying the Ambaſſadors to the Pallace, and in ſigne of greater fauour, Primaleon himſelfe went with Arnedes, who ſent his divarſe before, to let them vnderſtand his comming to the Porte: Whereupon, the Duke of Orleaunce with his company immediatly lāded, where firſt beholding their yong Prince, they ran hare-headed to kiſſe his hand, when he haning ſeuerallie embraſed the, thus ſpake to the Duke of Orleaunce, My noble Coſen, how many pleaſures hath your art ſhall héere inriched me withall, in ſooth farre more than you can eaſlie thinke on? But tell mee (I pray yée) ere we paſſe any further, how ſares the King my Noble Lorde and Father? So well as your heart can deſire my Lord, anſwered the Duke, and as one wounderfull longing

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
ſpéedilie to ſée you: wherefore his will is, that making ſo little ſtay héere as poſſible you can, you vſe ſome haſt in returning to your Countrie of Fraunce. Herein ſhall I moſt gladlie obey him, replyed Arnedes, ere many dayes after this hée expired: in meane ſpace, giue honour to Primaleon here the Emperours Sonne, who hath vouchſafed to come in perſon to welcome yée.
               
                  Primaleon maruelled that theſe French Lords and Knights ſo humbled themſelues to Arnedes, which made him imagine that he was Sonne to their King: in regard whereof, vſing the greater kindnes to the Duke of Orleaunce and the other Ambaſſadours, he deſired thē to reſolue him concerning the eſtate of Arnedes, who hitherto had not diſcloſed himſelfe to anie one. My Lord (ſaid the Duke) this yong Prince is out Soueraignes Sonne, who in reſpect of his earneſt deſire to be ſeruice to the Emperour your Father: thought it méeteſt for him to come vnknowne to this Court, and héere to remayne ſo concealed, till hee ſhould perceiue his priuate deſeignes fall out to his owne contentment. Concerning which, the preſent meſſage committed to our truſt by the King his Father, I hope will ſort to good and ſucceſſefull end; with the help of him whome I pray ſo ſpéed vs, as herein our enterpriſe may not be diſappointed. In good faith ſaid Primaleon (turning himſelfe to the French Prince) I haue very great reaſon to complaine of you Arnedes, that you would thus long hide yourſelf from me, for although you reſolued in comming hither, that no one ſhould know ye: yet you might haue exempted me from that vniuerſall number, conſidering the habitude and ſecrec
                     •
                  s you might boldlie haue repoſed in mee, that I ſhould not haue continued ſo long ignorāt of your royal race. My Lord (anſwered Arnedes embracing him) herein I beſéech you hold mee excuſed, in reſpect that ſtraying ſo far from the French Court, I determined to doo ſomewhat in actions of Armes, that might be worthie report of my progenie, before myſelfe were knowne to anie one: And béeing concealed, I might beſt doe it, conſidering no way els could I reach the top of my deſire: but anie

thing wherein I employed myſelfe, might rather redound to my diſgrace than commendation. Certainely (replied Primaleon) if by déeds of Armes you deſire to publiſh our name, me thinkes you ſhould haſten the day of Turney, conſidering your Royall geniture, and thereby expreſſe your knightly valour and reſolution. Ah my Lord (ſaide Arnedes, interrupting him) it pleaſeth you to account mee among men of deſert, though far vnworthie am I to bee ſeene in anie ſuch aſſembly. Notwithſtanding, if good will may incite forward a generous minde, by puiſſaunce to witneſſe ſome part of his ſtrength: I hope I ſhould not be reputed amongſt the weakeſt. No truelie (anſwered Primaleon) but rather amongſt the ſtrongeſt, where honourable victorie will ſet on your head a triumphall Crowne.
               But leaue wee theſe ſpéeches till ſome better conuenient time, and goe wée to the Emperour, who will be moſt ioyfull hearing theſe news. So mounting on horſe backe with the Ambaſſadors, they rode to the Pallace, where gratious entertainement was commanded them by the Emperour. And in this time Pinedo made knowen to the Prince Arnedes, how he paſt into Fraunce to finde Recinde, whome now hee came to acquaint with the death of his Brother, and how all the Barrons and people of Caſtile, would willingly accept him for their Lord and King.
               Of theſe tidinges was the Frenchman not a little glad, that his Coſin Recinde (whome hee loued as himſelfe) was heire to the Scepter of Caſtile: But yet was hee as ſorie on the other ſide, becauſe he could heare no report of him, wherfore perſwading Pinedo, that hee hoped of his ſhort returne, in that the Tourney at his mariage would be a meane thereof, which was publiſhed through all the parts of the Empire, he thought it néedleſſe anie further to purſue his ſearch.
               Now the Emperour (who in this ſpace had vnderſtood the diſcent of the Prince 
                     
                        •
                      Anedes) when hee ſaw him enter the Hall with his Sonne Primaleon, aroſe from his ſeat to embrace him, ſaying: How happens it my Lord Arnedes, that

you would all this while ſo cunningly diſſemble with vs, in ſhade wing of whence and what you were? wherin you haue done vs g
                     ••
                  at diſcourteſie, and leſt ſuch honour as your vertues deſerued. Tell me I pray you, wherefore did yée ſo conceale your ſelfe, knowing how happie I would haue thought my ſelfe, to haue vnderſtood of you with out thee ſayning:
               My Gratious Lord replyed Arnedes, moſt humblie I in treate yee, vſe no ſuch wordes on my behalfe, becauſe I know my ſelfe vnworthie of them, much leſſe of the honour I haue receiued in your Countrie, which a better man than I can no way deſerue. But neuer could any quiet enter my thoughts, till I beheld the Maginficence of your Court, and that to my poore power I might do you ſeruice: poore and ſlender in truth is it in reſpect of my good will, which is equall with the moſt affectionate ſeruant you haue, among whom I deſire your Grace to repute mee, as the man whome no one ſhall out-goe in zeale and deuotion of minde. And a great diſcountenaunce of heauen haue I accounted it, that no occaſion hitherto woulde happen, whereby I might liuelie expreſſe the true affection imprinted in my heart.
               It ſuffiſeth (anſwered the Emperour) what alreadie you haue done, proofe enough to giue you the reputation of one of the beſt Knightes in the worlde. And as for me, if I be not depriued of the fauour (conſidering the loue I beare yee) I ſhal euermore continue my former opinion, and repute my ſelfe happie in making alliance with you, when you ſhall thinke expedient to yeeld thereto.
               
                  Arnedes, who ſaw the paſſage open, whereby his ſoule might ſooneſt be conducted to reſt, and by him likewiſe that had the onely key thereof: was marueilouſly ouercome with thy, when taking the Emperour by the hand, to kiſſe it in ſigne of thankes, he ſaid. Well may I now vaunt my ſelf to haue attained the height of humane ſolicitie, beeing offered by your Grace an alliance ſo honourable, for which I know not how to ſhew my ſelfe thankfull (in diſcharge of the dutie wherein I ſtand bound) but onely by continuing your humble 
                     〈…〉
                  ,

and day by day to confirme the indiſſoluble bend, wherein I am euerlaſtingly wrapped by this extraordinarie fauour. Notwithſtanding, if my vnſayned affection, to remaine your obedient ſeruant, or dutifull Sonne if you pleaſe, may ſtand for an earneſt pennie: Then intreat I you to accept thereof as I preſent it, to the end I may hereafter be ſo readie in performaunce, as now I am in heart. For euen as the greateſt clap of thunder followes the faireſt day, and nothing elſe in ſuddennes may be compared thereto: as readie ſhall I be vpon receit of the verie coniectures of your deſires, to ſatiſfie the ſame, than if I ſhould giue attendance vppon commandement.
               The Emperour beeing maruellous glad to heare him vſe ſuch honeſt ſpeeches, gathered very well with what ſhaft hee was wounded, & that the matter now opened by conference, was but only to ſeeke a ſpeedie balme or medecine for the hurt receiued. Hereby he tooke occaſion to let him 
                     •
                  it by him, which drew on manie glaunces ſtill to the ſame purpoſe: but among the reſt, when the Emperour heard the whole ſtorie of Recinde his Coſen, he could not chuſe but greatly wonder thereat. Hereof was M
                        •
                     lioia ioyfull beyond meaſure, becauſe ſhe intirely loued the Spaniſh Prince: yet could ſhee not compare with Philocriſta in contentment of ſpirit, by reaſon ſhee wanted the amorous obiect which ſhe had, nor could ſhe participate in thoſe vnſpeakeable pleaſures, wherewith the harts of the other twaine were ſpecially delighted.
               On the morrow, the Emperour cauſed the Pallace to bee richlie adorned with tapiſtrie of gold and ſiluer, and his moſt ſumptuous Iowels to be placed in open ſhew, that the French Ambaſſadors ſhould behold his ſtately pompe: they likewiſe comming into the Hall, attired in their faireſt and coſtl
                     •
                  eſt habillimentes, were receiued by the Emperour with exceeding Honour, and to him (by faire Philocriſta) they preſented their Letters of crdence, the effect whereof hereafter followeth.
               
                  
                     
                     The Letter ſent from the King of Fraunce, to the Emperour Palmerin.
                     To the moſt high and magnanimous Prince, Palmerin, de Oliua Emperour of Conſtantinople, true mirrour of Chiualry: Lewes, by the grace of God, King of Fraunce, wiſheth health condigne to his excellent mightines.
                     
                        THe aſſurance giuen me of the renowne of your generoſitie (my moſt deare Brother) which is ſpred to the very furtheſt, moſt barbarous, and hidden regions of this hemiſphere: cauſed mee immediatly diſpatch my Ambaſſadours toward your Maieſtie, to intreate that you woulde conſent to an alliance, which I haue purpoſed (if you pleaſe) betwéene our houſes, according to the ordenaunce of the laſt will, which the into king of famous memorie my moſt Noble Father (whom God abſolue) left me when he payd his mortall tribute to nature. And becauſe I haue inſtructed the bearers hereof, in all the pointes and articles which on our behalfe you are to bee acquainted withall: I ſhall need to vſe the leſſe diſcourſe by Letter, repoſing onely on then ſufficiencie. Requeſting you that in this cauſe you will giue them credit, or what elſe they ſhall thinke méete and determine, concerning the marriage of Arnedes Prince of Fraunce my Sonne, as if I were with you my ſelfe in perſon: and looke what honor ſhall be done to them in your Countrie, I will account it as receiued by my ſelfe. But leaſt happilie you ſhould repute it ſtrange, that thee 
                           •
                        eſt Sonne of ſo great a houſe as this, ſhould come to your Court ſo meanely attended: therein I deſire yée conſider his earneſt

affection, to accompliſh ſome memorable déede vnknowne, whereby you may eaſly gather, how gladly he would goe beyond, or equall the beſt.
                     
                        Your affectionate and perfect friend.
The houſe of Fraunce.
                        
                     
                  
               
               This Letter béeing read, the Emperour tooke the Ambaſſadours into his Chamber, where after hee had heard at full the ſumme of their meſſage: immediatlie hee called together the Princes and Lordes of his priuie Councell, to let them vnderſtand his intent concerning theſe affayres.
               This by their aduiſe was immediatly confirmed for good, as well to accompliſhe his promiſe to the deceaſſed King of Fraunce, as alſo in reſpect Arnedes behauiour was ſo generally commended, béeing a vertuous Knight, and verie forward to Martiall exerciſe. But aboue all the reſt, Primaleon was moſt willing and readie in conſenting to this alliance, knowing the earneſt deſire of his Siſter, to ſée herſelfe the wife of Arnedes another Adonis: and for beautie, well might Philocriſta bée reſembled to Pſyches, or rather (if you will) a ſecond Venus.
               
               The mariage béeing concluded, on the morrow following they were affianced together, with very ſtately and magnificent triumphes, ſo that both in the Pallace and thorough the Cittie, was nothing but diſportes and pleaſure: to the no little content of the Emperour and Empreſſe, as well for the comming and knowledge of Palmendos, as for this loue knot betwéene Philocriſta and the Royall Prince of Fraunce. And now dooth Primaleon arme himſelfe for knighthood, that hereafter hee may beſtowe his time in thoſe commendable occaſions.
               Here the French Authour confeſſeth his fault, for hauing intiteled the whole booke the firſt Booke of Primaleon, both that which goes before, (called by me the Hiſtory of Palmendos) the name agréeing with the diſcourſe, and this, where

                  Primaleons chiualrie doth now but begin. His reaſon is, that the young Prince béeing verie daintylie brought vp, and not of yeeres to receiue the order of Knighthood: he tooke occaſion (in meane while) to report the braue behauiour of his brother Palmendos. But now ſhall wee ſpeake of the gentle Prince himſelfe, the onely mirrour of honour and Armes, as by reading his Hiſtory you may perceiue.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  How Primaleon intreated the Emperour Palmerin his Father, in the preſence of the French Ambaſſadoures (who prepared themſelues to the Grecian portes) that hee would giue him the order of Knighthood. And how the Lorde of the encloſed Iſle ſent him a Sheeld and a Sworde, wherewith hee tooke his order. And what hee ſent to the Emperour, which he afterward ſent to the King Florendos his Father, requeſting his preſence at the mariage of faire Philocriſta.
                  
               
               
                  TO begin the narration and diſcourſe of the déeds of our Primaleon, who in his yongeſt yeares exerciſed himſelfe ſo well in vertuous Diſciplines (whereof according to his verie naturall inclination and deſire, he declared himſelfe a ſtudious louer,) as one might iuſtly name him the true miracle of perfection: So among other endowments, for the ſpirite of wiſedome he might be compared to Salomon, for beautie both exteriour and interiour, to the gentle Gréeke Alcibiades, and for magnanimitie, councell, millitarie ſtrategemes and ſuch like, to valiant Scipio the African, or the ſubtill Hanniball of Carthage, eſpeciallie in this time of his youth, when he had not receiued his order of Knighthood.
               But now fit time therfore being come, hée ſell on his knée before his Father, armed with a light C
                     ••
                  ret, which had no other beautie or brauerie then the plaine faſhion which moſt he affected for his help in fight, and with humble geſtures hee

intreated one requeſt: The Emperour very willingly made him graunt thereof, as the like, hee did to diuers others, who this day demaunded his gratious fauour, ſeeing him ſo bountifull in honour of this feaſt.
               My Lord (ſaide Primaleon) the requeſt which at this inſtant I deſire your Grace not to denie mée, is, that I may be armed Knight by your hande in this armour, on the day of the feaſte for the nuptialls of Philocriſta my ſiſter, for to make the ſame the more magnificent, I hope to prouide a Tourney worthy the view of your Maieſtie, wherto I beſéech you graunt me licence of ſafe conduct for all Knights whatſoeuer, becauſe I intend to haue it publiſhed in diuers Countries.
               This had I graunted (quoth the Emperour) with all my hart, albeit thou hadſt not bound mee thereto by promiſe, becauſe theſe are the thinges that highly pleaſe me, and very honorable is it to ſée ſuch ſolempnities at mariages, eſpecially of ſuch a Princeſſe as thy Siſter is. My Lord (ſayd Abenunco to Primaleon) I humbly beſéech you to preferre me in this action, in that I likewiſe earneſtly deſire to receiue my order of Knighthood with you, ſo pleaſe the Emperour to honor mee with ſo much fauour. The like requeſt made Arnaſin ſonne to Duke Ptolome, who was equall with them in youthfulnes of yeares, wherwith Primaleon was not a little content.
               Immediatly were Heralds of armes diſpatched into diuers Regions, to publiſhe the Tourney, and the day purpoſed for the beginning of the ſportes, which ſhoulde continue during the feaſt, with Court royall openly kept, at the mariage of the Princeſſe Philocriſta: aſſuring all knights that pleaſed to ſhew themſelues there, to bee entertained with honour euerie way equall to deſert. Meane while was Arnedes ſeated by his affianced Miſtreſſe, (more faire and brauer adorned, than the daughter of Tindarus, when Paris Alexander was euercome with her loue) they bothe ioying, yet with modeſtie and baſhfulnes, as neither durſt enterpriſe the hardines to ſpeake

the firſt woord: in which mute paſſions, they rather reſembled the two beautifull ſtarres Caſtor and Pollux, than humaine creatures poſſeſſed of life and moouing, whereuppon Melicia ſmiling, thus ſpake to them.
               Ah that mine eyes were ſo happie, that they coulde now behold him, for whom my heart indures moſt paſſionate martirdome, I would not ſhow ſuch puſillanimitie as you doe, ſéeming as though you ſcantly knewe each other: why then doo you not giue ſome recreation to your affectionate ſoules, but ſtand thus as dead bodies depriued of life? Madame, (anſwered the Prince) meruaile not to ſee mee ſilent and diſpoſſeſſed of ſpeech, in that loue by nature ſealed vp my lippes, for ſeeing vs in greater content with the thing more conformable to our deſires, hee tooke the benefit of ſpeaking from vs, leaſt the one ſhould not pleaſe our eares ſo well as the other doth our harts. Moreouer, I haue till this houre ſo extreamely deſired that, which now I am perſwaded is altogether mine, as I ſhall neuer enioy any quiet in minde, (ſo yrkſome is the thought of time to me) till I may ſee the Crowne of Fraunce on the head of faire Philocriſta. As for you Madam, be you certaine, if my Coſin Recinde as yet liueth, one day to rule the Realme of Caſtile: for ſo perfectly doth he loue you, as his returne hether will not be long to conclude this affaire, which for my part, I would be glad to haſten, in regarde of the deſire I haue to pleſure you both to my power.
               At theſe words Melicia began ſomwhat modeſtly to bluſh, neuertheleſſe being prudent and well aduiſed, ſhee cunningly diſſembled this youthful feminine ſhame, ſaying. My Lord, the Prince Recinde is of ſuch a vertuous and gentle nature, and ſo well his valour and proweſſe knowen where he trauaileth, as each one ought to reioyce at his good fortune: eſpecially my ſelfe, beyond all other that loue and honor him, if it be ſo, that hee beares me ſuch good will as you ſpeake of.
               Theſe ſpeeches of Melicia ſo imboldned Arnedes, that now he beganne ſomewhat to cheare vp himſelfe, and entered into further conference with his Lady, taking of her the firſt erneſt

of their loue, which were many daintie kiſſes, ſoft touchings and ſuch like, yet ſo honeſt and comely diſcharged, as it was no ſcandall or offence to the beholders, but rather moued them to wiſh, that they would longer continue this agreeable and pleaſing behauiour.
               Now the Emperour amongſt thoſe that were of greateſt regarde there preſent, highly eſteemed and honored his ſonne Palmendos, in that the cheefeſt ioy and pleaſure of this feaſte proceeded from him: heeruppon he remembred the ſealed booke which he ſent him, with ſo many other precious thinges from the Iſle of Delphos, as in the tenth Chapter of Palmendos hath beene declared.
               To make knowen therfore to the french Lords the magnanimitie and vertues of his ſonne Palmendos, hee commaunded the rich & exquiſite chaire (wherin the Idol ſat) to be bright before him, and the booke likewiſe, which hee had cauſed to be kept in his treaſurie, amongſt matters of greateſt account.
               To open the booke hee made proofe againe by many of his Knights, but there was none could come néere it, which hee perceiuing, deliuered it to Palmendos ſaying. My ſonne, make ſome little proofe of this booke, for if you bring not this labour to end, I am aſſured wee may ſet our hearts at quiet, for reading or beholding any thing theerin contained. Palmendos turning aſide his head, and making a lowly reuerence to the Emperour, tooke the booke from foorth the hands of a Knight that endeuored to open it, and with ſuch eaſe did he open it, as if the ſame had neuer been cloſed before: heerat the Emperour was exceeding ioyfull, and turning towardes the Noblemen of Fraunce, he could not containe, but néedes muſt expreſſe before them a moſt euident ſigne of fatherly affection to Palmendos. Then taking the booke, he turned ouer the leaues from one end to an other, finding no matter or diſcourſe written therin: only he beheld the figures of two Emperours painted in the midſt therof, the one attyred after the greekiſh manner, holding a ſheeld vppon his arme, wherein was the blazon and diſcription of the armes of the Empyre: the other was armed

                  cap a pe after the Turkiſh guiſe, with a naked ſwoord in his right hand, wherewith he ſeemed to menace the Gréeke, and with his left hand very furiouſly hée ſnatched the ſhield from his arme.
               If the Emperour were highly pleaſed with Palmendos opening the booke no doubte, but hee greatlye marueiled what ſiniſter preſage theſe figures deliuered by their ſhew & faſhion, wherefore he ſaid aloud, that theſe did ſignifie mighty matters: hereupon all the Lordes and Knights approched nere him to ſee the figures, and paſſing the booke from hande to hand, they all could coniecture nothing but matter of aſtoniſhment. But as each one deliuered his opinion, according to ſuch reaſon as beſt ſéemed vnto them: there entred the pallace a young Gentleman in verie rich habilliments, carrying it Sheeld, and one of the verie beſt Swords for Armes, that euer Vulcan God of the Forgers could deuiſe to make by his diuine Arte: and being come before the Emperour, he ſet his knee to the ground, ſpeaking in this manner.
               Sir, the Knight of the encloſed Ile, ſent me directly to this Court, to kiſſe your hand on his behalfe, béeing the man whō he loueth, honoureth and eſtéemeth, more than any other perſon this day liuing vnder the celeſtiall Spheres: Albeit as yet hee neuer ſaw yee, neyther knowes yée, but onelye by the renowme of your manhood and generoſitie, which hath ſo farre commended yée, and gotten ſuch conqueſt ouer him, as hee cannot by his Magicke Arts, Necromancie, Cabaliſt and hidden Philoſophie, (wherein he may well bee named the ſecond Zoroasbres,) foreſée any thing, that may turne to your griefe or diſcontent of mind: but he imagineth himſelfe bound to let yee know thereof. Wherefore, that yée may wade no further in the depth of doubtfull opinions, which the two figures in this enchaunted booke may cumber your thoughts withall: he tells yée by me, that as yée behold here theſe Images, euen ſo (one day) ſhall the Empire of Gréece, and the glorie of her good Knightes, be abated and deſtroyed by the enemies of our fayth. So that for the ſinnes and iniquities of the Chriſtians,

God will ſuffer betwéene the Gréekes and Turkes mortall diuorce a hatred, which ſhall end by a moſt bloodie diſcomfiture, whereto you and your Son Palmendos haue alreadie giuen beginning. Neuertheleſſe, this raine and decadence ſhall not happen in your time, neyther of him or your poſteritie, becauſe all their liues (euen to the laſt day) ſhall bee moſt glorious and triumphall, not any of your enemies erecting one Trophe ouer them: therefore receiue no griefe at this fatall iudgment, conſidering we can no way eſcape the ineuitable deſtenie, whereto God hath appoynted vs.
               I ſée well then (replyed the Emperour in great heauſnes) that man ſhall not haue anie one intire pleaſure in this mortall life.
               Ah ſoueraigne directer of all thinges, moſt deuoutly I intreat thee, that thou wilt for euer imprint within my ſoule, the true caracters of thy holy catholike faith, to the end I may both liue & die thereafter, without any other deſire, than to accompliſh thy moſt bleſſed will. And albeit that Greece (in my time) ſhall not receiue this wound, yet muſt it néeds marueilouſly offend and diſpleaſe me, that ſo good people (by a falſe and miſcreant Dog) ſhould be ſo outraged.
               Neuertheleſſe, ſéeing I can no other way redéeme it, I ſweare and proteſt before yée all, hereafter to be a cruell and capital enemie to theſe harbarous and vnbeléeuing helhounds, making them dearely to buy before hand, the infelicity deſtinyed to this moane-worthie countrie. And euen ſo it came to paſſe, in that both he, and Palmendos in his Kingdome of Theſſalie, did great and infinite dammages to the Turkes, for euer after there was continually open warres betweene thoſe Nations,
               But the Emperour then ſomewhat mittygating hys choller, with a more pleaſing countenance and milder tearms, thus ſpake to them about him.
               Wherefore ſhould I offend my ſelfe wyth ſuch things as we ſhall neuer behold? I pray yée (for all this) let vs not leaue the fruition of ſuch pleaſures, as God hath ſent vs at this inſtant:

for ſéeing it is hys will, that happy ſucceſſe ſhall betyde the affayres of my time, and they that follow of my poſterity likewiſe: I haue no reaſon to paſſionate my ſelfe, but rather to repute me the moſt happy Prince, that thys day inhabiteth betweene the two Poles.
               Therfore I pray you (quoth hée to the Meſſenger) on my behalfe, thank the Lord of the encloſed Iſle your Maiſter, for putting mée out of thoſe doubtfull imaginations, ſtriuing to vnderſtand what theſe two figures ſhoulde ſignifie: aſſuring him withall, that he hath no friend in this world, who can make more account of his goodwill than I doo, nor ſhall hee finde any iot leſſe in me towards him, when pleaſeth him to make any triall therof: ſo breaking off, the Gentleman went a little lower toward Primaleon, who likewiſe was there preſent, & thus ſpake to him: Happy & fortunate Prince, the Lord of the encloſed Iſle my maſter, who louer you as himſelf, hath ſent yée this good ſword and rich ſhield, the two beſt and moſt exquiſite weapons, that at this day are to be found in all the world, and them hee thinks méete for ſo valiaunt a Knight as you will prooue, aduertiſing you, that the clouen rock, being thus ſeparated, as you may beholde héere figured in this ſhield: ſignifieth the partialitie and little looue betwene you and her, who in after time ſhall make one ſole heart of twaine: ſo that on the day of this riciprocation hapning betwéene you, this impregnable rock ſhall then remaine intyre & cloſed againe, and without any impeach, to teſtifie your reconciliation.
               Tell your Maſter from me (anſwered Primaleon, as one abaſhed to heare ſuch ſpéeches,) that as it hath pleaſed him to ſend me this fayre preſent, which I ſhal wel & carefully hope for his ſake: ſo wold I haue him commād me any thing wherin I may do him pleaſure, when he ſhall aduertiſe me, as the mā that may command my vttermoſt, & whom I highly thank for his curteſis, albeit I cannot but remaine in penſiuenes, 
                     〈◊〉
                   I vnderſtand more clearly the matters you haue told mée.
               The time will come (replyed the yong Gentleman,) when you ſhall knowe them ſufficiently, although at this inſtant

they ſéeme ſo hard and obſcure to yée: and then ſhall ye recompence the ſeruice, which now yée receiue from my Maiſter.
               Then commaunded Primaleon, that one ſhould fetch a rich preſent for the Lord of the encloſed Iſle, in requitall of the excellent Armes he ſent him, and another in like manner for the Gentleman that brought them: which immediatly was perfourmed in euery reſpect, when the youth (with great reuerence taking his leaue) returned preſently towarde the Iſle, leauing all the Court meruayling at the newes before rehearſed.
               The Emperour and his Barrons long looked on the weapons, each one commending the artificiall workemanſhip of them, & meruayling what the ſtrange ſeperation of the rocke ſhould meane, being thus foretold, that one day it ſhould ioyn together againe, which made the Emperour deliuer theſe wordes before all there preſent. I am perſwaded wee ſhall behold great matters of importance, when this halfe deuided Rock ſhall knit together againe: So that as ſéemes to mee my Sonne (ſpeaking to Primaleon) for thée are reſerued many aduentures, which none but thou canſt effectually finiſhe: Wherein I pray God to bee thy directer, enduing thée with ſuch ſtrength and hardines, as thou mayeſt honorably make an end of them.
               So doe I deuoutlie pray my ſelfe (anſwered Primaleon) els ſhall I repute all my life verie careleſlie beſtowed, and I vnworthie to come in companie of ſo great perſonages, if I ſhuld not reſemble (in ſome good part or other) the noble Lord that begot me: and that I may attaine thereto, it is neceſſarie I ſhould paſſe through many perillous tranayles, knowing that without excéeding endeuour, it is impoſſible to reach ſuch honour, as doth for euer make men to be eſtéemed. For this may ſerue me as a moſt worthie crample, yea and an infallible mirrour of all vertues, proceeding from your excellencie ſo great a preſident, as not onely hath ſweetly conquered the loue of your ſubiects, but gayning likewiſe a priueledge of euerie ones good will, hath beſide conſtrayned the enemie and

moſt barbarous Nations, to admire and honour yée for al perfections, being the cheefeſt peece of workemanſhippe that euer Nature made.
               Theſe gentle and gratious ſpeeches of the Prince Primaleon, made the Emperour his Father ſo pleaſed as poſſiblie might be, hearing from him ſuch honeſt commendations, yet collourably ayming at a third perſon, as thence forth he reputed him verſe magnanimous, and remembring Achilles, Alexander, Themiſtocles, and other ſuch valiant Champions, which Greece in former time had brought forth, he began to conceiue ſome hope, that one day he ſhould ſee him go beyond all other of his time. Whereupon hee gaue commandement, that the weapons ſent from the Lorde of the encloſed Iſle, ſhould be verie charilie layde vp, and for this cauſe, if afterwarde in any place Primaleon would not be knowen, he named himſelfe the knight of the clouen rocke. From that time all the whole day, there paſſed no other ſpeeches among them, but of the meruaylous knowledge of this great Magitian, the Emperour entring into ſo good opinion of him, as he could neuer forget that the Empire of Greece ſhould be ſackt by the Turkes, which was a continuall griefe to his heart: yet would hee not outwardly deliuer any ſhow thereof, but with Princely ieſtures ſhadowing them ſtill, ſeemed as pleaſant as euer be was before.
               
                  Primaleon likewiſe on the other ſide was very penſiue, deſiring alſo to know her name, who already by the very words of the yong Gentleman, had inflamed his thoughts with the heauenlie fire of Venus: for till this houre hee had no knowledge of amourous paſſions, but now his heart was ſo liuely touched therewith, as there they had taken a perpetual dweling place, as yee ſhall perceiue by the following diſcourſe of the Hiſtorie.
               But now he fell to make prouiſion with the other knights, giuing order that all thinges might bee readie againſt the triumph day, which was appointed for the Nuptialles of his Siſter. And for the more magnificent gracing thereof, the

Emperour grently deſired, to ſee the king his Father and the Queene his Mother there preſent, which made him ſend a peſt in this behalfe to requeſt them. The like did hee to the king of Sparta and Ariſmena his Aunt, whome hee had not ſeene ſince their eſpouſalls: hee ſent for King Friſoll alſo, with the reſidue of his chiefeſt friendes, that they would honour him with their preſence at his Daughters wedding, becauſe ſoone after ſhe was to depart for Fraunce.
               
               The Horſeman which the Emperour ſent for Macedon, found king Florendos in exceeding pleaſure, in that hee had married Belcar with Alderina, Daughter to the Duke of Pontus, and as yet the feaſt endured, where Recinde was enforced to abide, at the earneſt intreatie of Belcar, who promiſed afterward to accompanie him to Conſtantinople: So that when the Poſte arriued there, they were prouiding to ſet forward on the way.
               Now were the king and Quéene not a little ioyfull, when they vnderſtood that Palmendos was their Nephew, & Philocriſta ſhould marrie with ſo great a Prince, as was the ſon to the king of Fraunce: Hereupon they concluded, not to fruſtrate the Emperours deſire, which hee had to ſee them at this ſolemnitie. Then the meſſenger recounted to them, how Arnedes had remayned vnknowen in the Court, without any intent to make him ſelfe knowen, untill the Ambaſſadours of Fraunce arriued there. With whome (quoth hee) there came a knight of Spaine, that enquired after Recinde Son to the Caſtile king: becauſe his eldeſt brother being deceaſſed, the Subiectes of the Realme deſire him for their king.
               
                  Recinde hearing theſe newes, beeing vnable longer to endure, deliuered forth meruaylous ſorrowe for the death of his Brother, ſaying that hee more deſired his life, than all the Kingdomes in the world.
               Sundrie other mournefull ſpéeches hee procéeded in, when the king and Balcar (wundring that two ſuch knights had ſo long concealed themſelues) reioyſed not a little, thinking themſelues happie, that they had done ſuch honors to Recinde:
                  
with whome they vſed many reaſons and ſweet perſwaſions, to comfort and put him from his ſorrowfull dumpes.
               The meſſenger being likewiſe glad, becauſe hee had found the end of the Spaniſh Knights perigrination, thus ſpake.
               My Lord Recinde, ceaſe theſe teares, which ſerue to no purpoſe, for recouering the thing that is out of all hope of men, but rather to hinder the Caſtillians, who deſire ſhortly to ſee yee as their Lorde and King Soueraigne: For which (me thinkes) ye haue greater occaſion to thanke God, than thus to torment your ſelfe againſt all reaſon, conſidering that the Scepter of Caſtile, is one of the moſt rich and honourable in all Europe. And if yee meane ſhortly to ſee the Prince Arnedes in Conſtantinople, who is not a little penſiue for your cauſe of heauines: yee will procure great ioy both in him and the whole Court of the Emperour, becauſe each one doth wiſh your preſence there, eſpecially vpon ſo good occaſion as is now offered.
               When Recinde heard the Gentleman vſe ſuch ſpéeches, he began to remember himſelfe, that nowe hee was to deliuer ſome Heroicall ſpectacle, for better attayning his Lady Melicia, whome, by the ſad and certaine newes of his Brothers death, he thought the ſooner to recouer as his owne. Wherefore he determined to make one in this Tourney, and as hee reſolued on this honourable purpoſe, many ſecret diſcourſes combatted with his ſpirite, which he generally imparting to Belcar, receiued this anſwere from him.
               My Lord and Brother, although I durſt not enterpriſe to goe ſo ſoone to Conſtantinople, yet would I gladly beare you companie, as well to grateſte yée herein, as any thing els I am able to deuiſe, becauſe you are the man, to whom I would haue my neareſt thoughtes knowen throughout my whole life, with this aſſurance beſide, that yée ſhall not find any man leſſe ſparing of him ſelfe, in ſuch matters as may be déemed agreable to yée.
               
                  Seigneur Belcar, anſwered Recinde, I may well ſay, that if Fortune heretofore hath ſlenderly fauored mee, entertayning

me often with verie rigorous tearmes, yet might it bée interpreted but as a preſage of vnſpeakeable content in future proſperitie: for the ioy I take in being of ſo good account with you, ſurmounteth all the miſhaps that haue befallen mee.
               So knitting vp theſe courteous entercourſes, they purpoſed to take order for their voyage, each one according to his owne beſt contriuing, deſiring the King not to make ouer much haſte, becauſe they minded to trauaile together: For Belcar, Recinde and Tirendos required to go thither before, meaning to perfourme ſome matter at honour and worthie commendation, in the ſight of the Emperour, who had neuer ſeene anye deedes of Belcar and Tirendos, whereto King Florendos agréed verie willingly, who notwithſtanding hee was aboue thréeſcore yéeres old, yet was hee neuertheleſſe of ſtrong nature, able to endure the paine of trauaile.
               Nowe when hee had appointed euerie thing in equipage, with a goodly companie, he ſet on towarde Conſtantinople, whither the Duke of Pontus could not come ſo ſoone as hee, for certaine buſineſſe of importaunce that had befallen him, to the great griefe of the Princeſſe Alderina, that ſhee ſhould ſo long be abſent from her deare ſpouſe Belcar. So leaue we them voyaging as time fauoured, to ſpeake of ſuch things as happened in the Emperours Court in meane while.
            
            
               
               CHAP. III.
               
                  How Ozalio intreated Palmendos to accompliſh the promiſe he made him, and he vnwilling to deny him any thing) gaue him Marencida to wiſe, as alſo the Kingdome of Tharſus. And howe they both embarqued themſelues, with a gallant companie of Knights to goe thither: And what hapned the Queene, Mother to Palmendos, at their arriuall.
               
               
                  WHile the Horſemen and meſſengers were thus buſied about their charge, the Emperour commaunded preparation for the great triumph, feaſting his Sonne Palmendos and the French Lords, & entertayning them with all paſtimes his hart could deuiſe: ſo that the whole Court exerciſed themſelues in nothing els, than in ſuch things as might yéeld greateſt pleaſure to this honorable aſſemblie.
               Among them all that were thus contented, Ozalio had little minde of pleaſaunce, ſéeing his Coſen altered from the Law of Mahomet, wherefore he intreated him according to his promiſe, that he would giue him the Princeſſe Marencida to wife, with leaue to returne againe to Tharſus: which motion highly pleaſed Palmendos, knowing that (by theſe meanes) the Queene his Mother ſhould heare certaine tydinges of him.
               
                  Marencida on the other ſide was in no leſſe paine than Ozalio, and albeit the Princeſſe Philocriſta euermore comforted her, with ſuch honorable meanes as became her calling: yet could ſhe not faſten vpon any thought of pleaſure, but continuing daylie ſolitarie, like ſolitude it ſelfe, would not come forth of her Chamber, but there all the day ſtreamed foorth fountaines of teares, complayning (without ceaſing) of her aduerſitie. Of one thing ſhe might iuſtly make vaunt, that her eyes were become ſources, diſhlling foorth water more cleare than Chriſtall: and if ſhe tooke any finall pleaſure or recreation,

it was only with Ozalio, who euerie hower fayled not to viſite her.
               At length Palmendos went one day to conferre with her, concerning the former determination, of ioyning her in matriage with Ozalio: but ſo ſoone as he entred the Chamber, ſhee began to renewher wonted griefes and paſſions, ſaying. Alas Sir Knight, wherfore come yée to renue my ſorrowe, ſo extreame and inſupportable, as death it ſelfe is readie to ſeaze on me in this place? I intreat yée, ſéeing the deſtinies haue fatallie appointed me to this endleſſe torment, that yée woulde not vrge it the more by the meanes of your preſence.
               Madame, anſwered Palmendos, if heretofore I haue procured yee any iniurie or griefe of minde, I hope at this inſtant to make a final end thereof, by the meanes of an ineſtimable gift which I meane to beſtow vpon yée, giuing yée the Knight to your huſband, who eſtéemes and loues yée aboue al thinges in the world. Nor could the King Ocurites compare with him for valour and vertue, the heauens bearing witnes of his proweſſe and dexteritie in Armes, as I know no Gentleman of the Turkiſh Nation, ſéeing him once manage déedes of Chiualrie, that dare méete him in Tourney or fieldbattaile, without repenting it dearely afterward, Neyther could King Ocurites equall him in riches and poſſeſſion
                     •
                   enuoying the kingdome of Tharſus which hereafter ſhall be his, a ſtate more wealthie than the Prouince of Culaquin. For this cauſe (Madame) appeaſe the violence of your paſſions, & conſider, that your comming into this Countrie will bring ye great honour and felicitie, if yee pleaſe to accept as your lawfull huſband the Prince Ozalio my Coſen, whoſe affectionate dilligence yée behold in your ſeruice. But ſhould yée be ſo vnmercifull as to refuſe him, yée may eaſly hill both life & ſoule together, a matter too irregular and differing from Ladies reputation, in that by nature they are rather benigne & pittiful, than bloodie and cruell, though (verie often) ouer firme in peruerſe obſtinacie.
               Lord Palmendos, quoth Marencida, how is it poſſible to

condiſcend vnto the matter you propound mee, but by forces well may you gueſſe (by the ſmall delight I take in béeing in this Countrie) I will neuer doe this with my good will: aſ
                  
                     •••
                  t Sergnent Ozalio ſeemeth vnto me ſuch a one, as I could not better beſtow my loue vpon any, who meriteth more ſauour at my hand, than he doth: but alas my fortune hath reduced me into ſo pittifull tearmes, that I cannot accommodate my ſelfe to any thing which delighteth my ſpirits. Notwithſtanding, if ſo it bee, that againſt the good will of your handmaide and captiue, you haue determined to effect this buſineſſe, I pray you before I eſpouſe the Prince Ozalio your Ecſe
                     •
                   that I may ſee the king Ocurites my 
                     ••
                  ſt huſband, to the end, I may aduertiſe him of my diſaſter: 
                     〈◊〉
                   of that which I am now forced to doe, being not able by my reaſons any way to reſiſt.
               Thereunto do I accord moſt willingly, anſwered Palmendos, and addreſſing his ſpeech to Philocriſta, thus hee procéeded. Madame I humble beſeech you after dinner, to take her with you into the Emperours great chamber, to gratifie her in that which ſhe hath preſently requeſted.
               So ſell it out, after the Infant had conſtraynedly made her to 
                     〈◊〉
                   on her richeſt habillunenis, in which it was a godlye ſight to behold her, for ſhe was both faire, and of the beſt grace. Being come into the preſence, where the Emperor was conferring with the king of Theſlalie, & with manie other Princes and great Saigneurs, Palmendos commanded by and by to ſend for the king of Culaquin, who ſeene after was brought thither, looking ſo leane chaunged, and meager of countenance, that Marencida did not know him: and had not Palmendos ſhewed him to her, ſhe could not will haue gueſt it to be he. Then ſhe riſing vp from a chaire where ſhee ſate, went to embrace him, the teares ſtanding in her eyes: when ſhe cried out. Alas! king Ocurites, which of the Planneds haue wee prouoked, that doth ſubmit vs both to this ſiniſter fortune and inexplicable miſchaunce, euen by the meanes of one onely knight? the ſame who vanquiſhed and tooke you

priſoner in the Leuant-ſeats, hath brought me away by force out of my Countrey, from my Father and friendes into this place, where not contented to held me as his ſlaue; but will moreouer (in my deſpite, giue me to another huſband. And that which I haue receiued of him as great ſauour, is this, that he hath onely permitted me to let you vnderſtand hereof, to the end I hauing once tolde you, you may not blame mee hereafter, knowing not for my part howe to remedie it otherwiſe.
               Ah, I wiſh the fatal Goddeſſes, would quickly ſhread a two the thrid of my life, before I conſent by my will to any ſuch occaſion. Ah! If it might ſo will befall me, I ſhould repute my ſelfe happie, as receiuing the onely contentment which I deſire, is to ſaue mee from contaminating the excéeding loue I bare you: But infortunate and miſerable woman that I am, ſéeing death ſheweth himſelfe herein inexorable, I muſt ſpend in extreame ſorrow the reſt of my dayes. Alas, poore King Ocurites who was wont to be ſo much eſteemed off among the Princes and Kings of Turkye, whoſe proweſſe and haughtie courage did farre ſurpaſſe all the braueſt and hardieſt Knights of Aſia; where are now become thy riches and great eſtates? who hath dimmed the ſo ſignall and ſamous renowne of thy Heroicall geſtes, captiuing both thée and thy loyall ſpouſe? How did fortune vngently abandon thée in this manner? O it was ambition and deſire of winning he nor, which hath put this ſlauiſh chaine about thy necke, placing thée among Gallie-ſlaues, where it ſhalbe veſt for thee to die immediatly, ſéeing the Emperour is our mortall and capitall enemie? O diuine prouidenes, how haſt thou permittet fortune to rebell thus, and to execute againſt vs ſo enorme and woful a miſchiefe's Aſſuredly I can well vaunt that the celeſtiall bodies haue more fauored vs, than thou haſt béene friendlie and gentle towards vs.
               She vttered manie other lamentable diſcourſes, ſtill deteſting her accurſed life. When the King Ocurites, who had giuen attentiue eare to her (knowing that ſhe was Marencida)
                  
felt him ſelfe ſo confounded, and out of his wits; that he could not pronounce aboue fiue or ſixe ſuch like wordes: Alas Mahomet! did it not ſuffiſe thée to haue ſo auſterely afflicted me, but thou muſt reduce into ſo pittifull and baſe extreamity the ſoule which did not merrite the leaſt of all theſe ſorrowes, which doth ſo much the more agrauate my torment? Ah, the moſt outraged King that euer was borne of his mother, ſée alloweth downe patiently the potion mixtured with bitternes, which thou haſte prepared for him.
               Speaking theſe wordes, hee fell his height to the ground, and Marencida fell downe heard by him, where they vſed ſuch ſtrange geſtures, that ſome ſuppoſed they were ſtricken with the falling ſicknes, inſomuch, that they m
                     ••
                  ed all the ſtanders by to compaſſion: and the Emperour for his parte would willingly haue deliuered them, had hee not perceaued Palmendos could not honeſtly fruſtrate Ozalio, of the promiſe which he had made him. By meanes whereof, not to abide beholding them any longer in this pitteous Tragedie, he commaunded incontinent to recarry Ocurites to his lo
                     •
                  ging, & Marencida backe into her chamber: where ſhe would willingly haue done that for him (to ſaue him from death) which Alceſte whilom Quéene of Theſſalie, would only haue enterpriſed for Admetus her huſband, after ſhe vnderſtood by the Oracle, that any one of his friends, who would die in his ſtead, might ſaue his life, which elſe in no wife might bee preſerued.
               So great was ſhe heartes griefe Ocurites felt, during his traunce; that refuſing to eat or drinke a long time afterwards, he weakned ſo much his members, and ſpent his naturall vigour ſo farre, that his ſoule was conſtrained to take leaue of his body: which was interred afterward (by commaundement of the Emperour) in a rich tombe; whereof Marencida neuer knew any thing: for they ſought meanes expreſſ
                     ••
                  y to conceale from her this miſchaunce, fearing leſt ſhe ſhould goe after, to héepe him companie in the other world, as might bee miſdoubted by the coniectures gathered of the anguiſh ſhe indured,

ſéeing him in ſo miſerable eſtate, when ſhee ſounded in his preſence, as you haue read before. And for that Ozalio did ſolicite at the length her departure with all dilligence, Palmendos cauſed two ſhippes to be made readie with all things neceſſary, graunting him fréely his departure (albeit there was much griefe on both ſides, for that from their infancie they had béene both brought vp together) they gaue each other their laſt adieu, not without bedewing their faces with ſtore of teares, their mindes beeing touched inwardly with the ſtrict and more than fraternall amitie betwéene them: ſo that euerie one maruelled, why he would not for this only reſpect renounce Paganiſme, as Palmendos had done: which hee would ſurely haue done, if the loue of Marencida had not ſo preuailed with him.
               The Emperour gaue them many ſumptuous preſentes, to carrie from him to the Queene of Tharſus, which beeing beſtowed in fit place on ſhip boorde, hee commaunded to hoyſe ſailes, and ſo incontinent launched into the maine ſea, which was ſo calme and ſtill, that within fewe dayes hee fell within the coaſt of Tharſus. So ſoone as he was ariued in the haue it, all the Cinſo began to make bone fires, and many other tokens of ioy, thinking to recouer their true & liege Soueraigne Palmendos: But ſoone after chaunged their reioycing into ſadnes; when they knew certainly Palmendos was ſo farre from that plate, where they thought him to be preſent, all the people doing nothing els but cur
                     ••
                  e and ban the old Beldame, who 
                     〈…〉
                   the loſte of ſo made and gentle a Prince. At this time 
                     •
                  ay ſhe Quéene very grieuouſly ſicke in her bed, for the abſents of her ſonne Palmendos, ſo that ſeeing Ozalio 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   for into the chamber, her heart felt preſent he ſuch an 
                     〈◊〉
                   anguiſh, that ſhe had neyther ſinew, veine, artir, nor mi
                     •
                  ſcle, which was not depriued of their vſuall functions. So that without hearing the Ambaſſage, which the Emperor 
                     〈◊〉
                   to Ozalio to oſter hir with his preſents, ſhe died more 
                     〈…〉
                   euer 
                     ••
                  erre through 
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               
                  
This honourable Lady hauing thus accompliſhed the laſt law of nature, and yeelded before God her mortall homage: Ozalio gaue the principals of the Kingdome to vnderſtand of the ordenance of Palmendos his Coſen: wherby vpon calling them together ſoone after the deceaſe of the Quéene, hée ſhewed them faſt ſcaled, and ſo ſubſcribed as they ought to bee: by which meanes they all knowing him to bee a moſt ſage and valerous Prince, accepted him gladly for their King.
               Thus hauing peaceably inueſted himſelfe in the kingdome, he married forthwith in great triumph and magnificence, his deare Marencida, who ſeeing the loue her huſband bare her, to increaſe more and more euery day, conuerted her mourning and ſorrow into thankfull gladnes: ſo that within few daies ſhe quite forgate all thinges paſt, louing afterward ſo perfectly the good King Ozalio her ſecond huſband, that ſhee had by him many goodlie children, many whereof proued very braue and hardie Knights.
               Thus feaſting them whom he tooke from Conſtantinople, for to accompanie him homeward, at length he returned them backe againe with ſuch newes and rich giftes, which the king Ozalio ſent to his Coſen Palmendos, as hee (in memoris hereof) continued the ſame euery yeare following in like manner, for tribute and homage of the high eſtate, which he confeſſed onely to hold of him.
               No ſooner were the Knightes arriued in the Emperours Court, but Palmendos was aduertized of the death of the Quéene his mother: whereupon he grew into great mellancholle, and made woefull lamentation, ſeeming to him that his abſence was the principall cauſe of her death: but he loued Franchelinaſo ardently, that hee could not well buſie his ſpirites in any other thing, than in thoſe which he knew might cauſe her delight and pleaſure: wherefore in time hee forgot the ſorrow which theſe heauie newes cauſed, eſpecially féeling himſelfe ſo comforted by his loue, whom wee will now leaue to take the gratious paſtimes, wherwith thoſe that are 
                     〈…〉
                   affianced and wont to ſollace one another, attending the

wiſhed day of their Nuptials; And now returne wee vnto Rifarano, whome we ſhall finde yet in the houſe of the Counteſſe, of Iſland.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  
                     How Rifarano beeing departed from the Counteſſe of Iſland, to go to the Tourney which was to be held in Conſtantinople: met with his companion Ledefin, with whome hee fought to reuenge a pore Damſell, whoſe husband hee had ſlaine.
                  
               
               
                  
                     RIfarano, who Combated Dioll the Earle of Iſland
                        •
                     
                   brother, if you remember, remayned ſometime with the Counteſſe his widdowe, as well to heale his woundes throughly (eſpecially that in the ſcull of his head, which hee was faine to cauteriſe, and haue throughly ſe
                     ••
                  ched) as alſo for the pleaſure and graunt of amourous fauours, which he receiued daylie of her: by meanes where of he could not leaue her, till hée was aduertiſed how the Emperour Palmerin would holds open Court in Conſtantinople, and of the great Triumphes, which were here in preparation, to ſolemni
                     •
                  s the alliance & Nuptials of the infant Philocriſſa with Arnodes Sonne is the King of Fraunce, & likewiſe of the Princeſſe Franchelina with Palmendos. But not to looſe ſo good occaſion, to preſent himſelfe in ſo honorable a companie, which hee hoped would there m
                     •
                  ete at this ſolemne feaſt: hee demaunded licence of the Counteſſe to goe ſee the Prince Palmendos, at whoſe handes he had heretofore receaued ſo much fauour, that vs though that held his life but of him and the immortall God who might end it when 
                     ••
                   beſt pleaſed him: Whereunto very loath and vnwilling ſhe accorded doubting leſt, bee ſhould not returne againe to her ſo ſoone as he had promiſed, and that in there hee would for 
                     •
                  Word hir; For when a thing is farre out of 
                     •
                  ight, it is the ſooner out of remembrance.
               
                  
And ſhe good Ladie, the digger ſhe ſelf her ſelfe with 
                     〈◊〉
                  , ſo much more did her ſorrow redouble: therefore with a verie ſeeble voice, which did ſufficiently demonſtrate the trouble of her minde, ſhe praide him of all loues hee would ſometimes remember her, whome his departure leſt in a weartſome diſtreſſe. Againſt the which I cannot long time holde out, quoth ſhe, but death will preuent me, vnles you purpoſe ſpéedylie to make your returne: and thereby ſhall I know if you deſire to prolong my life or no, which I put altogether into your handes.
               Madame, aunſwered Rifarano, too inſupportable a paine would it be to me; if I ſhould fruſtrate you of my ſpeedy returne, for in ſteede of one onlie torment (which per aduenture I ſhould ſuffer more eaſely, making mine abſence but of ſmall continuance) too intollerable a 
                     •
                  art ſorrowe might ſuffocate my ſoule, hearing ſay you ſhould conceiue ſome miſconceit againſt mee: ſo that I pray you beleeue, no obiect whatſoeuer which may preſent it ſelfe before mine eyes, ſhall euer be ſaid or ſeene; that therefore I will deface your Image ſo I fuely figured within my ſoule: which ſufficeth (many minde,) to take away the ſcruple you may alleadge, that I 
                     〈…〉
                   you willingly: For I aſſure my ſelfe you doo not 
                     〈…〉
                   knowing well the teſtimony of my loyaltie, and perpetual 
                     〈…〉
                   towards your excellence, ſhall alwaies put you out of 
                     〈◊〉
                   feare.
               The Prince hauing vndoubtedly aſſured the Counteſſe, to return as ſpéedily no he could poſſibly, ſhe was a little 
                     〈…〉
                   thereby: and giuing him for a preſent a moſt 
                     〈…〉
                   coate of Armes of greene colour, praide him to weare it for her ſake: Likewiſe to take one of her Squires with him, to the end ſhe might at all occurrences vnderſtand 
                     〈…〉
                   him, for ſhe miſdoubted much, he would not 
                     〈…〉
                   as ſhe would haue him, as hereafter you ſshall heare: ſo that many times ſhe was purpoſed to take away her owne life, as did ſorrowful Phillis; ſeeing there arme expired that Demophon ſhould eſpouſe her.
               
                  
                  Rifarano beeing departed from the Counteſſe, he rode thrée dayes without finding any aduenture, and on the fourth paſſing verie early néere vnto a Caſtell, bee ſaw before the Gate the Lord thereof dead vpon his bed, couered and cloathed with many clothes of ſtike: at whoſe beds head ſate a yong Damſell making moſt ſtrange and pittifull lamenting, that the verie panting breath of her ſighes did well ſhew, in what manner her hart did beat within her breaſt. All about her were many Damſels and others, whoſe countenances and piteous cries which they powred forth into the ayre, did plainely bewray the great griefe they had to ſée this dead corpes, the which they made as though they would carrie to buriall, whē 
                  Rifarano approached, to know what mooued them to lament ſo much, promiſing them for recompence to work his reuenge according to his power, if in caſe there were anie néede to doe it.
               Then the Damſell (thanking him much for his ſo gratious and courteous offer,) began in this manner to be ſpeake him. Faire knight, although my miſfortunes be ſo extreame, that I cannot well imagine whether I liue or no, yet the aſſurance which I conceiue, that you haue taken ſome pittie of my miſhap, will giue me argument to deliuer you the whole diſcourſe: albeit it would bee better peraduenture I ſhoulde conceale it, to the end I may no further ſtirre vp the ſorrow & heauines ſeated in my ſoule.
               Know then my Lord, that this my dead huſbād going yeſterday abroad on hunting, 
                     ••
                  t by the way a Knight, whome for his curteſſe ſake, hée brought home to lodge here all night, & (for his better entertainment) commaunded me to doo him all ſhe ſeruice I might deuiſe, in that he ſéemed to him to bee diſcended of ſome great houſe: albeit hee knew him not before, for he would neuer tell his name nor whence hee was. I hauing therein fréely accepted the commaundement of my Huſband, did him all the honour I could druiſe; ſo that we ſupped together in great ioy and content: but afterward, I perceiued be neuer remoued his eyes from off me, which made my hart as cold as ice, when I ſaw no bodie about vs, for all our ſeruantes

were gone to Supper, ſo ſoone as they had done feruing vs.
               Then the Traitor began to giue ſome enterpriſe to the diſlanie which he deuiſed forthwith, ſaying he was going to the Court of the Emperour of Conſtantinople, to preſent himſelfe at the magnificent Tourney which was prepared for the Nuptials of his Daughter: This was the cause that my huſband (for he loued greatly the exerciſe of Armes) roſe ſodainly from the table to commaund his Squiers to haue all his equipage in a readineſſe to depart the morrow morning with him: by this occaſion the diſloyall man ſhiding the tune and place bite for his purpoſe, vſed vnto mee theſe ſpeeches: Truely ſaire Lady, paragon of the moſt perfect Damſels, I thinke it had beene far better for mee, neuer to haue entred into your houſe, than to remaine long time in the paine which I féele: for your excellent beautie hath ſo rauiſhed my hart, that if the balme wherein conſiſteth the onely cure of this wound be not quickly applied there unto, I muſt néedes dſe, through the violent and too exceſſiue heate which hath ſet it on fire. Further did he proſecute his ſugared and deceaning language, when I who could not endure to hearken to it, was very wrath with hun, ſaying: It ſeemeth faire ſir, you are a Knight little curteous, and wanting good manners, ſeeing you will vſe ſuch an act againſt him, who hath done you ſo much honour.
               Madame quoth hee againe, thinke not I am come to diſpleaſe you, nor to procure you any damage, but to ſauegaide my ſelfe from the variable and periltous accidents, into which the burkenes of the night doth expoſe ſometime theſe who are wandring out of their waies, ſo that I pray you not to blame me nor reprehend me therin of indiſcretion, but rather accuſe your own Graces, which haue prouoked, nay 
                     〈◊〉
                   me to vſe theſe tearmes vnto you: no reaſon béeing able to ſway ouer the impatient deſire which tormenth me: when he had thus ſaid, he put forth his arme to embrace me: whom I reſiſted withall my might, and being inflamed with an inſupportable choller, I roſe vp from the table, crying 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
In an ill houre camſt thou hether yeſterday, fellon, to commit ſo great a contempt in theſe Countries: I ſpake theē words ſo loud, that my poore and infortunate huſband hearde mee eaſely, who perceiuing the treaſon of this treacherous wretch: as an in raged perſon, ran furiouſly to his Armes, menacing him, that he would make him dearely buy his villanie: not withſtanding the wicked villaine, who had then his weapon at his ſide, hearing him make theſe threates, ſet hand quickly to it to ſtand vpon his guard, and before my huſband could aſſaile him: hee thruſt his ſworde vppe to the hills with ſuch a violence, that it ranne cleane through his bodie. Which theſe ſorrowfull eyes of mine beholding, I began to cry out like a woman deprined of her wits, and as ill ſucke hapned, there was not found one in all the Caſtell, who had power or courage to take Armes, to reuenge me of this Barbarian, for that the two bretheren of my diſceaſed huſband, (who are indeed both ſo hardle Knights, that he had not dared to haue perpetrated this homicide in their preſence) take away the day before, al the men of deſence with them into the Countrie. By meanes whereof this fellon and cruell murtherer, had time ynough to arme him ſelfe, and to make away from the Caſtell, where (after the maſſaker) he 
                     〈◊〉
                   not aboue a quarter of an houre: in which ſhort ſpare I could not aduertiſe my neighbours, the place where I dwell beeing far in the fields, and remote from all other habitations.
               Now you haue heard who by word 
                     •
                  ir Knight, the veritie of my diſgrate, ſéing it hath pleaſed you to vnderſtand it: wherein, beſide ſhe diſaſter of my huſband, (which cannot now be remedied.) I account my ſelfe much diſſauored of the heauens and fortune, hauing no meane ſo finde out one, who will for mee enterpriſe vengeance againſt Authour of thy finall 
                     〈…〉
                  .
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  , Rifarano, I 
                     〈…〉
                   there is not that 
                     〈◊〉
                  , who will not affirme him to be a 
                     〈…〉
                  , and you ſhall 
                     〈…〉
                   Knights, who 
                     〈…〉
                   him vpon this quarrell, of whome I offer my ſelfe 
                     〈…〉
                   In my learne what ways

he hath taken, and the coate of Armes which hee heareth, is the end I may haue ſome knowledge of him the better: in the meane time, pray vnto God that I may méete with him, if you deſire to he reuenged: for to that effect doe I purpoſe to bend all my forces, or elſe they ſhall ſayle mee at my greateſt néede.
               Faire Knight, a thouſand thankes I yéeld you, aunſwered the Damſell for your curteſie and good will, the which certes I knew to be no leſſe when firſt you began to ſpeake, which puts me in ſome good hope, that I ſhall bee reuenged by your hand: and through this meane ſhall you binde me to ſo great obligation towards you, that bardly ſhall I euer bee able to cancell it, if of your grace you may not accept for ſatiſfaction thereof, the deſire that I haue to employ my ſelfe for you in at honeſt requeſtes wherein it ſhall pleaſe you to commaunde mee.
               This Knight hauing learned the way and the markes, whereby he might diſcrie him who had ſlaine his hoſte, hee tooke leaue of the Damſell all ſo bee blubbered with wéeping, that whoſoeuer had ſéene her, would haue iudged two channels to haue béene made artificiall vpon her chéekes, through the aboundance of teares falling inceſſantly from her two eies: Hée rode all that day without méeting him; but nowes he heard at the entring into a forreſt, that hee went that ways not farre before him: where béeing ouertaken by night, hee purpoſed to repaſe himſelfe till day. But he could not ſléepe a wink, becauſe he fell into a déepe thought, how he might depart after the Courney, to take his vayage into Almaine towards the Emperour Trineus his Father: herewith was his ſpirite ſo diſquieted, that he was forced two houres before day to remount on horſebacke: And galloyping as leſt as hee could, hee was gone before the ſunne riſing 
                     〈◊〉
                   leagues, which they counted from the forrest to a little village, where lay that night the Knight whome hee ſought, enquiring after him of thoſe whome he met, he was a ware of him where hee was mounting by the ſide of a hillocks, not farre from the

place whence be was not a quarter of an houre before diſlodged, and went an eaſie pace: Rifarano well a paid hereof, ſpurred his horſe to euertake him, which hee did before hee was gotten to the foote on the other ſide of the hill. As ſoone then as the murtherer entred the plaine, and began to ſet ſpurres to his horſe to goe a little faſter, Rifarano called alond vnto him deſcending into the bottome: Hola Sir Knight tarrie: I ſhall kéepe you from vauting to haue ſlaine trayterouſly a gentleman, who receaued you with all humanitie into his Caſtell, and that you did a little to raſhly rauiſh your ſelfe with the loue of his wife.
               When the Knight affailed heard his menacing, he preſently turned bridle, and vayling his launce, ſtaide for him couragieuſlie, without ſtirring a foote: for ſéeing him in company of one onely Aquire, he was nothing amazed but anſwerd him verie ſtoutlie: Knight you are come to reuenge the death of him, who will make you looſe your life: I thinke therefore it were better for you (if you deſire euer to ſee her againe for whome you reſolue to combat mee) to withdrawe your ſelfe from ſo great an enterpriſe, leauing to counterſet the butterfly, who after ſhe hath found the light, can neuer goe from it, till in the end ſhe haue ſet her ſelfe on fler.
               We ſhall quickly ſée, replied then Rifarano, howr God can chaſtice the ouer wéening and Arrogancie of Traitors, ſuch as you are, who for the luſt of their ſenſuall appetites, corrupt the inuie late laws of hoſpitalitie: ſpeaking theſe words, they encountered with ſuch a power, and breaking both their Launces one vppon another, as Rifarano was a little wounded with that of his aduerſarie, whome hee ſent in ſo bad caſe to the ground, that he could hardly riſe againe. Neuertheleſſe being magnanimious, and could manage Armes well, he quickly put hand to his ſword, and thruſting his arme into his ſhield as ſoone as he could, he gaue ſo peſant a blow vppon Rifaranos horſe head, that he made him fall downe dead betwéen his legs; from whome he leapt off nimbly, ſaying all in rage and choller: Nowe I ſée well your occupation is to betraye

folke, ſéeing you haue ſo diſcoueteouſ
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  laint my horſe, for which I hope to makke you 
                     〈◊〉
                   dearely before you paſſ
                     •
                  .
               With thoſe wordes began Rifarano to ſtrike home, and to how him in ſuch ſtrange manner: that (being néere valiante and ſtronger made for Armes than his enemie,) within a ſmall ſpace he laid him on the ground at his féete, where ſéeing him lie a long in a traunce, hee ran vpon him to giue him the mortall guerdon of his demerits: which hee had done, if the Knight (who felt himſelfe in extreame perill of his life) had not cryed out, ſaying: Alas! My Coſen Rifarano, where art thou now, that thou canſt not ſuccor me in this neceſſity wherin I ſee myſelfe? Certaine I aſſure my ſelfe, full ſorrie wilt thou be, when thou ſhalt beare tydings of my death. It was Lecefin his companion, who for the cure of his wounds, which hee receiued in fighting with Arnedes Prince of Fraunce when he ſlew the Hermite who would haue parted them (as you haue read before,) retired himſelfe into a Nunnerie: Where by meanes of a Religious ſiſter, who did verie well vnderſtand the methode of Chirurgerſe, he was carefully looked vnto till his perfect recouerie. Notwithſtanding, during his cure, the Abbeſſe who was Daughter of a great Parentage, faire, young, and comely, knowing that hee did not boudge from the Emperours Court, cam often times to viſite him; inſomuch, that this continuall viſitation ingendred ſome ſparkes of amorous paſſion: the which by little & little kindled in them both in ſuch ſort, that it could not bee long diſſembled; but Lecefin was conſtrained (by the way which ſéemed moſt commodious vnto him) to diſcouer vnto his Lady the ſeruitude into which her loue had reduced him, praying her to haue regard to the infirmitie which he felt in hart, farre more corroſwe than that of his outward griefes.
               By meanes whereof the young Nunne, who felt her ſelfe ſcorched with the like flame, and who in this matter did not deſire to be a long time praide, to yéeld the keyes of the Forts which was aſſailed, reſolued one day with Lecefin to meete together to parley thereof ſecretly, out of the preſence of witneſſes

vnrequeſted to ſtand by when ſuch a fortreſſe is to bee ſcaled.
               
                  Ʋppon which platfourme, at the firſt encounter were deliuered ſome rudeſt occadoes on the aſſaylours ſide, whilſt the defendant rewarded valiantly with her buckler of proofe: And afterward ſo often renewed this Alarum, which was expedient to vſe againſt a fortreſſe, that could not well be wonne at the firſt proſter (becauſe of the ſmall breach that one only blow of Cannon can make:) that the Abbeſſe would willingly haue left her breuiarie behinde, thus to haue managed ſtill the Iauelin, and at all times to finde herſelfe in ſuch Shirmiſhes: Whereby it fell out that Lecefin (after his recouerie) remained in garriſon within the Abbie, vntill hee was ſo wearie with beeing euery day on horſe backe, with his Launce in reſt (which for the ſame purpoſe he was faine to haue very ſtrong, well pointed, better ſtéeled, and tempered) as hee departed to put himſelfe in queſt of Rifarano, of whoſe abſence hee was aſſured, and of the very day that he departed from the Court of the Emperour Palmerin. He reſolued to take the way for Almaine as ſoone as he ſhould finde him: for he meant to returne no more to Conſtantinople, becauſe of the touch he had ſerued Arnedes, which he knew well to bee made, knowne ouer all Greece: but trauerſing many clymates without any newes of him whome he ſought, he purpoſed to go vnknowne to the Nuptials of Philocriſta, hoping to méete him there, or els in no other region of Europe.
               So trauelling that way, hee met (as you haue read) with the Knight whom he ſlew in his houſe: wherein no marueile though he raſhly diſcouered his vnchaſte and laſciuious affecte to his wife, for hee was neuer better conditioned: nor was there found in him courteſie, loyaltie, or any other vertue, by the which a man of good behauiour may be eſtéemed: nor did he euer change this his lewd nature and deteſtable manner of liuing, till he was enamoured verie ſtrangely on out of the Emperour Trineus Daughters, for to pleaſe whom he began afterward to vſe a little more honeſt ciuilitie.
            
            
               
               CHAP. V.
               
                  Howe Rifarano knew Ledefin, whome hee cauſed afterwards to be cured of his wounds: reprehending him much for his diſcourteſie: and how they arriued in Conſtantinople vnknowne, and embarqued themſelues afterwards to goe to Allmaine, where they were honourably entertained by the Emperour Trineus: and what befell Rifarano afterwards.
               
               
                  TO returne to our matter, when Rifarano heard the lamentable wordes of Ledefin, he maruelled as though hee had entred into ſome news world, and knowing not what to thinke, demaunded him forth with his name: but Ledeſin hurt with the fall, and ſore aſtonied with the feare her had to end his life, could not anſwere him one word. By meanes whereof he went preſently to diſarine his head, and aſſoone as he had perceiued him, he felt within himſelfe ſuch a ſorrowfull paſſion, that hee fell downe in a traunce hard by him: which his Squire ſeeing ran to him to vnlace his helmet, for to giue him aire that he might come to himſelfe againe. Sodainely hee cald his ſpéech to him againe, beginning ſo pittifull a complaint, that by the ſtrange exclamations which hee continued, Ledefin at laſt opened his eyes, and beholding hard by him Rifarano his faithfull friend, whome hee had called to his ſuccour: we neede not aſke what aſtoniſhment hee was in, when he ſaid to him thus.
               Deare friend, if now I die preſently, my ſoule ſhall goe in great toy to repoſe in heauenly bliſſe: ſeeing I ſée you before it depart from my body, which feeleth it ſelfe verie ſore wronged, by the waight and force of your hand. If ſo it be (quoth Rifarano) that you die by this encounter, well may I aſſure you that all the dayes of my life, no man ſhall euer ſée me merrie: and demaunding whether hee felt himſelfe ſo ill, that hee could not goe thence to ſeeke ſome cure, he anſwered him, hee

ſhould peraduenture endure to ſit a little on horſe backe, albeté he had broght him but into a very bad taking. Then Rifarano this Squire diſarmed him, and wrapping vp his wounds as well as they could, they conducted him vnto the next Cittle from thence, where they committed him into a Chirurgians hands, who aſſured them of ſpeedie recouerie.
               Whereof Rifarano was full glad, but more it chaſed him, when each one recounting their fortunes paſt to one another, vnderſtood the outrage offered by Ledefin to the Prince Arnedes. He reprehended and rebuked him greatly therefore, ſaying, theſe were not parts be ſéeming knights extracted of ſo high Parentage: and that hee reputed it a great indiſcretion in him; a Moore, to loue Philocriſta beeing a Chriſtian, and of a Law contrarie to his.
               Moreouer he blamed much his great impudencie towards the Gentlewoman, whoſe huſband bee ſlew: requeſting him in the end verie amiably, he would vſe no more thoſe trickes of youth, too farre diſtant from the vertuous honeſty of an illuſtrious and generous heart.
               
                  Ledefin aſhamed to heare him preaching thus on his imperfections: promiſed to leaue all lawdnes, and to follow ſuch good counſell as it ſhould pleaſe him to giue him: And as they had determined of their voyage, they concluded to ſend Rifaranos Squire to Conſtantinople, to the Knights who came with them from Perſia, to aduertiſe them, that they ſhoulde haue the Maiſter of their ſhip in a readines, to depart without making ſpéech thereof to any man liuing. So the Squire was preſently ſent away for this purpoſe, whoſe arriualt cauſed great gladnes in the Perſians, hauing not a good while before heard any newes of their Maiſters. Afterward when Ledefin felt himſelfe ſtrong inough to endure trauaile with his Armes, and Rifarano had refreſhed himſelfe well, they came both to Conſtantinople, where they found no ſmall number of knights, arriued there before, to ſhewe themſelues in the Tourney: at the which they would not be preſent, fearing it would be ſome diſturbance to their Nauigation, but embarqued

themſelues on the morrow before day, which diſpleaſed Rifarano verie much, for that hee could not take his leaue of the Emperour, nor of Palmendos, whom he deſtred to ſée aboue all other.
               Wherefore calling to him the Squire of the Counteſſe who followed him, hee commaunded him before his departure from thence, he ſhould preſent himſelfe before the Emperour, and to tell him that Rifarano recommended himſelfe moſt humbly to the good grace of his Maieſtie: beſeeching him of excuſe if he could not come him ſelfe to doe the meſſage: for that by reaſon of ſome buſineſſe which was of great importance he was coniured to depart in all haſte, to the end to arriue with more ſp
                     •
                  d in Germanie, and that he would ere long returne to make amends by his humble ſeruice, for the Honour which he had receaued in his Court: Then giuing him manie rich preſents as well for himſelfe as his Miſtris, commaunded him aſſoone as hee had diſcharged his dutie towardes the Emperour, he ſhould returne to hir ſtrait, to pray her learn him ſhee ſhould not thinke amiſſe of him, if during his aboue with her, he neuer told her the name of his houſe and linage: For which he would come to make amends, hauing remayned ſome few daies in Almaine, whether he was going with Ledefin to ſée the Emperour Trineus his Father: and that in the meane time ſhe ſhould make account of him, as of the moſt affectionate ſeruant ſhee might finde in the vniuerſall world.
               After theſe ſpéeches the Pilot began to cut with his ſhip the ſpacious pliane of ſalt waters, leauing vppon the ſhore the Squire verie penſiue and ſorrowfull to abandon thus his Maſter: but after he had called his courage to him, he went to do his embaſſage to Palmendos and the Emperour, who was wil ſorrie for his ſecret departure, becauſe he would ſoone haue ſent Rifarano home to his Father wiſh more honour.
               The Counteſſe of Iſlande vnderſtanding by her Squier that her Paramour was an Infidell, and had n
                     ••
                  eadie taken his way towards Germanie, ſhee had almoſt 
                     〈◊〉
                   for ſorrow:

So that tooing afterwardes ſome 
                     ••
                  llere pennance for her offence, after the end of nine Moneths, ſhee brought into this world a goodlie Sonne, who inherited the 
                     •
                  ar
                     ••
                  dome of Iſland after the diſceaſe of his mother: and following military Diſcipline did atchieue 
                     〈◊〉
                   many ſtrange thinges in Fraunce, whether he went to ſée his Father who was Duke of Burgundie, as you ſhall vnderſtand by the diſcourſe of our Hiſtorie.
               With this Childe the Counteſſe tooke ſo great comfort that by little and little ſhe forgot the loue of Rifarano, whom' wee will nowe come to finde making ſaile in the Adr
                     •
                  aticke Sea, where he had ſo happie Nauigation, that within fewe daies hee came vppon the coaſt of Germanie: and caſting his ankers in a Porte foure dayes iourney diſtant 
                     ••
                  om the Emperour Trineus Court, they went thither in compleate armes, except the head.
               In breefe béeing arriued at the Pallace, Rifarano ſell on his knées before his Father, demaunding his hande to kiſſe it. The good Prince Trineus who vnderſtoode long time before, by letters from the Emperour of Greece of his Sonnes arriuall in Conſtantinople, (which hee then preſentlie imparted to the Empreſſe his wife, who greatly deſired to knowe what they were,) ſéeing theſe two ſtrange Knightes, miſtruſted leſt the one ſhould be him: whereof ſerued for a good teſtimonie the gladneſſe which hee ſhewed in his heart when he ſaide: Sir Knight to giue you my hand, I may not willingly conſent, before I knowe who you are.
               My Lorde replyed hee againe, in places where I am knowne they call mee Rifarano, and this my companic
                     •
                   
                  
                     
                        •
                     echefin, Sonne to the Solton of Perſia, and to 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   moſt affectionate friends.
               O then you are thrice welcome quoth the Emperour into the place, where your arriuall ouercommeth mee with gladnes: So ſaid he embracing them, hauing for very 
                     •
                  ole ſo r
                     •
                  re the teares in his eyes, that he could hardly abſtaine, but ſome one did fall to the ground, when he began thus.
               
                  
Ah! my ſonne, happie may I thinke the perill and danger I paſt to be get you, ſéeing that I ſee you no 
                     〈◊〉
                   proued ſuch fruite of my labour, that all my life I ſhall for my part, praiſe God for ſo great a grace: but how could you ſtay ſo long away, before you would come to ſee me, conſidering your valour and Chiualrie did much increaſe my deſire thereunto 
                     •
                   Alas, It was the heauen which beeing en
                     ••
                  ous and iealous of my bliſſe, could not permit me to enioy your preſence.
               Hauing done this ſpeech, hee welcomed verie courteouſlye Lecheſin, & in the meane time they had this honeſt and gratious communication, came in many Nobles who vnderſtood newes of Rifarano, to entertaine him the moſt Honourabl
                     ••
                   they could: So that the Emperour who knew verie well the Empreſſe would be moſt glad of this occurrence, taking the two Knights, the one in the right hand, and the other in the left, went to finde her in her Chamber ſaying.
               Madame theſe Princes the one who is of the Soldan of Perſiaes ſonnes, and the other ouer whom you haue abſolute power to commaund, come to do you their humble reuerence, and to offer you their ſeruice in any thing whatſoeuer wherein it ſhall pleaſe you to employ them.
               Then the Empreſſe riſing from her 
                     〈…〉
                   to embrace them both with great loue, eſpecially Rifarano to whome ſhe ſaide: My ſonne I haue now good occaſion to reioyce mee of your preſence, and to cherriſh you as mine owne Childe, ſeeing you reſemble him ſo naturally, who following his deſtante, gaue you your eſſence among men, whome I loue aboue mine owne perſon, with zeale ſo entire and perfect, that it extendeth and redoundeth far ouer yours.
               Madame quoth Rifarano, nature hath ſo fullie accompliſhed you with all vertues, that there can procéed from you nothing but a ſincere good will, for which I thanke you moſt humblie in mine owne behalfe, albeit it much ſurpaſſeth my little merite: which ſhall cauſe me to put this kindnes into the number of manie others which you haue ſo well heaped on mee, that all my life I ſhall finde my ſelfe much bounde
                     •
                  
                  
vnto you.
               Then bee kiſt her hand with the honour and reuerence which appertaineth to ſo high a Ladie, and next did embrace Vernan her eldeſt ſonne, a Prince ſurely carefullie inſtituted in good manners and vertuous education: which well hee could ſhew by the gentle entertainment he made him in recogniſance of this new fraternitie, albeit he were verie young of yeares. Hee held the ſecond place of thrée male Children, and of two female which they had at one birth: whereof the firſt liued not long: & becauſe this was not in age marriageable, the alliance of the houſes of Almaine with that of Conſtantinople could not be redoubled giuing him to Philocriſta, whome the Prince of Fraunce had neuer other wiſe eſpouſed; their eldeſt Daughter of the age of fourtéene (called Belleriſa) was verie fa
                     •
                  re, yet not ſo faire as the younger. But the Emperour cauſed the two Knights to bee diſarmed, and by & by to inveſt two magnificent robes which he gaue them with manie other riche preſentes, and likewiſe to all the Perſian Knights who came with them, determining as well for their arriuall and the mariage of his néece Philocriſta, as alſe for the recogniſance of the néere affinitie of Palmendos to make a ſumptuous feaſt, and to hold the eight dayes following open Court: During the which Belleriſa ſhewed her ſelfe ſo quaint and curious to entertaine with gratious diſcourſe her brother Rifarano, that thence forth Lechefin 
                  
                     ••
                  ering himſelfe with her loue, as long as he liued could neuer quite 
                     •
                  rtinguiſh this fire out of his heart, wherein ſerued him for a bai
                     •
                  e the fauour which ſhe ſhewed him to gratifie her brother, deuiſing manie tunes together which gaue ſome refreſhing to his burning ſeuer.
               After a few daies come and gone, the Emperour gaue Rifarano to vnderſtand ſhe great pleaſure that he tooke of him arriuall: Notwithſtanding it would be far greater, when 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſhould perceiue in him ſome deſtre to receaue the bolid order of Chriſtianitie: ſo that quoth hee, if I doe not ſée you verie quicklie to condiſcend vnto the beliefe of our faith, I ſhall

thinke you make account to returne into Porſia, which would plunge me in a gulfe of griefes, and inſupportable ſorrowes.
               God forbid aunſwered Rifarano, that I ſhould euer cauſe you to take any diſpleaſure at mee: I had rather teare my ſelfe in a thouſand peeces, than not to accompliſh that which it pleaſed you to propound mee: with this aunſwere was the Emperour well apaid, ſuch at to make it to ſome effect, hee went with him on the morrowe to the Fount of Baptiſme, where by the hande of a diſcreete Biſhoppe hee receaued the firſt Chriſtian Ʋiction, where at Lechefin tooke ſuch a griefe, that all that day and the next he could not ſhew a merrie countenance.
               Which Belleriſa marking, who honoured and gouerned him continually, praied him not to take any diſpleaſure at the act of Rifarano his companion: for that when he had not ſpéedilie reſolued to doe it, his eſtéeme had not beene ſo great, eſpeciallie of the Emperour, who thought himſelfe 
                     〈◊〉
                   beholden to him, in that he had fulfilled his minde therein. And ſéeing you loue him quoth ſhee, with ſo cordiall affection as you ſaye, I meruaile much w
                     •
                  y you doe not the ſame, béeing that you know the ſuperioritie of our God doth much abaſe yours: whome if you will renounce, you néede not doubt but riches, eſtates, and whatſoeuer you ſhall demaunde of my Lorde and Father, ſhall want you no more here, than in your owne Kingdome.
               If you faire Madame, replyed he then, will promiſe need one fauour, onely for the loue of you will I bee Baptized incontinent, for the deuotion which giueth me that which I demaunde you, conſtrayneth mee to hate alcedie the Pagan Secte.
               Surely Seigneur Lechefin, quoth ſhe againe, I ſhould repute myſelfe during and after my life vnfortunate, and vnworthie to come into any good companie, if to bee a meane of ſo great good, I ſhould refuſe any thing which were in my power: aſſuring me that you will not requeſt me of any

thing which may offende the Honour of the one, nor of the other of vs two, the which being ſaued, I will doe my beſt to ſatiſfie your deſire, as much as in me lieth.
               Nowe may I call my ſelfe thrice, and foure times happie, quoth Lechefin, ſéeing I ſee ſo precious a good ſo freelie offered mee, whereof I loſt all hope that it would neuer he by me acquired, which I will not demaunde of you Madame, vntill that you ſhall ſee me accompliſh my promiſe, which by this occaſion hath willingly made me accept of your commandement: whereunto to giue ſome beginning, bee ſaide vnto the Emperour, that ſéeing his Sonne had left the Mahometicall law, hee would doe no leſſe than hee had done: becauſe their more than Fraternall amitie might not ſuffer a diuerſitie of ſaith betwéene them.
               If the gladneſſe of the Emperour were great for the conuerſion of Rifarano, it was doubled ſo much more, hearing Lechefin vſe this faire language: ſo that remitting his pompe but till the morrowe morning onelie, he was receiued into the Catalogue of Chriſtians by the ſame Biſhop, and in the ſame Fount that Rifarano was, hauing for his Godmother the Empreſſe, and the Emperour for his Godfather, who when the Ceremonie was finiſhet, beſpake him in this manner.
               You haue nowe my Godſonne, done the acte of a vertuous and worthie Knight, forſaking the erronious and deteſtable Doctrine which you held, to embrace our holie and Catholike religion.
               By meanes whereof I will howe and account you hereafter for mine own proper Sonne, giuing you ſuch Eſtates in my Countrie whereby you may moſt Honorablie liue by, and maintaine your ſelfe after your own content.
               
                  Lechefin thanked him moſt humblie, and prayed him not to repute him leſſe affectioned to his ſeruice, than the moſt loyall and faithfull kinſman or allis whome hee had to his race▪ Whereof the Emperour thanked him, who for

this regard ordainted to continue a feaste throughout all his Court, & the Empreſſe gaue the name Trioll vnto Rifarano for the loue of his Father, becauſe ſhee would not haue him called any more by that name which hee brought out of Barbarie. But Lecheſin tooke no great care to chaunge his, hauing in hand matters which did much more moue his ſpirite, to the which he would aſſay to giue ſome tranquillitie: ſo that finding Belleriſa one boure of the day fit for his purpoſe, hee vſed this gratious ſpeech to her.
               Madame it ſeemeth to me I haue obayed your commandement, which I reuerence and will reuerence all my life as an oracle, and God graunt you may by this meanes knows the extreame deuotion I haue to your ſeruice; This is the matter, I would humblie beſéeth you to call to minde the promiſe you made me preſentlie thereupon, hauing ſome pittie of an inſupportable torment that my afflicted hart hath felt euer ſince the firſt time I ſaw you. You know the offer that the Emperour your father hath made me of his Grace: as touching which I hope not to demaund of him anything els but you in mariage: and if ſo great happines befall me, that I be not there in fruſtrate, I ſhall reckon my ſelfe the moſte fortunate Knight who euer matched vnder the celeſtiall Machine.
               Alas quoth the Damſell, how could you weaue ſo ſubtilly the ſnare where in I nowe ſée my ſelfe entrapped? In good ſaith I neuer thought making you promiſe, that your carriage ſended to this end: Neuertheles, ſeeing you accorded 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſo is eaſily no meane matter, which maketh me ſurely much bounden to you, for my part I will acquite my promiſe, ſo that wée doe not tranſgreſſe the limittes and bounds of honour, which I muſt hold as deare as my life. And to the end to ſhew by a good beginning that I am not ingratefull for your ſo gro
                     •••
                   fauour, I accept you for my Knight, with aſſurance to own you hence forth no leſſe amitie than to Trioll my Brothers Wherein if my Lorde and father commaund mee any thing farther, I ſhall conſent with a verie good will, to returne you

the guerdon, which ſo good will as yours doth merite: wee may well imagine what was the caſe & content of Lechefin, knowing there was giuen (and that by his verie Lady) ſome refrigeration to the burning of his flame: which beganne to liue and kindle ſo liuelie afterward in Bellariſaes hart, that it was within a while no loſſe vehemente than that of her louer: Who by this meane became more hardie and couragious than euer hee was before: committing afterwarde nothing which might ſtaine his honour, but in Iouſtes Tourneyes which were held in thoſe quarters, he carried away ſtil the greateſt part of the honour, as the beſt Champion ne
                     •
                  te after Trioll, who farre ſurmounted all thoſe of that Countrie: Therefore both the one and the other were greatly eſteemed by the Emperour and the Potentates of Almaine: where wee will leaue them a while, to paſſe their time according to the renowne and commendation which they ſhall win, to recount the Cournies and great magnificentes made in the meane time in Conſtantinople in attending the Courney, held at the Nuptials of Palmendos and Franchelina.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  
                     How the County Peter one of the French Ambaſſadors, determined to hold eight daies together continuall Iouſles againſt all commers to Conſtantinople, which hee did for the honour and beautie of Ladies, attending the opening of the great Tourney, which Primaleon cauſed to be publiſhed before: And how the Duke of Drante vaſſall to the King of Theſſal
                              ••
                           , was the firſt who entered the liſtes againſt him.
                  
               
               
                  YOU haue vnderſtoode heretofore howe the Emperour Palmerin, ſent to inuite meane great Princes and Signeurs of Greece, to be at the Nuptials of his Daughter Philocriſtat wherin the Poſts and Meſſengers did ſo well their 
                     •
                  ingenes, it as in ſhort time after, there arriued the 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
part of the Barrens ſtem all Countries vnder his obedience, in the beſt equi
                     •
                  age they could.
               Amongſt the Princes of 
                     •
                  arque, there arriued firſt, the King of Sparta and the Queens Ariſmene his wife, Aunt to the Emperour, who brought thither with them one onely Daughter which they had, beeing not twelue yeares of age, but verie beautifull, and of the beſt grace, called Amandria: Before whom the Emperour came forth to welcome and entertaine them, commanding his Fourriers a Har
                     •
                  ingers to marke out for them all the body of the great Serraglia née
                     •
                  rſt his quarter: But the Emperour had Philocriſta and two other yong daughters, whereof the eldeſt who was called Flerida betweene thirteene and fourteene yeares of age (certes as fayre as the day) reſembled very much the Empreſſe hir mother. Shee after the marriage of Plulocriſta, was put in her place, being giuen vnto her many Damſels and the ſame Eſtate that her ſiſter had, ſo that ſhee kept the Empreſſe alwaies company as did her ſiſter Philocriſta before. To be briefe, as for the graces and perfections wher with nature di
                     •
                  med worthy her gentle and diuine ſpirit, ſhe was the pearle of honour, the Idea of beauty, and the matchles Paragon of all good grace: ſeeing that euen from her infancie ſhée was reputed in ſageſſe, vi
                     •
                  acity and quicknes of ſpirit, a new or ſecond Pallas: being a Princeſſe fayrer demeanured and well aduiſed, ſhée acquainted her ſelfe, and grew into ſuch league of amity and lo
                     •
                  ing kindnes with her Coſen Amandria, that they did neuer part company.
               At the arriuall of the King of Sparta, thether, the Emperour his Nephewe conceiued a maruellous ioy: The which was redonbled when hee vnderſtoode that the King his father c
                     •
                  me accompanied with Belcar and Recindes the future King of Caſt
                        •
                     le: whereof Prince Arnedes was not glad a little: nor the Spaniſh gentleman who did attende for him in that Court, and the Infant Meliſſa was moſt ioyfull of all, for th
                     •
                   hope ſhee h
                     •
                  d to ſee him q
                     ••
                  cly her huſband.
               From diuers other ſtrange Regions and Countries, came

euerie day Knights to the Court, where they were all curteouſly reccaued by Primaleon: Eſpeciallie a great Eroupe of Theſſalian Barrons, who came thither to kiſſe their Kings hand: and alſo to ſée Palmendos whome they bleſſed, and by their praiers lodged him aboue the heauens: lawding God who gaue thē ſuch a Prince for Seigneur: whom for his part hee cheriſhed and honoured in the beſt manner, which contented them moſt of all. Moreouer thither came the good Knight Friſoll King of Hungarie, whether could not his Quéene accompanie him becauſe ſhee was verie ſicks: And the Emperour ſtayd but for King Florendos his Father, before he would begin 
                     ••
                  e feaſt and ſolemnitie of the Nuptials, when the French Embaſſadors who were there (ſéeing ſo manie Princes and braue Knights gathered together) pricked forward through deſire of glorie, determined to enterpriſe ſome Martiall excerciſe to paſſe away idlenes. The formoſt of whome was the Earle Peter, a verie braue and hardie Knight, who loued (as his own ſoule,) Iſortine the Duke of Sauoyes Daughter: the ſame man whome the Emperour Palmerin vanquiſhed in Gaule, who afterward eſpouſed Lucimine, Daughter to the King of Fraunce: by whom he had thrée male Children verie braue knights, and that only daughter faire in perfction, whome hee cauſed to bee brought vp in the Court of his Father in law.
               The Earle deſired extreamely to haue her in marriage, and for that purpoſe did he marueilous deeds of Armes as her Knight: for the great loue that hee bare her redoubled his forces, and encreaſed his courage in ſuch ſort, that hee was eſteemed one of the beſt Champions of the Kingdome; which was cauſe the King of Fraunce thoſe him for ſecond Ambaſſadour in this treatie of mariage betwéene Arnedes and Philocriſta. Upon a day whilſt the Emperour was conferring with the King of Sparta, this French Earle came to beſéech him in preſence of the aſſiſtance, to giue him lea
                     •
                  c to make a cloſe 
                     •
                  ilt yeard in the great place of the Pallace, where (if it pleaſed him alſo) he had enterpriſed to abide eight dayes together

from Sunne to Sunne, maintaining Iouſt and Combate againſt all commers, who ſhoulde come to ſhew their valours in protection of their Ladies: For that hee deſired to maintaine her who poſſeſſed his heart to be one more Accompliſhed in vertues and graces correſpondent to her extreame beauty, than any other loued or ſerued of any Knight, except Philocriſta and Franchel
                        •
                     e, the two glorious Startes of their age.
               This did hee eſtabliſh for a Lawe of the Combate, that all knights vanquiſhed by him, ſhould leaue theyr coats of Armes behinde them hanged vpon a piller, which he cauſed to be erected at the ende of the Liſts, hoping to carry them with him away into Fraunce, if ſo it fortuned that hee ſtaid out his eight dayes iourney without giuing ouer his enterpriſe: Contrariwiſe he would leaue his to his vanquiſher, who could holde out the reſt of the preſtred time vnder the honour and defence of the Lady whom he ſerued.
               The Emperour who heard the County talke thus brau
                     •
                  
                  ly, was in ſo profound a thought: calling to minde the happy tune that he purchaſed ſo much renown in trauerſing the 
                     
                        •
                     eltique & Belgicke Gaule, that he ſhewed outwardly ſome apparent token of gladnes: and ſeeming to be in the Counteſſe thoughts, and to feele the ſame pleaſure which he receiued, remembring the perfections of his Lady, anſwered him merrily in this ſort.
               My Lorde, I foreſèe well the paine and trauell which will lie vppon your necke in this charge, and howe much courage ſhe giueth you whom you loue ſo perfectly, that in her fauour you enterpriſe ſo Knightly an exployt: Whereuppon I aſſure my ſelfe that beſide the praiſe which ſhall remaine vnto you, ſhee ſhall eſtéeme you much more, conſidering the great hazard into which you expoſe your owne perſon: But that I may condiſcend vnto your requeſt (albeit I ſhould bee very ſorry, if I ſhoulde accorde you any thing which might turne you to any hurt) I grant you fréely to execute your enterpriſe therein, and in all other honeſt and loudable 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
of Chiualry.
               Gratious Lord replied the Countie, as long as my ſoule ſhall dwell in his paſſible bodie, I will alwaies endeuour in all places to manifeſt the praiſe of her merite, according to the ſmall puiſſance that it hath pleaſed God to giue me, whollie vowed, yea fatally deſtinated to her ſeruice: & when my forces ſhall not anſwere my hart, which in this reſpect is mexpugnable: I ſhal augment onely but the number of theſe, who cannot bring their driftes about, thanking you in all moſt humble affection, of the fauour which you ſhewed me, in giuing me ſuch licence in your houſe.
               After theſe ſpeeches and manie other which they had together, the Countie retired himſelfe into his lodging: whereas ſoone as he was come, he commaunded that on the morrowe they ſhould plant in the place before the Pallace an incloſure which ſhould haue in Diameter and circomference of the Center vnto the ends foure and twentie ſethome in latitude, and eight and thirtie in longitude: which was done with high railes in ſo ſufficient proportion, that ſixe Knights might eaſily fight together afront, beſides hee would haue a doore made hard by, where he gaue order to ſet vp a Tent, a Bedde, a Kitchin with Offices, & al which was neceſſarie for ſo ſumptuous a recreation. The next day at Sunne riſing be armed himſelfe at all points, and mounting vpon a double Courſer, hee came to appeare within the liſtes, where were manie Knights diſarmed to kéepe him companie, whome he vſed verie magnificently in the feaſt. The firſt man who came within the liſtes was the Duke of Drante, vaſſall to the King of Theſſalie, young in age, but luſtie and verie ſkilfull in managing Armes, who loued with a ſingular affection a da
                     •
                  nſel his ſubiect, faire and marueilous gracious, who finding the doore of the Tilt ſhutte, thruſt it open with the great end of his Launce to enter in: therefore ſoone mounted the Earle on horſebacke, and taking his ſworde in his hand demaunded the Duke whether hee would Iouſte or Combat wi
                     ••
                   him.
               
                  
I will haue but the Iouſte quoth the Duke, for that I thinke quicklie to make you confeſſe her whome I loue, to excell in beautie and good grace, the Ladie for whome you enterpriſe an exploit, which ſeemeth to paſſe your cunning.
               It were a thing almoſt miraculous, replied the Earle, if with ſo great reaſon as I haue to make good mine enterpriſe, I ſhould be vanquiſhed by the firſt aſſailant. Saying ſo they went to campe themſelues at the two ends of this place, then comming violently to encounter, they ſhiuered both their Launces, and daſhing one another with their ſhields they paſſed brauely the reſt of the carriere: whereof the Earle was verie ſorrie when he cried to his aduerſarie: Knight take yet one ſtaffe more; for the encounter of this firſt Iouſte hauing béene ſo fauourable vnto you, I will ſee how you will behaue your ſelfe in the ſecond: Then ſhall bee ſéene manifeſtlye the iuſt occaſion I haue to Iouſte, anſwered the Duke, taking another Launce, with the which comming couragiouſlye to charge him, he miſt his blow in ſtriking, which the Countie did not: but running aright carriere, ſent him ouer his horſe croupper with a tumbling caſt downe to the ground: Saying with a ioyfull courage; An other time venter not with me in the liſtes, if you haue no better reaſon to combat.
               To that the Duke anſwered him nothing; for hee founde himſelfe aſhamed to haue voyded the A
                     •
                  ſon before Francheline his ſoueraigne Ladie, and many other Lords and Knights, who beheld them through the Pallace windowes. But riſing vp, he put off gently his Coate of Armes, and afterward beeing remounted he departed out of the Tilt-yeard, to goe whether it pleaſed God to conduct him: whereof Palmendos had ſo great remorſe, becauſe of the vaſſalage which hee owed vnto the Father of his affianced Ladie, that with ſome apparance of reaſon, hee would haue entred the liſtes himſelfe to haue reuenged him.
               Afterwards there appeared nine or ten Knightes, from whome the Countie ſtill carried away the honour and hanbergions: So that about Sunne ſetting, when hee retired for

that day, he felt himſelfe verie wearie and ouerpreſſed with the burthen that he was faine to ſuſtain: notwithſtanding the i
                     •
                  i
                     •
                   which rauiſhed his ſpirites more and more, made him forget the dolour and wearines of his members. Thether came Arnedes with all the French Knightes, to feaſt him and to kéepe him companie the greateſt part of the night: where to ſtay our ſelues no longer, the Earle continued ſir whole daies before he was vanquiſhed of anie, doing marueils of Armes, as well at the Iouſte, as at the Combat at the ſword, & making great cheare and banquetes to thoſe who viſited him: whereof the Emperour meruailed much, no leſſe of his proweſſe and valour, than of his magnificence and ſumptuoſitie, which hee continued vntil the ſeauenth day following, when there came thither two Knightes, one whereof tooke awaie within few houres from the Earle, all the honour hee had wonne in the former dayes, as you ſhall preſently heare.
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  
                     How Belcar, Recindes and Tyrendos, being departed from Conſtantinople paſſed by the Duchy of Bort, where Tyrendos vanquiſhed at the Iouſts, the Knight who kept a paſſage out of the Cittie for the loue of the Ducheſſe, and what fell out afterward vpon this occaſion.
                  
               
               
                  WEE declared a while ſince how Belcar, Recindes and Tyrendos departed vnknowne from Macedon to go to Conſtantinople, and riding great iournies paſſed by the Duchy of Bort, whereof was Lord an aged and grayheaded father, who in his youthfull yeares loued reſt and his delights, better than the Courtlie life, or any millitarie exerciſe.
               He had two faire Daughters, and one Sonne eſtéemed a verie valiant Knight, who againſt his Fathers will was gone to Conſtantinople: and at his ſecond mariage, did this oldman take to wife a verie yong Ladie excéeding his daughters

in beautie, whereof a rich & gentle Knight called Dirdan was much enamoured, before and after the Duke had taken hir to wife. By meanes wherof knowing there was no better nor more expedient remedie to ſee her and ſpeake often with her, he contracted great amitie with the Duke her huſband, giuing him to vnderſtand he wold be verie glad to eſpouſe his youngeſt daughter comming once to age, it hee might pleaſe to beſtow her on him in mariage.
               The Duke who ſmelt his ſubtilty a little, would haue willingly debarred him from his houſe, had it not bin for the ſcandall which he feared: and on the other ſide the Ducheſſe (who being put to choice would not refuſe the yong and vigorous Champion to take an old and decrepit man to her Huſband) ſeeing him ſo paſſionate as he was, albeit ſhe being married before, could no leſſe gratefie him, but muſt by iuſt and reaſonable guerdon, loue him againe with the like; which neuertheleſſe ſhee diſſembled, bidding him manie times not to torment him ſelfe for her, and not to feede his vaine hope, which in the ende would deceaue him, for it would not haue ſo good ſucceſſe as he expected.
               Notwithſtanding ſhee could neuer diſſwade him from his purpoſe, but reſting to the auncient Prouerbe which ſaith thus. (All paine deſerueth recompence,) reſolued him ſelf that if not verie quickly, yet at the lenght hee might gather ſome fruite of his ſweet Ladie, which did not fruſtrate him by ſome coniecture which he had ſeene after: for that hee hearing hee ſay ſhee would goe willingly to ſee the Triumphs which were to be held at the mariage of Philocriſta at Conſtantinople, he purpoſed to ſhew her ſome paſtime, to the ende to diſſware her from that affection: and to this end complotted with a Brother and coſen Germaine of his, to gard a paſſage in the wide field before the Citty where the Duke was reſident alwaies.
               This Dirdan then hauing vpon this occaſion obtayned lycence of him, who at the inſtant prayers of his wife & daughters, ſometime did walke into the plaine, began to defend thy paſſage: wherein he gat honor be ſeeming a good knight, 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
himſelfe before her who augmented the forces of his body by the one halfe: whoſe iudgement in his fauour, hee eſtéemed more than that of all the reſt of the ſpectators; who held all no other than a good opinion of his deedes, ſo that he loued him more than before.
               But Belcar and his companions paſſing by the Cittie of this Duke, knowing nothing of the Iouſte, Tyrendos who rode before the other ſomewhat penſiue, looked not abent till he ſaw a Squier verie nere him, who beganne to charge him that he ſhould not paſſe anie further. Wherefore quoth Tyrendos?
               
               For that replyed hee, if you goe on ſtill forward, you muſt Iouſte againſt a knight, who will eaſilie lay you along from your Horſe, ſo that by this meane you ſhall be forced to leaue him behinde, becauſe here is eſtabliſhed ſuch a law; and when peraduenture you ſhould diſmount him, yet muſt you encounter two other hardie Knightes, therefore you thruſt your ſelfe into great danger.
               For all this quoth Tyrendos, I will not ride a ſteppe out of my way: and daſhing on he ſaw the Tents of the Knight, & alſo of the Duke, who was in them with his wife and his daughters, to ſee the Iouſte that day.
               
                  Dirdan who ſaw him come a farre off, ſtood ſtill minding to giue him the ſhock and the branado, and when hee perceaued him to be 
                     •
                  ere he called vnto him. Ho Knight, ſeeing you will paſſe 
                     〈◊〉
                  , you muſt Iouſte with me: for vppon ſuch paſte keepe I this ſtrait.
               Seigneur defendant anſwered Tyrendos, nothing but the deſire I had to breake a launce with you, cauſed mee to paſſe this way. Aſſoone as he had ſaid, they came ſo violently to encounter, that Dirdan breaking his ſtaff in a thouſand ſhi
                     •
                  ers, and giuing the Aſſailant a little wound, to the ground fell hee ſtrait, where by the grieuous and louriſh fall hee had, hee ſound himſelfe fruſhed with his Harneſſe: By reaſon whereof Tyrendos taking his horſe by the Bridle, ſaide verie lawde.
               
                  
This horſe appertaineth to me by reaſon of his encounter, thoſe who were preſent much marueiled, principally the brother of Dirdan, who chaſing monſtrouſly ſaide as hee was mounting his horſe: Knight thinke not to haue done, for you muſt I cuſt with me, who will make you pay dearely for the miſad
                     •
                  enture of my brother.
               Well may you replied Tyrendos ſéeke the ſame, if if pleaſe the diuine bountie but to ſauour mee. As he had done this ſpéech hee gaue into Belcars hand the horſe of the vanquiſhed Knight, who arriued thether during their altercation', maruellous apaide ſeeing his companion be haue him ſelfe liken valiant and hardie Knight.
               Then running one at another with a right carriere, Tirendos ſent his Aſſailant top
                     ••
                  turlie with a vengeaunce ouer his horſe taile, whoſe ſtaffe by miſhap ranne into his horſe head: whereby he preſently died betwéene his legges, which conſtrayned ryrendos to leape ſtrait out of the ſaddle, to mount vp with a trice vppon him which Belcar held by the 
                     〈◊〉
                  , which the brother of the two vanquiſhed Knights 
                     ••
                  ing, 
                     •
                  an furiouſly vpon him to charge him in a great rage, ſaying they would die in the place, or bee reuenged of them 
                     •
                  or th
                     ••
                   miſfortune: but it was not long before hee went to kéepe them companie vpon the gréene graſſe, which was died red with their owne blood in manie places: This made the Ducheſſe then call to minde the Metamorpheſts of Hyacinth
                        •
                     s, & Recindes and Belcar to receaue great ioy in their ſpirits.
               
                  Tyrendos then ſent by a Page the two Horſes of the vanquiſhed, to the Duke, who was marueilous glad of the Manour that Dirdan loſt in the Ionſte: and the Knight who had vanquiſht him ſéeming to him no leſſe co
                     ••
                  tentis and 
                     〈◊〉
                   than valerous and magnaniunous, hee ro
                     •
                  e out of his Chairs to entertaine him and his companions, 
                     〈◊〉
                   them to refreſh themſelues in his houſe. By 
                     〈◊〉
                   wherof when the Duke, Ducheſſe and all the reſt were mounted on Horſebacke, they rode ſtraite to the Caſtell, where the Duke 
                     ••••
                  
                  
                  
                     •
                  maunded that the Knights were quickly diſarmed, and 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
that they ſhould with all ſpéede dreſſe Tyrendos wounde, to whome euerie one did great honour: for albeit they knewe his companiens to be verie vertuous, beautifull, and better proportioned of their perſons, yet for ſome reſpect, they did eſteeme and preſume more of Tyrendos.
               
               Then ſupper time approching, the Duke commanded they ſhould couer in a pleaſant and delicious garden which ioyned hard to the Caſtell, where they were verie honourably ſerued with diuers diſhes, of moſt exquiſite and rare viandes: and after the repaſt was taken, the Ducheſſe with her daughters came in ſinging and playing vpon 
                     •
                  arps, U
                     •
                  ols and Lutes, with ſo excellent a grace, that to beare the ſwéet harmonie which reſounded as well from their corall mouthes, as their cunning touchings with their white and delicate hands, playing vpon thoſe lericall inſtruments, the Aſſiſtances thought them ſelues in the Eliſ
                     •
                  an fieldes amonge the nine Muſes, Apollo and all the reſt of the muſte all conſort.
               The Knights ſurely tooke great recreation and pleaſure, ſurpaſſing almoſt the capacitie of their ſpirites, in the which if the handes and mouth of the Ducheſſe were occupied to make ſuch melodie, their eyes did no leſſe omit their office to beholde Tyrendos, and by that they had well beheld and admired him, at that inſtant was there a ſodaine change made within her hart of the loue which ſhe bare to Dirdan, with that which Cupido preſented her vnexpected on the behalfe of Tyrendos.
               
               And as ſhe well ſawe how ſhee perſeuered a great while in this contemptation, (the excellence and ſingularity of her graces pleaſing him verie much on the other ſide) was as prompt an ſhe to giue eſſence to this bargaine of chaunge.
               During the accompliſhment wherof, the Duke reaſoning of many things with Belcar, demaunding him in the end who Tyrendos was, perce
                     •
                  uing nothing the prime wound hee had 
                     〈…〉
                   made in 
                     •
                  he heart of his wife. Wee are quoth hee Knights of the King of Macedons Court who go to the 
                     〈◊〉
                   which is 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  Conſtantinople.
               
               
                  
I beléeue replied the Duke, in all the aſſembly which ſhall bee ſeene, there will bee found fewe men at Armes who can come neere this, for as much as I can preſage, by the proofe I haue ſeene him make to day. You ſay true quoth Belcar, and yet you would ſay more if you knewe who he is. The Ducheſſe who making no ſemblance, heard all theſe diſcourſes paſſe, imagined preſently Tyrendos muſt bee ſome Knight of great and illuſtrious blood, therefore ſhee made greater account of him than before, béeing thrice happie to haue chaunged Dirda
                        •
                     
                   for him, whome ſhee loued alreadie ſo ardently that before they parted company, ſhee whiſpered vnto him verie ſoftly theſe wordes, ſo that no body heard her: Faire Knight you muſt repaire the ſorrow and griefe you haue procured vain vanquiſhing theſe Knights of our countrie, whom we muſt eſtéeme of. God forbid replyed Tyrendos, I ſhould be borne into this worlde, to worke you faire Lady the leaſt ſparke of diſpleaſure and miſcontentment that any humane ſpirite may lightly receaue: Neuertheleſſe if the Plannets haue ſo much diſſa
                     ••
                  red me, that I haue giuen you any cauſe to be ſad, I beſéech you Madame, to appoint me any pennance as you ſhall know may ſuffice to blot out this offence. which againſt m
                     •
                   will and before I was aware I haue committed thereby: then ſaide the Ducheſſe, I verilye beléeue you will not faile to accompliſh that which your hart commaundets you to ſpeake, the generouſnes whereof I know alreadie: & I pardon as willingly this ouerſight, as I hope you will accompliſh hereafter the liberall offer you make me, to 
                     〈◊〉
                   it according to my diſcretion. I thanke you moſt humblie quoth he then, to graunt me ſo quickly pardon in ſo great 
                     •
                   miſdéede as to prouoke the choller of Ladies, which ſhall 
                     〈◊〉
                   me to ſay euer hereafter, to haue found in you curteſie and 
                     ••
                  
                  manitie, ſurmounting the forces of my tongue: In recompence whereof aſſure your ſelfe Madame, in all occaſions preſented to me for your ſeruice, I wil imploy my ſelfe with 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſinceritie of denotion, as I deſire to be made known vnto 
                     〈◊〉
                   when it ſhall pleaſe you to giue me full fruition of that 
                     〈…〉
                  ,

which I ſhall repute ſecond to no other, in retayning mee for your Knight: ſo much I neuer offered yet to any Lady liuing, for that I acknowledge my ſelfe farre vnworthie to ſerue any Ladie.
               If ſo it he replied the Ducheſſe, I may well glorie to haue made this day ſo precious and ineſtimable a purchaſe, gayning him for my Knight, who is a verie pe
                     •
                  rle and repreſentation of Mars: wherein I finde my ſelfe ſo much beholding vnto you, that I ſee my ſelfe out of all hope to be euer able to cancell towards you the Obligation of my ſpirite: if of your fauour and grace it do not pleaſe you to accept in part of payment and ſatiſfaction thereof, the extreame deſire which I haue to ſhewe you in effect, I loue you euen as the ſame ſoule which giueth mee comfort and good hope that you ſhall reape condigne recompence for the paines you offer to endure for my ſake.
               Theſe laſt wordes ſhe ſpake ſo ſoftly that none but he could heare them, and ſo faire and ſoftly proſecuting their matter, Tirendos told her that his heart would be verie well content, if any accident did fall out to conſtraine him to make ſome abode to doe her humble ſeruice there.
               That would bee anſwered his louer, the moſt agréeable thing which I could deſire: ſo that I beſéech you depart not hence yet theſe two dayes, during which time peradventure ſome opportunity may ſerue to bring about this buſineſſe.
               
                  Tirendos promiſed hee would (when the Duke praied them altogether, becauſe hee was come in talke to the ſame points with the others) they wold not depart on the morrow: wherunto they conſented, to the great contentment of the Ducheſſe, who ſhewed by all ſignes ſhee could deuiſe, to make knowne the extreame loue ſhe bare Tyrendos.
               
               And as ſhe 
                     •
                  nſred her ſelfe the day following, to druiſt ſome inuention to prolong the ſoiourning of her louer, behold there entred into the Pallace a woman clothed in blacke, who demanded of the Duke if the Knight vanquiſter of Dirdan and his companions were in his houſe; who bé
                     ••
                  ng ſhewe
                     •
                  
                  
vnto him, ſhe fell proſtrate at his féete, praying and coniuring him by the thing which he loued beſt in this world, that hee would graunt her one boone.
               The knight hauing accorded this womans requeſt, ſhe began againe after humble thankes to ſay in this manner.
               Faire Knight you haue now promiſed to goe into a place with mee, where I hope by meanes of your valour and proweſſe (whoſe fame yeſternight came vnto my eares) to finde mee remedie for a wronge, which the worſt of all Knightes cauſed me wickedly theſe laſt dayes to endure. Tyrendos promiſed her againe to employ himſelfe for her, ſo that ſhe ſhould remaine content: and ſeeing he muſt yet haue another Combat in that quarter, he liked verie well his occurrence, which was a meane for him to ſtay longer nere his deare Miſtreſſe, who thereupon was almoſt rauiſhed for ioy: but if they two were well pleaſed, Belcar and Recindes, who would not ſoiourne there anie longer, (to the end they might come before the King Florendos to Conſtantinople,) were as much diſpleaſed when they vnderſtood of the iniured Gentle woman, that Tyrendos muſt néedes abide about ten or twelue daies in that place. Wherefore hee prayed them to be going alwaies before, ſaying that be muſt néeds ſtay there to exploit ſome act which might make more famous the reputation of his perſon: Aſſuring them hee would not be long after them, & that the great deſire which hee had to be at the Triumph woulde kéepe him from ſo
                     •
                  ourning long in any other place. His companions ſéeing they could not get him along, thāked the Duke & the Ducheſſe for the good vſage & honorable entertainment they had made them, & leauing Tyrendos in Bort, (being a little diſpleaſed to ſeperate their Trinity) they tooke their iournie ſtrait to Conſtantinople: whereby the Duke was marucylous glad of this Knights abode with him, miſdoubting nothing that be would lie in ambuſh for his wiſes honor: who hoping to take ſome paſtime in the amorous chace with her new Parramour, made a great deale the better cheare to the Gentlewoman, who was cauſe to retayne him with her 
                     •
                  
                  
where wee will leaue them to the liking of their loues, to recount what befortuned Belcar and Recindes after they had parted company.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  How Belcar and Recindes being arriued in Constantinople vnknowne of any, vanquiſhed the County Peter, and continued the lawe of his Iouſt, dooing maruels of Armes: and how the Emperour ſent Palmendos and Primaleon to know who they were.
               
               
                  
                     BElcar and Recindes perceiuing the will of Tirendes their companion, prayed God to preſerue him from all ſiniſter accident, then bidding him adien, they fell into their way againe: wherein riding many dayes iourneys, they arriued at the laſt in Conſtantinople on a Sunday morning, the ſeanenth day of the Iouſt that County Peter enterpriſed (as you may call to minde) whereof they heard ſome newes by the way as they came. By meanes wherof they determined before they would make themſelues knowne, to prooue themſelues againſt him as Knights errant: Belcar praid his companion to let him haue the firſt courſe, which hee willingly graunted, albeit hee coulde haue deſired to win the honour or ſhame firſt himſelfe.
               Entring then into the Citty, they made directly to the Tilt-yeard, where they found the gate faſt, by reaſon the County dined then in the company of many Knights with great ioy and ſollace, as they were accuſtomed within his Pauilion: So that being ſaint to ſtay the fit houre, they leaued vpon their Launces, vntill they ſawe the Emperour take his place on the left hande, to whome the King of Hungarie who fate at his ſide begins to ſay: My Lord, behold thoſe two 
                     •
                  nights who will I 
                     〈◊〉
                  , how braue they gouerne themſelues 
                     ••
                   horſe-backe.
               
                  
Truly brother you ſay well (quoth hee) I beliue it will doo a man good to ſee them at the ſhecke. When Belcar perceiued the Emperour whom he had not ſéene long time before, force and courage increaſed ſo in his heart, that hee purpoſed to ſhew this day ſome pleaſure in his houſe, where becauſe his was nouriſhed and brought vp in it from his infancy, he knew not King Friſol his father who was with him in company, beeing brought from Hungarie thither in his ſwadling clouts.
               But the Earle ſéeing the Seigniory & Nobleſſe in the galleries, cauſed forth with his Helmet to be brought, and by and by all his ſtrings, leathers and buckles, to be laced and tyed: Then mounting he commaunded the Trumpets and 
                     〈◊〉
                   to ſound, and to open the Gate of his repairs: Whereinto Belcar being firſt entred, the Earle aſked him, whether he would Ieuſt or fight, I will quoth the Aſſailant, doo all that I ſhall know to be neceſſary, but let vs firſt Ieuſt to ſée what will follow.
               Hauing thus ſaluted each other, they encounter with 
                     〈◊〉
                   a fury that Belcar loſt his 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and the Earle (breaking in, daſhing together the pe
                     ••
                  rall and the girths of his horſe) went mangre his noſe to luſte his greater and mother, but 
                     •••
                   ſoone got vp againe, being greatly aſhamed and vexed, to lo
                     ••
                   an inſtant the honour he had conqurred in ſixe dayes.
               Sir Knight then quoth Belcar, I haue w
                     •
                  rme your Coats of Armes, if I be not giuen to miſunderſtand in declaring 
                     •••
                   the Lawe of your enterpriſe: According to which you muſt depart this field, which I purpoſe to garde and defend in my turne as you haue done before me; if ſeene body 
                     〈…〉
                   not by force of Armes. My Habilliament ſhall I 
                     〈◊〉
                   giue you anſwered the County) without departing the Tilt, 
                     〈◊〉
                   be not by Martiall exployte performed by you or ſome other, which ſhall force me to doo it. You will ſéene your 
                     〈…〉
                  , replied Belcar; neuertheleſſe, ſeeing you will 
                     〈…〉
                   hathly, and con me thanke for ſhe curteſie 
                     〈…〉
                   which I ſhew you.
               
                  
Then ſet the Earle foote to ſtirrup againe, and in the meane time the Emperour being greatly aſtoniſhed at the magnanimity of this Knight, ſaid to the King of Hungarie, he well knew who he was; the two Champions beganne with their ſwords a terrible and furious ſkirmiſh, hewing out another in ſo bruſke and ſtrange manner, that it terrified the b
                     ••
                   olders to be are them onely: For the County through rage and deſpite which ſurmounted his reaſon, laid on without feare, & moſt deſperately.
               But his aduerſary, who was a little more nimble, and could mannage a little better than hée, did tiggle his ribbes with ſuch ſound flaſhes which eaſtly tamed him at length; ſo that being weary to make him languiſh ſo much, hee 
                     〈…〉
                   in the ende a fell ſtroake vppon his Murrion, which l
                     •
                  ude him in a ſtonny vpon the bare ground; ſaying: Now Knight muſt you condiſcende by force, to that whereunto you woulde not accord by your good with: a thing ſurely proc
                     ••
                  ding from your raſh preſumption, which make you thinke the honour of Chiualry dwelt onely among Frenchmen.
               At this ſpectacle and words 
                     〈…〉
                   the Prince Arnodes, and had it not beene through the 
                     ••
                  diſpoſition of his perſon, and that Philocriſta would neuer haue permitted it, hee had endoſſed his Armes to 
                     〈◊〉
                   the County and his Nation of this reproach.
               In the ſame paine and choller were all the reſt of the French Nobility who ſéeing they coulde none other remedye, liſted by Earle Peter from his fall, and bare him into his lodging to cauſe the Surgeons to 
                     ••
                  ke vnto him, and ſearch his wounds.
               
                  Belcar who thought in the 
                     〈◊〉
                   time what he ha
                     •
                   
                  
                     ••
                   doo, tooke the coats of Armes, and giuing it to one of his Pages, commaunded him to be are it from him and one of his companions to Meliſſa the King of Hungaries Daughter: whom they 
                     〈…〉
                   all commers, it ſhee would vouchſafe them ſo 
                     〈…〉
                  , to let them Combat vnder her 
                     〈…〉
                  .
               
                  
And gaue charge more-ouer to the young-man, to tell the Emperour and thoſe who were about his Maieſtie, that whoſoeuer would Tourney againſt him, ſhould alwaies finde him ready within the Liſtes: Where if per aduenture hee were vanquiſhed by any of the Aſſailants, the field ſhould remaine tol
                     •
                  s companion, who ſhould ſecond him therein, which they did deſire to did in attending the opening of the generall Triumph.
               The Page vnderſtanding throughly his Maſters will, went ſtrait to the Pallace, where knéeling before the Empreſſe, h
                     •
                  e beſought her to ſhowe him which of her Ladies was Meliſſa, King Friſols Daughter: wherein beeing by her gratiouſly certef
                     •
                  ed, the youth roſe vp, and with a moſt lowly reuerence began to ſay in this manner.
               Madame Meliſſa, the Knight who vanquiſhed Earle C
                     •••
                   kiſſeth the hand of your Excellencie, and ſendeth you by 
                     〈◊〉
                   this his ſpoile, the which hee knoweth beſéeming your worthines, whom he loueth more than any Lady of this company: And although he neuer ſaw you, hee aſſureth himſelfe neuertheleſſe, ſhee for whoſe loue the French Lord fought, is not ſo perfect in beauty, but ſhe yéeldeth and giueth the firſt place into you. Aduertiſing you more-ouer, that he and his companion remaine from this preſent houre, your moſt 
                     〈◊〉
                   and obedient Knights, as hoping (if it pleaſe you to doo them ſo much honour, that they may accompliſh the Lawe of the Iouſt of County Peter vnder your name) to employ themſelues ſo in this place, that the renowne of your beauty ſhall flie throughout all climates of the Leuant.
               Hee that had there ſéene the comely beauty of Meliſſa, ſhould not haue ſailed to haue ludged of the tamour a
                     •
                   her two Alabaſter cheekes, couered with a tranſparent and 
                     〈◊〉
                   Lawne, for the ſhame that ſeazed her, hearing him ſpea
                     ••
                   
                  
                     ••
                   in her fauour: Nor could ſhe anſwere a worde to the youngman, ſhee founde her ſelfe ſo confounded; when the King her father (who was there with the Emperour) 
                     〈…〉
                   this Embaſſage in good part, ſaid vnto her; Daughter I will

not beléeue but the Seigneur who ſendeth you ſuch a preſent knoweth you; and though it were for no other reſpect, at leaſt you ought to receiue it, and to honour him who ſendeth it you for loue of his generous minde.
               I know not my Lorde (quoth Meliſſa then) who may bee the Knight, whoſe curteſie ſeemeth not to approch his force; taking this hardleſſe to giue a preſent to a Damſell whom he knoweth not: which notwithſtynding, for that it is your pleaſure I will accept of it.
               You ſhall aduertize your Maſter (quoth ſhee to the Page) he greatly miſtaketh to preſume ſo much of my beauty, as to continue the Iouſt of the Earle for mee, who haue deſerued no ſuch honour at his hand: Neuertheleſſe, I thanke him for his good will, in 
                     •
                  ccompence whereof, if I can doo any thing for him, you ſhall aſſure him from mee, I will employ my ſelfe with as good will, as I pray God to preſerue him and his companion alſo from all incumbrances which may impeach his valiant enterpriſe; for the ſmall occaſion they haue to charge ſo heauy a burthen for ſo little beauty as mine, makes me feare they wil be vanquiſht, if their proweſſe and dexterity doo not ſupply this default.
               Then the young youth making a low obeyſance to thanke her for this curteous anſwere, tooke his leaue gratiouſly of her: And turning to Duke 
                     
                        •
                     uſtace who was neer eſ
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  e
                  
                     •
                  ought him to tell the Emperour and his company, that who ſo euer had any deſire to iouſt againſt this Knight-vanquiſher, and his companion, ſhould appeare vpon the Battiers, where hee ſhould finde them alwaies ready; which hee did without delay: The Emperour miſdoubting one of theſe Knights to be Belcar, told if incontinent to King F
                        •
                     iſol, who aſſured him the contrary; for that he ſuppoſed hee had hardly leſt the company of Florendos.
               
               Now did Belcar all that day nothing but breake ſtanes, for there was no French Knight but came to doo his beſt againſt him, hoping euery one to reuenge the County Peter: but the like chaunce befell them, as did to him before, for this

Deſendant was rough, and a very good horſeman, which was his inheritance he helde from King Friſol his father, who was eſteemed one of the beſt men at Armes of his time. That ſame day Belcar diſmounted beſide the Frenchmen about twenty Knights the moſt redoubted of the Court: whereat the Emperour wondered much, ſo that he ſent Primaleon to them to know who they were; who gladly did this Embaſſage with Palmendos; entreating them to repoſe that night in the Emperours Court, who gaue them ſuch charge, for the great deſire he had to know them.
               Gentlemen anſwered Belcar, deſire his Maieſty to pardon vs this once, for that wee cannot leaue this place without incurring ſome blame, beeing departed from our houſes, with full detemination to make our ſelues knowne to none.
               This is a point of ſmall curteſie (quoth the Conſtantino Politan) to refuſe the honeſt offer which the Emperour maketh you, with ſo ſimple excuſe as you finde now.
               And who are you faire Syr, quoth Belcar, (faining not to know him) who tearme vs diſcurteous:
               I am Primaleon (replied hée) Sonne to the Emperour, who ſendeth to intreate you by mée to doo him this honour.
               I haue done then (preſecuted the Deſendant) becauſe I knowe you haue not as yet receiued the order of Chiualry: Aſſuring you, that for your praiers, nor for the entreaties of the Emperour, ſhall you preuaile further with me than as I told you before.
               I will not importune you any further (ſayth the young Prince) then being ſomewhat offended, and when hee had ſo ſaid, he returned into the Pallace with Palmendos, who was ſo wrath with this thwart anſwere, that hee purpoſed on the next morrow to Arme himſelfe, to the ende to chaſti
                     •
                  e his arrogance.
               When the Emperour vnderſtood they had diſdained to graunt his requeſt, hée did but laugh at it, ſaying; they muſt he let alone in their obſtinacie, to ſée what might bee the 
                     〈◊〉
                  , Neuertheleſſe, Palmendos would be reuenged, and without

ſaying ought to any body, went ſecretly to endoſſe the Coat of Armes, in which he vanquiſhed the Tourney, which we haue deſcribed before, and came withall with a great Eaunce in his hand within the Barriers.
               So ſoone as Recindes ſpide his Armour hee knewe it, and who carried it on his back; which he let his companion know, requeſting him not to Iouſt againſt him for the Emperours ſake: Whereunto Belcar anſwered, bee coulde willingly forbeare; notwithstanding he o
                     ••
                  ht not to refuſe ſo good occaſion to proone his valour againſt ſo 
                     〈◊〉
                   a Knight; for if he diſmount me at the Iouſt, quoth hee, I ſhall not thinke it any ſhame or diſhonour for mee, ſeeing hee is the Achilles of our age, with whoſe valerous exployts all the Orient reſeundeth. When hee had done his ſpeech, hee did his beſt endeuour to make him feele his forces, and running one againſt the other very roughly, ſuch was their encounter, that Belcar had taken meaſure of the earth, had he not taken hold of his horſe-maine. And Palmendos liked not very wel the knocke which he gaue him, but it was néedefull for them to breath a little. Then charging a freſh with new Launces (for that the firſt flewe in pieces to their Gauntlets) they met together with ſo ſodaine a ſury, that they made the ground tremble vnder them, where Belcar ſound himſelfe much bruiſed, what with the blow and the fall in his Armour. Then Palmendos who loſt onely his ſtirrups, glad of this reuenge, demaunded his Hanburgeon, aduiſing him if he would not fight at the ſharpe, to depart the field. Other battell quoth Belcar, ſéeke not I againſt thee, for ſmall hope haue I to gaine more honour by the ſword, than I haue already at the Iouſt: and for that alſo I eſtéeme and loue then too well, to make further tryall againſt thée; knowing right well by this encounter, I ſhould haue but ill ſpéede if I procéeded further. Palmendos hearing him ſay ſo, mittigated a good part of his indignation, and taking his Coate of Armes, went directly to the Pallace, where the Emperour & the King of Theſſalie, very glad of this act, receiued him with great pleaſure, the Emperour ſaying thus to him.
               
                  
Sonne the Knight did wiſely not to accept the Combat of the ſharpe againſt you, otherwiſe he might haue ſped ill, conſidering his ſucceſſe at the Iouſt: Now God grant (I wiſh it with my hart) that all your future enterpriſes may ſort to ſo good & honorable ende, as the paſſed haue receiued a moſt fortunate and fauourable iſſue.
               
                  Palmendos kiſſing his hands, thanked him humbly for this good wiſh, then ſent hee Belcars Gabardine to his faire Francheline, who was not a little glad thereof: Therefore ſhée would needes come to diſarme him with her owne handes, caſting about him a faire and rich mantle ſurd with white ſables, for feare he ſhould take cold.
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  How Recindes continuing the 
                        •
                     ouſt after Belcar vanquiſhed the Marques of Penerad, and a Coſen of his, with many others after them: and howe the Prince Arnedes his Coſen louſted againſt him, which cauſed the Emperour to come into the field to know who he was.
               
               
                  
                     BElcar ſeeing Palmendos depart the Liſtes, roſe vp very angry for his fall, to retire himſelfe to the Earles Pauilion where Recindes was: who galled to the heart for his companions miſfortune, purpoſing to reuenge him if any man appeared within the Barriers: So that beeing mounted his f
                     •
                  uced liuely vp and downe, when the Marqueſſe of Penerad, (eſteemed a good Knight, as deſcenting of the race of the Emperours of Conſtantinople) came into the field.
               Hee beeing aduertiſed, that the two Knights who kept the Iouſt ofter Earle Peter had ſent his Coat to Meliſſa, whom hee deſired extreamely to haue in marriage, beganne to beare them a mortall and ſecrete grudge; and purpoſing to chaſtize them for their ouer bolde raſhnes, came richly armed into the fielde, where without any word ſpeaking, prouoked with raging anger, vailing his Launce, daſht his horſe ſodainely.
               
                  
Which Recindes perceauing, ſet ſpurs quickly to his likewiſe, ſo furious was their encounter, that the Marques went arſe ouer head, ouer his horſe head to kiſſe the ground, taking ſuch a grieuous thulch, that he remayned in the place, wagging neyther hand nor foot: whereupō one of his coſens proper and valiant of his perſon, a heauie man at this accident (in the meane while they carried the Marques into his Chamber) ranne ſpeedile to Arme himſelfe, thinking to reuenge his miſhap: Bimer was the Marques Coſen called, who beganne to Iouſt in ſuch a heat, that he miſt his blow againſt Recindes, who contrariwiſe hi
                     •
                   him ſo full pat, that he ſent him caſtly to take the Marques place: but he roſe vp againe lightly, ſaying to the Defendant, hee ſhould not thinke to haue yet done with him, ſeeing he would know how he could handle his ſharpe.
               At theſe words the Spaniſh Prince alighted, and putting his ſhield on his Arme with a couragious ſtomack, they began a fierce combat, which for all that was quickly finiſhed. For Recindes beeing a better warrier, and more ſpruce than his aduerſarie, made him recoyle to the place where he was vanquiſhed: then pulling off his Gabberdine, left him wounded in many places of his bodie among his people, who carried him thence into his Coſens lodging.
               That done, he gaue that and the Marques coate to Belcars Page, to beare them to Meliſſa, beſéeching her to accept them, as comming from one her moſt affectionate ſeruitour, that ſhe might finde vnder the two Tropicks of heauen.
               She who was with Philocriſta in her Chamber, when the Page came to doo the meſſage, anſwered thus: I know not what theſe Knights meane to ſend mee ſuch preſents without knowing me: yet faine would I learne their names, & what mooueth them to doe it: Madame (quoth the youth, they are ſuch, that when you ſhall knowe them, you ſhall thinke ſome great good Fortune will befall you, in béeing able to doe them ſome honour for your part in recompence of the extreame deſire that I can aſſure you they haue to ſerue you in the things wherein you take ſome pleaſure: For all that they ſhal haue

none other thankes of mee replied the Princeſſe till I knowe more, well will I take that which they ſend me, where with I finde my ſelfe greatly content: albeit farre more ſhould my ſpirits be ſatiſfied, as you may tell them, if I might perceaue openly their drift. Few dayes ſhall paſſe Madame, quoth the youngman, before you ſée the true end of all: ſo that I beſéech you doe not vexe your ſelfe, but attend the fitte honour which ſhall be bréefely as I hope.
               Finiſhing his ſpéech, he tooke honeſtlie his conge of the Ladies, whome he left verie penſiue, and curious to knowe who theſe valiant and curteous Knights might bee. In the meane time Recindes who held on his Chiualries, Iouſted againſt ten or twelue Aſſailants: all whome hee laid brauely along, winning by this meane their Coats, which hee cauſed to bee hanged on high vpon the Piller, where Countie Peter hoped to erect his Trophie: After this he tooke his ſollace and recreation, before any one preſented himſelfe within the Liſts, euerie one fearing to aduenture againſt him, whoſe proweſſe and derteritie was ſo great: Whereupon Arnedes who felt himſelfe better at eaſe than he was wont, hearing the Emperour ſay the Defendant might well remaine with the honour of the Iouſt, ſeeing that no man entred the field any more, anſwered him.
               I doe not thinke my Lord, they ceaſe c
                     •
                  mming for feare of him, for the number of braue & hardie Knightes of this Court is not ſo little that he can long time hold out againſt them, and as he had ſaid, hee went preſently to fit himſelfe with Armes, putting on a Murrion well tempered with ſteele: then came he into the place mounted on a mightie Courſer, who did nothing but neigh and ſome at the mouth.
               When Recindes ſaw him enter the Barriers, hée diſcouered him ſoone by his deuiſe, and as he thought howe to auoide Iouſting with him, hee was forced to ſet ſpurres to his horſe, becauſe he ſaw his Coſen Arnedes do the like: neuertheleſſe approaching within the reach of their Launces, he hau
                     ••
                  ed his and would not couch it againſt him.
               
                  
By this meane Arnedes eaſily broke his ſtaffe, albeit hee could not wagge the Champion an inche out of the Saddle, ſo that in manner abaſhed to ſée him doe ſo, turning bitte hee incontinent charged vpon him thus: Sir Knight let vs haue another bout yet, and vſe no more this curteſie towards him, who will con you no thanke for your fauour: So taketh hee another ſtaff and fetching his carriere to run the ſecond time, Recindes did as he had done before: Arnedes by that meanes or els by choller, miſſing his attainte, in a greate rage threwe his Launce to the ground, and ſetting couragiouſly hand to his ſworde, ſaide to the Knight: As God mee helpe nowe will I knowe for what reaſon you would not Iouſte againſt mee, as well as againſt the reſt.
               That ſhall you neuer vnderſtand by my meanes quoth the Spaniard: hereof can I well aduertiſe you, that happen to mee what may, I will not couch my Launce againſt you.
               You will tell mee then a reaſon quoth Arnedes, or you ſhall preſently die of my hand. Such inhumanitie ſhall I neuer ſée in you, replyed Recindes, albeit I had no will to deſend my ſelfe.
               By the liuing God ſaid Arnedes haſtily, you wil conſtraine me to bée diſcourteous indéede, and therefore at your owne perill be it.
               I can no longer forbeare quoth the Emperour then (who heard this controuerſie) but I muſt néedes knowe who are theſe two Knightes nowe in fielde: for me thinkes I ſee none other than the true repreſentation of Belcar and Recindes.
               
               When he had thus ſaide, he deſcended with manie Nobles after him, and finding the two Combattants yet in diſpute, the one ſéeking to knowe why his aduerſarie woulde not encounter him, the other excuſing himſelfe that hee might not tell the cauſe, willed Arnedes to goe aſide: And taking Recindes Horſe by the Bridle, hee prayed him of all loue that hee woulde ſatiſfie the great deſire hee had to knowe him.
               
                  
My Lord quoth he, I cannot doe it without inſ
                     •••
                  ging my faith, therefore I pray you vrge mee not to be per
                     •
                  urde. Aſſure you, replyed the Emperour, you ſhall neuer ſée me depart from hence before I knowe and looke you in the face: ſo that by excuſes you may not preuaile.
               Therefore I pray you put off your helmet, and thinke in ſo doing you ſhall not breake your faith and promiſe. For Gods ſ
                     •
                  ke, replied Recindes, do not offer to force me in your countries. This force will I offer you, anſwered the Emperour, for that in my mind, it ſtayneth neither your honor nor mine. The Knight in a perplerity not knowing what to ſay further, ſeeing it was a matter of conſtraint, held his peace and not a word. Then Belcar who had verſe well heard all the whole circumſtance (ſeeing hee coulde no longer conceale himſelfe, threwe incontinent his helmet to the ground and went to fall on his knees before the Emperour, in kiſſing whoſe handes her ſaide.
               My Lord pardon vs if it pleaſe you; if wee haue not béene ſo prompt to obey you as your greatnes requires, for wee determined at our departure out of Macedon, to come vnknowne into this place, to exployte before your eyes ſome honourable attempt, wherein you might take ſome delight & pleaſure: Notwithſtanding ſeeing wee are fruſtrate of one intention, hauing perfourmed nothing worthie to giue you contentment, it is the verie reaſon, why wee diſſembled our ſelues vnto your Maieſtie: of whom both the one and the other of vs two reputeth himſelfe a moſt happie man, to haue receaued ſo great honour.
               Ah my deare friends quoth the Emperour then, you be exceeding welcome into my Court, wherein I may well aſſure my ſelfe cannot be founde two Knighte, in whom can be found ſo much an
                     ••
                  roſity as in you onely: but tell mee I pray you whether the King my moſt honourable Father, will come ſpeedily vnto this Cittie.
               My Lord anſwered Belcar, I am ſure it wil not be a wéeke before he arriue here. For he was readie to depart, when I

entreated him to let vs goe before, to bring you newes thereof. The Emperour maruellous ioy full of this aunſwere, turning himſelfe with a laughing countenance towardes the King of Hungarie, ſaying to him: Brother receaue to you Belcar your Sonne, whoſe vertues and good manners make him ſo amiable, that euery braue man of good iudgment, wold be to him in ſteede of a Father in this behalfe.
               As the Dominators of Greece ſpake theſe words, Belcar falling vppon his knees kiſſed honourably his Father King Friſols hand, who embraced him with great loue, the trickling teares ſtanding in his eyes, and at length the French Prince ſeeing his Coſen Recindes in face, ranne vnto him with open Armes to giue him the accollad
                     •
                  e, and could not almoſt ſpeake for extreame gladnes, which ſeazed his heart in recogniſing him.
               Which the Spaniard perceauing, alighted quickly from his Horſe to embrace him, and after they had ſhewed manie familiar & louing cherriſhings one to another, he went to doe his dutie to the Emperour, who receaued him moſt ioyfullie, as did likewiſe all the 
                     •
                  eigneurs and Barrons of the Court: whereof the greateſt part eſteemed themſelues verie happie if they might come next to offer them the gentle welcome: and if all the beholders were very glad of this ſodaine and inexpected ioy (whereof euerie one had a good ſhare) that of Pinedes was ſo abundant, that it could not be expreſſed: hauing ſeene him perfourme the valiant and famous acts, which you haue to fore vnderſtood.
               Then tooke the Emperour Recindes by the hande, and the King of Hungarie his Sonne Belcar, whome they lead ſtraite to the Pallace, where beeing diſarmed, they went honourably to kiſſe the Empreſſe hand, who entertayned them with moſt kinde ſpéeches.
               During which, Meliſſa who heard them (by the only inſtinct of the vnſpeakeable ioy which ſhe felt in minde, reueſted in the ſuperficies of her face, ſuch a naturall beautie, that it was an admirable thing to behold.
               
                  
Full well did the two knights marke it when they came to doe reuerence to Philocriſta, Francheline, and to her who repreſented the third Goddeſſe. So that thinking her ſelfe thrice happie, to haue bin knowne worthie the preſents of two worthy and excellent Princes, embraced many times her brother Belcar amiably: Neuertheleſſe with more than a ſinguler affection, and without any meane, (as it falleth out manie times to thoſe who are ſtriken with the ſame Dart that ſhee was) ſhee entertained Recindes her loyall and perfect louer. And beleeued firmely, by that which her Brother ſent her, when the youngman brought her the firſt coate of Armes, that ſhee knewe indéede the whole diſcourſe of their ſecretes: wherein ſhe found great conſolation, ſhewing oftentimes to her louer by many ſignes, gratious aſpects, and other du
                     •••
                   Embaſſages of loue, what was her intention, which Recindes did the like for his part toward her.
               In this meane time Belcar was buſie in beholding the extreame beautie of Franch
                        •
                     line, whereof he was greatly aſtoniſhed not without thinking Palmendos a moſt happie man, to haue won ſo much honour in winning her for his wife, And albeit hee was well contented with Alderine the onely Lady of his heart, yet hee could haue wiſhed to haue had this for his Miſtreſſe, which paſſion could not be ſo well diſſemble, but in embracing Palmendos hee muſt néedes tell him in ſmiling manner: Truely Sir it was for my great good, I was not preſent at the bridge of Carderie when you arriued there, for obtayning nowe ſo caſte victorie of me, what would you haue done when your heart was ſo much pricked forwarde to purchaſe ſo rich a treaſure as Francheline is? No marueile then if you haue ſhewed that proweſſe vpon me which euerie man hath manifeſtly knowen in you, ſeeing before your eyes, a beautie ſufficient to make able the moſt coward and faint harted knight that is, to performe any ſtrange aduenture, were it neuer ſo hard and difficult.
               My deare Coſen replied Palmendos, (béeing very glad to heare him ſelfe giuen this honeſt conunendation by ſo good a

Knight as Belcar,) you are as much bounden as my ſelf to the Princeſſe Francheline, for ſéeing the deſire to conquethes, cauſed you in the garde of the bridge to win the honro which ſhal for euer immortalize your fame: Where I was verie happy not to meete with you, auoyding great danger thereby of looſing my life, which God hath preſerued me hither to.
               Further would they haue proſecuted theſe gratious ſpéeches when Arnedes who approached with his Coſen, ſaide: Seigneurs leaue off theſe matters now, ſéeing that all men ſée the valour and dexteritie of you both, wherewith you Brother Palmendos do make many ſicke through your beauie and puiſſant ſtrokes: whereof I ſhall all my life beare good witnes, by that which hapned to me once, which I account no diſhonour, ſéeing it hath pleaſed God to accompliſh you in all Martiall perfection.
               At theſe lawdable reproches bluſhed Palmendos a little, when be anſwered them both in this manner: My Lords let vs not talke of things that are paſt among vs, when we knew not one another, albeit therby is clearely ſéene with what valour & Chinalry you were both endued & enriched: ſo deuiſing together of manie aduentures, they returned to the Emperour, who made them kinde entertainment, & like wiſe King Friſoll, béeing not able to ſat
                     •
                  ate himſelfe with the 
                     •
                  ight of his Sonne: So that the feaſt was much encreaſed by their arriuall in this Court; where we will leaue them, attending the comming of the King and Quéene of Macedon (whome the Emperour vnderſtood would bee there within foure dayes) to recount you what Tyrendos did in the Duke of Borts houſe.
            
            
               
               CHAP. X.
               
                  How Tyrendos reuenged the Ladie clothed in black, who came into the Duke of Borts houſe, of an iniutie that was d
                        ••
                     e her by a Knight named Alegon, and how by his meane the Ducheſſe and Tyrendos attayned to their hearts deſire.
               
               
                  THe Knight Tyrendos deſiring with an incredible affection to doe ſome pleaſurable ſetuice ſo the Dutcheſſe of Bort, made tariance with all his heart in her Caſtel, hoping to bring quickly ſome end to his amorous paſſions: During which he declared once more to her, how ſince his firſt arriual in the plame, he was ſo e
                     •
                  flamed with hir loue that he pretended neuer to forſake her, whereof ſhee was a meruailons glad woman, a much more when hee manifeſted vnto her his race.
               By meanes wherof making more account of him than ſhée did before, they determined together to giue ſome ſolace to their deſires, after he had accompliſhed the promiſe which hée made to the Dame
                     ••
                  ll clothed in blacke, ſo that to diſpatche quickly he departed thence a ioyful man on the next morning, not without the great intreatie of the Duke to repaſſe by his houſe if his way didlye any thing that way.
               In the mean
                     •
                   time the Dutcheſſe gaue one or two preſents to the Dame
                     ••
                  ll, and diſcouering vnto her the loue which ſhée bare Tirendos, deſired he
                     •
                   to be carefull of his health: and that ſhe would requite it, which the good Lady promiſed her frankly: ſo that taking her leaue of her and her huſband, ſhee went her way with the Knight, who demaunding her afterwarde, wherin ſhe had need of his aide, ſhe anſwered him thus.
               Know faire Knight that two of my Sons being this other day at the mariage of a ſiſter of a naughty Knight called Alegon, they got there ſo great honor in a fortreſſe that the Bridgroome & many others defended againſt al others, that the wife of Alegon (ſome little kin vnto them) did cheriſh them the more

for that, eſpecially the elder, who was a ſpruce youth & well experienced in feats of war: For this occaſion her tr
                     •
                  yterous huſband conceiued in his minde a deadly grudge againſt him, which encreaſing more and more, at one time among all other, when he eſpted him deuiſing with his wife, he fell into a furious choller, that without any word ſpeaking, he came vppon him with his naked ſword and ſlew him eaſily: My poore ſonne beeing diſarmed and taken at vnawares: And afterwards running vppon my other ſonne with his Catchpoules, put him incontuient into priſon for feare leſt he ſhould reuenge the death of his brother; ſaying further, he would put him to ſome cruell death within the priſon. But I sorrowfull and heauy Widdowe, voyde of kinred and friends, who may for medem 
                     ••
                  d Iuſtice for this iniury done; hearing the ſame of your Proweſſe, built ſome hope to be reuenged by your mean, b
                     •
                  ing as aſſured as I am to dye, my ſonnes were innocent, and intured without any reaſon; and therefore would I moſt humbly pray you faire Syr, according to the promiſe you made me, to goe bid him de
                     ••
                  ance in his Caſtell, telling him if he refuſe the Combat you wil accuſe him of treaſon before the Emperour. If ſuch be (quoth Tyrendos) the diſaſter and miſaduenture of your children, as you tell me; the homſeide it ſelfe crieth vengeance againſt the trayterous and fellon murtherer, who hath perpet
                     •
                  ated it; which I hope by Gods aide to make him confeſſe, promiſing you to employ my beſt 
                     •
                  orces there
                     ••
                  , with ſuch a courage, that I will either dye or els you ſhall 
                     •
                  emaine ſatiſfied.
               The Damſell gaue him great thanks for his good will 
                     •
                  nd taking two Squiers for guide and company 
                     〈…〉
                  , they arriued the third day after about ſixe a clocke b
                     •
                  fore th
                     •
                   Caſtell of Alegon: Where Tirendos 
                     ••
                  d the Porter 
                     〈◊〉
                   his Maſter, there was come thither a Knight from the Emperour Palme
                        •
                     u
                        •
                     
                   Court, who would ſpeake with him.
               Whereof the 
                     •
                  eigneur beeing aduertized, ſtey
                     •
                   to a window ouer the Ca
                     ••••
                   gate, demaunding what was his e
                     ••
                  a
                     ••
                  , I would willingly deſire you (anſwered Tirendos) to 
                     •
                  urceaſe

the inhumanity which you vſe toward a poore widdow, reſtoring her youngeſt ſonne to her, whom you detaine in priſon vniuſtly: and if you will ſo doe, I promiſe to obtaine you pardon for the death of her eldeſt, whome you ſlewe againſt all right and reaſon, otherwiſe I denounce you the Combat, ſaying that you haue wronged your honour.
               Truely I had not thought replyed Alegon that at the perſwaſion of a woman who complaineth without anie cauſe, a Knight had beene ſo credulous, whom I may ſuſpect of cowardize: aſſuring you that I haue done, but what I ought in reaſon to doe towards her Children, who ſought to diſhonour mee: ſo that I thinke you will gaine more to be gone againe vnto the Emperours Court, where you ſhall finde opportunitie at this preſent to ſhew your proweſſe, and to braue your bellie full, rather than to enterpriſe here any thing, which might peraduenture coſt you deare.
               With that hee got him from the window ouer his portall, when Tyrendos in a marueilous rage, began to ſpeake many haynous villanies to him, reproching his cowardlineſſe, and aſſuring him (if he would not Combat againſt him) to accuſe him of fellonie before the Emperour ſoueraigne Seigneur.
               Which beeing well wayed by Alegon, was ſomewhat afraide, & perſwading himſelfe it were better to ende that quarrell there than before the Emperour, reſolued to ſally out to Combat him: which hee did after hee had well harneſſed himſelfe with Armes and a good Courſer, telling his enemie hee made little eſteeme of his braues, were hee the moſt redoubted Knight of the Emperour Palme
                        •
                     ius Court. Uppon this contention they comming to encounter with a marueylous furie, Alegon miſt his blowe, but Tyrendos pearcing his ſhield and his 
                     •
                  uy race, thruſt the pointe of his Launce ſo far into his breaſt, that he ouerturned him ſhrewdly wounded to the ground, whence the wretch could not ſo ſoone riſe vp againe, but Tyrendos (who leapt nimbly from his Horſe) was at his backe to cut a two quickly the laces of his helmet
                     •
                   then ſetting the point of his ſword at his throat, ſaide: Thou

art dead Alegon, if thou cauſeſt not preſently come hether the Knight with his Armes and Horſe, which thou holdeſt wrongfully in priſon: Gentle Knight cried the vanquiſhed, for Gods ſake ſaue my life and I will obey you willingly in what ſoeuer your pleaſure is. Then he commaunded his people to fetch the priſoner quickly with all his millitarie equipage, ſo that the Gayler hauing ſet him at libertie, it was not longe before he appeared in the place; whereof Tyrendos was glad without meaſure, when he aſked him whether hee were him, for whome he had Combated: I am the man quoth he, who will ſerue you as long as my ſoule ſhall dwell within my body, which you haue ſo well reléeued now: And as hee had ſaid, Tyrendos put vp his ſword into his ſheath, then mounting all three to horſe, he ſaid to Velican (ſo was the reſcued Knight named) theſe wordes.
               Let vs nowe Brother depart this place, where I beléeue this falſe and cruell Tyrant will not commit hereafter, ſo many miſchéefes as he hath done heretofore, which was moſt true: for his ſeruants hauing brought him home to his chamber, and diſarmed to viſite him, they founde his wound ſo great and dangerous, that he liued but thrée daies afterward, and in the meane time Tyrendos, Velican, and his Mother, arriued in her Caſtell, which was a delight full and pleaſant houſe, within terme mile of the Cittie where the Ducheſſe of Bort dwelled.
               But this Damſell ſhewed ſuch kinde of cherriſhing to her Sonne, that it were impoſſible to write them, thanking many times the Knight who had reſcued him: who hauing his ſpirites occupied in nothing but vppon the Ducheſſe, tooke this Damſell a parte to diſcouer likewiſe to her his paſſion, praying her to goe make his excuſe to the Duke, if hee could not returne onto his houſe as hee promiſed him at his departure: for that vppon ſome ſodaine newes which were brought him, he was faine to make in all haſte a voiage to Conſtantinople.
               
               
                  
Moreeuer prayed her to talke ſecretely with his wife, to know her intention concerning the conſerence betwéene them in taking their plot touching the future accident of this occurrence, and that in any wiſe hee would 
                     ••
                  ay for her anſwere in that place where he would ſollace himſelfe vntill ſhée ſhould doo him that fauour.
               The Damoſell aſſured him to employ her ſelfe in this ſo dangerous a meſſage, albeit ſhe were certaine to looſe her life, finding her ſelfe too much bounden and behelding to him, to refuſe any thing which he would command or deſire: by means whereof, taking her ſonne with her, they went ſtrait to the Dukes houſe, who entertained them very amiably, enquiring himſelfe what was become of the Knight and of the iſſue of his promiſe: The which Velican told him from print to point: and after that which Tirendos would haue ſaide from him, whereat the good Seigneur was not a little diſpleaſed; for hee woulde willingly haue ſéene him yet once more in his Caſtle, as being the man whom hee eſtéemed more than any other Knight of the Countries adioyning to his Duchy.
               But the Lady and her ſonne aduertiſing him, that they reſolued from thenceforth to liue vnder the protection of his ſeruice, for the little aſſurance they had elſe-where, becauſe of Alegons kindred, whom they feared as death.
               The Duke for fully welcommed the Knight Velican, and the Ducheſſe entertained his mother for one of her Ladies of honour: and had a ſingular pleaſure in hearing her recount how Tirendos her loyall Louer vanquiſhed ſo eaſily Alegon the murtherer.
               When the Damſell afterward ſpied a ſit time for their purpoſe, ſhe imparted to her the principall point of her ſecrete Embaſſage: Whereuppon the Ducheſſe (who loued him as her owne ſoule) beganne to make this ſodain
                     •
                   aunſwere: Alas deare ſiſter, the great valc
                     •
                  r and proweſſe of Tirendos maketh me commit this errour, againſt the Duke my huſband; for ſince I firſt ſ
                     •
                  we him, my heart felt it ſelfe wounded and inflamed with his loue, that it is impoſſible for

me to endure any longer in this ardent flame, which bath almoſt dried me vp, and no good humor in me.
               Madame quoth the Damoſell, it was well foreſéene of you to fire your amorous fancie vpon ſo braue a Knight, of whom I can well aſſure you, for the ſmall time I haue frequented him, in a better place could you not haue beſtowed it: and furelie the Seigneur Tyrendos meriteth ſuch reciprocation, were it but for the extreame deſire he hath to make you know how his deuotion towards you, ſurpaſſeth that of the moſt affectionate ſeruitor of Cupid. So cunningly knewe the Damoſell to vſe her eloquence, with the good will that the Ducheſſe bore the Knight: that falling from one matter to another, they concluded ſo ſoone as it was 
                     〈◊〉
                  , Velican ſhould goe ſecretly to fetch and conduct him to the dore of a Garden which ioyned faſt vpon the Dutcheſſs lodging, by which way hee might eaſily enter into her Chamber, and remaine there hidden as long as they thought good: For that the Ducheſſe had two or thrée fatre Cabinets, into which neuer any entred but herſelfe: in one wherof ſhe made account to kéepe Tyrendos as long as 
                     •
                  he could.
               This determination quickly ſorted to effect, for Tyrendos pricked forward with ſuch deſire as euery one may 
                     〈…〉
                   an houre before day to the Garden doore, where attended for him the Damoſell, who conueyed him afterward into the chamber of the Ducheſſe, whom hee kiſt many times ſwéetly as ſoone as he was arriued ſaying: Now can I ſay I haue attayned the height of the blis, which loue prepareth for his fauourites, and I cannot imagine Madame, how I may euer recompence the curteſie and fauour you ſhew me, in receauing me for your ſeruant: If it be not to offer you the ſincere and incorruptible: affection that I haue to continue your perpetuall 
                     •
                  laue.
               Ten thouſand thankes for your good will, anſwered the Ducheſſe: neuertheleſſe if you ſée now a poore and ſimple louer forget ſo much her chaſtitie, as to de
                     ••
                  le her mariage bed, I beſéech you not to a
                     ••
                  gne the fault vnto me vnfortunate and deſolute

woman, but referre the whole vnto your beauty, proweſſe and valour, which hath brought me into ſuch a taking, that no reaſon beeing able to preuaile ouer the flaming deſire of my heart, which you infuſed into mee when I gaue you mine, I am conſtrayned to abandon mine honour vnto you. Wherein I cannot but merualle to finde my ſelfe ſo quicklie ouer taken with your loue, (regarding the ſmall time I feele this burning paſſion in my breaſt,) for to make you knowe the waight, you ſée preſently howe I haue feared nothing which may ſtaine the reputation of a Lady Illuſtrious and of great renowne.
               The Ducheſſe perſeuering in theſe her curteous Ceremonies, the Damoſell beganne to cut her off thus: Maddame, it is nowe time to bring into ſome harbour the two Barkes ſo toſſed with the amorous ſtorme and tempeſt: So that to preache is not nowe required in this place, rather let the Pilots thereof alone to doe the deuoire of their office.
               By this meanes Tirendos hauing well vnderſtoode the watch worde, ſet vp the Maſt with one hande, and lifted vp the Sayles with the other, then laying downe his Armes of ſteele required in mortall battells, hee helped himſelfe with thoſe which are more eſteemed betweene two Courtaines, couching himſelfe neere the Ducheſſe ſide: where tooke ſome end the anguiſh of two Louers, who remayned in that manner, vntill they thought it high time to giue order for the reſt of their Nauigation, a Chamber was appointed for the Knight in a ſecret corner.
               There hee ſoiourned nine or tenne dayes in the greateſt pleaſure and contentment, that as yet hee euer taſted in his life, for the Ducheſſe who loued him as dearelye as her own life, was faire and gratious in perfection: in ſuch ſorte that the departure and diſcontinuing of this felicitie, and pleaſure, was a moſt grieuous thing to both theſe vaſſals of Loue.
               For fearing leſt at length this ſecrete miſterie would bee

diſcouered, the Knight muſt néedes go out of his ſwéet and voluntarie Priſon: albeit the Ducheſſe did not much feare her old and gray-headed Huſband: who may bée an example to all other, (that euery one ſhould ſéeke his match) leſt the other inconuenient happen.
               But Tyrendos in taking leaue of his Lady, promiſed vndoubtedly to ſée her againe, which comforted her a little: and afterward in going out of the Garden, hee was met by Dirdan, who louing the Ladie as you haue before vnderſtood, could by no meanes reſt or ſléepe, but walking all night long about her lodging to bee within ſent of his Paramour, in meane while to allay (as he thought) the reſtles fit of his burning feuer.
               Hee ſéeing Tyrendos ſally foorth of the Orchard, was vexed to the gall, as euerie one who hath taſted the bitter fruite of iealouſſe may preſume: inſomuch that to knowe who hee might be, he drew neare, raging, and grumming betwéene his teeth theſe wordes: Ah, a curſed death maiſt thou die who commeſt nowe from the place, the iſſue from whence hath wounded & peirced my heart in twaine: wiſh that he would haue laide hande on his choller to ſtay him: but Tyrendos who had at the inſtant ſet hand to his ſworde reached him a blow vpon his coxcombe, which cleft him downe to the ſhoulders, continuing his purpoſe thus: Now ſhal the martyrdome end, which hath hetherto tormented thée for her, whoſe ſhooſole thou waſt vnworthie to kiſſe.
               Then making haſt to the place where Velican attended him, hee mounted ſtrait, and without any other company but this Knight, who would neuer leaue him, went directlye to Conſtantinople, where they arriued in good time for the Turney.
               On the morrow morning was Dirdan found dead hard at the Garden dore, whereat was great murmuring, the people ſaying hee was ſlaine for loue of the Ducheſſe, which brought her into ſome ſuſpition of her honour.
               As ſoone as ſhee knewe thereof ſhee quicklie déemed who

was the author of this Homicide, Tyrendos her louer, whom ſhe neuer ſaw afterward, albeit all the reſt of her life, he, was the chiefeſt Darling of her deſtres.
               The Duke who was old and loued his Ladie aboue meaſure, neuer enquired farther of Dirdans death: nor cared hee much what the worlde might thinke: But miſdéemed the Ducheſſe had cauſed him to bee diſpacht to baniſh him for euer her preſence, for which déede hee eſtéemed her the more, and had better opinion of her than before; and ſo we will let them liue, the one ioyfull of this perſwation, and the other paſſing ſorrie to depart from her ſwéet louer, whome wee ſhall finde hereafter in Conſtantinople at the Tourney to behaue himſelfe better in other Combats.
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               
                  
                     How the King Florendos arriuing with his Queene Griana his wife in Conſtantinople, were moſt honourably receaued by the Emperour Palmerin their Sonne, who met them with a great traine a dayes iourney from the Cittie: And howe Primaleon Abenuncq and Arnaſin receaued the order of Knighthood.
                  
               
               
                  THe King Florendos and his Quéene Griana being departed from Macedon, in the companie of the principall Barcons of their Kingdome, tooke by their way all the paſtimes they could deuiſe: But beeing entred within the bounds of the Empire, they were ioyfullie receaued by the Emperours commandement. who had giuen order to his Subiects for the ſame effect: as alſo for that the Queene Griana his Mother was their naturall and Soueraigne Princeſſe.
               All this Troupe beeing arriued within a dayes iourney of Conſtantinople, hee came to méete them, accompanied with the greateſt part of the Nobles of his Court, with all the honour, and moſt kinde entertainment, as a Sonne ſo well

brought vp as hee, might ſhew towards his Father and Mother: who hauing firſt gr
                     •
                  eted him, receaued and cheariſhed Primaleon and Palmendos his Children, who did vnto them all the reuerence poſſible to be thought of: The like curtoſie vſed Arnedos towardes them (whome they reputed as their Sonne,) and in like manner all the reſt, both Kings and Princes who accompanied the Emperour: So that theſe interchaungeable gréetings and welcomes were ſo long a dooing, that they could not reach Conſtantinople: but tooke vp their reſt for that night, in a moſt pleaſant place foure miles diſtant from the Cittie, where the Quéene could not fill her eies with beholding her ſonne.
               To bée breefe on the morrow they entred the Cittie with the greateſt ioy, that was euer heard of, the Empreſſe, Quéene Ariſmene, the thrée Infantes, and manie Ladies of high renowne, who kept them companie béeing at the firſt Gate of the Pallace to receaue them more Honourablie: who entertayning firſt the King and the Quéene, after them came the thrée Infants to kiſſe their hands, and then all the other Princes one after another.
               Theſe welcomming Ceremonies of the Ladies accompliſhed, all this Royall companie mounted into the principall Hall of the Serraglia, where the Emperour ſate downe next to the King his Father, and the Empreſſe (bringing her thrée Daughters with her) next the Quéene, who could not faciate her ſelfe furuaying with an vnſpea
                     •
                  eable ioye, ſo Heroicall and Illuſtrious a 
                     •
                  rue: In ſo much that in this profounde contemplation, ſhee could not countermaunde her ſpirite, but her eyes muſt ſhedde ſame teares for gladneſſe, when ſhe thus brake foorth.
               Lord God, now let mee leaue this mortall world when it ſhall pleaſe thee, ſeeing thou dooeſt mee this Grace to repreſent before mine eyes, the thinges which I ſo extreamely deſtred to ſée.
               Scant had ſhe finiſhed theſe few words but the enchaunted bird, who was within the auncient chamber of the Emperor,

ſent forth two moſt lamentable ſcréeches, and had not at their comming ſhewed any ſigne of gladſomnes, as ſhée was alwaies accuſtomed to doo at the arriuall of the Emperours fauourites. So that the Emperour (who was very ſorrowful for this preſage) gaue great héede vnto it, with many other Seigneurs who knew the nature of this animall, beléeuing verily by her hoarſs chattering, ſome ſiniſer accident was preſaged: But he diſſembled it as well as he might, without ſhewing any outward appearance, but ſaid incontinent to the Queene.
               Madame, I beſeech you moſt humbly, let vs not talke in this happy time of recreation, of any thing which may driue vs into melancholly, ſeeing you being yet farre from death, ſhall ſee your ſelfe long time ſerued and reuerenced of all theſe who are aſſiſtant before you; and therefore doo not diſmay your ſelfe by any thing which may bring you into a vaine and fantaſticall opinion.
               My ſonne replied the Quéene then; Death hath this by nature, that there is none liuing in this world, who can ſtew himſelfe ſo ſtrong againſt it, that he may anoyde it; our predeſtmation being ſuch, we cannot prolong or abridge it one little minute; whereby enſueth, that for any thing I haue now ſaide, I can neither retarde it, nor haſten it any thing the ſooner.
               When ſhee had ſpoken theſe words with a very good grace, ſhee embraced the Infant Flerida, who ſeemed vnto her the 
                     •
                  apreſt and gratious creature ſhee had euer ſeene in her life before, and kiſſing her ſweete cheekes many times ſhee ſaide.
               Fayre Daughter, I pray God, he ſuffer you to liue ſo long as your beauty and ſweetnes of feature deſerueth; wherein I thinke well, neither maide nor wiſe can bee founde, to come once neere your Paragon: Moſt true was that which the Queene ſpake; for whoſoeuer behelde this young Princeſſe, iudged her to be a Venus in beauty, and a Pallas in prudency: But this day they paſt in great ioy and ſollace throughout all the Court, and in the euening, Primaleon beſought the Emperour

againe, that hee woulde the next day following, giue him the order of Knighthood, and the ſame hee entreated him alſo to doo for Abenu
                        ••
                     cq and Arnaſin Duke Tolomus ſonne which be accorded vnto very willingly.
               Therefore on the morrowe euery one doathing himſelfe pompeouſly in rich and ſumptuous Habits, except Primaleon and his 
                     •
                  ead companions, who watched all that night their Armes within the Chappell, whether the Emperour comming with his father and the other Kings and Princes there was aſolemne Maſſe begun.
               You muſt vnderſtand ſince the firſt time that Abenuncq ſaw Amand in the King of Spartaes daughter, hee was ſo attainted with her loue, that no other thought than of her dwelt within his breaſt: So that in meane time while the Maſſe was ſaying hee reſolued to become a Chriſtian, to ſhew more euidently vnto his Lady and Miſtreſſe, the extreame deſire which ſet him on, and eſpecially to enter the Tourney as her onely Knight, wherein hee hoped to adde vnto his praiſe, that which he could make good there.
               The Maſſe beeing ended, hee humbly beſought the Emperour, hée might be partaker of the holy Sacrament of Baptiſme, before he came to the order of Knighthood: For knowing how much the Law of Chriſt was more ſublimate and in bleſſednes excéeding that of the Mores, hee would no longer liue in Paganiſme.
               Which the Emperour and all the Aſſiſtants hearing, were paſſing glad of his renouncing of Infidelity: So that vncouering his head, the Patriarck of Conſtantinople did baptize him preſently, che
                     •
                  ſing for his Godfather the King Florendos, who commended him greatly for ſo vertuous an act.
               For teſtemony whereof, he promiſed ſtrait to make him ſo great and puiſſant a Prince, that hee ſhould haue cauſe to put in obliuion the eſtate and riches of his father. Whereof the new Chriſtian returning him humble thankes, the Greekiſh Mona
                     •
                  ke turned himſelf towards Primaleon, ſaying; Sen, requeſt of my moſt honourable father, it would pleaſe him to

arme you Knight with his hand, for if. I haue purchaſed ſome little honour in this world, I can aſſure you all procéeded from him, who inucſted mee firſt with this honourable degrée of Knighthood; which I hope will be augmented more in your perſon, if it pleaſe him to enrich you therewith. Then you ſhall giue it vnto the young Arnaſin, and I vnto Abenuncq your companion.
               
                  Primaleon hauing heard what the Emperour his Father ſaid, went full ioyfull to knéele before the King his Grandfather, beſéeching him he would put on his ſpurre and girde vnto him his ſworde of Armes: whereof hee excuſed himſelfe, ſaying it were better to bee done by his Sunnes hand: But the Emperour himſelfe and all the other Princes, who were there prayed him ſo inſtantly, that in the end he was conſtrained to condiſcend thereunto: and giuing him as well his fatherly bleſſing as the militarie acolado
                     •
                  , hee ſoone made him Knight: the Emperour armed Abenuncq Knight, and afterwards Primaleon himſelfe dubbed Arnaſin of the ſame order. The ceremonies were done with ſo great pompe, that it was noone before they departed out of the Chappell: ſo that the dinner ſtaying for them (after that the Yeomen of the Pantry had recouered the Tables rounde) the Squiers of the kitchin were not long before they ſerued in their firſt ſeruice: So comming from Church they went ſtrait to dinner, where the Emperour ſate downe with his father, the other Kings and great Lordes beeing ſerued moſt honourably, and as ſuch a magnificent Feaſt 
                     •
                  e ſéemed ſo Royall a companie of Princes.
               After the tables were taken vp, the Quéene Griana and the Empreſſe whoſe prouiſion was no leſſe; came to them with all the reſt of Ladies ſo richly attired, that the onely aſpect of them put ſome gladnes into the Knights heartes who beheld them; and amongſt the reſt filled ſome of their breaſts with ſuch amorous and pricking deſires, which tooke ſo déepe roote therein, that they could neuer afterwards hee 
                     〈…〉
                  .
               
                  
Then beganne the dauncing and other reuelling, in midſt whereof thy enter laced interchaunge able talke of many matters: Belcar tooke in the meane time Recindes by ſhe hand, whome hee brought to ſit downe hard by Meliſſa with this language: Deare Siſter I muſt eſtéeme great and maruellous the felicity which God hath within this little while ſent you, to make you Ladie and Miſtreſſe, of one of the moſt valiant Knights, who liueth vnder the zodiacke, beſides he is in all other thinges, a Prince ſo accompliſhed that there are few at this day founde to be his like in valour and worldlie riches. He of whome I ſpeake is the Prince Recindes, whom yee ſee no leſſe affectioned towards you with an intire loue, than deſirous to ſhew you the experience: by meane whereof I pray you of all fauour betwéene you and me, you will reciprocally loue him, for that he deſerueth it, & his vertues of themſelues ſhould inuite you thereunto; and I promiſe you to employ my ſelfe ſo well for you both, that with in few dayes your heartes ſhall finde ſome caſe and content.
               The Damoſell who was ſage and as curteous as might he, haſht a little at her Brothers ſpéeches, and made him this anſwere: You ſay true Brother; that the Seigneue Recindes, is vertuous, valiant and a rich Prince, & I ſhould 
                     〈◊〉
                   my ſelfe to want manners and grace, not to obay you in that which it pleaſeth you to commaund mee, ſéeing betwéene you two ſo perfect amitie is confirmed: ſo that you and hee may he aſſured all my life I ſhall reuerence him in ſuch ſorte, that you ſhall know with what ſincerity ſhee ſpeaketh, who will remayne perpetually ſeruant to you both.
               Now may I quoth Recindes, repute my ſelfe truely happie about all theſe, who thinke to ha
                     ••
                   attayned 
                     〈…〉
                   of their felicitie, ſeeing you ſo prompt Madame, 
                     〈…〉
                   which it pleaſeth my Lord your Brother to preſerue in my 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and if I reioyce in any good which God giueth me, it is onlie but for the hope I haue to make you the Ladie and Miſtreſſe of me and of the kingdomes of Spaine.
               The Emperour who was a 
                     〈…〉
                   and we 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
Prince, caſting his eye round about (eſpecially ſuruaying the qualitie of thoſe, who were in any conference with the young Princeſſe) that it would be a verie ſorteable match betweene Recindes and Meliſſa: in ſo much that in time hee purpoſed to put it in effect. Likewiſe he ſpied Abenuncq ſitting nere Amandria Daughter to the King of Sparta his Ʋnkle: whom hee permitted alſo to giue vnto him in mariage: to the ende to recompence him there with, becauſe hee had forſaken his Mahometicall law: and whilſt the Emperour had this in his minde Abenuncq boorded her thus.
               Onely Miſtreſſe of my ſeruitude, you might ſée this morning the victorie which loue hath gotten ouer me, making me renounce mine owne proper religion, to take a new which is ſtrange vnto me: During which Combat, the poore ſlaue of Cupid ſo fortefied himſelfe with your liuely and rare beauty, which hee ſhooting off at his eyes, hath ſo imprinted it within his ſoule, that no other thing were it neuer ſo highly eſtéemed can take that place from it.
               Neuertheleſſe, if to make ſufficient proofe of his Magnanimitie, finding this precious treaſure néere him, it would pleaſe you to let him enter into the Cour
                     ••
                  ey as your Knight, (which is the moſt Soueraignety of his deſiers) you may well aſſure your ſelfe, you neuer ſawe ſo much hardineſſe in a young and new made Knight as in him.
               If for the loue of mee, quoth Amandria then you haue renounced the Pagan lawe, I am greatly bounden to bleſſe God, and to thanke you for the good will you beare me, albeit I merite not the leaſt parcell of any ſuch honour, in recompence whereof I might he iudged ingratefull and too diſcurteous, if I ſhould refuſe the honeſt requeſt it pleaſed you to make mee, béeing but newely Knighted and iſſued out of ſo Royall a houſe as you doe: Wherefore I am content, and thinke my ſelfe happie, that in my name you will enter the 
                     •
                  iſtes, wherein I hope you ſhall winne ſuch Honour among the reſt, ſeeing you had ſo good knowledge and deuorſ
                     ••
                   of yourſelfe to come to our faith.
               
                  
Madame replyed he, you onely haue béene the occaſion, in that to inſinuate my ſelfe into your fauour, I get the knowledge of the Soueraigne God.
               For that regarde ſhall I loue you the more quoth ſhee ſmiling, and will eſtéeme you euer more than any Knight, which may offer himſelfe to mine eyes: in ſigne whereof there is a ring which ſhall ſerue you for a fauour in the 
                     •
                  ourney.
               This ring replyed hée, which nowe I haue by your gift, ſhall giue me ſo much force and courage, that when I ſhould haue a thouſand liues, I would employ them all one after another, ſéeling it faſt vppon my little finger: ſo that hauing it in my poſſeſſion, I ſhall prize it farre more than the fatall ring of Gyges.
               
               This was the parlie theſe two newe louers had together that day: which made Abenuncq in ſo great ioy (hauing vnderſtood thereby his Ladies will) as hee paſt away merrily that night with the other Knights.
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               
                  
                     How the Prince Arnedes was eſpouſed with Philocrista, and Palmendos with Franch
                              •
                           line, and afterward laie all foure in two beddes, which the Knight of the Iſle-Cloſe ſent the Emperour with eight Muſitians to make them all kinde of harmonious mellodie: And howe the next day following they opened the great Triumph wherein Primaleon bore away the prize.
                  
               
               
                  ON the morrowe which was the day when the Nuptials of Arnedes with Philocriſta, and of Palmendos with Francheline ſhould be ſolemnized, come euerie one foorth richly arrayed to accompanie them to the Church of Saint Marie the round: but before they came thither they ſtaire an houre by the way, ſo full were the ſtreetes and windowes ſtuffed with Knights who came thither to the 
                     •
                  ourney.
               
                  
At the laſt they came thither, and preſently was there begun a high and ſolemne Maſſe by a Biſhop, who giuing his benediction to the new Epouſes, finiſhed incontinent the Ceremonie which the Greekes had accuſtomed to vſe in their Nuptials: then returning to the Pallace in the ſame order they came, it was paſt twelue before they came backe thither: by meanes wherof theſe new married Princes ſitting down
                     •
                   to cable with the King their Ʋnkle, the Emperour their Father and the other Kings and Princes, and great Seigneurs, beganne preſently a Conſort of Muſitions to ſound on al kind of Inſtruments.
               In briefe they ſo feaſted all that day that it were impoſſible to recount it: afterward bed time beeing come, the Queene of Theſſalie and many other Ladies of Honour brought Philocriſta to her Chamber, where they laid her in a rich and ſtatelie Bed: whoſe Curtaines and Canope were cloth of gold, wrought with little figures of Birds, ſpred cleane ouer a Couerture of fine crimſon Ʋeluet, diapred euery where with great orientall Pearles. The couch (beſet round with Imagerie of P
                     •
                  rle, in forme of Pomgranets holding two great & braue Medailles of maſſiue gold) had the ſoure principall pillers of the Mother of Emraude wrought infaſhion of bathes, vnderpropped by foure Dragons of gréene marble planted vppon the baſes of Ca
                        •
                     cidonie, and foote ſtalles of Ia
                     •
                  per: and vpon the top of the pillers, ſtood foure S
                     •
                  hinges of 
                     ••
                  ne 
                     •
                  gate, comming ſo
                     •
                  ere the naturall creatures, that you 
                     •
                  ould haue ſaid there had bin nothing in thē wanting but the ſpéech.
               The like did the Empreſſe to Francheline with manie other Ladies in her Chamber, and in a Bed of no leſſer 
                     〈◊〉
                   & ar
                     ••
                  fice thā that of Philooriſta, as comm
                     •
                  ng both out of the mans ſhop, and from one & the ſame worke-maſter that made them.
               Afterward did the Emperour and all the other Kings, conduct the Bridegroomes each of them into his Ladies chamber, where leauing thē alone remained not long, but there 
                     •
                  ayned a new Metamorpheſis to Philoctiſta & Francheline, for that of

vertuous maidens they were within a ſmall time tranſlated into moſt faire and gratious wiues: Whereof 
                     〈◊〉
                   gaue a good teſtimony to them that beheld it then, 
                     •
                   liuely 
                     ••
                  r
                     ••
                  llion bluſh, which after the ſodaine mutation remained a good while vpon their cheekes: During which cha
                     ••
                  ge of name and not of perſon, came fower young men from forth their Ch
                     •
                  mber doores bringing a Nuptial Ditty which the Knight of the Ile-Cloſe had compoſed, and ſent into the Court at the ſame time, with the two Beds where in the new married Princes lay.
               I doubt not but ſome of you perfect Louers, reading this paſſage, will wiſh with ſome priuate affection to ſée your ſelues neere your Paramours in like ioyes as were the foure loyall Louers; and it were but for the delight which your ſpirites might take, in remembring theſe things ſo rare and pretio
                     •
                  s.
               So then the Seigntur of the Ile-Cloſe louing the Emperour wi
                     •
                  h 
                     •
                  uch entire amity as he did, would néeds by ſkill o
                     •
                   his Art make the 
                     •
                  eaſt of his ſonne and Daughter more excelling and magnificent, when he ſent him the two beddes and a Conſ
                     •
                  rt of eight voyces: who ſéeing the vower fit for their purpoſe began to ſing an Epithalme thus:
               
                  GOD Hymeneus chiefe of Nuptiall Rites,
                  Yee Bacchus, Cupid, Ceres, Hymens powers
                  Be preſent here, hale hence with all your mights
                  All mo
                        ••
                     ning ſorrowe: Bring vs happie howers:
                  And Flora Summers Queene for our delights,
                  Beſtrew this Royall Court with choyce of flowers.
               
               
                  Your fauours ſhew to foure Knights Combatant,
                  Who try their Valours in the cloſed field,
                  But if the Victor doo his foe ſupplant,
                  Or if the vanq
                        •
                     i
                        ••
                     t bee conſtraind to yeeld;
                  
                     
Vppon the Conquerours head a Garland plant,
                  And him that's foild from further perrill ſheeld.
               
               
                  Be yee conductors of theſe valiant Knights,
                  That euerie one may win his Miſtreſſe fauour:
                  Entring the Liſtes in Armes redoubted Wights,
                  To ſhew their proweſſe worthied to haue her,
                  At the next Iouſting, Tornements and fights
                  Proclaimed by the Greekiſh Emperour.
               
               
                  Permit no worthy fauorite to dye,
                  Who is a Iouſter in this Courtly crue:
                  Let none beholde that fatall tragedie,
                  Leſt all the Court doe his misfortune rue,
                  For death alwayes dooth part good companie,
                  All myrth is daſht when ſadnes doth enſue:
               
               
                  In meane time let no dutie be ſurceaſte,
                  By help of gentle Cupid God of Loue:
                  To marry many a Nimphe this ſolemne feaſt,
                  Who in this Court doe ſhine as Starres aboue:
                  With haughtie Knights who thinke their fortune bleſt,
                  For their ſweet ſakes aduentures ſtrange to proue.
               
               
                  The Emperours Royall ſeruitour am I,
                  In humble dutie readie to fulfill:
                  What it ſhall pleaſe his Sacred Maieſtie,
                  I may not diſobay his Royall will:
                  From the Cloſe-
                           •
                        le I ſent this melodie,
                  To honour him ſet by mine Art and skill.
               
               
                  
This Confort of Muſitions ſo harmoniouſly deſeanted vpon this Nuptiall dittie, that many yong Damoſels, who ran vnto them like Bées to the hearbe Thy me, would needs haue a Coppie thereof: as well becauſe it was partly compoſed in their fauour, as alſo becauſe the Muſicke therof ſéemed almoſt diuine, filling the eares of all the hearers with a maruellous content.
               Of this great curteſſe of the Knight of the Ile-Cloſe was the Emperour paſſing glad; & for that kindnes and manie other, hee loued him all the dayes of his life: in ſomuch that be redoubled the feaſt vpon this occaſion, and would not on the morrow permit the Tourney to be opened, nor vntill the third day after: after which we will beginne to reocunt the glorious exployts, the meruaylous and triumphant Iouſtes of our valiant and hardis Primaleon.
               
               To come then to the beginning of his Martiall Chiualries, bee commanded his Fathers Ingenour to chooſe out in the plaine field, a plot wherein hee ſhould ſet by a Tilt-yeard invironed with high barres and railes, in Longitude and Latitude aunſwering iuſt his Diameter, and in forme Ouall, ſo that at the leaſt fine hundred Knightes might Combat afront.
               The firſt day hee purpoſed to appeare therein himſelfe, as the Emperour did when diſcouering himſelfe to his Father, hee was elected to the Empire of Greece: to wit, that within the cloſe fielde ſhould not enter more than foure hundred Knightes of choyce, halfe on the one ſide and halfe on the other, putting the Imperialles with the ſtrangers altogether pell-mell. Whers Abenunq, Arnaſin, Peynedin and manie other valiant Knightes were on the one partie, and on the other ſide Belcar, Recindes, with many other gallant Champions of the Kingdome of Fraunce, Sparta, & Theſſalie.
               
               The Emperour and the other Kinges hauing dined, they went with the new Bridegromes vppon the Seaffolds which were ſet vp for them in the plame: And in like maner the Empreſſe & the Quéene with their two yong Brides vpon theirs,

where euery one placed himſelfe as well as he could at their beſt caſe, behold Primaleon entreth at one of the gates of the Theater accompained with all thoſe of his part, and Belcar and Recindes at the other; for there were two doores made, and at euery one whereof was a Piller of ſtone, very rich and ſumptuous; vpon the toppe of the one ſtoode the ſhape of Mars holding in his hand a Globe crowned with an imperiall Diad
                     ••
                  n
                     •
                  ; vpon the other that of Venus, hauing her diuine Duiu
                     ••
                   burning on the one ſide, and her ſonne Cupid on the other, who leaned on her ſay.
               So did Primaleon giue order they ſhoulde bee made, to the end they might as well perceaue the 
                     •
                  ngen
                     •
                  ouſnes of his ſpirit, as his corporall dexterity
                     •
                  : Thither woulde her not beare his ſhield of the Roche-ſendue; but his ſword he had girded to his thigh, becauſe it was ſuperlatine in bountie. Nowe after that the one and the other ſide had made a turne about the field, the Clarions, Drums, and F
                     •
                  les began to ſound the Aſſault: And then might you ſee this Caualery hurry one againſt another with ſuch ſury that it was wounders to beholde and heare the encounter of both ſides claſhing together▪ Primaleon before he broke his firſt Eaunce, diſmounted more than halfe a dozen Knights, beeing all ſhrewdly wounded, or els in danger of death: Then drawing his ſword, hee began to ſtrike ſo thicke, that euery one gaue him place, auoyding his preſence as if it had beene Meduſa the terrible Gorgon. By meanes whereof, the Emperour who coulde diſcerne the good and perfect Knights from the other, better than any of the ſlanders by, ſeeing him ſo hardy and ſo ſpruce, iudged he would one day prooue a very good and an accompliſhed Knight; whereof he greatly thanked and prayed God to preſerue and keepe him from miſchaunce.
               
                  Abenuncq ſhel
                     •
                   he were a little younger than hee, neuertheleſſe made his Proweſſe there very well knowne, and that he was the ſonne 
                     •
                  f the good Knight Olorick Soldan of Ba
                     
                        ••
                     lo
                        •
                     
                   and of Ar
                        ••
                     d
                        ••
                     na: Of like valour and hard
                     •
                  eſſe ſhewed himſelfe Aruaſin the third newe created Knight: But

                  Primaleon who beſturd him more than any of the reſt, (laying on ſore blowes and ſo thick, that it ſeemed thunder paſſed the place where hée went) behaued himſelf ſo, that albeit Belcar and Recindes did merualles of their perſones, hee droue for all that by force of armes his aduerſartes out of the place of combat, for that one beeing firſt gotten foorth, all the reſt followed him as faſt as they could at one an others héeles: inſomuch that Belcar, Recindes and ſome othere of their pertakers, who held out ſtoutly againſt him: could not at the length endure the ſtreſſe of their aduerſaries becauſe they would not fight at all extremities againſt Primaleon; in the end they were ſo conſtrayned to retyre them ſelues, and auoyde the Barriers.
               The Tourney then beeing vanquiſhed by Primaleon, hée was receiued by all the Barons of Greece with an incredible ioy, ſaying with a common voyce, he ſhould be one day more valiant than the Emperour his father, who then returned into the Cittie more ioyfull than he euer was before: and giuing the honour of the Tourney to Abenuncq, hee ſaid that hee well ſhewed himſelfe to deſcend of ſo rare and accompliſhed Knight, as was the Soldan his Father.
               But the King Florendos many times embracing Primaleon with the teares ſtanding in his eyes, praide the Almightie God that hee would to ſo faire a beginning, giue alſo a better end: Wherefore the young Prince kiſſed him, b
                     •
                  ie his hand, thanking him for ſo fauourable a wiſh.
               Afterwards the other Knights being ariued at the Pallace, the Emperour honoured greatly Recindes and Belcar, ſaying they of purpoſe ſuffered themſelues to be vanquiſhed, for that they had no luſt to fight againſt the principall of their aduerſaries: which he ſpoke to no other end but to comfort them onelie in the diſcouragement they tooke at this miſaduenture: knowing neuertheleſſe that none in the Troupe could equall themſelues in hardleſſe and dexteritie to Primaleon his Son. And for that none of the Principall died not, nor was not hurt in this firſt tourney, the feaſt was redoubled which they held

afterwards the ſpace of fifteene daies together with open field for all commers: wherein ſome dayes entred more than ten thouſand Knights exployting ſtrange and admirable deedes of Armes. In the which Primaleon beeing euery day preſent, carried away from all other the Honour and prize, as at the firſt: for albeit Palmendo, and Arnedes the new Bridegroomes entred twice into Battaile with him, and did actes that euery one was aſtoniſhed at, they were forced for all that to leaue him the vpper hand.
               Notwithſtanding let vs ſpeake of a Knight who was ſlaine during the Triumph, whereupon it fell out that many defied him afterwards accuſing him or Treaſon, for that hee had aſſured al Knights who would come vnto his Tonruyes, of ſafe conduct and returne throughout all the Countries of the Empire.
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               
                  
                     How Perrequin of Duas the King of Pollands Son comming to the Tourney at Conſtantinople to kill Primaleon, and to reuenge Gridonia the Ducheſſe of Ormedaes Daughter, was ſlaine himſelfe by the hands of Primaleon.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     NArdides Duke of Ormeda, beeing vanquiſhed and done to death by the Emperour Palmerin, which Duke of a 
                     •
                  roth came to Conſtantinople to reuenge the two Coſens of Tariſius his Bretheren, whome the Emperour himſelfe and King Friſoll ſlew with their owne handes, as writeth the Author of his Hiſtorie; his people returned with theſe ſorrowful tydings to his Mother and the yong Ducheſſe his wife, who made ſuch lamentable complaints and mone for him, that it was a pittifull thing to behold the iſſue of ſo miſerable a Tragedie. And to the ende to make more memorable her mourning and funerall ceremonies, ſhe commanded to erecte a faire and rich tombe within the Chappell of hir

Pallace, vppon the which for her laſt expiation (after many other Honourable Pempes required in ſuch a caſe) ſhe ſhedde euer it an infinitie of teares (as if the bodie ſo much deplored had béene therein buried.) But what? Surelie he was not there, and I beleeue that if ſhee might haue recouered it, ſhee would neuer haue encloſed it vnder that lamine, but rather haue done as Arthemiſia Quéene of Caria, who after the death of Mauſolus her huſband (for the more Honourable interring of him) cauſed to be builded a magnificent and ſumpiuous monument, which was afterward called one of the ſeauen wonders of the world: and neuertheleſſe ſeeing that edifice finiſhed (which ſhee called Mauſolus, after her dead huſbands name,) ſhe then iudged it vnworthie to receaue the ſo pretious and rare treaſure of her amitie: Therefore ſhe cauſed to burne the bodie to cinders, & the ſaid cinders afterwarde to be aromatized, diſtilled, and reſolued into water, that ſhee might be her ſelfe his Sepulcher: ſupping vp that diſtillation as the moſt exquiſite potion which ſhe could finde, for alwaies afterward to conſerue in her the integritie of her loue toward him.
               Now this yong Ducheſſe being euery day after her mourning readie to be brought a Bed, the anguiſhes and throngs which happen to women in that caſe, came vpon her at the report of this newes, ſo that ſhee was ſpeedily deliuered of a verie faire and beautifull Daughter: vnto whome for that ſhee was borne in a ſorrowfull time, and in that Countrie they call to lament, or to crie, Gridar, was her name giuen Gridonia.
               
               The old Ducheſſe (who had no other heire but this one lie Niece) cauſed her to bee carefullie brought vp: and with ſo great dilligence that ſhee grew to the ſight of the eye, ſo faire and perfect in all features and lineatures of her viſage, that her mother ſeeing her ſuch a quaint péece, ſware ſhee woulde neuer marrie her, but to him who ſhould reuenge the death of Nardides her defund huſband. And vpon this condition did ſhee then preſently ſet downe the marriage of Gridonia,
                  
who comming to the age of fiftéene yeares was required and demaunded of many Princes in marriage. Neuertheleſſe when they heard the law and vengearnce which was to enſue, none would be ſo hardie as to accept the match.
               So radiant and admirable was her beautie, that through all the Countries and Marches rounde about the Duchie of O
                        •
                     medes they could talke of nothing els: By meanes wherof Perrequin of Duas. Sonne to the King of Polland, who was Brother to the Mother of the ſame Gridonia, hearing a report of ſo erquiſite beautie, had great deſire to ſee her: Inſomuch that hee be ſought the King his Father to giue him leaue to goe viſite the Ducheſſe his Aunt, whereunto he eaſily accorded.
               Hee then commaunding to rigge and equippe a good ſhip with all that might be neceſſarie for ſuch a voyage, ſoone after tooke the route of Ormedes: where being with a fauourable winde and faire weather arriued; the Ducheſſe reioycing much at his comming, entertayned him verie amiablie, which G
                        ••
                     donia alſo knew full well howe to doe. She was ſo curteous and gratious, that Perrequin ſéeing her ſo beautifull, comelie and well nurtured, found himſelfe in a moment ſurprized and enamored, ſwearing for a ſmall reſolution to marrie neuer any other Wife but her: which cauſed him to breake thus with his Aunt.
               Howe hee comming into her Countries to ſée and ſerue her in that wherein ſhee ſhould pleaſe any waie to employe him, hee felt at the firſt encounter his heart ſo priuely rauiſhed by Gridonia her Daughter, whome if hee were refuſed to haue her to his Wife, hee did thinke hee could not liue long afterwardes, and concluding his preamble, beſaught her moſt humbly ſhee woulde condiſcend to make her Queene of Polonia, and that he would procure a diſpenſation from the Pope. Ah, deare Nephew quoth the Ducheſſe then, of this alliance ſhould I be more glad than you, if ſhee and I might in any wiſe conſent thereunto: But hauing ſworne long ſince, neuer to giue her in marriage but to him, who

ſhould reuenge the death of her defemet father, I may not expoſe you to ſo great hazard of your life, the Emperour Palmerin being ſo mighty and puiſſant a Prince, that I am halfe in diſpaire, you will neuer be able to compaſſe our requeſt.
               I will not therefore let, replied Perrequin, to employ my beſt forces, to the end to practiſe ſo iuſt and reaſonable a vengeance: For as well I clearely ſée, I am but a dead man if I enioy not my Coſen briefely to wife. If God woulde ſo much fauour you then (quoth the Ducheſſe) that you might bring your purpoſe to paſſe, aſſure your ſelfe not onely to haue in recompence Gridonia mine onely Daughter to your wife, but my ſelfe alſo for your humble and perpetuall ſeruant, with the whole eſtates and riches that God hath giuen vnto vs both: wherein I ſhall eſteeme my ſelfe the moſt happieſt of all ſtep-dames, winning ſuch a ſonne in law, as I could not chooſe a better if I ſhould ſeeke one throughout all the inhabitants from the one to the other Pole: So that I beſeech the Almighty that he will ſo direct your actions, that the end may be as proſperous and happy, as I poore and deſolate widdowe doo wiſh it. The Knight thanked her curteouſly for this good affection; and if hee were very glad on the one ſide, hee found himſelfe farre more penſiue, counting with himſelfe what was to be done, to conduct ſo tiggleſome an enterpriſe to an iſſue: The which being vnderſtood by Gridonia, ſhe reioyced as the Louer who could haue béene willing to haue comitted the condition of this vengeance, to the end to haſten ſooner the conſummation of her marriage; neuertheleſſe, ſhe would not gaineſay or ſtriue againſt that which her Mother and Grandmother had reſolued therein.
               As Perrequin was in profounde conſideration howe to lay this Ambuſh, beeing able to deuiſe no meane, which might ſeeme eaſie enough to effect it with ſanegarde of his ſoule and body, hee had newes by certaine Merchants who came from Conſtantinople, of the 
                     •
                  ouſte which Primaleon had publiſhed throughout the Empire: whereupon he conceaued exceeding gladnes, hoping to goe thither quicklie, and vnder pretence of

Iouſting in that for full ſpectacle to kill Primaleon by treacherie.
               So declaring to the Ducheſſe and Gridonia amply his deſire (after he vnderſtoode they ſhoulde bee very well ſatiſfied with Primaleons death, as being the thing which wold much trouble and diſturbe the Emperours Court) purpoſed to depart ſpéedily accompanied with fifteene Knights of choice, whom he gaue to vnderſtand all the points of his conſpirarie: But when he came to take his leaue of the Ducheſſe and her Daughter, they could not preuaile ſo much ouer the weake and feminine nature, but muſt plainely ſhew by apparent tokens the ſorrow and diſcontent which this departure did cauſe their ſpirits, eſpecially Gridonia, who for all the demonſtration of her anguiſh, prayde the Soueraigne aboue to ſafegard & preſerue him from mortall danger, for that the Emperour and his people were in all their affaires moſt fortunate. Perrequin comforted her as well as he could, and ſéeing the teares diſtilling from her faire eyes, déemed himſelfe beloued of her vnfaignedly; which encreaſed ſo much the more his force and courage; then embarking himſelfe, and ſetting ſayle, hée came ere long after to ſurge in the Roade of Conſtantinople, where hee commaunded to ſtrike ſayle to goe a ſhore, and Campe himſelfe in the Playne as did the other Knights.
               It was now the ſixt day of Primaleons Iouſts, when the Polonian vnderſtoode by all men that he did maruelous Actes of Chiualry, behauing himſelfe like a Hector in middeſt of the field: which was a cooling to him, fearing leaſt he ſhould not at his eaſe haue his will of him. Yet hee encouraged himſelfe, and prayed his fifteene confederates to bende their eyes and heart only vpon Primaleon, caring not a ruſh for the reſt, and that hee would doo the like to ſet him quickly packing out of this world: in ſuch ſort that this night he would not go to the Pallace for feare leſt the inchaunted Byrde ſhould reueale by ſome token the plot of his treaſon; the nature of that creature being well knowne thorough out all the Countries and Frontiers of the Empire.
               
                  
On the morrow arming himſelfe with a rich and prowde Harneſſe, hee entred with fiftéene Knights within the field, beeing ſhewed vnto Primaleon by the deuiſe of his Armes; whom hee knewe otherwiſe before hee had béene long within the Barriers by his great Proweſſe: For ſo ſoone as the Clarions and Trumpets had founded the Alarme hee began to doo ſtrange and maruelous déeds of Armes.
               Which the two Knights of Perrequin ſéeing, they crept néere him before hee was aware, and had hee not had his 
                     •
                  uy race of proofe well tempered with the fineſt ſtéele, they had wounded him ſore.
               Neuertheleſſe, hee who felt himſelfe thus outraged, as a Lion aſſailed with two bloud-hounds, turned towards them full of furious choller, and reaching either of them a downeright knocke vpon the Helmet ſent them ſoone to the ground.
               Then began Primaleon ſo fell a fight, ſkirmiſhing on the right hand and on the left, that Perrequin could no longer ſuffer this braue, but taking a Launce without euer ſpeaking worde, ran with all his force at his backe behinde, ſo that hee made him looſe his ſtirrops, and piercing his Armour, ſcrateht his fleſh a little.
               You néede not demaund whether Primaleon found himſelf more aſhamed of this encounter, than ſorry not to know who might be the Knight who ſet vpon him in this cowardly ſort: So that turning bridle he after him brauely beaking him luſt
                     •
                  
                  ly. In the meane while Perrequin ſtood not ſtill but did the like to him, as he who deſired nothing els but to make him quickly looſe his life. Recindes who perceaued this ſharpe and cruell battell, ſtepping betweene them parted them for that time; and on the morrow alſo when they renued the like: Whereat Perrequin grew wrath, that he might not haue his will, albeit he feared much the ſturdy and beauy blowes of his aduerſary. Then began Primaleon to take it in dudgeon finding him alwaies before him offering ſuch faſhion of Combat, feeling rather a mortal & bloudy fight, than an excerciſe of ioy & paſtime; wherefore he ſwore to be reuenged of him, if hée encountred

him any more in the Tourney: which fell out euen ſo; for that vpon the morrow ſéeing him with his Launce in his reſt to come amaine vpon him, ſnatcht another out of his Squiers hands quickly, ſaying alowd in great indignation: Diſcurteous Knight, I know not who you are, who filled with ſuch a fury and mallice againſt mée, will not ſuffer me to be one minute of an houre at quiet. Neuertheleſſe I will ſee now whether I can vncaſe this fellowe, who thinkes to diſpatch him, who neuer (as farre as bee knoweth) offended him in his life.
               Finiſhing theſe ſpéeches, he went to charge him with his ſword, which he thruſt ſo right into the middeſt of his breaſt, that it ranne more than a foote and a halfe croſſe thorough his ſhoulders, and at that inſtant ſent him as dead as a Dogge to the ground, proſecuting his talke thus.
               Now ſhall thou leaue mee manger thy mallice, who haſt dogde mee ſo theſe thrée dayes, that I could neuer kéepe thée from behind or before mee: Then in great hardieſſe hurring into the thickeſt of the preſſe, hée charged them ſo couragiouſly of all ſides, that ere long hée forced all his aduerſaries to turne their backs.
               To make a ſhort abridgement, hée got alwaies the honour of the victory, as long as the Tourney laſted: Whereof the Emperour and all the Nobles of Greece were paſſing ioyfull of his generoſity, valour and Chiualry. But let vs nowe before wée conclude this firſt part of our Hiſtory, ſée what good lucke befell the Spaniſh Prince, who hath lately left the Iouſts to Court his fayre Lady Meliſſa.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XIIII.
               
                  
                     Howe Recindes hauing eſpouſed Meliſſa returned into Spatue, Arnedes into Fraunce with Philacriſta, and all the other Kings and Princes into their Kingdomes; Except King Florendes and Queene Griana who died in Conſtantineple to the great ſorrow and mourning of the Emperour and all his Court.
                  
               
               
                  WHo might euer be able to recount the great magnificence and meruallous thinges which were done during the feaſt of Philocriſta and Francheline? Surely the ſumptuoſitie thereof ſeemed ſo pompous, and the feates of Armes ſo admirable, that to deſcribe them well, they ſurpaſſe the cloquent tongues of Demoſthenes or Cicero: For there was preſent ſo great a number of braue and valiant Knights, that you would haue iudged the whole aſſemblie, to haue béene the choyce and flower of all the men at Armes in the whole world.
               But aboue all Recindes made his valour well knowne there, for the earneſt deſire which prouoked him to do his beſt endeuour in ſome thing which might the more recommend him to his deare and beſt beloued Meliſſa: Therfore the Emperour, who eſtéemed him highly, told the King of Hungarie, that he ſhould get a good Sonne in law, if hée purpoſed to giue him his Daughter in marriage. King Friſoll anſwered, hee would be very willing of this alliance, and cauſing his Son Belcar, Recindes great friend to be ſent for: demeunded him his aduiſe, and what coniecture hee had concerning his will in this matter: Whereunto making anſwere, that it was the moſt affectionate point of the Caſtilians honour: beganne thus to ſet this buſines abroach.
               Lord Recindes, your valour and chiualrie ſheweth it ſelfe ſo Heroicall among this Illuſtrious Troupe, that I loue you

as much as my Sonne Primaleon: ſo that to accquite my ſelfe in part of ſatiſfaction of the good turnes I ow you, hauing done mee this great Honour, to come and viſite mee in my houſe, I am content to giue you for wife Meliſſa my néece, Daughter to ſo Honourable a King, as is my Brother of Hungarie: As for the perfections of the Infante, ſéeing you know and ſée them euery day your ſelfe, I will not labour to dilate further vppon her praiſe, ſéeming to mee that the amitle betwéene you and my Sonne Belcar ſhould bee farre more inſeperable when the accompliſhment of this alliance ſhoulde be conſummate.
               The Knight moſt attentiuely giuing eare to the Emperours talke, bowed himſelfe with a lowly reuerence to 
                     〈◊〉
                   his hande, and likewiſe King Friſols, accepting him for his father, and reputing himſelfe for the happieſt Spaniſh Knight that euer ſet ſaile toward the Fennes of Meotis, for that he alone had compaſſed ſuch a marriage: the which was ſolemnized the morrow after with ſo much pompe and a newe ſupply of Tourneying & Tilting, that Primaleon had leyſure inough to ſhew his ſinguler proweſſe & valour: nor hapned there any thing during all theſe Triumphes which diſquieted the Emperour in minde but the death of Perrequin, knowing that he was not the leaſt of his faction, for otherwiſe he would not haue cared ſo much for it.
               When all the feaſts were finiſhed, the Emperour gaue many preſents to many Knights, ſending them home moſt ioyfull men into their owne houſes and countries. And in the meane while he ſhewed good cheare & countenance, Arnedes ſolicited by his Ambaſſadors, demaunded leaue to returne into Fraunce with his wife Philocriſta, and ſo likewiſe did Recindes with his.
               The Greekiſh Daminator denied them not their ſutes, but beſtowed great riches vppon his Daughter, to the end ſhe ſhould goe moſt honourablie into Fraunce, and in like manner to Meliſſa his néece. Then he commaunded to rigge out a fleete of ſhips well equipped with al things neceſſary for

ſuch a voyage. The King Florendos gaue moreèuer manie rich and pretious Iewels to his néeces: the King of Hungarie not forgetting to doe the like to his Daughter, with whom hee ſent a certaine number of his Knightes to accompany and ſauegard her home. And if the Empreſſe became verie ſad at the departure of her two Daughters, no leſſe was the griefe of the two Princeſſe: But for that they went away gallantly married to their content, they eaſily forget all ſorrowes paſt. Euerie one then taking their leaues, they be tooke themſelues to the ſalt water, and ſo well were they fauoured by Zoylus & Neptune, that with a proſperous gale and a calme Sea, they ſoone arriued in the Coaſts of Prouence: where Recindes bidding adew his coſens Arnedes & Philocriſta, followed the ro
                     •
                  t of his voyage with Meliſſa. And commaunding to ſingle towards the ſtrait of Gibraltar (which lieth betwéene the two mountaines Calpe and Abylas, at this day called the pillers of Herculos, becauſe the one of them in Spaine and the other in Barbarie, were long ſince by him ſeperated, to nauigate from the Ocean Sea into the Mediterranian) came to land in the cittie of Siuill, where he was moſt Honourably receaued: From thence hee tooke his iourney towardes his Cittie Toledo, where the King his Fatherſoiourned, who was paſſing glad of his arriuall: moſt of all when hée heard the reputation hee had gotten in feates of Armes: In ſomuch that going from his Pallace to entertaine them louingly could not forbeare weeping, ſeeing him in ſo good diſpoſition; and Meliſſa his Wife ſo ſage, be autifull and vertuous: So at the firſt, Fatherly embraced them both, and after that hée had welcommed them with a thouſand welcomes, hee ledde them both into his lodgings, purpoſing quicklie to ſolenmize the marriage in his Court: Which he did, and after warces li
                     •
                  erally beſtowed many preſentes vpon the Greekes and Hungarians, which came to accompany Meliſſa, who returned all verie well pleaſed from him towards King Friſoll their Soueraigne. But the Princeſſe Philocriſta was receaued with no leſſe ſumptuoſl
                     •
                  y by the King of France and all other

Dukes, Marqueſſes, Carles and Barrons, of that Kingdome, where they helde manye Iouſtes and Tournyes for her newe and ioyfull entrance: wherein purchaſed great honour Arnaſin Duke Tolomus Sonne; and Peynedin, hee who reſeued ſo brauelye the French Prince, when Leche
                        ••
                     
                   ſlewe the Hermite in combatting him, as you may yet verie well remember: Yet did hee nothing in compariſon of Tyrendos, who would néedes go along with this new married couple to conducte them into Gaule: For that falling there in loue with a verie faire and beautifull Princeſſe neere Coſen to Prince Aruedes, and ſhee likewiſe beeing ina
                     •••
                  
                  red of him, did meruallous thinges in Annes to get her further fauour: In ſomuch that the King, and the Prince his Sonne, perceauing their Loues, married them together ſoone after: and gaue them ſo great Treaſure for a dowrie, that the feaſte beeing ended, they returned all to Conſtantinople, feeling the liberalitie and bountie of the King of Fraunce.
               
               But to returne to the order of our Hiſtorie, the Emperour remayned almoſt alone by reaſon of the departure of the new married Princes, and of ſomany other Knights which did accompany them: Likewiſe the King of Theſſalie tooke his leaue of him, to the end to goe viſite a little his Kingdome, where Palmendos and Francheline were moſt Honourably receaued with great ſignes of ioy and gladneſſe. And the King liued three yeares there onelie after his returne: After whoſe death immediatelie was the Knight Palmendos Crowned: who by meanes of his valour and proweſſe 
                     〈…〉
                   greatly the conſines and demaynes of his Kingdome: waging continuall war againſt the Turkes, hauing conqueſt in manye battails, ſkirmiſhes and aſſaults of Citties.
               Like hoſtilitie receaued that nation by Belcar, who incontinent after the Tourney and all their Feaſtes were finiſhed in Conſtantinople, departed thence to returne to D
                        •
                     uace: where as ſoone as hee had ſolemnely celebrated his Nuptiais, hée ſet forth on foote a numerous and bloud

Hoſt to goe againſt theſe Infidels, and to reuenge himſelfe for faire Laurena.
               
               In like maner euery one of the other great Princes which came to Conſtantinople tooke their way homeward towards their Countries: Eſpecially King Friſol and the King of Sparta; and very willingly would the King Florendos haue returned into Macedon, had it not béene for the Emperour who be ſought him humbly, to tarry a little longer with him: Neuertheleſſe, many dayes were not come and gone, before the good old Prince found himſelfe caſt downe with a grieuous ſickenes, wherewith by reaſon hee was already drooping and decrepit he died within one month afterward. The Quéene Griana ſaing him abandoned by the Phiſitions, and out of all hope euer to recouer againe, fell alſo ſicke with the ſorrow and griefe ſhée tooke for him: And a maruelous thing it was, that theſe two both rendring their tribute vnto nature, left on one day this mortall and tranſitory life.
               The Emperour and the Empreſſe conceiued ſuch inwarde griefe and anguiſh at this occurrence, that thorough the continuall teares wherewith they bewayled them, or through the abundance of melancholicke humours which ſtufft their braines, they made account to goe kéepe them company in the other world: Yet for all that, afterward recomforting themſelues as well as they might, they cauſed them to be both buried in a rich and moſt ſtately Tombe, with great funerall Pompe and Ceremonies. And if this Court had a long time before continued in ſollace and gladnes, yet was it nowe as farre in mourning and griefe, after this death, without any token of ioy or myrth at all. So that Primaleon all this time of tribulation and heauy chears, gaue himſelfe to nothing but hunting & hauking, retayning many braue Knights with him who alwaies kept him company which way ſoeuer he went.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XV.
               
                  
                     How after that the Ducheſſe of Ormeda had knowledge of Perrequins death, her Daughter Gridonia made anoath neuer to marry with any man, if firſt he did not reuenge her vpon Primaleon of Greece: and for what occaſion the Caſtel of the Coc-fendu was builded, whereinto the old Ducheſſe with Gridonia retiring themſelues, how as they reſted themſelues hard by a faire Fountaine there iſſued out of a Forreſt a Lion, which put all their traine to ſlight, and the Princeſſes in great feare.
                  
               
               
                  
                     PErrequin being ſlaine, the greateſt parte of the Knightes who behelde him in this lamentable taking, being alwaies at his ſide, alighted ſtrait complaining greatly for his ſo great diſaſter: but knowing his life irreuocable, blamed him without any dread, who had ſeperated it from his body, the which they tooke vp and conuayed out of the field. And after long lamentation and ſhedding of many teares ouer it, they did moſt honourably bury it in an Abbey that ſtoode in the ſuburbes of the Citty.
               Soone after without any long ſo
                     •
                  ourning there, they embarqued themſelues againe, and ſet ſayle to the firſt Port of Ormeda, not daring to returne into Polland; ſo that the Ducheſſe and her Daughter had the firſt newes of this miſh
                     •
                  p: At the comming whereof, it were impoſſible to recount the ſorrow and wayling that they made; but eſpecially Gridonia who loued Perrequin with a moſt perfect lone: Bymeanes whereof ſhée vowed and ſware an oath in preſence of many, neuer to accept of any other man for her huſband, but him onely who ſhoulde giue her for an earneſt of her marriage Primaleons heade: And if ſhée and her mother made great mourning for the death of Perrequin their kinſman; it was nothing in reſpect of that of the King his father, and of all the

Kingdome of Polland, hauing knowledge of this miſchance.
               It fortuned that many Princes afterward ſending to the Ducheſſe to demaund Gridonia in marriage, when they vnderſtoode the conditions, they doubted greatly whether they might euer be able to accompliſh it or no: Albeit ſome ſurceaſed not for all that to proſecute their demaunde; menacing the Mother, that if ſhe would not giue them her Daughter with a good will, they would ere long take her away by force: And the principall who vſed theſe threatninges was the Prince of Clarence, a moſt prowd and arrogant knight. Inſomuch that the good Lady fearing left for this effect he wold come to make warre vpon her, ſent both her Daughter and the old Ducheſſe her Mother vnto one of her Caſtels called the Roc-fendu which the great Grandfather of Gridonia had cauſed to bee builded informe of a Fortreſſe for this occaſion.
               This auntient Duke had an elder ſiſter, who 
                     •
                  ell in loue with a yong man ſonne to the Steward of his houſe, a youth very beautifull and wiſe, and ſo exceſſiue was the paſſion of her loue, that ſhée was conſtrained to diſcouer vnto him the affection of her heart. The young gentleman who ſhewed not himſelfe ſlow to chace in this a mourous Parke, vanquiſhed with the beauty and prouocation of his Lady, loued her ſo extreamely, that to come to the paint, ſhee fell her belly to ſwell by his déede; wherein ſhee vſed ſuch cunning to couer the matter (after the example of the poore deceiued Nymph Caliſto, for feare ſhe had of the Goddeſſe Diana) that when her prefixed time was expired, ſhee was deliuered of a moſt faire daughter, none liuing beeing priuy thereof, except one wayting Gentlewomen, to whom ſhee did impart the ſecret, by whom this Princeſſe ſent away this Babe to the young Gentleman who was father thereof, who receiuing it as ſoone as it was brought, ſtrait waies went with it vp to the top of a litle mountaine not far from the Citty of Ormeda, whereful ſore againſt his will he was conſtraſited to committe it to the hands of Fortune, to anoyd the ſcandall and diſhonour which might haue come thereby.
               
                  
And to the ende this little Baby ſhould not be found out of any perſon, hee laide it downe a good way within a thicket of buſhes and brambles, néere vnto a cleare fountaine, whoſe water diſtilled from a high Rocke which ouerſhadowed it: But the true directour of all things would not permitte this innocent and immaculate creature dying without Baptiſme ſhould beare the ſinnes of her Parents, but ordained for it a ſweete meane of comfort as preſently you ſhall heare.
               At the toppe of the hill there dwelt an old Hermit leading a holy life in a little Cell which hee had built as well as hee might beſt for his purpoſe betwéene two open Rockes, ſeperated onely by one Cleft thorough the which day might eaſily be ſéene to appeare on both ſides, wherein it ſéemed nature had done her endeuour to cleaue them expreſſely with her owne hand.
               This holy man deſcending from his Cell (as his cuſtome was) to drawe water at the Fountaine, heard the crying and mone of one whom hee knewe full well not to bee horne long time before, and appreching the place where ſhée was laide, mooued with pitty, tooke her in his Armes, to carry her with him into his Hermitage, praying God of his goodnes to preſerue it from death: Afterward baptizing it, and giuing it to name Poncia, hee nouriſhed it with the milke of a Hind
                     •
                   which came euery day into his Caue, hauing by good fortune not long before that time fawned néere the place.
               So the good olde father brought her vp carefully, and ſhée growing dayly more and more became verie beautifull and gratious in the appearance of her perſon: In ſuch manner that the venerable Hermite inſtructed her verie well, teaching her about all thinges how ſhee ſhould ſerue and Honour God. And ſhe might be abought thirteene or fourteene yeares of age, when the bleſſed olde man departing this mortall life paſſed into life euerlaſting, and left behinde him this comfortleſſe 
                     •••
                  i
                     •
                  ng Hermiteſſe in the auſtere deſert: Neuertheleſſe 
                     ••
                   is vnfortunate little ſoule béeing ſage and well brought vp, 
                     ••
                  mmended her ſelfe deuoutly vnto God, that it would pleaſe

him to take her into his protection, which did not faile her of his pittifull 
                     〈◊〉
                   and ſuccour, neuer refuſed to any which craue it at his handes: for that the Duke her vnkle delighting much in hunting, vppon a day made a méeting at the roote of this mountaine: where it fortuned by chaunce that all the hunters diſpearſing themſelues in the woode to diſcouer ſome game, a fawne by the opening of ſome dogges béeing put vp, made way before the Duke (who at that time was accompanied but with one onely Squire) after which he gallopped his horſe, thinking to giue her a turne by the ſwiftnes of his horſe gallop. Notwithſtanding the feartfull fawne ſéeing it ſelfe purſued ſo nere, neuer ſtayed till it was at the Fountaine, where the Hermite was wont to fetch water: and there breathing a little, whipt preſently into the hole wherein Poncia was: for it was one of the Fawnes of the Hinde which had ſuckled her: and for ſomuch as it knew her well, and ſuffered her to handle i
                     •
                   gently, it did quickly alſo leape into her lappe with his two foreféet.
               The Duke who purſued it to the verie month of the caue, allght
                     ••
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   from his Horſe, and entred the caue with his naked ſword in hand
                     •
                  , wherewith Poncia was ſore afraſt
                     •
                   and diſmayed at ſo ſtrange a ſight: becauſe that ſince ſhee had any knowledge or remembrance, ſhée as yet had neuer ſéene anie other perſon in this world but the good Hermite now dead, hauing neuer in her life gone further abroad, than to the Fountaine which was at the Forreſt ſide. If the mayden were abaſhed, the Duke was no leſſe in a great maruelle, when putting vp his ſword into his ſcabberd hee thus beſpake her.
               For thy loue my Darling will I ſpare to kill this Hart which I haue taken ſo great paine to chace hither: But tell me of curteſie, who brought you hither into this deſer
                     •
                  ? but for that ſhe made him no anſwere, he approching ſomewhat néere, and taking her by her Lillie white handes, he held and handled them gentlie, knowing well by their faſhion, that the Ʋ
                  
                     •
                  rgin was came of ſome high and Noble blood: By meanes whereof fluding her a little ſtrange by reaſon of the feare

which might haue ſeaſed her hart, he beganne to ſhew her all turtelies hee could beſt deuiſe: ſo that after a little the young Hermiteſſe emboldened hir ſelfe to aunſwere him in this ſort.
               Faire Lord I cannot tell what hath mooued you to come in to this place to affright, and to put almoſt out of her witte & poore creature dedicated to the ſeruice of God: ſeeing that you ſéeme to me a man of a farre diuerſe and ſtrange manner than was my Father who lieth a ſléeps behinde this Alter, & is ſhe only perſon of this world, that I euer ſawe in my life vntill this preſent houre.
               I cannot tell who engendred thée quoth the Duke, well I can aſſure thée that thy beautie hath ſo rauiſhed my heart, that I account it a moſt happie hower wherein I haue purſued thy little Fawne hither: and knowe that I am Lorde of all this Countrie, who deſtre to doe thée ſome great good: if thou canſt reſolue to credit me in the thinge which I ſhall tell this: ſéeing it hath pleaſed God replied Poncia to guide me into this Hermitage, I beſéech you permit not that any wrong bee 
                     ••
                  ered to mine honour: Feare not daughter ſaid the Duke, but you ſhall be greatly loued and tendred of me.
               The God of heauen graunt if quoth the yong Nunne, that it may be according to the decrée of his diuine pleaſure: The grace this Mayden had in her honeſt tattle, pearced ſo deepe in to the heart of the Duke, that what by promiſe, by flattery, or otherwiſe, before an houre was paſt hee appeaſed the firſte of his paſſion, making her of a mayden dedicated to Pallas, a wiſe ready to offer the Seſton or Girdle to Venus, to preſent him her ſeruice, whereof he was the gladdeſt man that might bee: Neuertheleſſe well bethinking with himſelfe afterwards what was beſt for him to do, (for that he was alreadie married) purpoſed to build in the ſame place a ſtronge and invi
                     •
                  ſible Caſtell, there to kéepe her within it, with all the pleaſure and contentment that her heart might deſire: For this cauſe hee ſent word by his Squier to ſhe Hunters, who ch
                     •
                  
                  ced in the wood, that they ſhould euery man 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
Cittie: And hauing ſhewed to him the Hermits Daughter, and afterwardes making him vnderſtand his determination: commaunded him to cauſe his Architect to come thither with a number of Artificers to builde a Fortreſſe in that ſame place: Whereunto hys Squire gaue preſent order, and returned with many rich robes for the young Damſell into the Cell: wherein none euer entred but himſelfe alone, all the reſt remayning vnder Tentes which hee had pitched before that ſame place. From which the Duke would neuer depart, vntill hee ſaw the Caſtell finiſhed, which hee had cauſed to bee builded vppon that clo
                     •••
                   Rock, whereof it bore the name continuallie afterwardes, 
                     •
                  nd was one of the ſtrongeſt and fayreſt in all that Countrie, for the Sea invironed it on the one ſide, and on the other ſide was a moſt ſteepe and in acceſſible Rocke, except onelie on that ſide where the fountaine was.
               Therein did the Duke encloſe his Loue Poncia, the which when her time was come, ſhee brought him foorth a verie faire and goodlie Sonne, who was afterwardes Grandfather of Nardides, Father of Gridonia & of the 
                     〈◊〉
                   Knightes whome the Emperour and King Friſoll ſhewe in a Combat which they had together: But theſe Loue trickes could not ſo well bee concealed, but the Ducheſſe had intelligence therof: who ſéeing herſelfe ſo much contemned by her Huſbande, 
                     〈◊〉
                   for griefe and rage: Whereuppon it fell out that for the intire loue which the Duke hare to the Childe which hee had by Poucia, hee eſpouſed her afterward in ſecond Marriage, liuing together in great pleaſure and ioy, vntill the verie end of his dayes when hee knowe that ſhee was his owne Néece.
               Now in this Caſtell retired Gridonia with the olde Ducheſſe, for feare ſhee had of the Prince of Clorence, and arrining at the Fountaine (for that it was both 
                     ••
                  pleaſant and a delightfull place) ſhe would haue 
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  ne gone 
                     〈◊〉
                   to 
                     ••
                  to refreſh her ſelfe: But ſhe was not ſo ſoone ſet downe vppon the br
                     •
                  nke of it, but the remembrance of hir dead 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  Per
                        ••
                     quin
                  
comming in her thoughts, renewed in her a pittifull and lamentable be wailing of his death, for that fortune fauoured ſo much the Emperour Palmenn, who ſlew firſt the Duke Nardides her Father, and Primaleon afterwards this her Coſen, with whome ſhee hoped to paſſe ioyfully the reſt of her life: Meane while ſhe made theſe ſtrange complaints, which might prouoke almoſt the vnreaſonable and inſenſible creatures to compaſſion, behold there ruſheth out of the wood a huge and furious Lyonrozing ſo terrible, that all the company of gentle women beeing wonderfull ſcarred, euery one got away as well as they could: leauing with her only the good old Ducheſſe who was not able to runne away as the others did. Wee néed not in the queſtion how great might be the feare of a ſimple and timerous Damoſell, as of Gridonia, who ſuppoſed vndoubtedly that to be the laſt houre of her life. Yet perceauing this Lyon to come right vppon her, ſhee ſoone perceaued the contearie: for that hee began to fawne vpon her with his pawes, and to play with his taſte, as though hee had béene familiarly brought vp with her all his life. In ſuch ſort that h
                     •
                  e put his head into her lappe, and beginning gently to licke her handes, made her as much amazed, as if ſhee had ſéene before her eyes ſome new and ſtrange wonder: Wherefore by little and little aſſuring her ſelfe of the tameneſſe of this brute beaſt, ſhee ſtroked her hand vppon his head, flattering him in moſt gentle and gratious manner: wherein the Lyon ſéemed to haue ſo great pleaſure, that Gridonia and her 
                     〈◊〉
                   ther putting away all feare, called to them againe their company, which was diſperſed in the Forreſt. And if ſome of them came backe greatly aſhamed 
                     •
                  o haue thus abandoned 
                     •
                  he two Ladies in their greateſt neceſſitie, yet ſhe was more ioyfull to ſée this beaſt ſo louing and 
                     〈◊〉
                  , meruayling much that a Lyon by nature cruell and humane, ſhould be made ſo 
                     〈…〉
                   and gentle before Ladies: to whom nor to any of their Dam
                     •
                  
                  ſels and waiting gentle women hee neuer ſhewed him ſelfe 
                     •
                  urious nor angry: but vnto all Knights who did approche the Intent, and vnto others whome 
                     ••
                   knew not, he did 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
ſome diſpleaſure, either hee ſcratcht them with his pawes, or 
                     〈◊〉
                   them outright. Glad then without all compariſon was Gridonia of this good fortune, and lead this Lion with her into her Caſtell where hee woulde neuer forſake the ſight of her: In ſuch ſort that ſhée ſtill
                     •
                  ed him with her owne hande, and from thence forward hee was a ſure Gardean of her perſon, being very t
                     ••
                  me, quiet and familiar with all the ſeruants of her houſe, euen as it had béene ſome little Dogge, which ſéemed a moſt rare and ſtrange caſe to all thoſe in the Countries round about which had knowledge thereof.
            
            
               CHAP. XVI.
               
                  
                     How Valido the King of Bohemiaes ſonne, hearing the renowne of Gridoniaes beauty, came to ſee her in the Caſtell of the Clouen-Rocke, and howe hoping to haue her in marriage, hee went to Combat with Primaleon in Constantinople, where he was by his hands ſlaine outright.
                  
               
               
                  FAire Gridonia then being within her Caſtell of the Clouen-Rocke, the Ducheſſe her Mother who remained at Ormeda, for the gouernement and adminiſtration of Iuſtice in her Countries, had euery day meſſengers ſent from diuers Princes which did demaund her in marriage; as well for her ſuperexcellent beauty and good grace, as for that they hoped ſhe ſhould one day inherite the Kingdome of Polonia, becauſe of her mother the Kings ſiſter, who neuer had any Children but Perrequin whome Primaleon 
                  
                     •
                  lewe in his Tourney: yet when they vnderſtoode with what condition they ſhould marry this Princeſſe, euery one did furceaſe to make any more earneſt ſute, fearing the perrill of death which might en
                     ••
                  e.
               But the King of Bohemia, the ſame who tooke Diartes and Cardonia, whome the Emperour deliuered afterwardes (as you may haue read in his Hiſtorie) had two male children, the

youngeſt whereof named Valido, who was a valiant and hardy Knight, bearing the renown ſpread abroad of the great beauty of Gridonia departed his fathers kingdome, accompanied with many braue Knights to take his voiage towards Ormeda: Where being arriued, hee was honourably receiued by the Ducheſſe, vnto whom after hee had a little refreſhed himſelfe and his traine, hée thus imparted at large his minde.
               Madame, to the ende you ſhould not bee ignorant of the chiefeſt cauſe of my comming into this Country, knowe yée that I being prouoked with an incredible deſire to doo you ſeruice, am departed the Kingdome of Bohemia (the proper place of my natiuity) where the King my father happily ſwayeth the Scepter at this preſent day: and this vpon confidence, that you ſhall know the ſincere affection which I haue to obey you in all things, you will not refuſe to accept me fréely for your ſonne in Law. And albeit, that I doo not repute my ſelfe at this preſent very rich in earthly riches, hauing as yet my father liuing, yet may I well vaunt to bee in bart and good will to ſerue and defende you from your enemies, a man more forward than any other Prince of Europe: For this occaſion I pray you graunt mee in marriage your Daughter Gridonia, whome I ſhall bée able to vpholde in her honours better than any other Knight that at this day liueth.
               Faire Knight replyed then the Ducheſſe, to giue you my Daughter to wife could I well be content, if by any meanes it might bée, knowing very well the illuſtrious bloude from whence you deſcende: Notwithſtanding ſhée hath ſworne neuer to marry with any but with him, who for the Iewels of her marriage, ſhall firſt preſent her with the head of Primaleon of Greece, ſonne to the Conſtantino Politane Emperour.
               This is no ſmall demaund quoth the Knight againe, albeit when I ſhoulde haue ſome iuſt and reaſonable occaſion, I would embolden my ſelfe ſo farre, as to dare to goe to de
                     •••
                   him at his owne home to effect the ſame. I will tell you

occaſion good ynough, ſaid the Lady then; you ſhoulde knowe that in a Tourney which he cauſed to be publiſhed at the Nuptials of his ſiſter Philocriſta, hee gaue ſafe conduct to all commers, when for all that he ſlew felloniouſly (as if it had béene in a mortall Combate fought at all deſtance) Perrequin of Duas, ſonne to the King of Polland my Brother, who entred the Liſts onely to the ende to aſſay himſelfe againſt him: So that by good reaſon you may vppon this death accuſe him of fellony and diſloyalty.
               Madame anſwered hée, that is not ſufficient to vrge this euill act vpon him, becauſe the Knight who entereth into a Tourney is as the man that playeth at Dice, who before hée ſit himſelfe downe to play, muſt make account that hée may ſometimes looſe and ſometimes winne: Euen ſo the true Knight ſhould appeare within the Liſts in hazard to leaue his life there behinde him, as ſoone as to bring it away with him againe.
               Notwithſtanding, ſéeing that I haue no better occaſion, I will combat him, alleadging that hée ſlew him in anger and mallice which prouoked him thereunto: Whereuppon I doo aſſure thy ſelfe that hee truſting in Proweſſe and reputation, will anſwere me arrogantly, and prouoke mee with ſome iniurious wordes which will giue mee more apparent reaſon to combat him.
               And to the ende that you ſhoulde knowe I ſpeake nothing with my mouth which my heart forethinketh not; I promiſe to depart incontinently hence, and to take my voyage to Conſtantinople, where if I dye in the battell, it ſhall be for me a perpetuall honour and praiſe, to dye for ſo perfect a Lady as Gridonia is; and if I chaunce to vanquiſh mine enemy I ſhal purchaſe the moſt exquiſite and rare treaſure that Nature might preſent me on this earth. True it is Madame, that I would greatly deſire that it would pleaſe you of curteſie to let me ſée the Princeſſe your Daughter before my departure, for that hauing once imprinted her liuely beauty within my hart, ſhée ſhall double augment my force and courage.
               
                  
That will I not refuſe you ſaid the Ducheſſe, but I accorde it vnto you with all my hart, yet not without aduertiſing you before hand, that you ſhal put your ſelfe in great perrill of your life, by reaſon of a Lyon which gardeth her continuallie: the which wareth fierce and cruell ſo ſoone as hee per
                     ••
                  aneth anie Knights come neare my Daughter.
               For all that will not I let to go ſee anſwered then Valido, hoping I ſhall well enough defend my ſelfe if the beaſt come to aſſaile me. Hauing then taken this reſolution, the Ducheſſe ſent with him, one of the Gentlemen of her houſe, with expreſſe commandement not to ſuffer any other to enter within the Caſtell but this Knight onely: where when hee came afterwards, and that Gridonia knew that it was the King of Bohemiaes Sonne, who would go to combat Primaleon for her Loue, ſhe commaunded to bring him vp into her chamber. Which the Prince vnderſtanding, hee tooke brauely his buckler in one hand, & his naked ſword in the other, then entred 
                     ••
                   without any feare like a hartie and valiant Champion: But the Lyon ſéeing him approch in this equipage, began
                     ••
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   and narre, lifting vp his head furiouſly out of the Damoſels lappe, where he was wont for the moſt part to repoſe it. Neuertheleſſe ſhe held him backe by great force, by a leaſe made of gold-twiſt which held by a rich coller buckled to his necke: & for that Gridonia was not ſtrong inough to ſtay him, Valido came full vppon him with his brandiſhed ſword to ſtrike hym, but ſhe cried vnto him that he ſhould not doe it except he wold die: and that he ſhould depart onely out of the Chamber, and they would finde meanes to ſpeake together.
               The Bohemian did doe ſo much willinglie, and much 
                     •
                   doo had the Inſant to kéepe her Lyon foom running after him: yet by ſtroaking and making much of him, ſhée ſhut him 
                     ••
                   within a great Chamber, wherein ſéeing himſelfe thus impriſoned, he began to roare in ſo ſtrange manner, that hee made all thoſe who heard him fore afraid: Whereat Gridonia was ſo vered, that going out of her Chamber to ſpeake with the Knight, ſhée ſpake but thus much.
               
                  
Fayre Knight my miſhap and diſaſter will not permit mee at this preſent to haue any long talke with you: therefore I beſéech the Almightie ſo to ſtrengthen your Arme againſt Primaleon, that you may make him pay dearely for his treaſon: wherein I remayning ſatiſfied, ſhall repute my ſelfe a moſt Fortunate woman to bee reuenged by meanes of the beſt knight, who euer put foote in ſtirrop.
               So much aſtoniſhed and raniſhed with her great beautie was Valido, that hardly could be anſwere one only word: neuer fearing to be accounted lumpiſh and of ſmall diſcretion, he hazar
                     ••
                  d to breake ſilence in this manner: Madame ſore ſhuld the heauens puniſh mee, and Fortune ſhould ſhew hir ſelfe too too mutinous againſt mee, if ſéeing ſo rare and perfect a Paragon as is your perſonage, I ſhould not employ my body and ſoule to their vtter moſt
                     •
                  , to reuenge you of the wrongs which are offered you: for that hee ſhould be very blinde and deuoide of naturall reaſon, who hauing once ſéene your ſelfe, if he ſhuld not iudge you vnworthie of aduerſitie, and for ſomuch as you cannot ſtay heere any while, taking my leaue of you, I will now preſently depart, 
                     •
                  oying neuer to reſt quietly in my bed vntill I haue brought this myne enterpriſe to a good paſſe.
               God be your guide and conduct replied Gridonia, and ſo well direct your actions, that you may obtaine a triumphant victorie ouer your enemie: to the ende hee may haue no more occaſion to redouble the anguiſh wich he hath ſo liuely imprinted in my ſoule. And vpon this point giuing him the laſt adieu, ſhee retired ſtraite to her Lyon whome ſhee could not abide to heare him make ſuch terrible roaring: which ſéemed to euery one to ſignifie ſome great 
                     〈◊〉
                  . Likewiſe Valido returned to the Ducheſſe very penſiue and doubtfull to obtaine for his wife ſo beautifull a Damoſell: in ſomuch that licencing al the Knights who accompained him vnto this place to depart, he tooke along with him but two onely; the one béeing ſonne to the Earle Marco (the ſame whom the Emperour Palmerin ſlew, becauſe he accuſed Diartes and Cardonia of treaſon) to reuenge himſelfe of the Emperour pricked forward Valido
                  
very much to purſue his pointe, & the other who was Diartes Sonne, would willingly haue hindred him: for that it angred him to the verie death, that in his company ſhould be any ambuſh plotted againſt the Emperour: in ſuch ſorte that the Prince of Bohemia went accompanied with two perſons contrarying one another in deſire, wherof he knew nothing.
               Afterwardes imbarking himſelfe hee had ſo proſperous & gale, that within few dayes hee came to ſurge within the hauen of Conſtantinople, where hee diſembarked, being weſt appointed with his two Knights both diſarmed: and beeing arriued before the Pallace, hee ſent the Emperour worde hee was a Knight who required ſafe conduct into his Court, becauſe he came thither to defie his Sonne vpon a treaſon which he had committed: who beeing aduertized thereof, meruayled greatly that any man would be ſo hardie to come to accuſe him of that whereof he neuer thought, much leſſe euer put in effect: eſpecially beeing an act of a Traytour, which was the vice he euer had in greateſt deteſtation.
               But the Emperour as he was ſage and well aduiſed, imagined incontinent that it proceeded but of the death of Perrequin, for the which he was ſo ſorrowfull a man; by meanes whereof he thus ſchooled Primaleon.
               
               My Sonne, let vs conſider the different whereuppon this Knight purpoſeth to accuſe you, wherein for ought he can ſay vnto you, anſwere him not arrogantly, nor with the leaſt iniurious word: For ſo much there is nothing more in beſ
                     •
                  eming Princes and Knights deſcended of noble houſes, than to vſe diſcurteous and vile ſpéeches. Hearken what hee ſhall ſay vnto you, and anſwere him honeſtly, alleadging what you ſhall beſt thinke méete for the iuſtifying of your innocencye: For oftentimes the proude language giueth occaſion of incouragement to the aduerſarie; & in battaile the beſt Champions are knowne to be vanquiſhers in déedes, and not contenders in wordes.
               Therein my Lord and Father anſwered Primaleon, and in whatſoeuer as it ſhall pleaſe you to commaund me will I neuer

whilſt I liue diſobay your will. At this inſtant Valido entring the great Chamber, bowed not himſelfe towards ſhe Emperour, ſo much felt her him ſelfe troubled and perplexed with this Battaile: but looking rounde about him a prettye while (after hee had a little cooled his choller) hee drewe néere vnto the throut where the Emperour ſate, making vnto him this ſpeech.
               All ouer the globe of the earth, is your generous conrage Noble Emperour of Conſtantinople, well knowne & made famous, ſince the time when as a wandring Knight you paſſed like a pilgrime ouer the greatiſt part thereof, ſeeking ne
                     •
                  s of your Father, whome anyed you know not: And ſince you haue beene placed in this honour and highnes of eſtate, no man can ſay you haue done the leaſt iniuſt ſet to great, ſmall, or meane: which thing I foreſeeing on mine owne behalfe, I haue 
                     〈…〉
                   as to come 
                     〈…〉
                   to domain
                     •
                  d a Combat, hoping for good or badde which may befall mee, I ſhall haue no wrong offered mee herein.
               So 
                     〈◊〉
                   I ſay, for that I come to complaine of Primaleon your Sonne, touching the death of Perrequin of Duas whome hee new in Tourney, wherein hee would néeded be & preſent to honour the more 
                     〈◊〉
                   feaſt of 
                     〈◊〉
                   Children: truſting hee will not 
                     •
                  enie but that vpon the aſſurance which her gaue to euerie one, hee hath maſſacred him verie trecherouſlie: And you Primaleon 
                  
                     •
                  f you heare this, I knowe not what excuſe you may alleadge againſt mee, who doth auouch it to your ſate that it was done in Treaſon againſt him.
               
                  Primaleon who gaue attentiue cure to theſe iniurious ſpéeches, roſe vppe with manye other Knights and Barrons aunſwering him thus: Good Syr, it 
                     〈◊〉
                   you are verie ill aduiſed to come to ſeeke his riuenge, who following this fatall and vnluckie deſtriue, 
                     ••
                  ded hys 
                     ••
                  yes in a Tourney: wherein I doe not dertie but that I flewe him with my Sword vppon the like aſſuraunce no you doe name at thi
                     •
                   preſence, becauſe of 
                     ••
                   diſloyality:

For during the ſpace of thrée monthes together, I could neuer get me ridde of him, but ſtill I found him before mee or behind me at my backe, with full intention to haue 
                     ••
                  aine mee by his owne handes: But God the onely ſearcher of hearts, who knew well his diſloyall malice, fauoured mee ſo much that I preuented him before the execution of his trecher
                     •••
                   deſſein, giuing him that meaſure which hee would hau
                     •
                   offered vnto me. Notwithſtanding if you haue ſo hot a deſire to combat mee vppon this point as you make ſemblant, behold I am readie to enter the Liſtes when it ſhall pleaſe you, to the end I may by my beſt endeuour ſhewe to all the worlde that the quarrell is falſe, and wrongfullie vndertake
                     •
                   on your behalfe.
               This contenteth me wonderfull well replyed Valido to ſée you not to refuſe the combat, which ſhall bee a ſufficient witnes before all, that the truth is ſuch as your conſcien
                     •
                  e 
                     〈◊〉
                   well tell.
               Then Primaleon fell on his knées before the Emperour, demaunding leaue of him to enter the Combat for this effect: and afterwardes in token that he accepted the Combat, he
                     •
                   preſented him a gloue which hee tooke at his handes very ſor
                     •
                   againſt his will, béeing ignorant which of the two had the better right on his ſide: for if hee had perceaued the leaſt ſmoke of the peruerſ
                     •
                   and malicious intent of Perrequin, hee would neuer haue miſtruſted that his Sonne ſhoulde bee 
                     •
                  anquiſhed. Which the Bohemian Prince ſeeing (to ſhewe hee was verie gl
                     •
                  d of this acceptation) did reach vnto him one of the lappe
                     •
                   of his Harneſſe, which the Emperour tooke alſo: Deputing preſently the Dukes P
                        •
                     holomey and 
                     
                        •
                     uſtace for Iudges and Marſhals of the field: to the end they ſhould with all equity maintayne the right of bold the Combatants.
               Theſe Dukes who ſtirred not from the Emperours Court; to obey their Maſters commandement, con
                     •
                  ucted Valido incontinently within the Barriers where they en
                     •
                  ampe
                     •
                   themſelues on 
                     •
                  oe one ſide, meane while Primaleon Armed himſelfe: who for that hee was of a middle ſtature, but

otherwiſe very well proportioned in hi
                     •
                   members, did mannage himſelfe with a woonderfull dexteritye both on foot
                     •
                   and on horſe back; and ſoone had his Armourers ſitted him carefully in all peeces, ſo that he came lightly to preſent himſelfe before his father, who ſpake vnto him in this manner: My ſonne, I pray God aboue to preſerue you from death in this conflict, and to manifeſt thereby, that you are not 
                     ••
                  lpable of this miſchiefe which they lay to your charge.
               Sir (quoth he) I can well aſſure you, that what I did, was done but with great reaſon, knowing before that h
                     ••
                   ſought nothing more than to haue 
                     〈…〉
                   for this cauſe I hope, bée who knoweth that I procéeded not with any 
                     •••
                  litions intent wil exempt me from death, if he 
                     ••
                  e that my life 
                     •
                  e as yet neceſſary.
               Hauing ended theſe ſpéeches, hee kiſſed his handes, which embraced him quickly, then mounting on horſe backe, he tooke his way towardes the Barriers, accompanied with many other Seigneurs an foot
                     •
                  : And in the meane while Valido who felt his heart boyle in a vehement heate to finiſh victoriouſly this enterpriſe, calling to 
                     〈◊〉
                   the beauty of Gridonia, ſaid; that a finall time ſhoulde his enemy ſtande before him: Who after place was made by the M
                     •
                  r
                     •••
                  , within the running place came with a fury. his Launce couched in reſt vpon the Bohemian, who vaſting his Launce in like manner, brake it to the handle without euer mouing the Conſtantino Poli
                     
                        •
                     ane out of his ſaddle: where alſo this Aſſailant loſt his ſtirr
                     •
                  ps at the attaint of his, and was alſo a little hu
                     •
                  t in the right ſide. Neuertheleſſe, beeing an 
                     〈◊〉
                   and a ſkkill all Knight in Armes, hee ſeated himſelfe quickly againe in his ſaddle, and began fiercely to ſay vppon Primaleon, with his ſword, but he who exceeded him farre in Proweſſe and dexterity, b
                     •
                  eing aſhamed hee had not at the firſt encounter made him kiſſe the ground, beganne to hewe him with ſuch fell and heauy blowes, that with
                     •
                  . a while euery one perceiued who beare beare away the victory. And he himſelfe knowing that his enemy (who loſt his bloud by great drops) waxed féeble

in ſight of euery one, deliuered him ſuch a mighty backe ſtroake vpon his Morton, that he clo
                     •••
                  e a two both his heade and heade peece downe to his ſhoulders, in ſuch manner that preſently falling vnder his horſe feete; Primaleon ſpake theſe words alowd: ſee what you are come ſo farre to ſeeke: then making cleane his ſworde, hee put it vp into his 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and the Iudges put him forth of the L
                     •
                  ſts with greatioy.
               Of this victory was the Emperour and all the other Lords of the Court maruelous ioyfull, ſéeing ſo 
                     •••
                  dently the verity of this falſe accuſation: By meanes whereof, cauſing Primaleon to bee diſarmed, and afterwardes dreſſed of ſome wounds which he had receiued of his aduerſary, communded the vanquiſhed Knight to bee fetcht out of the Barriers, and to be honourably enterred.
               But the two Gentlemen who came in his company, made a maruelous lamentation for his death eſpecially the ſonne of the Earle Marcus, who in bewailing him vtter
                     •••
                   ſtronge things; ſo that by this meanes the Emperour knowing who Valido was, ſent for the Knights ſaying thus; A merualle very much howe the King of Bohemia, whom I holde for my friend, hath permitted that his 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſhould 
                     〈…〉
                   my Com
                     •
                   to d
                     ••
                   here an exploy
                     •
                  e, whoſe ſorrowfull 
                     〈…〉
                   greatly grieued me, which if I had fore ſeene it, and 
                     〈…〉
                   him as now I doo, to be the accuſer of my ſonne, I ſhould by no meanes haue graunted him this combat, as you may well aſſure him from me.
               Syr (anſwered then the ſonne of Diartes) willingly will I obay your commandement, euen as I deſir
                     •
                   alſo to 
                     〈…〉
                   you my beſt ſeruice; wherein when you ſhall know my 
                     〈◊〉
                  , you will not ſay that I came hither of mine owne accorde with Valido, but full ſore againſt my will, and as not knowing to the King my Maſter my thing of his 
                     〈…〉
                   caſe.
               When the Emperour vnderſtoode that this Knight was Diartes ſonne, hee made him many kinde offers, tha
                     •
                  king him for the good will he bare him.
               
                  
And then the ſonne of the 
                     •
                  arle Marcus (
                     〈…〉
                   with extreame 
                     〈◊〉
                   to the gall): could not forbo
                     •
                  ye to ſpeake thus much.
               Emperour of Greece, 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   hath bée
                     ••
                   to you: 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  uourable, ſince you 
                     〈…〉
                   which I cannot beare 
                     〈…〉
                   to ſée my ſelfe reuenged for his death.
               Hee had no ſooner ſpoken the
                     •
                  t words, but for his beſt aduantage he quickly 
                     〈…〉
                   of the Pallace, becauſe that many ſetting 
                     〈…〉
                   him by the 
                     •
                  ares, 
                     •
                  ad not the 
                     〈…〉
                   them not to ſtirre after him, but to let him goe whether hee thought good; which was ſtrait to the 
                     〈◊〉
                   with his communion: where embarking in Validoes ſhippe they reformed into Bohemia, to tell the King the ſorrowfull newes of his ſon
                     •
                  e: Wherevppon hee conceiued great 
                     〈…〉
                   her for the principall occaſion of this his death, for the which miſchance ſhée was no leſſe ſorrowfull than he could be for his life.
            
            
               CHAP. XVII.
               
                  
                     Howe Lurcon a Giant ſonne to 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           , whome the Emperour ſte
                           •
                        e in 
                           〈◊〉
                         the Damoſell Eſm
                              •
                           rinda, came to defie Primaleon vppon the ſame quarrell as 
                           Ʋalido had done before and what ſucceſſe befell vnto him after his defiance.
                  
               
               
                  IN Romanie was there long ſince a Giant named Lurcon, whome the Emperour 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   ſlowe to deliuer the Damoſell 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , as you may ſometime haue read in the beginning of this Hiſtory. This Lurcon being eſteemed a very braue Knight, was not miſhapen 
                     〈…〉
                   ſo inhumane

and ſauage as the other Giants, but a man very actiue 
                     〈◊〉
                   amongſt his friendes: and euen when the Nurſe carried him in her Armes who had giuen him ſucke euer ſince his fathers death: after the which, hee recouered by force of Armes the Caſtels which they kept from him in his minorly 
                     •
                  y, and vowed neuer to marry before he had reuenged ſo great wrong offered him: So he began to make ſo cruell warre vppon Criſpin the huſ bande of Eſmerinda, that hee kept him at home within doores from walking to far abroade in the fields: and now her entred into the eighth yeare of his Knighthoode, when Pertequin died ſéeking to accompliſh, his promiſe to Gridonia.
               
               Of whom on a day hauing vnderſtoode the diſcourſe, imagined preſently with himſelfe, none could 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  Primaleon about better than hee, nor ſooner enioy the Lady, ſo that reioyſing greatly in himſelfe vpon this concluſion, hee cared not at all to goe to ſée the Ducheſſe nor her Daughter, hopingth haue her to wiſe by force or frée will.
               Whereupon hee embarked himſelfe in a Frigot, rigged with all neceſſaries to voyage into Conſtantinople; where being arriued in ſafety, hee ſent away a Squier to the Emperour to demaund a ſafe conduct for him to come into his Court to combat with Primaleon; which if he ſhould refuſe him, hée would make his vaunts abroad, howe hee durſt not graunt it for feare he had of him.
               When the Emperour heard the Gentleman talke in this manner, he began to be very angry, iudging preſently that he came to continue the accuſation which Valido began; therefore he anſwered him thus.
               Tell your Maſter againe from me, that when I ſhall grant him the aſſurance which he demaundeth at my handes, it ſhall hee but to chaſtlye him for his prowde and arrogant ſpéeches, which are more vſed in Giants mouthes, than in any other perſons; being often cauſe they worke their owne ruine, and confuſion therein.
               Then ſpake diuers Barrons who were there preſent, Sir,

vnder reuerence of your Maieſty, 
                     〈…〉
                   vnto vs that this 
                     〈◊〉
                   by no meanes to bee 
                     〈…〉
                  , ſay ſo 
                     〈◊〉
                   in that of the Bohemian Prince all the words 
                     〈◊〉
                   manifeſtly the truth of the matter from the falſe and 
                     〈…〉
                   which he preſented 
                     〈…〉
                   of Perriquin: So that you ſhoulde rather 
                     〈…〉
                   of Lurcon, than to accord him any 
                     〈…〉
                   appearance of truth.
               In the meane 
                     〈◊〉
                   whilſt this was bruied through the Court, Primaleon returned from 
                     〈◊〉
                  , who woondre
                     •
                   greatly to heare ſuch a marmuring ſtirre: whereof when he heard the occaſion hee waxed a little angrie, as euery one might 
                     〈◊〉
                   by theſe wordes which 
                     〈…〉
                   to his Father.
               I woonder 
                     〈…〉
                   that you 
                     〈…〉
                   who hath 
                     〈…〉
                  , you wil cleane 
                     〈…〉
                   opinion of your Knights, who ſéeme to haue feare of a beaſt beeing an enemie to God: wherein I beſeech you of your eſpeciall ſauour, that you will ſuffer rather your Sonne to dye, than ſhe leaſt act of cowardize ſhould bee reproched and 
                     〈◊〉
                   vnto 
                     〈◊〉
                  : Giue 
                     〈…〉
                   permiſſion to haue Combat with mee, and to all thoſe hereafter who ſhall came to 
                     〈◊〉
                   mee vppon 
                     〈…〉
                   will 
                     〈…〉
                   as him who neuer thought to him offended 
                     〈…〉
                   will.
               The Emperour 
                     〈…〉
                   and that 
                     〈…〉
                  .
               
                  
                     〈1 paragraph〉
                  .

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
               
               
                  
Which when the Giant vnderſtande, becauſe it was alreadie late, would in no wiſe that Euening goe a ſhort, but beeing made priuſe of all that which hapned in the Pallace vpon this ſodaine, did but laugh and make a ſcotte thereat: ſaying that if Primalcon did ſhew himſelfe hardie and of great courage, if would ſtand him in good ſtéede on the more 
                     〈◊〉
                   before the conflict was ended; ſo that to prouoke him the more, and to the end he ſhould not ſaile to enter the field with him, hee ſent his Squier backe incontinent with a letter of deſtance which be wrote with great expedition to this effect.
               
                  
                     
                        A Letter of Defiance vvritten by the Giant Lurcon, to Primalcon of Greece.
                     
                     
                        TO thée Primalcon of Grecce, the moſt ſooliſh and cowardly defender of Cournyes, the Giant Lurcon Sonne to Dermaquus, who will eternize his renowne by thy death ſendeth this deſtance: for ſo much as the 
                           〈◊〉
                         hauing fauoured thée ſo much, as to make thée he borne of Noble and Royal blood, thou haſt ſtayned that famous marks of nature, beſide all the reputation which thou maieſt her 
                           •
                        aſter 
                           〈◊〉
                         in military diſcipline, beginning thy 
                           ••
                        ertiſe by a moſt abſurd diſhonour able and villanous murder. I meane by the death of the gentle Knight Porrequin of D
                              ••
                           s, Son to the 
                           〈…〉
                         king of Poland, whom thou 
                           ••
                        e weſt felloniouſly in the Turney which then heldeſt at the marriage of thy ſiſter, where he would faine be preſent the more to honour her 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        
myſelfe thou ſhalt not dare to denie (to confeſſe manifeſtly the 
                           •
                        reaſon) but that thou haſt ſhamefullie and 
                           〈…〉
                         maſſacred him vnder the pretence of the aſſuraunce which thou gaueſt to all commers: Wherein I know not what excuſe thou mayeſt pretend, except it be a ſp
                           •
                        die and liberall offer to giue in recompence and ſatiſfaction of his life the dead of him who hath committed ſo diſloyall an ouerſight: The which I am now come to fetch, to offer it vp vnto her who remendeth vengeaunce therefore: aduiſing thee that when with thy good wil thou wouldeſt not conſent to ſo iuſt and reaſonable a thing. I hope to conſtraine thée by force of Armes if thou haſt ſo much courage as to enter the cloſe field with me, there to trie it out by ſingle combat.
                  
               
               So ſoone as this Deſtance was quickly read ouer by Primaleon, hee returned to the Squire who brought the 
                     〈◊〉
                  , whome verie 
                     •
                  ough
                     •••
                   and in great choller hee a
                     •
                  nſwered, that if it had not beene ſo late, hee woulde verie willing hir haue Combatted his Maſter that 
                     •
                  ight without any longer attendaunce: Wherevppon the Emperour his Father gaue him aduiſe by 
                     〈…〉
                   reaſons, that though are not to bee done vppon a hotte ſpurre: 
                     〈…〉
                   ſhould bee the beſt way to ſee a little what the Giant woulde ſay further.
               But the Empreſſe and her Daughters beeing troubled without meaſure by the remembrance thereof, could not all that night once cloſe their eyes to take a little 
                     〈◊〉
                  : And 
                     ••
                   leſſe was the inconuenient of the 
                     〈…〉
                   which did importunately 
                     〈◊〉
                   and trouble the Emperours ſpirke, quite contrarie to Primaleons, who for all that did not forbeare his ſlépe neuer a whitte the more, but tooke his reſt well enough as her that before 
                     〈…〉
                   Annin
                     •
                   himſelfe verie ſtrongly 
                     〈…〉
                   the 
                     〈…〉
                   morning, beeing as merrie and 
                     〈◊〉
                  , not if he
                     •
                   ſhould haue gone but to 
                     〈…〉
                   for ſhe 
                     〈…〉
                   of ſoone amiable Ladie.
               
                  
But the Giant aſſoone as the day appeared went a ſho
                     •
                  re, and mounting vpon a ſtrong and mightie 
                     〈◊〉
                   armes at a
                     •
                   po
                     ••
                  tes except his head, tooke his way with his people toward the Cittie: where by reaſon of the brute of the arriuall of this 
                     〈…〉
                   which was alreadye ſpreade abroade euerie where; bothe little and great came about him to 
                     ••
                   him, ſo that 
                     •••
                  
                  ing maruelouſly 
                     〈…〉
                   of the ſight of his perſon, they prayde vnto God that he wold ſuccour & giue their Prince victorie againſt him: the ſame did in like maner the knights of the court: who were in great doubt of Primaleons life, ſéeing before them ſo deformed and huge an aduerſarie: neuertheleſſe the Emperour who was accuſtomed to talke with ſuch Colo
                     ••
                  es and ſkarbabes beeing but lumpes of fleſh without any 
                     〈◊〉
                   of ſpirite or bodie; made light account of him: and woulde willinglie haue accepted ſhe Combat 
                     ••
                  nſeſſe to haue 
                     •
                  aſed his Sonne Primaleon
                        •
                     : But as he diſcourſed thus with himſelfe, behol
                     •
                   
                  Lu
                        •
                     con 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   before him who beginneth with this abrup
                     •
                  e ſpéech to him a
                     •
                  owde.
               Emperour of Conſtantinople, I rather with thy ruine than that of any other man who liueth vnder the celeſtiall Globe, for that thou ſleweſt 
                     •
                  oth my Father and Brother, two the verie flowers of Chiualrie: whereby I haue euer ſince ſe
                     ••
                   an 
                     〈◊〉
                   anguiſh in my heart, becauſe I coulde neuer finde any meane to be reuenged of ſo cruel an homiride. Notwithſtanding ſéeing God hath now opened 
                     〈◊〉
                   the waie I hope ſoone to 
                     〈…〉
                   with me vpon 
                     〈…〉
                   and a 
                     •
                  reaſon, which I ſtand vppon to make him 
                     〈…〉
                   before he eſcape my handi
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   Knight quoth Primaleon I am reſolued to fight 
                     〈◊〉
                   the 
                     〈◊〉
                   which thou 
                     〈…〉
                   to reuenge his death, without giuing thée any reaſon how or wherefore I 
                     •
                  lew him 
                     •
                   ſéeing I haue giuen to him account ſufficient alreadie; who 
                     •
                  ot willing 
                     ••
                   content himſelfe therwith, I haue made him buy the refuſall deare, as I hope to pay ſhée for the paine which thou haſt taken to come ſo farre to this place.
               
                  
                  Ʋerie glad was the Giant 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , ſéeing Primaleon readie to enter the Barriers with him, Into which the Emperor commaunded the Duke of Pera & the Earle of Redon to conduct him, and to aſſure him from all men except from his enemie: in the meane time there remayned not almoſt any perſon within the Cittie which came not thither to beholde this Battaile: euery man deuoutly praying him in whoſe handes are all victories, to ſhew fauour to their Prince, for whome they ſhould bée in great diſpaire, were it not for the confidence they haue, that hee will neuer forſake him in this neceſſitie: as in him who neuer abandoneth nor reiecteth thoſe who Arming themſelues with true ſaith, doe build their rain part on his refuge.
               The Giant then after hee had laced and buckled the ſtrings of his headpéece, tooke a ſtrong launce in his hand, and ſeeing hys enemie come Armed, conceaued ſo great pleaſure, that flouriſhing his Launce he thus began: This ſtaffe imbr
                     •
                  ed to day in the bloud of my aduerſarie, ſhall take vengeaunce on that 
                     〈◊〉
                   who hath with his, pearced the boſome of mine aunceſtors.
               
                  
                     •
                  old thy tongue, for ſhame great animall, quoth Primaleon, holde thy tongue, and ceaſe to vaunt thy preſumpt
                     •
                  ous 
                     〈◊〉
                  , till thou ſeeſt thy ſelfe banquiſher, for their is the houre to bragge and not before: Then the Iudges ſéeing theſe two Combatants in good will euerie one to do his beſt for him ſelfe, they departed the Barriers, and preſently the ſigne of the aſſault beeing ſounded by the Trumpets, the Knightes encountred with ſuch furie, that they 
                     〈◊〉
                   their 
                     〈◊〉
                  : For the height of Lurcon conſtrayning him to carrie his Launce lower againſt Primaleon, than if he had béene of his 
                     •
                  oulenes, ſo that he could attaint him but on the 
                     •
                  ippe, where peareing his Armour he ſcracht his ſk
                     ••
                  e a little: But the Conſtantino Politane, who came full vpon him with a right carriere with his Launce 
                     〈◊〉
                   him cleane through the cuirace into the 
                     〈◊〉
                  : ſo they daſht their ſh
                     •
                  elds and ruſht their bodies together in ſuch ſorte that they both ſmoked at it: In this 
                     ••
                  
                  counter

the Giants Horſe had ſuch a ſhouldering, that hee could goe afterwardes but vpon thrée legges: by meane
                     •
                   whereof feeling the heauie burden which hee had vppon his backe, he kept ſuch a capering, rearing and flinging, that hee laid his loutiſh Maſter vppon the bare ground: who in falling did ſo entangle one of his feete in his ſtirroppe, that his horſe t
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  ld him a long time from place to place: Which Primaleon ſeeing ranne vppon him with his naked ſword in his hand, and before he could get up againe, he gaue him ſo ſound a blow vppon his legge, that he cut the bone almoſt quite a two: whereat he caſt out ſo horrible a noyſe, that hee 
                     •
                  erriſted all the aſſiſtants, but not him who he 
                     〈◊〉
                   him with the Cemitorie which the Knight of the Cloſed-Ile had ſent him, which hee ſo be laboured then with all his might vppon hys Helmet, that cutting a two the ſtringes that hee ſhewed quicklie his bare head: Whereuppon Lurcon entred into ſo intollerable a phrenzie, that béeing vnable to defende himſelfe from the fell blowes of his aduerſarie, hee purpoſed to gripe him by the bodye, thinking to diſpatch him that waye: But for all that Primaleon kept himſelfe at the point of hys ſworde, and with a backe ſtroke vppon the Mazzard, felde him as dead as a Dogge to the ground ſaying: It is now that thou mayeſt exe
                     •
                  te thy Trophies to Palla
                        •
                     
                   and Mars for the victories they haue ſent thee, and not before thou haſte Combatted, as not long ſince thou didſt vaunte to doe.
               It were verie difficult to recount the ioy and gladneſſe that euerie one conceau
                     •
                  d, ſeeing the happie ſucceſſe of this ſpectacle: The which to the ende to make it publikely knowne abroade, the Iudges and Martials of the fielde perceauing the Giant to haue breathed his laſt, did accompany Primaleon with victorious acclamations vnto the pallace, where they preſented him to the Emperor, who receaued him with great ioy.
               Then came forth the Empreſſe and her Daughters to entertaine him as if he had béene newly arriued from ſome for
                  
                     •
                  en Countrie, prayſing and bleſſing God for ſo ſignall a 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
torie; the which beganne to bring ſome comforte and reioycing to the Court, which was before all in 
                     〈◊〉
                  , verie ſad and mournefull for the death of King Florendos & his Quéene Griana Father and Mother to the Emperour.
               Afterwards there arriued manie Knights to Combat Primaleon vppon the ſame quarrell, but it coſt them all deare, as béeing thoſe who defended a wrong quarrell, the Prince behauing himſelfe euerie day more valiantly than other: wherof the Greekes reputed themſelues moſt happie men, to haue after the Emperour ſo ſage & valiant a Prince for their Seigneur: wherefore from diuers Countries were preſented him manie good offers to marrie a wife, the which he would accept of in no wiſe, for the little deſire hee had to marrie ſo young: But let vs diſcourſe a little of the great perrils and traualles that another Knight made him endure, who came to Conſtantinople to defie him vppon the ſame pretended treaſon of the Polonians death, as you ſhall in the next Chapter heare more at large.
            
            
               CHAP. XVIII.
               
                  
                     Howe Prince Edward the eldeſt Sonne to the King of England was inamoured of faire 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           , ſeeing her picture againſt a wall, and hovve hee was afterward conducted by a ſtrange aduenture into a Monaſterie of Nunnes, and what befell him there in the meane time he was within the Nunnerie.
                  
               
               
                  KIng Fredericke of England brother to Agri
                        •
                     la Empreſſe of Almaine, had by his wife manie Male Children, the eldeſt whereof called Prince Edward, was no leſſe accompliſhed & excellent in the exerciſe of Armes, than verie well 
                     〈◊〉
                   in moſt ciuill and good manners, and in all

other laudable vertuous and honeſt thinges: So that hauing receaued the order of Knighthood, he held daylſe Iouſtinges & Tournyes, to exerciſe and make himſelfe ſkilfull in militarie profeſſion: And for aſmuch as hee delighted alſo in hunting, one of the braueſt Knights called Robert, ſent him a faire dog which he recouered of a woman who was a great Mag
                     •
                  rian, as you ſhall vnderſtand hereafter.
               This Knight Robert being in the prime of his youth had a great deſire to ſee the aduentures of the world, by meanes whereof embarking himſelfe among other Marchants, who went to trafficke and to fall Armes in Turkie beeing toſſed by tempeſt and foule weather on Sea, come to an anker in the Iland of Malfada, where they were all enchaunted except him onely, who pleaſed much the Ladie of the Ile. Whereuppon 
                     ••
                   fortuned that hee liued there in verie great pleaſure, about the ſpace of two yeares; at the ende where of calling to minde vppon a time his owne countrie, he fetcht a great 
                     •
                  igh from his breaſt, ſo that this Fayrie who neuer was far from him, deſired to know the cauſe of that ſigh, vnto whome hee reuealed the whole matter.
               In good faith faire ſir quoth Malfada then, ſéeing you finde it not beſt to dwell any longer with me, I am of aduiſe that you depart aſſoone as it ſhall pleaſe you, to the end to take your 
                     •
                  ourney where you may find better entertainment than here: And for that I haue loued you extreamely, I will preſent 
                     •
                  ou a ſhippe verie well rigged, with all that is néedfull for your commodious nauigation vnto your own Countrie.
               Ten thouſand thankes I giue you Madame, replyed Robert, for the good will you beare me: and albeit I do not mer
                     •
                  ie the leaſt part of this fauour, yet will I not ceaſe to remayne your perpetuall bounden, and a great deale the more, if you refuſe not to giue mee this Dog which I woulde cra
                     ••
                   at your handes.
               Surely I ſhould bee verſe ingrately and little curteous quoth the Fayrie, if I ſhould denie you ſo ſmall a thing, albeit that heretofore this beaſt hath beene a Giant, Lorde of the

Ile of Eſcania: who that I may in thrée words count you his Hiſtory, deſiring at eighteene yeares of age (when he receaued his Knighthood) to doo ſome ſeates of Armes in the world, embarqued him ſelfe néere his owne houſe for the ſame purpoſe: And ſuch was his fortune, that a great ſtorme which roſe vpon the Sea, caſt him a ſhore in this Iland, where preſently hee found himſelfe inchaunted vnder the forme of this Beaſt that you ſée, which I giue you alſo fréely, as a thing wherewith you may helpe your ſelfe at you néede and ſhall be peraduenture ſometime occaſion for you to call to minde the remembrance of mée, which I recommende vnto you as much as you haue knowne the ſingular and perfect loue I too heare you.
               After many accuſtomed embracinges Robert tooke his leaue of Malfada thanking her againe for his Dogge, to whom, (for that the Giant of whom hee had once the forme, was called Maiortes, and for that he was alſo the greateſt of all that Iland) he gaue the ſame name of Maiortes, and afterwardes ſetting ſayle towardes England paſſed by hard paſſages, where his Dogge ſtood him in good ſtoode.
               But in the meane ſeaſon whileſt Prince Edward was ſo highly eſtéemed in his fathers Kingdome, the Knight Robert fell ſicke, who knowing the ende of his dayes were at hand, purpoſed to make him inheritour of his Dogge, as the perſon of all the Engliſh Nation whom he knewe worthy of ſuch a preſent; and ſent the Dogge to him by a Squier of his, beſeeching him to take him alwaies with him in company, and that he would not neglect him, in that hee ſhoulde make great account of him one day when he knew his quallities better.
               The young Prince was woonderfull glad of this Dogge, when making as much of him as might be, hée ſhewed him ſelfe ſo louing and gentle as if hee had brought him vp from a little whelpe: therefore he ſent in recompence of this Dogge great riches to the Knight Robert, who in the meane ſeaſon paſſed out of this world into the other.
               Euer the Prince would haue Maiortes at his ſide, whome

he loued as a humane creature: But facre more he eſtéemed him, knowing the wondrous thinges hee did in hunting, to which ſport he lead him forth almoſt euery day.
               During which idle and pleaſant life, it befortuned him vppon a day, to ſee a thing which cauſed him afterward to haue i
                     ••
                  umerable trauels: For that the Knight his Father delighting much to build as well Caſtels as other pleaſant and delightfull houſes, for aboue all his moſt ſumptuous buildings, hee cauſed to be builded with all magnificency one ſumptuous Pallace, whither he was woont to goe to take his diſport with the Quéene his wife.
               It fortuned that amongſt many maiſter workemen who did worke in this new building, there was a Painter of Ormeda, who by chaunce was preſent at the Fountaine, when Gridonia was met there by the Lyon; who to the ende hée might at his eaſe fully behold the fauour of the Princeſſe, hée followed her into the Caſtell with others that were there; for thoſe of that profeſſion are very deſirous to ſée the Idea of ſo perfect beauty with whoſe lineament and perfect feature, they may helpe themſelues in their portraitures.
               And for that hee founde not any ſtore of worke to employ himſelfe in the City of Ormeda, he reſolued to goe ſéeke in other Countries; So that being arriued in England, after hée had gotten acquaintance to bee knowne, hee tooke charge to paint this goodly Pallace, which the King cauſed to bee built néere his chiefe Citty.
               Wherein among many excellent things which hee inuented there by his Art and ſkill, hauing as yet freſh in his memory the beanties of Gridonia, hée pourirayed her ſo naturall, that ſhée ſéemed a liuing creature, ſéeming euer to them which behelde her, that ſhée woulde open her mouth to ſpeake vnto them; and there hee ſet her in a place as it were in a priſon, ſei
                     ••
                  ate vpon a Rocke, and a Lyon couched vppon the ſky it of her Coate, holding his heade betwéene this Ladies handes, who did gently ſtroake his heade and all the reſt of hys body.
               
                  
Prince Edward who went much abroade to hunt 
                     〈◊〉
                   oftentimes ſo make his m
                     ••
                  ing in this place, where beholding vpon a time the worke of this Painter, ſawe there amongſt other thinges Gridonia paynted as you haue heard: And woondring in himſelfe at ſo admirable beauty (eſpecially to ſée a Lyckrepayre ſo peaceably néere a woman) coulde not cheeſe but 
                     •
                  all for the Paynter vnto him ſaying; I pray thée interprete vnto me a little the meaning of this picture, and how a Lyon may be made ſo tame, that one may ſée him couched ſo ſtill 
                     〈◊〉
                   a Damoſell; for that it ſo m
                     •
                  th to me to be a thing fit rather for little Dogges, than for ſuch ſauage animals, which are cruell and ind
                     •
                  mptable by nature.
               You ſay very true, quoth the Paynter, but knowe yée my Lorde, that in the world are many ſtrange thinges a among the which, I ſweare vnto you by him that giueth vs life, to haue ſéene with mine owne proper eyes, the true Modell of this my poore among liuing creatures.
               Thou he began to make diſcourſe vnto him of the Eſtates and perfections of this Princeſſe: Whereat the Knight remayned much amazed and troubled u
                     •
                  minde, but anſwered him thus.
               It is a very rare example that a beaſt without reaſon, (as this eſpecially) hath ſo much foreſight, as to knowe the valour and bounty of a Lady ſo well accompliſhed, and that ſhée preſumeth in her ſelfe to recouer the heade of Primaleon for the earneſt of her marriage.
               The Painter affirmed to him againe, it was as true, as hée had in euery word recounted to him.
               Whereupon Prince Edward began to beholde a little better than he did before his buſines; and becauſe he reputed him one of the beſt Artiſts that as yet hee had euer ſeene to handle Penſill, hee reſearched with ſuch dilligence, and remarked ſo exactly many times the lineature and grace of Gridonia
                        •
                     s countenance diſputing in himſelfe whether ſhée might bee ſo faire a creature as he ſaw her painted & coloured in that place) that from thenceforth he fell into a more vehement alteration:

For that the little 
                     〈…〉
                   who lay in ambuſh for him, during this his contemplation, ſhot off out of his Qu
                     •
                  uer ſo ſharpe and piercing an Arrowe againſt him, that wounding him to the heart, this wounde cauſed him ſo ſtrange a Paſſion, that for to finde remedy for it hee purpoſed to ſeeke all meanes which might take away his paine, and to eſchewe no trauell whatſoeuer, in gaing to that place where he thought he might recouer her.
               The Prince then conſidering, that to purchaſe this Lady he muſt needes combat with Primaleon, thought he ſhould commit too ſowle an ouerſight, ſeeing the amity ſo long continued betweene their Fathers: Neuertheleſſe for all that hee thought with himſelfe he ſhould not ſurceaſe, Palmerin hauing heretofore taken away by force from his Grandfathers houſe the Princeſſe Agriola his Aunt; and that vnder the pretext of reuenging that iniury (after the example of the taire Troian, who inſteede of Heſione his Aunt, ſtole away the wife of King Meuelaus in Greece) hee had good occaſion to goe to combat the Conſtantino Politane.
               
               Uppon this conflict of opinions which came to trouble his minde, hee caſt himſelfe vppon a bed, where ſighing without ceaſing he thus complained to himſelfe.
               Alaſſe Gridonia, how much had it beene better for the eaſe of mine afflicted heart neuer to haue heard thee named, nor ſeene the Pourtrait of thy face before my eyes? whoſe ſight hath into ſmall time penetrated ſo deepe into my breaſt, and weakened my members in ſuch ſort, that they cannot well preuaile to perfourme the onely of their office? Wherein if by the onely obiect of thy 
                     〈◊〉
                   I feele to exceeding torment; what will it then doo, when I ſhall indéede ſee the naturall and liuely compoſition of ſuch a piereleſſe Paragon of Nature? Ah! it is expedient for all that, that I put my ſelfe in ſearch to finde thee out, to the ende that in ſeeing thee in deed, I may giue ſome refrigeration to this my burning and newe flame: For if the ſauage and inhumane creatures forgetting their fiercenes, yeelde themſelues ſo meeke and gentle in thy

preſence, what ſhall hee doe who hath ſome knowledge of humane reaſon? Certes albeit I were ſure to end my life, yet muſt I employ for thy ſake my perſon with all the goods and eſtates that God hath giuen
                     •
                  nes, ſeeing thou art ſo worthie a creature: which I thinke the heauen hath reuealed vnto mee as it were by a fatall oracle, to the end that thou ſhouldeſt bée mine, and I ſhine perpetually. To atchieue vnto which point, I promiſe thee to refuſe no aduenture nor perillons attempt which may preſent it ſelfe to make mee refuſe it: Conſidering that by how much more Knights are iſſued of noble blood and illuſterous linage, by ſomuch more it behooueth them to enterprſſe more generous and heroicall actes. And to this may inuite thee the example of Arnedes Prince of Fraunce, who for the loue of Philocriſta Daughter to the Emperour of Conſtantinople, departed from his Fathers Kingdome. and in like manner Recindes Prince of Spaine for Meliſſa the King of Hungaries Daughter: I then beeing of no leſſe houſe than the one or the other of theſe two Princes my neighbours, it behooueth mee to followe their ſteppes in the like enterpriſe.
               So long time was the ſpirite of this yong Knight ſo occupied in making ſuch like diſcourſes, that beeing not able to forbeare, hee loſt not onelie all appetite to eate, and deſire to ſleepe, but alſo therewithall all pleaſure of hunting, wherin hee had ſo much delighted before: In ſuch ſorte that hauing none occaſion neyther to heare no) to ſee any recreation, hee ſhunned the companie of thoſe whome hee knewe deſierous to bee neare him to make him merrie and pleaſant.
               One onely content hee enioyed during theſe his anguiſhes, which was to finde himſelfe before the Image of Gridonia, whoſe infinite beautie ſo rauiſhed the vigilance of his eyes, that it did conſtraine his tongue to reaſon with it, euen as if he had beene hard by her proper perſon: beeing otherwiſe neuer ſatiſfied to deuiſe with the painter of the graces of this Princeſſe.
               
                  
It chances vpon a day, that being wearied with this ſtorme and wauering of minde, he went forth into a wood which ioyned hard vppon the ditches of his Pallace (where hee paſſed the greateſt parte of the time of his paſſion) without taking with him any other weapons but his rapi
                     •
                  r by his ſide: So that walking vp and downe, he ſate him downe vnder abroad and thicke beech trée, to diſcourſe as his fancie ſhewed him of ſome thinges which might giue him ſome contentment. And after hee had long time muſed with himſelfe, bethinking by what meanes hee might beſt goe ſee Gridonia, bee faſt vp his eyes, which he had before fired on the ground, as it falleth out manie times to a man that is perplexed & irreſolute in minde to doe: Wherby he eſpied neare him a wood man who would binde a burden of wood together in a little ſtring, ſo that beeing vexed with ſome thing els, and to ſee him looſe his time be ſaid.
               So God helpe me villaine, I perceaue it procéedeth of thy great blockiſhnes or froward nature, that thou doſt labour in vaine after this impoſſibilitie: whereuppon it ſéemeth to me that thou ſhouldeſt leaue the wood behinde, or els if thou wilt carrie it away to haue a longer corde to binde it withall.
               The peſant who heard himſelfe miſcalled, turning himſelfe and looking behinde him anſwered, Prince Edward thou doſt behold verie neare my follie, who canſt not take béede of thine owne which toucheth thee a little nearer. I tell thee that euen as thou ſeeſt me looke my labour in binding this burden of ſtickes, euen ſo iuſt ſhall it fall out with you in all the trauailes that you ſhall vndertake for her who reſerueth her ſelfe for a better knight than you.
               When the prince heard theſe ſpéeches, ſetting hand to his ſword, he can incontinent after this wiſard, ſaying in a great cage: In an euill houre for thy part great clowne ca
                     ••
                  ſt thou euer to publiſh ſo neare me ſo ſoule a lie: For that in the circuite of the rounde world is there no Prince who doth deſerue her better than myſelfe, who loue her ſo perfectly that no liuing creature is able to attaine to the height of my loue.
               
                  
The woodman who heard him ſpeake in ſuch a rage ranye away as faſt as hee could through the woods, and Prince Edward after him with ſpéede: Notwithſtanding hee was not farre gone before an Armed knight came right vppon him being mounted vppon a verie luſtie and braue Horſe, ſaying vnto him thus.
               Gentleman let the villaine goe, otherwiſe you are but a dead man. Rather ſhall thou looſe thy life anſwered the Engliſh man, than I will not be reuenged of him who hath iniured mee thus villanouſlie: Now aduiſe thy ſelfe if thou wilt defend him. Yes indéede replyed the Knight, and yet I will craue none aduenture at thy handes.
               After theſe words he alighted from his horſe and ſéeing his enemie diſarmed, hee would not drawe his ſworde but cloſed with him, which Prince Edward did in like manner, and ſo they tugd a good while together. In the end fortune woulde ſo much ſauour the Prince, that he laide his enemie a long, & ſetting his knée vppon his breaſt, he cut a two the ſtringes of his Helmet: thinking preſently to cut off his head, but as he was about to do it, he pecceaued it was a verie faire woman: ſo that maruelling much at this mummery he roſe vp incontinent being in great admiration. Faire Lorde then ganne the Damſell, admire not to ſée now a woman in Armes, ſéeing that there haue bin and as yet are ſome which are couragious and warlike, and take it not in diſdaine that you haue ſought againſt one of them, for Ac
                        •
                     illes eſtéemed that one of his moſt ſignall victories which he obtained againſt Penthaſilia the Nunne of Amazonians: and the valiant Mithrid
                        •
                     tes King of Pontus, neuer craued better aide than that of Hipſicratea his wedded wife: the which béeing in mans attire after the Perſian manner, did enter into all dangers vnto which her huſband did aduenture himſelfe, during the war which hee had againſt Pompeius. So much I ſay becauſe I ſée you make a wonder at this ſtrange noueltie: Neuertheleſſe if you will graunt me but one beene, I will conduct you into a place where you ſhall ſée things far more admirable than theſe.
               
                  
Uerie willing will I accord thee whatſoeuer it ſhall pleaſe thee to demaund at my hands, anſwered the Knight vnto hir, for the great deſires ſake which I haue to follow ſtraunge aduentures.
               Mount then replied the Damſell vpon my Horſe, and come preſently away with me. But Prince Edward would firſt goe fetch his Armes, and make his people priuie to his departure, to the end they ſhould not trouble themſelues to ſeeke after him, then the Ladie told him, that to compaſſe their attempt, it was expedient for them to ſet forward of their iournie forthwith. So then he mounted vppon a Courſer, and ſhe vpon a pal
                     •
                  r
                     •
                  e which attended not farre from thence. Fiue dayes iourney they made, and met nothing which might hinder them in their way; and vppon a Saterday morning they arriued at a faire Cloyſter of women built vpon the top of a high Mountaine in a verie ſolitarie place. There did the Damſell cauſe this Knight to alight, whome ſhee lead afterwarde into a faire Chamber, whether the Abbeſſe and all her Nunnes came to entertaine him, when his guide began to vtter theſe ſpéeches vnto him.
               Faire Knight, knowe that in this Monaſterie there is a moſt ſtrange and maruellous aduenture, which as they ſaye cannot be ended but by one of the beſt Knightes of this age: & for that you are reputed one of thoſe whom the celeſtiall plannets haue adorned with ſo manie excellent graces in preheminence of Chiualrie, we haue hope that you will bring it to a finall end.
               Now within the precinct of this Religious houſe is encloſed a verie faire Orchard, planted with diuers ſortes of fruit trées, which in their ſeaſons doe bring forth their fruites in abundance, and within the whole compaſſe of our Conuent is there none more delightfull place than that, except on the north ſide, from whence out of a fearefull caue euerie Saterday about Euenſong there cometh forth a moſt hideous and ill fauoured old woman, bearing a rich Faulch
                     •
                  on in her hande, where with ſhe ſtriketh flatting, when ſhe méeteth by chaunce

with any Religious Nunne ſo furiouſlie that ſhee ſendeth her quicklie to the ground: in ſuch ſorte that the poore wretch can not riſe againe, nor a long time after get out of this traunce, ſo much doth ſhe féele her ſelfe aſtoniſhed with the blowes this 
                     •
                  lend of hell giueth her: Which done, ſhe returneth within her den lamenting in moſt ſtrange maner: And I tell you faire Knight, that a great number of valiant Knightes haue come hether, thinking to follow her and to ſee the place of her reſidence, towards which none can apprethe nearer than ten paces, but he is immediatly repulſed verie rudely: ſo that we haue no hope euer to ſee an end of this aduenture, vnleſſe you accompliſh it now. For this effect haue I brought you hether, hearing by report in diuers places that your proweſſe & valour doth exceede farre, that of the moſt hardieſt Knights of all the Weſt.
               Madame replied Prince Edward then, it falleth out ſome times, that many Knights which are eſteemed hardie and valiant Champions, ſhewe in the end the contrarie of this vulgure opinion: And vppon me firſt of all may ſuch an example bee ſhewed: Notwithſtanding ſéeing I finde my ſelfe brought vnto this place, I will not let to proue what I can do in the aduenture, whereof I haue heard ſo great ſpeech: Towardes the which feeling not my ſelfe endued with the force & addreſſe which is expedient for him to haue, who ſhall finiſhe it, I ſhould not preſume to bee ſo hardie as to march my ſelfe: ſo that béeing not able now to bring it about, I will only leaue as others haue done, the honour thereof to whome God hath reſerued it.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XIX.
               
                  
                     How Prince Edward entred the Caue, where hee vanquiſhed a Knight, who would haue kept him out of the gate of the Pallace which was there within: And howe paſſing further in, hee founde two Gentlemen within a Marble Sepulcher, whome he deliuered out of ſtrange paine and the ſequele.
                  
               
               
                  THe houre of Euening praier approching, Prince Edward Armed himſelfe carefully with a Harneſſe that ſome Knight who had béene there to proue himſelfe in the aduenture of the Caue, had left behinde him in the Abbye: then beeing brought into the Orchard by the Damoſell, and by one of the Nunnes, hee put himſelfe néere the mouth of this hole, where hee ſtayed not long before the old trot came foorth, and quickly popt in againe ſeeing the Engliſh Prince before her eyes: who was not ſlow to follow her in, when ſhe caſting her armes about his necke, by no force or ſtrength ſoeuer that he could employ, hee could neuer ſtay her nor once looſe her from him: but ſtil the further he went in, ſo much more did his labour & paine increaſe and torment him: for that finding the farther he was in, the way more darke and obſcure, it ſeemed vnto him that ſome bodie ſtroke him on euery ſide, puſhing him backewards to make him recoyle: But hee who was magnanimous, enduring this paine, thumping and thruſting, without euer letting goe the old trot, came at the laſt into a great Pallace very ſumptuouſly wrought and ſet forth. Then the old woman crying for ayde, there came a Knight vppon him verye richlie Armed, bearing a ſhield vppon his arme, whereon were painted two Damſels, wherof the one which appeared very beautifull, held betwéene her handes a hart wounded, which the other that had a vaile vppon her face, made ſemblant to take away from her by force.
               
                  
Helpe me then cried the old woman, in preſenting him the ſworde, againſt this Knight who will take from mee by force the rareſt Iewell in this world, which hee is not worthie ſo much as to looke vppon. Whereuppon he began to ſpeake vnto the Prince in this manner.
               Knight let that good Lady alone to deale with me, who hoping to chaſtice you quickly, for this great preſumption by which you haue beene ſo hardy and bolde as to enter within this place in deſpite of me. I am verie glad quoth Prince Edward to haue to doe with thée, ſéeing the ſmall honour a man may purchaſe to vanquiſh women beeing but feeble creatures by nature, and of ſmall reſiſtance.
               After theſe ſpeeches they beganne a terrible ſkirmiſh, in the which albeit the Prince charged his enemie with many fell: ſtrange knockes, for the ardent zeale hee had to finiſh this aduenture; his aduerſarie neuertheleſſe hauing in his hande the beſt ſword which was to be founde in the circute of the earth, deliuered fewe blowes but made the maile of his harneſſe or ſhield vpon his arme flie in péeces: By reaſon whereof Prince Edward ſeeing his life ineuident perrill (knowing not well what to doe) reſolued to put this Battaile in hazard: ſo that couring himſelfe as well as he could with his buckler, he cared not to endure two or thrée blowes of his enemie to come to gripes. Which he did when the Knight which founde himſelfe a little wearie, hauing not ſtrength enough to holdeing with him, was conſtrained to fall with him to the grounde: where it fell out ſo well on the Engliſh Knightes ſide that he was vppermoſt; Notwithſtanding béeing out of breath, hee could hardlie winde himſelfe from his aduerſarie. Who by reaſon of his lumpiſh & heauie fall, ſounded vnder the Prince, who ſéeing him in that paſſion would not wrong him further, than to ceaze vppon his ſworde: then looking rounde about him, hee perceaued at that inſtant how the old woman vaniſhed away behinde a little yron doore.
               He reſolued to follow her, to know what might be the purſute of this aduenture, ſéeing by the cleare brightneſſe of a

cleare glaſſe windowe ſome light within the next Chamber, which did prouoke him the rather: vppon this occaſion claſping on the vanquiſhed knights Armes to play the ſureſt part, they fitted him ſo iuſt as if they had bin forged for his backe: Moreouer he tooke his ſhield which he beganne to be hold with great admiration and féeling afterward his force and courage to encreaſe double, entred without feare into the next roome: In the middeſt whereof he was a ware of a faire Sepulcher of Marble, whoſe couering was ſo high and ſo much ſeparated from the ſides, that a man might eaſily behold all that was within.
               In this place hee heard ſome body make ſuch a 
                     〈…〉
                   noyſe, that approching ſoftly néere it to know what ſtrange matter it might bee, he ſawe two armed Knights, 
                     〈…〉
                   couched flat vpon their bellies did cruelly wound one 
                     〈◊〉
                   with daggers whch each one of them helde betwéene their handes. Whereupon hauing compaſſion of ſo much blood inhumainely ſpilt vnder them, by the wounds which they giue themſelues without ceaſing, remained a while perplexed what he ſhould beſt doo in ſo tragicall a ſpectacle. In fine, beſéeching the diuine prouidence to aide him to pacifie them, he puſhed the couering of the Sepulcher off with ſuch a violence, that it remained vncouered: which of a 
                     •
                  roth had neuer any other Knight béene able to doo but hée or Primaleon who was more valiant than himſelfe. The two Knights ſéeing the heauy Marble throwne downe, which had a long time kept them locked faſt in that Sepulcher, roſe vpon their féete incontinent, and after they were come foorth, they call themſelues downe, at Prince Edwards feete, ſaying; Praiſed 
                     •
                  ee ſhe incomprehenſible goodnes of God who hath endowed you with ſuch proweſſe and magnanimity, which deliuereth vs now at the laſt from this intollerable martyrdome which we both did endure; the which we know right well coulde neuer be brought to ende, but by the vertue of the beſt Knight who was euer borne in the houſe of England, and the one of them procéeding did.
               
                  
Know faire Lorde, it is a long time that wee were in this paine, & that we deſcend of the moſt Royal bloud of the Engliſh Nation, as I will recount vnto you, ſeeing you haue deliuered vs out of this torment.
               At this ſtrange accident the Prince much merualled, eſpecially for that theſe two perſonages as ſoone as they were out of the Sepulcher had receaued the perfect healing of their woundes, and that of ſo cruell enemies, they were ſo ſoone become peaceable friends: ſo that taking them both by the hands, hee made them ſtande vp ſaying; my deare brethren, happy may I tearme my ſelfe at this preſent, to haue freed you from this mortall paſſion, offering my ſelfe beſide to purſue your entier deliuerance, if peraduenture any further encumbrance moleſt you: Likewiſe to continue your perpetuall friend in all places where you ſhall know my ſmall power may ſtand you in any ſtéede, beſeeching you to make relation to me of your hard aduenture, the Hiſtory whereof I would willingly enioy
               Then began one of them; we are brethren, and ſonnes to the Duke of North-wales, and to the ſiſter of the King Prince Coward; in the houſe of whom (for he loued vs both as his owne children) we were brought vp from our infancie; But afterwards as our euill fortune would, knowing nothing one of anothers loue, wee were both enamoured onely by the ſame and renowne of the Duke of Borſa
                        •
                     s Daughter, eſtéemed at that time the fayreſt and moſt vertuous Lady of the weſterne world. Now in a Tourney being helde at a certaine time in preheminence of her at this Dukes principall Pallace, we purpoſed both to bee preſent at it in good equ
                     •
                  page of furnitures, to the ende the better to enter in grace of this Princeſſe: So that her father (being a wiſe and learned Magitian) knowing our néerenes of lignage with the King, entertained vs moſt honourably into his houſe: And after that we had ſéene the Damoſell in face, the flame which from day to day conſinned the force and vigour of our vitall ſpirites did augment in ſuch ſtrange manner, that had not the hope béene

which fed vs with future fruition of caſe, wee had made both ſome lamentable and tragicall ende; beeing ignorant one of anothers purſute, and aduiſing it for the beſt, neuer to make priuy to one another of our loues. Both of vs perfourmed maruelous ſeates in this Tourney to incline this Princeſſe to loue vs the more: wherein I exceeded my brother, becauſe I was his elder by byrth: So that hauing by this meanes more opportunity to ſpeake vnto her, I made her prmy to my deſire, whereupon there ſucceeded ſuch a concluſion betweene vs, that ſhee aſſured mee to bee content to accept mee for her huſband: Then I aduentured my ſelfe to ſpeake vnto the Duke her father, who anſwered mee, hee had already promiſed her to the Carle of Brabant: Which anſwere made me in ſuch a rage, that I had almoſt run mad for ſpight.
               Neuertheleſſe, for the laſt refuge which I hoped to finde in this my frenzy, I prayd the Damoſell to beare mee a word or two inſecret: Whereunto ſhe anſwered me, that I ſhould come the very ſame euening into her Chamber by a little dore which was ſeldome times opened, where ſhee woulde bee to beare what I would ſay vnto her.
               The appointed houre being come, I would in no wiſe permit ſo good opportunity to ſlip my hands, without reaping that ſweete frute which might reſtore the heart, to the which all other liquor ſeemed gall and bitterneſſe: But ſoone claſping on mine Armes, I went ſtrait to the doore with my priuy watchword, in the moſt ſecret wiſe which might be poſſible. Yet I could not carry my ſelfe thither ſo well, but my brother who began to miſtruſt my draft (as it falleth out ſundry times, ſealouſie cauſeth to comecture thinges which haue ſmall appearance of truth) ſo that hee arming himſelfe in like manner, 
                     〈…〉
                   ſlily to the very place where I ſtaide for the opening of the doore; and without making himſelfe knowne vnto me, began to let driue at me, ſaying he would take order I ſhoulde neuer attaine that where unto I did aſpire.
               Then ſeeing to defend my ſelfe whether I would or not, I muſt néedes in that extremity put my ſelfe in deuoyre as well

as I could; and in the meane time the Duke who heard our cople, ran vnto vs with many of his ſeruants, erclaiming in a great rage: How now diſloyall knights, goe yee about to diſhonour mee with ſo great an infamie. By the liuing God I ſhall make you dearely buy this ſo great preſumption. Hee preſently working by his Art of Negromancie, made vs both remaine as deade at the very inſtant: and beeing in this traunce ſodainely tranſported into this place, hee encloſed vs faſt within the Sepulcher, with this inſtance of wordes; yee combat to diſhonour mee and my Daughter, well continue hardly your battell, till a Knight of your race may by his generous courage come to part you.
               When he had thus ſaid, he vaniſhed from our preſence, and we remained there in a wonderfull rage, ſtriking one at an other, as you haue ſeene euen vnto this preſent, ſo that wee know not how long this deadly quarrel and mallice betweene vs hath laſted: and the extreameſt point of the diſaſter vnto which this ſorcetie did binde vs was in that wee could not dye by any of thoſe ſtabbes and woundes which wee receaued one of another.
               Maruelous thinges are thoſe which you tell mée quoth tho Prince, and know that it is nowe a long time ſince the Duke inchaunted you heere, becauſe Prince I dward of whome yée ſpeake, was my great Grandfather: Neuertheleſſe, let vs depart out of this place to goe a while ſome whether elſe to refreſh vs all three together: And as he ſet his ſoote vpon the threſhold of the doore of this Chamber, he ſpied an old woman which thus be ſpake him.
               Faire knight, long time before you were borne, did the Duke of Bo
                        •
                     ſa knowe by meane of his knowledge your valour and magnanimity, and how you ſhould finiſh this aduenture: therefore left you the ſword which you haue gotten, and keepe it well as being of that vertue as I aſſure you hath few fellowes at this day, eſpecially for as much as if you ſhall held it in your right hand, no enchauntment ſhall euer bee able to hurt you.
               
                  
In like manner is the ſhield which you haue there wonne moſt woonderfull and moſt rare, for that you ſhall ſée the diſcourſes of all your life pourtrayed out moſt liuely therein: the which not withſtanding you ſhall neuer knew but by lapſe of time, following the deſteny, whereunto God ſubmitted you euen from your birth day: ſo that hauing now accompliſhed that which was by great learning foreſéene & directed in this aduenture you may goe hence, when it ſhall ſéme good vnto you: And for that the two Knights who goe with you, cannot long time remayne in this world: counſaile and admoniſh them to remember the mercie of God, who by his diuine grace hath giuen you power to deliuer them from the miſery and calamity wherein they haue remayned this hundred yeares laſt paſt.
               The old woman hauing ſpoken thus much vaniſhed away, whereat the Prince was amazeo, when making far greater account of the ſworde and ſhield than he did before, hee departed out at the doore with his companions: And ſéeing no more the Pallace wherein hee had ſought with the Knight of the Caue, nor the Armes which were giuen him at the Monaſterie, his admiration was much more redoubled: Yet as hee came backe hee founde the way to be verie darke and obſcure, which as hee came was as cleare & light ſome, as at the mouth of the hole; where being arriued they got out eaſily without any diſturbance, and from thence forth was it for euer ſhut vp, the Pallace reſolued into ſmooke, and all the enchauntments thereof vndone and brought to finall end.
               Afterwards walking together towardes the Gardengate, there met them the Abbeſſe and her Nunnes, who entertayned the Prince with ioy and the greateſt gratulation that might bee, maruelling much at the two companions whome hee brought with him: which cauſed the Abbeſſe to demande who they were, and who had giuen him the 
                     ••
                  ch Armes ſhee ſaw him being on his backe out of the Caue.
               Madame quoth hee, theſe two Gentlemen ſay they are two Brethren and Knights deſcended of noble race, who by the

great ſkill of the Duke of Borſa, were encloſed faſt in the place from whence I haue nowe deliuered them out of a torment farre worſe than the cruelleſt torture which they might endure. The Armes which you ſée, I haue conquered from a Knight, who woulde haue kept from mee the entrance of a Pallace, where combating with him vpon that refuſall, I changed mine Armes, being bewed and péece meale broken for theſe which you ſée; but in ſtéede thereof will I leaue you my ſword, for a teſtemony of the affection I haue to giue you far greater thinges when the time ſhall come: for that ſworde which I haue gotten of the old woman will I carry with mée vnto the Kings Court, whether I hope by the helpe of God ſpéedily to conduct theſe Knights.
               That may you not well doo quoth the Damoſell who garded him into this place, before you accompliſh firſt that which you haue already promiſed me: Well may theſe two Knights in the meane time in this place attende your returne, which will be in very ſhort ſpace as I hope.
               Prince Edward anſwered he would goe with her willingly, into what place ſoeuer it ſhoulde pleaſe her to bring him: Neuertheleſſe, being already late in the euening, they departed not that night out of the Monaſtery: Where the Lady Abbeſſe and her ſiſters could not ſatiſfie themſelues to feaſt the Prince and the two Knights, the which at their inſtant prayer, made once more vnto them the whole diſcourſe of their Hiſtory, after that they had all ſupped moſt daintely.
               The morrow morning Prince Edward roſe at the point of day-breake and departed alone with the Damoſell, leauing the two brethren among the Nunnes in the Conuent, where the Abbeſſe made them good cheare for his ſake, and kept very carefully the ſword which he gaue her, whereuppon it fortuned afterward that he being King, he augmented much the reuenues of this Nunnerie, remembring the promiſe which hee had made to the Abbeſſe, and to all the religious Nunnes her ſiſters.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XX.
               
                  
                     How Prince Edward was brought by the Damoſell into the houſe of the Duke of Borſa, where her ſiſter thought to enchaunt him to make him marry a Niece of hers beeing Daughter to the Duke, who was inamoured of him, onely by the great fame which was bruted of his valour, and what enſued there upon.
                  
               
               
                  THis Damſell who guided the Engliſh Prince, wayted in the houſe of the Duke of Borſa, Nephewe to her for whom her father enchaunted the two brethren within the Sepulcher: the which was afterward married with the Earle of Brabant, vnto whom he had promiſed her, as ye haue read before.
               But this Duke had onely one ſonne and one Daughter which was his eldeſt, excelling farre in beauty all others of that country, for which cauſe, hir father loued her a great deals the dearer: ſo that more carefully to haue her nuctured in all feminine ciuility, hee cauſed her to bee brought vp in the houſe of a ſiſter of his being a widdow, a moſt prudent Lady, beeing well aduized and verye well ſeene in the Arte of Magicke and ſecret Philoſophie, a Profeſſion very peculiar to the moſt part of their familie.
               This Dukes Daughter called Rene, hearing the famous report of the generous valour of Prince Coward, ſo publikely talked of in the mouth of all men, tell ſo farre in loue with him without euer ſéeing him, that ſhe became wonderfull penſiue and melancholly: and by reaſon of the continuall teares and complaints which without ceaſing ſhée powred out to the winde, when ſhe could ſecretly retire her ſelfe into her Chamber apart, to eaſe the paſſion of her minde a little, ſhee ſo defaced her beauty in fewe dayes, that the Duke her father was aware thereof.
               
                  
Whereupon ſeeing her ſometimes to fetch déepe ſighes, déerely requeſted his ſiſter (for he loued his Daughter entirely) to ſound by ſome ſubtle meanes from whence this her melancholly ſadnes might proceede.
               Whereunto the good Lady made reply, how ſhe had not as yet perceiued any ſuch matter, notwithſtanding ſhée woulde worke ſo wiſely, that ſhée woulde learne the truth. And from thence going ſtrait to her Néeces Chamber, ſhée found her continuing her daily complaints: So that ſitting downe by her, ſhe began to pray and to coniure her, that ſhee would no longer conceale from her the cauſe of her griefe: then the young Damſell with a baſhfull and bluſhing countenance anſwered to her with theſe words.
               Madame, I knowe not what to anſwere you in this caſe, but that I am the moſt wicked and moſt diſaſtred Damoſell that was euer borne vnder the celeſtiall Spheares; ſéeing that I haue imprinted in my heart a thing which redoundeth more to my totall ruine, than to the leaſt lote of any contentment, whoſe 
                     •
                  ſ
                     •
                  ue ſhall be my ſpéedy death which ſhall bring an ende to my deteſtable and too too languiſhing life. Then ſhée proceeded to tell how ſhe loued with a moſt vehement and exceſſiue flame Prince Edward of England, who would be the onely cauſe that ſhee ſhoulde ſpeedily ſée her ſelfe diſſolued to duſt and aſhes; foraſmuch it ſéemed altogether impoſſible, euer to haue any fruition of her deſire, becauſe the Prince and ſhe were not of equall eſtates. The Aunt who ſawe her in ſuch a pittifull taking, would not prolong her furthee torment, but preſently began thus vnto her. Deere Neere, I pray you gouern your ſelfe with ſome conſtancie of minde in this paſſion, and in the meane time blotte out of your minde this impoſſibilitie, which you alledge for the principal point of your anguiſh: for I promiſe you ſo to imploye my Art, that the Knight (who will loue ere long, more than anie liuing creature,) ſhall arriue in this place to eſpouſe you: So great and vnſpeakable was the ioy of Rene, that taking her Aunt about the necke, ſhee embraced and kiſſed her manie times ſaying.
               
                  
O my ſwéete Aunt, if you procure me now this bliſſe and felicitie (inferiour to none in this world) you may well vaunt, and ſay you haue deliuered a ſorrowfull and deſolate Niece of yours out of the moſt in
                     ••
                  icate Laborinth which euer was deuiſed in this earth, yea, if it were that which Dedalus inuented ſo artificially in Crete, to include the infatiable Min
                     •
                  
                  taure.
               My louing Niece, take you no care (replied the Lady) but haue a little patience that all things may be done in theſe due time. With that ſhee departed from the Chamber to conferre this buſines with the Duke her brother, with out whoſe priuy conſent ſhe would in no wiſe begin to ſet this worke abroach: and diſcourſing to him at large the whole matter, told him what hope ſhee had to carrie this buſineſſe to circumſpectly, that ere long Prince Edward ſhuld wed his danghter: ſo that after their concluſion, ſhe went to turne ouer hir bookes of Negromancie, where ſhe found that the Knight was ſure in loue already of Gridonia: Notwithſtanding hoping to croſſe and reuoke his affection by her Magicke, ſhée diſpatcht away immediatly the Damoſell of whome you haue vnderſtood before, to bring him vnto Borſa: True it is, ſhée commanded her not to leade him vnto the aduenture of the Cloyſter, but thether ſhe conducted him her ſelfe, becauſe of a ſiſter of hers who was a Nunne in that place; from whence departing together as ye haue read before in the former Chapter, in two dayes he arriued at the Citty of Borſa: But before the Knight did enter into the Citty, the Damoſell prayed him to ſtay for her a while in a Hermitage neere the Suburbes, till ſhée returned from dooing a meſſage to her Miſtriſſe, who was very willing ſo to doo: And abiding with the Hermit, ſhée went to the Infant Rene, who right glad of his 
                     ••
                  rſual, trickt vp her ſelfe moſt richly to entertaine her Louer, ſending backe with ſpéede the meſſenger to conduct him ſecretely into her Chamber.
               Shée being quickly arriued at the Hermitage ſayth thus to the Knight; Syr you muſt leaue your horſe here, and come on

foote with mée, who will bring you into a place, whether you ſhall finde your ſelfe a glad man to bée arriued.
               I pray God quoth the Prince then, that I be not deceiued nor circum
                     •
                  uented by you in any thing.
               Alas! That God whom you haue innocated forbid, that I ſhould euer ſeeke to entrap my Liege and ſoueraigne in any Ambuſh; I pray you onely come with mee aſſuredly, and without any feare of ill encounter, vpon condition (if it ſhuld fall out otherwiſe by my meane) I will bee reputed the moſt falſe and diſloyalleſt woman that euer guided Knight into any vnknowne place.
               Beeing put in this aſſurance of ſauegard by his guide, hée went on fayre and ſoftly his pace by that falſe gate (before which the two brethren long ſince fell together by the eares) euen till hee came within the Chamber of Rene: where as ſeene as they were entred, quickly was the doore well barred: Whereupon by fortune Prince Edward called to minde that which appeared vnto him in the wood, and moreoner that which the old woman foretold him touching the vertue of his ſword.
               By meanes whereof, miſtruſting ſome inchauntment, hée ſpéedily ſet his hand vpon it; and then marched towardes the Infant, which he ſaw ſo beautifull and ſo Pompouſly attired, that any Knight would haue taken great pleaſure in her ſight onelie: And for hee came without his Helmet on his heade, with ſo magnificent and rich Armour vppon his backe, hée pleaſed the Damoſell ſo much, that riſing vp from her ſeate ſhée came to proſtrate her ſelfe at his feete, ſaying.
               Prince Edward, in truth I was out of hope with my ſelfe, that the heauens would fauour me ſo much, as to make theſe mine eles beholde you, which haue ſhed ſo many teares to deplore my future calamitie; if it pleaſe not you to ſuccour mée: Whereby my hart hath béene by an impatient deſire prouoked to rage and exclaime againſt fortune, which hauing blowne your renowne vnto mine eares, would fruſtrate my ſight of ſo rare a creature.
               
                  
Notwithſtanding, nowe my lucke is ſo proſperous, as to make me the happieſt Damſell of all Europe, ſeeing the paine you take to viſit mee, I perceiue well that not without great reaſon it hath made mee altogether the ſlaue and captiue of your loue.
               The Knight greatly maruaſling no leſſe at the ſinguler beauty of this Damſell, than to heare her vſe ſuch eloquent and cunning tearmes; tooke her by the hande to lift her from the grounde, and to ſeate her in her chaire againe, néere vnto which, the Damſell who was the meſſenger before, hauing already ſet another, the infant cauſed the Prince to ſit downe hard by her ſide, reentring the former talke with this inſtance.
               Faire Lorde, knowe yee I am Daughter to the Duke of Borſa, one of your moſt faithfull vaſſals, who hearing the brute of your generous actions, on euery ſide publiſhed round about vs, began ſo extreamely to loue you, that I forgot the very zeale which I bare vnto my ſelfe: Whereof ſhall bee a good teſtemony the extreame paſſions which you ſhall vnderſtand doo daily debilitate my life that dependeth onely but vppon your humanity: the which I hope to ſée ſo pittifull towards me, that it ſhall haue compaſſion of the grieuous anguiſhes, which without intermiſſion doo martyr mee with more painefull torment than that which king Phalaris cauſed Perillus to endure within the braſen Bull, which he himſelfe inuented for the cruell torturing of others: And you may well thinke faire Prince, I could not in any other Knight of baſe condition haue knowne howe to ground ſo much hope as I haue nowe in you, and therefore I pray you to haue regard to the reaſon and carriage of all good and ſounde iudgement.
               Madame, replied the Prince, I could not imagine the mean to exempt from you the recognizance wherein I find my ſelfe bounden to you, conſidering the good will, which of your grace you beare me without any merit of my part: Neuertheleſſe, if death doo not preuent the affection which I haue to ſhewe

you howe it is not to an vngratefull perſon, or one of ſmall power to whom you addreſſe your ſelfe, I will vſe ſuch munificence and liberalitie towards you and your father, that you ſhall haue chiefeſt cauſe of any liuing in this kingdome to giue me thankes.
               And beléeue mee (ſwéete Ladie) if I had knowne your will (ſetting apart all mine owne affaires) I had come vnto you to doo you all the ſeruice I could poſſibly haue deuiſed; yet not with intent to obtaine of you any thing which might ſtaine your honour, or abaſe that vertue which I ſée ſhining in you, as doth Virgo the maiden ſigne in the Zodiacke of the heauens: Forſomuch as thereunto could he neuer conſent who ſhall thinke himſelfe all his life time to be your loyall and obedient ſeruant. Thus much I ſay, becauſe I may not haue you in marriage to be my wife, my hart béeing vowed in another place.
               Albeit, to aſſure you of my ſincere and true deuotion towards you, there is nothing ſo difficult or harde to bee accompliſhed, which it ſhall pleaſe you to commaund me, but I will erecute moſt willingly, in the beſt ſort which I may or ſhall be able to deuiſe.
               Iudge yée whether the Ladie were perplered and greatly troubled in her minde or no, hearing the reſolution of the Knight (whoſe minde was onely fixed and eſtabliſhed on Gridonia) for ſo much as her very ſpéech which ſhée loſt for a while, ſhewed euidently a moſt true and perfect token of her ſufferance.
               Which her Aunt perceiuing, who in the meane time employed her beſt ſkill to bring her in grace with the Prince, was ſore difended to ſee her in ſuch a ſwowne.
               Knowing alſo that ſhe laboured in vaine, by reaſon of the ſword which he got in the Caue, ſhee came into the Chamber where they were together ſaying.
               Prince Edward, ſo fauourable are the heauens vnto you, that they will happily conduct you to the ende of all your enterpriſes, except of that one which you haue ſo liuelie now imprinted

in your breaſt. For the Lady which you purpoſe to ſerue with infinite paines and trauels, is long ſince dedicated to a more accompliſhed Knight than your ſelfe: So that as I thinke you ſhould doe well to leaue that way which ſhall bee ſo hard for you to kéepe, to take this which hath no difficultie nor diſturbance in it.
               That cannot I do by mine own conſent quoth the Prince, hauing alreadie ſurrendred the conqueſt of my libertie into a place, whence when I would, I cannot well call it vacke at my pleaſure: Wherefore I beſéeche you of all fauour make me vnderſtand ſo much as I perceaue you knowe, and withall who ſhall be that ſo fortunate Knight who ſhall go before mee in the fruition of the Princeſſe Gridonia, Nay ſeeing you haue no pittie (replyed the Inchauntres) of this faire Lady whome you ſée almoſt breathleſſe in your preſence, I am not purpoſed to tell you things wherein you may take delight, but rather not to drownd my ſelfe in ſorrowes ſéeing you before mine eies, I wil preſently depart out of this Chamber: with that ſhee went her wayes, leauing the poore lauer in a Sea of teares, continuing her exclamations with lamentable 
                     •
                  ighes, thinking to moue her Narciſſus to ſome compaſſion: But he who cared little for theſe ſantaſles, ſuppoſing what was ſaide of Gridonia, was ſpoken onely to winne him from her loue, he comforted the Damſell as well as be could, telling her bow hee would conferre with her Father, and if hee would condeſcende thereunto, hee woulde come thither ere it were long to marrie her.
               In the meane time her Aunt went to ſpeake with the Duke her Brother, with whome (after ſhée had giuen him to vnderſtand that 
                     •
                  ot knowledge was not to 
                     〈◊〉
                   to work Prince Edward to this paſſe, ſhe aduiſed him to go accompanied with twenty Knights Armed into his Daughters chamber: Where ſayning himſelfe ignoraunt of the matter, and ſhewing himſelfe fore diſpleaſed againſt them hath, hée ſhould 
                     •
                  eaze vppon his body and put him in priſon, and ſo they might worke their matters as they lifted.
               
                  
The Duke than putting in pr
                     ••
                  tize this ſtratage
                     ••
                  e, came with twenty men all in Armes who the chamber dore, wherin he 
                     〈◊〉
                   entred all alone, 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  ignes of ad
                     ••
                  
                  cation, began thus to ſay.
               Alas my God what a bay
                     ••••
                   caſe 
                     ••
                   Iſle: Am I awake, or do
                     •
                   I meaning beholde this 
                     〈◊〉
                  ? Ah! I ſhould haue thought to haue had a vertuous 
                     〈◊〉
                   and chaſt 
                     •••
                  den to my Daughter, more 
                     〈…〉
                  , than any other in theſe Northen Regions, and 
                     〈…〉
                   I truſtrated of mine opinion: for I ſée before mine owne eyes ſhe is more vitious and corrupt than euer was 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   as Meſſalina, Truely I may well vaunt my ſelfe to make th
                     ••
                   both dye in priſon by the moſt 
                     〈◊〉
                   torment that may bee 
                     〈◊〉
                  , ſéeing they haue ſhamefully diſhonoured 
                     〈…〉
                   all my poſterity.
               Enter then and come in my Knights to 
                     ••
                   hand
                     •
                   vppon this murthering Pallia
                     •
                  d, to the ende I may know who be is and who hath counſelled him to enter to r
                     •
                  ſhly into my houſe; for all thoſe who are cul
                     •
                  able and in any 
                     〈◊〉
                   conſ
                     •
                  crate in this miſdéede, I ſhall make them pay deare
                     •••
                   for it by a moſt 
                     〈…〉
                   ſhamefullend of their 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 
                     〈◊〉
                   that hee 
                     •
                  ept out of the Chamber doore to 
                     •
                  et 
                     ••
                   his 
                     〈◊〉
                  , who 
                     〈◊〉
                   come in, did nothing anim
                     •••
                   nor terrif
                     •
                  e the Engliſh Prince. who ſetting band to his ſword and with an inuincible 
                     〈◊〉
                   putting his ſhield on his arme 
                     〈◊〉
                   them thus.
               Come now hardly who 
                     〈…〉
                   to 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and I ſhall ſhew him, 
                     〈1 line〉
                   
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   from all 
                     〈◊〉
                   this 
                     〈…〉
                   of 
                     〈…〉
                   and 
                     〈…〉
                   gath
                     •
                  ring 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                   
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  et for all th
                     •
                  t 
                     〈…〉
                   and 
                     〈◊〉
                   about him ſo 
                     〈◊〉
                  , th
                     •
                  t he 
                     〈…〉
                   them all, 
                     〈◊〉
                   not the 
                     〈◊〉
                   after gone

to worke with her magicke ſpels as you ſhall heare: Shée forſooth darkened all the light of the Chamber, making a ſulphurous and obſcure ayre 
                     〈…〉
                   darke than hell itſelfe, in ſtéed therof: then deliuering forth the Knights with the Infant
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   (who would willingly haue bin in his place who was dead) ſhe ſhut Prince Edward faſt within the Chamber vntill the morrow morning when ſhe ſaw ſeuen of the Dukes Squiers lying along on the ground one ſtaine outright, and other 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſore wounded. Now could not the Duke tell what it were beſt to doo with him; becauſe if he ſhould deliuer him, it ſéemed to him, but to haſten too ſhamefull a death for himſelfe, and if hee ſhould kéepe him any longer in his houſe, it ſhould but encourage him to forethinke all meanes to put him to more cruell torment; ſo that he paſſed the night in this conflict, vntil the morrow morning when an auntient Knight reprehending him ſharpely becauſe he ſuffered himſelfe to be gouerned by women, counſelled him to cauſe Prince Edward to bee ſecretly conuayed out of his houſe by the ſame Damoſell which giuded him thither.
               The Duke who liked well of this aduiſe, cauſed the Damoſell who had béene the meſſenger to come before him, vnto whom after he had ſhewed ſome ſignes of great heauines, his made this ſpéech.
               It grieueth me much, that my ſiſters pretence hath not ſorted to ſo good effect as ſhe expected, and for ſo much as you are the cauſe, hauing conducted the Knight into the aduenture of the Cloyſter, where hee hath conquered ſuch a it well which ſafe-gardeth him from all her enchauntments, néeds muſt you your ſelfe get him by ſubtle meanes from hence, ſaying you onely haue meanes ſo ſaue his life; and for you ſhould thinke your ſelfe greatly culpable of his death, if it ſhould chaunce to happen, vpon the aſſurance which you gaue him bringing him into my houſe, you will willingly ſet him frée from hence into the fields, if hee will promiſe you neuer to ſéeke any reuenge of the Duke, nor of any of his family.
               Hereunto willingly condeſcended the Damoſell, when departing

from the Duke, troubling like an Daken leaſe, ſhee came to the Chamber where Prince Edward was, who ſtudied already how he might breake open the doore to ſackage them who would come againſt him: Shée proſtrating her ſelfe before him, with the teares in her eyes, beginneth thus the 
                     •
                  enour of her words.
               Fayre Prince, great is the occaſion which I haue nowe to complaine of fortune, for I hauing brought y
                     •
                  u into this houſe vnder a protext of the extreame loue which my Miſtris beareth you, they ha
                     •
                  e deuiſed a ſpéedy and moſt ſhamefull death for vs all thrée: for you eſpecially whome the Duke hath ſurpriſed with his Daughter, whom albeit he ſhould pardon the vainouſnes of the caſe, which hee ſuppoſeth falſely to haue béene a
                     ••••
                  knowing you ſhould 
                     〈…〉
                  , will 
                     〈◊〉
                   ther owne boſome with ſome ſword, or 
                     〈…〉
                   ſome nowe kinde of death as did 
                     
                        •
                     ortia, the Daughter of Cato where ſhée heard of the death of her huſband Brutus. As forme you may well thinke, my Lord the Duke 
                     〈◊〉
                   of the ſour
                     ••
                   of this occurrence, as he beginneth already to doo moſt tractly finding out at laſt my priuy practi
                     •
                  es (which I proteſt before God I neuer went about to carry to any euill end) I ſhall be moſt ſharpely puniſhed of vs all thrée: Neuertheles, yet i
                     •
                   I dye, will I not ſurceaſe (as being the perſon of this Trinity which know I haue beſt deſerued, as wel I know I muſt die for it) to employ my ſelf in ſome ſubtle inuentions to make vs eſcape this imminent perrill, ſo that ye will a
                     ••
                  are mee neuer to ſéeke any reuenge for the offence which hath béene offered you in this place: Wherefore I beſéch you fayre Lord, moſt humbly to graunt me generall remiſſion, to the ende that declaring it to the Duke at the article of my death, hee may bée moued to compaſſion to pardon me alſo himſelfe; and this is the meanes whereby wee may peraduenture ſaue our liues from the mortall puniſhment which they prepare for vs euery day. So well knew the Damſell to colour her ſpéeches, that ſhe wone the mercy of the Prince, who anſwered her thus.
               Fayre maiden for the loue of Rene, who ſurely meriteth

much more at my handes, I haue willingly pardoned this iniurie to the Duke and to all his familie, albeit it is one the moſt vileſt touch and outrage which might bee offered to any Knight: And albeit the death which they determine to make vs die, be horrible and cruell, yet I ſhoulde take mine in very good part, if I might execute vpon thoſe va
                     •
                  leſs who woulde lay hands on me, ſuch a maſſacre as they deſerue: Neuertheleſſe ſéeing the occaſion preſents it ſelfe, to auoyd this ſcandall I am content to followe it, ſo that no greater dammage may enſue. Ah my Lord replied the Damſell, I giue you leaue to ſhew your ſurie on me the very firſt of all, if euer I bring you into any further perrill, with that ſhee kiſt his hande, and letting him forth by the ſame doore hee came in at, ſhee conducted him to the Hermitage, where taking leaue one of another, the Knight tooke his way toward the Cloiſter, being moſt ioyfull of the vertue of his ſword which he had purchaſed there: but very ſorrowfull and penſiue for the wordes which the Dukes ſiſter told him, which hee alſo ſaw ſo haue ſome relation to the Preſage of the figures painted vpon his ſhield.
               Afterwardes beeing arriued at the Abbey, after the entertaimnents and welcommings accuſtomed, taking the two Knights whom he had deliuered along with him in company, he returned ſtrait vnto the Court of the King his father, who for that hee could heare no newes of him was in great heauines and melancholly, the which at his arriuall was all changed into extreame ioy and gladnes, when embracing him, h
                     ••
                   thus began to welcome him.
               My deare ſonne, I cannot ſufficiently woonder how ye departed without making me any thing at all priuy to your intent. My Lord and father (anſwered the young Prince) I beſéech you to pardon me, for ſo much as I was forced ſore againſt my will ſo to doo; and then hee recounted vnto him the brauad
                     •
                   of the Damſell in the woode, who carried him afterwards to prooue his valour in the aduenture of the Num
                     •
                  ey, where hee deliuered alſo theſe two with the whole diſcourſe of their Hiſtory.
               
                  
Whereat all thoſe who heard him wondred greatly: and eſpeacially the King his father, who beeing filled with an vnſpeakeable ioy, welcommed them in the beſt manner vnto his Court, and with kinde ſpéeches embraced them, whereby they thanking him in moſt humble manner, bowed themſelues verie low to kiſſe his hand: ſo that after this Royall entertainment they had great honor done them by al thoſe of the Court: who could not be ſatiſfied with beholding them, but did extoll vnto the heauens the inuincible valour of their deliuerer.
               The Duke of North-Wales the verſe ſame who was at that time Succeſſor to their Father, came to viſite them as his néereſt kinſmen, with many other Knights and Lordes of his blood, whereof they were wonderfull ioyfull, eſpecially to ſee themſelues in the place where they were brought vp in theyr tender age, and yet not knowing any one body of all thoſe whome they beheld there.
               And after they had made ſome abode in this Court for the loue of the King and of Prince Edward his Sonne, ſo ſoone as he departed they went their waies alſo to yeeld themſelues religious men within the Monaſtery of the Caue, where they vowed the ſmall reſidue of their liues vnto the ſeruice of God, The King and all the great Lordes of his Court, beheld with much admiration the rich ſworde, and all the reſt of the Princes Armes, eſtéeming the knowledge of the auncient Duke of Borſa to be moſt wonderfull, who had 
                     •••
                  ented ſo cunning matters in his houſe: where to returne to the Infant Rene, after ſhee ſaw her hope deſperate, ſhee beſought her Father to make her a Nunne in the Monaſtery which had béene cauſe of her diſafter, proteſting neuer to loue any other Knight but he: Whereunto her Father eaſily condeſcended, becauſe this Ahbie was within the Country vnder his obedience, and long ſince founded by his aunceſtors.
               In this place the Damſell liuing at her great caſe, felt cuerie day more and more ſome acceſſe of the languiſhing paſſion which ſhée indured for her deare and perpetuall friend Prince Edward: who after hee was Crowned King of England,

knowing of the auſtere life ſhe lead after his refuſall, came to ſee her as farre as the Connent was from him, where hee beſtowed great riches on it, for the loue of her and of the Abbeſſe, who by meanes of his ſword which he left there, remembred his promiſe,
               The Engliſh Prince then being greatly eſtéemed of his father, and of all the Lordes and Barrons of his Realme; hée made ſmall account of that reputation, for that his ſpirit was rather occupied to ſéeke out the meanes how hée might ſecretly depart to goe followe ſtraunge aduentures, by the which hee might finde out her, whom hee loued more entirely than himſelfe.
               In the meane time, hee tooke his chiefeſt delight, to viſite many times her image and repreſentation, vnto the which hée diſcourſed and recounted the extreame affection be bare her, as if he had beene in preſence of the liuing creature; and by this meane tooke he ſome comfort, when vppon a day fortune preſented before his eyes a fit opportunity to depart, and to goe into any part of the world, whether ſo euer he deſired, which was in this manner.
               When he was walking vpon the bankes of the Thames mere London be ſpied a veſſell laden with merchandize ariue, which a rich Merchant of Hungarie accompanied with diuers others had laden together to ſell and to tra
                     •
                  ſique; by whom vnderſtanding whence the ſhip was (for he knew long before howe the Duchy of Ormeda bordered vpon the kingdome of Hungarie) aduiſed himſelfe that hee might ſecretely depart with this ſhip, when it ſhould bee ready to ſet ſayle towards the North.
               By this occaſion beeing returned into his Chamber (purpoſing to get his equipage in a readines) calleth aſide a Page of his who was very faithfull named Clawde, of whom hee demaunded if hee knewe not the Maſter of the ſhippe with whom he had ſpoken: Who made anſwere he did: then hée tolde him further, howe hee muſt néedes make a voyage into Hungarie, and to Conſtantinople, about matters of great

importance: And becauſe this ſhippe ſayled directly into thoſe Countries, hée commaunded him to certefie the Pilot how a Knight who deſired to paſſe into Hungarie, would giue him willingly what he would demaund, if hee would ſpéedily make for thoſe parts.
               The Prince made no creature priuy to his departure, for that he meant to carry no more company along with him, but his man Clawde only and Maiortes for to make him paſtime by the way.
               
                  Claudius hauing thoroughly vnderſtood his Maſters mind, went incontinent ſtrait to the Hauen, where hee concluded with the Maſter for the time of their embarkement; and deliuering him a good ſumme of money to prouide neceſſary furnitures, returned backe to his Lord and told him all, who was very ioyfull of this opportunity. And as ſecretly as hee could by night time be cauſed his Armes to be carried a boorde the ſhippe, with ſuch ſea prouiſions as were neceſſary for this voyage; and after that the Merchant had made good trafficke of all his merchandize, Prince Edward embarked himſelfe with his man Clawde, and his Dogge Maiortes onely.
               The King and the Quéene miſſing Prince Edward at his vpriſing, as he was accuſtomed to ſalute them, were in great he a
                     •
                  nes for him, and yet ſuppoſing he had but abſented himſelfe from the Court for a while, they comforted themſelues herein, being well aſſured whereſoeuer he was in the worlde, he would make his valour and proweſſe be knowne. Neuertheleſſe, commaunding to ſéeke for him thorowout their whole Kingdome, where being not heard off, they ſuppoſed he was trauelled into ſome farre ſtraunge Climate, wherefore they prayed deuoutly vnto the diuine Maieſty, that it woulde preſerue him from all miſfortune and diſtreſſe.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXI.
               
                  How Prince Edward ſayling towards the Coaſt of Hungarie, hee tooke within a ſhip of Mores which aſſailed him Zerphira Daughter to the Soldan of Perſia, whom he ſent to dwell with the faire Gridonia, and of her entertainement when ſhe came at the Clou
                        •
                     n-Rocke where Gridonia dwelt.
               
               
                  PRince Edward ſailing in the North ſea, concealed himſelfe as much as hee poſſibly might, le
                     •
                  t he ſhould bee deſcried of any: but comming to ſurge néere the Coaſt of Hungarin, there roſe a contrary winde to the courſe they held, ſo that they were conſtrained to ſtrike all their ſailes; and their veſſell going ſower daies at the mercie and furie of the tempeſt, the firſt day that the tempeſt began to ceaſe, and the ſea began to be calme, they diſcouered a farre off floating a Brigandin
                     •
                   of Mores, within which was Zerphira Daughter to the Soldan of Perſia, and to the faire Princeſſe Zerphira, h
                     ••
                   whom the Emperour Palmerin loued ſo tenderly in his yong yo
                     •
                  ers.
               This Infant beeing ſiſter to Lecheſin, for her rare and great beauty was demanded in mariage by the king of India, vnto whom the Soldan ſent her with wonderfull and infinite riches, being accompanied with the brother of the ſaid King of India, a moſt magnanimious and valiant Knight, who c
                     •
                  me into Perſia to captiuate the articles of this marriage. 
                     •
                  ée as the ſtorme and tempeſt had parted all his other veſſels, came alone toſſed too and fro with the huge waues, when he diſcried the Hungarians to be Chriſtians: Whereupon commanding his Pilots they ſhould put forth all their cloth to fetch in the i
                     •
                   ſhip, who grappeth with them ere long afterward: For all his Marriners were very expert in ſea affaires, and eſpecially in Pira
                     •
                  ie, as hauing béene all for the moſt part choſen out of the cunning off Rouers and Pirats which might be found out.
               The Merchants who perceiued by the flags and pondents

of their veſſell, that they were infidels, beganne to cry out for ayde: whereupon the Prince who heard that noyſe, lated his Helmet incontinent, and mounted vpon the batches, where he found many Mores who had already taken his Marriners.
               When hee knewe they were Miſcreants, (his courage riſing at an inſtant was redoubled in valour) hee began to lay vppon them ſo couragiouſly who preſented themſelues to the battell, that with the firſt blow he charged with his good ſword he ſent one into the other world, ſaying in a great rage; If it pleaſe the almighty to haue pitty on vs this day, I hope you ſhall not make vs ſo ſoone priſoners nor ſlaues as ye wéen a at the leaſt it will coſt ſome of you déere before ye bring out féete into the chaines.
               Which the brother of the Indian king perceiuing, for that he entred firſt the ſhippe, came vpon him with a great brauery whom the Engliſh Prince receiued with ſome ſhrewd flaſhes of his ſword: and beginning to he we one another in furious manner, for that Prince Edward was more nimble and better ſhilled than the Moore, putting him out of paine to receiue the triumphant crowne of his ſea-victory, hee made him ſpéedily goe giue account of his Paganiſme before the helliſh Lucifer: For whome the other knights of his ſect beeing very heauy and ſorrowful, came 
                     〈…〉
                   him in round about to lay vpon him on all ſides more eaſily at their aduantage.
               Then the Engliſh Prince knowing hee muſt either bye ſhamefully, or defende himſelfe from theſe miſereants, ſpared none of his forces; but like vnto a Bull aſſa
                     •
                  led with many Maſ
                     •••
                  es, did ſo driue them all before him, that not one euer could approach him, but hee made him féele the ſmart of his ſword, remayning dead or wounded, or els forced to lye aſtonied on the ground: which his good Dogge Maiortes perceiuing ranne vpon them to tears them in pieces, or els to make them drownd in the middeſt of the ſea.
               The Merchants who thought themſelues vtterly vndone, ſéeing at the firſt encounter howe valiantly Prince Edward behaued himſelfe againſt his aduerſaries, tanne to Armes to

ſuccour him; by meanes whereof they ſhewed ſuch vnlour, that within a ſmall while there remayned not a More within Zerphiraes Barke, who paſſed not the edge of the ſword, and was incontinent thrown headlong into the waues of the ſea, which happened to none of the Chriſtians.
               Prince Edward and ſome few of the Merchants were hurt a little, but had no dangerous nor mortall wound.
               Afterward, the knight and the Maſter of the ſhippe being entred into the Mores Brigandine, they found within a Cabbin néere vnto the bottome of the veſſell the Infant Zerphira, moſt ſumptuouſly attyred with twenty other Damoſels, powring foorth many ſtrange and lamentable complaintes, where aboue the reſt one might eaſily heare the young Princeſſe, as her amongſt them all, whom the diſaſter of this conflict touched néereſt.
               Neuertheleſſe Prince Coward had no ſooner eſpied her, but hée iudged the Lady to be iſſued of great bloud, and to bee Miſtreſſe of the reſt, as excelling them all in beauty, and among the braueſt ſhewing her ſelfe the beſt equipped, therefore hée approched néere to comfort her.
               But what? the one vnderſtoode not the language of the other: for Zerphira beſought him to kill her, as hee had done her people; and the Prince intreated her to let him vnderſtand ſomething touching her affayres: Whereupon a Marriner (whoſe life the knight had ſaued to vſe him for an interpretour, becauſe he could ſpeake diuers languages) anſwered how ſhe was the Soldan of Perſiaes Daughter, who ſent her as then to the king of India, who had demaunded her in marriage.
               Of this newes was the Prince very ioyfull, eſpecially hearing him ſay ſhe deſcended of ſo illuſtrious and noble place, for the hope hee had to ſende her for a preſent to Gridonia; in ſuch ſort that cauſing her to bee put in good comfort by the Marriner his Interpretour, hee commaunded him to abuertize her how ſhe was in the power of a knight, who vpon his life would not permit the leaſt diſhonour in the worlde to bee

done vnto her. And the young Princeſſe being willing to know whether he were allied to the bloud of the Emperour of Conſtantinople, becauſe ſhee would willingly haue made an end of her ſorrow and griefe, Prince Edward cauſed her to be anſwered incontinent, that he was not: Neuertheleſſe ſhee ſhould not therfore want any thing ſhee deſired, & that he purpoſed to ſend her into a place where ſhe ſhoulde finde her ſelfe in the greateſt content her heart might require.
               Ah accurſed and vnfortunate that I am cryed ſhe then out, I doubted greatly that fortune would not bee ſo gentle and ſo fauourable vnto me, as to make me fall into the hands of any Knight who were iſſued out of that ſo noble and generous race of Palmerin de Oliua: Notwithſtanding ſéeing without doubt it is an in
                     •
                  uitable extremity, I muſt patiently yéeld my ſelfe his humble captiue, beſéeching God I may finde ſo much curteſſe in him, as once did my mother in the like accident receaue of the ſo redoubted Prince, Palmerin de Oliua.
               
               Prince Edward afterwardes hauing vnderſtoode by the More the interpretation which the Infant had accompanied with ſo heauy a ſigh, he would take the charge of her himſelfe, ſaying to the Maſter of the ſhippe, that of all the booty they had taken, he demanded nothing els for his ſhare but this Damſell. So Prince Edward lead away into his Chamber, the Princeſſe Zerphira with fower of her principall Damſels onely, who carryed with them theyr rings and iewels, giuing the reſt of the pillage to the Merchant and his companions; then procéeding in theyr voyage, the Knight called to minde how there were diuers Chriſtians within his ſhippe, who did him ſeruice with great reuerence: whereupon miſtruſting leſt they ſhould know him; he tooke aſide a little the Maſter of the Shippe ſaying thus vnto him; my friend I perceaue you know who I am, whereby men may thinke great ſimplicity in me to conceale my ſelfe hereafter: Underſtand therefore that I departed out of the King my fathers Court, with an vnſpeakable deſire to come to ſée as well the good Knights which are in the Court of King Friſol, as alſo in that of the

Emperour of Conſtantinople; therefore I muſt requeſt you not to manifeſt mee to any one, conſidering that what I doo now is but for ſome good reſpect: And 
                     •
                  o the ende wee may auoyde the inconuenience which might enſue by the enquiry made of mée, you ſhall doo mee hereafter the leaſt honour you can; reputing me but for a ſimple and poore wandring Knight whom you ſhall call the Knight of the Dogge, and ſay I am of ſome farre Nation to you vnknowne, who wandring thorough the world to ſéeke ſtrange aduentures, and arriuing at the King of Englands Court, ſoiourned there a while with Prince Edward his ſonne; with whome I was ſo well acquainted, that he would haue kept me there a long time with him; whereby it procéedeth that I can better ſpeake that language than any other, yea than mine owne naturall tongue: And if yee doo ſo, and God giue mee grace to liue the age of a man, I will reward you ſo that you ſhall thinke it a bleſſed hower, wherein you firſt met me.
               Syr replyed the Merchant, you haue already done me more grace, than I ſhall euer bee able hereafter to deſerue at your hands; which may well aſſure you, I ſhall neuer dare diſcloſe you, ſeeing the great care and dilligence you your ſelfe vſe, not to bee deſcried of any whatſoeuer; and whereas there is others beſide in this veſſell who knowe you as well as I doo, I will make them all come before you to the ende they may promiſe not to make knowne your name, but when and to whom you ſhall pleaſe.
               So it fell out when they arriued afterward with great gladneſſe at Arriace, which was the place of the birth and dwelling of the chiefe Merchant who was owner of the ſhip: Being a Cittie verie ſtrong and of good defence ſituate in the Kingdome of Hungarie, on the one ſide confining with the Countries of the Soloan of Nicea. There came they into a Hauen, and for the Merchant was rich and had a faire lodging, hee tooke the Knight with him into his houſe: who would néedes bring along Zerphira with him, leading hir by the arme, where they were Honourably entertained by the

Merchants wife, who at their arriuall vnderſtood ſecretly by meanes of her huſband the diſcourſe of this Nauigation.
               But all thoſe of this ſhip hauing purchaſed by the helpe of the Knight of the Dogge great riches from the Inſtdels, the brute thereof came quickly to the eares of this Ladie: who found her ſelfe at that inſtant in a wofull caſe, becauſe King Friſoll went about by his Soueraign
                     •
                  ty to take from her this Cittie to forteſie it, as beeing the next frontier to the Mores Country: And alſo becauſe her deceaſed huſband had rebelled in his tune againſt Netrides his Father, when after the conqueſt of this Kingdome hee ſought to inueſt himſelfe with the principall Citties, wherein no man gaintſaide him, but he onely who died in this reuolte.
               Under this pretexte then ſent King Friſoll for this Lady to come vnto him, ſo diſpoſſeſſe her of the Cittie, promiſing neuertheleſſe to recompence her in good ſort: But ſhee who had but one only Sonne, as yet a tender pupill & vnder age, would not exchange it for any other Cittie of his Kingdome, as well by reaſon that hers was well ſeated for all kinde of commodities, as alſo for that ſhe ſaw all her ſubiects and inhabitance growne very rich and wealthy. So that this Lady had no more but eight dayes of tearme remayning when ſhe was to appeare before the King, when alſo Prince Edward arriued at Arriace, and hauing not as yet found out any that durſt appeare to anſwere for her, ſo that ſhe wared very ſad beeing in perplexety: knowing not howe to reſolue what was beſt to be 
                     〈◊〉
                   in this cale, when ſhe vnderſtoode of the proweſſe and magnanimitie of the Knight of the Dogge bruted abroad in her Cittie.
               Whereuppon it fortuned that ſhee ſent incontinent for the principall Merchant to come to her Caſtell, who arriued there ſoone after with two handmaides of Zerphira, which fell to his ſhare, whereof he made a preſent vnto her, and declared vnto her as much as yon haue read before: wherewith thee had her minde ſo troubled, that ſhe loſt almoſt both her ſence, and reaſon, and therefore ſhe prayed him to moue the Knight

to haue ſome compaſſion of her woefull diſtreſſe. Whereuppon he proteſting vnto her of a troth the great curteſie and generouſnes of Prince Edward, ſhee made no farther enquirie; but beeing accompanied with the Marchant & with ſome one of her Damſels, ſhe went preſently to him, and falling downe proſtrate before him thus ſhe began.
               Braue Knight, if the affliction of any poore deſolate widdow hath euer found place of pittie in your noble minde, I beſeech you moſt humbly you will now vouchſafe to regard mée in the neceſſitie wherein I am. And after ſhee had vnfolded the whole matter vnto him, the Prince made her this aunſwere.
               Madame I am verie ſorie and ſore diſpleaſed at your ſadneſſe and cauſe of melancholie; on the other ſide I am verie glad that ſo good an occaſion doth offer it ſelfe now, to make you knowe the deſire I haue had euer ſince mine Infancie, to helpe and ſuccour to my ſmall power all Ladies, who would employ mee, and eſpecially thoſe who feele themſelues oppreſſed, and deſtitute of aids and counſell. And for this cauſe will I willingly preſent my ſelfe before your King, making him to vnderſtand, that corrupting the inuiolable lawes of Iuſtice, he doth you wrong and great iniuſtice, to take your Cittie away from you by force and authoritie. And if there be anie Knight in his Court will maintaine the contrarie, I hope by the helpe of God to make him confeſſe it by force of Armes.
               Thus much hee ſaid for that he knew before howe Belcar one of King Friſols Sonnes was lately married with Alderine the Duke of Pontus Daughter, and brought away his wife into Hungarie, whereupon that occaſion they held great feaſtes and Tournies: ſo that growing vppon this quarrell in this contention with him or with the Prince Dutreus, and killing him in ſingle combat he hoped to do acceptable ſeruice to his Ladie Gridonia, being this houſe néere allied to that of Conſtantinople.
               
               The Ladie thanking him for this honeſt and curteous offer,

tolde him that if it pleaſed him to bare her companie, ſhee feared nothing, and that leauing her Sonne vnder good & ſure garde, ſhee purpoſed to depart verie ſoone with ſome number of Knights for her ſafer conduct. Whereunto the Knight anſwered that he was readie at any time when ſo euer ſhe pleaſed. And therefore ſhee cauſed good order to bee taken for all thinges which might be needfull in this voyage, deſiring before her departure, to get into her poſſeſſion for the Knightes ſake the Damſels of Zerphira, which remayned ſtill in the Marchants hands, paying for euery one of them a reaſonable ranſome according to their eſtate.
               All that night was Prince Edward very ſad, for hee could not reſolue with himſelfe, whether he ſhould firſt goe to Gridonia to preſent vnto her the Infant Zerphira, or whether he ſhould paſſe vnto Conſtantinople, to end the Combat with Primaleon.
               
               In fine after many reſolutions he concluded that with himſelf, which he put in execution very early on the morrow morning; for hee came to requeſt the Marchant his Hoaſt that it would pleaſe him to commaund a ſonne of his called Diazan to goe doo an errand for him as farre as the Clouen-Rocke, wherein he was more willingly obayed, than hee coulde commaund; then went he ſtrait to the Infants chamber, whome he told that he would ſend her to an excellent Lady who wold honour her, and vſe her with all humanity, and hee beſought her to bee willing to goe, hoping to come to viſit her there ere long, and to bring her ſuch newes, which ſhould giue her no occaſion to repent her going thither.
               The yong Princeſſe albeit this offer went néere her heart, anſwered him neuertheleſſe in this manner: In good faith it is great reaſon ſir, that as your priſoner and captiue I ſhould obay your requeſtes without any contradiction, eſpecially knowing they deriue from the ſincere and honeſt amity which it pleaſeth you to beare me, albeit I am ſure I ſhall neuer be able to merite it on my behalfe; neuertheleſſe I beſeech you to cauſe my Damſels to be called hether, vnto whome if it pleaſe

you I will ſpeake ſome few words before my departure; moſt willingly will I cauſe it to bee done replyed the Knight: So hee cauſed them to come into her Chamber forthwith, where theſe young Damſels ſéeing their Miſtres in ſtrange manner to hate her owne life in deploring and bewayling her infortunate diſaſter, they began altogether to make ſuch a ſtrange and pittifull complaint, that the Knight was conſtrayned to ſeparate them, and ſoone after to ſend away Diazan with the Infant Zerphira towards the Caſtell of the Clouen-Rocke, to preſent her to the Princeſſe Gridonia from a Knight vnknowne, with a letter whoſe tenour followed in theſe words.
               
                  
                     Prince Edwards Letter to the Princeſſe Gridonia.
                     
                        TO the rareſt Paragon of Princeſſes the Lady Gridonia, the onely Phoenix of her time, future Quéene of Polonia, and lawfull heyre of the Duchy of Ormeda, a Knight who deſireth to ſerue her perpetually, ſendeth gréeting, kiſſing with all curteſie, the hand of her Excellency. The perfect Idea of your neuer periſhing beauty, accompanied with ſo many other ſinguler gifts of grace, which the celeſtiall prouidence doth diſtribute equally to diuers perſons, hath ſo dim
                        
                           •
                        ned the cléere-ſéeing eyes of her burning and vnquencheable beames, that the Artizan in pourtraying of his liuelieſt péeces helpeth himſelfe with your diuine lineatures, as it were beauty it ſelfe deſcended into theſe lower Regions to bee ſéene amongſt vs: Such an example ſéene with mine eyes, beſides the teſtemony of another ſtrange accident, haue (as it were a fatall arrow) ſo liuely pierced my breaſt, that I can take no reſt, but in trauelling to aſpire vnto that, which ſhoulde giue mee the ſwéete fruition of ſo precious a rarenes of fortune: which is onely to reuenge the death of Perrequin of Duas your Coſen, vppon the falſe traytor and fellonious bom
                           •••
                        de

                        Primaleon of Greece. Continuing which tranqu
                           ••
                        lity of ſpirit by traueile of my body, I ſayl
                           •
                        d merrily towards Conſtantinople, and for the ſame effect; when by great fortune I met a Brigandine of Mores toſſed by tempeſt of weather into the North ſea, which would haue taken me priſoner: But the Soueraigne of all Gods, conſtrayning theſe mine enemies to paſſe the edge of my ſworde, hath ſafegarded and reſerued me to the end to be your comforter, and the reuenger of your iuſt quarrell. For aſſurance whereof in attending that happy ſeaſon, I ſend you in Hoſtage a Damſell iſſued of great parentage, whom I found within the veſſell of thoſe nuſcreant Mores; whom ſo I pray you to vſe and entertaine as you ſhall know her vertue and Princely de
                           ••
                        anor doth deſerue, as well in regard of the anguiſh which ſhe ſhall ſuffer perceiuing her ſelfe thus captiue, as alſo in reſpect of the ſincere and perfect amity which ſhe will ſhew vnto you all her life time.
                     
                        He who hath not his match in good will to doo your Ladiſhip all dutifull ſeruice.
                     
                  
               
               So then departed Diazan with Zerphira, and all her ſewels, accompanied with many Merchants who conuayed them very willingly; and holding on their iourney, they arriued at the Caſtle of the Clouen-Rocke, where after they had giuen Gridonia to vnderſtand that there was a Damſell which they had brought her in the behalfe of a Knight. Incontinent the Draw-bridges were all let downe, and the great gates ſet wide open.
               Then Diazan tooke the Infant by the hand, to lead her ſtrait into the Chamber of the Princeſſe, who ſéeing her ſo richly attyred and ſo curteous to doo her honour and reuerence, ſuppoſed ſhe muſt néeds be extracted from ſome high and illuſtrious Linage: wherefore ſhee came to welcome and to entertayn
                     •
                   her honourably: and perceiuing that the Lyon (which neuer ſtyrd from her, began to fawne vpon her, ſhe ſaid alowd; Siſter I cannot beléeue, but that this Lyon knoweth you, conſidering

the gentle ſemblant and ioyfull entertainement bée ſheweth you, which as yet I haue neuer ſéene him doo to any, ſince he was with me.
               
                  Zerphira vnderſtood nothing ſhee ſpake, but ſtedfaſtly beholding her excellent & perfect beauty, reputing her ſelfe moſt happy to become into the power and cuſtody of ſo gentle and rare a Princeſſe. Neuertheleſſe, Diazan who vnderſtood her well, ſpeaking for her, ſet one knée on the grounde and made this anſwere.
               Madame, in very déede I beléeue your Lyon neuer ſawe this Damſell before, becauſe ſhee commeth but nowe from a 
                     〈◊〉
                   Lande, farre diſtant from theſe Countries; but hée preſageth the great deſire which the Knight who ſent her vnto you, hath to doo you ſeruice; and alſo can iudge of the high choyce of this Princeſſe, beeing Daughter to the Soldan of Perſia, for ſo much, as the Lyons by nature (as being Kings among the foure footed Beaſts) doo recognize and knowe perfectly the illuſtrious and royall bloud.
               So hee procéeded to declare the Embaſſage which Prince Edward gaue him incharge to deliuer by worde of mouth, beſide the letter which he had already giuen into her hand, prayſing him in valour and curteſie aboue all the Knights to whom the fower Elements had euer lent any influence of harmonicall conſtitution: And told her moreouer, how he cauſed him ſelf to be called the Knight of the Dogge; by reaſon of a very great and fayre Dogge that he carried along with him, which was of ſo good knowledge, that hee ayded and ſuccoured him greatly in his neceſſities.
               Squire my friend, replyed the Princeſſe Gridonia, I make no doubt but that the Knight of the Dogge is both magnanimious and of great Proweſſe, ſéeing that without knowing me, hee hath had this remembrance of me; wherein I pray the Lord God to giue me the fauour, that according to his merite, I may returne him his due guerdon and rewards, and giue him ſo much power and ſtrength, as by his happy victory he may chace from my hart the languiſhing and bitter ſorrow

which hath ceazed it a long time. And for a teſtimony of the loue and duety I too owe him reciprocally, I take and accept this Infant (his preſent) in the place and ſteede of a ſiſter and a good friend; and ſo will I loue and honour her, as if wee were both iſſued out of one wombe.
               For this acceptation and curteſie did Diazan thanke her moſt humbly, in kiſſing her hand; then did hee interprete to the Infant what ſhe ſaid, whereat Zerphira bowing her ſelfe very low, did giue her alſo thankes for her part: and then did Gridonia take her by the hand to make her ſit downe by her, praying her to be of good cheare, and to deuiſe what paſtime ſhee pleaſed; all which Diazan expounded vnto her as well as he could.
               Then ſhee who perceiued ſo much honour was done vnto her in eating and drinking alwaies with Gridonia, which made her greatly comfort her ſelfe, and droue away all yrkeſomnes of the place, but not that ſhe could in any wiſe altogether forget her aduerſe and ſiniſter fortune: Neuertheleſſe, ſhe neuer ſhewed any euident token thereof, but very wiſely diſſembled it, whereat Gridonia maruelled not a little, but much more at her great riches and iewels which ſhée carryed about with her.
               
                  Diazan after hee had rewarded the Merchants of Arriace with ſome preſent, ſent them away home to their houſes, becauſe hee meant to abide there to ſerue the Infant Zerphira, whom he aduertized by the way, to take héede leaſt ſhée ſhuld ſpeake any thing in fauour of the Emperour of Conſtantinople to Gridonia, nor to ſhew by any token or ſigne that ſhe loued him, or any of his ſtocke or kindred: Which ſhee who was both ſage and well aduiſed, tooke for ſo good a forewarning, that ſhee was neuer heard in her preſence to ſpeake any thing by affection of this family.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXII.
               
                  How the Knight of the Dog preſented himſelfe with the Lady of Arriace before King Friſol, who at his entreaties let the widdow alone with her Cittie, and how afterward he got the beſt in a Tourney which was held in his Court, and what fell out by occaſion thereof.
               
               
                  
                     DIazan being departed with the infant Zerphira, Prince Edward, & the Lady of Arriace, accompanied with twentie knights whom they tooke for their ſafe conduct, tooke their iourney towards King Friſols Court, ſo that arriuing there the third day afterward about euening praier, the Knight being in his complete armour except his head-péece and gantlets onely, led the Lady by the hand, euen vp to the chamber of preſence: for in this place did the King recreate himſelfe with his children, and with many other Lords, who were come the ther of purpoſe to ſee and welcome Belcar not long time before arriued from Durace: and there was beſides the Quéene his Mother, accompanied with Eſquiuela & Alderine, the wiues of D
                        •
                     treus and Belcar his two Sonnes, with many other Ladies, deuiſing and ſporting themſelues together, euery one according to their pleaſure. The King ſéeing the Lady come in, knew preſently ſhe was Lady of Arriace, and beholding the phyſiognomie and honeſt countenance of the Knight, iudged with himſelfe he deſcended from ſome high and great linnage: when the Lady proſtrating her ſelfe at his féete, thus began to frame her complaint.
               Sir, it hath pleaſed you to cauſe notice to be giuen me to appeare before your royall Maieſtie, to the end that vnder the coulour of fortification and aſſurance of your kingdome, you may diſpoſſeſſe me of my towne of Arriace, becauſe it is ſituate vpon the frontiere confining vpon the Moores your enemies, from whom yée ſuppoſe putting therein ſure guarde and good garriſon, to ſhut vp all paſſage that way, & to cut off the hoſtile

inuaſion, which they might other wiſe make into your Maieſties dominions; wherein I maruell much that you addreſſe your ſelfe to me, being but a poore widow, rather than to any other of your vaſſalls, to vſe ſuch rigour & extremitie towards them: conſidering if you alledge that my ſonne is too yong to kéepe quarter, and to hold ſo dangerous a paſſage. I will anſwer you, this reaſon ſéemeth not ſufficient to execute iniuſtice towards him, but rather ought you as his King & ſoueraigue Lord, to take him into your protection and ſafegarde. Nor can you finde iuſtly any fault, that my citty is not well guarded and fortefited, ſéeing I ordinarily kéepe in pay a great number of Knights and Souldiers, who do not neglect their duty and diligence, aſwell in placing Sentinels and Scouts both by day and night, within and without my walles, as likewiſe in maintaining all other things which are requiſite for a frontire towne: beſides euery one may preſume, that in looſing of it I ſhould moſt of all be endammaged, as being depriued of the principall cittie of my domaine, which I will not exchange for any other which you ſhall offer me in recompence to haue it. This is the matter I am come to let you vnderſtand, hoping to finde ſome pitty and compaſſion in a Prince ſo full of clemencie as you are, otherwiſe I would neuer haue preſumed to haue béen ſo bolde to appeare before your preſence, aſſuring my ſelfe if you cauſe the charters of your Royaltie to be exactlie looked ouer, you ſhall finde it appertaineth not to you by any vaſſellage, but hath alwaies beene the chiefe citie belonging to the whole ſtocke of mine anceſtors.
               The king hauing giuen good eare to the ſpéeche of the Lady, perceiued the Knight whome ſhe brought thether came to defend her in a good and iuſt combate, if ſhe ſhould ſtand in néede: and foraſmuch as he knew the braue and valiant Knights by their countenance, this ſéemed vnto him a very reſolute and ſufficient man to maintaine her quarrell, which was not grounded of her part vpon any light occaſion: by reaſon wherof he ſome what repented himſelfe, in that he had cauſed her to be ſummoned vpō that buſineſſe, albeit to ſée what the Knight

would ſay, be made her this anſwer. Lady, it néedeth not too many words to you, determine you to render into my hands ſpeedily your towne, or elſe I will ſend to ſurprize it by force, and will giue you no other recompence, but that peraduenture which your Sonne hath inherited from his father, which is to be a diſloyall traitor to his King.
               O immortall God, then exclaimed the Lady, what is that which theſe mine eares haue now heard: Surely ſir you may do and ſay of vs your pleaſure, becauſe you are our Prince and liege Soueraigne: but if I were as good a Knight as I am a woman, I would make good againſt the hardieſt Knight of your Court, that my deceaſed huſband neuer committed any treaſon in his life. Moreouer, if my Sonne be wrongfully depriued of the citie, which by hereditary ſucceſſion appertaineth vnto him, we ſhall haue force, and not iuſtice offered vnto vs. I will do iuſtice, and that which I ought to do, replyed he: and I will ſée who will contradict me therein. Then Prince Edward who had hetherto remained ſilent without any worde ſpeaking, aduanced himſelfe towards the King, ſaying: I cannot ſufficiently maruell of you, O King of Hungarie, hauing heard heretofore the renown of your valiant and maruellous feates of armes, blowne abroade into the world with perpetuall fame and praiſe, that yée will now vpon ſo ſmall an occaſion obſcure and dim it.
               For vnderſtanding well the diſcourſe of this affaire, it ſéemeth to me that rather vpon ſome malice and grudge which you may haue conceiued againſt this Lady, than otherwiſe vpon any iuſt and apparant reaſon you will put her from her owne good. In ſo much that I muſt of fauour intreat you, that you will not ſuffer your ſelfe to be caried away with enuy, nor be blinded by couetouſneſſe, ſéeing ſhe will ſweare vnto you, to be for euer hereafter your loyall vaſſaile, as heretofore ſhe hath euer béene, and to keepe ſo ſtrong a guarde within Arriace, that you ſhall not néede to trouble your ſelfe, but remaine content in aſſurance of all tranquillitie and peace, ſo that if you refuſe this reaſonable condition which ſhe offereth

you, I ſhall be conſtrained to ſay you do her wrong, with intention to make it good by ſingle combate againſt whomſoeuer would maintaine the contrary. Belcar who was of great courage, ſtanding then vp with many other Lords who were preſent, anſwered him as it were in chollar. Knight, you come very preſumptuous and arrogant into this place, not reſpecting in what manner yee ſpeake before a King, whome I ſuppoſe you geſſe hath no children néere him. who dare quallifie your pride: you ſhall not be denied the combate if you ſo faine deſire it; and the Lady ſhall ſuſtaine more dammage in this her comming with you in her company (for your ſake) than ſhe ſhall get profit.
               I know not who you are (replyed the Prince) who giue ſo diſcurteous language vnto Gentlemen being ſtrangers; vnto whom ye ought to hearken attentiuely in their demaunds. Indéede I heard before I came into this Country, that the King was both valiant and actiue in feats of Armes, whome his ſonnes did ſecond and imitate very néere. Nor was I ignorant he had many other braue Knights in his Court, which notwithſtanding could not debarre me from vndertaking willingly the protection and defence of this Lady; ſo that if yée will vpon her quarrell enter the combat with me, I am ready to goe into the field, vpon condition, if you be by me vanquiſhed, the King ſhall neuer lay further claime to the Lady, nor to none of hers for the Citty of Arriace.
               
               
                  Belcar accepted with a very good will the battell vppon the ſame condition, and gaue him to vnderſtande who hee was. Whereat the Knight of the Dogge was moſt glad: For all this, the King would not hazard his ſonne to perrill of death, but commaunding him to ſit downe againe in his place, tolde them he would in no wiſe accord vnto this battell; becauſe hee was already reſolued to doo that which the Ladyes Knight had entreated him too, remembring himſelfe what occurrences he had paſſed in ſeeking ſtrange aduentures: So that Belcar hauing ſeated himſelfe againe, in a great chafe, the King turned himſelfe towardes Prince Edward with this language.

Gentleman, for your ſake haue I releaſed the towne of Arriace vnto this Lady, conditionally ſhe ſhall ſweare to kéepe it ſafe with ſufficient gartiſons of Soldiours able to defend it; that neither ſhée nor her ſonne ſhall hereafter bee rebels to my Crowne, and that you ſhall doo one pleaſure for mee beſide.
               Moſt willing will I employ my ſelfe in whatſoeuer it ſhall pleaſe you to commaund me (replyed the Prince) ſo it bee not to reueale my name, otherwiſe reputing the grace and fauour that you haue ſhewed to this Lady, as if I had receiued it my ſelfe. Then directing his ſpéech to the Lady bee willed her to kiſſe the Kings hand; the Amſtants who ſaw how ſecrete hée kept himſelfe, not bowing to doo the like, they preſhmed hée was ſome Knight deſcended of high Parentage. In the meane time, Belcar and the Engliſhman were in ſome contention, but the Quéene who tooke pitty of the Lady of Arriaces teares, beſought the King not to procure the death of her ſonne by this mean; ſo that for many reſpects he gaue the Lady her content, who ſware ſolenmely vnto him to obſerue all that hée propounded to her faithfully: and to ſende him alſo her ſonne vnto his houſe, to be brought vp to ſerue his Maieſty. King Friſol requeſted the Knight to ſoiourne in his Court vntill the next ſunday, to ſhewe him ſome Chiualries in a Tourney which ſhould be held there; whereunto he anſwered he would willingly abide with him, albeit he had great affayres to doo in another place. And hereupon the King commaunding they ſhould goe to diſarme him in ſome good chamber of the Caſtel, the Knight thanked him greatly for that curteſie, excuſing himſelfe that he would not leane the Lady of Arriace. Whervpon the King commaunded his Harbingers to ſée them very well lodged without his Pallace.
               Euery body ſtood gazing vpon Maiortes the Dogge which Clawdius lead in a Leaſe, maruelling much at his height and goodly proportion, amongſt whom wer many which did much deſire to haue him; and aboue all, there was the Earle of Oregua, agreat hunter and chacer in Forreſts rauiſhed to enioy him. Wherefore reputing himſelfe a hardy Knight, bée

determined to lay an ambuſh for Prince Edward to take him away by violence as you ſhall vnderſtand. But the Lady being a very ioyfull woman to ſée her buſineſſe haue ſo happy iſſue, would not depart vntil the Tourney were finiſhed; which her Knight alſo purpoſed to attend; who in the meane time was fore offended with himſelf that he combatted not Belcar, becauſe that ſlaying him in battell, hee thought to doo great pleaſure to Gridonia, who hated mortally the partakers and louers of the Emperour of her capitall enemy.
               But the King and all the Lords there preſent, had no other talke but of him; ſo that Belcar who felt himſelfe ſome what diſpleaſed hearing all the praiſe powred vpon him, ſaide thus much in all their hearings; The houre approcheth when we ſhall ſee what hee can doo: Notwithſtanding I maruell much of you my Lorde (looking vppon his father) that you ſuffer your ſelfe ſo ſoone to be ouercome with wordes. I haue done it ſonne (replyed the King) to preuent the perill of your life, hauing no better right on my ſide, and let mee heare no more, for good Knights ought to be honoured and maintained by Princes.
               After this commaundement this pleacame no more in queſtion, but euery one prouided to make himſelfe braue againſt the Tourney, attending with an incredible deſire to ſir howe the Knight of the Dogge would be haue himſelfe. Sunday being once come, the King went accompanied with his Barrons, and the Quéene attended by her Ladies to the Scaffold, and preſently the place of the Iouſts was opened, where wer about two thouſand Knights, what on one ſide and other, and the Duke of Borſa and the Earle of Oregua helde vppon the Courtiers ſide, being both very valiant Champions. A
                     •
                   the firſt encounter many knights were ſéene goe to the ground then beginning to ſtrike one vpon another 
                     •
                  dgeling, 
                     ••••
                  ling, and point wiſe, making ſuch noyſe as if a Legion of Smiths had béene beating vpon their Anuiles. But King Friſol looked about on euery ſide, thinking to recognize the Engliſh Prince, who hearing ſay that the Skirmiſh was already begun

(ſuppoſing ſome one or other of the Kings Sonnes would be within the liſts) he came thether accompanied with the xx. Knights of the Ladies: ſo that ſeeing the courtiers at the point of carying away the victory, he purpoſed to reléeue the féebler ſide: and daſhing Spurres to his Horſe, before he brake his Launce, he laide many a Knight along; then ſetting hand to his ſword he did maruelous things: By this means knew him many Courtiers, who came to prooue themſelues againſt him. Amongſt others, the Earle of Oregua comming very neere him lent him two ſound blowes with his Mace: for which he ſuſteined ſodaine reuenge by one blow which Prince Edward croſſed him ouer his Helmet, wherwith being ſore hurt he fell to the ground. Surely, quoth the King then, who beheld the cō
                  flict, I perceiue now that which my heart did preſage vnto me, of the proweſſe of the Knight of the Dog, to be true: things which euery one may iudge aſwel as I, by his honorable ſeats of armes which do aduance him far aboue all thoſe of the whole troope. And as he vttered theſe ſpéeches, behold Belcar and his brother Ditreus who enter the liſts vnknowne, and for they ſaid they would not be ſéene in the Tourney that day, to the end to auoid aſmuch as might be, the clamor of the vulgar ſorte aſſoone as the Nobility were placed vpon the Scaffolds, they went ſecretly to arme thēſelues, to thruſt in among the crowd, as being no better than ſimple Knights onely: where being ariued, Belcar ran his Launce cowched with great fury againſt the Knight of the Dog; who ſeeing him come with ſuch a powder, attended him couered with his ſhield: whereupon he receiued one liuely attaint, wherewith had it not bin for the band of the Armer or, who fatally tempered it, Prince Edward had bin in danger of his life. Then began they to charge one another with inuincible courage, neuertheleſſe their conflict continued not long: becauſe the Engliſhman who excelled Belcar in chiualry, féeling himſelfe ſomwhat mooued, lighted ſo fell a knock vpon his Helmet, that he cleft it a two, and wounded him déep in his head; ſo that he was conſtrained to fall aſtonied to the ground. When the Prince of Hungarie ſaw his brother Belcar
                  
lie ſo piteouſly vanquiſhed, & the Courtiers ouerthrowne, he ran as a mad man againſt Prince Edward with ſo terrible a furie, that his blow glauncing within the plates of his pouldrons vnder his ſhield, he gaue him a little wound in his arme: but he went not farre from the place to vaunt himſelfe therof, for the Knight of the Dog reached him two ſo ſound blowes vpon his left ſhoulder betwéene his Habergion and his headpéece, that he ſent him to kéep his brother company. Afterward with the aid of the moſt valianteſt on his ſide, he bruſht his aduerſaries in ſuch ſort, that he made them all diſcampe to ſaue themſelues: and ſeeing himſelfe victorious, being very weary and ouer trauelled, he retired himſelfe into his lodging, where he was by the Lady and her Knights diſarmed, and his wound carefully looked vnto. Meane while the King, who knew nothing of his ſonnes diſafter, ſhewed himſelfe to be very ioyfull to ſee that which he preſumed of the Knight of the Dog to be in effect moſt true: and ſuppoſed thereby he had done very well not to graunt his ſonne Belcar the combate againſt him: neuertheles being arriued at the Pallace, and finding them both in ſo ill pickle, he changed his ſodaine ioy into ſorrow, ſaying: Alas! I deſerue this well, who did my ſelf intreate the knight to attend the Tourney, to procure me this miſchiefe: now let him go his wayes on Gods name, and that no man be ſo hardie as to diſturbe and vexe him.
               The Engliſh Prince, vnderſtanding how Ditreus and his brother were wonderfull ill at eaſe, through the wounds which they receiued of his hand, was the gladdeſt man in the world, for the reſpect which you haue heard before: and conſidering how it was not very good to ſoiourne any longer in this court, requeſted the Lady to take her leaue of the King, and that it would pleaſe him to pardon him if he abode no longer there: which ſhe did moſt willingly, not without great enquiry of the King to know who her Knight might be, wherein the good Ladie being not able to ſatisfie him any otherwiſe, but that a Merchant of Arriace had taken him into his ſhip in England as a paſſenger: He tooke her conge honeſtly of him to returne

home to her own houſe, whether the knight of the Dog would néeds accompany her a good part onward of her way: whereof the Earle of Oregua being aduertized, who hated him mortallie, for that he had béene diſmounted by him in the Tourney: deſiring alſo with an extreame affection, to get his faire Dog Maiortes frō him, encouraged a brother of his, who was both a valiant and a hardy champion, to ſéeke to be reuenged of him, all
                     •
                  dging he durſt not leaue the Court without incurring great ſuſpition. He framed ſo cunning a ſpéech, that he ſent his brother after Prince Edward with xx. Knights very well appointed & armed, praying him not to aſſaile him, vntill he had intelligence by his ſpies, that he had taken his laſt leaue of the Lady. And then taking ſome good opportunitie they might ouertake him to maſſacre him, getting into their poſſeſſion aſſoone as they could the Dog. They followed him vntill the ſecond dayes iourney, when he tooke his farewell of the Lady with this faire ſemblant. Madame, will it pleaſe you to excuſe me, if I beare you company no farther: for hauing matter of importance to be done in an other part, I ſée the terme at hand when I muſt néedes take my iourney the that where my buſineſſe lieth. Moreouer, I hope now you ſhall doe well enough without my aide, being almoſt at your home, where yée ſhall liue héereafter in all peace and at your hearts eaſe.
               The Lady who ſaw him ſpeake in good ſooth, finding herſelf greatly beholding to him, durſt not by any entreaty withdraw him from his voyage: which notwithſtanding ſhe would willingly haue done, at the leaſt to haue gotten his company but vnto her Caſtel, to haue feaſted him there, and to haue beſtowed on him ſome preſents beſeeming his eſtate: wherefore taking her leaue with teares in her eyes, ſhe offered him ſome ritch Iewels, which he would in no wiſe accept, onely he recommanded the Merchant vnto her who brought him out of England, vpon whom afterwards for his ſake ſhe beſtowed many greatfauours: ſo will we ſuffer her in great ioy & contentment to goe home to her Citty, to tell what befell Prince Edward after he was departed from her company.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXIII.
               
                  
                     How Prince Edward vanquiſhed the twentie Knights whom the Earle of Oregua
                              •
                           s brother had laid in ambuſh to kill him, and to take away his Dogge: and how afterward he was brought by ſtrange aduenture into a Caue, where he dreamed a terrible dreame, and the ſequel thereof.
                  
               
               
                  THe Knight of the Dog bidding the Lady of Arriace adieu, tooke his way towards Conſtantinople, when the Earle of Oreguaes brother who followed him by the foot, had aduertiſment thereof by one of his ſpies, that was alwayes at his elbowes: by whoſe meanes learning perfectly what way he was to holde, rideth a great galloy to ouertake him by a little path, which lead into a wood, hard by which he was to paſſe: where ambuſhing his xx. Knights, he went before, to the end that diſcrying him a farre of, he might méete him full in the téeth, to make him endure the charge of his ambuſcado. In bréefe, beholde he commeth his loſt and eaſie pace, as he who had a great iourney to make, when the Earles brother, who marched already againſt him, meaſuring by his eye how farre he had to go to the place of the Ambuſh, eaſed a little the pace of hi
                     •
                   horſe, to méete him iuſt in the ſame place: where being arriued, he thus began. Knight, is it not you, who now goe from the King of Hungaries Court, with ſo good penyworths of the diſorders and outrages which yée haue there committed? By God I will ſaue you a labour from going far this wayes to make your vaunts thereof. O it is I whom it concerneth replied Prince Edward to ſaue you from this reproche of treaſon, which might be laide hereafter in your diſh to your ſhame and diſhonour, which I hope to doe at this preſent by the aide of him, vnto whom all iniuſtice is odious and deteſtable. With that he came and charged his Launce with ſuch a powder againſt the Earles brother, that piercing him cleane therein the body, he had no néed to call ford Barber or

Surgeon to dreſſe his wounds, which the twenty Knights inambuſhed (who had already compaſſed him in rounde that he might not flie from them any wayes) perceiuing, ran two or thrée vpon him at once, the one whereof failed his ſtroake, and winding himſelfe aſide at the attaint of the other, he hit the third which came carréering after thē with ſuch a ſound blow vpon the pate, that he ſent him from his ſaddle betweene his horſe héeles, wherein falling downe he burſt his neck.
               Then the Engliſh Prince, ſéeing himſelf in extreame danger of life, made choyce rather to looſe it valiantly, than to ſaue it by cowardly flight, ſo that in a moment his courage came to him in ſuch ſort, that hee made his aduerſaries well know, they had ſought him out but for their owne miſchance: For as a furious Lyon he made ſuch a bloody maſſacre of them, as the very graſſe being gréene before, & now all ſtayned with their goare bloud did giue ſufficient teſtemony thereof. But whilſt he ſtoode to incloſe with a great troupe of them, the reſt flew vpon his man Clawdius ſaying to him; let goe the Dog Raſcall, or elſe thou ſhalt dye preſently without repenting thy ſinnes. I will let him ſlip indéede (quoth the Page) but it ſhall be ſmall for your aduantage; before he had well ſpoken theſe words, 
                     •
                  etting ſlip one end of the Leaſe, bee let Maiortes looſe amongſt them: the Dog ſpying his Maſter in that perrill, ran ſo furiouſly to bite the horſes that made front againſt him, pulling out with his téeth their buttocks & flanks, that they were forced to alight from their backs: Then began he to play the diuel amongſt them, nor was there any plate of their Harneſſe ſo faſt nayled, but he rent it in pieces with his teeth; then faſtning in his ſharpe iawes in the places which he ſaw vnarmed, he brought the fleſh ſtill away with him, vntill the greateſt part of the twenty Knights were dead or wounded in the place; the reſt betooke them to their héeles as faſt as they could run, becauſe Maiortes had made ſuch worke of their horſes, that they could not ſtand them in any ſtéed; ſuch was the rage and fury of this Dog, that whoſoeuer had beheld him tearing the fleſh of their horſes, and pulling their armour in pieces,

might eaſily haue remembred the Seian or Bactrian Dogs, whom they 
                     •
                  éede with the fleſh and bloud of men, to the end to make them more fierce and eager againſt their enemie.
               Prince Edward for his part receiued but two or thrée little wounds, & to recure the ſame, went into a little Citty not far from thēce into a rich Bourgers houſe, who feaſted him very honourably during the time of his mallady, which laſted but eight dayes, becauſe none of his wounds were daungerous at all; but being healed and cloſed vp, he purpoſed to betake himſelfe again to his former iourney with his man Clawdius and Maiortes his good Dog, whom hee loued and made more account of than before. Already was the greateſt part of the day ouerſpent, before Prince Edward had made an ende of the conflict which ye haue heard recited, whereof the Earle of Oregua being aduertized by one of thoſe who ſaued himſelf by vertue of his héeles; hee was ready to dye through rage and deſpite: and cauſing the bodies of his Brother and the other ſlayne Knights to bee enterred, could not tell how to conceale this ignominious ouerſight (as in like caſe the true Iudge of all, doth permit ſuch haynous diſloyalties to bee quickly made knowne) but the bruit came to the Kings eare: Who forthwith impriſoned him as a tranſgreſſor of his commandement, thereby to manifeſt vnto the world his own innocency in this treaſon, conſidering the coniectures which might be gathered by the hard meaſure which his two wounded ſonnes receiued at the hands of this ſtranger: Which déede if it cauſed him to be highly honoured throughout all his kingdome; no leſſe did euery one commend the proweſſe and valour of the Knight of the Dog, who being recouered of his wounds, as ye haue lately read, hath taken his leaue of his Hoſt to proſecute his intented voyage. And trauelling fiue dayes ſpace along the ſea Coaſt, on the ſ
                     ••
                  t he entred into a forreſt, and found not in all that whole day any Cabbin or Tent wherein to make his repaſt, but one onely olde houſe where ſome ſhepheards had ſet by a lodge couered with thatch; ſo that he was conſtrayned to lodge therein all that night with Claudius his Page, who led

along with him his great Dog: neuertheleſſe before any ſléep could cloſe vp his eyes, he ſaw from a corner wherein he was couched vpon a little ſtraw, comming into that homely Cell, two goodly yong Stags, caſting foorth of their eyes an admirable gliſtering, whom aſſoone as Maiortes eſpyed, he ſtarted vp forthwith, as if he would haue ruſht vpon them furiouſly. But it tell out to the contrary, for they went out againe all thrée one after another, as quietly as if they had béen brought vp in one houſe together all their life time: ſo that the Prince no leſſe aſtoniſhed with this new accident: than deſirous to ſée the end which would follow thereof, went foorth of the Shéepecoate for the ſame purpoſe; and beholding the thrée beaſts run very louingly and quietly into the wood together, he ſaid. Now ſo God helpe me, it would greatly vex me if I ſhould loſe in this ſort the Dog, which I haue héeretofore ſo well defended: therfore Claudius bring me my horſe, that I may go after to ſaue him if I can. He had not ſcarſe ſpoken the word, but the Page was come with his horſe, vpon which mourning he was ſoone in the ſame way which he ſaw they had taken: and albeit he gallopyed amaine, yet could he neuer ouertake them, and neuertheleſſe he neuer loſt them out of his ſight. So that following them all night long, being very glad to ſée them trip ſo louingly together before him, yet was he far more ioyfull when he perceiued them hide themſelues within the narrow month of a Caue; where he being arriued, leauing his horſe with his Page who followed him, entred in preſently after them with his good ſworde in his hand. So farwent he within that darke hole vnder ground, that he at the laſt drew neere to a goodly ritch Pallace, ioyning hard vnto a moſt pleaſant garden planted round with all ſorts of fruite trées: betwixt which he ſaw many channels running with cleare ſtreames, comming all forth of a moſt ſumptuous and magnificent fountaine, whoſe baſen of fine Inſper ſtone, was ſupported by thrée Harpies of Orientall Chriſtolite. There Prince Edward encouraged him ſelfe to go on, and as he went a little farther, he found vnder a Pauillion of cloth of Golde, a moſt beautifull & gratious Lady

ſitting betwéen the two Stage, and his Dog iuſt ouer againſt her: whom the Knight ſéeing before him, laide his hands vpon the heads of the two Fawnes, of whome immediatly was made a wonderfull Metamorphoſts, for they became two yong men very richly attired, vnto whom the Prince drawing néer, being greatly amazed of that ſodaine tranſmutation, they began to ſhew great reuerence vnto him, and the Lady by and by fell vpon her knées, ſaying: Faire Knight, by the thing yee loue beſt in this world, we beſéech you pardon vs; if with this trouble and diſeaſe of minde we haue cauſed you to come ſo farre: for it hath not bin without good occaſion, conſidering the long time we attende you héere with great denotion: and yée may be vndoubtedly aſſured not to ſuffer any diſeaſe in this place, rather will we ſerue you héere as him, who ought to reeſtabliſh vnto vs, that which God and nature had prepared for vs after the death of our father. Behold héer your Dog whom my Brethren brought into this place, not to the end to ſteale him from you, but to cauſe you onely to come into this place. Prince Edward hauing heard this Damſell ſpeake, whom in the meane time he tooke vp from the ground by the hand, appeaſed his choller, and anſwered her thus.
               Madame, of a troth I was in very great care, fearing to looſe this Dog, which I looſe more than yée may imagine, notwithſtanding, ſéeing I haue recouered him, I pardon you willingly wherein ſoeuer you ſay yée haue offended me: and if yée can deuiſe wherein I may imploy my beſt indeuours to doe you good in that which they detaine from you wrongfully, I ſhall as willingly do it, as any Knight whom yée may finde within the circute of the Horkon, or in the whole center of the world. Then the Damſel thanked him moſt humbly, and taking him by the hand, lead him to ſitdowne by her in a Chaire, where the two yongmen diſarmed him: then brought they him out victuals to breake his faſt, and (after he had well eaten and ſatiſfied his hunger) they prayed him to lay downe his head vpon a rich pillow, which they laid for him vpon the ſide of a ſent, there to repoſe himſelfe, which he did willingly, being very weary with the trauell which he had endured the night before,

wherein he neuer ſlept winke. The Lady couering his legs with a Scarlet Mantle furd with Wloluerings, he fell a ſléepe preſently, & in the meane time the two brethren went to fetch Claudius, who ſtayed with his Horſe looking for him as yet at the mouth of the Caue. After that the Engliſh Prince had ſlept a good while, he awaked ſodainely out of his ſleepe, being fore affrighted with a terrible dreame which he had dreamed: It ſéemed to him to arriue at Conſtantinople to defie Primaleon, where entring within the Citty, he met a Lyon, and a fierce Lyonneſſe, which as he would ſet his foote within the Gate, iſſued foorth and ramped againſt him, tearing away with her pawes the forepart of his Haubergion, in ſuch ſort, that making ſtill a wound bigger and bigger in his breſt iuſt againſt his heart, it ſéemed to him that his ſoule did preſently depart out of his body. And as he thought beſide that the Lion and he being furiouſly in fight together, he could in no wiſe preuaile to vanquiſh, nor in good ſort defend himſelfe from him, he was ſo much in nature reſembling to the Lyonneſſe: which cauſed him in a great fright to ſtarte out of his ſléepe, ſaying: Lord God helpe me, and permit not I beſéech thée, that I receiue any ſhame or diſhonour in the battell which I hope to haue againſt Primaleon: with that Olymba roſe vp (for ſo was the Lady called ſitting at his ſ
                     •
                  oe) ſaying. Sir, yee awake very ſorrowfull, and I know not what may giue you occaſion thereof, if it be not ſome dreame, which yee know better than I, men accompt but falſe, and abuſiue imaginations: for when they ſhould be true, and ſhould preſage & foretell to credulous perſons ſome token of future occurrences, yée are not ignorant but that the noble and generous mindes muſt paſſe thorowe many ſtrange and hard aduentures. In good faith yée ſay true Madame, replied the Knight, ſeeing that to finde you in this place with your Brethren lately tranſformed, I reputed a thing moſt ſtrange and maruelous: wherefore I beſeech you declare vnto me the whole diſcourſe. Sir, replied Olymba, moſt willingly will I obey you in this requeſt, ſince that it pleaſeth you to vnderſtand our great diſaſter.
               
                  
Know yée, that we are all thrée children of the deceaſed Soldan of Nicea, the ſame who dyed by the moſt diſloyall and tycannous miſchance that euer was heard of: for this good Prince our Father, being by nature méeke and gentle, loued moſt dearely a yonger brother that he had, called Gelon, who of a troth neuer ſhewed him any part of reciprocall loue again, becauſe from day to day he ſought out all meanes to kill him, to ſeaze himſelfe wholy with his eſtate & Seigniories, which fell out after a while as they were both together Hunting abroad. For my Father vpon a time making an aſſembly néer vnto a thick brake wherein his Hunters had encloſed a great wilde Boare, and ſpread the 
                     •
                  oyle about it, to ſhew him ſome paſtime, the traitour ſéeing himſelfe ſtill néere my father, with thrée or foure of his faction, as he eſpied him a ſtrait paſſage, beſet & couered euery way round with thick buſhes (by which way he doubted the Boare would iſſue) lanched at him behind his hack a very ſharpe Iaueline, which he carried in his hand, with ſuch violence, that it ran him cleane thorow the body, being conſtrained to fall at that very inſtant from his Horſe backe to the ground, in the ſelfe ſame place: ſo that the Boare comming foaming and grinding his téeth in furious manner, toare and rent in péeces the Carcaſſe already deade, the fellon murtherer our Ʋnkle, making the world beléeue howe the Boare had ſlaine him, and would haue done the like to him, had he not ſhifted himſelfe a little aſide: ſo that ſome Hunters who ſaw very wel the contrary, durſt neuer open their mouth ſo much they feared leſt ſome miſchiefe would be done them if they ſhould make any ſpéech thereof. This lamentable murther being committed, he went ſtrait to Nicea, where inueſting himſelfe with the whole Eſtate in leſſe than fiftéene dayes he proclaimed himſelfe Soidan without any contradiction, my brethren and I being too little to reſiſt ſo damnable a creature; and yet for all that the cruell & bloudy minded monſter would haue ſlaine vs then in that our pupillage, had it not béene for the ayde of a Knight called Oſmaquin, very well learned in the Art of Magicke and Negromancie, who by the vertue of

his ſecret Philoſophy could foretell to our father, that he ſhould take héed of Gelon his yonger brother, vnto whom he gaue no credit, whereby this miſchiefe happened vnto him. But the good old man as ſoone as our father was deceazed, conducted vs thrée into this place, where by meanes of his knowledge hee hath built theſe goodly magnificences which you ſée, and dwelt here about fower yeares, vſing vs as his owne children; but at the end of that terme he fell into a grieuous and contagious mallady, with the which fearing to infect vs (knowing aſſuredly he ſhould then dye) would not in any wiſe we ſhould frequent néere him; but vpon a time, féeling himſelfe at the very laſt extremity of his life, cauſed vs to come before him ſaying; My children ſorrow ye not for my death, ſéeing that God being pittiful and merciful, will remember you before it belong; for a Chriſtian Knight iſſued of Royall bloud, reuenging the death of your father, ſhall reſtabliſh you in the goods which are wrongfully detained from you, and you ſhall know him by a fayre Dog which he hath, being a great deale better than he is ſuppoſed to be, in ſo much, as it is a man and a very valiant Knight. In fine, be commanded vs having once met you, to paſſe with you vnto Conſtantinople, where he foretold vs you ſhould receiue a wound in Combat, whereof you might neuer be cured in all your life time, albeit it ſhould be to your honor and immortall renowne: For the better direction of which voyage, and to auoyd all ſhipwracke in this Nauigation, hée told vs we ſhould finde a Frigot ready rigde with all thinges neceſſary not far from this place: then giuing vs many other holſome admonitions, for want of his breath which began to ſayle him, bee yéelded his ſoule vnto him who demanded it, in the ſame place as ye ſée, from whence my brethren haue iſſued forth diuers times to ſée if they might finde you: And now I prayſe God it is not in vayne, becauſe the Dog which Oſmaquin told vs off, maketh me doubtles beléeue, all the reſt will prooue as true as this. You recount me great matters (quoth the Knight then) I beſéech God with all my heart they may haue a happy ende, that I may reuenge you of ſo ſowle a treaſon.

Mine aduiſe being to goe aſſoone as may bee towards Conſtantinople, where the great affection I haue to ſee the aduenture which is reſerued for me, makes me thinke euery houre a yeare. Then the young men bowing themſelues very low, & doing their obeyſance to the Knight, thus beſpake him. Noble Prince, ſince that by fatall deſtiny it falleth to your good hap to reléeue vs out of this miſery, we hope alſo our valour will bee ſomething more aduantage to vs, in receiuing the order of Knighthood from your hand, the which I humbly kiſſe at this preſent, quoth the Elder called Moſderin, in token of the perpetuall ſeruice which yée ſhall alwayes finde at my hands: the like did the yonger named Bellager. Prince Edward embracing them both, was very glad to ſée Claudius hir Page there alſo, to the end he might make more ſpéede away: ſo comming forth of the Caue, he mounted the Infant behinde himſelfe, and Moſderin vpon Clandius horſe, and his Page behinde him (for Bellager would go on foote) they began faire and ſoftly to ſet forward thorow a Forreſt. And becauſe they could not that euening reach the Sea-coaſt, they reſted within a wood in a very thick place all couered and beſet with trées full of leaues and gréene boughes, where the Knight could not ſleep one winke, ſo much was his minde troubled with thinking of Maiortes, whom the Damſell had tolde him to be a man, and of the other things which Oſmaquin had propheſted of him, which did all iumpe right with the imagination of his dreame: wherein his thoughts were ſtill occupyed vntill it was day, when they remounted on horſe back, & marching along the ſea coaſt, they came at laſt vnto a little créeke lying betwéene two Rocks, where they found the Frigot at an Anckor, whereinto they went all aboard to Ship themſelues.
               In this veſſell were two little Chambers either of them garniſhed with a fine bed, and with whatſoeuer prouiſion was requiſite for ſuch a voyage: therein was alſo found two rich Armours varniſhed blacke, with two very fayre ſwordes for the young Gentlemen which Oſmaquin had layd in that place before he dyed, together with all the treaſure of the Soldan

their father, foreknowing well by meanes of his Art, what would enſue after their fathers deceaſe. So ſoone as the young men ſyied theſe Armours, they beſought Prince Coward to Arme them Knights before they ſet ſayie, whereunto he moſt willingly condeſcended; and cauſing them to endoſſe the Armours, he buckled on the ſpurres vnto them both, and gyrded both theyr ſwords vnto theyr ſides, giuing them the gentle accolado with theſe kinde ſpéeches; I pray God to make you as good Knights as your aſpect and phiſtognomie doth prognoſticate, that the proweſſe and valour which ſhall héereafter apparantly procéede from you, may deface the want of this act not accompliſhed according to the ceremonies requiſite in the honour of Chiualrie.
               When they had thus receiued the order of Knighthood, they hoyſedſailes, and without euer ſetting eye of any other ſhip, they rowed ſo long, that within a while they found themſelues in the maine Sea: where the Infant Olymba was ſo glad, ſéeing her two Brethren Knighted, that ſhe could not ſatiſfie her ſelf in her dilligent attendance vpon Prince Edward. So that ſayling with a proſperous and a calme ſea, they came to ſurge within the coaſt of Thrace, whence Prince Edwarde diſcrying Conſtantinople a great way off, his heart began to riſe, not knowing what fortune would befall him in that Cittie.
               And for that he would not directly put into an Hauen, they Anckored in a little gulfe about fiue miles off, where neuer any Ships vſed to ride: and yet thether haunted ſome poore Fiſhermen, whoſe dwelling was not farre of.
               As they were all gotten a ſhore: My friends, quoth Prince Edward to the young Gentlemen, I muſt of neceſſitie go into Conſtantinople; where I hope to haue the combate granted me againſt Primaleon of Greece, ſonne to the Emperour Palmerin, for indeed for no other cauſe am I come into theſe climates: wherein if God ſo much ſauour me, that I may eſcape with my life, I promiſe you to be héere againe quickly, to aide you with all my power: and if peraduenture I die, ending

my life in this Combate, heauen a graunt yée may ſpeedily recouer your eſtate and ſucceſſion. Therefore mine aduiſe is; that yée abide héere to accompany the Infant your ſiſter, for I am determined to paſſe thether alone, as I came when yée firſt found me out.
               When Olymba heard the Prince ſpeake in this manner, ſhe began to fetch a deepe ſigh, ſaying; Ah Noble ſir, God for bid your death ſhould be ſo ſodaine, I hope aſſuredly, you ſhall returne victorious in this battell; therefore trouble not your ſelfe with any of theſe thoughts and cares, but haue your confidence in God onely, who ſhall be your Protectour.
               Then Bellager interrupting this her ſpéeche, requeſted the Knight he would not for any thing in the world abandon him, whereby he might not ſée the ende of this combat; ſo that hee muſt néedes goe along, and Moſderin, who would faine haue made the ſame voyage, was faine to keepe his ſiſter company: where we will leaue them to bring the two Knights vnto the Citty of Conſtantinople.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXIIII.
               
                  
                     How Prince Edward being arriued in Conſtantinople to defie Primaleon vppon the death of Perrequin of Duas, found himſelfe ſurprized with the amorous and gratious regarde of the Infant Flerida the Emperours daughter: and how he and Primaleon fighting afterward a Combate at all 
                           〈…〉
                        , were by her parted, and what fell out therevpon.
                  
               
               
                  PRince Edward and Bellager hauing taken the way of Conſtantinople, had not trauelled aboue two miles, but they mette with many Knights who were walking abroade in the fields: For this place being very pleaſant and of great recreation, the Emperour woulde néedes ſhowe

ſome paſtime of hunting to Torques ſonne to Kings Toma
                        •
                     
                   of Grieſca and of Romata, him whom he had before deliuered out of the hands and dangerous aſſaults of the Soldan of I'erſia.
               
               This Torques a moſt gallant Gentleman and very actius 
                     ••
                  eats of Armes, pricked on with the ſpurre of vertue to winne bruite and renowne among the beſt Knightes, hearing euery day ſuch high commendation of thoſe in the Emperours Court ſurpaſſing the beſt accompliſhed and moſt valianteſt Knights in all Europe and Aſia, he beſought the King his Father vppon a time to giue him licence to goe the ther to ſée them.
               Whereunto he moſt willingly gaue his conſent, and ſhe rather becauſe the good Prince Palmerin was one of the greteſt friends hee had, a thing which might eaſily bee iudged by the ſumptuous and moſt honourable entertainement which hée made his ſonne at his arriuall, vnto whom Primaleon opened the ſecrete gates of his amity, loue, and faythfull friendſhippe, in ſuch ſort, that they were neuer ſhut vnto him afterward.
               Now by this time Prince Edward béeing come iuſt to the place where was pitched the Emperours Cent (who was then walking abroade with his Empreſſe along by a little freſh ſtreame which was very néere vnto that place, Primaleon and Torques with the Infant Flerida, and diuers other Ladies walking after them) hee was greatly amazed and aſtoniſhed for a time, but at the laſt he aſked of a Squire who it was.
               Syr (quoth hée) it is the Emperour of Conſtantinople, who came hether yeſterday to take his diſport and pleaſure at the Chace: Accompanied with the Prince of Grieſca, who arriued but this other day within his Court; And if you be a ſtranger in this place (as it ſéemeth vnto mee you are) I will preſently ſhowe you the Emperour if you knowe him not, for behold where hée is himſelfe in perſon walking with the Empreſſe.
               
                  
Kight ioyfull was the knight of the Dog to beholde the Emperour, calling to minde the maruellous deeds which he heard reported of him, & approching neerer, be did not alight at all from his horſe, to ſhew that he came not to doo him anie ſeruice. But a little he bowed himſelf on his horſe mane, ſaying: Sir, of your fauor I would requeſt you, it may pleaſe you to ſhew me if Primaleon your ſonne be in this tronye or no, for that before you (eſteemed the moſt iuſt and equitable Prince liuing at this daie vnder the firmament) I wil deſ
                     •
                  s him vpon the death of a knight whom he felloniouſly ſlew in his tourney. Ieſus Chriſt, (quoth the Emperour, then being ſome what affended) and when will this demand haue an end? I tell ye knight, that both you and all thoſe who ſhall come to take this reuenge, ſeeme vnto me raſhly aduiſed, ſince the truth of the act is ſo manifeſt and notorious. But the Prince who ſaws him ſpeake thus in choller, maruelled at the manner of his anſwere, for that he reputed him a little more modeſt and diſcreet than he ſeemed to be at that time, ſo that being not able to containe within his heart the burning 
                     •
                  eale which prouoked him ſo farre, he was forced to replie vpon his former purpoſe thus: Sir, I did not thinke to receiue ſo rigorous an anſwere from ſo benigue and curteous a prince as ye are, neuertheles to vſe no ſuperfluitie of ſpeech, ye ſhall knowe from me, that if Peregrim of Dugas haue not bin yet auenged, tho ſmall courage and cowardiſe of thoſe who came hether for that purpoſe hath bin the cauſe thereof, as I hop
                     ••
                  rs long to ſhew
                     •
                   you plainly, if ye will grant me the combat againſt your ſee. I wil ſée, quoth the Emperor, what you can doo more than others who haue entered the field vpon this quarrell, whom I eſtéeme of more, or at leaſt of as great valour, and as expert knightes as your ſelfe. At that word prince Edward thought great ſcorne, & would talke no longer with him, but being become ſaturnine, and dreaming built caſtles in the aire, when Primaleon & Torques, who lead betweene them faire Flerida by the hands, ariued at the place where this proteſtation was made, and comming in the ſame maner all three néerer vnto the knight, Primaleon who knew what the matter was before, ſainteth him thus My frind I am Primaleon, wold ye anie thing with me 
                     •
                   Nought but vengeance,

replyed the Engliſhman, for the death of Perregrim of Ducas, whom ye ſlew cowardly, and not as an honourable and loyall knight. It ſufficeth (quoth the Conſtantinopolitan) hereupon ye ſhall haue the combat with me, which ſhall not be deferred anie longer, than till I come from arming my ſelfe. For God forbid that ſuch ſtaines and reproaches imputed to mine honour, ſhould euer: for me be deferred or remitted vnto farther diſpute and longer proceſſe of time to decide them. Oh my God, gan the infant Flerida, what vnreaſonable deſtances are theſe? I neuer heard of anie demand more impudent and more, inconſideratly propounded than this, ſince that ſo often the truth ther of hath bene tryed, as euerie one can tell, and I cannot imagine what other guerdon thoſe knights pretend to haue, who come to reuenge this death vpon my brother, but onely to and my daies, without anie ſhew of other honeſt reaſon. Theſe ſpéeches vttered ſhe with ſo great a ſtomacke, that the verie griefe which her heart apprehended, cauſed the faire ſuperficies of her angelicall face to ſhew ſo perfectly, that there is no man liuing but would haue remayned marueliouſly a baſhed to beheld her ſo naturall and accompliſhed beautie. She enoing her exclamation turned towards prince Edward her wit in eyes, 
                     ••
                  dewed with teares; which diſtilled from her braine, thorough the vehemencie of the anguiſh which ſhe felt in her breſt, ſéeing her brother whom ſhe loued as her owne ſoul, ſo chafed, and ſo peruerſe againſt her, to performe the battell. The gracious and pittifull regard of theſe two gliſtering ſtarres wounded in a moment the heard of the knight in ſuch ſtrange manner, that looſing almoſt all ſenſe, hee clean forgot Gridonia alſo, and the paſſion of this his gr
                     ••
                  ne and newe wound was ſo vehement, that hee found no phiſition nor ſurgion who could vnderſtand the method of his cure, except the verie ſame from whome his wound was inflicted. Alaſſe, what might hee then doo: Surely, willingly would bee haue deſiſted with his honour from this battell, onely to haue done ſome acceptable ſeruice to the Princeſſe Flerida, whereby to haue gotten ſome acceſſe to be neere her. But what? Primaleon his a aduerſarie departed to goe arme himſelfe, and the infant more than his mortall enemie (for without dying all her forces failed her, and

her verie fine we
                     •
                   dyd ſhrinke for 
                     ••
                  ard) ſhe retired herſelfe incontinent with the Empreſſe into h
                     •
                  r ſent: Alaſſe, the poore deſolate louer remayned as it were rauiſhed and in a trance, thinking on the dreame he had within the caue of Oſmaguin, and on the words which Olymba tolde him: lykewiſe he called to mind the two figures pictured vpon his ſhield, and of that which the Duke of Borſaes ſiſter, and the ye ſent in the wood had forewarned him of. All theſe thinges comming into his imagination, made him ſo perplexed and irreſolute, as he could not tell what to doo, it ſéeming vnto him that for ſome one of theſe thinges whereof he was ſo many times ſorewarned, began to be true in déede. And on the other ſide, conſidering the high valour of Flerida, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   whence ſhee deſcended, hee ſawe many reaſons which did inuite him to lo
                     ••
                   her about Gridonia, whom he had not as yet euer ſéene, nor promiſed any other thing but onely by his Letter to combat Primaleon, to doe her ſeruice, ſo that hee ſayde within himſelfe: O God of Gods, how great and admirable are all thy iudgementes? Who is able to ouerthrowe the things which are by thée eſtabliſhed? Surely no liuing creature. Then if I may acchieue the fruition of mine vnhoped for deſire, which hath now aſſayled my ſoule, I ſhall haue none ocſion to complaine of Fortune. Wherein (to make my firſt a
                     •
                  
                  ſaie) eyther I will ſuffer my ſelfe to be vanquiſhed in this combat, or elſe I will imploy all the forces which God and nature haue lent me, to ouerthrow Primaleons and it behoueth me to do my beſt, leaſt I appears to be of ſmall valor in preſence of ſo faire a Ladie, for if it be in my power to kill her brother, and I for her loue ſaue his life, ſhall I not therby purchaſe her grace & amity? Meane while the knight of the Dog had theſe imaginations it: his head Primaleon, who had taken poſt to go arme himſelfe in Conſtantinople, returned mounted vpon a puiſant courſer, whō the Emperour mitigating his ſodaine indignation againſt the knight, began to view him better, and iudging by his very looke ſome excellent thing in him, cōmended him highly in his opinion & Bellagor likewiſe who accompanied him thether: then ceſting his 
                     •
                  is toward Claudius and his ſaire Dog, Maiortes maruelled much more what hee was, ſo that Primaleon beeing ariued, the

Emperour his father vſed this ſpeech vnto him. Sonne, take ye heed ye behaue your ſelfe valiantly in this battell, for your enemie ſeemeth to be both magnanimious and generous. My gracious Lord & Father, replied Primaleon, it ſhall ſtand him then in good ſtead, ſeeing he commeth to ſuſtaine a quarrell ſo vniuſt & repugnant to all reaſon. Then the Emperour who ſaw them both in a readynes to do their deuoires, commanded the Earle of Rhedon Captaine of his Pen
                     ••
                  oners, that aſſembling all his A
                     •
                  chiers with their halberts, he ſhoulde make a round in forme of a cloſe field, wherin none ſhould dare to ſtirre from his place, nor ſpeake anie word: and ſo was there made a great circle furniſhed with the gardes ſtanding arme in arme one by another, except on the ſide of the Emperours tent, to the end both he and the Empreſſe, and their daughter, might eaſily behold this combat. The Dukes Euſtace and P
                        •
                     holomey were appointed for iudges, who brought them both within the liſts, & equally without anie fauour diſtributed to them the Sunne. Then placing themſelues at the one ſide of the circle, and cauſing the word of the aſſalt to be giuen by the Herald, the knights, who had great deſire to come together, diſplaced themſelues to fetch theyr carier
                     •
                   as faſt as they could galloppe one againſt another, with ſo great a brauerie and furious violence, that the verie earth ſeemed to ſinke vnder them at theyr incounter, which was ſuch, that breking their lances one againſt the other, they went both roundly ouer theyr horſe croupers to the ground, either of them being wounded a little. But the deſire to vanquiſh, & the ſhame they receiued in being both caſt out of their faddles, (Primaleon before Torques and prince Edward in preſence of Flerida, whom he imagined had ſtill her eie vpon him) made them make quicks ſpeed to recouer themſelues, and imbracing with an inuincible courage their ſhields, they began a moſt fierce fight with theyr ſ
                     •
                  ordes being both right exquiſite and ſingular good. Wherewith be laboring each other roughly, in a ſhort ſpace they couered ye ground round about them with the peeces of their ſhilds, & with the broken plates of theyr armor, ſo that diſarming each other at euery blow they ſtroke, they neuer lighted anie foile or touch, but preſently the bloud followed to the ground, the beholders

affirming they neuer ſawe the like cruell combat, whereof they could not diſcerne as yet who ſhould beare awaie the victorie. The two knights then hauing a long time buckled together in this manner without perceiuing anis vantage one of an other, felt themſelues verie féeble by reaſon of the great heals which they indured vnder their harneys, and alſo for the ſmell intermiſſion they tooke to continue this hot and fearefull 
                     •
                  ight of their firſt aſſault. Wherefore they returned from choler to repoſe and breath themſelues a while, when the Empreſſe ſéeing her ſonne in ſo euill caſe, cryed out to the Emperor, ſaying: Alas my Lord, what a diſaſter & miſchiefe is this? Will ye than permit that I beholde the mortall iſſue of ſo tragick a ſpectacle? Ah heauens for bid, for if Primaleon die, I ſhall preſently beare him companie. If then either loue of a child or of a wife 
                     ••
                  ay find any place in the heart of a father and a huſband, I humbly intreate you haue pittie of vs both, conſidering the great danger wherin he is now, and the extreme anguiſh which I féele, which ye may ſoone remedie, praying them to procéede no farther in this theyr deadly fight. Willingly would I accord, quoth the Emperour, were it not for the ſhame and diſhonor which thereby would fall vpon my head, for the world woulde then ſai
                     •
                  , I had done it expreſly fearing my ſonne ſhould be diſcomitted in the battell: albeit I perceiue no ſigne of aduantage that the one hath ouer the other, aſſuring you that by the death of two ſo valiant knights, the worlde ſhoulde receiue great loſſe, for the good fruit which might come of their perſons. Rather let your daughter Fl
                        •
                     rida go to intreate them for her loue they would end, and deſiſt this combat, and doubtleſſe I ſuppoſe they will ſooner ſur
                     ••
                  aſe it for her than for anie other, and by this means ſhall I auo
                     ••
                   the danger of being 
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  ed therefore by mine enemies and euil willers. Scanthad the Emprour ſpoken theſe wordes, but the Empres who ſeemed greatly to feare the death of Primaleon, for this effect ſent the infant her daughter, accompanied with many damſels, who comming with all ſpeed vnto the knights who had alreadie renued their aſſalt more furiouſly than before, called vnto them aloud. Stay your hands my Lordes, ſtay I beſeech ye, & heare me a little what I would intreate ye to do for me. Thou

prince Edward ſeeing her before him who had wounded his hart cleane thorough, could not lift vp his arms to ſtrike a blow, ſeeing himſelfe vereft againe of all his forces, which cauſed him to retire backwards a little, when Primaleon cha
                     •
                  ing with great indignation againſt his ſiſter, ſpake to her verie rigorouſly. Siſter Flerida, what meane yee get yet gone from hence preſently, and let vs purſue our aſſault, for I will die in the place, or I wil make him die who hath put me to this plungs. Dearchrother, replyed the infant. I beſeech ye aboue all fauours that ye wyll euer do me, deſiſt the deſire ye haue to finiſh this combat, wherein I thinke your enemie ſo curteous, that he for his part wil be content to agree for my ſake. Then turning towardes prince Edward, Faire Knight, quoth ſhe, albeit I finde my ſelfe of ſmal trierite in your behalfe, yet muſt I needs requeſt ye by the ſaith ye owe to knighthood (which is to haue compaſſion of all Ladyes) and by the zeale and ſincere affection ye beare to her whom ye loue moſt, to abſolue your aduerſaris as touching this different, which I may no longer indure to beholde ſo bloudity tried betweene ye, ſo inuincible ſeemeth vnto me the high valour and extreame proweſſe of yee both. And if for my ſ
                     •
                  l
                     •
                  e ye do any thing heerein, I ſhall haue cauſe to ſ
                     •
                  ie, I haue found more fauour and curteſie in a ſtraunger, than in mine owne naturall brother: which ſhall not be without honeſt reward, when it ſhal pleaſe ye to imploie me in anie thing wherein I may manifeſt my good will to requite this vndeſerued curteſie of your hands. The knight ſeeing with what grace his ſweete enemie intreated him, reputed himſelfe more than happie by this opportunitie to finde me and to do ſome thing which might pleaſe her, ſo that bee framed her this anſwere: Madame, ingratefull and voice of all good iudgement ſhoulde I bee, if I ſhoulde refuſe ſo high a Ladie as your ſelfe the 
                     ••
                  ing yee demand of 
                     〈…〉
                   your ſweete ſaue, who deſerue much more at my 
                     •
                  auden, then may euer come from me, I abſolue Primaleon of the controuerſie for which wee entered the combat, or elſe yeelding my ſelfe vnnquiſhed by him, I giue him the honour of the battell: 
                     〈…〉
                   it for your ſelfe, quoth Primaleon then, for ſince it is not 
                     〈◊〉
                   by right, I will not inrich nor glorifie myſelfe therwith. Then

ſhall 
                     ••
                   triuth 
                     ••
                   my pleaſure, when I ſhall 
                     〈…〉
                   ouer ye. Therefore ſiſter Flerida get ye hen
                     ••
                   ſpeedily, or otherwiſe yee will make mee ſhew my ſelfe diſcourteous towards ye, for I will not haue this knight make his vaunts how hee brought me to this bay. Doo then your pleaſure, replyed the 
                     •
                  ainfall, neuertheles I will neuer conſent 
                     〈◊〉
                   yee ſtrike one another anie more; becauſe too lamentable 
                     〈…〉
                   end of this battell if ye be let alone. Hay what may, quoth Primaleon, wee will finiſh it now, ſeeing wee haue begun, and wyth that hee approached his enemie, vnto whome he let driue a puiſant blowe, which hee warded with his ſhield, for all which he neuer p
                     •
                  t
                     •
                  and to his ſword to ſtrike againe, or to reuenge himſelfe, which the Emperour perceiuing, departed from his pauillion in great indignation againſt his ſonne, whome he came to pull by the arme out of the field ſaying: What indignitie do yee now make your ſiſter indure, refuſing her vtterly a thing, which a knight of ſtraunge Countrie (who neuer ſawe her before,) hath with all curteſie graunted her? This act by your opinion, is it heroicall and 
                     〈◊〉
                  , or baſe and ridiculous? So and diſarme your ſelfe quickly, and knowe you haue highly diſpleaſed me. And yee knight, withdrawing your ſelfe on Gods name whether it 
                     〈…〉
                   vnto yee, praiſe your good fortune hardly, to haue purchaſed his daie ſo great reputation at 
                     〈◊〉
                  , (as well in 
                     〈…〉
                   all 
                     •••
                  ghtes whome I ouer 
                     〈◊〉
                   or frequented, that if it 
                     •
                  ad pleaſed God you had neuer come into my court to make demand of this ſorrowfull combat.
               Wonderfull gladde wereall the aſſiſtantes of it is worthie act of the Emperour, & doubtles prince Edward himſelfe knew full wall 
                     〈◊〉
                   the 
                     〈…〉
                   of his enemie, whom the two Judges were ſai
                     ••
                   with all theyr might to leade out of the fielde in to his tent 
                     〈◊〉
                   him. But hee was in ſuch a rage and extreame madneſſe with himſelfe, that do they what euer they 
                     ••
                  uld, in an hear
                     •
                   they were not able to applie ani e plaiſter vnto his woundes. 
                     〈◊〉
                   in the meane 
                     〈◊〉
                   the fayre Princeſſe Flerida withdrew her ſelfe towardes prince Edward, to the ende to 
                     〈◊〉
                   him heartle thankes 
                     ••
                   the great 
                     〈◊〉
                   and

fauour he had ſhewed her, preſented him many honeſt offers, and amongſt other tolde him theſe two or three wordes. Braue knight, I haue found ſuch curteſie in you, that whileſt my ſoule ſhall make habitation in this poſſible bodie, who therein greatly confeſſeth himſelfe bounden to ye, I ſhall remember the greate graces ye haue ſhewed me this daie, for the condigne thankes due vnto ye therefore, the heauens graunt mee ſo much grace, that ſome occaſion may preſent it ſelfe vnto me, wherein I may haue meane to teſtifie that in effect, which I cannot in wordes ſufficiently proteſt vnto yee. Longer would ſhe faine haue diſcourſed with prince Edward, (for loue diſcouered alreadie both to the one and the other I knowe not what fatall liking) if the Empreſſe had not gone her ſelfe to ſee her ſonne diſarmed, by meanes whereof ſhe giuing him a gracious farewel (ſuch at the leaſt did he interpret it) tooke her conge of her ſecret louer. Who ſeeing her depart ſo of a ſodaine from him without anie leaſure to anſwere her, was ſo perplexed as he knew not wel what to do nor to ſaie, vntill that his page Claudius and Bellager comming towards him brought his horſe, as it were awaked out of a ſoūd ſleepe, he mounted incontinently on horſeback, taking backe the ſame way to the place where he left Olymba and Meſderin, & as he trauelled thether, Bellager, who was no leſſe aſtoniſhed of the bloudie battell which he ſawe him ſight, than of his great valar and proweſſe, as they were on theyr waie beſpake him in this manner. Sir knight, of a trouth you haue ſhewed at the requeſt of the princes a great token of your honeſt and milne diſpoſition towards Primaleon. Companion (quoth the princes) I know not what I ſhould anſwere thee, but that he is one of the moſt valyant and ſkilfull knights whom I euer ſaw in my life: neuertheles much more dyd the delicate hand and the eloquent tongue of the infant his after vrge me, than did his heauie & ſound blows, or all the ſkill of his fight, whereby hee can ſo aduantagiouſly helpe himſelfe. Bellager hearing the Engliſhman ſpeake with ſo great affection, began to ſmile a little, when hee proſecuted his point, ſaying: Surely I beleeue the cruell wound which Oſmaginni propheſied you ſhuld receiue there, is in deed no other thing but the extreame beautie of the princes, which I ſhoulde neuer

haue imagined to haue bin ſo accompliſhed had I not 
                     ••
                  ne her before with mine eyes. And prince Edward ſaying moreouer, that God and nature had made her ſo 
                     〈…〉
                   a paragon only to plague him prayed him to wrap vp his 
                     〈…〉
                   a l
                     •
                  le. (for he loſſ much bloud and had in dured a crued phlebotomie, which he and Clau
                        •
                     us dyd as well as they could, vntill they came to their lodging, where they arriued verie late, for whome Olymba and Meſderin were in great paine, knowing not well what was become of them, or what ſucceſſe they had. When afterwardes they ſawe Prince Edward, they entertained him wyth vnſpeakable ioy, aſking him many times how he dyd: Ah Madame, quoth he, better had it beene for mee neuer to haue ſtirred from home this daie, for ſo much as I haue ſeene a thing which hath cruelly wounded mee, nay rather hath brought me into more than a mortall 
                     〈…〉
                  . Lake no care for that, replyed the infant Olymba, becauſe he who hath wounded you, ſhall himſelfe applie the free and ſoueraigne plaiſter to your grieſe. With that ſhe diſarmed him with her owne handes, then ſpreading ſingular 
                     〈…〉
                   which Oſmaguin left her, vppon his wounds, ſhe cauſed him to ſate him downe in the 
                     〈…〉
                   hedd
                     •
                   within the F
                     •
                  egot, where he ſlept foundly, not without greate need: and in the meane time Bellager recounted the ſucceſſe of ye battell vnto his brethren, commending him highly, who doubtleſſe deſerued it. In fine, aduiſing with themſelues what they were 
                     〈◊〉
                  , according to the ordinance which Oſmaguin had left them, they ſoy
                     •
                  ed with ſo good a gale all that night, that about the point of d
                     •
                  i
                     •
                   they found themſelues in Mora
                        •
                     a a citie ſcituat
                     •
                  , within the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of Nicea, where dwelled at the 
                     〈◊〉
                   time 
                     •
                   brother of the ſage Oſmaguin, a very gallant knight and the principall man in that place, wherof the princeſſe Oly
                        ••
                     b a 
                     ••
                  ing 
                     〈…〉
                   as ſoone as ſhe was vp to viſit prince Edward, 
                     〈…〉
                   of him how he dyd. Merg well made me, 
                     〈…〉
                   out ward wounds, but 
                     〈◊〉
                   of one which I haue 
                     〈…〉
                   wel remedy ſound for that as for the other, replyed the damſell, and I till you that your deſires ſhall haue a moſt happie end: for to obtaine the which, when time ſhall ſerue, I will ſhew you the waie which

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
&c 
                     〈…〉
                  , ſo that now at this preſent ye ſta
                     ••
                   in néed of nothing but of refreſhing, and to make you ſtrong, to the 
                     〈…〉
                   may ſpeedily ſuccour vs, for we are alreadie in one of the 
                     〈…〉
                   of the ſouldan our vnkle, where dwelleth Oſmaguin 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   whome we repoſe great conſt
                     •
                  ence, as in one of the principall ſeruants of the ſouldan and of our beſt friends. Madame, replied the Knight, it ſhal be yours to command me, and mine to they ye vntill death. I yeeld ye a thouſand thankes, quoth the damſell, albeit for my lyfe I ſhould not dare to vſe anie commaunde towards you, ſeeing it is I whome it neer 
                     •
                  y commeth to do yee the baſt ſeruice I can. Notwithſtanding, ſe
                     ••
                  ing aſide the circumſtances for this preſent, it ſhall pleaſe you to vnderſtande, how we three haue, whileſt ye three 
                     〈…〉
                   reſolued and made abſolute determination 
                     〈◊〉
                   that which wee are come to do in this place, according to the 
                     〈…〉
                   which Oſmaguin leſt vs at his 
                     ••
                  th. And 
                     ••
                   haue thought i
                     •
                   beſt that Bellager ſhould go attired like a 
                     〈◊〉
                   vnto 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   (ſo 
                     ••
                   the knight named) to vnderſtand of him how 
                     〈…〉
                   behaue our ſelues to procéede in this buſines. This aduiſe was 
                     〈◊〉
                   beſt of all by prince Edward, therefore Bellager entering into a 
                     〈◊〉
                  , apparelled like a ciuill marchant, wi
                     •
                  e a Span
                     •
                  , went into the towne as farre as Maruins houſe, vnto which euery one he met directed him eaſily. As ſoone as he was g
                     ••
                  ieu vnto his houſe, after ſalutations, he gaue him to vnderſtand how he wold deliuer a ſecrate meſſage vnto him, which no man 
                     〈…〉
                   but himſelfe. So with drawing themſelues 
                     〈…〉
                  , Bellager r
                     ••
                   al
                     ••
                   vnto him who he was, 
                     〈…〉
                   appointment of his brother they came th
                     •
                  ther, accompanion with a valyant chriſtian knight, to recouer theyr eſtate. When Maruin vnderſtood the matter (ſ
                     ••
                  ing Bellager ſo goodly and villane a Gentleman) he was maruellous glad, and liſting vp both his handes to beauens for ioy, thus beſp
                     •
                  ke. 
                     〈◊〉
                   be the 
                     〈…〉
                   tie God, who is mindfull of ye in the end, my 
                     〈…〉
                   ſoueraigne Lordes, he
                     •
                   yes moſt heartily 
                     〈…〉
                   with that houſe, as thoſe who ſhall want nothing which I may 
                     ••
                   for ye, to reeſtabliſh ye in your owne eſtate, & as ſhine as the euening ſhall come, ſee that you, your ſiſter, and all th
                     •
                   other who accompanie

them, come ſecretly into this place, where I wil keep you vntill I impart your arriuall vnto many others who haue lyke deſire as I haue to doo you good, to the end we may aduiſe together how to bring this our enterpriſe beſt about. Bellager hauing receiued this aduertiſement, went directly towards the companie, who attended his comming with great deuotion, ſo that as ſoone as the houre of the night was come which Maruin and he had agreed vpon, they all went aſhoar
                     •
                   in a place where they found one of his ſonnes, who waited there for them of purpoſe to guide them the waie: and preſently the barke wherein they came, vaniſhed out of ſight, and was neuer ſeene afterwardes. They being all ſafe ariued at the houſe, and lodged in the moſt commodious part thereof, where none of the ſeruants did frequent, when Maruin ſawe his fitteſt time he
                     •
                   went to viſite the children of his true liege and ſoueraigne, vnto whom hee wept for ioy in welcomming them thether. Then hauing giuen ſuch curteous entertainment to prince Edward as beſéemed a man of his calling, he vſed ſuch care and diligence in all thinges to doo him good, yt within a ſhort ſpace be cured him of all his wounds. But let vs ſuffer them to reſt here a little, while Maruin worke his complo
                     •
                  s with other his conductors, to make an end of the firſt booke of Primaleon, whoſe generous and heroicall 
                     ••
                  ates of armes are continued in a ſecond parts, no leſſe profitable than pleaſant, and full of all ſweete recreation to delight the readers, with infinitie of amore and martiall diſcourſes, the like neuer read of in anie hiſtorie before.
            
            FINIS.
            
            
         
      
   