
      
         
            
            
               
IOB MILITANT: WITH MEDITATIONS DIVINE AND MORALL.
            
               Horat. car. lib. 1. ode 17.
               
                  —Dijs, pietas mea,
               
               
                  Et Muſa, cordieſt.—
               
            
            By FRA. QVARLES.
            
               SAPIENTIA PACEM PAX OPVLENTIAM.
               F K
            
            LONDON, Printed by Felix Kyngston for George Winder, and are to bee ſold at his Shop in Saint Dunſtons Churchyard in Fleetſtreet. 1624.
         
         
            
            
            
               TO THE HIGH AND THRICE ILLVSTRIOVS Prince, CHARLES, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall and Yorke, Albany and Rothſay, Marqueſſe of Ormont, Earle of Roſſe, and Baron of Armanoch, High Seneſchall of Scotland, Lord of the Iles, and Knight of the moſt Noble Order of the Garter.
            
               THrice-hopefull Earneſt of a Royall Race,
               Whom Art and Nature, to returne Compleate,
               Haue pray'd the Aide of a Diuiner Grace,
               
               Whereby thou art a Prince, as Good, as Great;
               
               
                  Nature and Art haue both been proud e're ſince,
               In their Compoſure of ſo Rare a Prince.
            
            
               
                  Rare Prince,
               
               Oh! let the Influence of thy quickning Ray
               
               Affect theſe faint, and indiſpoſed Lines,
               That they may flouriſh, as the Child of May,
               
               And clime, like freſh Aurora's Eglentines;
               
               That, by the ſmell, the World may know, this Flowre
               
               Hath had th' aſpect of ſuch a Sunne, as You are.
            
            
               
               Before the Luster of ſo pure a Light,
               My proſtrate heart (ſwolne big with Loyaltic)
               Preſents this Legend of a ſad Delight;
               Which if made Glorious with thy pleaſed Eyc,
               
               My Workes are crowned with like Honour, done
               By Princely Caeſar, and his Princely Sonne.
               
            
            
               Your Highneſſes, in Choyce Affection, and Chaſte Loyaltie, Francis Quarles.
            
         
         
            
            A PREFACE TO THE READER.
            
               I Preſent thee with a new worke, a work difficult and intricate, wherein (I confeſſe) I had ſuffered ſhipwracke on the firſt ſhore, had I not been ſteared by the better Pilots, by whoſe compaſſe I haue ſecurely ſayled, and (weather-beaten,) I ſalute thee ſerious Reader.
            I commend to thee heere the Hiſtorie of Iob, in part, Periphraſed; in part, Abridged. It is not of the nature of a Parable (whereon Hiſtoricall Faith depends not,) no feigned thing, or counterfeite Sceane (as many raſh heads would,) but a true and faithfull record of reall paſſages, as appeares by the holy Scriptures, where the Spirit of God pleaſeth Ezech. 14. 15, 20. to mention the name of this our Iob. And Saint Iames 5. 11. 
               Chryſoſtome in ſome of his writings, ſaith; That his Sepulcher in his dayes was to be ſeene in Arabia Foelix.
            Who this Iob was, and from what ſtock deſcended, it ſhall appeare by the conſent of the moſt famous and ancient Writers, who abſolutely deriue

him from the Loynes of Eſau: Of which opinion is Origen in Epiſt. ad Iulium Affricanum. Saint Auguſtine18. de Ciuit. Dei, 47. Saint Chryſoſtome, Concione, 2. de Lazaro. Saint Gregorie in praefat. and many more, beſides the Septuagints, who in theſe words (Poſt Balac autem Iobab qui vocatur Iob) conclude, that Iob is but the contraction of Iobab, which Iobab is of the Lineage of Eſau, as appeares in his 
                  Ambroſius et ſedulius ad Roman 9. Proſper de pradict. part. 1. c. 22. Euſebius lib. 1. de demonſt. Euang cap 1. 14 Peronius lib. 1. de vitis Prophetard. Volateranus lib. 13. ſua antropologiae. Gen. 36. Genealogie. But the aduerſaries to this opinion (who deriue him from Abraham by Keturah) obiect, that Eſau and his Seede were accurſed by God, therefore Iob could not (being ſo vpright a man) ſpring from ſo tainted a Generation. To which I anſwere, that, though Eſau bee ſaid to bee expulſus à primogenitura; yet wee reade not, that hee is excluſus à foedere. And when God in Iuſtice curſes a Generation in generall, yet his mercie (neuertheleſſe) which is endleſſe, hee may extend to ſome in that Off-ſpring in particular.
            Touching the time when theſe things were done, it is thought, that it was before Moſes penned the Law, and much about the dayes, when the Children of Iſrael were captiu'd by Pharaoh.
            
            Who the Pen-man was, is not directly concluded, and to ſmall purpoſe to bee enquired: Gregorius Romanus ſaith, That it is in vaine to enquire the Writer, where it is certaine, the holy Spirit is the Author; yet by ſome it is (nor without ſome ground) imagined, that it was done by the penne of Moſes, (when hee fled into Midian,
               
after hee ſlew the Egyptian,) in Hexameter Verſes, from the third Chapter, to the fifth verſe of the laſt.
            To conclude, Reader, I commit this my booke to thy fairer diſpoſition. As for Cenſures, I am ſo ouer-bold, that I feare none, and I ſhould be ouer-wiſe, if I deſerued none.
            An ſi quis atro dente me petiuerit, 
                  Hor. Epod 6. Inultus, vt flebo, puer?
            Farewell.
         
         
            
            
            THE PROPOSITION OF THE WORKE.
            
               
                  WOuld'ſt thou diſcouer in a curious Map,
               
               
                  That Iland, which fond worldlings cal, Miſhap,
               
               
                  Surrounded with a Sea of brinie Teares,
               
               
                  The rocky dangers, and the boggie Feares,
               
               
                  The ſtormes of Trouble, the afflicted Nation,
               
               
                  The heauy ſoyle, the lowly ſituation?
               
               
                  On wretched Iob, then ſpend thy weeping eye,
               
               
                  And ſee the colours painted curiouſly.
               
            
            
               Would'ſt thou behold a Tragick Sceane of ſorrow,
               Whoſe wofull Plot, the Author did not borrow
               From ſad Inuention? The ſable Stage,
               The liuely Actors, with their Equipage?
               The Muſick made of Sighes, the Songs of Cryes,
               The ſad Spectators, with their watry Eyes?
               Behold all this, comprized here in One,
               Expect the Plaudit, when the Play is done.
            
            
               
                  Or would'ſt thou ſee a well-built Pinnace toſt
               
               
                  Vpon the ſwelling Ocean, ſplit (almost)
               
               
                  Now, on a churliſh Rocke, now, fiercely ſtriuing
               
               
                  With labouring Winds, now, deſperately driuing
               
               
                  Vpon the boyling Sands, her ſtorme-rent Flags,
               
               
                  Her Maine-maſt broke, her Canuas torne to Rags,
               
               
                  Her Treaſure loſt, her Men with Lightning ſlaine,
               
               
                  And left a Wreck to the relentleſſe Maine?
               
               
                  This, this and more, vnto your moyſtned Eyes,
               
               
                  Our patient Iob ſhall liuely moralize.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Would'ſt thou behold vnparalell'd Diſtreſſe,
               
               
                  Which minds cannot out-thinke, nor tongues expreſſe
               
               
                  Full to the life; The Anuill, whereupon
               
               
                  Miſchiefe doth worke her Maſter-piece, for none
               
               
                  To imitate; The dire Anatomie
               
               
                  Of (curiouſly diſſected) Miſerie;
               
               
                  The face of Sorrow, in her ſtearneſt lookes,
               
               
                  The rufull Arg'ment of all Tragick bookes?
               
               
                  In briefe, Would tender eyes endure to ſee
               
               
                  (Summ'd vp) the greateſt ſorrowes, that can be?
               
               
                  Behold they then, poore Iob afflicted here,
               
               
                  And each Beholder ſpend (at leaſt) his Teare.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE GENERALL ARGVMENT OF THE HISTORIE.
            
               IOB, tryed of God, by the loſſe of his Children, Goods and Health, is tempted by his Friends to deſpaire, and by his Wife to blaſphemie; neuertheleſſe, continues patient for a while; but at laſt yeelds to Paſſion, curſes his birth-day, and wiſhes death. His Wife and three Friends condemne him of Hypocriſie; Iob defends his ſpeeches, Gods Iuſtice, and his owne Integritie, blaming his Friends for handling Gods cauſe to an ill end, and for accuſing him without a cauſe. At length Elihu makes a modeſt agreement betweene them, reprooues them al; him, for not handling a good cauſe well; and them, for handling a bad cauſe, though well. Hee teaches Iob Gods greatneſſe by his works, and that man ought not to pleade with his Maker. In fine, God himſelfe out of a Cloud, confirmes Elihu's words, by example from his workes, puts Iob to ſilence, to confeſſion and repentance, rebukes his three Friends, commands reconciliation, reſtores Iob his Health, doubles his former Wealth, and giues him a ſecond Iſſue of his body.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE GREAT TETRAGRAMATON, LORD PARAMOVNT OF HEAVEN AND EARTH: HIS Humble ſeruant dedicates himſelfe, And Implores the Enfranchiſing of his Muſe.
            
               1
               GReat God, the indebted prayſes of thy Glorie,
               If Man ſhould ſmother, or his Muſe waxe faint
               To number forth; the Stones would make cōplaint,
               And write a neuer-ending Storie,
               And, not without iust reaſon, ſay,
               Mens hearts are more chdure then they.
            
            
               2
               Diſmount from Heauen (O thou Diuiner Power)
               Handſell my ſlender Pipe, breathe (thou) vpon it,
               That it may run an euerlaſting Sonnet,
               Which Enuious Time may not deuower:
               Oh, let it ſing to After-dayes
               (When I am Dust) thy lowder Prayſe.
            
            
               
               3
               Direct the footſteps of my ſober Muſe
               To tread thy glorious Path: For, be it knowne,
               She onely ſeekes thy Glorie, not her owne,
               Nor rouzed for a ſecond vſe;
               If otherwiſe, O! may ſhe neuer
               Sing more, but be ſtruck dumbe for euer.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            IOB MILITANT.
            
               
                  THE ARGVMENT.
                  Iobs Lineage and Integritie,
                  
                  
                     His Iſſue, Wealth, Proſperitie,
                  
                  
                     His childrens holy Feast: His wiſe
                  
                  
                     Forecast, and zealous Sacrifice.
                  
               
               
                  Sect. 1.
               
                  NOt far from Caſius, in whoſe bountious wombe, Chap. 1. 1.
                  
                  Great Pompeys duſt lies crowned with his Tombe,
                  Weſtward, betwixt Arabia and Iudaea,
                  Is ſituate a Country, called Idumaea,
                  There dwelt a Man (brought from His Linniage,
                  That for his belly, ſwopt his Heritage,)
                  His name was Iob, a man of vpright Will,
                  Iuſt, fearing Heauen, eſchewing what was Ill,
                  On whom his God had heap't in higheſt meaſure,
                  The bountious Riches, of his boundleſſe Treaſure,
                  
                     
As well of Fortune, as of Grace, and Spirit;
                  Goods for his children, Children to inherit;
                  As did his Name, his Wealth did daily wex,
                  His Seed did germinate in either Sexe
                  A hopefull iſſue, whoſe deſcent might keepe
                  His righteous Race on foote; ſeuen thouſand Sheepe
                  Did pay their Summer-Tribute, and did ad
                  Their Winter Bleſſings to his Fold: He had
                  Three thouſand Camels, able for their loade,
                  Fiue hundred Aſſes, furniſht for the Road,
                  As many Yoake of Oxen, to maintaine
                  His houſhold, for he had a mightie Traine;
                  Nor was there any in the Eaſt, the which
                  In Vertue was ſo rare, in Wealth ſo rich.
               
               
                  Vpon a time, his Children (to improue
                  The ſweete affection of their mutuall loue)
                  Made ſolemne Feaſts; each feaſted in his turne,
                  (For ther's a time to mirth, aſwell as mourne)
                  And who, by courſe, was Maſter of the Feaſt,
                  Vnto his home inuited all the reſt.
               
               
                  Euen as a Hen (whoſe tender brood forſakes
                  The downy clozet of her Wings, and takes
                  Each it's affected way) markes how they feed,
                  This, on that Crum; and that, on t'other Seed,
                  Mooues, as they mooue; and ſtayes, when as they ſtay,
                  And ſeemes delighted in their Infant-play:
                  Yet (fearing danger) with a buſie eye,
                  Lookes here and there, if ought ſhe can eſpie,
                  Which (vnawares) might ſnatch a booty from her,
                  Eyes all that paſſe, and watches euery commer.
                  Euen ſo the affection of this tender Syre
                  (Being made more feruent, with the ſelfe-ſame fyre
                  
                     
Of deareſt loue, which flamed in their breſts,
                  Preſerued (as by Fuell) in thoſe Feaſts)
                  Was rauiſh'd in the height of Ioyes, to ſee
                  His happy Childrens ten-fold vnitie:
                  As was his Ioy, ſuch was his holy Feare,
                  Leſt he, that plants his Engines euery-where,
                  Bayted with golden Sinnes, and re-inſnares
                  The ſoule of man, turning his Wheat to Tares,
                  Should ſeaſon Error with the taſte of Truth,
                  And tempt the frailtie of their tender youth.
               
               
                  No ſooner therefore had the dappled skye
                  Opened the Twilight of her waking eye,
                  And in her breaking Light, had promis'd day,
                  But vp he roſe, his holy hands did lay
                  Vpon the ſacred Altar (one by one)
                  An early Sacrifice for euery Sonne:
                  
                     For who can tell, (ſaid he?) my Sonnes (perchance) 
                     
                        Job ſacrifice
                           •
                        .
                  
                  
                     Haue ſlipt ſome Sinne, which neither Ignorance
                  
                  
                     Pleaded, nor want of heed, nor youth can cure.
                  
                  Sin ſteales, vnſeene, when men ſleepe moſt ſecure.
               
               
                  Meditatio prima.
                  
                     WAnt is the Badge of Pouerty: Then he
                     That wanteth most, is the most poore, ſay we.
                     The Wretch, that Hunger driues from dore to dore,
                     Ayming at preſent Almes, deſires no more.
                     The toyling Swaine, that hath with pleaſing trouble,
                     Cockt a ſmall fortune, would that Fortune double,
                     
                        
Which dearely bought with ſlau'ry, then (alas)
                     He would be deem'd a Man, that's well to paſſe:
                     Which got, his mind's now tickled with an Itch,
                     But to deſerue that glorious ſtile of Rich.
                     That done, h'enioyes the Crowne of all his labour,
                     Could he but once out-noſe his right-hand-neighbour.
                     Liues he at quiet now? Now, he begins
                     To wiſh, that Vs'rie were the leaſt of ſinnes:
                     But great or ſmall, he tryes, and ſweet's the trouble,
                     And for it's ſake, he wiſhes all things double. 
                           
                              Hor. Car. lib. 3. Od. 24.—improbae
                           
                           
                              Creſcunt diuitiae, tamen
                           
                           
                              Curtae neſcio quid ſemper abeſt rei.
                           
                           
                              Non qui parum habet eſt pauper,
                           
                           
                              Sed qui plus cupit. Sen ad Luc.
                           
                           
                              —Multa petentibus
                           
                           
                              Deſunt multa. Bene eſt cut Deus obtulit
                           
                           
                              Parca, quod ſatis eſt, manu.
                           
                           
                              Hor car. lib. 3. Ode 16. Simile.
                        
                     
                     Thus wiſhing ſtill, his wiſhes neuer ceaſe,
                     But as his Wealth, his Wiſhes ſtill encreaſe.
                  
                  
                     
                        Wiſhes proceed from Want: The Richeſt then,
                     
                     
                        Moſt wiſhing, want moſt, and are pooreſt men:
                     
                     
                        If he be poore, that wanteth much, how poore
                     
                     
                        Is he, that hath too much, and yet wants more?
                     
                     
                        Thrice happy he, to whom the bounty of Heauen,
                     
                     
                        Sufficient, with a ſparing hand, hath giuen:
                     
                     
                        Tis Grace, not Gold, makes Great; ſeuer but which,
                     
                     
                        The Rich man is but poore; the Poore man, rich.
                     
                     
                        The fayreſt Crop of either Graſſe, or Grayne,
                     
                     
                        Is not for vſe, vndew'd with timely Rayne.
                     
                     
                        The wealth of Croeſus, were it to be giuen,
                     
                     
                        Were not thank-worthy, if vnbleſt by Heauen.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Euen as faire Phoebe, in Diameter,
                     
                     
                        (Earth interpos'd betwixt the Sun and Her)
                     
                     
                        Suffers Eclipſe, and is diſrobed quite
                     
                     
                        (During the time) of all her borrowed Light;
                     
                     
                        So Riches, which fond Mortals ſo embrace,
                     
                     
                        If not enlightned with the Beames of Grace,
                     
                     
                        Being interpoſed with too groſſe a Care,
                     
                     
                        They lye obſcured, and no Riches are.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        My ſtint of Wealth lyes not in my expreſsing,
                     
                     
                        With Iacobs Store (Lord) giue me Iacobs Bleſsing;
                     
                     
                        Or if, at night, thou grant me Lazars Boone,
                     
                     
                        Let Diues Dogs licke all my ſores at noone.
                     
                     
                        Lord, pare my Wealth, by my Capacitie,
                     
                     
                        Leſt I, with it, or it ſuite not with me.
                     
                     
                        This humbly doe I ſue for, at thy hand,
                     
                     
                        Enough, and not too much, for my command.
                     
                  
                  
                     Lord, what thou lend'st, ſhall ſerue but in the place
                     Of reckoning Counters, to ſumme vp thy Grace.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  THE ARGVMENT.
                  
                     Satan appeares, and then profeſſes
                  
                  
                     Himſelfe mans Enemy, confeſſes
                  
                  
                     Gods loue to Iob, malignes his Faith,
                  
                  
                     Gaines power ouer all he hath.
                  
               
               
                  Sect. 2.
               
                  VPon a time, whē heauēs ſweet Quire of Saints, Chap 16.
                  
                  (Whoſe euerlaſting Halleluiah chaunts
                  The higheſt prayſe of their celeſtiall King)
                  Before their Lord, did the preſentment bring,
                  Of th' execution of his ſacred Will,
                  Committed to their function to fulfill:
                  Satan came too (That Satan, which betray'd
                  The ſoule of man, to Deaths eternall ſhade,
                  
                     
Satan came too) and in the midſt he ſtands,
                  Like to a Vulture 'mongſt a Heard of Swans.
               
               
                  Said, then, th' Eternall; From what quarter now, 
                     God queſtions Satan.
                  
                  
                     Hath buſineſſe brought thee? (Satan) Whence com'ſt thou?
                  
               
               
                  
                     Great Lord of Heauen (ſaid th' Infernall) ſince 
                     Satans anſwere.
                  
                  
                     Thou hast intitled me the Worlds Great Prince,
                  
                  
                     I haue been practiſing mine old profeſsion,
                  
                  
                     And come from compaſsing my large Poſſeſsion,
                  
                  
                     Tempting thy ſonnes, and (like a roaring Lion)
                  
                  
                     Seeking my prey, diſturbe the peace of Sion;
                  
                  
                     I come from ſowing Tares, among thy Wheate;
                  
                  
                     To him, that ſhall diſſemble Peters Seate,
                  
                  
                     I haue been plotting, how to prompt the death
                  
                  
                     Of Chriſtian Princes, and the bribed breath
                  
                  
                     Of cheapned Iustice, hath my Fire inflam'd
                  
                  
                     With ſpirit of boldneſſe, for a while, vnſham'd.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           ••
                        come from planting ſtrife, and ſterne debate,
                  
                  
                     Twixt priuate man and man, 'twixt State and State,
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ubuerting Truth with all the power I can,
                  
                  
                     Accuſing Man to God, and God to Man:
                  
                  
                     I daily ſow freſh Schiſmes among thy Saints;
                  
                  
                     I buffet them and laugh, at their complaints;
                  
                  
                     The Earth is my Dominion, Hell's my Home,
                  
                  
                     I round the World, and ſo from thence I come.
                  
               
               
                  Said then th' Eternall: True, thou hast not faild 
                     God ſpeakes to Satan.
                  
                  
                     Of what thou ſay'ſt; Thy Spirit hath preuail'd
                  
                  
                     To vex my little Flocke; Thou hast been bold
                  
                  
                     To make them ſtray, a little, from their Fold.
                  
                  
                     But ſay; In all thy hard Aduentures, hath
                  
                  
                     Thine eye obſerued Iob my Seruants Faith?
                  
                  
                     Hath open Force, or ſecret Fraud beſet
                  
                  
                     His Bulwarks, ſo impregnable, as yet?
                  
                  
                     
                     And hast thou (without enuy) yet beheld,
                  
                  
                     How that the World, his ſecond cannot yeeld?
                  
                  
                     Hast thou not found, that hee's of vpright Will,
                  
                  
                     Iust, fearing God, eſchewing what is Ill?
                  
               
               
                  
                     True Lord, (replide the Fiend) thy Champion hath 
                     Satans reply.
                  
                  
                     A ſtrong and feruent (yet a crafty) Faith,
                  
                  
                     A forced loue needs no ſuch great applauſe,
                  
                  
                     He loues but ill, that loues not for a cauſe.
                  
                  
                     Hast thou not heap'd his Garners with exceſſe?
                  
                  
                     Inricht his Pastures? Doth not he poſſeſſe
                  
                  
                     All that he hath, or can demand, from Thee?
                  
                  
                     His Coffers fil'd, his Land ſtockt plentiouſly?
                  
                  
                     Hath not thy Loue ſurrounded him about,
                  
                  
                     And hedg'd him in, to fence my practice out?
                  
                  
                     But ſmall's the tryall of a Faith, in this,
                  
                  
                     If thou ſupport him, 'tis thy ſtrength, not his.
                  
                  
                     Can then my power, that ſtands by thy permiſsion,
                  
                  
                     Encounter, where Thou mak'ſt an Oppoſition?
                  
                  
                     Stretch forth thy Hand, and ſmite but what he hath,
                  
                  
                     And prooue thou then, the temper of his Faith;
                  
                  
                     Ceaſe cock'ring his fond humour, veyle thy Grace,
                  
                  
                     No doubt, but hee'l blaſpheme thee to thy Face.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Lo, (ſaid th' Eternall) to thy curſed hand, 
                     God licences and limits Satan.
                  
                  
                     I here commit his mightie Stocke, his Land,
                  
                  
                     His hopefull Iſſue, and Wealth, though ne'r ſo much;
                  
                  
                     Himſelfe, alone, thou ſhalt forbeare to touch.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Meditatio ſecunda.
                  
                     SAtan beg'd once, and found his Pray'rs reward: Obiect.
                     
                     We often beg, yet oft returne, vnheard.
                  
                  
                     If granting be th' effect of Loue, then we Reſol.
                     
                     Conclude our ſelues, to be leſſe lou'd, then he.
                     True, Satan beg'd, and beg'd his ſhame, no leſſe;
                     'T was granted; Shall we enuie his ſucceſſe?
                     We beg, and our requeſt's (perchance) not granted;
                     God knew, perhaps, it were worſe had, then wanted.
                  
                  
                     
                        Can God and Belial both ioyne in one Will;
                     
                     
                        The One to aske, the Other to fulfill? 
                        Obiect.
                     
                  
                  
                     Sooner ſhall Stygian Darkneſſe blend with Light,
                     The Froſt with Fier, ſooner Day with Night. Reſol.
                     
                     True, God and Satan wild the ſelfe ſame Will,
                     But God intended Good; and Satan, Ill:
                     That Will produc'd a ſeuerall concluſion;
                     He aym'd at Mans, and God, at his confuſion.
                     He that drew Light, from out the depth of Shade,
                     And made of Nothing, whatſoere He made,
                     Can, out of ſeeming Euill, bring good Euents; 
                           Volens agit Deus per malum inſtrumentum. Simile.
                     
                     God worketh Good, though by euill Inſtruments.
                  
                  
                     As in a Clocke, one motion doth conuay,
                     And carry diuers wheeles a ſeuer all way:
                     Yet all together, by the great wheeles force,
                     Direct the Hand vnto his proper courſe:
                     Euen ſo, that ſacred VVill, although it vſe
                     Meanes ſeeming contrarie, yet all conduce
                     
                        
To one effect, and in a free conſent,
                     They bring to paſſe heauens high decreed Intent.
                  
                  
                     Takes God delight in humane weakeneſſe, then?
                     What Glory reapes he from Afflicted men? Obiect.
                     
                     The Spirit gone, can Fleſh and Blood endure? Reſp.
                     
                     God burnes his Gold, to make his Gold more pure:
                  
                  
                     Euen as a Nurſe, whoſe childs imperfect pace Simile.
                     
                     Can hardly leade his foot from place to place,
                     Leaues her fond kiſsing, ſets him downe, to goe,
                     Nor does vphold him, for a ſtep, or two:
                     But when ſhe ſindes that he begins to fall,
                     She holds him vp, and kiſſes him withall:
                     So God, from man ſometimes withdrawes his Hand
                     A while, to teach his Infant-faith to ſtand;
                     But when he ſees his feeble ſtrength begin
                     To faile, He gently takes him vp againe.
                  
                  
                     Lord, I'm a child; ſo guide my paces, than,
                     That I may learne to walke an vpright man:
                     So ſhield my Faith, that I may neuer doubt thee,
                     For I ſhall fall, if ere I walke without thee.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  THE ARGVMENT.
                  
                     The frighted Meſſengers tell Iob
                  
                     His foure-fold loſſe: He rends his Robe,
                  
                  
                     Submits him to his Makers trust,
                  
                  
                     Whom he concludeth to be lust.
                  
               
               
                  Sect. 3.
               
                  VPon that very day, when all the reſt
                  Were frollike at their elder Brothers feaſt, Chap. 1. v 13.
                  
                  A breathleſs mā, prickt on with winged feare,
                  With ſtaring eyes, diſtracted here and there, The firſt Meſſenger.
                  
                  (Like kindled Exhalations in the aire
                  At midnight glowing) his ſtiffe-bolting haire,
                  Not much vnlike the pennes of Porcupines)
                  Croſſing his armes, and making wofull ſignes,
                  Purboyld in ſweat, ſhaking his fearefull head,
                  That often lookt behind him, as hee fled,
                  He ran to Iob, ſtill ne'retheleſſe afraid,
                  His broken blaſt breath'd forth theſe words, and ſaid,
               
               
                  Alas (deare Lord the whiles thy ſeruants plide
                  Thy painfull Plough, and whileſt, on euery ſide
                  Thy Aſſes fed about vs, as we wrought,
                  There ſallied forth on vs (ſuſpecting nought,
                  Nor ought intending, but our chearfull paine)
                  A rout of rude Sabaeans, with their Traine
                  Armed with Death, and deafe to all our Cries,
                  Which, with ſtrong Hand, did in an houre ſurprize
                  
                     
All that thou hadſt, and whileſt we ſtroue (in vaine
                  To gard them, their impartiall hands haue ſlaine
                  Thy faithfull ſeruants, with their thirſty Sword;
                  I onely ſcap't, to bring this wofull word.
               
               
                  No ſooner had he clos'd his lips, but ſee!
                  Another comes, as much agaſt as he: The ſecond Meſſenger
                  
                  A flaſh of Fire (ſaid he) new falne from Heauen,
                  Hath all thy Seruants of their liues bereauen,
                  And burnt thy Sheepe; I, I alone am He,
                  That's left vnſlaine, to bring the Newes to thee.
               
               
                  This Tale not fully told, a third enſues, The third Meſſenger.
                  
                  Whoſe lips, in labour with more heauie Newes,
                  Brake thus; The forces of a triple Band,
                  Brought from the fierce Caldaeans, with ſtrong hand,
                  Hath ſeyz'd thy Camels, murther'd with the Sword
                  Thy ſeruants all, but Mee, that brings thee word.
               
               
                  Before the ayre had cool'd his haſty Breath, The fourth Meſſenger.
                  
                  Ruſht in a fourth, with viſage pale as death:
                  The while (ſaid he) thy children all were ſharing
                  Mirth, at a Feaſt of thy firſt ſonnes preparing,
                  Aroſe a Wind, whoſe errand had more haſt
                  Then happy ſpeed, which with a full-mouth Blaſt,
                  Hath ſmote the houſe, which hath thy children reft
                  Of all their liues, and thou art childleſſe left;
                  Thy children all are ſlaine, all ſlaine together,
                  I onely ſcap't to bring the Tidings hither.
               
               
                  So ſaid, Behold the man, whoſe wealth did flow
                  Like to a ſpring-tide, one bare houre agoe,
                  With the vnpattern'd height of Fortunes bleſt,
                  Aboue the greateſt Dweller in the Eaſt;
                  He, that was Syre of many Sonnes but now,
                  Lord of much People, and while-ere could ſhow
                  
                     
Such Heards of Cattell, He, whoſe fleecy ſtocke
                  Of Sheepe could boaſt ſeuen thouſand, in a flocke,
                  See how he lyes, of all his Wealth diſpoyl'd,
                  He now hath neither Seruant, Sheepe, nor Child;
                  Like a poore man, aroſe the Patient Iob,
                  
                  (Stun'd with the newes) and rent his Purple Robe,
                  Shaued the haire from off his wofull head,
                  And, proſtrate on the floore he worſhipped:
               
               
                  
                     Naked, ah! Poore and naked did I come
                  
                  
                     Forth from the clozet of my mothers Wombe;
                  
                  
                     And ſhall returne (alas) the very ſame
                  
                  
                     To th' earth as Poore, and naked, as I came:
                  
                  
                     God giues, and takes, and why ſhould He not haue
                  
                  
                     A priuiledge, to take thoſe things, he gaue?
                  
                  
                     We men miſtake our Tenure oft, for Hee
                  
                  
                     Lends vs at Will, what we miſcall as Free;
                  
                  
                     He reaſſumes his owne, takes but the ſame
                  
                  
                     He lent a while. Thrice bleſſed be his Name.
                  
                  In all this paſſage, Iob, in Heart, nor Tongue,
                  Thought God vniuſt, or charg'd his hand with wrong.
               
               
                  Meditatio tertia.
                  
                     THe proudeſt pitch of that victorious ſpirit
                     Was but to win the World, whereby t'inherit Alexander.
                     
                     The ayrie purchaſe of a tranſitory,
                     And glozing Title of an ages Glory;
                     Would'ſt thou, by Conqueſt, win more Fame then Hee?
                     Subdue thy ſelfe; Thy ſelf's a World to thee:
                     
                        
Earth's but a Ball, that Heauen hath quilted o're
                     With Wealth, and Honour, banded on the floore
                     Of ſickle Fortunes falſe and ſlippery Court,
                     Sent for a Toy, to make vs Children ſport,
                     Mans ſatiate ſpirits, with freſh delights ſupplying▪
                     
                     To ſtill the Fondlings of the world, from crying,
                     And he, whoſe merit mounts to ſuch a Ioy,
                     Gaines but the Honour of a mighty Toy.
                  
                  
                     But would'ſt thou conquer, haue thy Conquest crown'd
                     By hands of Seraphims, tryumph'd with the ſound
                     Of Heauens lowd Trumpet, warbled by the ſhrill
                     Celeſtiall Quire, recorded with a Quill,
                     Pluck't from the Pinion of an Angels wing,
                     Confirm'd with Ioy, by heauens Eternall King?
                     Conquer thy ſelfe, thy rebbel thoughts repell,
                     And chaſe thoſe falſe Affections that rebell.
                  
                  
                     Hath Heauen diſpoyl'd what his full hand hath giuen thee?
                     Nipt thy ſucceeding Bloſſoms? or bereauen thee
                     Of thy deare lateſt hope, thy boſome Friend?
                     Doth ſad Deſpaire deny theſe griefes an end?
                     Deſpair's a whiſpring Rebbell, that, within thee,
                     Bribes all thy Field, and ſets thy ſelfe agin thee:
                     Make keene thy Faith, and with thy force, let flee.
                     If thou not conquer him, hee'l conquer thee:
                     Aduance thy Shield of Patience to thy head,
                     And when Griefe ſtrikes, 'twill ſtrike the ſtriker dead;
                     The Patient man, in ſorrow, ſpies reliefe,
                     And by the taile, he couples Ioy with Griefe.
                  
                  
                     In aduerſe fortunes, be thou ſtrong and ſtout,
                     And brauely win thy ſelfe, Heauen holds not out
                     His Bow, for euer bent. The diſpoſition
                     Of nobleſt ſpirits, doth, by oppoſition,
                     
                        
Exoſperate the more: A gloomie night
                     Whets on the morning, to returne more bright;
                     A Blade well try'd, deſerlies a trebble price,
                     And Vertu's pureſt, moſt oppo'd by Vice:
                     Braue minds, oppreſt, ſhould (in deſpight of Fate)
                     Looke greateſt, (like the Sunne) in loweſt ſtate.
                  
                  
                     But ah! ſhall God thus ſtriue with fleſh and blood? Obiect.
                     
                     Receiues he Glory from, or reapes he Good
                     In mortals Ruine, that he leaues man ſo,
                     To be o'rewhelm'd by his vnequall Foe?
                  
                  
                     May not a Potter, that, from out the Ground, Reſ.
                     
                     Hath fram'd a veſſell, ſearch if it be ſound?
                     Or if, by furbuſhing, he take more paine
                     To make it fairer, ſhall the Pot complaine?
                     Mortall, thou art but Clay: then ſhall not Hee,
                     That fram'd thee for his ſeruice, ſeaſon thee?
                     Man, cloze thy lips; Be thou no vndertaker
                     Of Gods deſignes; Diſpute not with thy Maker.
                  
                  
                     Lord, 'tis againſt thy nature to doe ill,
                     Then giue me pow'r to beare, and worke thy Will;
                     Thou know'ſt what's beſt, make thou thine owne Concluſion,
                     Be glorifi'd, although in my Confuſion.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  THE ARGVMENT.
                  
                     Satan the ſecond time appeares,
                  
                  
                     Before th' Eternall, boldly dares
                  
                  
                     Maligne Iobs tryed Faith afreſh,
                  
                  
                     And gaines th' afflicting of his Fleſh.
                  
               
               
                  Sect. 4.
               
                  ONce more, whē heauens harmonious Quiriſters
                  Appear'd before his Throne, (whoſe Miniſters
                  They are, of his concealed will) to render
                  Their ſtrict account of Iuſtice, and to tender
                  Th' accepted Sacrifice of higheſt praiſe,
                  (Warbled in Sonnets, and celeſtiall Layes)
                  Satan came too, bold, as a hungry Fox,
                  Or rauinous Wolfe amid the tender Flockes,
               
               
                  Satan, (ſaid then th' Eternall) from whence now God queſtions Satan.
                  
                  Hath thy imploymēts driuē thee? whēce com'ſt thou?
               
               
                  Satan replies: Great God of heauen and earth, Satan anſwere.
                  
                  I come from tempting, and from making mirth:
                  To heare thy deareſt children whine, and roare:
                  In briefe, I come, from whence I came before.
               
               
                  Said then th' Eternall, Haſt thou not beheld God replies to Satan.
                  
                  My ſeruants Faith, how, like a ſeuen-fold ſhield,
                  It hath defended his Integrity
                  Againſt thy fiery Darts; Hath not thine Eye,
                  (Thine enuious eye) perceiu'd how purely iuſt
                  He ſtands, and perfect, worthy of the truſt
                  
                     
I lent into his hand, perſiſting ſtill
                  Iuſt, fearing God, eſchewing what is ill?
                  'T was not the loſſe of his ſo faire a Flocke,
                  Nor ſudden rape of ſuch a mighty Stocke;
                  'T was neither loſſe of Seruants, nor his Sonnes
                  Vntimely ſlaughter, (acted all at once)
                  Could make him quaile, or warpe ſo true a Faith,
                  Or ſtaine ſo pure a Loue; ſay (Satan) hath
                  Thy hand (ſo deepely counterfeiting mine)
                  Made him miſtruſt his God, or once repine?
                  Can there in all the earth, ſay, can there be
                  A Man ſo Perfect, and ſo Iuſt, as Hee?
               
               
                  Replies the Tempter, Lord, an outward loſſe Satans anſwere.
                  
                  Hopes for repaire, tis but a common croſſe:
                  I know thy ſeruant's wiſe, a wiſe forecaſt,
                  Gricues for things preſent, not for things are paſt;
                  Perchance, the tumor of his ſullen heart,
                  Brookes loſſe of all, ſince he hath loſt a part;
                  My ſelfe haue Seruants, who can make true Boaſt,
                  They gaue away as much, as he hath loſt:
                  Others (with learning made ſo wiſely mad)
                  Refuſe ſuch Fortunes, as he neuer had;
                  A Faith's not try'd by this vncertaine Tuch,
                  Others, that neuer knew thee, did as much:
                  Lend me thy Power then, that I might once
                  But ſacrifice his Fleſh, afflict his Bones,
                  And pierce his Hide, but for a moments ſpace,
                  Thy Darling, then, would curſe thee to thy Face.
               
               
                  To which, th' Eternall thus: His body's thine, 
                     Gods reply.
                  
                  
                     To plague thy fill, withall, I doe confine
                  
                  
                     Thy power to her liſts, Afflict and teare
                  
                  
                     His Fleſh at pleaſure: But his life forbeare.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Meditatio Quarta.
                  
                     
                        BOth Goods, and Body too; Lord, who can ſtand?
                     
                     
                        Expect not Iobs vprightneſſe, at my hand,
                     
                     
                        Without Iobs aid; The temper of my Paſsion,
                     
                     
                        (Vntam'd by thee) can brooke no Iobs Temptation,
                     
                     
                        For I am Weake, and Fraile, and what I can
                     
                     
                        Moſt boaſt of, prooues me but a ſinfull Man;
                     
                        Things that I ſhould auoyd, I doe; and what
                     
                     
                        I am inioyn'd to doe, that doe I not.
                     
                     
                        My Fleſh is weake, too ſtrong in this, alone,
                     
                     
                        It rules my Spirit, that ſhould be rul'd by none
                     
                     
                        But thee; my ſpirits faint, and hath been neuer
                     
                     
                        Free from the fits of ſins Quotidian Feuer.
                     
                     
                        My powr's are all corrupt, corrupt my Will,
                     
                     
                        Marble to Good, and Wax to what is Ill;
                     
                     
                        Eclipſed is my Reaſon, and my Wit;
                     
                     
                        By interpoſing Earth 'twixt Heauen, and it:
                     
                     
                        My Mem'ry's like a Searce of Lawne (alas)
                     
                     
                        It Keepes things groſſe, and lets the purer paſſe.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        What haue I then to boaſt, What Title can
                     
                     
                        I challenge more then this, A ſinfull man?
                     
                        Yet doe I (ſometimes) feele a warme Deſier,
                     
                     
                        Raiſe my low Thoughts, and dull affections, higher,
                     
                     
                        Where, like a ſoule entrans't, my ſpirit flies,
                     
                     
                        Makes leagues with Angels, and brings Deities
                     
                     
                        Halfe way to heauen, ſhakes hands with Seraphims,
                     
                     
                        And boldly mingles wings with Cherubims,
                     
                     
                        
From whence, I looke askaunce, adowne the Earth,
                     Pitty my ſelfe, and loath my place of birth:
                     But while I thus my lower ſtate deplore,
                     I wake, and prooue the Wretch I was before.
                  
                  
                     Euen as the Needle, that directs the Howre, Simile.
                     
                     (Toucht with the Loadſtone) by the ſecret power
                     Of hidden Nature, points vpon the Pole;
                     Euen ſo the wauering powers of my Soule,
                     Toucht by the vertue of thy Spirit, flee
                     From what is Earth, and point alone to Thee.
                  
                  
                     
                        When I haue ſaith, to hold thee by the Hand,
                     
                     
                        I walke ſecurely, and me thinkes I ſtand
                     
                     
                        More ſirme then Atlas; but when I forſake
                     
                     
                        The ſafe protection of thine Arme, I quake,
                     
                     
                        Like wind-ſhaki Reeds, and haue no ſtrength at all,
                     
                     
                        But (as a Vine, the Prop cut downe) I fall:
                     
                  
                  
                     Yet wretched I (when as thy Iuſtice lends
                     Thy glorious Preſence from me) ſtraight am friends
                     With Fleſh and Blood, forget thy Grace, flye from it,
                     And, like a Dog, returne vnto my Vomit;
                     The ſawning world, to Pleaſure then inuites
                     My wandring Eyes; The fleſh preſents Delights
                     Vnto my yeelding heart, which thinks thoſe pleaſures,
                     Her onely bus'nes now, and rareſt treaſures,
                     Content can glorie in, whil'ſt I, ſecure,
                     Stoope to the painted plumes of Satans Lure:
                     Thus I captiu'd, and drunke with pleaſures Wine,
                     Like to a mad man, thinke no ſtate like mine.
                  
                  
                     
                        What haue I then to boast? What Title can
                     
                     
                        I challenge more then this, A ſinfull man?
                     
                        I feele my Griefe's enough, nor can I be
                     
                     
                        Redrest by any, but (Great God) by thee.
                     
                     
                        
                        Too great thou art, to come within my Roofe,
                     
                     
                        Say but the word, Be whole, and 'tis enough;
                     
                     
                        Till then, my tongue ſhall neuer ceaſe, mine Eyes
                     
                     
                        Ne'r cloze, my lowly bended Knees ne'r riſe;
                     
                     
                        Till then, my Soule ſhall ne'r want early ſobs,
                     
                     
                        My cheekes no Teares, my penſiue Brest, no Throbs,
                     
                     
                        My Heart ſhall lacke no Zeale, nor tongue expreſsing.
                     
                     
                        I'le ſtriue, like Iacob, till I get my Bleſsing:
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Say then, Be cleane, I'le neuer ſtop till then,
                     
                     
                        Heauen ne'r ſhall rest, till Heauen ſhall ſay, Amen.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  THE ARGVMENT.
                  Iob, ſmote with Vlcers, groueling lyes,
                  
                  
                     Plung'd in a Gulfe of Miſeries,
                  
                  
                     His Wife to blaſphemy doth tempt him,
                  
                  
                     His three Friends viſit, and lament him.
                  
               
               
                  Sect. 5.
               
                  LIke as a Truant-Scholler (whoſe delay Chap. 2. 7.
                  
                  Is worſe then whipping, hauing leaue to play) Simile.
                  
                  Makes haſte to be inlarged from the Iayle
                  Of his neglected Schoole, turnes ſpeedy tayle
                  Vpon his tedious booke (ſo ill befriended)
                  Before his Maſters Ite be full ended.
                  So thankleſſe Satan, full of winged Haſte,
                  Thinking all time, not ſpent in Miſchiefe, waſte,
                  
                     
Departs with ſpeed, leſſe patient to forbeare
                  The patient Iob, then patient Iob to beare.
               
               
                  Forth from the furnace of his Noſtrell, flyes Iob ſmote with vlcers.
                     
                  
                  A ſulpherous Vapour, which (by the enuious eyes
                  Of this foule Fiend inflam'd) poſſeſt the faire,
                  And ſweet complection of th'abuſed Aire
                  With Peſtilence, and (hauing power ſo farre)
                  Tooke the aduantage of his worſer Starre,
                  Smote him with Vlcers (Ezod. 9. 10. ſuch as once befell
                  Th' Egyptian Wizzards,) Vlcers 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      hot and fell,
                  Which like a ſearching Tetter vncorrected,
                  Left no part of his body vnaffected,
                  From head to foote, no empty place was found,
                  That could b'afflicted with another wound:
                  So noy ſome was the nature of his Griefe,
                  That (left by Friends, and Wife, that ſhould be chiefe
                  Aſſiſter) he (poore he) alone remain'd,
                  Groueling in Aſhes, being (himſelfe) conſtrain'd,
                  With Pot-ſheards, to ſcrape off thoſe rip'ned Cores,
                  (Which Dogs diſdayn'd to licke) from out his ſores.
               
               
                  Which when his Wife beheld, aduſt, and keene,
                  Her paſſion waxt, made ſtrong, with ſcorne & ſpleene;
                  Like as the Winds, impriſon'd in the earth, Simiie.
                  
                  And barr'd the paſſage to their naturall birth,
                  Grow fierce; and nilling to be longer pent,
                  Breake in an Earth quake, ſhake the World, and vent;
                  So brake ſhe forth, ſo forth her Fury brake,
                  Till now, pent in with ſhame, and thus ſhe ſpake.
               
               
                  
                     Fond Saint, thine Innocence finds timely ſpeed, 
                     
                        The ſpeech of Jobs wife.
                     
                  
                  
                     A fooliſh Saint receiues a Saintly meed;
                  
                  
                     Is this the Iuſt mans Recompence? Or hath
                  
                  
                     Heauen no requitall for thy painefull Faith,
                  
                  
                     
                     Other then this? What, haue thy zealous Qualmes,
                  
                  
                     Abſtemious Faſtings, and thy hopefull Almes,
                  
                  
                     Thy priuate Groanes, and often bended knees,
                  
                  
                     No other End, no other Thankes, but theſe?
                  
                  
                     Fond man, ſubmit thee to a kinder Fate,
                  
                  
                     Ceaſe to be righteous, at ſo deare a rate:
                  
                  
                     'Tis Heauen, not Fortune, that thy Weale debarres;
                  
                  
                     Curſe Heauen then, and not thy way ward Starres:
                  
                  
                     'Tis God that plagues thee, God not knowing why;
                  
                  
                     Curſe then that God, reuenge thy Wrongs, and Dye.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Iob then reply'd: God loues where he chaſtiz'd,
                  
                  
                     Thou ſpeakeſt like a Foole, and ill aduis'd;
                  
                  
                     Laugh we to licke the ſweete, and ſhall we lowre,
                  
                  
                     If he be pleas'd to ſend a little ſowre?
                  
                  
                     Am I ſo weake, one Blast or two, ſhould chill me;
                  
                  
                     I'le truſt my Maker, though my Maker kill me.
                  
               
               
                  When theſe ſad tidings fill'd thoſe itching eares
                  Of Earths black babbling Daughter (ſhe that heares,
                  And vents alike, both Truth and Forgeries,
                  And vtters, often, cheaper then ſhe buyes)
                  She ſpred the pinnions of her nimble Wings,
                  Aduanc't her Trumpet, and away ſhe ſprings,
                  And ſils the whiſpring Ayre, which ſoone poſſeſt
                  The ſpacious borders of th' enquiring Eaſt,
                  Vpon the ſummon of ſuch ſolemne Newes,
                  Whoſe Truth, malignant Fame could not abuſe,
                  His wofull Eliphaz, Tſophar, Buildad. Friends came to him, to the end,
                  To comfort, and bewaile their wretched Friend.
                  But when they came, farre off, they did not know,
                  Whether it were the ſelfeſame Friend, or no,
                  (Brim-fill'd with brinie Woe) they wept, and tore
                  (T'expreſſe their griefe) the garments that they wore,
                  
                     
Seuen dayes and nights they ſate vpon the ground,
                  But ſpake not, for his ſorrowes did abound.
               
               
                  Meditatio Quinta.
                  
                     SAy, is not Satan iuſtly ſtiled than,
                     A Tempter, and an Enemy to Man?
                     What could he more? His Wiſh would not extend
                     To Death, leſt his aſſaults, with death, ſhould end:
                     Then what he did, what could he further doe?
                     His Hand hath ſetz'd both Goods, and Body too,
                     The hopefull Iſſue of a holy Straine,
                     In ſuch a dearth of holineſſe, is ſlaine.
                     What hath the Lazar left him, but his Griefe,
                     And (what might best been ſpar'd) his fooliſh Wife?
                     Could Miſchiefe been more hard (though more in kind)
                     To nip the Flowers, and leaue the Weeds behind?
                  
                  
                     Woman was made a Helper by Creation,
                     A Helper, not alone for Propagation,
                     Or fond Delight, but ſweet Societie,
                     Which Man (alone) ſhould want, and to ſupply
                     Comforts to him, for whom her Sexe was made,
                     That each may ioy in eithers needfull aide:
                     But faireſt Angels, had the fouleſt fall;
                     And beſt things (once abus'd) prooue worst of all,
                     Elſe, had not Satan been ſo foule a Fiend,
                     Elſe, had not Woman proou'd ſo falſe a Friend.
                  
                  
                     Euen as the treacherous Fowler, to entice Simile.
                     
                     His ſilly winged Prey, doth firſt deuiſe
                     
                        
To make a Bird his ſtale, at whoſe falſe Call,
                     Others may chance into the ſelfe-ſame Thrall:
                     Euen ſo, that craftie Snarer of Mankind,
                     Finding mans righteous Pallate not enclind,
                     To taste the ſweetneſſe of his guilded Baites,
                     Makes a collater all Sute, and ſlily waites
                     Vpon the weakeneſſe of ſome boſome Friend,
                     From whoſe enticement, he expects his end.
                  
                  
                     
                        Ah righteous Iob, what Croſſe was left, vnknowne?
                     
                     
                        What Griefe may be deſcrib'd, but was thine owne?
                     
                  
                  
                     Is this a luſt mans caſe? What doth befall
                     To one man, may as well betide to all.
                  
                  
                     The worst I'le looke for, that I can proiect,
                     If better come, 'tis more then I expect;
                     If otherwiſe, I'm arm'd with Preparation;
                     No ſorrow's ſudden to an Expectation.
                  
                  
                     Lord, to thy VViſdome I ſubmit my VVill,
                     I will be thankfull, ſend me Good, or Ill;
                     If Good, my preſent State will paſſe the ſweeter;
                     If Ill, my Crowne of Glorie ſhall be greater.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  THE ARGVMENT.
                  Orewhelm'd with griefe, Iob breaketh forth
                  Into impatience: Bans his Birth,
                  Profeſſes, that his heart did doubt,
                  And feare, what, ſince, hath fallen out.
               
               Sect. 6.
               
               
                  WOrne-bare with griefe, the patient Iob betray'd 
                  
                     Chap 3. Iob curſes his birth-day.
               
               
                  His ſeuen-dayes ſilence, curſt his day, & ſaid:
               
               Oh that my Day of birth had neuer been,
               Nor yet the Night, which I was brought forth in!
               Be it not numbred for a Day, let Light
               Not make a difference twixt it, and Night;
               Let gloomy Shades (then Death more ſable) paſſe
               Vpon it, to declare how fatall 'twas:
               Let Clouds ore-caſt it, and as hatefull make it,
               As life's to him, whom Tortures bid, forſake it:
               From her next day, let that blacke Night be cut,
               Nor in the reckning of the Months, be put:
               Let Deſolation fill it, all night long,
               In it, be neuer heard a Bridall ſong:
               Let all ſad Mourners, that doe curſe the Light,
               When light's drawne in, begin to curſe this Night.
               Her euening Twylight, let foule Darkeneſſe ſtaine,
               And may her Mid-night expect Light, in vaine;
               
                  
Nor let her infant Day (but newly borne)
               Suffer't to ſee the Eye-lids of the morne,
               Becauſe my Mothers Wombe it would not cloze,
               Which gaue me paſſage to endure theſe Woes:
               Why died I not in my Conception, rather?
               Or why was not my Birth, and Death together?
               Why did the Midwife take me on her knees?
               Why did I ſucke, to feele ſuch Griefes, as theſe?
               Then had this Body neuer been oppreſt,
               I had inioy'd th' eternall ſleepe of reſt;
               With Kings, and mighty Monarchs, that lie crown'd
               With ſtately Monuments, poore I had found
               A place of Reſt, had borne as great a ſway,
               Had been as Happy, and as Rich as they:
               Why was I not as an abortiue Birth,
               That ne're had knowne the horrors of the earth?
               The ſilent Graue is quiet from the feare
               Of Tyrants: Tyrants are appeazed there,
               The grinded Priſner heares not (there) the noyſe,
               Nor harder threatnings of th' Oppreſſors voyce:
               Both Rich and Poore are equal'd in the Graue,
               Seruants no Lords, and Lords no Seruants haue:
               What needs there Light to him thats comfortleſſe?
               Or Life to ſuch as languiſh in diſtreſſe,
               And long for death, which, if it come by leiſure,
               They ranſack for it, as a hidden Treaſure?
               VVhat needs there Life to him, that cannot haue
               A Boone, more gracious, then a quiet Graue?
               Or elſe to him, whom God hath wal'd about,
               That would, but cannot finde a Paſſage out?
               VVhen I but taſte, my Sighes returne my Food,
               The flowing of my Teares haue rais'd a flood;
               
                  
When my Eſtate was proſperous, I did feare,
               Leſt, by ſome heedleſſe, or want of care,
               I might be brought to Miſery, and (alas!)
               What I did then ſo feare, is come to paſſe:
               But though, ſecure, my ſoule did neuer ſlumber,
               Yet doe my Woes exceed both Waight, and Number.
               
                  Meditatio ſexta.
                  
                     SO poore a thing is Man. No Fleſh and Blood
                     Deſerues the ſtile ofHor lib. 2. car. ode. 16. Nihileſt exom ni parte beatum. 
                        Abſolutely Good:
                     
                     The righteous man ſins oft; whoſe power's ſuch,
                     To ſin the leaſt, ſins (at the leaſt) too much:
                     TheGen. 22. 10. Man, whoſe Faith diſdain'd his Iſacks life,
                     Diſſembled once, aIbid. 20. 2. Siſter, for a Wife
                     The righteousGen. 19. 33. 
                        Lot, being drunk, did make (at once)
                     His Daughters, both, halfe ſisters to their Sonnes:
                     The royall Fauorite of heauen, ſtood
                     Not guilileſſe of2 Sam. 11. 4, 15 Adultery, and Blood,
                     And he, whoſe hands did build the Temple, doth
                     Bow downe his luſtfull knees to1 King 11 5. 
                        Aſhtaroth
                     
                     TheIohn 8 9. ſinfull Woman was accus'd, but none
                     Was found, that could begin to ſting a ſtone.
                     From muddled Springs, can Chriſtall Waters come?
                     In ſome things, all men ſin, in all things, ſome.
                  
                  
                     Euen at the ſoyle, (which Aprils gentle ſhowers
                     Haue fild with ſweetneſſe, and inricht with flowers) Simile.
                     
                     Reares vp her ſuckling plants, ſtill ſhooting forth
                     The tender bloſſomes of her timely Birth,
                     
                        
But, if deny'd the beames of cheerly May,
                     They hang their withred heads, and fade away:
                     So man, aſsiſted by th' Almighties Hand,
                     His Faith doth flouriſh, and ſecurely ſtand,
                     But left, awhile, forſooke (as in a ſhade)
                     It languiſhes, and nipt with ſin, doth fade:
                     No Gold is pure from Droſſe, though oft refin'd;
                     The ſtrongeſt Cedar's ſhaken with the wind;
                     The faireſt Roſe hath no prerogatiue,
                     Againſt the fretting Canker-worme; The Hiue
                     No hony yeelds, vnblended with the Wax,
                     The fineſt Linnen hath both ſoyle and bracks:
                     The beſt of men haue ſins; None liues ſecure,
                     In Nature nothing's Perfect, nothing Pure.
                  
                  
                     Lord, ſince I needs muſt ſin, yet grant that I
                     Forge no aduantage by infirmity:
                     Since that my Veſture cannot want a Staine,
                     Aſsiſt me, leſt the tincture be in Graine.
                  
                  
                     To thee (my great Redeemer) doe I flye,
                     It is thy Death, alone, can change my Dye;
                     Teares, mingled with thy Blood, can ſcower ſo,
                     That Scarlet ſinnes ſhall turne as white as Snow.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  THE ARGVMENT.
                  
                     Raſh Eliphaz reproues, and rates,
                  
                  
                     And falſly cenſures Iob; Relates
                  
                  
                     His Viſion; ſhewes him the euent
                  
                  
                     Of wicked men: Bids him repent.
                  
               
               
                  Sect. 7.
               
                  THen Eliphas, his pounded tongue replieu'd, 
                        Eliphaz ſpeech Chap. 4.
                  
                  And ſaid, Shuld I cōtēd, thou would'ſt be grieu'd;
                  Yet what man can refraine, but he muſt breake
                  His angry ſilence, hauing heard thee ſpeake?
               
               
                  O ſudden change! Many haſt thou directed,
                  And ſtrengthned thoſe, whoſe minds haue been deiected,
                  Thy ſacred Thewes, and ſweet Inſtructions, did
                  Helpe thoſe were falling, rays'd vp ſuch as ſlid:
                  But now it is thy caſe, thy ſoule is vext,
                  And canſt not helpe thy ſelfe, thy ſelfe perplext;
                  Thou lou'dſt thy God, but baſely for thy profit,
                  Fear'ſt him, in further expectation of it;
                  Iudge then: Did Record euer round thine eare,
                  That God for ſooke the heart, that was ſincere?
                  But often haue we ſeene, that ſuch as plow
                  Lowdneſſe, and Miſchiefe, reape the ſame they ſowe?
                  So haue proud Tyrants from their throanes bin caſt,
                  With all their of spring, by th'Almighties Blaſt;
                  
                     
And they, whoſe hands haue bin imbrew'd in blood,
                  Haue with their Iſſue dyed, for want of Food:
               
               
                  A Viſion lately' appeard before my ſight, The Viſion.
                  
                  In depth of darkneſſe, and the dead of night,
                  Vnwonted feare vſurpt me round about,
                  My trembling bones were sore, from head to foot:
                  Forthwith, a Spirit glanc'd before mine eyes,
                  My Browes did ſweat, my moyſtned Haire did riſe,
                  The Face I knew not, but a while it ſtayd,
                  And in the depth of ſilence, thus it ſaid,
               
               
                  Is man more Iuſt, more pure then his Creator?
                  Amongſt his Angels, (more vpright by nature
                  Then Man) he hath found Weaknes, how much more
                  Shall he expect in him, that's walled ore
                  With mortall Fleſh, and Blood, founded, and floor'd
                  With Duſt, and with the Wormes to be deuour'd?
                  They riſe ſecurely with the Morning Sunne,
                  And (vnregarded) dye ere Day be done;
                  Their Glory paſſes with them, as a Breath,
                  They dye (like Fooles) before they thinke of death.
               
               
                  Rage then, and ſee who will approue thy rage, Chap. 5.
                  
                  What Saint will giue thy railing Patronage?
                  Anger deſtroyes the Foole, and he that hath
                  A wrathfull heart, is ſlaine with his owne wrath;
                  Yet haue I ſeene, that Fooles haue oft been able
                  To boaſt with Babel, but haue falne with Babel:
                  Their ſons deſpairing, roare without reliefe
                  In open Ruine, on the Rocks of Griefe:
                  Their harueſt (though but ſmall) the hungry eate,
                  And robbers ſeaze their wealth, though ne'r ſo great:
                  But wretched man, were thy Condition mine,
                  I'de not deſpaire, as thou doſt, nor repine,
                  
                     
But offer vp the broken Sacrifice
                  Of a ſad ſoule, before his angry eyes,
                  Whoſe Workes are Miracles of admiration,
                  He mounts the Meeke, amidſt their Deſolation,
                  Confounds the worldly wiſe, that (blind-fold) they
                  Grope all in Darkneſſe, at the noone of Day:
                  But guards the Humble from reproach of wrong,
                  And ſtops the current of the crafty Tongue.
                  Thrice happy is the man his Hands correct:
                  Beware, leſt Fury force thee to reiect
                  Th' Almighties Tryall; He that made thy Wound
                  In Iuſtice, can, in Mercy, make it ſound:
                  Feare not, though multiply'd Afflictions ſhall
                  Beſiege thee; He, at length, will rid them all;
                  In Famine he ſhall feed, in Warre defend thee,
                  Shield thee from Slander, and in Griefes attend thee,
                  The Beaſts ſhall ſtrike with thee eternall Peace,
                  The Stones ſhall not diſturbe thy fields Encreaſe;
                  Thy Houſe ſhall thriue, repleniſht with Content,
                  Which, thou ſhalt rule, in proſprous Gouernment,
                  The number of thy Of-ſpring ſhall abound,
                  Like Summers Graſſe vpon a fruitfull ground,
                  Like timely Corne, well rip'ned in her Eares,
                  Thou ſhalt depart thy life, ſtruck full of yeeres:
                  All this, Experience tels: Then (Iob) aduiſe,
                  Thou haſt taught many, now thy ſelfe be wiſe.
               
               
                  
                  Meditatio ſeptima.
                  
                     
                        THe perfect Modell of true Friendſhip's this:
                     
                     
                        A rare Affection of the ſoule, which is 
                        The deſcription of true friendſhip.
                     
                     
                        Begun with rip'ned Iudgement, doth perſeuer
                     
                     
                        With ſimple Wiſdome, and concludes with Neuer.
                     
                     
                        'Tis pure in ſubſtance, as refined Gold,
                     
                     
                        That buyeth all things, but is neuer ſold:
                     
                     
                        It is a Coyne, and most men walke without it;
                     
                     
                        True Loue's the Stampe, Iehouah's writ about it;
                     
                     
                        It rusts, vnvs'd, but vſing makes it brighter,
                     
                     
                        'Gainst Heauen high Treaſon 'tis, to make it lighter.
                     
                     
                        'Tis a Gold Chaine, linkes ſoule and ſoule together 
                        
                           Sali
                                 •
                              s homo amico amicus Ter. Phorm Act. 3. ſcn 3.
                     
                     
                        In perfect Vnitie, ties God to either.
                     
                     
                        Affliction is the Touch, whereby we prooue,
                     
                     
                        Whether't be Gold, or guilt with fained Loue.
                     
                     
                        The wiſeſt Moralist, that euer diu'd
                     
                     
                        Into the depth of Natures bowels, ſtriu'd
                     
                     
                        With th' Augar of Experience, to bore
                     
                     
                        Mens hearts ſo farre, till he had found the Ore
                     
                     
                        Of Friendſhip, but, deſpaying of his end,
                     
                     My Friends (ſaid he) there is no perfect Friend. Ariſtotle.
                     
                     
                        Friendſhip's like Muſick, two Strings tun'd alike,
                     
                     
                        Will both ſtirre, though but onely one you ſtrike.
                     
                     
                        It is the Quinteſſence of all Perfection
                     
                     
                        Extracted into one; A ſweet connexion
                     
                     
                        Of all the Vertues, Morall and Diuine,
                     
                     
                        Abſtracted into One. It is a Mine,
                     
                     
                        
                        Whoſe nature is not rich, vnleſſe in making
                     
                     
                        The ſtate of others wealthy by partaking:
                     
                  
                  
                     It bloomes and bloſſoms, both in Sunne and ſhade,
                     Doth (like the Bay in winter) neuer fade:
                     It loueth all, and yet ſuſpecteth none,
                     Is prouident, yet ſeeking not her owne: 1. Cor. 13.
                     
                     'Tis rare it ſelfe, yet maketh all things common,
                     And is iudicious, yet it iudgeth no man.
                  
                  
                     
                        The 
                        Epaminond as. 
                        noble Theban, being asked, which
                     
                     
                        Of 
                        
                           Chahrias, or Jphicrates, or himſelfe. 
                        three (propounded) he ſuppos'd moſt rich
                     
                     
                        In vertues ſacred Treaſure, thus reply'd,
                     
                     Till they be dead, that doubt cannot be try'd.
                  
                  
                     It is no wiſe mans part, to waigh a Frend,
                     Without the gloſſe, and goodneſſe of his End:
                     For Life, without the Death conſidered, can
                     Affoord but halfe a ſtory of the Man.
                  
                  
                     'Tis not my friends Affliction, that ſhall make
                     Me either Wonder, Cenſure, or Forſake:
                     Iudgement belongs to Fooles; enough that I
                     Find hee's afflicted, not enquier, Why:
                     It is the hand of Heauen, That ſelfeſame Sorrow
                     Grieues him to Day, may make me grone to Morrow:
                  
                  
                     Heauen be my comfort; In my higheſt griefe,
                     I will not truſt to mans, but Thy reliefe.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  THE ARGVMENT.
                  Iob counts his ſorrowes, and from thence
                  
                  
                     Excuſes his Impatience;
                  
                  
                     Deſcribes the ſhortneſſe of mans Time,
                  
                  
                     And makes confeſsion of his Crime.
                  
               
               
                  Sect. 8.
               
                  BVt wretched Iob, ſigh't forth theſe words, & ſaid, Chap. 6.
                  
                  Ah me! that my Impatience were waigh'd
                  With all my Sorrowes, by an equall hand, 
                        Jobs ſpeech.
                  
                  They would be found more pondrous then the ſand,
                  That lyes vpon the new-forſaken ſhore;
                  My Griefes want vtt'rance, & haue ſtopt their Dore:
                  And wonder not; Heau'ns ſhafts haue ſtruck me dead,
                  And God hath heapt all Miſchiefes on my head:
                  Will Aſſes bray, when they haue graſſe to eate?
                  Or lowes the Oxe, when as he wants no meate?
                  Can Pallates find a relliſh in diſtaſt?
                  Or can the whites of Egges well pleaſe the taſt?
                  My vexed ſoule is daily fed with ſuch
                  Corruptions, as my hands diſdaine to touch.
                  Alas! that Heauen would heare my hearts Requſte,
                  And ſtrike me dead, that I may find ſome Reſt:
                  What hopes haue I, to ſee my end of griefe,
                  And to what end, ſhould I prolong my life?
                  
                     
Why ſhould not I wiſh Death? My ſtrength, (alas)
                  Is it like Marble, or my fleſh like Braſſe?
                  What Power haue I to mitigate my Paine?
                  If e're I had, that Power now is vaine,
                  My friends are like the Riuers, that are dry
                  In heat of Summer, when neceſſity
                  Requireth water; They amazed ſtand
                  To ſee my Griefe, but lend no helping hand.
                  Friends, begge I ſuccour from you? Craued I
                  Your Goods, to ranſome my Captiuity?
                  Shew me my faults, and wherein I did wrong
                  My Patience, and I will hold my tongue;
                  The force of reaſonable words may mooue,
                  But what can Rage or Lunacy reprooue?
                  Rebuke you (then) my words, to haue it thought
                  My ſpeech is frantick, with my griefe diſtraught?
                  You take a pleaſure in your friends diſtreſſe,
                  That is more wretched then the Fatherleſſe:
                  Behold theſe Sores: Be iudg'd by your owne eyes,
                  If theſe be counterfeited miſeries;
                  Ballance my words, and you ſhall find me free
                  From theſe foule crimes, wherewith ye branded me,
                  And that my ſpeech was not diſtaind with ſin,
                  Only the language, ſorrow treated in.
               
               
                  Is not mans Day prefixt, which, when expyr'd, Chap 7.
                  
                  Sleepes he not quiet, as a ſeruant hir'd?
                  A ſeruants labour doth, at length, ſurceaſe,
                  His Day of trauell findes a Night of peace,
                  But (wretched) I with woes, am ſtill oppreſt,
                  My mid-day torments ſee no euen of Reſt,
                  My nights (ordaind for ſleepe) are fill'd with griefe,
                  I looke (in vaine) for the next dayes reliefe:
                  
                     
With Duſt, and Wormes my fleſh is hid, my ſorrow's
                  Haue plough'd my skin, and filth lyes in her furrowes:
                  My dayes of ioy are in a moment gone,
                  And (hopeleſſe of returning) ſpent and done:
                  Remember (Lord) my life is but a puffe,
                  I, but a man, that's Miſery enough,
                  And when pale Death hath once ſeald vp my ſight,
                  I ne're ſhall ſee the pleaſures of the light,
                  The eye of man ſhall not diſcouer me,
                  No, nor thine (Lord) for I ſhall ceaſe to be;
                  When mortals dye, they paſſe (like clouds before
                  The Sunne) and back returne they neuer more,
                  T'his earthly houſe he ne're ſhall come agin,
                  And then ſhall be, as if he ne're had bin:
                  Therfore my tongue ſhall ſpeak, while it hath breath,
                  Prompted with griefe, and with the pangs of death:
                  Am I not weake and ſaint? What need'ſt thou ſtretch
                  Thy direfull hand vpon ſo poore a Wretch?
                  When as I thinke that night ſhall ſtop the ſtreames
                  Of my diſtreſſe, thou fright'ſt me then, with dreames,
                  So that my ſoule doth rather chuſe to dye,
                  Then be inuolued in ſuch miſerie;
                  My life's a burthen, and will end: O grieue
                  No longer him, that would no longer liue.
                  Ah! what is Man, that thou ſhould'ſt raiſe him ſo
                  High at firſt, then, ſinke him downe ſo low?
                  What's Mā? Thy glory's great enough, without him:
                  Why doſt thou (thus) diſturbe thy mind about him?
               
               
                  Lord, I haue ſin'd, (Great Helper of mankind)
                  I am but Duſt and Aſhes, I haue ſin'd:
                  Againſt thee (as a marke) why haſt thou fixt me?
                  How haue I treſpas't, that thou thus afflict'ſt me?
                  
                     
Why, rather, didſt thou not remoue my ſin,
                  And ſalue the ſorrowes that I raued in?
                  For thou haſt heapt ſuch vengeance on my head,
                  That when thou ſeek'ſt me, thou wilt find me dead.
               
               
                  Meditatio octaua.
                  
                     
                        TH' Egyptians, amidst their ſolemne Feaſts,
                     
                     
                        Vſed to welcome, and preſent their Gheſts,
                     
                     
                        With the ſad ſight of Mans Anatomie,
                     
                     
                        Seru'd in with this loud Motto, All muſt dye.
                     
                        Fooles often goe about, when as they may
                     
                     
                        Take better vantage of a neerer way;
                     
                     
                        Looke well into your boſomes; doe not ſlatter
                     
                     
                        Your knowne infirmities: Behold, what matter
                     
                     
                        Your fleſh was made of: Man, caſt back thine eye,
                     
                     
                        Vpon the weakneſſe of thine Infancie;
                     
                     
                        See how thy lips hang on thy mothers Breſt,
                     
                     
                        Bawling for helpe, more helpleſſe then a Beast.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Liu'st thou to Childhood? Then, behold, what toyes
                     
                     
                        Doe mocke the ſenſe, how ſhallow are thy ioyes:
                     
                     
                        Com'st thou to Downy yeeres? ſee, how deceits
                     
                     
                        Gull thee with golden fruit, and with falſe baits,
                     
                     
                        Slily beguile the prime of thine affection:
                     
                     
                        Art thou attaind at length to full perfection
                     
                     
                        Of ripened yeeres? Ambition now hath ſent
                     
                     
                        Thee on her frothy errand, Diſcontent
                     
                     
                        Payes thee thy Wages: Doe thy grizly haires
                     
                     
                        Begin to caſt account of many cares
                     
                     
                        
                        Vpon thy head? The ſacred luſt of gold
                     
                     
                        Now fires thy ſpirit, for fleſhly luſt, too cold,
                     
                     
                        Makes thee a ſlaue to thine owne baſe deſire,
                     
                     
                        Which melts and hardens, at the ſelfe ſame Fire:
                     
                     
                        Art thou Decrepit? Then thy very breath
                     
                     
                        Is grieuous to thee, and each griefe's a Death:
                     
                     
                        Looke where thou liſt, thy life is but a ſpan,
                     
                     
                        Thou art but Duſt, and, to conclude, A Man.
                  
                  
                     Thy life's a Warfare, Thou a Souldier art,
                     Satan's thy Foe-man, and a faithfull Heart,
                     Thy two edg'd Weapon, Patience thy Shield,
                     Heauen is thy Chiefetaine, and the world thy Field.
                  
                  
                     To be
                           Mahu eſt miles qui Imperate rem gemens ſequitur. Sen. afraid to dye, or wiſh for death,
                     Are words and paſsions of deſpairing breath:
                     Who doth the firſt, the Day doth faintly yeeld,
                     And who the ſecond, baſely flies the Field.
                  
                  
                     Man's not a lawfull Steares-man of his dayes,
                     His bootleſſe wiſh, nor haſtens, nor delayes:
                     We are Gods hired Workmen; He diſcharges
                     Some, late at Night, (and when he liſt) inlarges
                     Others at Noone, and in the Morning, ſome:
                     None may relieue himſelfe, till He bid, Come:
                     If we receiue for one halfe day, as much
                     As they that toyle till Euening, ſhall we grutch?
                  
                  
                     Our life's a Road, in death our Iourney ends,
                     We goe on Gods Embaſſage, ſome, he ſends
                     Call'd with the trotting of hard Miſery, 
                           Hor. car. lib. 2. od. 3.
                     
                     And others, pacing on Proſperity: 
                           Omnium verſatur vrna, ſerius Ocyius ſors exitura.
                        
                     
                     Some lagge, whileſt others gallop on, before;
                     All goe an end, ſome faſter, and ſome ſlower.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Epictet. Euchirid. cap. 77. 
                        Lead me that pace (great God) that thou think'ſt beſt,
                     
                     
                        And I will follow with a dauntleſſe breſt:
                     
                     
                        
                        VVhich (ne'rtheleſſe) if I refuſe to doe,
                     
                     
                        I ſhall be wicked, and yet follow too.
                     
                     
                        Aſsiſt me in my Combate with the fleſh,
                     
                     
                        Relieue my fainting powers, and refreſh
                     
                     
                        My feeble ſpirit: I will not wiſh to be
                     
                     
                        Caſt from the world; Lord, caſt the world from me.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  THE ARGVMENT.
                  Bildad, man's either ſtate expreſſes,
                  
                  
                     Gods Mercy' and Iuſtice Iob confeſſes;
                  
                  
                     He pleads his cauſe, and begs reliefe,
                  
                  
                     Foyl'd with the burthen of his griefe.
                  
               
               
                  Sect. 9.
               
                  SO Bildads ſilence (great with tongue) did breake, 
                        Bildads ſpeech. Chap. 8.
                  
                  And, like a heartleſſe Comforter, did ſpeake:
                  How long wilt thou perſiſt to breath thy mind
                  In words, that vaniſh as a ſtorme of wind?
                  Will God forſake the Innocent, or will
                  His Iuſtice ſmite thee, vndeſeruing ill?
                  Though righteous death thy ſinfull ſons hath rent
                  From thy ſad boſome, yet if thou repent,
                  And waſh thy waies with vndiſſembled teares,
                  Tuning thy Troubles to th' Almighties eares,
                  The mercy of his eyes ſhall ſhine vpon thee,
                  And ſhowre the ſweetneſſe of his Bleſſings on thee:
                  
                     
And though (a while) thou plunge in miſery,
                  At length hee'l crowne thee with proſperity:
                  Run back, and learne of ſage Antiquity,
                  What our late births, to preſent times, deny,
                  See, how, and what (in the worlds downy age)
                  Befell our fathers in their Pilgrimage;
                  If Ruſhes haue no myre, and Graſſe no raine,
                  They ceaſe to flouriſh, droope their heads, & wayne:
                  So fades the man, whoſe heart is not vpright,
                  So periſheth the double Hypocrite;
                  His hopes are like the Spiders web, to day
                  That's flouriſhing, to morrow ſwept away:
                  But he that's iuſt, is like a flowring tree,
                  Rooted by Chriſtall ſprings, that cannot be
                  Scorcht by the noone of day, nor ſtir'd from thence,
                  Where, firmely fixt, it hath a reſidence,
                  Heauen neuer failes the ſoule that is vpright,
                  Nor offers arme to the baſe Hypocrite:
                  The one, he bleſſes with eternall ioyes,
                  The other, his auenging hand deſtroyes.
               
               
                  I yeeld it for a truth; (ſad Iob reply'd) Chap. 9. Jobs reply.
                  
                  Compar'd with God, can man be iuſtifi'd?
                  If man ſhould giue account what he hath done,
                  Not of a thouſand, could he anſwere one:
                  His hand's all-Power, and his heart all pure,
                  Againſt this God, what fleſh can ſtand ſecure?
                  He ſhakes the Mountaines, and the Sun he barres
                  From circling his due courſe, ſhuts vp the Starres,
                  He ſpreads the Heauens, and rideth on the Flood,
                  His Workes may be admir'd, not vnderſtood:
                  No eye can ſee, no heart can apprehend him,
                  Liſts he to ſpoyle? What's he can reprehend him?
                  
                     
His Will's his Law. The ſmootheſt pleader hath
                  No power in his lips, to ſlake his Wrath,
                  Much leſſe can I pleade faire Immunitie,
                  Which could my guiltleſſe Tongue attaine, yet I
                  Would kiſſe the Footſtep of his Iudgement-ſeate:
                  Should he receiue my crie, my griefe's ſo great,
                  It would perſwade me, that he heard me not,
                  For he hath torne me with the fiue-fold knot
                  Of his ſharpe Scourge, his plagues ſucceſſiue are,
                  That I can find no ground, but of Deſpaire.
                  If my bold lips ſhould dare to iuſtifie
                  My ſelfe, my lips would giue my lips the lye.
                  God owes his mercy, nor to Good, nor Bad;
                  The wicked oft he ſpares, and oft does adde,
                  Griefe, to the Iuſt mans griefe, woes after woes;
                  We muſt not iudge man, as his Market goes.
                  But might my prayers obtaine this boone, that God
                  Would ceaſe theſe ſorrowes, and remoue that Rod,
                  Which moues my patience, I would take vpon me,
                  T'impleade before him, your raſh Iudgement on me,
                  Becauſe my tender Conſcience doth perſwade me,
                  I'm not ſo bad, as your bad Words haue made me.
               
               
                  My life is tedious, my diſtreſſe ſhall breake Chap. 10.
                  
                  Into her proper Voyce, my griefes ſhall ſpeake;
                  (Iuſt Iudge of Earth) condemne me not, before
                  Thou pleaſe to make me vnderſtand wherefore.
                  Agrees it with thy Iuſtice, thus to be
                  Kind to the Wicked, and ſo harſh to Me?
                  Seeſt thou with fleſhly Eyes? Or doe they glance
                  By fauour? Are they clos'd with Ignorance?
                  Liu'ſt thou the life of Man? Doeſt thou deſire
                  A ſpace of time to ſearch, or to enquire
                  
                     
My ſinne? No, in the twinkling of an eye,
                  Thou ſeeſt my heart, ſeeſt mine Immunitie
                  Frō thoſe foule crimes, wherwith my friends, at pleaſure
                  Taxe me, yet thou afflict'ſt me, in this Meaſure:
                  Thy hands haue form'd, and fram'd me, what I am,
                  When thou haſt made, wilt thou deſtroy the ſame?
                  Remember, I am built of Clay, and muſt
                  Returne againe (without thy helpe) to Duſt.
                  Thou didſt create, preſerue me, haſt endu'd
                  My life with gracious bleſſings, oft renew'd
                  Thy precious Fauours on me: How wert thou,
                  Once, ſo benigne, and ſo cruell now?
                  Thou hunt'ſt me like a Prey, my plagues encreaſe,
                  Succeed each other, and they neuer ceaſe.
                  Why was I borne? Or why did not my Tombe,
                  Receiue me (weeping) from my Mothers Wombe?
                  I haue not long to liue; Lord, grant that I
                  May ſee ſome comfort, that am ſoone to dye.
               
               
                  Meditatio nona.
                  
                     HE that's the truest Maſter of his owne,
                     Is neuer leſſe alone, then when alone,
                     His watchfull Eyes are plac't within his Heart;
                     His Skill, is how to know himſelfe; his Art,
                     How to command the pride of his Affections,
                     With ſacred Reaſon: How to giue Directions
                     Vnto his wandring Will; His
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           . Conſcience checks his
                     More looſer thoughts; His lowder ſinnes, ſhe vexes
                     
                        
With ſrights, and feares; Within her owne precincts,
                     She rambles with herJuuenal. Sat. 13. Occultum qua tientean
                              •
                            
                           
                              •
                           o tortore ſlagcl
                           
                              •
                           um. Whips of wire, ne'r winks
                     At ſmallest faults. Like as a tender Mother
                     (Howe're ſhe loues her darling) will not ſmother
                     His childiſh fault, but ſhe (her ſelfe) will rather
                     Correct, then truſt him to his angry Father:
                     Euen ſo the tender Conſcience of the wiſe,
                     Checks her beloued ſoule, and doth chaſtiſe,
                     And iudge the Crime her ſelfe, lest it ſhould ſtand,
                     As liable to a ſeuerer Hand.
                  
                  
                     Fond ſoule, beware, who e're thou art, that ſpies
                     Anothers Fault, that thou thine owne, chaſtize,
                     Leſt, like a fooliſh man, thou iudge another,
                     In thoſe ſelfe-crimes, which in your breſt you ſmother.
                  
                  
                     Who vndertakes, to dreine his brothers eye
                     Of noyſome Humors, firſt, muſt clarifie
                     His owne, leſt when his brothers blemiſh is
                     Remoou'd, he ſpie a ſouler Blame in his.
                  
                  
                     It is beyond th' extent of Mans Commiſsion,
                     To iudge of Man: The ſecret diſpoſition
                     Of ſacred Prouidence isHor. car. lib. 3. Ode 29. Prudens ſulturi temporis exitum, caliginoſa nocte, prenut Deus. Luk 16. 22.
                         lockt, and ſeal'd
                     From mans Conceit, and not to be reueal'd,
                     Vntill that Lambe breake ope the Seale, and come
                     VVith Life and Death, to giue the VVorld her Doome.
                  
                  
                     The Ground-worke of our Faith, must not relie
                     On bare Euents; Peace and Proſperitie
                     Are goodly Fauours, but no proper Marke,
                     VVherewith God brands his Sheepe: No outward barke
                     Secures the body, to be ſound within.
                     The Rich man liu'd in Scarlet, dyed in Sinne.
                     Behold th' afflicted man; Affliction mooues
                     Compaſsion; but no Confuſion prooues.
                     
                        
A gloomie Day brings oft a glorious Euen:
                     The Poore man dyed with ſores, and liues in Heauen.
                     To Good and Bad, both Fortunes Heauen doth ſhare,
                     That both, an after-change, may hope, and feare.
                  
                  
                     I'le hope the beſt (Lord,) leaue the reſt to thee,
                     Leſt, while I iudge another, thou iudge me;
                     It's one mans VVorke, to haue a ſerious ſight
                     Of his owne ſinnes, and iudge himſelfe aright.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  THE ARGVMENT.
                  Zophar blames Iob; Iob equall makes
                  
                  
                     His wiſdome vnto theirs: He takes
                  
                  
                     In hand to pleade with God; and then
                  
                  
                     Deſcribes the fraile eſtate of men.
                  
               
               
                  Sect. 10.
               
                  THen Zophar from deepe ſilence, did awake Chap. 11. Zophars ſpeech.
                     
                  
                  His words, with lowder language, & be ſpake:
                  Shall Prattlers be vnanſwer'd, or ſhall ſuch
                  Be counted iuſt, that ſpeake, for babbling much?
                  Shal thy words ſtop our mouths? He that hath blam'd
                  And ſcoft at others, ſhall he dye vnſham'd?
                  Our eares haue heard thee, when thou haſt excus'd
                  Thy ſelfe of Euill, and thy God accus'd:
                  But if thy God ſhould pleade with thee at large,
                  Thoud'ſt reape the ſorrowes of a double Charge.
                  
                     
Canſt thou, by deepe enquirie, vnderſtand
                  The hidden Iuſtice of th' Almighties hand?
                  Heauens large Dimenſions cannot comprehend him;
                  What e're he doe, what's He, can reprehend him?
                  What Refuge haſt thou then, but to preſent
                  A heart, inricht with the ſad compliment
                  Of a true Conuert, on thy bended knee,
                  Before thy God, t'attone thy God and thee?
                  Then doubt not, but he'l reare thee from thy ſorrow,
                  Diſperſe thy Clouds, and, like a ſhining Morrow,
                  Make cleare thy Sun-beames of Proſperitie,
                  And reſt thy Soule in ſweet Securitie:
                  But he, whoſe heart, obdur'd in ſinne, perſiſts,
                  His Hopes ſhall vaniſh, as the morning Miſts.
               
               
                  But Iob, euen as a Ball, againſt the ground Chap 12.
                  
                  Banded with violence, did thus rebound:
               
               
                  You are the onely Wiſemen, in your breſts, Iobs reply.
                     
                  
                  The hidden Magazen of true Wiſdome reſts,
                  Yet (though aſtunn'd with ſorrowes) doe I know
                  A little, and (perchance) as much as you;
                  I'm ſcorned of my Friends, whoſe proſprous ſtate,
                  Surmiſes me (that haue expyr'd the Date,
                  Of Earths faire Fortunes) to be caſt away,
                  From Heauens regard, thinke none belou'd, but they;
                  I am deſpiſed, like a Torch, that's ſpent,
                  Whil'ſt that the wicked blazes in his Tent:
                  What haue your wiſdoms taught me, more then that,
                  Which Birds and Beaſts (could they but ſpeak) would chat?
                  Digeſts the Stomake, 'ere the Pallat taſtes?
                  O weigh my Words, before you iudge my Caſe.
                  But you referre me to our Fathers dayes,
                  To be inſtructed in their wiſer Layes.
                  
                     
True, length of dayes brings Wiſdome; but, I ſay,
                  I haue a Wiſer teacheth me, then they:
                  For I am taught, and tutor'd by that Hand,
                  Whoſe vnreſiſted power doth command
                  The limits of the Earth, whoſe Wiſdome ſchooles
                  And traines the Simple, makes the learned, Fooles:
                  His hand doth rayſe the poore, depoſes Kings;
                  On him, both Order, and the Change of things
                  Depend, he ſearches, and brings forth the light,
                  From out the ſhaddowes, and the depth of night.
               
               
                  All this, mine owne Experience hath found true, Chap 13.
                  
                  And in all this, I know as much as you.
                  But you auerre; If I ſhould pleade with God,
                  That he would double his ſeuerer Rod.
                  Your tongue belyes his Iuſtice, you applie
                  Amiſſe, your Med'cine, to my Maladie;
                  In ſilence, you would ſeeme more Wiſe, leſſe weake;
                  You hauing ſpoke, now lend me leaue to ſpeake.
                  Will you doe wrong, to doe Gods Iuſtice right?
                  Are you his Counſell? Need you helpe to fight
                  His Quarrels? Or expect you his applauſe,
                  Thus (brib'd with ſelfe-conceit) to pleade his Cauſe?
                  Iudgement's your Fee, when as you take in hand
                  Heauens cauſe, to pleade it, and not Heauen command.
                  If that the fouleneſſe of your Cenſures could
                  Not fright you, yet, me thinkes, his Greatnes ſhould,
                  Whoſe Iuſtice, you make Patron of your lyes;
                  Your ſlender Maxims, and falſe Forgeryes,
                  Are ſubſtanc't, like the duſt, that flies beſides me;
                  Peace then, and I will ſpeake, what ere betides me.
                  My ſoule is on the Rack, my teares haue drown'd me,
                  Yet will I truſt my God, though God confound me;
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                     
He, He's my Towre of ſtrength; No hypocrite
                  Stands, vnconfounded, in his glorious ſight:
                  Ballance my words; I know my caſe would quit
                  Me from your cenſures, ſhould I argue it.
                  Who takes the Plaintiffes pleading? Come, for I
                  Muſt pleade my Right, or elſe (perforce) muſt dye.
                  With thee (Great Lord of Heauen) I dare diſpute,
                  If thou wilt grant me this my double Sute;
                  Firſt, that thou ſlake theſe ſorrowes, that ſurround me,
                  Then, that thy burning Face doe not confound me;
                  Which granted, then take thou thy choyſe, let me
                  Propound the Queſtion, or, elſe, anſwere Thee.
                  Why doſt thou thus purſue me, like thy Foe?
                  For what great Sinne do'ſt thou afflict me ſo?
                  Break'ſt thou a withred Leafe? Thy Iuſtice doth
                  Summe vp the Reck'nings of my ſinfull Youth;
                  Thou keep'ſt me Pris'ner, bound in fetters faſt,
                  And, like a thread-bare Garment, doe I waſt.
               
               
                  Man, borne of Woman, hath but a ſhort while Chap 14. The ſhortnes of Mans life.
                     
                  
                  To liue; his Dayes are fleete, and full of toyle;
                  He's like a Flower, ſhooting forth, and dying,
                  His Life is as a Shaddow, ſwiftly flying.
                  Ah! being ſo poore a thing, what need'ſt thou mind him?
                  The nūber of his daies, thou haſt confin'd him;
                  Then adde not plagues vnto his Griefe, O giue
                  Him peace, that hath ſo ſmall a time to liue;
                  Trees, that are fell'd, may ſprout againe, Man neuer;
                  His dayes are numbred, and he dyes for euer,
                  Hee's like a Miſt, exhaled by the Sunne,
                  His dayes once done, they are for euer done.
                  O, that thy Hand would hide me cloſe, and couer
                  Me in the Graue, till all thy Wrath were ouer!
                  
                     
My deſperate ſorrowes hope for no Reliefe,
                  Yet will I waite my Change. My day of griefe
                  Will be exchang'd, for an eternall Day
                  Of Ioy: But now, thou doſt not ſpare to lay
                  Full heapes of Vengeance on my broken ſoule,
                  And writeſt my ſinnes, vpon an ample ſcrowle;
                  As Mountaines (being ſhaken) fall, and Rocks,
                  (Though firme) are worne, & rent with many knocks:
                  So ſtrongeſt men are batter'd with thy Strength,
                  Looſe ground, returning to the Ground at length:
                  So Mortals dye, and (being dead) ne'r mind
                  The faireſt Fortunes, that they leaue behind.
                  While man is man (vntill that death bereaue him
                  Of his laſt breath) his Griefes ſhall neuer leaue him.
               
               
                  Meditatio decima.
                  
                     DOth Hiſt'ry then, and ſage Chronologie,
                     (The Index, pointing to Antiquitie,)
                     So firmely grounded on deepe Iudgement, guarded,
                     And kept by ſo much Miracle, rewarded
                     With ſo great Glorie, ſerue, but as ſlight Fables,
                     To edge the dulneſſe of mens wanton Tables,
                     And claw their itching eares? Or doe they, rather,
                     Like a conciſe Abridgement, ſerue to gather
                     Mans high Aduentures, and his tranſitorie
                     Atchiuements, to expreſse his Makers glorie?
                     Acts, that haue blowne the lowdeſt Trumpe of Fame,
                     Are all, but Honours, purchac't in His name.
                  
                  
                     
                     Is 1. Sam. 10. 1. he, that (yesterday) went forth, to bring
                     His Fathers Aſſes home, (to day) crown'd King?
                  
                  
                     Did Dan 4 30. he, that now, on his braue Palace ſtood,
                     Boaſting his Babels beautie, chew the cud
                     An hower after? Haue not Babes been crown'd,
                     And mightie Monarchs beaten to the ground?
                     Man vndertakes, Heauen breathes ſucceſſe vpon it;
                     What Good, what Malum poenae. Euill is done, but Heauen hath done it?
                  
                  
                     The Alexander. Man, to whom the World was not aſham'd,
                     To yeeld her Colours, he, that was proclam'd
                     A God, in humane ſhape, whoſe dreadfull Voyce
                     Did ſtrike men dead, like Thunder, at the noyſe;
                     Was rent away, from his Imperiall Throne,
                     Before his flowre of Youth was fully blowne,
                     His Race was rooted out, his Iſſue ſlaine,
                     And left his Empire to another Straine.
                  
                  
                     Who, that did e're behold the ancient Rome,
                     Would raſhly, giuen her Glorie ſuch a doome,
                     Or thought her ſubiect to ſuch Alterations,
                     That was the Terrarum Domina Gentium que Roma. Martial. Miſtreſſe, and the Queene of Nations?
                  
                  
                     Egypt, that in her walls, had once engroſt
                     More Wiſdome, then the World beſides, hath loſt
                     Her Senſes now; Her wiſeſt men of State,
                     Are turn'd, like Puppets, to be pointed at:
                     If Romes great power, and Egypts wiſdome can
                     Not aide themſelues, how poore a thing is Man?
                  
                  
                     God Playes with Kingdomes, as with Tennis-balls,
                     Fells ſome that riſe, and rayſes ſome that falls:
                     Nor Policie can preuent, nor ſecret Fate,
                     VVhere Heauen hath pleas'd, to blow vpon a State.
                     If States be not ſecure, nor Kingdomes, than
                     How helpeleſſe (Ah!) how poore a thing is Man!
                     
                        
Man's like a Flower, the while he hath to laſt,
                     Hee's nipt with froſt, and ſhooke with euery blaſt,
                     Hee's borne in ſorrow, and brought vp in teares,
                     He liues, a while in ſinne, and dyes in feares.
                  
                  
                     Lord, I'le not boaſt, what ere thou giue vnto me,
                     Leſt e're my brag be done, thou take it from me.
                     No man may boaſt, but of his owne, I can 
                           Nemo gloriari debet, niſi de ſuo, Sen. ad Lucil.
                     
                     Then boaſt of nothing, for I am a Man.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  THE ARGVMENT.
                  
                     Raſh Eliphaz doth aggrauate
                  
                  
                     The ſinnes of Iob, malign's his ſtate,
                  
                  
                     VVhom Iob reprouing, iuſtifies
                  
                  
                     Himſelfe, bewailes his miſeries.
                  
               
               
                  Sect. 11.
               
                  DOth vaine repining (Eliphaz replies) Chap. 15. Eliphaz his ſpeech.
                  
                  Or words, like wind, beſeeme the man that's (wiſe?
                  Ah ſure, thy faithleſſe heart reiects the feare
                  Of heauen, doſt not acquaint thy lips with prayre:
                  Thy words accuſe thy heart of Impudence,
                  Thy tongue (not I) brings in the Euidence:
                  Art thou the firſt of men? Doe Myſteries
                  Vnfold to thee? Art thou the onely wiſe?
                  Wherein hath Wiſdome been more good to you
                  Then vs? What know you, that we neuer knew?
                  
                     
Reuerence, not Cenſure, fits a young mans eyes,
                  We are your Ancients, and ſhould be as wiſe;
                  Is't not enough, your Arrogance derides
                  Our counſels, but muſt ſcorne thy God beſides?
                  Angels (if God inquier ſtrictly) muſt
                  Not plead Perfection: then, can man be iuſt?
               
               
                  It is a truth receiu'd, theſe aged eyes
                  Haue ſeen't, and is confirmed by the wiſe,
                  That ſtill the wicked man is voyd of reſt,
                  Is alwayes fearfull, falles, when he feares leaſt,
                  In troubles he deſpaires, and is deiected,
                  He begs his bread, his death comes vnexpected,
                  In his aduerſity, his griefes ſhall gaule him,
                  And, like a raging Tyrant, ſhall inthrall him,
                  He ſhall aduance againſt his God, in vaine,
                  For Heauen ſhall cruſh and beate him downe againe;
                  What if his Garners thriue, and goods encreaſe?
                  They ſhall not proſper, nor he liue in peace,
                  Eternall horrour ſhall begirt him round,
                  And vengeance ſhall both him and his confound,
                  Amidſt his ioyes, deſpaire ſhall ſtop his breath,
                  His ſons ſhall periſh, with vntimely death;
                  The double ſoule ſhall dye, and in the hollow
                  Of all falſe harts, falſe harts themſelues ſhall ſwallow.
               
               
                  Then anſwered Iob, All this, before I knew, Chap. 16. Jobs anſwere.
                  
                  They want no griefe, that find ſuch friends as you?
                  Ah, ceaſe your words, the fruits of ill-ſpent houres!
                  If heauen ſhould pleaſe to make my fortunes yours,
                  I would not ſcoffe you, nor with taunts torment ye,
                  My lips ſhould comfort, and theſe eyes lament ye:
                  What ſhall I doe? Speake not, my griefes oppreſſe
                  My ſoule, or ſpeake (alas) they'r ne'r the leſſe;
                  
                     
Lord, I am waſted, and my pangs haue ſpent me,
                  My skin is wrinkled, for thy Hand hath rent me,
                  Mine enemies haue ſmit me in diſdaine,
                  Laught at my torments, ieſted at my paine:
                  I ſwel'd in wealth, but (now) alas, am poore,
                  And feld with woe) lye grou'ling on the floore,
                  In duſt and ſackcloth, I lament my ſorrowes,
                  Thy Hand hath trencht my cheekes with water-furrowes,
                  Nor can I comprehend the cauſe, that this
                  My ſmart ſhould be ſo grieuous as it is:
                  Oh Earth! If then an Hypocrite I be,
                  Couer my cryes, as I doe couer thee,
                  And witneſſe Heauen, that theſe my Vowes be true,
                  (Ah friends!) I ſpend my teares to Heau'n, not you.
                  My time's but ſhort, (alas!) would then, that I
                  Might try my cauſe with God, before I dye.
               
               
                  Since then I languiſh, and not farre from dead, Chap. 17.
                  
                  Let me, a while, with my Accuſers plead
                  (Before the Iudge of heauen, and earth) my right,
                  Haue they not wrong'd, and vext me, day and night?
                  Who, firſt, layes downe his Gage, to meet me? Say,
                  I doubt not (Heauen being Iudge) to win the day:
                  You'l ſay, perchance, Wee'l recompell our word,
                  E're ſimple Truth ſhould, vnawares, afford
                  Your diſcontent; No, no, forbeare, for I
                  Hate leſſe your Cenſures, then your Flattery;
                  I am become a By-word, and a Taber,
                  To ſet the tongues, and eares of men, in labour,
                  Mine eyes are dimme, my body's but a ſhade,
                  Good men that ſee my caſe, will be afraid,
                  But not confounded; They will hold their way,
                  And in a bad, they'l hope a better day;
                  
                     
Recant your errours, for I cannot ſee
                  One man, thats truly wiſe, among you Three;
                  My dayes are gone, my thoughts are miſ-poſſeſt,
                  The ſilent night, that heauen ordain'd for reſt,
                  My day of trauell is, but I ſhall haue
                  Er'e long, long peace, within my welcome graue;
                  My neereſt kindred, are the wormes, the earth
                  My mother, for ſhe gaue me, firſt, my birth;
                  Where are my hopes then? where that future ioy,
                  Which you falſe-prophecy'd I ſhould enioy?
                  Both hopes, and I, alike, ſhall trauell thither,
                  Where, clos'd in duſt, we ſhall remaine together.
               
               
                  Meditatio vndecima.
                  
                     
                        THe Morall Poets, (nor vnaptly) faine,
                     
                     
                        That by lame Vulcans help, the pregnant braine
                     
                     
                        Of ſoueraign
                        The Father of the gods. Ioue, brought forth, & at that birth;
                     
                     
                        Was borne
                        The Goddeſſe of wiſedome. Minerua, Lady of the earth.
                     
                  
                  
                     O ſtrange Diuinity! but ſung by rote;
                     Sweet is the tune, but in a wilder note.
                  
                  
                     
                        The Morall ſayes, All Wiſedome that is giuen
                     
                     
                        To hood-wink't mortals, firſt, proceeds from heauen:
                     
                     
                        Truth's errour, Wiſedom's, but wiſe inſolence,
                     
                     
                        And light's but darkneſſe, not deriu'd from thence;
                     
                     
                        Wiſdom's a ſtraine tranſcends Morality,
                     
                     
                        No Vertu's abſent, Wiſedome being by.
                     
                     
                        Vertue, by conſtant practice, is acquir'd,
                     
                     
                        This (this by ſweat vnpurchas't) is inſpir'd:
                     
                     
                        
                        The maſter-piece of knowledge, is to know
                     
                     
                        But what is Good, from what is good in ſhow, 
                        Tla
                              •
                           o in Me none.
                     
                     
                        And there it reſts: 
                        Prudentia ſola pralt & ducit ad recte ſaciendum. 
                        Wiſdome proceeds, and chuſes
                     
                     
                        The 
                        
                           Lipſius ciuil. doct. lib. 1. cap. 7 
                        ſeeming Euill, th' apparant Good refuſes;
                     
                     
                        Knowledge deſeru's, alone; Wiſedome applyes,
                     
                     
                        That, makes ſome fooles, this, maketh none but wiſe;
                     
                     
                        The curious hand of knowledge doth but pick
                     
                     
                        Bare ſimples, Wiſedome pounds them, for the ſicke;
                     
                     
                        In my affliction, knowledge apprehends,
                     
                     
                        Who is the Authour, what the Cauſe, and Ends,
                     
                     
                        It findes that Patience is my ſad reliefe,
                     
                     
                        And that the Hand that caus'd, can cure my griefe:
                     
                     
                        To reſt contented here, is but to bring
                     
                     
                        Clouds without raine, and heat without a Spring:
                     
                     
                        What hope ariſes hence? The Diuels doe
                     
                     
                        The very ſame: They know, and tremble too;
                     
                     
                        But ſacred Wiſedome doth
                        
                           Non vt ſciamus, quid ſit virtus, perſcrutamur, ſed vt boni eſſiciamur. Ariſt. Eth. 2. cap. 2. 
                        apply that Good,
                     
                     
                        Which ſimple Knowledge barely vnderſtood:
                     
                     
                        Wiſedome concludes, and in concluſion, proues,
                     
                     
                        That whereſoeuer God corrects, he loues:
                     
                     
                        Wiſedome digeſts, what knowledge did but taſt,
                     
                     
                        That deales in futures, this, in things are paſt:
                     
                     
                        Wiſedom's the Card of Knowledge, which, without
                     
                     
                        That Guide, at random's wreckt on euery doubt:
                     
                     
                        Knowledge, when Wiſedome is too weak to guide her,
                     
                     
                        Is like a head-ſtrong Horſe, that throwes the Rider:
                     
                     
                        VVhich made that great 
                        Socrates. Hoc vnum ſcit, me nihil ſcire. 
                        Philoſopher auow,
                     
                     
                        He knew ſo much, that he did nothing know.
                     
                  
                  
                     Lord, giue me VViſdome to direct my wayes,
                     I beg nor riches, nor yet length of dayes,
                     O grant thy ſeruant VViſedome, and with it,
                     I ſhall receiue ſuch knowledge as will fit
                     
                        
                        To ſerue my turne: I wiſh not Phoebus waine,
                     
                     
                        Without his skill to driue it, leſt I gaine
                     
                     
                        Too deare an Honour, Lord, I will not ſtay,
                     
                     
                        To pick more Manna, then will ſerue to day.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  THE ARGVMENT.
                  Bildad, the whil'ſt he makes a ſhow
                  
                  
                     To ſtrike the wicked, giues the blow
                  
                  
                     To Iob: Iobs Miſery, and Faith;
                  
                  Zophar makes good what Bildad ſaith.
                  
               
               
                  Sect. 12.
               
                  SAid Bildad then, When will ye bring to end, Chap. 18. Bildads ſpeech.
                  
                  The ſpeeches, whereabout ye ſo contend?
                  Waigh eithers words, leſt ignorant confuſion
                  Debarre them of their purpoſed concluſion▪
                  
                  We came to comfort, fits it then that we
                  Be thought as beaſts, or fooles accounted be?
                  But thou, Iob, (like a mad man) would'ſt thou force
                  God, to deſiſt his order, and ſet courſe
                  Of Iuſtice? Shall the wicked, for thy ſake
                  (That would'ſt not taſte of Euill) in Good partake?
                  No, no, his Lampe ſhall blaze, and dye, his ſtrength
                  Shall faile, or ſhall confound it ſelfe, at length,
                  He ſhall be hampred with cloſe hidden ſnares,
                  And dog'd, where e're he ſtarts, with troups of feares:
                  
                     
Hunger ſhall bite, deſtruction ſhall attend him,
                  His skin ſhall rot, the worſt of deaths ſhall end him,
                  His feare, ſhall be a thouſand link't together,
                  His branch, aboue, his root, beneath, ſhall wither,
                  His Name ſhall ſleepe in duſt, with duſt, decay,
                  Odious to all, by all men chas't away,
                  No Son ſhall keepe aliue his Houſe, his Name,
                  And none ſhall thriue, that can alliance clame,
                  The after-age ſhall ſtand amaz'd, to heare
                  His Fall, and they that ſee't, ſhall ſhake for feare:
                  Thus ſtands the ſtate of him that doth amiſſe,
                  And (Iob) what other is thy caſe, then this?
               
               
                  But Iob reply'd, How long (as with ſharpe ſwords) Chap. 19. Jobs reply.
                  
                  Will ye torment me, with your poynted words?
                  How often haue your biting tongues defam'd
                  My ſimple Innocence, and yet, vnſham'd?
                  Had I deſeru'd theſe plagues, yet let my griefe
                  Expreſſe it ſelfe, though it find no reliefe,
                  But if you needs muſt weare your tongues vpon me,
                  Know, 'Tis the hand of God hath ouerthrowne me;
                  I roare, vnheard; His Hand will not releaſe me;
                  The more I grieue, the more my griefes oppreſſe me:
                  He hath diſpoyld my ioyes, and goes about
                  (My Branches being lopt) to ſtroy the Root,
                  His Plagues, like ſouldiers, trench within my bones,
                  My friends, my kindred fly me all at once,
                  My neighbours, my familiars haue forgon me,
                  My houſhold ſtares, with ſtrangers eyes, vpon me:
                  I call my ſeruant, but his lips are dumbe,
                  I humbly beg his helpe, but hee'l not come,
                  My owne wife loathes my breath, though I did make
                  My ſolemne ſuit, for our dead childrens ſake:
                  
                     
The poore, whoſe wants I haue ſupply'd, deſpiſe me,
                  And he that liu'd within my breſt, denyes me,
                  My bones are hide-bound, there cannot be found
                  One piece of skin, (vnleſſe my gummes) that's ſound,
                  Alas! complaints are barren ſhaddowes, to
                  Expreſſe, or cure the ſubſtance of my woe.
                  Haue pitty, (oh my friends) haue pitty on me,
                  'Tis your Gods hand and mine, that lyes vpon me,
                  Vexe me no more. O let your anger be
                  (If I haue wrong'd you) calm'd with what ye ſee;
                  O! that my ſpeeches were ingrauen, then,
                  In Marble Tablets, with an yron Pen:
                  For ſure I am, that my Redeemer liues,
                  And though pale death conſume my fleſh, and giues
                  My Carkas to the wormes, yet am I ſure,
                  Clad with this ſelfe-ſame fleſh (but made more pure)
                  I ſhall behold His glory; Theſe ſad eyes
                  Shall ſee his Face, how-e're my body lies,
                  Mouldred in duſt; Theſe fleſhly eyes, that doe
                  Behold theſe Sores, ſhall ſee my Maker too.
               
               
                  Vnequall hearers, of vnequall griefe,
                  Y'are all ingag'd to the ſelfe-ſame beliefe,
                  Know ther's a Iudge, whoſe Voyce will be as free,
                  To iudge your words, as you haue iudged me.
               
               
                  Said Zophar then, I purpos'd to refraine Chap. 20. Zophar's ſpeech.
                  
                  From ſpeaking, but thou mou'ſt me back againe:
                  For hauing heard thy haughty Spirit breake
                  Such haſty termes, my Spirit bids me ſpeake:
               
               
                  Hath not the change of Ages, and of Climes,
                  Taught vs, as we ſhall our ſucceeding times,
                  How vain's the tryumph, and how ſhort the blaze,
                  Wherein the wicked ſweeten out their dayes?
                  
                     
Though for a while his Palmes of glorie flouriſh,
                  Yet, in concluſion, they grow ſeire, and periſh:
                  His life is like a Dreame, that paſſes o're,
                  The eye that ſaw him, ne're ſhall ſee him more:
                  The Sonne ſhall ſlatter, whom the Syre oppreſt,
                  And (poore) he ſhall returne, what he did wreſt;
                  He ſhall be bayted with the Sinnes, that haue
                  So ſmil'd vpon his childhood, to his Graue,
                  His Plenty (purchac't by oppreſſion) ſhall
                  Be Hony, taſted, but digeſted, Gall;
                  It ſhall not bleſſe him with prolonged ſtay,
                  But euilly come, it ſoone ſhall paſſe away;
                  The man, whoſe griping hath the poore oppreſt,
                  Shall neither thriue in ſtate, nor yet find reſt
                  In ſoule; nought of his fulneſſe ſhall remaine,
                  His greedy Heyre ſhall long expect, in vaine;
                  Soak't with extorted Plenty, others ſhall
                  Squeeze him, and leaue him diſpoſſeſt of all;
                  And when his Ioyes doe in their height abound,
                  Vengeance ſhall ſtrike him groaning, to the ground,
                  If Sword forbeare to wound him, Arrowes ſhall
                  Returning forth, anoynted with his Gall,
                  No ſhade ſhall hide him, and an vnblowne Fyer
                  Shall burne both him, and his. Heauen, like a Cryer,
                  Shall blaze his ſhame, and Earth ſhall ſtand his Foe,
                  His wandring Children ſhall no dwelling know;
                  Behold the mans Eſtate, whom God denies,
                  Behold thine owne, pourtracted to thine Eyes.
               
               
                  
                  Meditatio duodecima.
                  
                     
                        CAn mercy come from bloody Cain? Or hath
                     
                     
                        His angry Brow a ſmile? Or can his Wrath
                     
                     
                        Be quencht with ought, but righteous Abels Blood?
                     
                     
                        Can guiltie Pris'ners hope for any Good
                     
                     
                        From the ſeuerer Iudge, whoſe diſmall Breath
                     
                     
                        Doomes them to die, breathes nothing elſe but Death?
                     
                     
                        Ah righteous Iudge, wherein hath Man to trust?
                     
                     
                        Man hath offended, and thy Lawes are Iust;
                     
                     
                        Thou frowneſt like a Iudge, but I had rather,
                     
                     
                        That thou would'ſt ſmile vpon me like a Father▪
                        
                     
                     
                        What if thy Eſau be auſtere and rough?
                     
                     
                        Thou haſt a Iacob that is ſmooth enough:
                     
                     
                        Thy Iacobs tender Kid brings forth a bleſsing,
                     
                     
                        While Eſau's tedious Ven'zon is a dreſsing.
                     
                     
                        Thy face hath ſmiles, as well as frownes, by turnes;
                     
                     
                        Thy fier giueth light, as well as burnes.
                     
                     
                        What if the Serpent ſtung old Adam dead,
                     
                     
                        Young Adam liues, to breake that Serpents Head?
                     
                     
                        Iuſtice hath ſtruck me with a bleeding wound,
                     
                     
                        But Mercy Powr's in Oyle, to make it ſound.
                     
                     
                        The milke-white Lambe confounds the roaring Lion,
                     
                     
                        Blasted by Sinah, I am heal'd by Sion:
                     
                     
                        The Law finds guiltie, and Death Iudgement giues,
                     
                     
                        But ſure I am, that my Redeemer liues.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        How wretched was mans caſe, in thoſe darke dayes, 
                        Obiect.
                     
                     
                        When Law was onely read? which Law diſmaies,
                     
                     
                        
                        And, taking vantage, through the breach of it,
                     
                     
                        The Letter kils, and can no way admit
                     
                     
                        Releaſe by Pardon; for by Law we dye.
                     
                     
                        Why then hop'd man, without a reaſon Why?
                     
                     
                        Although there was no Sunne, their Morning eies,
                     
                     
                        Saw, by the Twilight, that the Sunne would riſe.
                     
                     
                        The Law was like a mistie Looking-Glaſſe,
                     
                     
                        Wherein the ſhaddow of a Sauiour was,
                     
                     
                        Treates in a darker ſtraine, by Types and Signes,
                     
                     
                        And what ſhould paſſe in after-dayes, diuines.
                     
                     
                        The Goſpell ſayes, That He is come, and dead,
                     
                     
                        And thus the Riddle of the Law is read.
                     
                     
                        
                           Lex eſt Euangelium velatum, & Euangelium eſt lex reuelata. Simile. 
                        Goſpell is Law, the Myſt'ry being ſeal'd;
                     
                     
                        And Law is Goſpell, being once reueal'd.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Experience tells vs, when as Birth denies
                     
                     
                        To man (through Natures ouer-ſight) his eyes,
                     
                     
                        Nature (whoſe curious workes are neuer vaine)
                     
                     
                        Supplies them, in the power of his Braine:
                     
                     
                        So they, whoſe eyes were barr'd that glorious ſight
                     
                     
                        Of the Meſſiah's day, receiu'd more Light,
                     
                     
                        (Inſpyred by the Breath of Heauen) then they,
                     
                     
                        That heard the tidings of that happy Day.
                     
                  
                  
                     The man, that with a ſharpe contracted eye, Simile.
                     
                     Looks in a cleare Perſpectiue-Glaſſe, doth ſpie
                     Obiects remote, which, to the ſenſe, appeare
                     (Through helpe of the Perſpectiue) ſeeming neere.
                     So they that liu'd within the Lawes Dominion,
                     Did heare farre off, a Bruit and buzz'd Opinion,
                     A Sauiour (one day) ſhould be borne; but hee
                     That had a Perſpectiue of Faith, might ſee
                     That long-expected Day of Ioy as cleere,
                     As if the Triumph had been then kept there.
                  
                  
                     
                     Lord, ſo direct me in thy perfect VVay,
                     That I may looke, and ſmile vpon that Day:
                     O! bathe me in his Blood, ſpunge euery Staine,
                     That I may boldly ſue my Counter-paine:
                     O! make me Glorious in the Doome he giues,
                     For ſure I am, that my Redeemer liues.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  THE ARGVMENT.
                  
                     Earths happineſſe is not Heauens brand:
                  
                  
                     Araſh recounting of Iob's crimes:
                  Iob truſts him to th' Almighties hand:
                  
                  
                     God tyes his Iudgements, not to Times.
                  
               
               
                  Sect. 13.
               
                  THen Iob replyde: O, let your patience proue, Chap 21. Iobs answere.
                     
                  
                  You came (not to afflict me but) in Loue.
                  O! beare with me, & heare me ſpeak at leiſure,
                  My ſpeech once ended, mock, & ſcoffe your pleaſure;
                  Myſt'ries I treat, not Toyes; If then I range
                  A thought beyond my ſelfe, it is not ſtrange;
                  Behold my caſe, and ſtand amaz'd, forbeare me;
                  Be ſtill, and in your deeper ſilence heare me.
               
               
                  Search you the hearts of man (my Friends) or can
                  You iudge the Inward, by the Outward man?
                  How haps the Wicked then, ſo ſound in Health,
                  So ripe in Yeeres, ſo proſperous in Wealth?
                  
                     
They multiplie, their Houſe is fill'd with Peace,
                  They paſſe vnplagu'd, their fruitfull Flockes encreaſe;
                  Their Children thriue in ioyfull Melodie,
                  Proſperous they liue, and peacefully they dye;
                  
                     Renounce vs (God) ſay they (if God there be▪
                     
                  
                  
                     What need we knowledge of thy VVord, or Thee?
                  
                  
                     VVhat is th' Almighty, that we ſhould adore him?
                  
                  
                     VVhat bootes our prayer, or vs, to fall before him?
                  
               
               
                  'Tis not by chance, their vaine Proſperitie
                  Crownes thē with ſtore, or Heauē, not knowing, why:
                  But you affirme, That in concluſion they
                  
                  
                     Shall fall. But not ſo ſudden, as you ſay:
                  But can ye limit forth the ſpace, confine,
                  How long, or when their Lampes ſhall ceaſe to ſhine?
                  Will any of you vndertake to teach
                  Your Maker, things ſo farre aboue your reach?
                  The Bad man liues in plentie, dyes in peace:
                  The Good, as doe his howres, his griefes encreaſe;
                  Yet both the Good and Bad alike ſhall haue,
                  Though Liues much differing, yet one cōmon graue.
                  I know your mining thoughts; You will demand,
                  
                     VVhere is the wickeds Power? And where ſtand
                  
                  
                     Their loftie Buildings, are they to be ſeene?
                  
                  Enquire of wandring Pilgrims, that haue beene
                  Experienc'd in the Roade, and they'l relate
                  The Princely greatneſſe of their Tow'rs, and State:
                  Liue any more ſecure, then they? Or who
                  Dare once reprooue them, for the Deeds they doe?
                  He liues in Power, and in Peace he dies,
                  Attended in his pompeous Obſequies.
                  How vaine are then the comforts of your breath,
                  That cenſure goodneſſe, or by Life, or Death?
               
               
                  
                  Said Eliphaz: What then remaines? Thy tongue Chap. 22. Eliphaz his reply
                     
                  
                  Hath quit thy ſelfe, accus'd thy God of Wrong.
                  Gaines he by mans vprightneſſe? Can man ad
                  To his Perfection, what He neuer had?
                  Feares He the ſtrength of mā? Doth He torment him,
                  Leſt that his vntam'd power ſhould preuent Him?
                  What need I waſte this breath? Recall thy ſenſes,
                  And take the Inuentorie of thy Offences:
                  Thou tookſt the poore mans Pawne, nor haſt thou fed
                  Thy needy Brother, with thy proſp'rous Bread;
                  Thy hands peruerted Iuſtice, and haue ſpoyl'd
                  The hopeleſſe Widdow, with her helpeleſſe Child.
                  Hence ſpring thy ſorrowes (Iob;) 'Tis Iuſtice, then,
                  Thou ſhould'ſt be plagu'd, that thus plagu'd other mē.
                  Is Heauen Iuſt? Can Heauens Iuſt Creator
                  Let paſſe (vnpuniſht) Sinnes of ſo high nature?
                  Hath not Experience taught, that for a while,
                  The Wicked may exalt their Creſts, and ſmile,
                  Blowne vp with Inſolence: but in concluſion
                  They fall, and good men laugh at their confuſion?
                  
                     Iob, adde not ſinne to ſinne, ceaſe to beguile
                  Thy ſelfe, thinking to quench thy fire with Oyle;
                  Returne thee to thy God, confeſſe thy crimes;
                  Returne, and he will crowne thy after-times
                  With former Bleſſings, and thy Riches ſhall
                  Be as the Sand: for God is all in all;
                  His face ſhall welcome thee, and ſmile vpon thee,
                  And ceaſe that miſchief, his iuſt Hand hath done thee;
                  He ſhall be pleaſed with thy holy Fiers,
                  And grant the iſſue of thy beſt Deſires.
               
               
                  
                     Iob anſwer'd then: Although my ſoule be faint, Chap. 23. Iobs ſpeech.
                     
                  
                  And Griefes weigh down the Scale of my complant,
                  
                     
Yet would I pleade my Cauſe (which you defam'd)
                  Before my Maker, and would pleade, vnſham'd;
                  Could I but find him, I would take vpon me,
                  To quit the Cenſures you haue paſſed on me.
                  His Iuſtice hath no limits, is extended
                  Beyond conceit, by man vnapprehended;
                  Let Heauen be Vmpire, and make Arbitration,
                  Betwixt my guiltleſſe heart, and your taxation.
                  My Embrion thoughts and words are all inroll'd,
                  Pure will he find them, as refined Gold;
                  His ſteps I followed, and vprightly ſtood,
                  His Lawes haue been my Guide, his Words my food;
                  Hath he but once decreed? (alas!) there's none
                  Can barre: for what he wills, muſt needs be done;
                  His Will's a Law: If he hath doom'd, that I
                  Shall ſtill be plagu'd, 'tis booteleſſe to replie.
                  Hence comes it, that my ſore afflicted ſpright
                  Trembles, and ſtands confounded at his ſight;
                  His hand hath ſtruck my ſpirits in amaze,
                  For I can neither end my Griefes nor Dayes.
               
               
                  Why ſhould not Times in all things be forbid, Chap. 24.
                  
                  When to the Iuſt, their time of ſorrow's hid?
                  Some mooue their Land-markes, rob their neighbour
                  Others, in gage, receiue the Widowes Oxe,
                  Some grinde the Poore, while others ſeeke the Prey; flocks;
                  They reape their Harueſt, beare their Graine away;
                  Men preſſe their Oyle, and they diſtraine their Store,
                  And rend the Gleanings, from the hungry poore.
                  The Citie roares, the Blood, which they haue ſpent,
                  Cryes (vnreueng'd) for equall puniſhment;
                  Early they murther, and rob late at night,
                  They trade in Darkeneſſe, for they hate the Light;
                  
                     
The ſinne (vnpuniſht) thriuing, vncontroll'd,
                  And what by Force they got, by Force they hold.
               
               
                  O Friends! Repeale your words, your ſpeeches bring
                  No lawfull Yſſue, prooue not any thing:
                  Your deeper Wiſdomes argue (in effect)
                  That God doth, or not know, or elſe neglect:
                  Conclude with me, or proue my words vntrue,
                  I muſt be found a Lyer, or elſe you.
               
               
                  Meditatio tertiadecima.
                  
                     THe VViſeſt men, that Nature e're could boaſt,
                     For ſecret knowledge of her power, were loſt,
                     Confounded, and in deepe amazement ſtood,
                     In the diſcouery of the Chiefeſt Good:
                     Keenely they hunted, beat in euery Bracke,
                     Forwards they went, on either hand, and backe
                     Return'd they Counter; but their deepe-mouth'd Art,
                     (Though often challeng'd Sent, yet) ne'r could ſtart,
                     In all th' Encloſures of Philoſophy,
                     That Game, from ſquat, they terme, 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , id eſt, 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           . Felicity:
                     They iangle, and their Maxims diſ-agree,
                     As many men, ſo many minds there be.
                  
                  
                     
                        One digs to Pluto's Throane, thinkes there to find
                     
                     
                        Her Grace, rak't vp in Gold: Anothers mind
                     
                     
                        Mounts to the Courts of Kings, with Plumes of Honour,
                     
                     
                        And feather'd Hopes, hopes, there, to ſeize vpon her;
                     
                     
                        A third, vnlockes the painted Gates of Pleaſure,
                     
                     
                        And ranſacks there, to find this peereleſſe Treaſure.
                     
                     
                        
                        A fourth, more ſage, more wiſely melancholy,
                     
                     
                        Perſwades himſelfe, her Deity's too holy,
                     
                     
                        For common hands to touch, he rather chuſes,
                     
                     
                        To make a long dayes iourney to the Muſes:
                     
                     
                        To Athens (gown'd) he goes, and from that Schoole
                     
                     
                        Returnes vnſped, a more inſtructed foole.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Where lies ſhe then? Or lies ſhe any where?
                     
                     
                        Honours are bought and ſold, ſhe reſts not there,
                     
                     
                        Much leſſe in Pleaſures hath ſhe her abiding,
                     
                     
                        For they are ſhar'd to Beaſts, and euer ſliding;
                     
                     
                        Nor yet in Vertue, Vertu's often poore,
                     
                     
                        And (cruſh't with Fortune) begs from dore to dore,
                     
                     
                        Nor is ſhe ſainted in the Shrine of wealth,
                     
                     
                        That makes men ſlaues, is vnſecur'd from ſtealth;
                     
                     
                        Conclude we then, Felicity conſiſts
                     
                     
                        Not in exterior Fortunes, but her liſts
                     
                     
                        Are boundleſſe, and her large extenſion
                     
                     
                        Out-runnes the pace of humane apprehenſion;
                     
                     
                        Fortunes are ſeldome meaſur'd by deſert,
                     
                     
                        The fairer face, hath oft the fouler heart;
                     
                     
                        Sacred felicity doth ne're extend
                     
                     
                        Beyond it ſelfe:Ariſt. Eth. Felicit as propter ſe oppetitur. In it all wiſhes end:
                     
                     
                        The ſwelling of an outward Fortune can
                     
                     
                        Create a proſperous, not a 
                        
                           Non poſſidentem multa, vocaris Recte beatum Rectius occupat nomen beati, qui, &c. Hor. car. lib. 4. od. 9. 
                        happy man;
                     
                     
                        A peacefull Conſcience is the true Content,
                     
                     
                        And wealth is but her golden Ornament.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        I care not, ſo my Kernell relliſh well,
                     
                     
                        How ſlender be the ſubſtance of my ſhell;
                     
                     
                        My heart being vertuous, let my face be wan,
                     
                     
                        I am to God, I onely ſeeme to man.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  THE ARGVMENT.
                  Bildad ſhowes mans impurity;
                  
                  Iob ſetteth forth th' Almighties power,
                  
                  
                     Pleads ſtill his owne Integrity:
                  
                  
                     Gods Wiſedome no man can diſcouer.
                  
               
               
                  Sect. 14.
               
                  SAid Bildad then, With whom doſt thou conteſt, Chap. 25. Bildads ſpeech.
                  
                  But with thy Maker, that liues euer bleſt?
                  His Powr's infinite, mans light is dimme,
                  And knowledge darkneſſe, not deriu'd from Him:
                  Say then, Who can be iuſt before Him? No man
                  Can challenge Purity, that's borne of Woman.
                  The greater Torch of heauen in his ſight,
                  Shall be aſham'd, and loſe his purer light;
                  Much leſſe can man, that is but liuing Duſt,
                  And but a fairer Worme, be pure and iuſt.
               
               
                  Whereat Iob thus: Doth heauens high Iudgement ſtand, Chap. 25. Jobs reply.
                  
                  To be ſupported by the weaker hand?
                  Wants Hee thy helpe? To whom doſt thou extend
                  Theſe, theſe thy lauiſh lips, and to what end?
                  No, Hee's Almighty, and his Power doth giue
                  Each thing his Being, and by Him they liue:
                  To him, is nothing darke, his ſoueraigne Hands
                  Whirle round the reſtleſſe Orbs, his Pow'r cōmands
                  
                     
Th' euen poys'd Earth; The Water-pots of heauen
                  He empties at his pleaſure, and hath giuen
                  Appoynted liſts, to keepe the Waters vnder,
                  The trembling Skies he ſtrikes amaz'd, with thunder:
                  Theſe, theſe the Trophies of his Power be,
                  Where is there e're a ſuch a God as He?
               
               
                  My friends, Theſe eares haue heard your cenſures on me, Chap. 27.
                  
                  And Heauens ſharp hand doth waigh ſo hard vpō me
                  So languiſhing in griefe, that no defence
                  Seemes to remaine, to ſhield my Innocence:
                  Yet while my ſoule a gaſpe of breath affords,
                  I'le not diſtruſt my Maker, nor your words
                  Deſerue, which Heauen forfend, that euer I
                  Proue true, but I'le plead guiltleſſe till I dye,
                  While I haue breath, my pangs ſhal ne'r perſwade me
                  To wander, and reuolt from Him, that made me.
                  Er'e ſuch thoughts ſpring from this confuſed breſt,
                  Let death and tortures doe their worſt, their beſt.
                  What gaines the Hypocrite, although the whole
                  Worlds wealth he purchaſe, with the price on's ſoule?
                  Will Heauen heare the voyce of his diſeaſe?
                  Can he repent, and turne, where-e're he pleaſe?
                  True, God doth ſometime plague with open ſhame
                  The wicked, often blurres he forth his Name
                  From out the earth, his children ſhall be ſlaine,
                  And who ſuruiue, ſhall beg their bread in vaine;
                  What if his Gold be heap'd, the Good man ſhall
                  Poſſeſſe it, as true Maſter of it All,
                  Like Moths, their houſes ſhall they build, in doubt
                  And danger, euery houre to be caſt out,
                  Beſieg'd with Want, their lips make fruitleſſe moane,
                  Yet (wanting ſuccour) be relieu'd by none.
                  
                     
The worme of Conſcience ſhall torment his breſt,
                  And he ſhall rore, when others be at reſt,
                  Gods hand ſhall ſcourge him, that he cannot flye,
                  And men ſhall laugh, and hiſſe, to heare him cry.
               
               
                  The pureſt metall's hid within the Mould, Chap. 28.
                  
                  Without, is grauell, but within, is Gold;
                  Man digs, and in his toyle he takes a pleaſure,
                  He ſeekes, and finds within the turfe, the Treaſure,
                  He neuer reſts, vnſped, but (vnderneath)
                  He mines, and progs, though in the fangs of death:
                  No ſecret, (how obſcure ſoeuer) can
                  Earths boſome ſmother, that's vnfound by man;
                  But the Diuine, and high Decrees of heauen,
                  What mind can ſearch into? No power's giuen
                  To mortall man, whereby he may attaine
                  The rare diſcouery of ſo high a ſtraine,
                  Diue to the depth of darkneſſe, and the deepes,
                  Renounce this Wiſedome: The wide Ocean keepes
                  Her not inclos'd; 'Tis not the pureſt Gold
                  Can purchaſe it, or heapes of ſiluer, told,
                  The Pearles, and peereleſſe Treaſures of the Eaſt,
                  Reſined Gold, and Gemmes, are all, the leaſt
                  Of nothings, if compar'd with It, as which,
                  Earths maſſe of treaſure, (ſumm'd) is not ſo Rich;
                  Where reſts this Wiſedome then? If men enquire
                  Below, they find her not; or, if they (higher)
                  Soare with the Prince of Fowles, they ſtill deſpaire,
                  The more they ſeeke, the further off they are.
               
               
                  Ah friends! how more then men? how Eagle-eyde
                  Are you, to ſee, what to the world beſide
                  Was darke? To you, alone, (in truſt) was giuen
                  To ſearch into the high Decrees of Heauen:
                  
                     
You read his Oracles, you vnderſtand
                  To riddle forth mans Fortunes by his Hand,
                  Your wiſedomes haue a priuiledge to know
                  His ſecret Smiling, from his angry Brow:
                  Let ſhame preuent your lips, recant, and giue
                  To the Almighty his Prerogatiue,
                  To him, the ſearching of mens hearts belong,
                  Mans iudgement ſinkes no deeper then the tongue;
                  Hee ouerlookes the World, and in one ſpace
                  Of time, his Eye is fixt on euery place:
                  He waigh'd the Waters, ballanc'd out the Ayre,
                  What-e're hath Being, did his Hands prepare;
                  He wills that Mortals be not ouer-wiſe,
                  Nor iudge his Secrets with cenſorious eyes.
               
               
                  Meditatio quartadecima.
                  
                     TIs Vertue to flye Vice: Ther's none more ſtout,
                     Then he that ventures to pick Vertue out,
                     Betwixt a brace of vices: Dangers ſtand,
                     Threatning his ruine, vpon either hand;
                     His Card muſt guide him, leſt his Pinnace runne
                     Vpon Charibdis, while it Scylla ſhun:
                     In moderation all Vertue lyes;
                     'Tis greater folly to be ouer-wiſe,
                     Then rudely ignorant: The golden meane,
                     Is but to know enough; ſafer to leane
                     To Ignorance, thenCypr. in Symp. Curioſitie,
                     ForEtiam de Deo vera dicere periculoſum eſt. Ferumtque ſummos Fulmina mentes, Hor. car. lib. 2. od. 10.
                         lightning blaſts the Mountaines that are high:
                     
                        
The firſt of men, from hence, deſeru'd his fall,
                     He ſought for ſecrets, and ſought death, withall:
                     
                        Boetius 3. de Conſ. Philoſ. Non eſt fas homini cunctas diuini oper is machinas, vel ingenio com prehendere, vel ſermone explicare. Secrets are vnfit obiects for our eyes,
                     They blind vs in beholding: he that tryes
                     To handle water, the more hard he ſtraines
                     And gripes his hand, the leſſe his hand retaines:
                     The mind that's troubled with that pleaſing itch,
                     Of knowing Secrets, hauing flowne a pitch
                     Beyond it ſelfe, the higher it aſcends,
                     And ſtriues to Melius ſciuntur, neſciendo, S Aug. lib. 2. de ord. Simile.
                         know, the leſſe it apprehends:
                     That ſecret Wiſeman, is an open Foole,
                     Which takes a Councel-chamber, for a Schoole.
                  
                  
                     The eye of man deſires no farther light,
                     Then to deſcry the obiect of his ſight,
                     And reſts contented with the Sunnes reflection,
                     But (lab'ring to behold his bright complection)
                     If it preſume t'outface his glorious Light,
                     The beames bereaue him, iuſtly, of his ſight: Raymond Sebond, Theol. natural cap. 24.
                        
                     
                     Euen ſo the mind ſhould reſt in what's reueal'd,
                     But ouer-curious, if in things conceald,
                     She wade too farre, beyond her depth, vnbounded,
                     Her knowledge will be loſt, and ſhe confounded.
                     
                        Melius eſt dubitare de incertis, quàm litigare de occultis, S. Aug. lib. 8. de Gen. ad liter. cap. 5.
                         Farre ſafer 'tis, of things vnſure, to doubt,
                     Then vndertake to riddle ſecrets out.
                  
                  
                     It was demanded once, What God did doe
                     Before the World he framed? Whereunto
                     Anſwere was made, He built a Hell for ſuch,
                     
                     
                        As are too curious, & wouldNec ſcire, ſa
                                 •
                               eſt, omnia—Hor. car. lib 4. od. 4.
                            know too much.
                     
                  
                  
                     Who flies with Icarus his father, ſhall
                     Haue Icarus his fortunes and his fall.
                     A noble Prince, (whoſe bounteous hand was bent,
                     To recompence his ſeruants faith, and vent
                     
                        
The earneſt of his fauours,) did not proffer,
                     But wil'd him, boldly, to preuent his offer:
                     Thankfull, he thus reply'd, Then grant vnto me
                     
                     
                        This boone, With-hold thy princely ſecrets from me.
                     
                  
                  
                     That holyExod. 24. 2. Man, in whoſe familiar eare
                     Heauen oft had thundred, might not come too neare:
                     The Temple muſt haueExod. 26. 2. Curtaines; mortall hearts
                     Muſt reſt content to ſee hisIbid 33. 23. Hinder parts.
                  
                  
                     I care not (Lord) how farre thy Face be off,
                     If I but kiſſe thy Hand, I haue enough.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  THE ARGVMENT.
                  Iob wiſheth his paſt happineſſe,
                  
                  
                     Shewes his ſtate preſent, Doth confeſſe
                  
                  
                     That God's the Authour of his griefe,
                  
                  
                     Relates the pureneſſe of his life.
                  
               
               
                  Sect. 15.
               
                  OH! that I were as happy as I was, Chap. 29.
                  
                  When heauens bright fauours ſhone vpon my face,
                  And proſpred my affaires, inrich't my ioyes,
                  When all my ſonnes could anſwere to my voyce;
                  Then did my ſtore, and thriuing flockes encreaſe,
                  Offended Iuſtice ſought my hands, for peace;
                  Old men did honour, and the young did feare me,
                  Princes kept ſilence (when I ſpake,) to heare me,
                  
                     
I heard the poore, relieu'd the widdowes cry,
                  Orphans I ſuccour'd, was the blind mans eye,
                  The Cripples foot, my helpleſſe brothers drudge,
                  The poore mans Father, and th'oppreſſours Iudge;
                  I then ſuppoſed, that my dayes long Leaſe
                  Would paſſe in Plenty, and expire in Peace,
                  My Roots were fixed, and my Branches ſprung,
                  My Glory blaz'd, my Pow'r grew daily ſtrong;
                  I ſpeaking, men ſtood mute, my ſpeeches moou'd
                  All hearts to Ioy, by all men were approou'd,
                  My kindly words were welcome, as a latter
                  Rayne, and were Oracles in a doubtfull matter.
               
               
                  O ſudden change! I'm turn'd a laughing-ſtock Chap. 30.
                  
                  To boyes, & thoſe, that ſu'd to tend my Flock,
                  And ſuch, whoſe hungry wants haue taught their hands
                  To ſcrape the earth, and dig the barren lands,
                  For hidden roots, wherewith they might appeaſe
                  Their Tyran'-ſtomakes, theſe, (euen very theſe)
                  Flout at my ſorrowes, and diſdaining me,
                  Poynt with their fingers, and cry, This is He:
                  
                  My honour's foyld, my troubled ſpirit lyes
                  Wide open to the worſt of iniuries,
                  Where-e're I turne, my ſorrow, new, appeares,
                  I'm vex't abroad, with ſlouts, at home, with feares,
                  My ſoule is faint, and nights that ſhould giue eaſe
                  To tyred ſpirits, make my griefes encreaſe,
                  I loathe my Carkas, for my rip'ned ſores
                  Haue chang'd my garments colour with their cores:
                  But what is worſt of worſts, (Lord) often I
                  Haue cry'd to Thee, a ſtranger to my cry,
                  Though perfect Clemency, thy nature be,
                  Though kind to all, thou art vnkind to me.
                  
                     
I ne'r waxt pale, to ſee another thriue,
                  Nor e're did let my' afflicted brother ſtriue
                  With teares, alone, but I (poore I) tormented,
                  Expect for ſuccour, and am vnlamented;
                  I mourne in ſilence, languiſh all alone,
                  As in a Deſart, am relieu'd by none;
                  My ſores haue dyed my skin with filth, ſtill turning
                  My Ioyes to Griefe, and all my Mirth to Mourning.
               
               
                  My Heart hath paſt Indentures with mine Eye, Chap. 31.
                  
                  Not to behold a Maide: for what ſhould I
                  Expect from Heauen, but a deſeru'd reward,
                  Earnd by ſo foule a ſinne? for death's prepar'd,
                  And flames of wrath, are blowne for ſuch: Doth He
                  Not know my Actions, that ſo well knowes me?
                  If I haue lent my hand to ſlie deceit, Iobs innocency.
                  
                  Or if my ſteps haue not been purely ſtrait,
                  What I haue ſowne, then let a Stranger eate,
                  And roote my Plants vntimely from their ſeate.
                  If I with Luſt haue e're diſtain'd my life,
                  Or been defiled with anothers Wife,
                  In equall Iuſtice, let my Wife be knowne
                  Of all, and let me reape as I haue ſowne:
                  For Luſt, that burneth in a ſinfull breſt,
                  Till it hath burnt him too, ſhall neuer reſt.
                  If e're my haſte did treate my Seruant ill,
                  Without deſert, making my Pow'r, my Will,
                  Then how ſhould I before Gods Iudgement ſtand,
                  Since we were both created by one Hand?
                  If e're my power wrong'd the Poore mans Cauſe,
                  Or to the Widdow, length'ned out the Lawes:
                  If e're (alone) my lips did taſte my bread,
                  Or ſhut my churliſh doores, the poore vnfed,
                  
                     
Or bent my hand to doe the Orphane wrong,
                  Or ſaw him naked, vnapparell'd long;
                  In heapes of Gold, if e're I tooke delight,
                  Or gaue Heauens worſhip, to the heauenlyIt was the Cuſtome of that ignorant Nation, to worſhip the Sunne and Moone. Light,
                  Or e're was flattred by my ſecret Will,
                  Or ioyed in my Aduerſaries Ill;
                  Let God accurſe me from his glorious Seate,
                  And make my Plagues (if poſſible) more great.
               
               
                  Oh! That ſome equall hearer, now were by,
                  To iudge my righteous Cauſe; Full ſure am I,
                  I ſhall be quitted, by th' Almighties hand.
                  What, therefore, if cenſorious tongues withſtand
                  The Iudgement of my ſober Conſcience?
                  Compoſe they Ballads on me, yet from thence,
                  My ſimple Innocence ſhall gaine renowne,
                  And on my head, I'le weare them, as my Crowne:
                  To the Almighties Eare will I reueale
                  My ſecret Wayes, to Him, alone, appeale:
                  If (to conclude) the Earth could find a tongue,
                  T'impeach my guiltleſſe hands of doing wrong:
                  If hidden Wages (earn'd with ſweat) doe lye,
                  Rak't in her furrowes, let her Wombe denie
                  To bleſſe my Harueſt, let her better Seeds
                  Be turn'd to Thiſtles, and the reſt, to Weedes
               
               
                  Meditatio quintadecima.
                  
                     
                        THe man, whoſe ſoule is vndiſtain'd with Ill,
                     
                     
                        Pure from the check of a diſtemp'red Will,
                     
                     
                        
                        Stands onely free from the diſtracts of Care,
                     
                     
                        And flies a pitch aboue the reach of Feare:
                     
                     
                        His boſome dares the threatning Bow-mans arme,
                     
                     
                        His Wiſdome ſees, his Courage feares no harme,
                     
                     
                        His breſt lyes open to the reeking Sword;
                     
                     
                        The Darts of ſwarthy Maurus can afford
                     
                     
                        Leſſe dread, then danger, to his well prepar'd
                     
                     
                        And ſettled mind, which (ſtanding on her Guard)
                     
                     
                        Bids Miſchiefe doe the worst ſhe can, or will,
                     
                     
                        For he that doth no Ill, deſerues no Ill.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Would any ſtriue with
                        Iudg. 16. 30. Samſon for renowne, 
                     
                     
                        Whoſe brawny Arme can ſtrike most pillers downe?
                     
                     
                        Or try a fall with
                        Gen. 32. 24. 
                        Angels, and preuaile?
                     
                     
                        Or with a Hymne, vnhinge the ſtrongest
                        Acts 16. 26. 
                        Iayle? 
                     
                     
                        Would any from a Pris'ner, prooue a
                        Gen 41. 40. 
                        Prince?
                     
                     
                        Or with
                        Exod. 4. 10. 
                        ſlow ſpeech, beſt Orators conuince? 
                     
                     
                        Preſerue he then, vnſtained in his breſt,
                     
                     
                        A milke-white Conſcience; let his ſoule be bleſt
                     
                     
                        With ſimple Innocence: This ſeuenfold ſhield
                     
                     
                        No dart ſhall pierce, no ſword ſhall make it yeeld;
                     
                     
                        The ſinowy Bow, and deadly-headed Launce,
                     
                     
                        Shall breake in ſhiuers, and the ſplinters glaunce
                     
                     
                        Aſide, returning backe from whence they came,
                     
                     
                        And wound their hearts with an eternall ſhame.
                     
                     
                        The Iuſt and Conſtant mind, that perſeueres
                     
                     
                        Vnblemiſht with falſe pleaſures, neuer feares
                     
                     
                        The bended threatnings of a Tyrants brow,
                     
                     
                        Death neither can diſturbe, nor change his Vow;
                     
                     
                        VVell guarded with Himſelfe, he walkes along,
                     
                     
                        VVhen, most alone, his ſtand's a
                        Conſcientia mille teſtes. 
                        thouſand ſtrong 
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Liues he in VVeale, and full Proſperitie?
                     
                     
                        His wiſdome tells him, that he liues, to die.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Is he
                        
                           Hor. car. lib. 4. Ode 9.—Secund's Temporibus du
                              
                                 •
                              b
                                 •
                              que reclus.
                         
                        afflicted? Sharpe Afflictions giue
                     
                     
                        Him hopes of Change, and that that he dyes, to liue.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Is he
                        Mat. 5. 11. 
                        reuil'd and ſcorn'd? He ſits, and ſmiles,
                     
                     
                        Knowing him
                        
                           V
                                 ••
                               nunquam triſtis eſſe? Bene viue Iſod. Soliloq. lib. 11. 
                        Happie, whom the World reuiles.
                     
                     
                        If Rich, he giues the poore; and if he liue
                     
                     
                        In poore eſtate, he finds rich friends to giue;
                     
                     
                        He liues an Angell in a mortall forme;
                     
                     
                        And, hauing paſt the brunt of many a Storme,
                     
                     
                        At laſt, arriueth at the Hauen of Reſt,
                     
                     
                        Where that Iuſt Iudge, that rambles in his breſt,
                     
                     
                        Ioyning with Angels, with an Angels voyce,
                     
                     
                        Chaunts forth ſweet Requiems of Eternall Ioyes.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  THE ARGVMENT.
                  Elihu Iob reprooues, reprooues
                  
                  
                     His Friends alike, he pleades the caſe
                  
                  
                     With Iob in Gods behalfe, and mooues
                  
                  
                     Him to recant, and call for Grace.
                  
               
               
                  Sect. 16.
               
                  THus Iob his ill-defended Cauſe adiournes, Chap. 32.
                  
                  And ſilence lends free libertie of turnes,
                  To his vniuſt Accuſers, whoſe bad cauſe
                  Hath left them grounded in too large a pauſe:
                  Whereat Elihu (a young Stander-by,
                  Whoſe modeſt eares, vpon their long reply
                  
                     
Did waite) his angry ſilence did awake,
                  And (crauing pardon for his Youth) beſpake.
               
               
                  Young Standers-by doe oftentimes ſee more, Elihus ſpeech.
                     
                  
                  Then elder Gameſters: Y'are too blame all foure;
                  T'ones cauſe is Bad, but with good proofes befriēded,
                  The others Iuſt and Good, but ill defended.
                  Though reaſon makes the man, Heauen makes him wiſe,
                  Wiſdome in greateſt Clerks not alway lyes:
                  Then let your ſilence giue me leaue to ſpend
                  My Iudgement, whil'ſt your heedfull Eares attend.
                  I haue not heard, alone, but ſtill expected
                  To heare, what more your ſpleenes might haue obiected,
                  Againſt your wofull Friend; but I haue found
                  Your reaſons, built vpon a ſandy ground.
                  Flouriſh no Flags of Conqueſt: Vnderſtand,
                  That hee's afflicted by th' Almighties hand:
                  He hath not fayld to croſſe your accuſations;
                  Yet I (though not with your foule exprobations)
                  Will croſſe him too. I'me full, and I muſt ſpeake,
                  Or, like vnuented veſſels, I muſt breake,
                  And with my tongue, my heart will be relieu'd,
                  That ſwells, with what my patience hath conceiu'd:
                  Be none offended, for my lips ſhall tread
                  That ground (without reſpect) as Truth ſhall leade;
                  God hates a flattring language: then how can I
                  Vnliable to danger, flatter any?
               
               
                  Now, Iob, to thee I ſpeake, O, let my Errant Chap. 33. Elihu ſpeakes to Iob.
                  
                  Be welcome to thine eares, fortruth's my warrant;
                  They are no ſlender Trifles that I treate,
                  But things digeſted with the ſacred heate
                  Of an inſpired knowledge; 'Tis no raſh
                  Diſcharge of wrath, nor wits conceited flaſh;
                  
                     
I'le ſpeake, and heare thee ſpeake as free, for I
                  Will take no vantage of thy Miſerie.
               
               
                  Thy tongue did challenge to maintaine thy caſe
                  With God, if he would vayle his glorious Face:
                  Be I the man (though clad with clay and duſt,
                  And mortall like thy ſelfe) that takes the truſt
                  To repreſent his Perſon; Thou doſt terme
                  Thy ſelfe moſt Iuſt, and boldly doſt affirme,
                  That Heauen afflicts thy ſoule without a reaſon.
                  Ah Iob! theſe very words (alone) are Treaſon
                  Againſt th'Almighti's will. Thou oughteſt rather
                  Submit thy paſſion to him, as thy Father,
                  Then pleade with him, as with thy Peere. Is he
                  Bound to reueale his ſecret VVill to thee?
                  God ſpeaketh oft to man, not vnderſtood,
                  Sometimes in
                        Lucret. lib. 5. 1168.—Perſomnia ſapeloquentes Aut morbo delirantes, &c. Et celata diu in medium peccata dediſſe.
                      Dreames, at other times thinks good,
                  To thunder Iudgement in his drowzy eare;
                  Sometimes, with hard afflictions ſcourge, doth teare
                  His wounded ſoule, which may at length giue eaſe
                  (Like ſharper Phyſicke) to his foule Diſeaſe:
                  But if (like pleaſing Iulips) he afford
                  The meeke Expounders of his ſacred VVord,
                  VVith ſweete perſwaſions to recure his griefe,
                  How can his ſorrowes wiſh more faire Reliefe?
                  Ah, then his body ſhall waxe young and bright;
                  Heauens-face that ſcortcht before, ſhall now delight,
                  His tongue with Triumph, ſhall confeſſe to men,
                  I was a Leper, but am cleare agen.
                  Thus, thus that Spring of Mercy oftentimes
                  Doth ſpeake to man, that man may ſpeake his crimes.
                  Conſider, Iob; My words with Iudgement weigh;
                  VVhich done (if thou haſt ought) then boldly ſay;
                  
                     
If otherwiſe, ſhame not to hold thy peace,
                  And let thy VViſdome with my words encreaſe.
               
               
                  And you, you VViſemen, that are ſilent here, Chap 34.
                  
                  Vouchſafe to lend my lips your rip'ned care,
                  Let's call a parlie, and the cauſe decide;
                  For Iob pleades guiltleſſe, and would faine be tride;
                  Yet hath his boldneſſe term'd himſelfe Vpright,
                  And taxt th'Almightie for not doing right;
                  His Innocence with Heauen doth he pleade,
                  And that vniuſtly he was puniſhed:
                  O Puritie by Impudence ſuborn'd!
                  He ſcorn'd his Maker, and is iuſtly ſcorn'd:
                  Farre be it from the heart of man, that He,
                  VVho is all Iuſtice, yet vniuſt ſhould be.
                  Each one ſhall reape the Harueſt he hath ſowne,
                  His meede ſhall meaſure, what his hands haue done.
                  VVho is't, can claime the Worlds great Soueraignty?
                  VVho rays'd the Rafters of the Heauens, but He?
                  If God ſhould breathe on man, or take away
                  The breath he gaue him, what were man, but Clay?
                  O, let thy heart, th'vnbridled tongue, conuince!
                  Say; Dare thy lips defame an earthly Prince?
                  How darſt thou then maligne the King of Kings,
                  To whom, great Princes are but pooreſt things?
                  He kicks down kingdoms, ſpurns th' Emperial crown,
                  And with his blaſt, puffes mighty Monarchs downe.
                  'Tis vaine to ſtriue with Him; and if He ſtrike,
                  Our part's to beare, not (fondly) to miſlike,
                  (Miſconſtruing the nature of his drift)
                  But husband his Corrections to our thrift.
                  If he afflict, our beſt is to implore
                  His Bleſſing with his Rod, and ſinne no more.
                  
                     
What if our torments paſſe the bounds of meaſure?
                  It vnbeſits our wills, to ſtint his pleaſure;
                  Iudge then, and let th' impartiall world aduiſe,
                  How farre (poore Iob) thy Iudgement is from wiſe:
                  Nor are theſe ſpeeches kindled with the fire
                  Of a diſtempred ſpleene, but with deſire,
                  T' inrich thy wiſdome, leſt thy furie tie
                  Preſumption to thy raſh infirmitie.
               
               
                  Meditatio ſextadecima.
                  
                     
                        FOr mortals, to be borne, waxe old, and die,
                     
                     
                        Lyes not in Will, but bare Neceſsitie,
                     
                     
                        Common to beaſts, which, in the ſelfe-degree,
                     
                     
                        Hold by the ſelfe-ſame Patent, euen as wee:
                     
                     
                        But to be Wiſe, is a diuiner action
                     
                     
                        Of the diſcurſiue Soule, a pure abſtraction
                     
                     
                        Of all her powers, vnited in the will,
                     
                     
                        Ayming at Good, reiecting what is Ill;
                     
                     
                        It is an Influence of inſpired Breath,
                     
                     
                        Vnpurchaſed by birth, vnloſt by death,
                     
                     
                        Entayl'd to no man, no, nor free to all,
                     
                     
                        Yet gently anſwers to the eager call
                     
                     
                        Of thoſe, that, with inflam'd affections, ſeeke,
                     
                     
                        Reſpecting tender Youth and Age alike;
                     
                     
                        In depth of dayes, her ſpirit not alway lyes,
                     
                     
                        Yeeres make man Old, but Heauen returnes him Wiſe;
                     
                     
                        Youths Innocence, nor riper Ages ſtrength
                     
                     
                        Can challenge her, as due; (Deſired) length
                     
                     
                        
                        Of dayes, produced to decrepit yeeres,
                     
                     
                        Fild with experience, and grizly haires,
                     
                     
                        Can claime no right; Th' Almighty ne'r engages
                     
                     
                        His gifts to times, nor is He bound to Ages,
                     
                     
                        His quickning Spirit, to ſucklings oft reueales,
                     
                     
                        What to their doting Grandſires he conceales,
                     
                     
                        The vertue of his breath; can vnbenumme
                     
                     
                        The frozen lips, and ſtrike the ſpeaker dumme:
                     
                     
                        Who put that mouing power into his tongue,
                     
                     
                        Whoſe lips did right the chaſte Suſanna's wrong,
                     
                     
                        Vpon her wanton falſe Accuſers death?
                     
                     
                        What ſecret fire inflam'd that
                        Exod. 4. 11. 
                        fainting breath
                     
                     
                        That blaſted Pharo? Or thoſe ruder tongues,
                     
                     
                        That ſchool'd the faithleſſe
                        Ionah 1. 10. 
                        Prophet, for the wrongs
                     
                     
                        He did to ſacred Iuſtice? Matters not
                     
                     
                        How ſlight the meanes be in it ſelfe, or what
                     
                     
                        In our eſteemes, ſo wiſedome be the meſſage;
                     
                     
                        Embaſſadours are worthyed in th' Embaſſage:
                     
                     
                        God ſowes his Harueſt to his beſt encreaſe,
                     
                     
                        And glorifies himſelfe, how-e're he pleaſe.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Lord, if thou wilt, (for what is hard to thee?)
                     
                     
                        I may a Factor for thy glory be,
                     
                     
                        Then grant that (like a faithfull ſeruant) I
                     
                     
                        May render back thy ſtock with Vſury.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  THE ARGVMENT.
                  
                     God reapes no gaine by mans beſt deeds;
                  
                  
                     Man's miſery from himſelfe proceeds:
                  
                  
                     Gods Mercy and Iuſtice are vnbounded;
                  
                  
                     In workes of Nature man is grounded.
                  
               
               
                  Sect. 17.
               
                  
                     ELihu, thus his pauſing lips, againe
                  Diſclos'd, & ſaid, (Raſh Iob) doſt thou maintain Chap. 35.
                  
                  A rightfull Cauſe, which in concluſion, muſt
                  Auow thee blameleſſe, and thy God vniuſt?
                  Thy lawleſſe words implying, that it can
                  Aduantage none, to liue an vpright man?
                  My tongue ſhall ſchoole thee, and thy friends that would
                  (Perchance) refell'd thy reaſons, if they could:
                  Behold thy glorious Makers greatneſſe, ſee
                  The power of his hand, ſay then, Can He
                  Be damag'd by thy ſinne, or can He raiſe
                  Aduantage, by th'vprightneſſe of thy wayes?
               
               
                  True, th'afflicted languiſh oft in griefe,
                  And roare to Heauen (vnanſwer'd) for reliefe,
                  Yet is not Heauen vniuſt, for their fond cry,
                  Their ſinne bewailes not, but their miſery.
                  Ceaſe then, to make him guilty of thy crimes,
                  And waite his pleaſure, that's not bound to times,
                  
                     
Nor heares vaine words. The ſorrowes thou art in,
                  Are ſlight, or nothing, ballanc'd with thy ſin:
                  Thy lips accuſe thee, and thy fooliſh tongue,
                  To right thy ſelfe, hath done th'Almighty wrong.
               
               
                  Hold back thine anſwere; Let my flowing ſtreame
                  Find paſſage, to ſurround my fruitfull Theame, Chap. 36.
                  
                  I'le raiſe my thoughts, to plead my Makers caſe,
                  And ſpeake, as ſhall befit ſo high a place:
                  Behold th'Almighty's Meeke, as well as Strong,
                  Deſtroyes the Wicked, rights the Iuſt mans wrong,
                  Mounts him to honour; If by chance he ſtray,
                  Inſtructs, and ſhowes him where he loſt his way:
                  If he returne, his bleſſings ſhall encreaſe,
                  Crowning his ioyes with plenty and ſweet peace;
                  If not, th'intailed ſword ſhall ne'r depart
                  His ſtained houſe, but pierce his hardned heart;
                  Ah ſinfull Iob! theſe plagues had neuer bin,
                  Had'ſt thou been guiltleſſe (as thou boaſts) from ſin:
                  But thy proud lips againſt their Maker plead,
                  And draw downe heapes of vengeance on thy head;
                  Looke to thy ſelfe, ſeeke not to vnderſtand
                  The ſecret cauſes of th' Eternals hand,
                  Let wiſedome make the beſt of miſery,
                  Know who inflicts it, aske no reaſon why:
                  His will's beyond thy reach, and his Diuine
                  And ſacred knowledge farre ſurpaſſeth thine.
                  Ah! rather, praiſe him in his workes, that lye
                  (Wide open to the world) before thine eye;
                  His meaner Acts, our higheſt thought o'retops,
                  He pricks the Clouds, ſtils downe the raine by drops;
                  Who comprehends the Lightning, or the Thunder?
                  Who ſees, who heares them, vnamaz'd with wonder?
               
               
                  
                  My troubled heart chils in my quiuering breſt,
                  To relliſh theſe things, and is diſpoſſeſt
                  Of all her powers: Who euer heard the voyce
                  Of th'angry heauens, vnfrighted at the noyſe?
                  The beaſt by nature daz'd with ſudden dread,
                  Seekes out for couert to ſecure his head:
                  If God command, the dusky clouds march forth
                  Into a Tempeſt; From the freezing North
                  He beckens Froſt, and Snow; and from the South,
                  He bloweth Whirlewinds with his angry Mouth.
                  Preſumptuous Iob! if thou canſt not aſpire
                  So high, to comprehend theſe things, admire.
                  Know'ſt thou the progreſſe of the rambling Clouds?
                  From mortall eyes, when gloomy darkneſſe ſhrouds
                  The Lamps of heauen, know'ſt thou the reaſon why?
                  Can'ſt thou vnriddle heauens Philoſophy?
                  Know'ſt thou th'vnconſtant nature of the Wether?
                  Or whence ſo many Winds proceed, and whither?
                  Wer't thou made priuie, or a ſtander-by,
                  When God ſtretch't forth his ſpangled Canopy?
                  Submit thy ſelfe, and let theſe ſecrets teach,
                  How farre his Myſt'ries doe ſurmount thy reach:
                  For Hee's Almighty, and his ſacred will
                  Is iuſt, nor renders an vnearned ill;
                  His workes are obiects for no ſoaring eyes,
                  But whereſoe're he looks, he findes none wiſe.
               
               
                  
                  Meditatio ſeptimadecima.
                  
                     
                        THe World's an Index to Eternity,
                     
                     
                        And giues a glance of what our cleerer Eye,
                     
                     
                        In time, ſhall ſee at large; nothing's ſo ſlight,
                     
                     
                        Which, in its nature, ſends not forth ſome light,
                     
                     
                        Or Memorandum of his Makers Glory:
                     
                     
                        No Duſt ſo vile, but pens an ample ſtory,
                     
                     
                        Of the Almighties power, nor is there that,
                     
                     
                        Which giues not man iuſt cauſe to wonder at.
                     
                  
                  
                     Caſt downe thine eyes, behold the pregnant Earth,
                     (Her ſelfe but one) produceth at one birth,
                     A world of diuers natures: From a ſeed
                     Entirely one, things hot and cold proceed,
                     She ſuckles with one milke, things moyſt, and dry,
                     Yet in her wombe is no repugnancy.
                  
                  
                     Or ſhall thy Reaſon ramble vp ſo high,
                     To view the Court of wilde Aſtronomie?
                     Behold the Planets, round about thine eares,
                     Whirling like fire-balles in their reſtleſſe Spheares.
                     At one ſelfe-inſtant moouing ſeuerall wayes,
                     Still meaſuring out our ſhort, and ſhorter dayes.
                  
                  
                     Behold the parts, whereon the World conſiſts, Boetius Conſ. Philoſ.
                     
                     Are limited in their appoynted liſts,
                     Without rebellion, vnapt to varie,
                     
                        
                           Raymond Sebond. Theob. Natural. cap. 4. Though being many, diuers, and contrary:
                     Looke where we lift, aboue, beneath, or vnder,
                     Our eyes ſhall ſee to learne, and learne to wonder;
                     
                        
Their depth ſhall drowne our iudgements, and their height,
                     Beſides his wits, ſhall driue the prime conceit:
                     Shall then our daring mindes preſume t' aſpire
                     To heauens hid Myſt'ries? ſhall our thoughts inquire
                     Into the depth of ſecrets, vnconfounded,
                     When in the ſhowre of Nature they are drowned?
                  
                  
                     
                        Fond man, be wiſe, ſtriue not aboue thy ſtrength,
                     
                     
                        Tempt not thy Barke beyond her Cables length;
                     
                     
                        And, like Prometheus, filch no ſacred fire,
                     
                     
                        Leſt Eagles gripe thee: Let thy proud deſire
                     
                     
                        Suite with thy fortunes; Curious minds, that ſhall
                     
                     
                        Mount vp with Phaeton, ſhall haue Phaetons fall.
                     
                     
                        Vnbend thy bow betimes, leſt thou repent
                     
                     
                        Too late, for it will breake, or elſe ſtand bent.
                     
                  
                  
                     I'le worke at home, ne'r croſſe the ſcorching Line,
                     In vnknowne lands, to ſeeke a hidden Mine:
                     Plaine Bullion pleaſeth me, I not deſire
                     Deare Ingots from th' Elixars piercing fire;
                     I'le ſpend my paines, (where beſt I may be bold)
                     To know my ſelfe, wherein I ſhall behold
                     The world abridg'd, and in that world,
                           Raymond Sebond, Theol. natural cap. 1. my Maker,
                     Beyond which taske, I wiſh no Vndertaker.
                  
                  
                     Great God, by whom it is, what-e're is mine,
                     Make me thy Viceroy in this
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           . World of thine;
                     So cleare mine eyes, that I may comprehend
                     My ſlight Beginning, and my ſudden End.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  THE ARGVMENT.
                  
                     Godqueſtions Iob, and prooues that man
                  
                  
                     Cannot attaine to things ſo high,
                  
                  
                     As diuine ſecrets, ſince he can
                  
                  
                     Not reach to Natures; Iobs reply.
                  
               
               
                  Sect. 18.
               
                  FOrth from the boſome of a murm'ring Cloud, Chap 38. God ſpeakes to Job out of a Cloud.
                  
                  Heauens great Iehouah did, at length, vnſhrowd
                  His Earths-amazing language
                  Made terrible with Feare and Maieſty) equally
                  (Challeng'd the Düell) he did vndertake
                  His grumbling ſeruant, and him thus beſpake,
               
               
                  Who, who art thou, that thus doſt pry in vaine,
                  Into my ſecrets, hoping to attaine,
                  With murmuring, to things, conceal'd from man?
                  Say (blear-ey'd mortall) who art thou, that can
                  Thus cleare thy crimes, and dar'ſt (with vain applauſe)
                  Make me defendant in thy ſinfull cauſe?
                  Loe, here I am; Engroſſe into thy hands
                  The ſoundeſt weapons; Anſwere my demands:
               
               
                  Say, Where wer't thou, whē theſe my hands did lay
                  The Worlds foundation? canſt thou tell me? Say,
                  Was Earth not meaſur'd by this Arme of mine?
                  Whoſe hand did ayde me? Was I help't by thine?
                  
                     
Where wert thou, when the Planets firſt did blaze,
                  And in their Spheares ſang forth their Makers praiſe?
                  Who is't that tames the raging of the Seas,
                  And ſwathes them vp in miſts, when-e're he pleaſe?
                  Did'ſt thou diuide the Darkneſſe from the Light?
                  Or know'st thou whence Aurora takes her flight?
                  Did'ſt ere enquire into the Seas Abyſſe,
                  Or mark'd the Earth, of what a bulke ſhe is?
                  Know'ſt thou the place whence Light or Darkneſſe ſprings?
                  Can thy deepe age vnfold theſe ſecret things?
                  Know'ſt thou the cauſe of Snow, or Haile, which are
                  My fierce Artill'ry, in my time of warre?
                  Who is't that rends the gloomy Clouds in ſunder,
                  Whoſe ſudden rapture ſtrikes forth Fire, & Thunder?
                  Or who bedewes the Earth with gentle ſhowres,
                  Filling her pregnant ſoyle with fruits and flowres?
                  What Father got the Raine? from what chill wombe
                  Did Froſts, and hard-congealed Waters come?
                  Canſt thou reſtraine faire Maia's courſe, or ſtint her,
                  Or ſad Orion vſhering in the Winter?
                  Will ſcorching Cancer at thy ſummons come,
                  Or Sun-burnt Autumne with her fruitfull wombe?
                  Knowſt thou Heauens courſe aboue, or doſt thou know
                  Thoſe gentle Influences here below?
                  Who was't inſpir'd thy Soule with Vnderſtanding?
                  And gaue thy Spirit, the ſpirit of Apprehending?
                  Doſt thou command the Ceſternes of the Skie,
                  To quench the thirſty ſoyle; or is it I?
               
               
                  Nay, let thy practice to the Earth deſcend, Chap. 39.
                  
                  Proue there, how farre thy power doth extend;
                  From thy full hand will hungry Lions eate?
                  Feed'ſt thou the empty Rauens that cry for meate?
                  
                     
Sett'ſt thou the Seaſon, when the fearefull Hind
                  Brings forth her painefull birth? Haſt thou aſſign'd
                  The Mountaine Goate her Time? Or is it I?
                  Canſt thou ſubiect vnto thy ſoueraigntie,
                  The vntam'd Vnicorne? Can thy hard hand
                  Force him to labour on thy fruitfull land?
                  Did'ſt thou inrich the Peacock with his Plume?
                  Or did that Steele-digeſting Bird aſſume
                  His downie flags from thee? Didſt thou endow
                  The noble Stallion with his Strength? Canſt thou
                  Quaile his proud courage? See, his angry breath
                  Puffes nothing forth, but feares, ſumm'd vp in death?
                  Marke with what pride his horny hoofes doe tabor
                  The hard reſounding Earth; with how great labor,
                  How little ground he ſpends: But at the noyſe
                  And fierce Alar'm of the hoarſe Trumpets voyce
                  He breakes the rankes, amidſt a thouſand Speares
                  Pointed with death, vndaunted at the feares
                  Of doubtfull warre; he ruſhes like a Ranger,
                  Through euery Troope, & ſcornes ſo braue a danger.
                  Doe loftie Haggards cleaue the flitting Ayre,
                  With Plumes of thy deuiſing? Then how dare
                  Thy rauenous lips thus, thus, at randome runne,
                  And counter-maund what I the Lord haue done?
                  Think'ſt thou to learne (fond Mortall) thus, by diuing
                  Into my ſecrets, or to gaine by ſtriuing?
                  Pleade then: No doubt, but thine will be the Day;
                  Speake (peeuiſh Plaintiffe) if th'aſt ought to ſay.
               
               
                  
                     Iob then reply'd: (Great God) I am but Duſt, Iobs confeſſion.
                     
                  
                  My heart is ſinfull, and thy hands are Iuſt;
                  I am a Sinner (Lord,) my words are wind,
                  My thoughts are vaine, (Ah Father) I haue ſinn'd:
                  
                     
Shall Duſt replie? I ſpake too much before,
                  I'le cloſe theſe lips, and neuer anſwere more.
               
               
                  Meditatio octauadecima
                  
                     O Glorious Light! A light, vnapprehended
                     By mortall Eyes! O Glorie, neuer ended,
                     Nor e're created, whence all Glorie ſprings
                     In heauenly bodies, and in earthly things!
                     O power Immenſe, deriued from a Will
                     Moſt Iuſt, and able to doe all, but ill!
                     O Eſſence pure, and full of Maieſtie!
                     Greatneſſe (it ſelfe) and yet no Quantitie;
                     Goodneſſe, and without Qualitie; producing
                     All things from out of Nothing, and reducing
                     All things to nothing; paſt all comprehending,
                     Both Firſt and Laſt, and yet without an Ending,
                     Or yet beginning; filling euery Creature,
                     And not (it ſelfe) included; aboue Nature,
                     Yet not excluded, of it Selfe ſubſiſting,
                     And with it Selfe, all other things, aſsiſting;
                     Diuided, yet without diuiſion;
                     A perfect Three, yet Three, entirely One;
                     Both One in Three, and Three in One, together;
                     Begetting, and begotten, and yet neither;
                     The Fountaine of all Arts, Confounding Art;
                     Both All in All, and All in euery part;
                     Still ſeeking Glorie, and ſtill wanting none;
                     Though Iuſt, yet reaping, where Thou ne'r haſt ſowne!
                  
                  
                     
                     Great Maieſtie, ſince Thou art euery where,
                     O, Why ſhould I miſdoubt thy Preſence here?
                     I long haue ſought Thee, but my ranging heart
                     Ne'r queſts, and cannot ſee thee where thou art:
                     There's no Defect in thee, thy light hath ſhin'd,
                     Nor can be hid (Great God,) but I am blind.
                     O, cleare mine eyes, and with thy holy Fire
                     Inflame my breſt, and edge my dull deſire:
                     Waſh me with Hyſope, clenſe my ſtained thoughts,
                     Renew my ſpirit, blurre forth my ſecret faults;
                     Thou tak'ſt no pleaſure in a Sinners death,
                     For thou art Life, thy Mercy's not beneath
                     Thy ſacred Iuſtice: Giue thy ſeruant power
                     To ſeek aright, and (hauing ſought) diſcouer
                     Thy glorious Preſence; Let my blemiſht Eye
                     See my ſaluation yet before I dye.
                     O, then my Dust, that's bowell'd in the ground,
                     Shall riſe with Triumph at the welcome ſound
                     Of my Redeemers earth-awaking Trumpe,
                     Vnfrighted at the noyſe; no ſullen Dumpe
                     Of ſelfe-confounding Conſcience ſhall affright me,
                     For Hee's my Iudge, whoſe dying Blood ſhall quite me.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  THE ARGVMENT.
                  
                     God ſpeakes to Iob the ſecond time:
                  
                  Iob yeelds his ſinne, repents his crime.
                  
                  
                     God checks his Friends, reſtores his health,
                  
                  
                     Giues him new iſſue, double wealth.
                  
               
               
                  Sect. 19.
               
                  ONcemore the Mouth of heauē rapt forth a voice, Chap. 40. God ſpeakes to Iob out of a Cloud the ſecond time.
                     
                  
                  The troubled Firmament was fill'd with noiſe,
                  The Rafters of the darkned Skie did ſhake,
                  For the Eternall thundred thus, and ſpake:
               
               
                  Collect thy ſcattred ſenſes, and aduiſe,
                  Rouze vp (fond man) and anſwere my replies.
               
               
                  Wilt thou make Comments on my Text, and muſt
                  I be vnrighteous, to conclude thee, Iuſt?
                  Shall my Decrees be licenced by thee?
                  What, canſt thou thunder with a Voyce like Me?
                  Put on thy Robes of Maieſtie; Be clad
                  With as bright glorie (Iob) as can be had;
                  Make fierce thy frownes, and with an angry face
                  Confound the Proud, and his high thoughts abaſe,
                  Pound him to Duſt: Doe this, and I will yeeld,
                  Thou art a God, and need'ſt no other ſhield.
               
               
                  Behold, the Caſtle-bearing Elephant, The Eliphant.
                  
                  That wants no bulke, nor doth his greatneſſe want
                  
                     
An equall ſtrength. Behold his maſſie bones,
                  Like barres of Yron; like congealed ſtones,
                  His knottie ſinewes are; Him haue I made,
                  And giuen him naturall weapons for his aide;
                  High Mountaines beare his food, the ſhady boughes
                  His Couerts are; Great Riuers are his Troughs,
                  Whoſe deepe Carouſes would, to ſtanders-by,
                  Seeme at a watring, to draw Iordan drie:
                  What skilfull huntſman can, with ſtrength, out-dare him?
                  Or with what Engins can a man enſnare him?
               
               
                  Haſt thou beheld the huge Leuiathan, Chap 41. The Whale.
                     
                  
                  That ſwarthy Tyrant of the Ocean? Can
                  Thy bearded hooke impierce his Gils, or make him
                  Thy landed Pris'ner? Can thy Angles take him?
                  Will he make ſuite for fauour from thy hands,
                  Or be enthralled to thy fierce Commands?
                  Will he be handled as a Bird? Or may
                  Thy fingers bind him for thy childrens play?
                  Let men be wiſe, for in his lookes, he hath
                  Diſplayed Banners of vntimely death.
                  If Creatures be ſo dreadfull, how is he
                  More bold then wiſe, that dares encounter Me?
                  What hand of man can hinder my deſigne?
                  Are not the Heauens, and all beneath them, mine?
                  Diſſect the Greatneſſe of ſo vaſt a Creature,
                  By view of ſeuerall parts: Summe vp his feature,
                  Like Shields, his Scales are plac't, which neither Art
                  Knowes how to ſunder, nor yet Force can part,
                  His Belching rucks forth flames, his mouing Eye
                  Shines like the glory of the morning Skie;
                  His craggie Sinewes are like wreathes of braſſe,
                  And from his mouth, quicke flames of fier paſſe,
                  
                     
As from an Ouen, the temper of his Heart
                  Is like a Nether-milſtone, which no Dart
                  Can pierce, ſecured from the threatning Speare;
                  Affraid of none, he ſtrikes the World with feare:
                  The Bow-mans brawnie arme ſends Shafts in vaine,
                  They fall like Stubble, or bound backe againe:
                  Stones are his Pillow, and the Mud his Downe;
                  In earth none greater is, nor equall, none,
                  Compar'd with him, all things he doth deride,
                  And well may challenge to be King of Pride.
               
               
                  So ſaid, th'amazed Iob bent downe his eyes Chap. 42. Iobs Contrition.
                     
                  
                  Vpon the ground, and (ſadly) thus replyes.
               
               
                  I know (Great God) there's nothing hard to Thee,
                  Thy thoughts are pure, and too too deepe for me:
                  I am a Foole, and my diſtempered Wits,
                  Longer out-ſtrayed my Tongue, then well befits;
                  My knowledge ſlumbred, while my Lips did chat,
                  And, like a Foole, I ſpake I knew not what.
                  Lord, teach me Wiſdome, leſt my proud Deſire,
                  Cinge her bold Feathers in thy ſacred Fire;
                  Mine Eare hath oft been rounded with thy ſtorie,
                  But now theſe very Eyes haue ſeene thy Glorie.
                  My ſinfull Words I not (alone) lament,
                  But, in the horror of my Soule, repent Iobs repentance.
                     
                  
                  Repent with Teares in Sackcloth, mourne in Duſt;
                  I am a ſinfull man, and Thou art Iuſt.
               
               
                  Thou Eliphaz, that mak'ſt my ſacred Word, 
                        God reprooues Iobs three friends.
                     
                  
                  An Engine of Deſpaire (ſaid then the Lord)
                  Behold, full vyals of my Wrath, attends
                  On thee, and on thy two too-partiall Friends;
                  For you haue iudg'd amiſſe, and haue abus'd
                  My Word to worke your Ends; falſely accus'd
                  
                     
My righteous Seruant: Of you all, there's none
                  Hath ſpoke vprightly, as my Iob hath done.
                  Haſte then (before my kindling Fire begin
                  To ſlame) and each man offer for his Sin,
                  A Sacrifice, by Iob my ſeruants hand,
                  And for his ſake, your Offrings ſhall withſtand
                  The Wages of your ſinnes; for what can I,
                  If Iob, my Seruant, make requeſt, denie?
               
               
                  So ſtrait they went, and (after ſpeedy pardon
                  Deſir'd, and had,) the righteous Iob (for guerdon
                  Of his ſo tedious Griefe) obtain'd the health
                  Of a ſound Body, and encreaſe of Wealth;
                  So that the ſecond Harueſt of his ſtore,
                  Was double that, which he enioy'd before.
               
               
                  Ere this was blazed in the Worlds wide Eares,
                  (The frozen breſts of his Familiars,
                  And cold Allyes, being now diſſolu'd in Griefe,)
                  His backward Friends came to him with Reliefe,
                  To feede his Wants, and with ſad ſhowring eyes,
                  To moane his (yet ſuppoſed) Miſeries:
                  Some brought him Sheepe, to bleſſe his emptie Fold,
                  Some precious Earerings, others, Rings of Gold.
                  God bleſt his loines, from whence there ſprang again, 
                        The number of Iobs children ſupplied.
                     
                  
                  The number of his children that were ſlaine,
                  Nor was there any in the Land ſo rare
                  In vertue, as his Daughters, or ſo faire.
                  Long after this, he liu'd in peace, to ſee His long life.
                  
                  His childrens children, to the fourth Degree,
                  Till at the length, cut ſhort by Him, that ſtayes
                  For none, he dyed in Peace, and full of Dayes. His peaceable death.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Meditatio vltima.
                  
                     
                        EVill's the defect of Good, and as a ſhade,
                     
                     
                        That's but the Ruines of the Light decay'd:
                     
                     
                        It hath no 
                        Non ens & malum conſunduntur. 
                        Beeing, nor is vnderſtood,
                     
                     
                        But by the 
                        Non ens non intelligitur niſi per oppoſitionem Entis. 
                        Oppoſition of Good.
                     
                     
                        What then is man? whoſe pureſt thoughts are prest
                     
                     
                        For Satans warre, which from the tender breſt,
                     
                     
                        With Infant ſilence, haue conſented to
                     
                     
                        Such ſinfull Deeds, as (babes) they could not doe?
                     
                     
                        What then is man, but Nothing, being Euill,
                     
                     
                        His Lunatick affections doe vnleuell,
                     
                     
                        What Heauen created by iuſt Waight and Meaſure;
                     
                     
                        In Pleaſures ſincke, he takes a ſwinelike Pleaſure;
                     
                     
                        His ſpan of life, and beautie's like a Flower,
                     
                     
                        Faire flouriſhing, and fading in an hower.
                     
                     
                        He breakes into the World with Teares, and then
                     
                     
                        Departs with Griefe, nor knowing How, nor When.
                     
                     
                        His life's a Bubble, full of ſeeming Bliſſe,
                     
                     
                        The more it lengthens, the more ſhort it is;
                     
                     
                        Begot in darkneſſe, hee's brought forth, and cryes
                     
                     
                        For ſuccour, paſſes ore the Stage, and dyes;
                     
                     
                        Yet, like a Moale, the earth he vndermines,
                     
                     
                        Making the World, the Forge of his deſignes:
                     
                     
                        He plots, complots, foreſees, preuents, directs;
                     
                     
                        He hopes, he feares, he doubts, purſues, effects;
                     
                     
                        Each hath his Plot, each one his courſe doth bend,
                     
                     
                        Each hath his Proiect, and each one his end.
                     
                     
                        
                        Thus reſtleſſe man doth ſtill his ſoule moleſt,
                     
                     
                        To finde out (that which hath no Being) Reſt;
                     
                     
                        Thus trauels ſinfull man in endleſſe toyle;
                     
                     
                        Taking a pleaſure in his owne turmoyle.
                     
                     
                        Fond man, firſt ſeeke to purchaſe that diuine
                     
                     
                        And ſacred Prize, and all the World is thine:
                     
                     
                        Great Salomon made ſuit for Wiſedome, and he found
                     
                     
                        Not (barely) Wiſedome, but that Wiſedome, crown'd
                     
                     
                        With Diademes of wealth, and faire encreaſe
                     
                     
                        Of princely Honours, with long dayes of peace.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        (With ſafe reſpect, and awfull reuerence
                     
                     
                        To Myſtryes) Meditation doth commence 
                        Obiect.
                     
                     
                        An earneſt doubt: Was Iobs diſpoyled Flock
                     
                     
                        Reſtored double? Was his former Stock
                     
                     
                        Renew'd with double vantage? Did heauen adde
                     
                     
                        To all his fortunes, double what he had?
                     
                     
                        Yet thoſe ſweet Emblemes of his deareſt loue,
                     
                     
                        (His ſonnes) whom Death vntimely did remoue
                     
                     
                        From off the face of the vnthankfull earth,
                     
                     
                        Why likewiſe ſprang not they in double birth?
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Bruit beaſts, that periſh once, are loſt for euer,
                     
                     
                        Their ſubſtance, and their All conſume, together. 
                        Res.
                     
                     
                        Once hauing giuen a farewell to the light,
                     
                     
                        They dye, and with them is perpetuall night:
                     
                     
                        But man, (vnorgan'd by the hand of Death)
                     
                     
                        Dyes not, is but tranſplanted from beneath,
                     
                     
                        Into a fairer ſoyle, or as a ſtranger,
                     
                     
                        Brought home, ſecure from the worlds pleaſing Danger
                     
                     Iobs Flocks were loſt, and therefore double giuen,
                     
                     
                        His Iſſu's equall ſhar'd 'twixt Earth and Heauen,
                     
                     
                        One halfe in heauen, are glorious in their doome,
                     
                     
                        Ingag'd asNon amiſſ
                                 •…
                               
                              
                                 •
                              ed praen
                                 ••…
                              . Pledges, till the other come.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Great God! my Time's but ſhort, and long my Way,
                     My Heart hath loſt her Path, and gone aſtray,
                     My ſpirit's faint, and fraile, my ſoul's imboſt,
                     If thou helpe not, I am for euer loſt;
                     Though Dust and Aſhes, yet am I thy Creature,
                     How e're my ſinnes are great, thy Mercy's greater:
                     Of Nothing did'ſt thou make me, and my ſinne
                     Hath turn'd me back to Nothing, once agin:
                     Create me a new heart, (great God) inſpire
                     My cold Affections with thy ſacred Fire:
                  
                  
                     Inſtruct my Will, and rectifie my Wayes,
                     O teach me (Lord) to number out my Dayes.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            The Digeſtion of the whole HISTORIE.
            
               1 In Proſperity.
               
               THou, whoſe lanke fortunes heauē hath ſweld with
               Make not thy ſelfe, by ouer-wiſhing, poore, (ſtore,
               Husband that Good, which elſe, Abuſe makes Bad,
               Abſtracting, where thy baſe Deſire would adde:
               Lines flowing from a Sophoclean Quill,
               Deſerue no Plaudit', being Acted ill.
            
            
               2 In Aduerſity.
               
               Hath heauē withdrawn the Talent he hath giuē thee?
               Hath enuious Death of all thy Sons bereau'n thee?
               Haue foule Diſeaſes foyl'd thee on the floore?
               He earnes no ſweet, that neuer taſted ſowre:
               Thou art a Scholler; if thy Tutor doe
               Poſe thee too hard, Hee will inſtruct thee too.
            
            
               3 In Tentation.
               
               Art thou oppos'd to thine vnequall Foe?
               March brauely on; Thy Generall bids thee Goe,
               Thou art Heauens Champion, to maintaine his right;
               Who cals thee forth, will giue thee ſtrength to fight.
               God ſeekes, by Conqueſt, thy Renowne, for Hee
               Will win enough: Fight thou, or Faint, or Flee.
            
            
               
               4 In Slander.
               
               If Winter fortunes nip thy Summer Friends,
               And tip their Tongues with Cenſure, that offends
               Thy tender Name, deſpaire not, but be wiſe,
               Know Heauen ſelecteth, whom the World denies:
               Thou haſt a milke-white Thisby, that's within thee,
               Will take thy part, when all the world's again thee.
            
            
               5 In Re-aduancement.
               
               Art thou aduanc'd to thy ſupreme Deſier?
               Be ſtill the ſame; Feare Lower, aime no Higher:
               Mans Play hath many Sceanes, but in the laſt,
               Heauen knits vp all, to ſweeten All that's paſt:
               Affliction is a Rod, to ſcourge vs Home,
               A painfull Earneſt of a Heauen to come.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   