
      
         
            
            ¶Queſtions worthy to be conſulted on / 
for the weale publyque.
            
               FIrſt whether hipocriſie / fayned relygion called / and wicked lawes called
Cacanomia, myght be put out of this Realme without counſell of Auaricia.
            ¶Whether euell order long abuſed myght be redreſſed by good lawes well obſerued.
            ¶Whether the lawes of the kynges of Englande made before the conqueſt, be the common
lawes of this Realme, and myght be reuiued agayne.
            ¶Whether the proces at the common lawe is grounded on anye lawe poſitiue.
            ¶Whether the ſayde proces is daylye abuſed as wel in courte, as at the Shriffe his handes
by manyfeſt colluſion or not.
            ¶Whether manyfeſt calumnye to ſue falſe plees be ſuffred at the common lawe.
            ¶Whether by Iuſtice a man maye let fall his action and not aunſwer coſtes.
            ¶Whether proces of outlawrye, made vpon fayned contumacie doeth geue the partie plaintife better remedye vp
on a decree, than ſeaſon on his goodes vnto the partie will appere in courte.
            ¶Whether good and equitie called, Stet, may be pleaded in euerye the Kynges Maieſties courtes as wel as in
the Chauncerye, the Starre Chamber and the whyte Hale, in caſe not ruled.
            ¶Whether Sergiantes and men at lawe ought rather to pleede vpon bene et equo, then vpō ſimilitudes of iudgementes
in euerye the Kynges Maieſties courtes where there is no lawe certayne for the caſe.
            ¶Whether the Iudgement geuen vpon the verdite of .xii. men, is rather in opinion, than in veritie.
            ¶Whether anye corruption maye enſue vpon euydence geuen by wytneſſe to the iurie openlye when as the ſeconde
wytneſſe hath herde the firſt witneſſe depoſition.
            ¶Whether the Iuries doeth vnderſtande more of the pleadyng in Niſi prius and ſuche like, then the Iudges.
            ¶Whether a .M. pounde gotten yerelye by one man at lawe, was truelie deſerued at all mennes handes.
            ¶Whether the Salarie of men at lawe mighte be taxed to anye certayne ſum for euerye terme and for euerye
plee.
            ¶Whether the number of retaynyng learned counſel myght ſo be a brydged that but onely one man in one cauſe
ſhould be admitted to plede.
            ¶Whether there be mo Studientes and men at law, in this Realme of Englande then be lawes poſitiue.
            ¶Whether that it were neceſſarie that the Salarie for men at lawes Clarkes ſhould be taxed by the lyne for
wrytyng or not.
            ¶Whether certayne lawes woulde better be practyſed in this realme by ſum inducement to honeſtye and worſhyp
than by lawes penall.
            ¶Whether Actions Populer and Statutes Penall maye be ſued to forfetture without breache of chriſten
charitie.
            ¶Whether Iuriſdiction eccleſiaſtical and temporal may concurre in the kynges maieſties Courtes onely to be
determinable.
            ¶Whether the probates of teſtamentes and cauſes teſtamentarie be eccleſiaſtical or temporall and whan it was
chaunged with iure patronatus.
            ¶Whether the lacke of good lawes hathe bene more the decaye of this realme then the negligence of prynces.
            ¶Whether it be more for a common welth iuſtice to be miniſtred in euery citie and ſhere Towne in all matters
then in one place onely.
            ¶Whether Appeles vpon wrong iudgementes and errors in plees may be determined in place certain.
            ¶Whether any Archedeacon hauinge Iuriſdiction for probates of teſtamētes whoſe Seale is not allowable
at the common lawe deceaueth the people and is aunſwerable of extorcion for the money he taketh therfore.
            ¶Whether the Eccleſiaſticall cauſes vnited to his maieſties Courtes in euerye ſhere wyll bere the kynges charges
for the exercyſe of his imperiall Iuryſdictions towardes the Iudges fees.
            ¶Whether it be for the publyque wealth to haue many Cities Townes and portes well maynteined repaired
and inhabited then for the maynteynyng of one to decaye the hole realme.
            ¶Whether pryncelye buyldynges of goodlye houſes doeth more bewtyfye a realme than repairinge decayed
Townes dothe beawtifye the ſame.
            ¶Whether yf euery ſhepe maſter ſhoulde ſell his woll in yearne, not other to paſſe the ſees might a voyde the
great occaſyon of the ydelnes and pouertie of this Realme and all ſuche charge of common paſture.
            ¶Whether euery encloſer compelled to haue in tillage the thirde Acre ſo encloſed were more profytable for the
common wealth then to pull downe encloſes.
            ¶Whether the lande water and the See hathe waſted more good grounded in Englande then hath bene gotten
in forein Realmes.
            ¶Whether the degrees of all States and perſonages to be knowen & dyſeuered by apparell or otherwyſe doth
kepe good order in the realme.
            ¶Whether Marchauntes leuing their courſe of Marchaundyſe and folowyng the ydell trade of vſurie is worthye
to be put oute of anye citie.
            ¶Whether Magiſtrates reformers of the manners of men is as mete to be had in euery bodye politique as the
ciuile Iudges.
            ¶Whether thoſe Magiſtrates mighte haue by coheccion, power to repayre hyghe wayes, walles of Townes
decayed, Hauensſtopped, or noyed, tyllage layde downe, encloſers reryd.
            ¶Whether good lawes, can be ordeyned and made where euil men of lawe ſhall be chiefe of counſell.
            ¶Whether any profyte hath enſued of the laſt Statute made for beggars and vacabondes.
            ¶Whether Iuſtice and equitie and bonum publicum ſhould be the grounde of euerye lawe poſitiue.
            ¶Whether the bodye politique of this Realme woulde be directed in lyke ordre without confuſion of Magiſtrates
and degrees as the body materiall the king and this counſell ſuper intendant the Iudges and magiſtrates
their lawes exequete, nobilite, & mē of landes to be the Realme defendāte, marchaūtes, & negociators, the
wealthe publique practiſant, huſbandmen and craftes men laborant, the other membres to be obedyent.
            ¶Whether ye Spiritualte, the Biſhoppes, and the Clergye, be within the ſame body politique or they be a body
of them ſelues.
            ¶Whether Iuſtices of Sewers in places ſurūdered keping the quarter Seſſions .iiii. tymes by yere in circuite
myght ſaue the lower partes of Northfolke, Southfolke, Cambrydge ſhere, Huntingdon ſhere, Northāpton
ſhere, Linconſhere from drowning conteming in circuit .Clxxx. myles by eſtimacion.
            ¶Whether it were better for the huſbandman, noble men and gentilmen to ride poſt on other mennes Sadils, on
their owne horſes then to ryde poſt on other mennes horſes in their owne ſadilles.
            ¶Whether temporal poſſeſſions and godly Religion maye conſiſt in anye ſpirituall perſon.
            ¶Whether euery byſhoppe and prieſt not called of god as Aaron nor elected of the people hath the ſpirituall
charter of prieſthode.
            ¶Whether the prieſtes that ſue for pluralities of benefices doeth more offende before God then the powers
whiche dyſpence for lucre.
            ¶Whether any man by diſpenſacion may haue as wel ſunderye wyfes as prieſtes may haue ſunderie benefices.
            ¶Whether the diuines and learned in goddes lawes ſettinge forthe goddes worde after their owne fantaſies
ought all to be beleued.
         
      
   