
      
         
            
            
            QVESTIONS PROPOVNDED
TO THE PROFESSORS OF THE
CHVCH-ASSEMBLIES OF
ENGLAND.
            
               1.
               
                  WHither the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, haue by his laſt Teſtament, given vnto
and ſett in his Church ſufficient ordinarie Offices, with their callings,
workes, and maintenance for the adminiſtration of his holy things, &
for the ſufficient ordinary inſtruction, guidance, and ſervice of his
Church to the end of the world, or no?
            
            
               2.
               Whither the Offices of Paſtors, Teachers: Elders, Deacons and helpers, be thoſe
Offices appointed by Chriſt in his laſt Teſtament as is aforeſaide: Or whither the preſent
Eccleſiaſticall Offices of Archbips. Lord Bips. Suffragans, Chancellors, Commiſſaries,
Officialls, Doctors, Proctors, Regiſte
                     •
                  s, Scribes, or Clarckes, Aduocates, Prelates,
Purſevantes,Here are aboue 40. Offices diſcouered & named not one of them found in the nevve Teſtament. Paratours or Sumners, Deanes, Subdeanes, Archdeacons, Doctours
of Divinity, Bachellors of Divinity, Chapleines or Houſ-prieſtes, Prebendaries,
Cannons, petty-cannons, Goſpellers, piſtelers, Chaunters, Vergiers, Singing-men,
Organ-plaiers, Queriſters, or Singing-boyes, parſons, Vicares, Curates, Stipendaries
or Hired-preachers, Vagrant or mecenary Teachers, prieſtes, Halfe-prieſtes called Deacons,
Churchwardens, Sidemen, Collectors, Clarckes, Sextines, and the reſt now
had, in theſe Cathedrall and parishionall Aſſemblies, be theſe appointed by Chriſt in
his laſt Teſtament, as is aforeſaid, or no?
            
            
               3.
               Whither the Callinges and entrance into theſe eccleſiaſticall Offices aforeſaid,
their Adminiſtration alſo and maintenance, now had & reteined in England, be that
manner of calling adminiſtration and maintenance which Chriſt hath appointed for
the Offices of his Church aboue named, or no?
            
            
               4.
               Whither every true and Viſible Church of Chriſt be not a companie of people
called and ſeperated out from the Worlde by the Word of God, and joyned togither in
the Fellowship of the Goſpel by voluntarie profeſſion of their faith and obedience of
Chriſt, the ſure and right way to mortification and ſanctification. And whither the
preſent Aſſemblies of this Land be ſuch, or no?
            
            
               5.
               Whither the Sacramentes (being ſeales of righteouſnes which is by faith) may
be delivered to any other then the Faithfull and their Seede? Or in any other miniſtery
and manner then is appointed by Ieſus Chriſt the Apoſtle and High-prieſt of our
profeſſion. And whither they be not otherwiſe adminiſtred in the Cathedrall and Parishionall
Aſſemblies of England at this day, or no?
            
            
               6.
               Whither all Churches and people without exception be bound in Religion onely
to receiue and ſubmitt vnto the miniſtery, worship, and order, which Chriſt as
Lord and King hath given and appointed to his Church? Or whither in religion any
may receiue and joine vnto ſuch a miniſtery, worship, and order as is deviſed by men
or Angels for the ſervice of God? And conſequently whither they which joyne to the
preſent eccleſiaſticall miniſterie, worship, and order of theſe Cathedrall and parishionall
Aſſemblies can be aſſured by the word of God, that they joyne to the former appointed
by Chriſt, and not to the latter diviſed by others for the ſervice of God.
               To IESVS CHRIST the King of Kinges, 1. Tim. 6: 15. and
PRINCE of the Ringes of the earth Revela. 1. 5, be
praiſe and obedience of all Deut. 18. 19. Ieſ. 60. 12.
and of every perſon for evermore Act. 3. 22. 13.
            
         
      
   