
      
         
            
            The true diſcripcion of this marueilous ſtraunge Fiſhe, whiche was taken on thurſday was ſennight, the .xvi. day of June, this preſent month, in the yeare of our Lord God. M. DLX. ix.
            
               
            
            
               ¶ A declaration of the taking of this ſtraunge Fiſhe, with the length & bredth. &c.
               
                  DOoing you to vnderſtande, that on thurſdaye the .xvi. daye of this preſent month of June, in ye yeare of our Lord God. MD. LV. ix. This ſtraunge fiſhe (whych you ſee here picttured) was taken betweene Callis, and Douer, by ſertayne Engliſh Fiſſher men, whych were a fyſhynge for mackrell. And this ſtraunge & merueylous Fyſhe, folowynge after the ſcooles of Mackrell, came ruſhinge in to the fiſher mens Netts, and brake and tore their nettes marueilouſlie, in ſuch ſorte, that at the fyrſt they weare muche amaſed ther at: and marueiled what it ſhould bee, that kept ſuche a ſturr with their Netts, for they were verie much harmed by it, with breking and ſpoyling their Netts.
               And then they ſeing, and perceiuyng that the Netts wold not ſerue by reaſon of the greatnes of this ſtraung Fiſhe, then they with ſuch inſtruements, ingins, & thinges that they had: made ſuch ſhift that they tooke this ſtraung Fiſhe. And vppon fridaye the morowe after brought it vpp to Billynges gate in London, whyche was the .xvii. daye of June, and ther it was ſeene and vewid of manie which marueiled much at the ſtraungnes of it. For here hath neuer the lyke of it ben ſeene: and on ſaterdaye, being the .xviii. daye, ſertayne fiſhe mongers in new Fiſhſtreat, agreeid with them that caught it, for, and in conſideracion of the harme, whych they receiued by ſpoylinge of ther Netts, and for their paines, to haue this ſtraunge fiſhe. And hauinge it, did open it and flaied of the ſkinn, and ſaued it hole. And adiudging the meat of it to be good, broyled a peece and taſted of hit, and it looked whit like Veale when it was broiled, and was good & ſauerie, (though ſumwhat ſtraung) in the eating, and then they ſold of it that ſame ſaterdaye, to ſuche as would buy of the ſame, and they them ſelues did bake of it, and eate it for daintie: and for the more ſerteintaintie and opening of the truth, the good men of the Caſtle and the Kinges head in new Fiſh ſtreat, did but a great deale & bakte of it, and this is moſte true.
               
                  THis ſtraunge Fiſhe is in length .xvii. foote, and .iii. foote broad, and in compas about the bodie .vi. foote. and proporcioned as you ſee here by this picture, and is round ſnowted, ſhort headdid as you ſee, hauing .iii. ranckes of teeth on eyther iawe, maruaylous ſharpe and very ſhort .ii. eyes growing neare his ſnout, & as big as a horſes eyes, and his hart as big as an Oxes hart, & like wyſe his liuer and lightes bige as an Oxes, but all the garbidge yt was in hys bellie beſides, would haue gone in to a felt hat. Alſo .ix. finns, & .ii. of the ſormoſt bee .iii. quarters of a yeard longe from the body: & a verie big one on the fore parte of his backe, as you ſee h
                     •••
                   by this picture, blackiſh on the backe & a litle whitiſhe on the belly, a ſlender tayle, and had but one bone & that was a great rydge bone runninge a longe his backe, from the head vnto the tayle, and had great force in his tayle when he was in the water. Alſo it hath .v. gills of eache ſide of the head, ſhoing white as you ſee. Ther is no proper name for it that I knowe but that ſertayne men of Captayne Haukinſes, doth call it a Sharke. And it is to bee ſeene in London, at the red Lyon, in Flete ſtreete.
            
            Fininis.
            
               Qd. C. R.
            
         
      
      
         
            Imprynted at London. in Fleetſtreate, beneathe the conduit, at the ſigne of Saint John Euangeliſt, by Thomas Colwell.
            
         
      
   