
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  A FEAST FOR WORMES. SET FORTH IN A POEME OF THE HISTORY OF IONAH. By FRA. QVARLES.
                  
                     ad hoc.
                     ab hoc.
                     per hoc.
                  
                  
                     This Naked Pourtraiture before thine Eye,
                     Is Wretched, helpleſſe MAN, MAN borne to Die:
                     On either ſide, an ANGELL doth protect him
                     As well from EVILL, as to GOOD direct him:
                     Th' one poynts to DEATH, the t'other to a CROVVNE;
                     Who THIS attaines, muſt tread the OTHER downe:
                     All which denotes the Briefe of MANS Eſtate,
                     That HEE'S to goe from HENCE, by THIS, to THAT.
                     
                  
                  AT LONDON. Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, for Richard Moore, and are to be ſold at his ſhop in Saint Dunſtans Church-yard, in Fleetſtreet. 1620.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE, ROBERT, LORD SYDNEY, Baron of Penſhurst, Viſcount Liſle, Earle of Leiceſter, Knight of the moſt Noble Order of the Garter.
                  
                     SIR: two things more eſpeciall haue made me induſtrious to doe your Lordſhip ſeruice: The one is, the loue you did beare to my (long ſince) deceaſed Father; whom (dead) your Lordſhip did pleaſe to honour with your Noble remembrance. The other is, your vndeſerued Fauours, and Honourable Countenance towards me in your paſſage thorow Germany, where you haue left in the hearts of men, a Pyramis of your Worth. As for the firſt, I am heire to that ſeruice, which my Father, (alwayes obſeruant

to your Honour) was ready to performe. As for the ſecond, my ſelfe, in more particular ſtand obliged. In reſpect of both, heere I dedicate my ſelfe, and theſe few leaues to your truly-Noble Selfe, hoping your Lordſhip will vaile my boldneſſe in your good acceptance, and crowne my labours with your approbation:
                  
                     SIR, 
                     Your Lordſhips truly obſeruant, FRA. QVARLES.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  TO THE READER.
                  
                     
                        
                           Reader, J fairely ſalute thee:
                        
                        
                           I Liſt not to tyre thy patient eares with vnneceſſary language (the abuſe of complement.) My mouth's no Dictionary: it onely ſerues as a needfull Commentary, vpon the obſcure Text of my meaning.
                        J haue heere ſent thee the firſt fruits of an obortiue Birth. Jt is a dainty ſubiect, not Fabulous, but Truth it ſelfe.
                        VVonder not at the Title, (A FEAST FOR WORMES:) for it is a Song of Mercy: VVhat greater FEAST than Mercy? And what are Men but WORMES?
                        Moreouer, J haue gleaned ſome few Meditations, obuious to the Hiſtory; Let me aduiſe thee to keepe the Taſte of the Hiſtory, whilest thou readeſt the Meditations, and that will make thee Relliſh both, the better.
                        Vnderstanding Reader, fauour me: Gently expound, what it is too late to correct.
                        He le va de Golpe, Dios ſea con ella.
                        Farewell.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                  THE PROPOSITION OF the whole Worke.
                  'TIs not the Record of Great HECTORS Glory,
                  Whoſe matchleſſe Valour makes the World a Story;
                  Nor yet the ſwelling of that Romans Name,
                  That onely Came, and Look'd, and Ouercame;
                  Nor One, nor All of thoſe braue Worthies Nine,
                  (Whoſe Might was Great, and Acts almost Diuine,
                  That liu'd like Gods, but di' de like Men, and gone)
                  Shall giue my Pen a Taske to treat vpon:
                  I ſing the praiſes of the KING of Kings,
                  
                  Out of whoſe mouth, a two-edg'd Smiter ſprings,
                  Whoſe Words are Myſtery, whoſe Works are Wonder,
                  
                  Whoſe Eyes are Lightning, and whoſe Voyce is Thunder,
                  
                  Who like a Curtaine ſpreads the Heauens out,
                  Spangl'd with Starres, in Glory round about:
                  'Tis HEE that cleft the furious waues in twaine,
                  Making a High-way paſſage through the Maine:
                  'Tis He that turn'd the waters into Blood,
                  
                  And ſmote the Rocky ſtone, and caus'd a Flood:
                  
                  'Tis HEE, that's iuſtly Armed in his Ire,
                  
                  Behind with Plagues, before with flaming Fire:
                  More bright then mid-day Phoebus, are his Eyes,
                  
                  And whoſoeuer ſees his Viſage, Dyes.
                  
                  I ſing the Praiſes of Great Iudah's Lion,
                  
                  The fragrant Flowre of Ieſſe, the Lambe of Sion,
                  
                  Whoſe Head is whiter then the driuen Snow,
                  
                  Whoſe Viſage doth like flames of Fire Glow:
                  
                     His Loynes begirt with Golden Belt, His Eyne
                  
                  Like Titan, riding in his Southerne Shine,
                  
                  His Feet like burning Braſſe, and as the noyſe
                  Of ſurgie Neptunes roaring, is his Voyce.
                  
                  This is that Paſchall Lambe, whoſe deareſt Blood
                  
                  Is ſoueraigne Drinke, whoſe Fleſh is ſauing Food:
                  His precious Blood, the Worthies of the Earth
                  
                  Did drinke, which (though but borne of Mortall birth)
                  Returnd them Deities: For who drinkes THIS,
                  
                  Shall be receiu'd into Eternall Bliſſe:
                  Himſelfe the GIFT, which HE himſelfe did giue,
                  His Stripes heale vs, and by HIS Death we liue:
                  
                     HEE acting GOD and MAN in double Nature,
                  Did reconcile Mankind, and Mans Creator.
                  
                  I, heer's a TASKE indeed; if Mortals could
                  Not make a Verſe, yet Rocks and Mountaines would:
                  The Hils ſhall daunce, the Sunne ſhall ſtop his Courſe,
                  Hearing the ſubiect of this high Diſcourſe:
                  The Horſe, and Gryphin ſhall together ſleepe,
                  
                  The Woolfe ſhall fawne vpon the ſilly Sheepe,
                  
                  The Crafty Serpent, and the Fearfull Hart
                  
                  Shall ioyne in Conſort, and each beare a part,
                  
                  And leape for Ioy, when my VRANIA ſings,
                  
                     She ſings the praiſes of the KING of Kings.
                  
               
               
                  
                  THE INTRODVCTION.
                  ¶THat Aſſyria 
                     Ancient Kingdome, that old Aſſur ſwai'd,
                  Shew'd two great Cities. Ah! but both decai'd,
                  Both mighty Great, but of vnequall growth;
                  Both Great in People, and in Building, both;
                  But Ah! What hold is there of Earthly Good?
                  Now Graſſe growes there, where theſe braue Cities ſtood.
                  The name of one, Great Babylon was hight,
                  Through which the rich Euphrates takes her flight
                  From High Armaenia to the ruddy Seas,Diodor, Siculus, lib. 3. rerum antiqu. 6.4.
                     
                  
                  And ſtores the Land with rich Commodities.
                  ¶The other Ninus, Niniueh the Great,
                  
                  So huge a Fabrick, and well choſen Seat,
                     Pliny, lib. 6. cap. 26.
                     
                  
                  Dan Phoebus fiery Steeds (with Maines becurld,Strabo, lib. 16. princip.
                  
                  That circundates in twice twelue houres the World)
                  Ne'r ſaw the like: By Great King Aſſur. Geneſ. cap. 10.11. St. Auguſt lib. 15. de ciuit. Dei. Diod. Sic. cap. 1. rerum antiqu. The Cituation of the City. The height of the Walls. The Breadth. 
                     Ninus hand,Ptolimaeus, lib.6. Geograph. cap. 1.
                     
                  
                  'Twas raisd and builded, in th' Aſſyrians Land,
                  Which he ſubdude: 'Twas plac'd twixt riuers twaine,
                  
                     Licus, and ſwift Tygris that runnes amaine:
                  Begirt ſhe was with Walls of wondrous might,
                  Creeping twice fifty foot in meaſur'd height.
                  Vpon their bredth, (if ought we may relie
                  On the report of Sage Antiquity)
                  Three Chariots fairly might themſelues diſplay,
                  And ranke together in a Battell-ray:
                  
                  The Circuit that her mighty Bulke imbraces,The Circuit of the City.
                  
                  Containes the mete of ſixty-thouſand paces:
                  
                  
                     Within her well-fenc't-walles you might diſcouer
                  Fiue hundred ſtately Towers,
                     The number of ber Towers. Diod. Siculus cap. 3. rerum antiquarum. thrice told ouer;
                  Whereof the higheſt draweth vp the eye,
                  As well the low'ſt, an hundred Cubits hie;
                  All rich in thoſe things, which to ſtate belong,
                  For beauty,Her beauty and ſtrength. 
                     Braue, and for munition, Strong:
                  
                  Duly, and daily this Great worke was tended
                  With ten thouſand Workmen;The number of ber workmen. Radulf. Volateranus. Begun, and ended
                  In eight yeeres ſpace; How beautifull! How faire
                  Thy Buildings! And how foule thy Vices are!
                  ¶Thou Land of Aſſur, double then thy pride, And let thy Wells of Ioy be neuer dri'de,
                  Thou haſt a Palace, that's renown'd ſo much,
                  The like was neuer, is, nor will be ſuch.
                  ¶Thou Land of Aſſur, trebble then thy Woe,
                  
                  And let thy Teares (doe as thy Cups) o'rflow;
                  For this thy Palace of ſo great renowne,
                  Shall be deſtroy'd,Nab. 3.15. and ſackt, and batterd downe.
                  But cheere vp, Niniueh, thine inbred might,
                  Hath meanes enough to quell thy Foemans ſpite:
                  Thy Bulwarkes are like Mountaines, and thy Wall
                  Diſdaines to ſtoope to thundring Ordnance call:
                  Thy watchfull Towers mounted round about,
                  Keepe thee in ſafety, and thy Foe-man out:
                  I, but thy Bulwarks aide, cannot withſtand
                  The direfull ſtroke of High Almighties hand;
                  Thy Wafer-walles at dread Iehouah's blaſt
                  Shall quake, and quiuer, and ſhall downe be caſt:
                  Thy watchfull Towers ſhall aſleepe be found,
                  And nod their drowſie heads downe to the ground:
                  Thy Bulwarks are not Vengeance-proofe; thy Wall,
                  When Iuſtice brandiſheth her Sword, muſt fall:
                  
                     Thy lofty Towers ſhall be dumbe, and yeeld
                  To High Reuenge; Reuenge muſt win the field;
                  
                     Vengeance cries loud from heauen, ſhe cannot ſtay
                  Her Fury, but (impatient of delay)
                  Hath brim'd her Vials full of deadly Bane:
                  
                  Thy Palace ſhall be burnt, thy People ſlaine:
                  Thy Heart is hard as Flint, and ſwolne with pride,The ſinnes of Niniueh.
                  
                  Thy murth'rous Hands with guiltleſſe blood are dy'de;
                  Thy ſilly Babes doe ſtarue for want of Food,
                  
                  Whoſe tender Mothers thou haſt drench't in Blood:
                  
                  
                     Women with child, lie in the ſtreets about,
                  Whoſe Braines thy ſauage hands haue daſhed out:
                  Diſtreſſed Widowes weepe, (but weepe in vaine)
                  For their deare Husbands, whom thy hands haue ſlaine:
                  By one mans Force, another man's deuour'd,
                  Thy Wiues are rauiſht, and thy Maids deflowr'd,
                  Where Iuſtice ſhould, there Tor
                           •
                        
                      and Bribes are plac't:
                  Thy' Altars defild, and holy things defac't:
                  Thy Lips haue taſted of proud Babels Cup,
                  What thou haſt left, thy Children haue drunke vp:
                  Thy bloody ſinnes, thine Abels guiltleſſe blood
                  
                  Cries vp to heauen for Vengeance, cries aloud:
                  Thy Sinnes are ripe, and ready for the Sickle.
                  
                  Heere rouze thy ſelfe, my Pen, and breathe a little.
               
               
                  
                  THE ARGVMENT OF THE HISTORY.
                  
                     
                        GOd
                     Chap. 1. 1.2. ſent Ionah the Prophet, to the Nineuites, to denounce his Iudgements againſt them for their ſinnes:1.3. but Ionah tooke ſhipping, intending to fly to Tarſhiſh: 1.4. 
                     God raiſed a Storme, which indangered the Ship: 1.5. Whereupon the Mariners (perplext)1.6. did caſt Lots, to ſee for whoſe ſake the Tempeſt was: The Lot fell vpon Ionah, 
                     1.1
                           •
                        . 
                     They all conſented, and caſt Ionah into the Sea: 1.17. But God prouided a Whale, which receiued Ionah, and ſwallowed him, in whoſe Belly he continued three Dayes, and three Nights: Where (Chap. 2.2. 
                     He praying to God) 2.10. 
                     God at length ſpake to the Whale, and the Whale did caſt him vpon dry Land ſafe and ſound: Chap. 3.1.2. So God commanded Ionah the ſecond time, to goe and denounce his Iudgements againſt the Niniuites. 
                     3.3. So Ionah went to Niniueh 
                     3.4. and prophecied, that (vpon the expiring of forty dayes) Niniueh ſhould be deſtroyed: 3.5. Whereupon the Niniuites beleeued; 3.7. And the King cauſed a Faſt to bee proclaimed, 3.10. ſo that God likewiſe repented of the Euill that He had intended to haue done them;Chap. 4.
                           •
                        . Vpon which, Ionah was diſcontended,
                     4.5. Deſired to die, 
                     4.
                           •
                        . Went out of the City, & lay without the Gate, to ſee what would become of Niniueh after the forty dayes:4.
                           •
                        . There he made him a Booth of reeds and houghes, to guard him from the extremity of the heat of the

                     Sunne, and Wind: But the heat of the Sunne, and the feruency of the Wind ſtrait wither'd it: 4.6. Whereupon God raiſed vp a Gourd, which gaue him much content. 4.7. But the next morning, God ſent a Worme which did eate it to the ground: 4.8. So Ionah grew againe into paſſion, for the loſſe of the Gourd, wiſht to die, 
                     4.9. And iuſtified his Anger: 4.10. Whereupon God deputes with Ionah, framing his argument, à minore ad maius, viz. That if thou (Ionah) hadſt ſo much compaſsion, and grieued ſo much for the loſſe of a trifling Gourd,
                     4.11. Should not I (that am the God of mercy) take Compaſsion vpon ſo Great a City?
               
               
                  
                  TO THE MOST HIGH: HIS HVMBLE SERVANT IMPLORES HIS FAVOVRABLE ASSISTANCE.
                  
                     O 
                     All-ſufficient God, Great Lord of Light,
                  
                  Without whoſe Gracious ayde, & cōſtant Sprite,
                  
                  No labours proſper (howſoe're begun)
                  But flie like Miſts before the morning Sun:
                  
                  O raiſe my thoughts, and cleare my Apprehenſion,
                  
                  Infuſe thy Spirit into my weake Inuention:
                  
                  Reflect thy Beames vpon my feeble Eyes,
                  
                  Shew me the Mirrour of thy Myſteries;
                  My Art-leſſe Hand, my humble Heart Inſpire,
                  Inflame my frozen Tongue with holy Fire:
                  Rauiſh my ſtupid Senſes with thy Glory;
                  Sweeten my Lips with ſacred Oratory:
                  And (thou O FIRST and LAST) aſſiſt my Quill,
                  
                  That firſt and laſt, I may performe thy Will:
                  
                  My ſole intent's to blazon forth thy Praiſe;
                  My Ruder Pen expects no Crowne of Bayes.
                  
                  Suffice it then, Thine Altar I haue kiſt:
                  Crowne me with Glory', and take the Bayes that liſt.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  A FEAST FOR WORMES.
                  
                     
                        THE ARGVMENT.
                        The Word of God to Ionah came,Hiſtoria Ionae incipit. Commanded Ionah to proclaime, The vengeance of his Maieſty, Againſt the ſinnes of Nineuy.
                     
                     
                        Sect. 1
                     
                        THe Dreadfull Word of God, his high Decree,Chap. 1. verſ. 1.
                     
                     That aye remaines, and cannot fruſtrate bee,
                     Came down to Ionah, from the heuens aboue,
                     Came downe to Jonah interp. is a Doue. 
                        Ionah, heauens anoynted Doue,
                     
                        Ionah, the flowre of old Amittais youth,
                     
                        Ionah, the Prophet, Sonne, and Heire to Amittai interp▪ is Truth. Truth,
                     The bleſſed Type of him, that di' de for vs,
                     That Word came to him, and beſpake him thus,
                     "Ariſe, truſſe vp thy Ioynes, make all things meet,
                           Verſ. 2. Gods charge to Ionah.
                     
                     "And put thy Sandalls on thy haſty feet,
                     "Gird vp thy reynes, and take thy ſtaffe in hand,
                     "Make no delay, but goe, where I command;
                     
                        "Me pleaſes not to ſend thee (Ionah) downe,
                     "To ſweet Gath-Hepher, thy deare natiue Towne,
                     "Whoſe tender paps, with plenty ouerflow,
                     "Nor yet vnto thy brethren ſhalt thou goe,
                     "Amongſt the Hebrewes, where thy ſpredden fame
                     "Fore-runnes the welcome of thine honor'd name.
                     "No, I'le not ſend thee thither: Vp, Ariſe,
                     "And goe to Nineueh, where no allyes,
                     "Nor conſanguinity preſerues thy blood,
                     "To Nineueh, where ſtrangers are withſtood:
                     "To Nineueh, a City farre remou'd
                     "From thine acquaintance, where tha'rt not belou'd:
                     "I ſend thee to Mount Sinay; not Mount Sion,
                     "Not to a gentle Lambe, but to a Lion:
                     "Ne yet to Lydia,
                        Ier. 20.3. but to bloody * Paſſur,
                     
                     "Not to the land of Canan, but of Aſſur,
                     
                     "Whoſe language will be riddles to thine eares,
                     "And thine againe will be as ſtrange to theirs;
                     "I ſay, to Nineueh, the worlds great Hall,
                     "The Monarchs ſeat, high Court Imperiall:
                     "But terrible Mount Sinay will affright thee,
                     "And Paſhurs heauy hand is bent to ſmite thee:
                     "The Lions rore, the people's ſtrong and ſtout,
                     "The Bulwarkes ſtand afront to keepe thee out.
                     "Great Aſhur minaces with whip in hand,
                     "To entertaine thee (welcome) to his land.
                     "What then? Ariſe, be gone; ſtay not to thinke:
                     "Bad is the cloth, that will in wetting ſhrinke.
                     "What then, if cruell Paſhur heape on ſtrokes?
                     "Or Sinay blaſt thee with her ſulph'rous ſmokes?
                     "Or Aſhur whip thee? Or the Lions rent thee?
                     "P'ſh; on with courage; İ, the Lord haue ſent thee:
                     
                        "Away, away, lay by thy fooliſh pity,
                     "And goe to Niniueth that mighty City:
                     "Cry lowd againſt it, let thy dreadfull voice
                     "Make all the City eccho with the noyſe:
                     "Not like a Doue, but like a Dragon goe,
                     "Pronounce my iudgement, and denounce my Woe:
                     
                     "Make not thine head a fountaine full of teares,
                     "To weepe in ſecret for her ſinnes: Thine eares
                     "Shall heare ſuch things, wil make thine eyes run ouer,
                     "Thine eyes ſhall ſmart with what they ſhall diſcouer:
                     "Spend not in priuate, thoſe thy zealous drops,
                     "But hew, and hacke; ſpare neither trunke, nor lops:
                     "Make heauen, & earth rebound, whē thou diſcharges,
                     "Plead not like Paul, but roare like Boanarges:
                     
                     "Let not the beauty of the buildings bleare thee,
                     "Nor let the terrours of the Rampiers feare thee:
                     "Let no man bribe thy fiſt, (I well aduiſe thee)
                     "Nor foule meanes force thee, nor let faire entice thee:
                     "Ramme vp thine eares: Thy heart of ſtone ſhall bee;
                     "Be deafe to them, as they are deafe to thee:
                     "Goe cry againſt it. If they aske thee, Why?
                     "Say, God of heauen commanded thee to cry:
                     "In ſtead of prayers, and duties they ſhould doe me,
                     "Behold, their wickedneſſe is mounted to me:
                     "The fatneſſe of their fornication fryes
                     "On coales of raging luſt, and vpward flies,
                     "And makes me ſicke: I heare the mournfull grones
                     "And heauy ſighs of ſuch, whoſe aking bones
                     "Th' oppreſſor grindes: Alas, their grones implore me,
                     "Their pray'rs, and their oppreſſions come before me:
                     "Behold, my children they haue ſlaine, and kill'd,
                     "And bath'd their hands within the blood they ſpill'd:
                     
                        "The ſteame of guiltleſſe blood makes ſuit vnto me,
                     "The voice of many bloods is mounted to me;
                     "The vile prophaner of my ſacred Names,
                     "He teares my titles, and mine honour maimes,
                     "Makes Reth'rick of an oath, ſweares, and forſweares,
                     "Recks not my Mercy, nor my Iudgement feares:
                     "They eat, they drink, they ſleepe, they tyre the Day
                     "In wanton dalliance, and delightfull play.
                     "Heauens winged Herald Ionas, vp, and goe
                     "To mighty Niniueh, Denounce my woe;
                     "Aduance thy voice, and when thou haſt aduanc't it,
                     "Spare Shrub, nor Cedar, but cry out againſt it:
                     "I come my Selfe with plagues,Explicit Hiſt. Goe thou afore me,
                     "For all their wickedneſſe is come before me.
                     
                        Apolog. Authoris.
                        IT was my morning Muſe; And for her ſake
                        I thus apply my ſelfe to vndertake
                        This ſerious taske, (A taske for Doctors Muſe
                        To ſpend vpon) Then let me pleade excuſe:
                        For as good Phyſicke will not bate his force,
                        And (being well appli'd) prooue ne're the worſe,
                        Though giuē by hands, that could nor reade, nor write,
                        That skill not how, nor need not know t'apply't:
                        So this (perchance) may make another keene,
                        Though I, and it be blunt (as whetſtones beene.)
                     
                     
                        Applicatio.
                        TO thee (Malfido) now I turne my Quill,
                        That God is ſtill that God, and will be ſtill.
                        
                           The painfull Paſtors take vp Iona's roome:
                        And thou the Niniuite, to whom they come.
                     
                     
                        Meditatio prima.
                        HOw great's the loue of God vnto his creature?
                        Or is his Wiſedome, or his Mercy greater?
                        I know not whether: O th' exceeding loue
                        Of higheſt God! that from his Throne aboue,
                        Will ſend the brightneſſe of his Grace to thoſe
                        That grope in Darkneſſe, and his Grace oppoſe:
                        He helpes, prouides, inſpires, and freely giues,
                        As pleas'd to ſee vs rauell out our liues.
                        He giues vs from the heape, He meaſures not,
                        Nor deales (like Manna) each his ſtinted lot,
                        But daily ſends the Doctors of his Spouſe,
                        (With ſuch like oyle as from the Widowes cruſe
                        Iſſued forth) in fulneſſe, without waſting,
                        Where plenty may be had, yet plenty laſting.
                        I, there is care in heauen, and heauenly ſprights,
                        That guides the world, & guards poore mortall wights.
                        There is; elſe were the miſerable ſtate
                        Of Man, more wretched and vnfortunate
                        Than ſauage beaſts: But O th' abounding loue
                        Of higheſt God! whoſe Angels from aboue
                        Diſmount the Towre of Bliſſe, fly to and fro,
                        Aſſiſting wretched man, their deadly foe.
                        What thing is Man, that Gods regard is ſuch?
                        Or why ſhould he loue retchleſſe Man ſo much?
                        Why? what are men? But quicken'd lumps of earth?
                        A feaſt for wormes, A bubble full of mirth,
                        A looking-glaſſe for griefe, A flaſh, A minnit,
                        
                           A painted Toombe, with putrifaction in it:
                        A mappe of Death; A burthen of a ſong:
                        A winters Duſt; A worme of fiue foot long:
                        Begot in ſinne; In darkneſſe nouriſht: Borne
                        In ſorrow, Naked, Shiftleſſe, and forlorne:
                        His firſt voice (heard) is crying for reliefe.
                        Alas! He comes into a world of griefe:
                        His Age is ſinfull, and his Youth is vaine,
                        His life's a puniſhment, his Death's a paine:
                        His life's an howre of Ioy, a world of Sorrow,
                        His death's a winters night, that findes no morrow:
                        Mans life's an Houreglaſſe, which being run,
                        Concludes that houre of Ioy, and ſo is dun.
                        ¶Ionah muſt goe: Nor is this charge alone
                        To Ionah giuen, but giuen to euery one.
                        You Magiſtrates, ariſe, and take delight.
                        In dealing Iuſtice, and maintaining right:
                        There lies your Nineueh. Merchants, ariſe,
                        Away, and to your Ships, and Merchandiſe.
                        Artificers, ariſe, and ply your ſhops,
                        And worke your trade, and eate your meat with drops.
                        
                           Paul, to thy Tents, and Peter, to thy Net,
                        And all muſt goe that way which God hath ſet.
                        ¶Grant, liefeſt Lord, for our Deare Borrow ſake,
                        Thy loue, in ſending to vs, neuer ſlake:
                        Encreaſe ſucceſſion in thy Prophets liew,
                        For loe, thy Harueſt's great, and Workmen few.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        THE ARGVMENT.
                        But Ionah toward Tharſis went,
                        A Tempest doth his courſe preuent:
                        The Mariners are ſore opprest,
                        While Ionah ſleepes, and takes his reſt.
                     
                     Sect. 2
                     
                        BVt Ionah thus bethought: The City's great,Hiſt. Chap. 1. verſ. 3.
                        
                     
                     And mighty Aſhur ſtands with deadly threat,
                     Their hearts are hardned, yt they cannot heare:
                     Will greene wood burne, when ſo vnapt's the ſeire?
                     Strange is the charge: Shall I goe to a place
                     Vnknowne and forraine? Aye me! hard's the caſe,
                     That righteous Iſr'el muſt be thus neglected,
                     When Miſcreants and Gentiles are reſpected:Prima occaſio fugae.
                     
                     How might I hope my words ſhall there ſucceed,
                           2. Occaſio.
                     
                     Which thriue not with the flocke I daily feed?
                     Moreo're I weet, the Lord is wondrous kind,
                           3. Occaſio.
                     
                     And ſlow to wrath, and apt to change his mind
                     Vpon the leaſt repentance: Then ſhall I
                     Be deem'd as falſe, and ſhame my Propheſie.
                     O heauie burthen of a doubtfull mind!
                     Where ſhall I goe, or which way ſhall I wind?
                     My heart like Ianus, looketh to and fro:
                     My Credit bids me, Stay; my God bids, Goe:
                     If Goe; my labour's loſt, my ſhame's at hand:
                     If Stay; Lord! I tranſgreſſe my Lords command:
                     
                        If goe; from bad eſtate, to worſe, I fall:
                     If ſtay; I ſlide from bad, to worſt of all.
                     My God bids goe, my credit bids me ſtay;
                     My guilty feare bids fly another way.
                     So Ionah ſtraight aroſe, himſelfe bedight
                     With fit acoutrements, for haſty flight:
                     In ſtead of ſtaffe, he tooke a Shipmans weed;
                     In ſtead of going, loe, he flies with ſpeed.
                     
                        Simile.Like as a Hawke (that ouermatcht with might,
                     Doing ſad penance for th' vnequall fight,
                     (Anſw'ring the Faulkners ſecond ſhout) does flee
                     From fiſt; turnes tayle to Fowle, and takes a tree:
                     So Ionah baulks the place where he was ſent
                     (To Nineueh) and downe to Ciuitas Paleſt Iaffa went;
                     He ſought, enquired, and at laſt he found
                     A welcome Ship, that was to Tharſis bound,
                     Where he may fly the preſence of the Lord:
                     He makes no ſtay, but ſtraightway goes aboord,
                     His haſty purſe for bargaine finds no leiſure,
                     (Where ſin delights, ther's no account of treaſure:)
                     Nor did he know, nor aske, how much his Fare:
                     He gaue: They tooke; all parties pleaſed are:
                     (How thriftleſſe of our coſt, and paines, are we,
                     O bleſſed God of heauen, to fly from thee!)
                     Now haue the Pilots drunke their parting cup,
                     And ſome (with Sailors tune) are hoyſting vp,
                     Others the while, the faithfull Anchor wey,
                     The Ship, (as loth to leaue her quiet key,)
                     Creepes eaſly off, and (with directed courſe)
                     She glides along the ſhore with gentle force;
                     And now the whiſtling wind begins to dally
                     With Aura's fanne: Now ſtronger guſts doe fally
                     
                        Forth, rudely playing on the hollow ſaile,
                     And from the Mountaines blowes a luſty Gale:
                     She mounts the billowes with a lofty grace,
                     And now ſhe cuts the Deepe, and ſcuds apace
                     From land; from whence (vnwilling) ſhe was driuen,The Tempeſt
                     
                     Nothing's perceiued now but Sea, and heauen;
                     Betwixt them both, the bluſtring winds doe play:
                     The waues know not which Maſter to obey:
                     For now the Eaſt wind mutin's with the Weſt,
                     And now the Weſt wind counterbuffes the Eaſt,
                     And now the hollow Boreas roares amaine,
                     And vexed Notus thwarts the North againe:
                     Thus croſſely croſt, they threaten in reuenge,
                     To force the world from off his ſtedfaſt henge.
                     The Guide's perplext, and knowes not what to doe,
                     His Art's amaz'd, in ſuch a maze of woe:
                     The Welkin ſtormes, and rages more and more,
                     The Raine powr▪s downe, the Heauens begin to roare,
                     As they would ſplit the maſſie earth in ſunder,
                     From them that liue aboue, to thoſe liue vnder:
                     The reſtleſſe waues, and rolling billowes beate,
                     As they would ſhoulder Neptune from his feate;
                     The billowes ſeeme to mount the clouds, (or higher)
                     The dusky clouds did flaſh with often fier:
                     Now doth the Ship as high as heauen ſwell,
                     And now (o'rwhelm'd with waues) as low as hell;
                     The Barke no leſſe doth yeeld to Neptunes ſway,
                     Than lofty Tow'rs, when thundring Ordnance play.
                     The hardy Mariners begin to quaile:Verſ. 5.
                     
                     They vere their maine ſheet, and they ſtrike their ſaile:
                     Their haire, bolts vp, pale Death vſurps their cheekes,
                     Their mouthes are ful of cryes, their tongues of ſhreeks:
                     
                        They ſound with endleſſe line, and ſound againe:
                     They pumpe, and ſtill they pumpe, but all in vaine:
                     They row, and breake their Oares: At laſt th' aſſay
                     Each Mariner vnto his god to pray.
                     They prai'd, but winds did ſnatch their words away,
                     And lets their pray'rs not goe to whom they pray:
                     But ſtill they pray, but ſtill the wind, and wether
                     Do turne both pray'rs, & ſayles they know not whither:
                     Their gods were deafe, their danger waxed greater,
                     They caſt their wares out, and yet ne're the better:
                     But all this while was Ionah drown'd in ſleep,
                     And in the lower Decke was buried deepe.Explicit Hiſt.
                     
                     
                        Meditatio ſecunda.
                        
                           Obiect.BVt ſtay: This was a ſtrange and vncouth word:
                        Did Ionah fly the preſence of the Lord?
                        What miſter word is that? He that repleats
                        The mighty Vniuerſe, whoſe lofty ſeat's
                        Th' imperiall Heauen, whoſe footſtoole is the face
                        Of maſſy Earth? Can he from any place
                        Be ſpar'd? or yet by any meanes excluded,
                        That is in all things? (and yet not included,)
                        Could Ionah find a reſting any where
                        So void, or ſecret, that God was not there?
                        I ſtand amaz'd and frighted at this word:
                        Did Ionah fly the preſence of the Lord?
                        Mount vp to heauen aboue,Deus regnat in Coelis per gloriā. and there he is,
                        Swaying the Scepter of his Kingly bliſſe:In terris per gratiam.
                        
                        Beſtride the earth beneath (with weary pace)
                        And there he beares the Oliue branch of Grace:Apud inferos per inſtitiam.
                        
                        Diue downe into th' extreme Abyſſe of Hell,
                        
                           And there in Iuſtice doth th' Almighty dwell.
                        What vncouth Cloyſter could there then affoord
                        A ſcreene 'twixt faithleſſe Ionah, and his Lord?
                        ¶Ionah was charg'd, to take a charge in hand;Reſolue.
                        
                        But Ionah turn'd his backe on Gods command;
                        Shooke off his yoke, and wilfully neglected,
                        And what was ſtrictly charg'd, he quite reiected:
                        And ſo he fled the power of his Word;
                        And ſo he fled the preſence of his Lord.
                        ¶Good God! how poore a thing is wretched man?
                        So fraile, that let him ſtriue the beſt he can,
                        With euery little blaſt hee's ouerdon.
                        If mighty Cedars of great Libanon,
                        
                        Cannot the danger of the Axe withſtand,
                        Lord! how ſhall we, that are but Buſhes, ſtand?
                        How fond, corrupt, and ſenceleſſe is mankind?
                        How faining deafe is he? How wilfull blind?
                        He ſtops his eares, and ſinnes: he ſhuts his eyes,
                        And (blindfold) in the lap of danger flies:
                        He ſinnes, deſpaires; and then, to ſtint his griefe,
                        He chuſes death, to baulke the God of life.
                        ¶Poore wretched ſinner, trauell where thou wilt,
                        Thy trauell ſhall be burthen'd with thy guilt:
                        Climbe tops of hils, that proſpects may delight thee,
                        There wil thy ſins (like Wolues & Beares) affright thee:
                        Fly to the Valleys, that thoſe frights may ſhun thee,
                        And there like Mountaines they will fall vpon thee:
                        Or to the raging ſeas (with Ionah) goe;
                        There will thy ſinnes like ſtormy Neptune flow.
                        Poore ſhiftleſſe Man! what ſhall become of thee?
                        Wher'ere thou fly'ſt, thy gryping ſinne will fly.
                        ¶But all this while the Ship, where Ionah ſleepes,
                        
                           Is vexed ſore, and batter'd on the Deeps,
                        And well-nigh ſplit vpon the threatning Rocke,
                        With many a boyſtrous bruſh, and churly knocke:
                        God ſend the comfortleſſe, an happy howre,
                        And ſhield all good men from ſuch ſtormy ſtowre.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        THE ARGVMENT.
                        The Pilot thumps on Ionah's breſt,
                        And rowzeth Ionah from his Rest:
                        They al caſt Lots, (being ſore affrighted:)
                        The ſacred Lot on Ionah lighted.
                     
                     
                        Sect. 3.
                     
                        
                           Hist. Chap. 1. verſ. 6.THe hapleſſe Pylot finding no ſucceſſe,
                     (But that the ſtorme grew rather more than leſſe,
                     For all their toyleſome paynes,The Pylot awakes Ionah. and needleſſe pray'rs,
                     Diſpairing both of life, and goods) repaires
                     To Ionahs drowzie Cabbin; mainly calls;
                     Calls Ionah, Ionah; and yet lowder yawles;
                     Yet Ionah ſleepes; and giues a ſhrug, or two,
                     And ſnores, (as greedy ſleepers vſe to doe.)
                     The wofull Pylot iogs him, (but in vaine.)
                     (Perchance he dreames an idle word, or twaine;)
                     At length he tugs and puls his heauie courſe,
                     And thunders on his breſt, with all his force.
                     But (after many yawns) he did awake him,
                     And (being both affrighted) thus beſpake him:
                     "Ariſe,The Pylots ſpeech to Jonab. O Sleeper, O, ariſe, and ſee,
                     
                        "Ther's not a twiny thrid, 'twixt death, and thee:
                     "This darkſome place (thou meaſur'ſt) is thy graue,
                     "And ſuddaine Death rides proud on yonder waue;
                     "Ariſe, O Sleeper, O, ariſe and pray,
                     "Perchance thy God will heare, and not ſay, Nay:
                     "Perchance thy God's more powerfull then our's:
                     "Ariſe, Ariſe, and pray with all thy pow'rs,
                     "If ſo be, God will haue compaſſion on vs,
                     "And turne away this miſchiefe he hath done vs,
                     The ſturdy Saylers (weary of their paine,Verſe 7.)
                     Finding their bootleſſe labour loſt, and vaine,
                     Forbare their toyleſome taske, and wrought no more,
                     But wiſht for Death, for which they look'd before;
                     They call a parley, and conſult together,
                     They count their ſinnes, (accuſing one another)
                     That for his ſinne, or his, this euill was wrought:
                     In fine, they all prooue guilty of the fault;
                     But yet the Queſtion was not ended ſo:
                     One ſayes, 'Twas thine offence, but he ſayes, No,
                     But t'was for thy ſake, that accuſes mee;
                     Ruſht forth a third (the worſer of the three)
                     And ſwore it was anothers, which (he hearing)
                     Deny'd it flat, and ſay'd, 'Twas thine for ſwearing:
                     In came a fift, accuſing all; (replying
                     But little elſe) they all chid him for lying;
                     One ſayd it was, another ſay'd 'twas not:
                     So all agreed, to ſtint the ſtrife by Lot:
                     Then all was whiſt, and all to prayer went;
                     (For ſuch a buis'nes, a fit complement)
                     The lot was caſt; 't pleas'd God, by Lots to tell.
                     The lot was caſt; The lot on Ionah fell.Exp. Hiſt.
                     
                     
                        
                        Meditatio tertia.
                        O Sacred Subiect of a Meditation!
                        Thy Works (O Lord) are full of Admiration,
                        Thy iudgements all are iuſt, ſeuere, and ſure,
                        They quite cut off, or elſe by launcing cure
                        The feſtring ſore of a Rebellious heart,
                        Leſt foule infection taynt th' immortall part.
                        How deepe a Lethargie doth this diſeaſe
                        Bring to the ſlumbring Soule through careleſſe eaſe!
                        Which once being wak't, (as from a Golden Dreame)
                        Lookes vp, and ſees her griefes the more extreme.
                        How ſeeming ſweet's the quiet ſleepe of ſin?
                        Which when a wretched man's once nuzz'ld in,
                        How ſoundly ſleepes he, without feare, or wit?
                        No ſooner, are his armes together knit
                        In drowzie knot, athwart vpon his breſt,
                        But there he ſnorts, and ſnores in endleſſe reſt;
                        His eyes are cloſed faſt, and deafe his eares,
                        And (like Endymion) ſleepes himſelfe in yeares;
                        His ſence-bound heart, ne anſweres to the voyce
                        Of gentle warning, no, nor does the noyſe
                        Of ſtrong reproofe awake his ſleeping eare,
                        Nor lowder threatnings thunder makes him heare;
                        So deafe's the ſinners eare, ſo numb'd his ſence,
                        That ſinne's no corroſiue, nor no offence;
                        For cuſtome breeds delight,Conſuetudo peccandi tollit ſeaſum peccati. deludes the heart,
                        Beguiles the ſence, and takes away the ſmart.
                        ¶But ſtay; Did one of Gods elected number,
                        (Whoſe eyes ſhould neuer ſleepe, nor eye-lids ſlumber)
                        
                           So much forget himſelfe? Did Ionah ſleepe,
                        That ſhould be watchfull, and the Tower keepe?
                        Did Ionah (the ſelected mouth of God)
                        In ſtead of roring Iudgements, does he nod?
                        Did Ionah ſleepe ſo ſound? Could he ſleepe then,
                        When (with the ſuddaine ſight of Death) the men
                        (So many men) with yelling ſhreekes, and cries,
                        Made very heau'n report? and ſhooke the skies
                        So vncouth, that the ſhip it mought haue riu'n?
                        Hard muſt he winke, that ſhuts his eyes from heau'n.
                        O righteous Iſr'el, where, O, where art thou?
                        Where is thy Lampe? thy zealous Shepheard now?
                        Alas! the rau'nous Wolues will worr' thy Sheepe;
                        Thy Shepheard's careleſſe, and is fall'n aſleepe;
                        Grim dogs will rowze thy Flock, and rule the roſt;
                        Thy Sheepe are ſcatter'd, and thy Shepheard's loſt;
                        Ah weladay! whoſe words beſeeme the Altar,
                        Their works diſcent, and firſt begin to faulter;
                        And they, that ſhould be Watch-lights in the Temple,
                        Are ſnuffes, and want the oyle of good example;
                        The choſen Watch-men, that the Tow'r ſhould keepe,
                        Are waxen heauy-ey'd, and fall'n aſleepe.
                        ¶Lord, if thy Watch-mē wink too much, awake them;
                        Although they ſlumber, doe not quite forſake them;
                        The fleſh is weake, ſay not (if dulneſſe ſeaze
                        Their heauy eyes) Sleepe henceforth: Take your eaſe:Math. 13.41.
                        
                        And we poore weakelings, when we ſleepe in ſin,
                        Knock at our drowzie hearts; and neuer lin,
                        Till thou awake our ſinne-congealed eyes;
                        Leſt (drown'd in ſleepe) we ſinke, and neuer riſe.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        THE ARGVMENT.
                        They queſtion Ionah, whence he came,
                        His Country, and his peoples Name,
                        He makes reply: They mone their woe,
                        And aske his counſell what to doe.
                     
                     
                        Sect. 4.
                     
                        Hiſtor. Cap. 1. v. 8. Simile.
                        AS when a Thiefe's appr'ended on ſuſpect,
                     And charg'd for ſome ſuppoſed malifact,
                     A rude concurſe of people, ſtrait accrewes,
                     Whoſe itching eares euen ſmart, to know the newes,
                     The guilty pris'ner (to himſelfe betray'd)
                     He ſtands deiected, trembling and afrayd:
                     So Ionah ſtood the Saylers all among,
                     Incloſed round amid the ruder throng.
                     As in a Summers Euening you ſhall heare
                     In Hiue of Bees (if you lay cloſe your eare)
                     Confuſed buzzing, and ſeditious noyſe,
                     Such was the murmur of the Saylers voyce.
                     "What was thy ſinfull fact,The Mariners ſpeech to Ionas.
                         that cauſes this
                     "(Sayes one) wherein haſt thou ſo done amiſſe?
                     "Tell vs, What is thine Art (another ſayes)
                     "That thou profeſſeſt? Speake man, Whence awayes,
                     "From what Confines cam'ſt thou? (A third replies)
                     "What is thy Country? And of what allies?
                     "What, art thou borne a Iew? or Gentile? Whether?
                     "(Ere he could lend an anſwere vnto either)
                     
                        A fourth demands: Where hath thy breeding been▪
                     
                     All what they askt, they all askt o're againe.
                     In fine, their eares (impatient of delay)
                     Becalm'd their tongues, to heare what he could ſay.
                     So Ionah (humbly rearing vp his eyes)
                     Breaking his long kept ſilence, thus replies:Ionahs ſpeech to the Mariners.
                     
                     "I am an Hebrew, ſonne of Hebraei quaſi Abrahaei, S. Aug lib. 1. ſuper Gen. 
                        Abraham,
                     
                     "From whom my Land did firſt deriue her name,
                     "Within the Land of Iury was I borne,
                     "My name is Ionah, retchleſſe, and forlorne:
                     "I am a Prophet: ah! but woe is me,
                     "For from before the face of God I flee,
                     "From whence (through diſobedience) I am driuen;
                     "I feare Iehouah, mighty God of Heauen:
                     "I feare the Lord of Heauen, whoſe glorious hand
                     "Did make this ſtormy Sea, and maſſy land.
                     So ſaid, their eares with double rauiſhment,Verſ▪ 10.
                     
                     Still hung vpon his melting lips, attent,
                     Whoſe dreadful words, their hearts ſo neere impierc't,
                     That from themſelues, themſelues were quite deuers't.
                     Like as in a hot Summers euentide,Simile.
                     
                     (When luſtfull Phoebus re▪ſalutes his Bride,
                     And Philomela 'gins her caroling:)
                     A heard of Deere are browzing in a ſpring,
                     With hungry appetite, miſweening nought,
                     Nor in ſo deepe a ſilence fearing ought:
                     A ſudden cracke, or ſome vnthought▪ of ſound,
                     Or bounce of Fowlers Peece, or yelpe of Hound,
                     Diſturbes their quiet peace with ſtrange amaze,
                     Where (ſenceleſſe halfe) through feare, they ſtand at gaze:
                     So ſtand the Sea-men, (as with Ghoſts affrighted,)
                     Entraunc'd with what, this man of God recited.
                     
                        Their (whilome ſturdy) limmes wox faint, and lither,
                     Their hearts did earne, their knees did ſmite together:
                     Congealed blood vſurpt their trembling hearts,
                     Which coldly crawld about in all their parts:
                     Who (trembling out ſome broken language,) thus:
                     
                        The Mariners ſpeech."Why haſt thou brought this miſchiefe vpon vs?
                     "What humour led thee to a place vnknowne,
                     "To ſeeke a forrein land,Interrogatio. and leaue thine owne?
                     "What faith hadſt thou,Admiratio. by leauing thine abode,
                     "To thinke to fly the preſence of thy God?
                     "Why haſt thou not obey'd (but thus tranſgreſt)
                     "The voice of God,Neprehenſio. whom thou acknowledgeſt?
                     "Art thou a Prophet, and doſt thou amiſſe?
                     "What is the cauſe? And why haſt thou done this?
                     "What ſhall we doe? The tempeſt lends no eare
                     "To fruitleſſe chat, nor doe the billowes heare,
                     "Or marke our language: waues are not attent,
                     "Our goods they float, and all our paines are ſpent:
                     "Our Bark's not weather-proofe, for aye to laſt;
                     "(No Fort ſo ſtrong, but daily ſiege will waſt.)
                     "The Lot accuſes thee, thy words condemne thee,
                     "The waues (thy deaths-mē) ſtriue to ouerwhelme thee:
                     "What ſhal we do? Thou Prophet, ſpeak, we pray thee:
                     "Thou fear'ſt the Lord; Alas! we may not ſlay thee:
                     "Or ſhall we ſaue thee? No, for thou doſt fly
                     "The face of God, and ſo deſeru'ſt to dye:
                     "Thou Prophet,Expl. Hiſt. ſpeake, what ſhal we doe to thee,
                     "That angry ſeas may calme, and quiet be?
                     
                        
                        Meditatio quarta.
                        GIue leaue a little to adiourne your ſtory,
                        Run backe a ſtep, or twaine, and looke afore ye:
                        Can he be ſaid to feare the Lord, that flies him?Obiect.
                        
                        Can Word confeſſe him, when as Deed denies him?
                        My ſacred Muſe hath rounded in mine eare,Reſolutio.
                        
                        And read the myſt'ry of a twofold feare:
                        The firſt, a ſeruile feare, for Iudgements ſake;
                        And thus the damned Diuels feare and quake.
                        Thus Adam fear'd, and fled behind a tree:
                        And thus did bloody Kain feare and flee.
                        Vnlike to this, there is a ſecond kind
                        Of feare, extracted from a zealous mind,
                        Full fraught with loue, and with a conſcience cleare
                        From baſe reſpects: It is a filiall feare;
                        A feare whoſe ground would iuſt remaine, and leuell,
                        Were neither Heauen, nor Hell, nor God, nor Diuell.
                        Such was the feare that Princely Dauid had;
                        And thus our wretched Ionah fear'd, and fled:
                        He fled aſham'd, becauſe his ſinnes were ſuch;
                        He fled aſham'd, becauſe his feare was much.
                        He fear'd Iehouah, other fear'd he none,
                        Him he acknowledg'd; Him he fear'd alone:
                        Vnlike to thoſe men, that (befoold with errour)
                        Frame many gods, and multiply their terrour.
                        Th' Egyptians, God Apis did implore,
                        God Aſſas the Chaldaeans did adore:
                        
                           Babel to the Deuouring Dragon ſeekes,
                        Th' Arabians Astaroth; Iuno the Greekes;
                        
                        The name of Belus, the Aſſyrians hallow,
                        The Troians, Veſta; Corinth, wiſe Apollo;
                        
                           Th' Arginians ſacrifice vnto the Sunne;
                        To Light-foot Mercury bowes Macedon;
                        To god Volunus, louers bend their knee:
                        To Pauor, thoſe that faint, and fearfull bee:
                        Who pray for health, and ſtrength, to Murcia thoſe;
                        And to Victoria, they that feare to loſe:
                        To Muta, they that feare a womans tongue:
                        To great Lucina, women great with young:
                        To Eſculapius, they that liue oppreſt:
                        And they to Quies, that deſire reſt.
                        O blinded Ignorance of antique times,
                        How blent with errour, and how ſtuft with crimes
                        Your Temples were! And how adulterate!
                        How clog'd with needleſſe gods! How obſtinate!
                        How void of order, and how inconfuſe!
                        How full of dangerous and foule abuſe!
                        How ſandy, were thy grounds, and how vnſtable!
                        How many Deities! yet how vnable!
                        Implore theſe gods, that liſt to howle and barke,
                        They bow to Dagon, Dagon to the Arke:
                        But he to whom the ſeale of mercy's giuen,
                        Adores Iehouah, mighty God of Heauen:
                        Vpon the mention of whoſe ſacred Name,
                        Meeke Lambs grow fierce, and the fierce Lyons tame:
                        Bright Sol ſhall ſtop, and heauen ſhall turne his courſe:
                        Mountaines ſhall dance, and Neptune ſlake his force:
                        The Seas ſhall part, the fire want his flame,
                        Vpon the mention of Iehouah's Name:
                        A Name, that makes the roofe of Heauen to ſhake,
                        The frame of Earth to quiuer, Hell to quake:
                        A Name, to which all Angels blow their trumps;
                        A Name, puts frolicke man into his dumps:
                        
                           (Though ne're ſo blythe) A Name of high renowne,
                        It mounts the meeke, and beates the lofty downe;
                        A Name, deuides the marrow in the bone;
                        A Name, which out of hard, and flinty ſtone,
                        Extracteth hearts of fleſh, and makes relent
                        Thoſe hearts that neuer knew what mercy ment.
                        O Lord! how great's thy Name in all the Land?
                        How mighty are the wonders of thy hand?
                        How is thy Glory plac't aboue the heau'n?
                        To tender mouthes of Sucklings thou haſt giu'n
                        Coerciue pow'r, and boldnes to reprooue,
                        When elder men doe what them no'te behooue.
                        O Lord! How great's the power of thy hand?
                        O God! How great's thy Name in all the Land?
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        THE ARGVMENT.
                        The Prophet doth his fault diſcouer,
                        Perſwades the men to caſt him ouer:
                        They rowe, and toyle, but doe no good,
                        They pray to be excus'd from blood.
                     
                     Sect. 5.
                     SO Ionah fram'd the ſpeech to their demand;
                           Chap. 1. ve. 12. Iona's laſt will.
                     
                     "Not that I ſeeke to trauerſe the command,
                     "Of my deare Lord, and out of minde peruerſe,
                     "T' auoyd the Niniuites, doe I amerce
                     "My ſelfe; Nor that I euer heard you threat,
                     "(Vnleſſe I went to Niniueh, (the great)
                     
                        "And doe the meſſage ſent her from the Lord)
                     "That you would kill, or caſt me ouer boord,
                     "Doe I doe this; 'Tis my deſerued fine:
                     "You all are guiltleſſe, and the fault is mine:
                     "'Tis I, 'tis I alone, 'tis I am he:
                     "The tempeſt comes from heau'n, the cauſe from me;
                     "You ſhall not loſe a haire for this my ſin,
                     "Nor periſh for the fault that mine hath bin;
                     "Lo, I the man am here: Lo, I am He
                     "The roote of all; End your reuenge on me;
                     "I fled from God of Heau'n; O, let me then
                     "(Becauſe I fled from God) ſo flie from men;
                     "O, take me, (for I am reſolu'd to die)
                     "As you did caſt your Wares, ſo caſt in Me;
                     "I am the man, for whom theſe billowes dance,
                     "My death ſhall purchaſe your deliuerance;
                     "Feare not to ceaſe your feares; but throw me in;
                     "Alas! my ſoule is burthen'd with my ſin,
                     "And God is iuſt, and bent to his Decree,
                     "Which certaine is, and cannot altred bee;
                     "I am proclaim'd a Traytor to the King
                     "Of heau'n, and earth: The windes with ſpeedy wing
                     "Acquaint the Seas: The Seas mount vp on hie,
                     "And cannot reſt, vntill the Traytor die;
                     "Oh, caſt me in, and let my life be ended;
                     "Let Death make Iuſtice mends, which Life offended;
                     "Oh, let the ſwelling waters me embalme:
                     "So ſhall the Waues be ſtill, and Sea be calme.
                     So ſaid,
                           Verſ. 13.
                         the Mariners grew inly ſad,
                     (Though rude, and barbarous) and much ydrad,
                     As moou'd to ſee a Stranger (for their good)
                     Lay downe his life, which offer they withſtood,
                     
                        Till they had ſought with all their pow'r and skill,
                     To ſaue the man, and not the Ship to ſpill:
                     They digg'd, and deepely delu'd the ſurrow'd Seas,
                     With brawny armes they plough'd the watry Leas,
                     Hoping (in vaine) by toyle to win the ſhore,
                     And wrought more hard, thē erſt they wrought before.
                     Alas! their ſtrength now failes, and weares away,
                     (For bodies wanting reſt, doe ſoone decay)
                     The Seas are angry, and the waues ariſe,
                     Appeas'd with nothing, but a Sacrifice:
                     Gods vengeance ſtormeth like the raging Seas,
                     Which nought but Ionah (dying) can appeaſe.
                     "Bootleſſe it is, to thinke by any deed
                     "To alter that, which God of heau'n decreed:
                     "Ionah muſt die, 'tis folly to ſay, No;
                     "Ionah muſt die, or elſe we all die too;
                     "Ionah muſt die, that from his Lord did flie;
                     "The lot determines, Ionah then muſt die;
                     "His guilty word confirmes the ſacred lot,
                     "Ionah muſt die then, if we periſh not.
                     "If Iuſtice then it be, that he muſt die,
                     
                        Verſ. 14. The Mariners prayer.
                     "And we ſad Actors of his Tragedie;
                     "(We begge not (Lord) a warrant to offend)
                     "O, pardon bloud-ſhed, that we muſt intend.
                     "Though not our hands, yet ſhall our hearts be cleare:
                     "Then let not ſtaineleſſe Conſciences beare
                     "The pond'rous burthen of a Murthers guilt,
                     "Or voyce of harmeleſſe bloud, that muſt be ſpilt;
                     "For lo, (deare Lord) it is thine owne Decree,
                     "And we ſad miniſters of Iuſtice bee.Expl. Hiſt.
                     
                     
                        
                        Meditatio quinta.
                        
                           Obiect.BVt ſtay awhile, this thing would firſt be knowne:
                        Can Ionah giue himſelfe, and not his owne?
                        That part to God, and to his Country this
                        Pertaines, ſo that a ſlender third is his;
                        Why then ſhould Ionah doe ſo great a wrong,
                        To deale himſelfe away, that did belong
                        The leaſt vnto himſelfe? or how could he
                        Teach this, (THOV SHALT NOT KILL) if Ionah be
                        His lifes owne Butcher? What, was this a deed
                        That with the Calling he profeſt, agreed?
                        The purblind age (whoſe workes (almoſt diuine)
                        Did meerely with the oyle of nature ſhine,
                        That knew no written Law, ne yet no God,
                        To whip their conſcience with a ſteely Rod,)
                        How much did they abhorre ſo foule a fact?
                        When (led by Natures glimpſe) they made an Act,
                        That what man e're is ſo vnnaturall
                        To kill himſelfe,Homicida in ſe, inſepultus abijciatur. Seneca. ſhould want a buriall;
                        Can ſuch doe ſo, when Ionah does amiſſe?
                        What, Ionas, Iſr'els Teacher! and doe this?
                        The Law of charity doth all forbid,Reſolu. Non ideo ſine ſcelere facit alter, &c. S. Aug. lib. 1. de ciuitat, Dei. cap. 26. Iudg. 16.30.
                           
                        
                        In this thing to doe that, which Ionah did;
                        Moreo're, in charity, 'tis thy beheſt,
                        Of dying men to thinke, and ſpeake the beſt;
                        The mighty Samſon did as much as this;
                        And who dare ſay, that Samſon did amiſſe,
                        If heau'nly Spirit whiſper'd in his eare
                        Expreſſe command to do 't?Spiritus latenter hoc iuſſerat. S. Aug. then likewiſe heare,
                        
                           Who knowes of Ionah, whether, yea, or no,
                        A ſecret Spirit will'd him to doe ſo?Cum Deus iubet ſe iubere ſine vllis ambagibus intimat, quis inobedientiam in crimen vocat? S. Aug.
                           
                        
                        ¶Sure is the knot that true Religion tyes,
                        And Loue that's rightly grounded, neuer dyes;
                        It ſeemes a Paradox, beyond beliefe,
                        That men in trouble ſhould prolong reliefe;
                        That Pagans, (to withſtand a Strangers Fate)
                        Should be neglectiue of their owne eſtate,
                        Truſting their liues vpon a twyny thread,
                        And (dauntleſſe) daunce about in dangers dread.
                        Where is this Loue become in later age?
                        Alas! 'tis gone in endleſſe Pilgrimage
                        From hence, and neuer to returne (I doubt)
                        Till reuolution wheele thoſe times about;
                        Chill breſts haue ſtaru'd her here, and ſhe is driu'n
                        Away; and with Aſtraea fled to heau'n:
                        
                           Charity, that naked Babe is gone,Caritas eſt infans ſine pannis, dans mel api ſine pennis.
                        
                        Her hony's ſpent, and all her ſtore is done,
                        Her wingleſſe Bees can finde out ne'r a bloome,
                        And crookedDea Litis. 
                           Ate doth vſurpe her roome;
                        
                           Nepenthe's dry, and Loue can get no drinke,
                        And curs'd Ardenne flowes aboue the brinke:
                        Braue Mariners, the world your names ſhall hallow,
                        Admiring that in you, that none dare follow;
                        Your friendſhip's rare, and your conuerſion ſtrange:
                        From Paganiſme to Zeale? A ſuddaine change!
                        Thoſe men doe now the God of heau'n implore,
                        That bow'd to Puppets, but an houre before.
                        Their Zeale is feruent (though but new begun)
                        Before their egge-ſhels were done off, they run,
                        As when bright Phoebus, in a Summer tide,Simile.
                        
                        (New riſen from the pillow of his Bride)
                        
                           Enueloped with miſty fogges, at length
                        Breaks forth, diſplayes the miſt, with Southern ſtrēgth;
                        Euen ſo theſe Mariners (of Peereleſſe mirrour)
                        Their faith b'ing vayl'd within the miſt of errour,
                        At length their Zeale chac'd ignorance away,
                        They left their Paganiſme, and 'gan to pray.
                        ¶Lord, how vnlimmited are thy Confines,
                        That ſtill purſu'ſt man in his good deſignes!
                        Thy mercy's like the dew of Hermon hill,
                        Or like the Oyntment, dropping downward ſtill
                        From Aarons head, to beard; from beard, to foot:
                        So doe thy mercies drench vs round about:
                        Thy loue is boundleſſe; Thou art apt, and free,
                        To turne to Man, when Man returnes to thee.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        THE ARGVMENT.
                        They cast the Prophet ouer boord:
                        The ſtorme alay'd: They feare the Lord;
                        A mighty Fiſh him ſtraight deuoures,
                        Where he remayned many howres.
                     
                     Sect. 6.
                     EVen as a member,Hiſt. Chap 1. ve. 15. Simile. whoſe corrupted ſore
                     Infeſts, and rankl's, eating more and more,
                     Threatning the bodies loſſe (if not preuented)
                     The Surgion (after all faire meanes attempted)
                     Cuts off, and with aduiſed skill doth chooſe,
                     To loſe a part, then all the body loſe;
                     
                        Euen ſo the Mariners perceiuing all
                     Their labour ſpent, and the effect but ſmall,
                     And of neceſſity that all muſt dye,
                     If Ionah leaue not their ſociety,
                     They tooke vp Ionas, and with one accord,
                     And common ayde, threw Ionas ouer boord;
                     Whereat grim Neptune wip't his fomy mouth,
                     Held his tridented Mace vpon the South;
                     The windes were whiſt, the billowes daunc't no more,
                     The ſtorme allay'd, the heau'ns left off to rore,
                     The waues (obedient to their beheaſt)
                     Gaue ready paſſage, and their rage ſurceaſt:
                     The skie grew cleare, and now the glorious light
                     Begins to put the gloomy clouds to flight:
                     Thus all on ſuddaine was the Sea tranquill,
                     The heau'ns were quiet, and the Waues were ſtill.
                     As when a friendly Creditour (to get
                     A long forborne,Simile. and much-concerning debt)
                     Still plyes his willing debter with entreates,
                     Importunes dayly, dayly thumps, and beates
                     The batter'd Portalls of his tyred eares,
                     Bedeafing hm with what he knowes, and heares;
                     The weary debter, to auoyd the ſight
                     He loathes, ſhifts here, and there, and eu'ry night
                     Seekes out Protection of another bed,
                     Yet ne'retheleſſe (purſu'd and followed)
                     His eares are ſtill layd at with lowder volley
                     Of harder Dialect; He melancholly,
                     Sits downe, and ſighes, and after long fore-ſlowing,
                     (T' auoyd his preſence) payes him what is owing;
                     The thankfull Creditour is now appeas'd,
                     Takes leaue, and goes away content, and pleas'd.
                     
                        Euen ſo theſe angry waues, with reſtleſſe rage,
                     Accoſted Ionas in his pilgrimage,
                     And thundred Iudgement in his fearfull eare,
                     Preſenting Hubbubs to his guilty feare:
                     The Waues roſe diſcontent, the Surges beat,
                     And euery moments death, the billowes threat;
                     The wether-beaten Ship did euery minnit
                     Await deſtruction, while he was in it:
                     But when his (long expected) corps they threw
                     Into the deepe, (a debt through treſpaſſe due)
                     The Sea grew kind, and all her frownes abated,
                     Her face was ſmooth to all that nauigated.
                     'Twas ſinfull Ionah made her ſtorme and rage,
                     'Twas ſinfull Ionah did her ſtorme aſſwage.
                     With that the Mariners aſtoniſh't were,Verſ. 16.
                     
                     And feard Iehouah with a mighty feare,
                     Offring vp Sacrifice with one accord,
                     And vowing ſolemne vowes vnto the Lord.
                     
                        Verſ. 17.But God (whoſe breath can make the heauens ſhake,
                     And in an inſtant, all that force can ſlake,
                     Whoſe pow'rfull word can make the earths foundatiō
                     
                     Tremble, and with his word can make ceſſation,
                     Whoſe wrath doth mount the waues, & toſſe the Seas,
                     And make them calme, and whiſt when e're he pleaſe:
                     This God, (whoſe mercy runs on endleſſe wheele,
                     And pulls (like Iacob) Iuſtice by the heele)
                     Prepar'd a Fiſh, prepar'd a mighty Whale,
                     Whoſe belly ſhould be priſon-houſe, and baile
                     For retchleſſe Ionah. As a Garner dore
                     Opens his double leafe, to take the ſtore,
                     Wherewith the harueſt quits the Ploughmans hope,
                     Euen ſo the great Leuiathan ſet ope
                     
                        His beame-like Iawes, (as glad of ſuch a boone)
                     And at a morſell, ſwallow'd Ionah downe.
                     Till Roſy-cheek't-Aurora's purple dye
                     Thrice dappl'd had the ruddy morning skye,
                     And thrice had ſpred the Curtaines of the morne,
                     To let in Titan, when the Day was borne,
                     
                        Ionah was Tenant to this liuing Graue,
                     Embowel'd deepe in this ſtupendious Caue.Explicit Hiſt.
                     
                     
                        Meditatio ſexta.
                        LO, Death is now, as alwayes it hath bin,
                        The iuſt procured ſtipend of our ſinne:
                        Sinne is a golden Cauſie, and a Road
                        That's leuell, pleaſant, that is euen, and broad,
                        But leads at length to death, and endleſſe griefe,
                        To torments and to paines, without reliefe.
                        Iuſtice feares none, but maketh all afraid,
                        And then falls hardeſt, when 'tis moſt delaid.
                        But thou reply'ſt, Thy ſinnes are daily great,
                        Yet thou ſitt'ſt, vncontrold vpon thy ſeat:
                        Thy wheat doth flouriſh, and thy barnes doe thriue,
                        Thy ſheepe encreaſe, thy ſonnes are all aliue,
                        And thou art buxom, and haſt nothing ſcant,
                        Finding no want of any thing, but want,
                        Whil'ſt others, whō the ſquint-e'yd world counts holy,
                        Sit ſadly drooping in a melancholy,
                        With brow deiected, and downe-hanging head,
                        Or take of almes, or poorly beg their bread:
                        But Young man, know, there is a Day of doome,
                        The feaſt is good, vntill the reck'ning come.
                        
                           The time runnes faſteſt, where is leaſt regard;
                        The ſtone that's long in falling, falleth hard;
                        There is a Day, a dying Day (thou foole)
                        When all thy laughter ſhall be turn'd to Doole,
                        Thy roabes to tort'ring plagues, and fell tormenting,
                        Thy whoops of Ioy, to howles of ſad lamenting:
                        Thy tongue ſhall yell, and yawle, and neuer ſtop,
                        And wiſh a world, to giue for one poore drop,
                        To flatter thine intolerable paine;
                        The wealth of Pluto could not then obtaine
                        A minutes freedome from that helliſh rout,
                        Whoſe fire burnes, and neuer goeth out;
                        Nor houſe, nor land, nor meaſur'd heapes of wealth,
                        Can render to a dying man his health:
                        Our life on earth is like a thrid of flax,
                        That all may touch, and being toucht, it cracks.
                        ¶As when an Archer ſhooteth for his ſport,Simile.
                        
                        Sometimes his ſhaft is gone, ſometime 'tis ſhort,
                        Sometimes o'th' left hand wide, ſometimes o'th' right,
                        At laſt (through often triall) hits the White;
                        So Death ſometimes with her vncertaine Rouer,
                        Hits our Superiours (and ſo ſhootes ouer)
                        Sometimes for change, ſhe ſtrikes the meaner ſort,
                        Strikes our inferiours (and then comes ſhort)
                        Sometimes vpon the left hand wide ſhe goes,
                        And ſo (ſtill wounding ſome) ſhe ſtrikes our foes;
                        And ſometimes wide vpon the right hand wends,
                        There with impartiall ſhafts, ſhe ſtrikes our friends;
                        At length, (through often triall) hits the White,
                        And ſo ſtrikes vs into Eternall night.
                        ¶Death is a Kalender compos'd by Fate,
                        Concerning all men, neuer out of Date:
                        
                           Her dayes Dominicall are writ in blood;
                        She ſhewes more bad dayes, then ſhe ſheweth good;
                        She tells when dayes, and months, and termes expire,
                        And ſhewes thee ſtrange aſpects of fearefull fire.
                        ¶Death is a Purſiuant, with Eagles wings,
                        That knocks at poore mens dores, and gates of Kings.
                        Worldling, beware; for, lo, Death ſculks behind thee,
                        And as ſhe leaues thee, ſo will Iudgement finde thee.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        THE ARGVMENT.
                        Within the bowels of the Fiſh,
                        
                           Ionah laments in great anguiſh;
                        God heard his pray'r, at whoſe command,
                        The Fiſh diſgorg'd him on the Land.
                     
                     
                        Sect. 7.
                     THen Ionah turn'd his face to heau'n,Hiſt, Chap. 2. ver. 1.
                         and pray'd
                     VVithin the bowels of the VVhale, and ſayd,
                     "I cry'd out of my balefull miſery
                     "Vnto the Lord, and he hath heard my cry,
                           Verſe 2. The prayer of Ionas out of the Whales belly.
                     
                     "From out the paunch of hell I made a noyſe,
                     "And thou haſt anſwer'd me, and heard my voyce:
                     "Into the Deepes and bottome thou haſt throwne me,Verſ. 3.
                     
                     "Thy Surges, and thy VVaues haue paſt vpon me.
                     "Then Lord (ſaid I) from out thy glorious ſight
                     "I am reiected, and forſaken quite,Verſ. 4.
                     
                     "Nath'leſſe while theſe my wretched eyes remaine,
                     "Vnto thy Temple will I looke againe.
                     
                        "The boyſt'rous waters compaſſe me about,Verſ 5.
                     
                     "My body threats, to let her pris'ner out,
                     "The boundleſſe depth enclos'd me, (almoſt dead)
                     "The weedes were wrapt about my fainting head,
                     "I liu'd on earth reiected at thine hand,Verſ 6.
                     
                     "And a perpetuall pris'ner in the Land;
                     "Yet thou wilt cauſe my life t'aſcend at length,
                     "From out this pit, O Lord, my God, my Strength;
                     "When as my ſoule was ouer-whelm'd,Verſ. 7. and faint,
                     "I had recourſe to thee, did thee acquaint
                     "With the condition of my wofull caſe,
                     "My cry came to thee, in thine holy Place.
                     
                        Verſ. 8."Whoſo to Vanities themſelues betake,
                     "Renounce thy mercies,Verſ. 9. and thy loue forſake.
                     "To thee I'le ſacrifice in endleſſe dayes,
                     "With voyce of thanks, and euer-ſounding praiſe,
                     "I'le pay my vowes; for all the world records
                     "With one conſent, Saluation is the Lords.
                     
                     
                        Verſ. 10.So God (whoſe Word's a deed, whoſe Breath's a law,
                     Whoſe iuſt command implies a dreadfull awe,
                     Whoſe Word prepar'd a Whale vpon the Deepe,
                     To tend, and waite for Iona's fall, and keepe
                     His out-caſt body ſafe, and ſoule ſecure)
                     This very God, (whoſe mercy muſt endure
                     When heau'n, and earth, and ſea, and all things faile)
                     Diſclos'd his purpoſe, and beſpake the Whale,
                     To redeliuer Ionah to his hand;
                     Whereat the Whale diſgorg'd him on the Land.Explicit Hiſt.
                     
                     
                        
                        Meditatio ſeptimu.
                        I Well record, a holy Father ſayes,
                        "He teaches to denie, that faintly prayes:Quitimidè ora
                                 •
                              
                              ▪ docet negare.
                        
                        The ſuit ſurceaſes, when deſire failes,
                        But whoſo prayes with feruencie, preuailes;
                        For Pray'rs the key that opens heauen gate,Luke 11.9.
                        
                        And findes admittance, whether earl' or late,
                        It forces audience, it vnlocks the eare
                        Of heau'nly God, (though deafe) it makes him heare.
                        Vpon a time The Common-wealth. 
                           Babel (the Worlds faire Queene,
                        Made drunke with choller, and enrag'd with Spleene)
                        Through fell Diſdaine, derraigned Warre 'gainſt them
                        That tender Homage to Ieruſalem:
                           The Church.
                        
                        A Mayden fight it was, yet they were ſtrong
                        As men of Warre; The Battaile laſted long,
                        Much bloud was ſhed, and ſpilt on either ſide,
                        That all the ground with purple gore was dyde:
                        In fine, a Souldier of Ieruſalem,
                        
                        
                           Charity. 
                           Chariſſa hight, (the Almner of the Realme)
                        Chill'd with a Feuer, and vnapt to fight,
                        Into Iuſtitia's Caſtle tooke her flight,
                        Whereat great Babels Queene commanded all,
                        To lay their ſiege againſt the Caſtle wall;
                        But poore Feare 
                           Tymiſſa (not with warre acquainted)
                        Fearing Chariſſa's death, fell downe, and fainted;
                        Dauntleſſe Wiſedome 
                           Prudentia rear'd her from the ground,
                        VVhere ſhe lay (pale, and ſenceleſſe) in ſwound,
                        She rubb'd her temples (loſt in ſwouny ſhade)
                        And gaue her water, that Faith. 
                           Fidiſſa made,
                        
                           And ſaid, Cheare vp, (deare Siſter) though our foe
                        Hath ta'ne vs Captiues, and inthrall'd vs ſo,
                        We haue a King puiſſant, and of might,
                        Will ſee vs take no wrong, and doe vs right,
                        If we poſſeſſe him with our ſad complaint,
                        Cheare vp, wee'l ſend to him, and him acquaint.
                        
                           Timiſſa (new awak'd from ſwound) replies,
                        Our Caſtle is begirt with enemies,
                        And clouds of armed men beſiege our walls,
                        Then ſuer Death, or worſe then Death befalls
                        To her, (who ere ſhe be) that ſtirres a foote,
                        Or dares attempt, this place to fally out:
                        Alas! what hope haue we to finde reliefe,
                        And want the meanes that may diuulge our griefe?
                        Within that place, a iolly Matron won'd,
                        With firie lookes, and drawen-ſword in hond,
                        Her eyes, with age, were waxen wond'rous dim,
                        With hoary locks, and viſage ſterne, and grim;
                        Her name Iuſtice. 
                           Iuſtitia hight; to her they make
                        Their moane, who (well aduis'd) them thus beſpake:
                        "Faire Maydens, well I wot; y' are ill bedight,
                        And rue the ſuffrance of your wofull plight,
                        But Pitty's fond alone, and rankles griefe,
                        And fruitleſſe falls, vnleſſe it yeeld reliefe:
                        Cheare vp, I haue a Meſſenger in ſtore,
                        Whoſe ſpeed is much, but faithfull truſt is more,
                        Whoſe nimble wings ſhall cleaue the flitting skies,
                        And ſcorne the terrour of your enemies,
                        
                           Prayer 
                           Oratio hight, well knowne vnto your King,
                        Your meſſage ſhe ſhall doe, and tydings bring,
                        Prouided that Math. 21.21. 
                           Fidiſſa trauaile with her,
                        And ſo (John 15.16. on Chriſts name) let them goe together.
                        
                           With that, Fidiſſa hauing ta'ne her errant,
                        And good Oratio, with Iuſtitia's Warrant,
                        In ſilence of the midnight, tooke their flight,
                        Arriuing at the Court that very night;
                        But they were both as any fier hot,Oratio feruens, velox.
                        
                        For they did flie as ſwift, as Cannon ſhot,
                        But they (left ſuddaine cold ſhould doe them harme)
                        Together clung, and kept each other warme:Oratio & fides comites indiuidui.
                        
                        But lo, the Kingly gates were ſparr'd, and lockt,
                        They call'd, but none made anſwere, then they knockt,
                        Together ioyning both their force in one,
                        They knockt amaine; Yet anſwere there was none;
                        But they that neuer learn'd to take deniall,
                        With importunity made further triall:
                        The King heard well, although he liſt not ſpeake,
                        Till they with ſtrokes the gate did wel-nie breake.
                        In fine, the brazen gates flew open wide;
                        
                           Oratio moou'd her ſuit: The King replide,
                        
                           Oratio was a faire, and welcome gheſt;
                        So heard her ſuit; ſo graunted her requeſt.
                        Fraile Man, obſerue, In thee the practice lies,
                        Let ſacred Meditation moralize.
                        Let Pray'r be feruent, and thy Faith intire,
                        And God will graunt thee more then thy deſire.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        THE ARGVMENT.
                        The ſecond time was Ionah ſent
                        To Niniuy: ſo Ionah went:
                        Againſt her crying ſinnes he cri'd,
                        And her destruction propheci'd.
                     
                     
                        Sect. 8.
                     ONce more the voyce of heau'ns-high-Cōmander
                     (Like horrid claps of heau'ns-diuiding-thunder,Hiſt. Chap. 3. ver. 1.
                        
                     
                     Or like the fall of waters breach (the noyſe
                     B'ing heard farre diſtant off) ſuch was the voyce)
                     Came downe from heau'n, to Ionah new-borne-Man,
                     To re-baptized Ionah, and thus began;
                     
                        Am I a God? Or art thou ought but Duſt?
                     
                     
                        More then a man? Or are my Lawes vniuſt?
                     
                     
                        Am I a God, and ſhall I not command?
                     
                     
                        Art thou a man, and dar'ſt my Lawes withſtand?
                     
                     
                        Shall I (the motion of whoſe breath ſhall make
                     
                     
                        Both Earth, and Sea, and Hell, and Heauen quake)
                     
                     
                        By thee (fond man) ſhall I be thus neglected,
                     
                     
                        And thy preſumption ſcape vncorrected?
                     
                     
                        Thy Faith hath ſau'd thee (Ionah:) Sinne no more,
                     
                     
                        Leſt worſe things happen after, then before;
                     
                     
                        Ariſe;
                        
                           Verſ. 2. Gods ſecond charge to Ionah.
                         
                        let all th' aſſembled pow'rs agree
                     
                     
                        To doe the meſſage I impoſe on thee;
                     
                     
                        Trifle no more, and, to auoyd my ſight,
                     
                     
                        Thinke not to baulke me with a ſecond flight.
                     
                     
                        
                        Ariſe, and goe to Niniuy (the great)
                     
                        Where broods of Gentiles haue ta'ne vp their ſeat,
                     
                     
                        The Great-Queene-regent-mother of the Land,
                     
                     
                        That multiplies in people like the ſand;
                     
                     
                        Away, with wings of time, (I'le not eſſoine thee)
                     
                     
                        Denounce theſe fiery Iudgements, I enioyne thee.
                     
                     Like as a yongling that to ſchoole is ſet,Simile. verſ. 3.
                     
                     (Scarce weaned from his dandling mothers tet,
                     Where he was cockerd with a ſtroking hand)
                     With ſtubborne heart, denyes the Iuſt command
                     His Tutor will's: But being once corrected,
                     His home-bred ſtomack's curb'd, or quite eiected,
                     His crooked nature's chang'd, and mollified,
                     And humbly ſeeks, what ſtoutly he deny'd;
                     So Iona's ſtout, peruerſe, and ſtubborne hart,
                     Was hardned once, but when it felt the ſmart
                     Of Gods auenging wrath, it ſtrait diſſolu'd,
                     And what it once auoyded, now reſolu'd
                     T' effect with ſpeed, and with a carefull hand
                     Fully repleniſh'd with his Lords Command,
                     To Niniueh he flyeth like a Roe,
                     Each ſtep the other ſtriues to ouergoe;
                     And as an arrow to the mark does fly,
                     So (bent to flight) flyes he to Niniuy.
                     
                     (Now Niniuy a mighty Citty was,
                     And all the Citties of the world did paſſe,
                     A Citty which o're all the reſt aſpires,
                     Like midnight▪
                        Phoebé 'mong the leſſer fyers,
                     A Citty which (although to men was giuen)
                     Better beſeem'd the mighty King of Heauen,
                     A Citty Great to God, whoſe ample wall,
                     Who vndertakes to mete with paces, ſhall
                     
                        Bring Phoebus thrice a-bed, e're it be dun,
                     (Although with dawning Lucifer begun.)
                     When Ionas had approacht the City gate,Verſ. 4.
                     
                     He made no ſtay to reſt, ne yet to baite,
                     Nor yet with oyle, his fainting head he 'noynts,
                     Nor ſtayes to bathe his weather-beaten ioynts,
                     Nor ſmooth'd his countenance, nor ſlick't his skinne,
                     Ne craued he the Hoſtage of an Inne,
                     To eaſe his aking bones (with trauell ſore)
                     But went as ſpeedy, as he fled before,
                     The Cities greatnes made him not refuſe,
                     To be the trump of that vnwelcome newes
                     His tongue was great with; But (like thunders noyſe)
                     His mouth flew ope, and out there ruſht a voyce.
                     
                        
                           Iona's prophecy to the Niniuites.
                        When dewy-cheek't Aurora ſhall diſplay
                     
                     
                        Her golden locks, and ſummon vp the Day
                     
                     
                        Twice twentie times, and reſt her drowzy head
                     
                     
                        Twice twentie more, in aged Tithons bed,
                     
                     
                        Then Niniueh this place of high renowne,
                     
                     
                        Shall be deſtroy'd, and ſackt, and batterd downe.
                     
                     He ſate not down to take deliberation,
                     What manner people were they, or what Nation,
                     Or Gent, or Saluage, nor did he enquier
                     What place were moſt conuenient for a Cryer,
                     Nor like a ſweet-lipt Orator did ſteare,
                     Or tune his language to the peoples eare,
                     But bold, and rough (yet full of maieſty)
                     Lift vp his trumpet, and began to Cry,
                     
                        When forty times Dan Phoebus ſhall fulfill
                     
                     
                        His Iournall courſe vpon th' Olympian Hill,
                     
                     
                        Then Niniueh (the Worlds great wonder) ſhall
                     
                     
                        Startle the Worlds foundation with her fall.
                     
                     
                        The dreadfull Prophet ſtands not to admire
                     The Cities pomp, or peoples quaint attire,
                     Nor yet (with fond affection) doth pitty
                     Th' approching downfall of ſo braue a City:
                     But freely lifts his diſmall voyce on high,
                     Not caring who excepts againſt the Cry,
                     
                        When fortie Dayes ſhall be expir'd, and run,
                     
                     
                        And that poore Inch of time drawne out and dun,
                     
                     
                        Then Niniueh (the Worlds Imperiall throne)
                     
                     
                        Shall not be left a ſtone, vpon a ſtone.
                        Explicit Hiſt.
                     
                     
                        Meditatio octaua.
                        BVt ſtay; Is God like one of vs? Can hee,Obiect.
                        
                        When he hath ſaid it, alter his Decree?
                        Can he that is the God of Truth, diſpence
                        With what he vow'd? or offer violence
                        Vpon his ſacred Iuſtice? Can his minde
                        Reuolt at all? or vary like the winde?
                        How comes it then to paſſe? How mought it bee,
                        That hauing limited his iuſt Decree
                        Vpon the expiring date of fortie dayes,
                        He then performes it not? But ſtill delayes
                        His plagues denounc't, and Iudgement ſtill forbeares,
                        And ſtead of fortie Dayes giues many yeares?
                        Yet fortie Dayes, and Niniueh ſhall periſh?
                        Yet fortie yeeres, and Niniueh doth flouriſh:
                        A change in man's infirme; in God 'tis ſtrange;
                        In God, to change his Will, and will a Change,Reſolut. Aliud mutare voluntatem; aliud velle mutationem. Aquin. 1. quaeſt. 19 art. 7.
                           
                        
                        Are diuers things: When God repents from ill,
                        He wills a change; he changes not his Will;
                        
                           The ſubiect's chang'd, which ſecret he kept cloſe,
                        But not the mind, that ſo did it diſpoſe;
                        Denounced Iudgement God doth oft preuent,Mutat ſententiam, ſed non mutat conſiliū, lib. 20. mor. c. 29
                           
                        
                        But neither changes counſell, nor intent:
                        Moreo're He ſeldome threatens a perdition,
                        But with expreſſe, or an impli'd condition:
                        So that, if Niniuey do turne from ill,
                        God turns his hand, he doth not turne his Will.
                        ¶The ſtint of Niniuey was forty dayes,
                        To cry for grace, and turne from euill wayes;
                        To ſome the time is large; To others ſmall,
                        To ſome 'tis many yeeres; And not at all
                        To others; Some an hower haue, and ſome
                        Haue ſcarce a minute of their time to come:
                        Thy ſpan of life (Malfido) is thy ſpace,Tempus vitae, tempus poenitentiae.
                        
                        To call for mercy, and to cry for grace.
                        ¶Lord! what is man, but like a worme that crawl's,
                        Open to danger, euery foot that falls?
                        Death creeps (vnheard) and ſteales abroad (vnſeene)
                        Her darts are ſudden, and her arrowes keene,
                        Vncertaine when, but certaine ſhe will ſtrike,
                        Reſpecting King, and begger both alike;
                        The ſtroke is deadly, come it earl', or late,
                        And once being ſtruck, repenting's out of date;
                        Death is a minute, full of ſudden ſorrow:
                        "Then liue to day, as thou maiſt dye to morrow.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        THE ARGVMENT.
                        The Niniuites beleeue the Word;
                        Their hearts returne vnto the Lord;
                        In him they put their only truſt:
                        They mourne in Sackcloth, and in duſt.
                     
                     
                        Sect. 9.
                     SO ſaid; the Niniuites beleeu'd the Word,
                           Hiſt. Chap. 3. ver. 5.
                     
                     Beleeued Ionas, and beleeu'd the Lord;
                     They made no pauſe, nor ieſted at the newes,
                     Nor ſlighted it, becauſe it was a Iew's
                     Denouncement: No, Nor did their gazing eyes
                     (As taken captiues with ſuch nouelties)
                     Admire the ſtrangers garb, ſo quaint to theirs,
                     No idle chat poſſeſt their itching eares,
                     The whil'ſt he ſpake: nor were their tongues on fier,
                     To raile vpon, or interrupt the Cryer,
                     Nor did they queſtion whether true the meſſage,
                     Or falſe the Prophet were, that brought th' embaſſage:
                     But they gaue faith to what he ſaid; relented,
                     And (changing their miſ-wandred wayes) repented;
                     Before the ſearching Ayre could coole his word,
                     Their hearts returned, and beleeu'd the Lord;
                     And they, whoſe dainty palats cloy'd whileare
                     With cates, and vyands were, and luſcious cheare,
                     Doe now enioyne their lips, not once to taſt
                     The offall bread, (for they proclaim'd a Faſt)
                     
                        And they, whoſe wanton bodies once did lye
                     Wrapt vp in Robes, and Silkes, of princely Dye,
                     Lo now, in ſtead of Robes, in Rags they mourne,
                     And all their Silkes doe into Sackcloth turne.
                     They reade themſelues ſad Lectures on the ground,
                     Learning to want, as well as to abound;
                     The Prince was not exempted, nor the Peere,
                     Nor yet the richeſt, nor the pooreſt there;
                     The old man was not freed, (whoſe hoary age
                     Had eu'n almoſt outworne his Pilgrimage;)
                     Nor yet the young, whoſe Glaſſe (but new begun)
                     By courſe of nature had an age to run:
                     For when that fatall Word came to the King,Verſ. 5.
                     
                     (Conuay'd with ſpeed vpon the nimble wing
                     Of flitting Fame) He ſtrait diſmounts his Throne,
                     Forſakes his Chaire of State he ſate vpon,
                     Diſrob'd his body, and his head diſcrown'd,
                     In duſt and aſhes grou'ling on the ground,
                     And when he rear'd his trembling corpes againe,
                     (His haire all filthy with the duſt he lay in)
                     He clad in penſiue Sackcloth, did depoſe
                     Himſelfe from ſtate Imperiall, and choſe
                     To liue a Vaſſall, or a baſer thing,
                     Then to vſurpe the Scepter of a King:
                     His golden cup of Honour and Authority,
                     Made him not drunke, and ſo forget mortality,
                     (Reſpectleſſe of his pompe) he quite forgate
                     He was a King, ſo mindleſſe of his State,
                     That he forgate to rule, or be obey'd;
                     Nor did he weild the Sword,
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            Hiſt. nor Scepter ſway'd.
                     
                        
                        Meditatio nona.
                        ¶IS faſting then the thing that God requires?
                        Can faſting expiate, or ſlake thoſe fires
                        That Sinne hath blowne to ſuch a mighty flame?
                        Can ſackcloth clothe a fault? or hide a ſhame?
                        Can aſhes clenſe thy blot? or purge thy' offence?
                        Or doe thy hands make God a recompence,
                        By ſtrowing duſt vpon thy bryny face?
                        Are theſe the tricks to purchaſe heau'nly grace?
                        No, though thou pine thy ſelfe with willing want;
                        Or face looke thinne, or Carkas ne▪r ſo gaunt,
                        Although thou worſer weeds then ſackcloth weare,
                        Or naked goe, or ſleep in ſhirts of haire,
                        Or though thou chuſe an aſh-tub for thy bed,
                        Or make a daily dunghill on thy head,
                        Thy labour is not poyſd with equall Gaines,
                        For thou haſt nought but labour for thy paines:
                        Such idle madneſſe God reiects, and loaths,
                        That ſinkes no deeper, than the skinne, or cloaths;
                        'Tis not thine eyes which (taught to weep by art)
                        Looke red with teares, (not guilty of thy hart)
                        'Tis not the holding of thy hands ſo hye,
                        Nor yet the purer ſquinting of thine eye;
                        'Tis not your Mimmick mouthes, nor Antick faces,
                        Nor Scripture phraſes, nor affected Graces,
                        Nor prodigall vp-banding of thine eyes,
                        Whoſe gaſhfull balls doe ſeeme to pelt the skyes;
                        'Tis no: the ſtrict reforming of your haire
                        So cloſe, that all the neighbour skull is bare;
                        
                           'Tis not the drooping of thy head ſo low,
                        Nor yet the lowring of thy ſullen brow,
                        Nor howling, wherewithall you fill the ayre,
                        Nor repetitions of your tedious pray'r:
                        No, no, 'tis none of this, that God regards;
                        Such ſort of fooles their owne applauſe rewards;Matth. 6
                        
                        Such Puppit-playes, to heau'n are ſtrange, and quaint,
                        Their ſeruice is vnſweet, and foully taint,
                        Their words fall fruitleſſe from their idle braine;
                        But true Repentance runnes in other ſtraine;
                        Where ſad contrition harbours, there thy hart
                        Is firſt acquainted with an inly ſmart,
                        And reſtleſſe grones within thy mournfull breſt,
                        Where ſorrow finds her ſelfe a welcome gheſt;
                        It throbs, it ſighes, it mournes in decent wiſe,
                        Diſſolu's, and fills the Ciſternes of thine eyes;
                        It frights thy penſiue ſoule, with ſtrange aſpects
                        Of crying ſinnes committed; It detects
                        Thy wounded conſcience; It cryes amaine,
                        For mercy, mercy, cryes, and cryes againe;
                        It vowes, it ſadly grieues, and ſore laments,
                        It yernes for grace, Reformes, Returnes, Repents;
                        I; this is Incenſe, whoſe accepted ſauour
                        Mounts vp the heauenly Throne, and findeth fauour:
                        I; this is it, whoſe valour neuer failes,
                        With God it ſtoutly wreſtles, and preuailes:
                        I; this is it, that pierces heauen aboue,
                        Neuer returning home (like Noah's Doue)
                        But brings an Oliffe leafe, or ſome encreaſe,
                        That works Saluation, and eternall Peace.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        THE ARGVMENT.
                        The Prince and people faſts, and prayes;
                        God heard, accepted, lik'd their wayes:
                        Vpon their timely true repentance,
                        God reuerſt, and chang'd his ſentence.
                     
                     
                        Sect. 10.
                     
                        THen ſuddenly, with holy zeale inflam'd,
                        Hiſt. Chap. 3.7.
                        
                     
                     
                        He cauſ'd a Generall act, to be proclam'd,
                     
                     
                        By good aduice, and counſell of his Peeres;
                     
                     Let neither Man, nor child, of youth, or yeeres,The Proclamation of the Niniuites.
                     
                     From greateſt in the City, to the leaſt,
                     Nor Heard, nor pining Flock, nor hungry beaſt,
                     Nor any thing that draweth ayre, or breath,
                     On forfeiture of life, or preſent death,
                     Preſume to taſte of nouriſhment, or food,
                     Or moue their hungry lips, to chew the cud;
                     From out their eyes let Springs of water burſt,
                     With teares (or nothing) let them ſlake their thurſt:Verſ. 8.
                     
                     Moreo're, let euery man (what e're he be)
                     Of high preferment, or of low degree,
                     D' off all they weare (excepting but the ſame)
                     That nature craues, and that which couers ſhame)
                     Their nakedneſſe with ſackcloth let them hide,
                     And mue the veſt'ments of their ſilken pride;
                     And let the braue cariering Horſe of warre,
                     (Whoſe rich Capariſons, and Trappings are
                     
                        Of ſumptuous beautie, and of glorious ſhow)
                     Let him diſrobe, and put▪on ſackcloth too;
                     The Oxe (ordain'd for yoke) the Aſſe (for load)
                     The Horſe (as well for race, as for the road)
                     The burthen-bearing Cammell (ſtrong and great)
                     The fruitfull Kine, and eu'ry kind of Neate,
                     Let all put ſackcloth on, and ſpare no voyce,
                     But crie amaine to heau'n, with mightie noyſe;
                     Let all men turne the Byas of their wayes,
                     And change their fiercer hands, to force of praiſe:
                     For who can tell,Verſ. 9. if God (whoſe angrie face
                     Hath long bin wayning from vs) will embrace
                     This ſlender pittance of our beſt endeuour?
                     Who knowes, if God will his intent perſeuer?
                     Or who can tell, if He (whoſe tender loue,
                     And mercy' extends his Iudgements farre aboue)
                     Will change his high Decree, and turne his ſentence
                     Vpon a timely, and vnfain'd Repentance?
                     And who can tell, if God will change the lot,
                     That we, and ours may liue, and periſh not?
                     
                        So God perceiu'd their works, and ſaw their wayes,
                     
                     
                        Approu'd the faith,
                        Verſ. 10. 
                        that in their works did blaze,
                     
                     
                        Approu'd their works, approu'd their works the rather,
                     
                     
                        Becauſe their faith, and works went both together;
                     
                     
                        He ſaw their faith, becauſe their faith abounded,
                     
                     
                        He ſaw their works, becauſe on faith they grounded,
                     
                     
                        H' approu'd their faith, becauſe their faith was true,
                     
                     
                        H' approu'd their works, becauſe on faith they grew;
                     
                     
                        He ſaw their faith, and works, and ſo relented,
                     
                     
                        H
                              •
                            approu'd their faith, and works, and ſo repented;
                     
                     
                        Repented of the plagues, they apprehended;
                     
                     
                        Repented of the Euill, that he intended:
                     
                     
                        
                        So God the vengeance of his hand with-drew,
                     
                     
                        He tooke no forfeiture, although 'twere due;
                     
                     
                        The Euill, that once he meant, he now forgot,
                     
                     
                        Cancell'd the forfeit bond, and did it not.
                        Explicit Hiſt.
                     
                     
                        Meditatio decima.
                        ¶LO, into what an ebbe of low eſtate
                        The Soule, that ſeekes to be regenerate,
                        Muſt firſt decline; Before the Ball rebound,
                        It muſt be throwne with force againſt the ground;
                        The Seed cannot encreaſe in fruitfull eares,
                        Nor can ſhe reare the goodly ſtalke ſhe beares,
                        Vnleſſe beſtrow'd vpon a mould of earth,
                        And made more glorious, by a ſecond birth:
                        So fares with Man; Before he can bring forth
                        The braue exploits of truly noble Worth,
                        Or hope the granting of his ſinnes remiſſion,
                        He muſt be humbl'd firſt in ſad contrition;
                        The plant (through want of skill, or by neglect)
                        If it be planted from the Sunnes reflect,
                        Or lack the dew of ſeaſonable ſhowres,
                        Decayes, and beareth neither Fruit, or Flowres;
                        So wretched Man, if his repentance hath
                        No quickning Sunne-ſhine of a liuely Faith,
                        Or not bedew'd with ſhow'rs of timely teares,
                        Or works of mercy (wherein Faith appeares)
                        His pray'rs, and deeds, and all his forged grones,
                        Are like the howles of Dogs, and works of Drones:
                        The skilfull Surgeon, firſt (by letting blood)
                        Weakens his Patient, ere he does him good;
                        
                           Before the Soule can a true comfort finde,
                        The Body muſt be proſtrate, and the Minde
                        Truly repentiue, and contrite within,
                        And loath the fawning of a boſome Sin.
                        But Lord! Can MAN deſerue? Or can his Beſt
                        Doe Iuſtice equall right, which he tranſgreſt?
                        When Duſt and Aſhes mortally offends,
                        Can Duſt and Aſhes make Eternall mends?
                        Is Heau'n vniuſt? Muſt not the Recompence
                        Be full Equiualent to the Offence?
                        What mends by mortall Man can then be giu'n
                        To the offended Maieſtie of heau'n?
                        O Mercie! Mercie! on thee my Soule relyes,
                        On thee we build our Faith, we bend our eyes;
                        Thou fill'ſt my empty ſtraine, thou fil'ſt my tongue;
                        Thou art the ſubiect of my Swan-like ſong;
                        Like pinion'd pris'ners at the dying Tree,
                        Our lingring hopes attend, and wayte on thee;
                        (Arraign'd at Iuſtice barre) preuent our doome;
                        To thee with ioyfull hearts we cheerely come;
                        Thou art our Clergie; Thou that deareſt Booke,
                        Wherein our fainting eyes deſire to looke;
                        In thee, we truſt to reade (what will releaſe vs)
                        In bloudy Caracters, that name of IESVS.
                        ¶What ſhall we then returne to God of Heau'n?
                        Where nothing is (Lord) nothing can be giu'n;
                        Our ſoules, our bodies, ſtrength, and all our pow'rs,
                        (Alas!) were all too little, were they ours:
                        Or ſhall we burne (vntill our life expires)
                        An endleſſe Sacrifice in Holy fires?
                        ¶My Sacrifice ſhall be my HEART entire,
                        My Chriſt the Altar, and my Zeale the Fire.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        THE ARGVMENT.
                        The Prophet diſcontented prayes
                        To God, that he would end his dayes;
                        God blames his wrath ſo vnrepreſt,
                        Reproues his vnaduis'd Requeſt.
                     
                     
                        Sect. 11.
                     
                        BVt this diſpleaſing was in Iona's eyes,
                        
                           Hiſt. Chap. 4.1.
                     
                     
                        His heart grew hot, his blood began to riſe,
                     
                     
                        His eyes did ſparkle, and his teeth ſtruck fire,
                     
                     
                        His veines did boyle, his heart was full of yre;
                     
                     
                        At laſt brake foorth into a ſtrange requeſt,
                     
                     
                        Theſe words he pray'd, and mumbl'd out the reſt:
                     
                     Was not, O was not this my thought (O Lord)
                     Before I fled? Nay, was not this my Word,Verſ. 2. Ionas ſpeech to God.
                        
                     
                     The very Word, that theſe my lips had ſhaped,
                     When this miſ-hap mought well haue bin eſcaped?
                     Was there, O was there not a iuſt ſuſpect,
                     My preaching would procuer this effect?
                     For loe; I knew of old, they tender loue;
                     I knew the pow'r, thou gau'ſt my Tongue, would moue
                     Their Adamantine hearts; I knew 'twould thaw
                     Their frozen ſpirits, and breed relenting awe;
                     I knew moreo're, vpon their true repentance,
                     That thou determin'dſt to reuerſe thy ſentence;
                     For lo, I knew, thou wert a Gracious God,
                     Of long forbearance, ſlow to vſe the Rod▪
                     
                     
                        I knew the power of thy Mercies bent,
                     The ſtrength of all thy other works out-went;
                     I knew thy tender kindnes; and how loth
                     Thou wert to puniſh, and how ſlow to wrath;
                     Turning thy Iudgements, and thy plagues preuenting,
                     Thy mind reuerſing, and of Eu'll repenting:
                     Therefore (O therefore) through this perſwaſion,
                     I fled to Tarſiſh, there to make euaſion;
                     To ſaue thy credit (Lord) to ſaue mine owne:
                     For when this blaſt of zeale is ouer-blowne,
                     And ſackloth left, and they left off to mourne,
                     When they (like dogs) ſhall to their vomit turne,
                     They'l vilipend thy ſacred Word, and ſcoffe it,
                     Saying, Was that a God, or this a Prophet?
                     They'l ſcorne thy Iudgements, & thy threats deſpiſe,
                     And call thy Prophets, Meſſengers of lyes.
                     
                        Verſ. 3.Now therefore (Lord) bow downe attentiue eare,
                     (For lo, my burthen's more then I can beare)
                     Make ſpeed (O Lord) and baniſh all delayes,
                     T' extinguiſh (now) the tapour of my dayes:
                     Let not the minutes of my time extend,
                     But let my wretched howers find an end;
                     Let not my fainting ſprite thus long aby
                     In her fraile manſion of mortality:
                     The thrid's but weake, my life depends vpon,
                     O cut that thrid, and let my life be done;
                     My breſt ſtands faire, O ſtrike, and ſtrike againe,
                     For nought, but dying, can aſſwage my paine:
                     For liefer 'tis to dye, then liue in ſhame,
                     For better 'tis to leaue, and yeeld the game,
                     Then toyle for what at length muſt needs be loſt;
                     O kill me, for my heart is ſore imboſt;
                     
                        This latter boone vnto thy ſeruant giue,
                     For better 'tis for me, to dye then liue.
                     
                        So wretched Ionah; But Iehoua thus;
                     
                     What boot's it ſo to ſtorme out-ragious?Verſ. 4.
                     
                     Does it become my ſeruants heart to ſwell?
                     Can anger helpe thee, Ionah? Doeſt thou well?Explicit Hiſt.
                     
                     
                        Meditatio vndecima.
                        ¶HOw poore a thing is man! How vain's his mind!
                        How ſtrange, & baſe! And wau'ring like ye wind!
                        How vncouth are his wayes! How full of danger!
                        How to himſelfe, is he himſelfe a ſtranger!
                        His heart's corrupt, and all his thoughts are vaine,
                        His actions ſinfull, and his words prophane,
                        His will's deprau'd, his ſenſes all beguil'd,
                        His reaſon's darke, His members all defil'd,
                        His haſtie feet are ſwift, and prone to ill,
                        His guilty hands are euer bent to kill,
                        His tongue's a ſpunge of venome, (or of worſe)
                        Her practice is to ſweare, her skill to curſe;
                        His eyes, are fierballs of luſtfull fire,
                        And outward ſpyes, to inward foule deſire,
                        His body is a well erected ſtation,
                        But full of filth, and foule corrupted paſſion,
                        Fond loue; and raging luſt, and fooliſh feares,
                              Virgil▪ Aeneid. 8. Hinc metuunt, cupiunt, dotent, gaudent
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                              , nec auras Respiciunt, clauſae tenebris, & carcere caeco.
                        
                        Exceſſiue ioy, and griefe o'rwhelm'd with teares
                        Immoderate; and couetous Deſier,
                        And ſinfull anger, red, and hot as fier;
                        Theſe daily clog the ſoule, that's faſt in priſon,
                        From whoſe encreaſe, this luckleſſe brood is riſen,
                        
                           Reſpectleſſe Pride, and luſtfull Idlenes,
                        Foule ribbauld talke, and lothſome Drunkennes,
                        Fruitleſſe Deſpayre, and needleſſe Curioſitie,
                        Odious Ingratitude, Double Hypocriſie,
                        Baſe Flattery, and haughty-ey'd Ambition,
                        Heart-gnawing Hatred, and ſquint-ey'd Suſpition,
                        Self-eating Enuie, Enuious Detraction,
                        Hopeleſſe Diſtruſt, and too-too ſad Deiection,
                        Reuengefull Malice, Helliſh Blaſphemie,
                        Idolatry, and light Inconſtancie;
                        Daring Preſumption, wry-mouth'd Deriſion,
                        Fearefull Apoſtacie, vaine Superſtition.
                        ¶What heedfull watch? And what contin'all ward?
                        How great reſpect? and howerly regard,
                        Stands man in hand to haue, when ſuch a brood
                        Of furious hell-hounds ſeeke to ſuck his blood?
                        Day, night, and hower, they rebell, and wraſtle,
                        And neuer ceaſe, till they ſubdue the Caſtle.
                        ¶How ſleight a thing is man? How fraile and brittle?
                        How ſeeming great is he? How truly little?
                        Within the boſome of his holieſt works,
                        Some hidden Embers of old Adam lurks;
                        Which oftentimes in men of righteous wayes,
                        Burſt out in flame, and for a ſeaſon blaze.
                        ¶Lord teach our hearts, & giue our ſoules directions,
                        Subdue our Paſſions, Curb our ſtout Affections,
                        Nip thou the bud, before the Bloome begins;
                        Lord, keep all good men from preſumptuous ſins.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        THE ARGVMENT.
                        A Booth for ſhelter Ionah made;
                        God ſent a Gourd for better ſhade;
                        But by the next approching light,
                        God ſent a Worme conſum'd it quite.
                     
                     
                        Sect. 12.
                     SO Ionah (ſore oppreſt,
                           Hiſt. Chap. 4. ver. 5. and heauy-hearted)
                     From out the Cities circuit ſtraight departed,
                     Departed to the Eaſterne borders of it,
                     Where ſick with anguiſh ſate this ſullen Prophet;
                     He built a Booth, and in the Booth he ſate,
                     (Vntill ſome few daies had expir'd their date
                     With ouer-tedious pace) where he might ſee,
                     What would betide to threatned Niniuie;
                     A trunk that wanteth ſap, is ſoone decay'd;
                     The ſlender Booth of boughs and branches made,
                     Soone yeelded to the fire of Phoebus Ray,
                     So dri'd to Duſt, conſuming quite away:
                     Whereat, the great Iehoua ſpake the word,
                     And ouer Iona's head there ſprang a Gourd,Verſ. 6.
                     
                     Whoſe roots were fixt within the quickning earth,
                     Which gaue it nouriſhment, as well as birth;
                     God raiſed vp a Gourd, a Gourd ſhould laſt,
                     Let wind, or ſcortching Sunne, or blow, or blaſt;
                     As coales of fier rak'd in Embers,Simile. lye
                     Obſcure, and vndiſcerned by the eye;
                     
                        But being ſtird, regaine a glimm'ring light,
                     Reuiue, and glow, burning a-freſh and bright;
                     So Ionah 'gan to cheare through this reliefe,
                     And ioyfull was, deuoyded all his griefe:
                     He ioy'd to ſee, that God had not forgot
                     His drooping ſeruant, nor forſooke him not;
                     He ioy'd, in hope the Gourds ſtrange wonder will
                     Perſwade the people, he's a Prophet ſtill;
                     The freſh aſpect did much content his ſight,
                     The herball ſauour gaue his ſenſe delight;
                     So Ionah much delighted in his Gourd,
                     Enioy'd the pleaſures, that it did affoord:
                     But Lord!Verſ. 
                              •
                           . what earthly thing can long remaine?
                     How momentary are they! and how vaine!
                     How vaine is earth, that man's delighted in it!
                     Her pleaſures riſe; and vaniſh in a minnit:
                     How fleeting are the ioyes, we find below!
                     Whoſe tides (vncertaine) alwayes ebbe, and flow;
                     For lo! this Gourd (that was ſo faire, and ſound)
                     Is quite conſum'd, and eaten to the ground;
                     No ſooner Titan had vp-heau'd his head,
                     From off the pillow of his Saffron bed,
                     But God prepar'd a ſilly, ſilly worme,
                     (Perchance brought thither, by an Eaſterne ſtorme)
                     The worme that muſt obey, and well knew how,
                     Conſum'd it quite, ne left it root, nor bow;
                     Conſum'd it ſtraight, within a minut's ſpace,
                     Left nought,Explicit Hiſt. but (ſleeping) Ionas in the place.
                     
                        
                        Meditatio duodecima.
                        ¶THe Pleaſures of the world, (which ſoone abate)
                        Are liuely Emblems of our owne eſtate,
                        Which (like a Banquet at a Fun'rall ſhow)
                        But ſweeten griefe, and ſerue to flatter woe.
                        ¶Pleaſure is fleeting ſtill, and makes no ſtay,
                              Ʋoluptas.
                        
                        It lends a ſmile, or twaine, and ſteales away.
                        ¶Man's life is fickle, full of winged haſte,Vita.
                        
                        It mocks the ſenſe with ioy, and ſoone does waſte.
                        ¶Pleaſure does crowne thy youth, and lulls thy wants,Voluptas
                        
                        But (ſullen age approching) ſtraight auaunts.
                        ¶Man's life is Ioy, and Dolor ſeekes to baniſh,Vita.
                        
                        It doth lament, and mourne in age, and vaniſh.
                        ¶The time of pleaſure's like the life of man;
                        Both ioyfull, both contained in a ſpan;
                        Both highly priz'd, and both on ſudden loſt,
                        When moſt we truſt them, they deceiue vs moſt;
                        What fit of madnes makes vs loue them thus?
                        We leaue our liues, and pleaſure leaueth vs:
                        Why what are Pleaſures? But a golden dreame,Voluptas, quale
                        
                        Which (waking) makes our wants the more extreame?
                        And what is Life? A bubble full of care,Vita, quale.
                        
                        Which (prickt by death) ſtraight empties into ayre:
                        The flowers (clad in far more rich array,
                        Then earſt was Salomon) doe ſoone decay;
                        What thing more ſweet, or fairer then a flowre?
                        Nath'les, it blooms, and fades within an howre;
                        What thing more pleaſing then a morning Sun?
                        And yet this pleaſure euery Day is dun:
                        
                           But thou art heire to Croeſus, and thy treaſure
                        Being great, and endleſſe, endleſſe is thy pleaſure;
                        But thou (thou Croeſus heire) conſider muſt,
                        Thy wealth, and thou, came from, and goes to duſt;
                        Another's noble, and his name is great,
                        And takes his place vpon a loftie ſeat;
                        True 'tis, but yet his many wants are ſuch,
                        That better 'twere he were not knowne ſo much.
                        Another binds his ſoule in Hymens knot,
                        His Spouſe is chaſte, and faire withouten ſpot,
                        But yet his comfort is bedaſht, and done,
                        His grounds are ſtock't, and now he want's a ſonne.
                        ¶How fickle, and vnconſtant's mans Eſtate!
                        Man faine would haue, but then he knowes not what;
                        And hauing, rightly knowes not how to prize it,
                        But like the fooliſh Dunghill-cock imploy's it:
                        But who deſires to liue a life content,
                        Wherein his Cruze of ioy ſhall ne'r be ſpent,
                        Let him conſider what may be deſir'd,Boctius Philoſ. conſol.
                        
                        The date whereof is not to be expir'd:
                        For that's not worth the crauing, to obtaine
                        A happineſſe, that muſt be loſt againe;
                        Nor that, which moſt doe couet moſt, is beſt;
                        Beſt are the goods, mixt with contented reſt;
                        Gaſp not for Folia vanitatis. Honour, wiſh no blazing glory,
                        For theſe will periſh in an ages ſtory;
                        Nor yet for pow'r, for that may be conferr'd
                        On fooles, as well, as thee, that haſt deſeru'd.
                        Thirſt not for Lands, nor Mony; wiſh for none,
                        For Lil
                                 •
                              a terrae. Wealth is neither laſting, nor our owne;
                        Riches are faire inticements, to deceiue vs;
                        They flatter, while we liue, and dying, leaue vs.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        THE ARGVMENT.
                        
                           Ionah deſires to dye, The Lord
                        Rebukes him, He maintaines his word,
                        His anger he doth iuſtifie,
                        God pleads the Cauſe for Niniuie.
                     
                     
                        Sect. 13.
                     
                        WHen ruddy Phoebus had (with morning light)
                     
                     
                        Subdu'd the Eaſt, and put the ſtars to flight,
                        
                           Hiſt. Chap. 4.
                              •
                           .
                     
                     
                        The Lord prepar'd a feruent Eaſterne wind,
                     
                     
                        Whoſe drought together with the Sunne combin'd,
                     
                     
                        Each adding fier to the others heat,
                     
                     
                        (With ſtrong vnited force) amaine did beat,
                     
                     
                        And ſore reflect vpon the helpleſſe head
                     
                     
                        Of fainting Ionah (that was well-nye dead)
                     
                     
                        Who turning oft, and toſſing to and fro,
                     
                     
                        (As they that are in torments vſe to doe)
                     
                     
                        And (reſtleſſe) finding no ſucceſſe of eaſe,
                     
                     
                        But rather, that his tortures ſtill encreaſe;
                     
                     
                        His ſecret paſſion to his ſoule betrai'd,
                     
                     
                        Wiſhing with all his heart to dye, and ſaid;
                     
                     O kill me (Lord) or lo, my heart will riue;
                     For better 'tis for me to dye then liue:
                     
                        So ſaid, the Lord did interrupt his paſſion,
                        Verſ. 9. Gods ſpeech to Ionah.
                     
                     
                        Saying, How now? Is this a ſeemly faſhion?
                     Doth it become my ſeruants heart to ſwell?
                     Can anger helpe thee? Ionah, do'ſt thou well?
                     
                        Is this a fit ſpeech? or a well-plac'd word?
                     What, art thou angry (Ionah) for a Gourd?
                     What, if th' Arabians with their ruder traine
                     Had kill'd thine Oxen,Iob. 2 and thy Cattell ſlaine?
                     What, if conſuming fier (falne from heauen)
                     Had all thy ſeruants of their liues bereauen,
                     And burnt thy Sheep? What, if by ſtrong oppreſsion
                     The Chaldees had vſurpt vniuſt poſſeſsion
                     Vpon thy Cammels? Or had Boreas blowne
                     His full-mouth'd blaſt, and caſt thy houſes downe,
                     And ſlaine thy ſonnes, amid their iollities?
                     Or hadſt thou loſt thy Vineyard full of trees?
                           
                              •
                           . King. 21.15.
                     
                     Or bin bereaued of thine only Sheep,2. Sam. 12.3.
                     
                     That in thy tender boſome vſ'd to ſleep?
                     How would thine haſtie ſpirit then bin ſturr'd,
                     If thou art angry, Ionah, for a Gourd?
                     
                        So Ionah frames his anſwere thus,
                        Ionahs anſwer.
                         
                        and ſaith,
                     
                     Lord, I doe well to vex vnto the death;
                     I bluſh not to acknowledge, and profeſſe
                     Deſerued rage, I'm angry, I confeſſe;
                     'Twould make a ſpirit that is thorow frozen,
                     To blaze like flaming Pitch, and frie like Rozen:
                     Why doſt thou aske that thing, that thou canſt tell?
                     Thou know'ſt I'm angry, and it beſeemes me well.
                     
                        So ſaid,
                        Verſ. 10. 
                        the Lord to Ionah thus beſpake;
                     
                     Doſt thou bemoane, and ſuch compaſsion take
                     Vpon a Gourd,Gods reply. whoſe ſeed thou didſt not ſow,
                     Nor mou'd thy skilfull hands to make it grow,
                     Whoſe beautie ſmall, and profit was but ſlight,
                     Which ſprang, and alſo periſht in a night?
                     Hadſt thou (O duſt and aſhes) ſuch a care,
                     And in-bred pittie, a trifling plant to ſpare?
                     
                        Hadſt thou, (O hard and incompaſsionate,
                     To wiſh the razing of ſo braue a State)
                     Hadſt thou (I ſay) compaſsion, to bewaile
                     The extirpation of a Gourd ſo fraile?
                     And ſhall not I (that am the Lord of Lords)
                     Whoſe fountaine's neuer dry,Verſ. 11. but ſtill affords
                     Sweet ſtreames of mercie, with a freſh ſupply,
                     To thoſe that thirſt for grace? What ſhall not I,
                     (That am the God of mercie, and haue ſworne
                     To pardon ſinners, when ſoe're they turne?
                     (I ſay) ſhall I diſclaime my wonted pitie,
                     And bring to ruine ſuch a goodly Citie,
                     Whoſe hearts (ſo truly penitent) implore me,
                     Who day and night powre foorth their ſoules before me?
                     Shall I deſtroy the mightie Niniuie,
                     
                     Whoſe people are like ſands about the ſea?
                     'Mong which are ſixe-ſcore thouſand ſoules (at leaſt)
                     That hang vpon their tender mothers breſt?
                     Whoſe prettie ſmiles did neuer yet deſcry
                     The deare affection of their mothers eye?
                     Shall I ſubuert, and bring to deſolation
                     A Citie, (nay, more aptly tearm'd a Nation)
                     Whoſe walls are wide, and wondrous full of might?
                     Whoſe hearts are ſorrowfull, and ſoules contrite?
                     Whoſe infants are in number, ſo amounting?
                     And beaſts, and cattell, endleſſe, without counting?
                     What, Ionah, ſhall a Gourd ſo moue thy pitie?
                     And ſhall not I ſpare ſuch a goodly Citie?Explicit Hiſt▪
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        Meditatio vltima.
                        ¶MY heart is full, and knowes not how to vent;
                        My tongue proues traytor to my poore intent;
                        My mind's in labour, and find's no redreſſe;
                        My heart conceiues, My tongue cannot expreſſe;
                        My organs ſuffer, through a maine Defect;
                        Alas! I want a proper Dialect,
                        To blazon forth the tythe of what I muſe;
                        The more I meditate, the more accrewes;
                        But lo, my faultring tongue muſt ſay no more,
                        Vnleſſe ſhe ſtep where ſhe hath trod before.
                        What? ſhall I then be ſilent? No, I'le ſpeake,
                        (Till tongue be tyred, and my lungs be weake)
                        Of deareſt mercie, in as ſweet a ſtraine,
                        As it ſhall pleaſe my Muſe to lend a vaine;
                        And when my voyce ſhall ſtop within her ſourſe,
                        And ſpeech ſhall faulter in this high diſcourſe,
                        My tyred tongue (vnſham'd) ſhall thus extend,
                        Only to name, Deare mercie, and ſo end.
                        ¶Oh high Imperiall King, heauens Architect!
                        Is man a thing, befitting thy Reſpect?
                        Lord, thou art wiſdome, and thy wayes are holy,
                        But man's polluted, full of filth, and folly,
                        Yet is he (Lord) the fabrick of thy hand,
                        And in his ſoule he beares thy glorious brand,
                        How-e're defaced with the ruſt of ſin,
                        Which hath abus'd thy ſtamp, and eaten in;
                        'Tis not the frailtie of mans corrupted nature,
                        Makes thee aſham'd, t'acknowledge man, thy creature;
                        
                           But like a tender father, here on earth,
                        (Whoſe child by nature, or abortiue birth,
                        Doth want that ſweet and fauourable relliſh,
                        Wherewith, her creatures, Nature doth imbelliſh)
                        Reſpects him ne'rtheleſſe; ſo ſtands the caſe,
                        'Twixt God, and ſinfull man: Though ſinne deface
                        The glorious portraiture that man did beare,
                        Whereby he loath'd, and vgly doth appeare,
                        Yet God (within whoſe tender bowels are
                        Deep gulfs of mercie, ſweet beyond compare)
                        Regards, and loues, (with reu'rence be it ſaid)
                        Nay ſeems to dote on man; when he hath ſtrayd,
                        Lord, thou haſt brought him to his fold againe;
                        When he was loſt, thou didſt not then diſdaine
                        To think vpon a vagabond, and giue
                        Thine only Sonne to dye, that he might liue.
                        How poore a mite art thou content withall,
                        That man may ſcape his downe-approching fall?
                        Though baſe we are, yet didſt not thou abhorre vs,
                        But (as our ſtory notes) art pleading for vs,
                        To ſaue vs harmleſſe from our foemans iawes;
                        Art thou turn'd Oratour, to plead our cauſe?
                        ¶How are thy mercies full of admiration!
                        How ſoueraigne! How ſweet's their application!
                        Fatning the ſoule with ſweetnes, and repayring
                        The rotten ruines of a ſoule Deſpayring.
                        ¶Loe here (Malfido) is the feaſt prepar'd;
                        Fall too with courage, and let nought be ſpar'd;
                        Taſte freely of it, Here's no Miſers feaſt;
                        Eate what thou canſt, and pocket vp the reſt:
                        Theſe precious vyands are Reſtoritie,
                        Eate then; and if the ſweetnes make thee drie,
                        
                           Drink large Carouſes out of Mercies cup,
                        The beſt lies in the bottome, Drinke all vp:
                        Theſe cates are ſweet Ambroſia to thy ſoule,
                        And that, which fils the brimme of Mercies boule,
                        Is dainty Nectar; Eate, and drinke thy fill;
                        Spare not the one, ne yet the other ſpill;
                        Prouide in time: Thy Banquet's now begun,
                        Lay vp in ſtore, againſt the feaſt be done:
                        For lo, the time of banquetting is ſhort,
                        And once being done, the world cannot reſtor't;
                        It is a feaſt of Mercy, and of Grace;
                        It is a feaſt for all, or hye, or baſe;
                        A feaſt for him that begs vpon the way,
                        As well for him that does the Scepter ſway;
                        A feaſt for him that howerly bemoanes
                        His deareſt ſinnes, with ſighs, and teares, and groanes;
                        A feaſt for him, whoſe gentle heart reformes;
                        A feaſt for MEN; and ſo a FEAST FOR WORMES
                        ¶Deare liefeſt Lord, that feaſt'ſt the world with Grace,
                        
                        
                           Extend thy bountious Hand, thy Glorious Face:
                        
                        
                           Bid ioyfull welcome to thy hungry gheſt,
                        
                        
                           That we may praiſe the Maſter of the Feaſt;
                        
                        
                           And in thy mercie grant this boone to mee,
                        
                        
                           That I may dye to ſinne, and liue to thee.
                        
                        FINIS.
                        
                           S. AMBROSE.
                           
                              Miſericordia eſt plenitudo omnium virtutum.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  THE GENERALL VSE OF this Hiſtory.
                  ¶WHen as the Ancient world did all imbarke
                  Within the compaſſe of good Noahs Arke,
                  Into the new-waſht world a Doue was ſent,
                  Who in her mouth return'd an Oliffe plant,
                  Which in a ſilent language this related:
                  How that the waters were at length abated:
                  Thoſe ſwelling waters, is the wrath of God,
                  And like the Doue, are Prophets ſent abroad:
                  The Oliffe leafe's a ioyfull type of peace,
                  Whereby we note Gods vengeance doth decreaſe;
                  They ſalue the wounded heart, and make it whole,
                  They bring glad tydings to the drooping ſoule,
                  Proclaiming grace to them that thirſt for Grace,
                  Mercie to thoſe that Mercie will embrace.
                  ¶Malfido, thou, in whoſe diſtruſtfull breſt
                  Deſpayre hath brought in ſticks to build her neſt,
                  Where ſhe may ſafely lodge her luckleſſe brood,
                  To feed vpon thy heart, and ſuck thy blood,
                  Beware betimes, leſt cuſtome and permiſſion
                  Preſcribe a Right, and ſo ſhe claime poſſeſſion.
                  ¶Deſpairing man, whoſe burthen makes thee ſtoop
                  Vnder the terror of thy ſinnes, and droop
                  Through dull deſpayre, whoſe too-too ſullen griefe
                  Makes Heauen vnable to apply reliefe,
                  Whoſe eares are dull'd with noyſe of whips & chaines,
                  And yells of damned ſoules, through tort'red paines,
                  
                     Come here, and rouze thy ſelfe; vnſeele thoſe eyes,
                  Which ſad Deſpaire cloſ'd vp; Ariſe, Ariſe,
                  And goe to Niniuey, the worlds great Palace,
                  Earths mighty wonder, and behold, the ballace,
                  And burthen of her bulk, is nought but ſin,
                  Which (wilfull) ſhe commits, and wallowes in;
                  Behold her Images, her fornications,
                  Her crying ſinnes, her vile abominations;
                  Behold the guiltleſſe bloud that ſhe did ſpill,
                  Like Spring tides in the ſtreets, and reeking ſtill:
                  Behold her ſcortching luſts, and taint deſier,
                  Like Sulph'rous Aetna blaze, and blaze vp hier;
                  She rapes, and rends, and theeues, and there is none
                  Can iuſtly call the thing he hath; his owne;
                  That ſacred Name of God, that Name of wonder,
                  In ſtead of worſhipping, ſhe teares in ſunder;
                  She's not enthrall'd to this ſinne, or another,
                  But like a Leper's all infected ouer;
                  Not only ſinfull, but in ſinnes ſubiection,
                  She's not infected, but a meere infection.
                  No ſooner had the Prophet (Heau'ns great Spy)
                  Begun an onſet to his greater Cry,
                  But ſhe repented, ſigh'd, and wept, and tore
                  Her curious haire, and garments that ſhe wore,
                  She ſate in aſhes, and put ſackcloth on,
                  All drencht in briny griefe, all woe▪begon;
                  She calls a Faſt, proclaimes a Prohibition
                  To man, and beaſt; (ſad tokens of contrition)
                  No ſooner prayd, but heard; No ſooner groan'd,
                  But pitied; No ſooner grieu'd, but moan'd;
                  Timely Repentance ſpeedy grace procur'd,
                  The ſore that's ta'ne in time, is quickly cur'd:
                  
                     No ſooner did her trickling teares, or'-flow
                  Her blubber'd cheekes, (ſlie meſſengers of woe)
                  But ſtraitwaies heau'n wip't her ſuffuſed eyes,
                  And gently ſtrok'd her cheeks, and bid her riſe;
                  No faults were ſeene, as if no fault had bin,
                  Deare Mercy made a Quittance for her ſin.
                  ¶Malfido, rouze thy leaden ſpirit, Beſtirre thee,
                  Hold vp thy drowſie head, Here's comfort for thee;
                  What if thy Zeale be frozen hard? What then?
                  Thy Sauiours Blood will thaw that froſt agen:
                  Thy prayr's that ſhould be feruent, hot as fier,
                  Proceed but coldly from a dull Deſier;
                  What then? Grieue Inly, But doe not diſmay,
                  Who hear's thy pray'rs, will giue thee ſtrength to pray:
                  Though left awhile, thou art not quite giu'n o're,
                  
                     Where Sinne abounds, there Grace aboundeth more:
                  
                  ¶'Las, this is all the good that I can doe thee,
                  To eaſe thy griefe, I here commend vnto thee
                  A little Booke, but a great Myſtery,
                  A great Delight, A little Hiſtory;
                  A little branch ſlipt from a ſauing tree,
                  But bearing fruit as great, as great mought bee;
                  A ſmall abridgment 'tis of Gods great loue;
                  A Meſſage ſent from heauen by a Doue:
                  It is a heauenly Lecture, that relates
                  To Princes, Paſtors, People, all Eſtates
                  Their ſeu'rall duties.
                  ¶Peruſe it well, and binde it to thy breſt,
                  There reſts the Cauſe of thy Defectiue reſt:
                  But reade it often, or elſe reade it not:
                  Once read, is not obſeru'd, or ſoone forgot,
                  Nor is't enough to reade, but vnderſtand,
                  
                     Or elſe thy tongue, for want of wit,'s prophan'd,
                  Nor is't enough to purchaſe knowledge by it;
                  Salue heales no ſore, vnleſſe the party apply it:
                  Apply it then; 'Tis hard, and mickle paines,
                  Doe what thou canſt,Fac quod potes, & quod non pates, pete. and pray for what remaines.
                  
                     The particular application.
                     ¶THen thou, that art oppreſt with ſad Deſpayre,
                     Here ſhalt thou ſee the ſtrong effect of Prayre:
                     Then pray with faith,
                           Ionah, Chap. 2. & chap 3.10. Application.
                         and (feruent) without ceaſing
                     (Like Iacob) wreſtle, till thou get a bleſſing.
                     ¶Here ſhalt thou ſee the type of Chriſt,Chap. 1.17. thy Sauiour;
                     Then let thy Suits be through his name,Application. and fauour.
                     ¶Here ſhalt thou finde repentance and true griefe
                     Of ſinners like thy ſelfe,Chap. 3.5. and their beliefe;
                     Then ſuit thy griefe to theirs,Application. and let thy ſoule
                     Cry mightily,Chap. 3.10. vntill her wounds be whole.
                     ¶Here ſhalt thou ſee the meeknes of thy God,
                     Who on Repentance turnes, and burnes the Rod;
                     Repents, of what he meant,Chap. 4. and ſeemeth ſorrie;
                     Here mayſt thou then behold him pleading for ye:
                     Then thus ſhall be thy meed,Application. if thou repent,
                     In ſtead of plagues and direfull puniſhment,
                     Thou ſhalt finde mercy, loue, and heauens applauſe,
                     And God of heauen (himſelfe) will plead thy cauſe.
                     ¶Here haſt thou then compil'd within this Treaſure,
                     Firſt,Chap. 1.2. the Almighties high, and iuſt diſpleaſure
                     Againſt foule ſinne, or ſuch as ſinfull bee,
                     Or Prince, or poore, or high, or low degree.
                     ¶Here is deſcri'd the beaten Road to Faith:Chap. 3.4.
                     
                     ¶Here mayſt thou ſee the force that Preaching hath:Chap. 3.5.
                     
                     
                        ¶Here is deſcrib'd in (briefe but) full expreſſion,Chap. 3.6.
                     
                     The nature of a Conuert, and his paſſion:
                     His ſober Diet, which is thin, and ſpare,
                     His clothing, which is Sackcloth; and his Prayre
                     Not faintly ſent to heauen, nor ſparingly,
                     But piercing, feruent, and mightie cry:Chap. 3.10.
                     
                     ¶Here maiſt thou ſee, how Pray'r, and true Repentance
                     Doe ſtriue with God, preuaile, and turne his ſentence,
                     From ſtrokes to ſtroking, and from plagues infernall,
                     To boundleſſe Mercies, and to life Eternall.
                     ¶Till Zepher lend my Bark a ſecond Gale,
                     I flip mine Anchor, and I ſtrike my ſaile.
                     FINIS.
                     
                        O Dulcis ſaluator Mundi
vltima verba quae tu dixisti in Cruce,
ſint vltima mea verba in Luce;
& quando amplius affare non poſſum, 
exaudi tu cordis mei deſiderium.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  A Hymne to God.
                  
                     WHo giues me then an Adamantine Quill?
                     A Marble tablet? And a Dauids skill?
                     To blazon foorth the praiſe of my dear Lord
                     In deep grau'n letters, aye vpon Record
                     To laſt, for times eternall proceſſe, ſuer,
                     So long, as Sunne, and Moone, and Stars enduer:
                     Had I as many mouthes, as Sands there are,
                     Had I a nimble tongue for euery Starre,
                     And euery word I ſpeake, a Caractere,
                     And euery minutes time ten ages were,
                     To chaunt foorth all thy praiſe it nought auaile,
                     For tongues, and words, and time, and all would faile:
                     Much leſſe can I poore Weakling tune my tongue,
                     To take a taske befits an Angels ſong;
                     Sing what thou canſt, when thou canſt ſing no more,
                     Weep then as faſt that thou canſt ſing no more,
                     Be blurre thy booke with teares, and goe thy wayes,
                     For euery blurre will proue a booke of praiſe.
                     Thine Eye that viewes the mouing Spheares aboue,
                     Let it giue praiſe to him that makes them moue:
                     Thou riches haſt; Thy Hands that hold, and haue them,
                     Let them giue praiſe to him, that freely gaue them:
                     Thine Armes defend thee, then for recompence,
                     Let them praiſe him, that gaue thee ſuch defence:
                     Thy Tongue was giuen to praiſe thy Lord, the giuer,
                     Then let thy Tongue praiſe higheſt God for euer:
                     Faith comes by hearing, and thy faith will ſaue thee;
                     Then let thine Eares praiſe him, that hearing gaue thee:
                     Thy heart is begg'd by him that first did make it,
                     My ſonne, giue me thy heart; Lord, freely take it:
                     
                     Eyes, hands, and armes, tongues, eares, and hearts of men,
                     Sing praiſe, and let the people ſay, Amen.
                     
                        ¶:Tune you your Inſtruments, and let them vary,Pſal. 150.
                     
                     Praiſe him vpon them in his Sanctuary,
                     Praiſe him within the higheſt Firmament,
                     Which ſhewes his power and his gouernment,
                     Praiſe him, for all his mighty Acts are knowne,
                     Praiſe him according to his high Renowne,
                     Praiſe him with Trump victorious, ſhrill, and ſharp,
                     With Pſaltry lowd, and many-ſtringed Harp,
                     With ſounding Tymbrell, and delightfull Flute,
                     With (Muſicks full Interpreter) the Lute,
                     Praiſe him vpon the Mayden Virginalls,
                     Vpon the clerick Organs, and Cymballs,
                     Vpon the ſweet maieſtick Vyalls touch,
                     Double your ioyes, and let your praiſe be ſuch;
                     Let all, in whom is life and breath, giue praiſe
                     To mighty God of Hoſts, in endleſſe dayes;
                     Let euery Soule, to whom a voyce is giuen,
                     Sing Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord of heauen;
                     For loe, a Lambe is found, that vndertooke
                     To breake the ſeuen-fold-ſeale, and ope the Booke:
                     ¶O let my life add number to my dayes,
                     To ſhew thy Glory, and to ſing thy praiſe;
                     Let euery minute in thy praiſe be ſpent,
                     Let euery head be bare, and knee be bent
                     To thee (deare Lambe;) Who ere thy praiſes hide,
                     O let his lips be cloſ'd, and tongue for euer ty'de.
                  
                  
                     Halelujah:
                     Gloria Deo in excelſis.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Eleuen Pious Meditations.
                  
                     1
                     ¶WIthin the holy Writ I well diſcouer
                     Three ſpeciall Attributes of God; His Power,
                     
                     His Iuſtice, and his Mercy, All vncreated,
                     Eternall all, and all Vnſeparated
                     From Gods pure Eſſence, yet from thence proceeding
                     All very God, All perfect, All exceeding;
                     And from that ſelfe-ſame Text three names I gather
                     Of Great Iehoua; Lord, and God, and Father;
                     The firſt denotes him mounted on his Throne,
                     In Power, Maieſty, Dominion;
                     The next deſcries him on his Kingly Bench,
                     Rewarding Euill with dreadfull puniſhments;
                     The third deſcribes him on his Mercy-ſeate,
                     Full great in Grace, and in his Mercy great;
                     ¶All three I worſhip, and before all three
                     My heart ſhall humbly proſtrate, with my knee;
                     But in my priuate choice, I fancie rather,
                     Then call him Lord, or God, to call him Father.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     2
                     ¶IN Hell no Life, in Heauen no Death there is,
                     In Earth both Life, and Death, both Bale, and Blis,
                     In Heauen's all Life, no end, nor new ſupplying;
                     In Hell's all Death, and yet there is no dying;
                     Earth (like a partiall Ambidexter) doth
                     Prepare for Death, or Life, prepares for Both;
                     Who liues to ſinne, in Hell his portion's giuen,
                     Who dyes to ſinne, ſhall after liue in Heauen.
                     ¶Though Earth my Nurſe be, Heauen, be thou my Father;
                     Ten thouſand deaths let me enduer rather
                     Within my Nurſes armes, then One to Thee;
                     Earths honor, with thy frownes, is death to mee:
                     I liue-on Earth, as on a Stage of ſorrow;
                     Lord, if thou pleaſeſt, end the Play to morrow:
                     I liue on Earth, as in a Dreame of pleaſure,
                     Awake me when thou wilt, I wait thy leiſure:
                     I liue on Earth, but as of life bereauen,
                     My life's with thee, for (Lord) thou art in Heauen.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     3
                     ¶NOthing that e'r was made, was made for nothing:
                     
                        Beaſts for thy food, their skins were for thy clothing,
                     
                        Flow'rs for thy ſmell, and Herbs for Cuer good,
                     
                        Trees for thy ſhade, Their Fruit for pleaſing Food:
                     The ſhowers fall vpon the fruitfull ground,
                     Whoſe kindly Dew makes tender Graſſe abound,
                     The Graſſe is made for beaſts to feed vpon,
                     And beaſts are food for Man: But Man alone
                     Is made to ſerue his Lord in all his waies,
                     And be the Trumpet of his Makers praiſe.
                     ¶Let Heau'n be then to me obdure as braſſe,
                     The Earth as yron, vnapt for graine, or graſſe,
                     Then let my Flocks conſume, and neuer ſteed me,
                     Let pinching Famine want, wherewith to feed me,
                     When I forget to honour thee, (my Lord)
                     Thy glorious Attributes, thy Works, thy Word.
                     
                     O let the Trump of thine eternall Fame,
                     
                     Sound euer, Euer hallow'd be thy Name.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     4
                     ¶GOd made the World, and all that therein is,
                     
                        Yet, what a little part of it is his?
                     Quarter the Earth, and ſee, how ſmall a roome
                     Is ſtiled with the name of Chriſtendome;
                     
                     The reſt (through blinded ignorance) rebels,
                     O're-run with Pagans, Turks, and Infidels:
                     
                     Nor yet is all this little Quarter his,
                     For (though all know him) halfe know him amiſſe,
                     Profeſsing Chriſt for lucre, (as they liſt)
                     And ſerue the triple Crowne of Antichriſt;
                     
                     Yet is this little handfull much made leſſer,
                     Ther's many Libertines, for one Profeſſor:
                     
                     Nor doe Profeſſors all profeſſe aright,
                     'Mong whom there often lurks an Hypocrite.
                     
                     ¶O where, and what's thy Kingdome? (bleſſed God)
                     Where is thy Scepter? wher's thine yron Rod?
                     
                     Reduce thy reck'nings to their totall ſumme,
                     O let thy Power, and thy Kingdome Come.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     5
                     ¶MAN in himſelfe's a little World, Alone,
                     His Soul's the Court, or high Imperiall Throne,
                     Wherein as Empreſſe, ſits the Vnderſtanding
                     
                     Gently directing, yet with awe Commanding:
                     Her Handmaid's WILL: Affections, Maids of Honor,
                     All following cloſe, and duly wayting on her:
                     But Sin, that alwaies enui'd mans Condition,
                     Within this kingdome raiſed vp Diuiſion;
                     
                     Withdrawne mans Will, and brib'd his falſe Affection,
                     
                     That This, no order hath, nor That, Election;
                     The Will proues traitor to the Vnderſtanding;
                     
                     
                        Reaſon hath loſt her power, and left commanding,
                     She's quite depoſ'd, and put to foule diſgrace,
                     And Tyrant Will, vſurps her Empty place.
                     ¶Vouchſafe (Lord) in this little World of mine
                     To raigne, that I may raigne with Thee in thine:
                     And ſince my will is quite of good bereauen,
                     
                        Thy will be done in earth, as 'tis in heauen.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     6
                     ¶WHo liue to ſin, they all are theeues to Heauen,
                     And Earth; They ſteale frō 
                        God, & take vngiuen;
                     Good men they rob, and ſuch as liue vpright,
                     And (being baſtards) ſhare the free-mans Right;
                     They're all as owners, in the owners ſtead,
                     And (like to Dogs) deuoure the childrens bread;
                     They haue, and lack, and want what they poſſeſſe,
                     They're moſt vnhappy, in their moſt happineſſe:
                     They are not goods, but riches, that thou haſt,
                     And not be'ng goods, to eu'ls they turne at laſt.
                     ¶(Lord) what I haue, let me enioy in thee,
                     
                     And thee in it, or elſe take it from mee;
                     
                     My ſtore, or want, make thou, or fade, or flouriſh,
                     
                     So ſhall my comforts neither change, nor periſh;
                     
                        That little I enioy, (Lord) make it mine,
                     In making me (that am a Sinner) thine;
                     
                     'Tis thou, or none, that ſhall ſupply my need,
                     O Lord; Giue vs this day our daily bread.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     7
                     ¶THe quick-conceited Schoole-men well approue
                     A difference 'twixt Charitie, and Loue;
                     
                     
                        Loue is a vertue, whereby we explaine
                     Our ſelues to God, and God to vs againe:
                     But Charity's imparted to our Brother,
                     Whereby we traffick, one man with another:
                     The firſt extends to God; The laſt belongs
                     To man, In giuing right, and bearing wrongs;
                     
                     In number, they are twaine, In vertue, One;
                     
                     For one not truly being, t' others none.
                     ¶In louing God, if I neglect my Neighbour,
                     
                     My loue hath loſt his proofe, and I my labour:
                     My Zeale, my Faith, my Hope that neuer failes me,
                     (If Charitie be wanting) nought auailes me.
                     ¶(Lord) in my Soule, a ſpirit of Loue create me,
                     And I will loue my Brother, if he hate me:
                     In nought but loue, lets me enuy my betters;
                     And then, Forgiue my debts, as I may detters.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     8
                     ¶I Finde a true reſemblance in the growth
                     Of Sin, and Man; Alike in breeding, both;
                     The Soul's the Mother, and the Diuell Syer,
                     
                     Who luſting long in mutuall hot deſier,
                     Enioy their wils, and ioyne in Copulation;
                     
                     The Seed that fils her wombe, is foule Tentation;
                     
                     The ſinnes Conception, is the Soules Conſent;
                     
                     And then it quickens, when it giues content;
                     
                     The birth of Sin is finiſht in the action;
                     
                     And Cuſtome brings it to its full perfection.
                     
                     ¶O let my fruitleſſe Soule be barren rather.
                     Then bring foorth ſuch a Child, for ſuch a Father:
                     
                     Or if my Soule breed Sin, (not being wary)
                     O let it either dye, or elſe miſcarry;
                     
                     She is thy Spouſe (O Lord) doe thou aduiſe her,
                     Keepe thou her chaſte, Let not the Fiend entice her:
                     Trie thou my heart, Thy Trials bring Saluation,
                     
                     But let me not be led into Temptation.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     9
                     ¶FOrtune (that blind ſuppoſed Goddeſſe) is
                     Still rated at, if ought ſucceed amiſſe;
                     'Tis ſhe (the vaine abuſe of Prouidence)
                     That beares the blame, when others make th' offence;
                     
                     When this mans barne finds not her wonted ſtore,
                     
                     
                        Fortune's condemn'd, becauſe ſhe ſent no more;
                     If this man dye, or that man liue too long,
                     
                        Fortune's accuſ'd, and ſhe hath done the wrong;
                     
                     Ah fooliſh Dolts, and (like your Goddeſſe) blind!
                     You make the fault, and call your Saint vnkind;
                     For when the cauſe of Eu'll begins in Man,
                     
                     Th' effect enſues from whence the cauſe began;
                     Then know the reaſon of thy diſcontent,
                     The eu'll of Sinne, makes Eu'll of puniſhment.
                     
                     ¶(Lord) hold me vp, or ſpurre me, when I fall;
                     So ſhall my Eu'll be iuſt, or not at all:
                     
                     Defend me from the World, the Fleſh, the Deuill,
                     
                     And ſo thou ſhalt deliuer me from Euill.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     10
                     
                        ¶THe Prieſtly skirts of A'rons holy coate
                        I kiſſe; and to my morning Muſe deuote:
                        Had neuer King, in any age, or Nation,
                        Such glorious Robes, ſet foorth in ſuch a faſhion,
                        With Gold, and Gemmes, and Silks of Princely Dye,
                        And Stones, befitting more then Maieſtie:
                        
                        The Perſian Sophies, and rich Shaeba's Queene
                        
                        Had ne'r the like, nor e'r the like had ſeene;
                        Vpon the skirts (in order as they fell)
                        Firſt, a Pomegranat was, and then a Bell;
                        
                        By each Pomegranat did a Bell appeare;
                        Many Pomegranats, many Bels there were;
                        Pomegranats nouriſh, Bels doe make a ſound;
                        
                        As bleſſings fall, Thankſgiuings muſt abound.
                        ¶If thou wilt clothe my heart with A'rons tyer,
                        My tongue ſhall praiſe, as well as heart deſier:
                        My tongue, and pen, ſhall dwell vpon thy Story,
                        
                        (O Lord) for thine is Kingdome, Power, Glory.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           ¶THe Ancient Sophiſts, that were ſo preciſe,
                        (And often-times (perchance) too curious nice)
                        Auerre, that Nature hath beſtow'd on Man
                        Three perfect Soules: When this I truly ſcan,
                        Me thinks, their Learning ſwath'd in Errour, lyes;
                        They were not wiſe enough, and yet too wiſe,
                        
                        Too curious wiſe, becauſe they mention more
                        Then one; Not wiſe enough, becauſe not foure;
                        
                        
                           Nature, not Grace, is Miſtres of their Schooles;
                        
                        
                           Grace counts them wiſeſt,
                           Sapere eſt inſipere. that are verieſt Fooles:
                        
                        Three Soules in man? Grace doth a fourth allow,
                        The Soule of Faith: But this is Greeke to you:
                        'Tis Faith that makes man truly wiſe; 'Tis Faith
                        
                        Makes him poſſeſſe that thing he neuer hath.
                        ¶This Glorious Soule of Faith beſtow on mee,
                        (O Lord) or elſe take thou the other three: Faith makes men leſſe then Children, more then Men,
                        It makes the Soule crie, Abba, and Amen.
                        
                     
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  PENTELOGIA: Or THE QVINTESSENCE OF MEDITATION.
                  
                     Mors tua, Mors Chriſti, Fraus Mundi, Gloria Coeli, Et Dolor Inferni, ſunt meditanda tibi.
                  
                  
                     Thy Death, the Death of Chriſt, the Worlds Tentation, Heauens Ioy, Hells Torment, be thy Meditation.
                  
                  
                  
                     AT LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, for Richard Moore, and are to be ſold at his ſhop in Saint Dunſtans Church-yard. 1620.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  Mors tua. 1
                  ¶ME thinks, I ſee the nimble-aged Syre
                  
                  Paſſe by amaine, with feete vnapt to tyre,
                  Vpon his head an Hower-glaſſe he weares,
                  And in his wrinkled hand, a Sithe he beares,
                  (Both Inſtruments, to take the liues from Men,
                  
                  Th' one ſhewes with what, the other ſheweth when.)
                  Me thinkes, I heare the Dolefull Paſſing-bell,
                  
                  Setting an onſet to his lowder knell;
                  
                  (This moody muſick of impartiall Death
                  
                  Who daunces after, daunces out of breath.)
                  Me thinkes, I ſee my deareſt friends lament,
                  
                  With ſighs, and teares, and wofull dryriment,
                  
                  My tender Wife, and Children, ſtanding by,
                  Dewing the Death-bed, whereupon I lye.
                  Me thinkes, I heare a Voyce (in ſecret) ſay,
                  
                     Thy Glaſſe is runne, and thou muſt dye to day.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Mors Chriſti. 2
                  ¶ANd am I here, and my Redeemer gone?
                  Can He be dead, and is not my life done?
                  Was he tormented in exceſſe of meaſure?
                  And doe I liue yet? And yet liue in pleaſure?
                  Alas! could Sinners finde out ne'r a one,
                  
                  More fit then Thee, for them to ſpit vpon?
                  Did thy cheekes entertaine a Traytors lips?
                  Was thy deare body ſcourg'd, and torne with whips,
                  
                  So that the guiltleſſe blood came trickling after?
                  And did thy fainting browes ſweat blood and water?
                  Wert thou (Lord) hang'd vpon the Curſed Tree?
                  O world of Griefe! And was all this for mee?
                  ¶Burſt foorth, my teares, into a world of ſorrow,
                  And let my nights of griefe ne'r finde a morrow;
                  Since thou art dead (Lord) grant thy ſeruant roome,
                  Within his heart, to build thy heart a Tombe.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Fraus Mundi. 3
                  ¶WHat is the World? A great Exchange of ware,
                  Wherein all ſorts, and ſexes cheapning are,
                  The Fleſh, the Diuell ſit, and cry, What lack ye?
                  
                  When moſt they fawne, they moſt intend to rack ye;
                  The wares, are Cups of Ioy, and Beds of Pleaſure,
                  
                  There's goodly choice, downe weight, and flowing meaſure;
                  A Soul's the price, but they giue time to pay,
                  Vpon the Death-bed, on the dying Day.
                  
                  ¶Hard is the Bargaine, and vniuſt the Meaſure,
                  
                  When as the Price ſo much out-laſts the Pleaſure:
                  The Ioyes that are on earth are Counterfeits;
                  If ought be true, 'tis this, Th' are true Deceits;
                  They flatter, fawne, and (like the Crocadile)
                  
                     Kill where they laugh, and murther where they ſmile:
                  They daily dip within thy Diſh, and Cry,
                  
                     Who hath betray'd thee? Maſtre, Is it I?
               
               
                  
                  Gloria Coeli. 4
                  ¶WHen I behold, and well aduiſe vpon
                  The Wiſemans ſpeech,Eccleſ. 1. 
                     There's nought beneath the Sun,
                  
                  
                     But vanitie, my Soule rebells within,
                  And loaths the Dunghill-priſon ſhe is in:
                  But when I looke to new Ieruſalem,
                  
                  Wherein's reſeru'd my Crowne, my Diadem,
                  
                  O what a Heauen of bliſſe, my Soule enioyes,
                  On ſudden rapt into that heauen of Ioyes!
                  Where rauiſht (in the depth of meditation)
                  She well diſcernes, with Eye of Contemplation,
                  
                  The Glory of God, in his Imperiall Seat,
                  
                  Full ſtrong in Might, in Maieſtie compleat,
                  Where troups of Powers, Vertues, Cherubins,
                  
                  
                     Angels, Archangels, Saints, and Seraphins,
                  
                  Are chaunting praiſes to their heauenly King,
                  Where Halelujah they for euer ſing.
               
               
                  
                  Dolor Inferni. 5
                  ¶LEt Poets pleaſe to torture Tantalus,
                  
                  Let gryping Vultures gnaw Prometheus,
                  
                  And let Ixion turne his endleſſe Wheele,
                  Let Nemeſis torment with whips of Steele;
                  They far come ſhort, t' expreſſe the paines of thoſe
                  
                  That rage in Hell, enwrapt in endleſſe woes;
                  Where time no end, nor plagues finde no exemption;Ex infernis nulla redemp.
                  
                  Where cryes admit no helpe, nor place redemption;
                  Where fier lacks no flame, the flame no heate,
                  
                  To make their torments ſharp, and plagues compleat;
                  Where wretched Soules to tortures bound ſhall bee,
                  Seruing a world of yeeres, and not be Free;
                  Where nothing's heard, but yells, and ſudden cryes;
                  Where fier neuer ſlakes, nor Worme e'r dyes:
                  But where this Hell is plac'd (my Muſe)) ſtop there,
                  Lord, ſhew me what it is, but neuer where.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     1 Mors tua.
                  ¶CAn he be Faire, that withers at a Blaſt?
                  Or he be Strong, that Ayery Breath can caſt?
                  Can he be Wiſe, that knowes not how to liue?
                  Or he be Rich, that nothing hath to giue?
                  Can he be Yong, that's Feeble, Weake, and Wan?
                  So Faire, ſo Strong, ſo Wiſe, ſo Rich, ſo Yong is Man:
                  
                  So Faire is Man, that Death (a parting Blaſt)
                  Crops his faire Flow'r, and makes him Earth at laſt;
                  So Strong is Man, that with a Gaſping Breath
                  
                  He totters, and bequeaths his Strength to Death;
                  
                  So Wiſe is Man, that if with Death he ſtriue,
                  His Wiſdome cannot teach him how to liue;
                  So Rich is Man, that (all his Debts b'ing pay'd)
                  His wealth's the Winding-ſheet wherein hee's lay'd:
                  So Yong is Man, that (broke with Care and Sorrow)
                  Hee's old enough to Day, to Dye to Morrow:
                  
                  Why bragg'ſt thou then, Thou Worme of Fiue foot-long?
                  Th' art neither Faire, nor Strong, nor Wiſe, nor Rich, nor Yong.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     2 Mors Chriſti.
                  
                     I Thurſt; And who ſhall quench this Eager Thurſt?
                  
                  
                     I Grieue; And with my griefe my Heart will Burſt;
                  
                     I Grieue, becauſe I thurſt without Reliefe;
                  
                     I Thurſt, becauſe my Soule is burnt with Griefe;
                  
                  
                     I thurſt; And (dri'd with Griefe) my Heart will Dye;
                  
                     I Grieue, and thurſt the more, For Sorrow's drie:
                  
                  The more I grieue, the more my thurſt appeares:
                  Would God! I had not grieu'd out all my teares;
                  
                  
                     I Thurſt; And yet my Griefes haue made a Floud;
                  
                  But Teares are ſalt; I Grieue, and Thurſt for Bloud;
                  
                  
                     I Grieue for Bloud; for Bloud muſt ſend Reliefe;
                  
                  
                     I Thurſt for Bloud, for Bloud muſt eaſe my Griefe;
                  
                  
                     I Thurſt for ſacred Bloud of a Deare Lambe;
                  
                  
                     I Grieue to thinke from whence that Deare Blood came;
                  'Twas ſhed for Mee, O let me drinke my fill,
                  
                  Although my Griefe remaine Entier ſtill:
                  O ſoueraigne Pow'r of that Vermilion SPRING,
                  
                  Whoſe Vertue, neither Heart conceiues, nor Tongue can ſing.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     3 Fraus Mundi.
                  
                     I Loue the World (as Clients loue the Lawes)
                  To manage the vprightnes of my Cauſe;
                  
                  The World loues me, as Sheepheards doe their Flocks,
                  
                  To Rob, and ſpoyle them of their fleecy Locks;
                  I loue the World, and vſe it as mine Inne,
                  
                  To bait, and reſt my tyred Carkaſſe in:
                  The World loues me, For what? To make her Game;
                  
                  For filthy Sinne, ſhe ſels me timely Shame;
                  
                  Foorth from her Eyes doe Springs of Venome burſt,
                  But like a Baſiliske I'le ſee her firſt;
                  
                  And this my firme intended Courſe ſhall be,
                  To poyſon her, or ſhe will poyſon me:
                  We liue at Iarres, as froward Gamesters doe,
                  Still guarding, not Regarding others Foe;
                  I loue the World, to ſerue my turne, and leaue her,
                  'Tis no Deceit to Coozen a Deceiuer;
                  Shee'l not miſſe me, I, leſſe the World ſhall miſſe,
                  To loſe a World of Griefe, t' enioy a World of Bliſſe.
               
               
                  
                  
                     4 Gloria Coeli.
                  
                     EArth ſtands immou'd, and Fixt, Her Cituation
                  Admits no locall Change, no Alteration,
                  
                     HEAVEN alway moues, renuing ſtill his place,
                  And euer ſees vs with another Face;
                  
                  
                     EARTH ſtandeth Fixt, yet there I liue oppreſts;
                  
                  
                     HEAVEN alway moues, yet there is all my Reſt:
                  
                  Enlarge thy ſelfe, my SOVLE, with Meditation,
                  
                  Mount there, and there beſpeake thy Habitation;
                  
                  Where Ioyes are full, and pure, not mixt with mourning,
                  All Endleſſe, and from which is no returning:
                  No Theft, no Cruell Murther harbours there,
                  No Hoary-headed-Care, no ſudden Feare,
                  
                  No pinching Want, no (Griping faſt) Oppreſſion,
                  
                  Nor Death, the ſtipend of our ſoule Tranſgreſſion:
                  
                  But deareſt Friendſhip, Loue, and laſting Pleaſure
                  
                  Aye there abides, withouten ſtin
                        •
                     , or Meaſure;
                  
                  
                     Fulneſſe of Riches, Comfort ſempeternall,
                  
                     Exceſſe without a ſurfeiting; And Life Eternall.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     5 Dolor Inferni.
                  THe Trump ſhall blow, The Dead (awak'd) ſhall riſe,
                  And to the Clouds ſhall turne their wondring Eyes;
                  
                  The Heauen ſhall ope, The Bridegroome foorth ſhall come,
                  To iudge the World, and giue the World her Doome:
                  
                  
                     Ioy to the IVST, to others Endleſſe SMART;
                  
                  To thoſe the Voyce bids COME, to theſe, DEPART;
                  
                  
                     DEPART from LIFE, yet (dying) liue for Euer;
                  
                  For Euer dying be, and yet Dye Neuer;
                  
                  
                     DEPART like Dogs, with DIVELS take your lot;
                  
                     DEPART like DIVELS, for I know you not;
                  
                  Like DOGS, like DIVELS goe, Goe Howle, and Barke;
                  
                     DEPART in DARKNES, for your deeds were Darke;
                  Let roring be your MVSICK, And your Food
                  
                  Be fleſh of VIPERS, And your Drinke, their BLOOD;
                  
                  Let FIENDS afflict thee, with REPROCH, and SHAME,
                  
                  
                     DEPART, DEPART into Eternall FLAME:
                  
                  If HELL the Guerdon then of Sinners bee,
                  (Lord) giue me HEL on Earth (Lord) giue me HEAVEN with thee.
                  — vv — vv — I am Define Tibia verſus.
                  FINIS.
                  
               
            
         
      
   