
      
         
            
            
            Hadaſſa: OR THE HISTORY OF QVEENE ESTER: With Meditations thereupon, Diuine and Morall.
            
               Horat. Ode 6.

               Conamur tenues, grandia; nec pudor,
               Imbelliſque Lyrae Muſa potens vetat.
            
            By FRA. QVARLES.
            
               AT LONDON, Imprinted for Richard Moore, and are to be ſold at his ſhop in Saint Dunstans Church-yard, in Fleetſtreet. 1621.
         
         
            
               
               
               TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, RENOWNED FOR LEARNING, PIETY, AND ALL GRACIOVS GOVERNEMENT:
            IAMES, BY THE GRACE OF GOD, KING OF GREAT BRITTAINE, FRANCE AND IRELAND, DEFENDER OF THE FAITH.
            FRANCIS QVARLES, HIS MOST HVMBLE SERVANT, and faithfull Homager, dedicates, preſents, and conſecrates theſe his labours, to receiue honour from his gracious countenance, and to be glorified by his approbation.
            
         
         
            
            
            A PREFACE TO THE READER.
            
               A Sober vaine best ſuits Theologie: If therefore thou expectſt ſuch elegancy as takes the times, affect ſome ſubiect as will beare it.Audire fabulas, eſt impedimentum cognitioni veritatis. Arist. 2. Metaphiſ. Had I laboured with ouer-abundance of * fictions, or flouriſhes, perhaps they had expoſed me, cenſurable, and diſprized this ſacred ſubiect: Therefore I rest more ſparing in that kind.
            Two things I would treat of: Firſt, the matter, ſecondly, the manner of this Hiſtory.
            
                As for the matter, (ſo farre as I haue dealt) it is Canonicall, and indighted by the holy Spirit of God, not lyable to errour, and needs no blanching.
            In it Theologie ſits as Queene, attended by her handmaidThe excellence and vſe of this Hiſtory. Philoſophy; both concurring, to make the vnderſtanding Reader, a good Diuine, and a wiſe Moralist.
            As for the Diuinity, it diſcouers the Almighty in his two great Attributes; in his Mercy, deliuering his Church; in his Iuſtice, confounding her enemies.
            As for the Morality, it offers to vs the wholy practicke part of Philoſophy, dealt out into Ethicks, Politicks, and Oeconomicks.
            
                The Ethicall part (the obiect whereof is the Manners of a priuate man) ranges through the whole booke, and empties

it ſelfe into the Catalogue of Morall vertues, either thoſe thatHeiland in Eth. Mores inſtituūt ad virtutem. gouerne the body; as Fortitude, Chap. 9. 2. and Temperance, Chap. 1. 8. or thoſe which direct the ſoule, either in outward things, as Liberality, Chap. 1. 3. Magnificence, Chap. 1. 6. Magnanimity, Chap. 2. 20. and Modesty, Chap. 6. 12. or in conuerſation, as Iuſtice, Chap. 7. 9. Manſuetude, Chap. 5. 2, &c.
            
                The Politicall part (the obiect whereof is Publike Society) inſtructs, firſt, in the behauiour of a Prince, to his Subiect; in puniſhing his vice, Chap. 7. 10. in rewarding of vertues, Chap. 8. 2, 15. Secondly, in the behauiour of the Subiect to his Prince; in obſeruing his Lawes, and diſcouering his enemies, Chap. 2. 22. Thirdly, the behauiour of a Subiect, to a Subiect; in mutuality of loue, Chap. 4. 7. in propagation of peace, Chap. 10. 3.
            
                The Oeconomicall part (the obiect whereof is Priuate Society) teacheth, firſt, the carriage of the Wife, to her Husband; in obeying, chap. 1. 22. of the Husband, to his Wife, in ruling, chap. 1. 22. Secondly, of a Father, to his Child, in aduiſing, chap. 2. 7, 10. of a Child, to his Father, in obſeruing. chap. 2. 20. Thirdly, of a Maſter, to his Seruant, in commanding. chap. 4. 5. of a Seruant, to his Maſter, in effecting his command, chap. 4. 6.
            Furthermore, in this Hiſtory, the two principall faculties of the ſoule are (nor in vaine) imployed.
            Firſt, the Intellect, whoſe proper obiect is Truth. Secondly,Ariſt. Eth 3. Obiectum voluntatis non eſt niſi bonum. Ariſt. Eth. 10. the Will, whoſe proper obiect is * Good, whether Philoſophicall, which that great Maſter of Philoſophy cals * Wiſdome; or Theologicall, which we poynt at now, hoping to enioy hereafter.
            Who the Pen-man of this ſacred Hiſtory was, or why theDe dubijs non definies, ſed ſuſpenſam teneas ſententiam; Seneca de formali vita. name of God (as in few other parts of the Bible) is vnmentioned in this, it is immateriall, and doubtfull. For the firſt, it is enough for an vncurious queſtioner to know, it was indited

by the Spirit of God: for the ſecond, let it ſuffice, that, that Spirit will'd not here to reueale his name.
            
                As for the Manner of this Hiſtory (conſiſting in the Periphraſe, the adiournment of the Story, and interpoſition of Meditations) I hope it hath not iniured the Matter: For in this, I was not the leaſt carefull, to vſe the light of the beſt Expoſitors (Authoritatis quorum ſum germanus) not daring to goe vn-led, for feare of ſtumbling. Some ſay, Diuinity in Verſe, is incongruous and vnpleaſing: ſuch I referre to the Pſalmes of Dauid, or the Song of his ſonne Salomon, to be corrected. But in theſe lewd times, the ſalt, and ſoule of a Verſe, is obſcene ſcurrility, without which it ſeemes dull, and liueleſſe: And though the ſacred Hiſtory needs not (as humane doe) Poetry, to perpetuate the remembrance, (being by Gods owne mouth bleſt with Eternity) yet Verſe (working ſo neere vpon the ſoule, and ſpirit) will oft times draw thoſe to haue a Hiſtory in familiarity, who (perchance) before, ſcarce knew there was ſuch a Booke.
            Reader, be more than my haſty pen ſtiles thee: Reade me with aduice, and thereafter iudge me, and in that iudgement cenſure me. If I iangle, thinke my intent thereby, is to toll better Ringers in. Farewell.
         
         
            
            
            THE INTRODVCTION.
            
               WHen Zedechia (He whoſe hapleſſe hand
               Once ſwaid the Scepter of Great Iudah's Land)
               Went vp the Palace of proud Babylon,
               (The Prince Seraiah him attending on,)
               A dreadfull Prophet, (from whoſe blaſting breathIerem. 52.
               
               Came ſudden death, and nothing elſe but death)
               Into Seraiah's peacefull hand betooke
               The ſad Contents of a more diſmall Booke:
            
            
               Breake epe the leaues, thoſe leaues ſo full of dread,
               Reade (ſonne of thunder) ſaid the Prophet, reade,
               Say thus, ſay freely thus, The Lord hath ſpoke it,
               'Tis done, the world's vnable to reuoke it;
               Woe, woe, and heauy woes ten thouſand more
               Betide great Babylon, that painted whore;
               Thy buildings, and thy fenſiue Towers ſhall
               Flame on a ſudden, and to cinders fall;
               None ſhall be left, to waile thy griefe with Howles:
               
                  Thy ſtreets ſhall peopl'd be with Bats, and 
                  Iſay 13. 21. 
                  Owles:
               
               None ſhall remaine, to call thy places voyd,
               None to poſſeſſe, nor ought to be enioy'd;
               Nought ſhall be left for thee to terme thine owne,
               But helpleſſe ruines of a hapleſſe towne:
            
            
               Said then the Prophet, When performance hath
               Empty'd thy Cheekes of this thy borrow'd Breath,
                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
               
               
                  Euen ſo the Perſian Hoſt it ſelfe beſtur'd,
               So fell great Babel by the Perſian ſword,
               Which warme with ſlaughter, and with blood imbru'd,
               Ne'r ſheath'd, till wounded Babel fell, ſubdu'd.
            
            
               But ſee! Theſe braue Ioynt-tenants that ſuruiu'd
               To ſee a little world of men vnliu'd,
               Muſt now be parted: Great Darius dyes,Darius dyes.
               
               And Cyrus ſhares alone, the new-got prize;Cyrus, King alone.
               
               
                  Carionis Chro. lib. 2. p. 81. 2. Chro. 36. 23.
                   He fights for Heauen, Heauens foemen he ſubdues:
               
                  Carionis Chro. lib. 2. p. 81. 2. Chro. 36. 23.
                   He builds the Temple, he reſtores the Iewes,
               By him was Zedechias force diſioynted,
               Vnknown to God he was, yet Gods Anoynted;Iſay 4. 45. 
               
               But marke the malice of a wayward Fate;
               He whom ſucceſſe crown'd alwaies fortunate,
               He that was ſtrong t'atchieue, bold to attempt,
               Wiſe to foreſee, and wary to preuent,
               Valiant in Warre, ſucceſſefull to obtaine,
               Muſtnow be ſlaine, and by a Tomyris. Cyrus dyes. Woman ſlaine.
            
            
               Accurſed be thy ſacrelegious hand,
               That of her Patrone rob'd the holy Land;
               Curs'd be thy dying life, thy liuing death,
               And curs'd be all things, that proud Tomyris hath.Tomyris Queen of the Maſſagetans.
               
            
            
               O worſt that Death can doe, to take a life,
               Which (loſt) leaues kingdom's to a Tyrants knife:
               For now, alas! degenerate Cambyſes (vices)Cambyſes King ſucceeded Cyrus
               
               (Whoſe hand was fill'd with blood, whoſe heart with
               Sits crowned King, to vexe the Perſian ſtate,
               With heauy burthens, and with ſore regrate.
               O Cyrus, more vnhappy in thy Son,
               Then in that ſtroke wherewith thy life was don!
               
                  Cambyſes now ſits King, now Tyrant (rather:)
               (Vnlucky Sonne of a renowmed Father.)
               
                  Blood cries for Blood: Himſelfe reuenged hath
               His bloody Tyranny, with his owne death;Cambyſes dyes.
               
               That cruell Chro. Carionis. lib. 2. p. 89. ſword on his owne fleſh doth feed,
               Which made ſo many loyall Perſians bleed,
               Whoſe wofull choyce made an indiff'rent thing,
               To leaue their liues, or loſe their Tyran' King:
               
                  Cambyſes dead, with him the lateſt drop▪
               
               Of Cyrus blood was ſpilt, his death did ſtop
               The infant ſource of his braue Syers worth,
               Ere after-times could ſpend his riuers forth.
            
            
               Tyrant Cambyſes being dead, and gone,
               On the reuerſion of his empty Throne,A Magus ſucceeds Cambyſes.
               
               Mounts vp a Magus, which diſſembled right,
               Forging the name of him, whoſe greedy nightSmerdis.
               
               Too early did perpetuate her owne,
               And ſilent Death did ſnatch away vnknowne.
               But when the tidings of this Royall cheat,
               Tymes loyall Trumpe had fam'd, th'vſurped ſeat
               Grew too too hot, and longer could not beare
               So proud a burthen on ſo proud a Chayre:
               The Nobles ſought their freedome to regaine,
               Not reſting, till the Magi all-vvere ſlaine;The Magi ſlaine by the Perſians.
               
               And ſo renovvned vvas that happy ſlaughter,
               That it ſolemniz'd was for euer after;
               So that what pen ſhall write the Perſian ſtory,
               Shall treat that Triumph, and write that dayes glory;
               For to this time the Perſians (as they ſay)
                     The feast is called 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , which is the ſlaughter of the Magi.
                  
               
               Obſerue a Feaſt, and keepe it holy-day;
               Now Perſia lacks a King, and now the State
               Labours as much in want, as it of late
               Did in abundance; Too great calms doe harme
               Sometimes as much the Sea-man, as a ſtorme;
               
                  One while they thinke t'erect a Monarchy;
               But that (corrupted) breeds a Tyranny,
               And dead Cambyſes freſh before their eyes,
               Afrights them with their new-ſcap'd miſeries;
               Some to the Nobles would commit the State,Otanes.
               
               In change of Rule, expecting change of fate;
               Others cri'd no, more Kings then one incumber;Darius, Gobrias, Aſphatines, Hidarnes.
               
               Better admit one Tyrant, than a number:
               The rule of many doth diſquiet bring;
               One Monarch is enough, one Lord, one King:
               One ſaies, Let's rule our ſelues, let's all be kings;
               No, ſaies another, that confuſion brings;
               Thus moderne danger bred a carefull trouble,
               Double their care is, as their feare is double;
               And doubtfull to reſolue of what concluſion,
               To barre confuſion, thus they bred confuſion;
               At laſt (and well aduis'd) they put their choyceThey put the choyce of their King to ſeuen Electors.
               
               Vpon the verdit of a Iuries voyce;
               Seuen is a perfect number; then by ſeuen,
               Be Perſia's royall Crowne, and Scepter giuen;
               Now Perſia, doe thy plagues, or ioyes commence;
               God giue thy Iury ſacred euidence:
            
            
               Fearefull to chuſe, and faithleſſe in their choyce,
               (Since weale, or woe depended on their voyce,)
               A few from many they extracted forth,
               Whoſe euen poys'd valour, and like equall worth
               Had ſet a Non plus on their doubtfull tongues,
               Vnweeting where the moſt reward belongs,
               They this agreed, and thus (aduis'd) beſpake;
            
            
               Since bleare-eyd mortals, of themſelues, can makeThe ſpeech of the Electors.
               
               No difference 'twixt good, and euill, nor know
               A good from what is only good, in ſhow,
               
                  But, with vnconstant frailty, doth vary
               From what is good, to what is cleane contrary;
               And ſince it lies not in the braine of man,
               To make his drooping ſtate more happy, than
               His vnproſpitious ſtars allot, much leſſe
               To lend another, or a ſtate ſucceſſe,
               In vaine you therefore ſhall expect this thing,
               That we ſhould giue you fortune, with a King:
               Since you haue made vs meanes to propagate
               The ioyfull welfare of our headleſſe State,
               (Bound by the tender ſeruice that we beare
               Our natiue ſoyle, far then our liues more deare)
               We ſifted haue, and boulted from the Rest,
               Whoſe worst admits no badnes, and whoſe best
               Cannot be bettered:
               When Chaunticleere, (the Belman of the morne)
               Shall ſummon twilight, with his bugle horne,
               Let theſe braue Hero's, drest in warlike wiſe,
               And richly mounted on their Palferies,
               Attend our riſing Sun-gods ruddy face,
               Within the limits of our Royall place.
               And he whoſe lusty The Perſians did dedicate Horſes to their God, which was the Sunne. Stallion first ſhall neigh,
               To him be giuen the doubtfull Monarchy;
               The choyce of Kings lies not in mortals brest,
               This we; the Gods, and fortune doe the rest.
            
            
               So ſaid, the people, tickl'd with the motion,
               Some toſt their caps, ſome fell to their deuotion,
               Some clapt their ioyfull hands, ſome ſhout, ſome ſing,
               And all at once cri'd out, A King, A King.
            
            
               When Phoebus Harbinger had chac'd the night,
               And tedious Phoſpher brought the breaking light,
               Complete in armes, and glorious in their trayne,
               
                  Came theſe braue Heroes, prauncing o're the playne,
               With mighty ſtreamers came theſe blazing ſtarres,
               Portending Warres, (and nothing elſe but Warres;)
               Into the royall Palace now they come:
               There ſounds the martiall Trump, here beats the Drum,
               There ſtands a Steede, and champes his frothy ſteele,
               This ſtroaks the ground, that skorn's it with his heele,
               One ſnorts, another pufs out angry wind,
               This mounts before, and that curuets behind;
            
            
               By this, the fomy Steeds of Phaëton
               
               Puffe too, and ſpurne the Eaſterne Horizon:
               Whereat the Nobles, proſtrate to the ground,
               Ador'd their The Perſian worſhipped the Sunne. God, (Their God was early found.)
            
            
               
                  Heroditus in medio Tholiae Iustin. Forthwith, from out the thickeſt of the crowd,
               In depth of ſilence, there was heard the loud,
               And luſtfull language of Stiled Aſſuerus, whom Metactines calls Artaxerxes. 
                  Darius Horſe,
               Who in the dialect of his diſcourſe,
               Proclaim'd his rider, King; whereat the reſt
               (Patient to beare what cannot be redreſt)
               Diſmount their lofty Steeds, and proſtrate bring
               Their humbled bodies to their happy King;
               
                  God ſaue the King, they ioyntly ſay, God bleſſe
               Thy proſprous actions with a due ſucceſſe;
               The people clap their ſweatty palmes, and ſhout,
               The bonfires ſmoke, the bels ring round about,
               The minſtrels play, the Parrats learne to ſing,
               (Perchaunce as well as they,) God ſaue the King.
               
               
                  Aſsuerus now's inueſted in the throne,Eſter▪ 1. 1.
               
               And Perſia's rul'd by him, and him alone;
               Prooue, happy Perſia's Great Aſsuerus, prooue
               As equall happy in thy peoples loue.
            
            
               Enough; And let this broken breuiate
               
                  Suffice to ſhadow forth the downefall ſtate
               Of mighty Babel, and the conqueſt made
               By the fierce Medes, and Perſians conqu'ring blade;
               Whoſe iuſt ſucceſſion we haue traced downe,
               Till great Aſſuerus weare the Perſian Crowne;
               Him haue we ſought, and hauing found him, reſt:
               To morrow goe we to his royall Feaſt.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            THE ARGVMENT OF THE HISTORY.
            
               KIng Aſſuerus makes two feaſts: to that, he inuites his Courtly gheſts, to this, the Citizens of Suſa, wherevnto he ſends for Queene Vaſhti, who denyes to come; whereupon the King is angry, and referres the cenſure of her offence to his Councell, who giue ſentence that ſhee ſhould be degraded from her Princely eſtate: Forthwith the King commands the faireſt Virgins in the Land to bee brought before him, for him to take his choyce, among whom Eſter (the Orphane of a Iew) is choſen, married, and Crowned Queene. Mordecai, Queene Eſters Vnkle, diſcouers a treaſon, which was entred into the Records: Haman, the ſon of Amedatha, is promoted into the Kings fauour: the King commands his Subiects to bow to him, which Mordecai alone refuſed to doe: whereupon Haman is full of wrath, and (directed by a lot) begs of the King to deſtroy all the Iewes in his Prouinces vpon the thirteenth day of the twelfth moneth; which the King granting, Haman ſends Letters in the Kings name to make the Maſſacre vpon that day: The Queene vnderſtanding the plot, ventures in to the King, (vncalled:) The King demanding the cauſe of her comming; ſhe inuites him, and Haman to a feaſt: They come: the King is pleaſed to demand her further ſuit; whereupon ſhe inuites them both to a ſecond Feaſt. In the meane while Haman, aduiſed by his wife, builds vp a Gallowes for Mordecai, (intending

at the Banquet to beg his life.) That night, the King (indiſpoſed to ſleepe) reades the Chronicles, where hee findes, that Mordecai diſcouered a Treaſon; which ſeruice the King intending to reward, askes Haman (who then came to beg Mordecai's life) what Worſhip beſt befits him that the King meanes to honour? Haman (ſuppoſing himſelfe the man) ſpake largely: whereupon the King commands him to doe that very honour to Mordecai: So Haman goes home diſcomforted, and is ſtraight ſent for to attend the King to the Queenes Feast; where (in his preſence) the King vrges the Queene to mooue her ſuit; whereupon ſhee humbly begs hers, and her peoples life, which Haman ſought to betray: wherat the King is inraged, & cōmands Haman to be hanged on the Gallowes which he built for Mordecai, and giues his Eſtate to the Queene, and his Honour to Mordecai: The Queene earneſtly requeſts the King, that he would reuerſe the letters which Haman had deuiſed for the Iewes deſtruction: the King referres it to the Queene, and Mordecai, who ſent Letters in the Kings name, that the Iewes ſhould defend themſelues on the day that Haman had appoynted for their ſlaughter; vpon which day the Iewes ſlay in Suſa fiue hundred men, and the ten ſonnes of Haman, and in the other Prouinces 70000. Whereupon the Queene deſires the King, that the next day the Iewes might likewiſe defend themſelues from their enemies: and that the dead ſons of Haman may be hanged vp; all which the King grants: ſo as the Iewes ſlew the next day in Suſa, 300. men, and Hamans ten ſons were hanged vp; whereupon the Feasts of Purim are inſtituted, and in the Kings name confirmed for euer.
         
      
      
         
            
               〈2 pages missing〉
            
            
            
               Partly to blow the coles of old affection,
               Which now are dying through a forc'd ſubiection;
               Partly to make his Princely might appeare,
               To make them feare for loue, or loue for feare,
               He made a Feaſt: He made a Royall Feaſt,The King makes a Feaſt to his Princes.
               
               Fit for himſelfe, had he himſelfe bin Gheſt;
               To which he calls the Princes of his Land,
               Who (paying tribute) by his power ſtand;
               To which he calls his ſeruants of Eſtate,
               His Captaines, and his Rulers of the State,
               That he may ſhew the glory of his ſtore,
               The like vnſeene by any Prince before;
               That he may boaſt his Kingdomes beauty forth,
               His ſeruant Princes, and their Princely worth;
               That he may ſhew the Type of Sou'raignty,
               Fulfil'd in th'honour of his Maieſty:
               He made a Feaſt, whoſe time did full extend
               One hundred foureſcore dayes before an end:
            
            
               And when this royall-tedious Feaſt was ended,
               (For good more common 'tis, 'tis more commended)
               For meaner ſort he made a ſecond Feaſt;The King makes another Feaſt to the common people.
               
               His Gheſts were from the greateſt to the leaſt
               In Suſa's place; Seuen dayes they did reſort
               To Feaſt i'th Palace Garden of the Court;
               Where in the midſt, the houſe of Bacchus ſtands,The deſcription of the banqueting houſe.
               
               To entertaine when Bounty claps her hands;
               The Tap'ſtry hangings were of diuers hiew,
               Pure White, and youthfull Greene, and ioyfull Blue,
               The maine ſupporting Pillers of the Place
               Were perfect Marble of the pureſt race;
               The Beds were rich, right Princely to behold,Whereon they vſed to feaſt.
               
               Of beaten Siluer, and of burniſh't Gold.
               
                  The Pauement was diſcolour'd Porphyry,
               And during Marble, colour'd diuerſly;
               In lauiſh Cups of oft-refined gold,
               Came wine vnwiſht, drinke what the people would;
               The Golden veſſels did in number paſſe,
               Great choyce of Cups, great choyce of Wine there was.
               And ſince Abuſe attends vpon Exceſſe,A Law againſt immoderate drinking.
               
               Leading ſweet Mirth to lothſome Drunkenneſſe,
               A temp'rate Law was made, that no man might
               Inforce an vndiſpoſed Appetite:
               So that a ſober mind may vſe his pleaſure,
               And meaſure drinking, though not drinke by meaſure.Explicit Hist.
               
            
            
               Meditatio prima.
               
                  NO man is borne vnto himſelfe alone;
                  Who liues vnto himſelfe, he liues to none:
                  The World's a body, each man a member is,
                  To adde ſome meaſure to the publike bliſſe;
                  Where much is giuen, there much ſhal be requir'd,
                  Where little, leſſe, for Riches are but hyr'd;Heſiod.
                  
                  Wiſdome is ſold for ſweat, Pleaſures for paine;
                  Who liues vnto himſelfe, he liues in vaine;
                  To be a Monarch is a glorious thing;
                  Who liues not full of Care, he liues no King;
                  The boundleſſe tryumph of a King is ſuch,
                  To ſweeten Care, becauſe his Care is much:
                  The Sun (whoſe radient beames reflect ſo bright)
                  Comforts, and warmes, as well as it giues light,
                  
                     By whoſe example Phoebe (though more dim)
                  Does counterfeit his beams, and ſhines from him:
                  So mighty Kings are not ordain'd alone
                  To pearch in glory on the princely Throne,
                  But to direct in Peace, command in Warre
                  Thoſe Subiects, for whoſe ſakes they onely are;
                  So loyall Subiects must adapt them to
                  Such vertuous actions as their Princes doe:
                  So ſhall his people, euen as well as He,
                  Princes (though in a leſſer volume) be.
                  ¶ When as I fixe my ſharpe-contracted eye
                  Vpon Aſſuerus Feast, me thinkes, I ſpye
                  The Temple daunce, in my attentiue eare
                  (Rauiſht with th'Heauenly muſike that I heare)
                  I well conceiue this ſence-bereauing ſong,
                  Like dainty warbling of an Angels tong,
                  Vaſhti ſhall fall, and Ester riſe,
                  
                  
                     Sion ſhall thriue, when Haman dyes.
                  
                  Blest are the meetings, and the Banquets blest▪
                  
                  Where Angels caroll muſike to the Feast;
                  ¶ How doe our wretched times degenerate
                  From former Ages! How intemperate
                  Hath lauiſh custome made our bed-rid Age,
                  Acting obſceane Sceanes on her drunken Stage!
                  Our times are guided by a lewder lot,
                  As if that world another world begot:
                  Their friendly Feasts were fill'd with ſweet ſobriety;
                  Ours, with obſceane delights, and foule ebriety.
                  Theirs, the vnualued prize of Loue intended;
                  Ours ſeeke the cauſe, whereby our Loue is ended.
                  How in ſo blind an age could thoſe men ſee!
                  And in a ſeeing Age, how blinde are wee!
                  
                     ¶ Let poore men then diuide their wants to me,
                  If not to them my wealth diuided be.
               
               
                  
                     THE ARGVMENT.
                     
                        The King ſends for the Queene, the Queene
                        Denies to come; His haſty ſpleene
                        Inflames, vnto the Perſian Lawes
                        He leaues the cenſure of his cauſe.
                     
                  
                  Sect. 2.
                  
                     TO adde more honour to this Royall Feaſt,Chap. 1. 9. Queene Vaſhti makes a Feaſt.
                        
                     
                     That Glory may with Glory be increaſt,
                     
                        Vaſhti the Queene, (the faireſt Queen on earth)
                     Shee made a Feaſt, and put on iolly mirth,
                     To bid ſweet welcome with her Princely cheere
                     To all her Gheſts; Her Gheſts all, women were.
                  
                  
                     By this the Royall bounty of the King
                     Hath well-nigh ſpent the ſeuen dayes banqueting.
                     Six Iouiall dayes haue run their howers out,
                     And now the ſeuenth doth wheele the weeke about,
                     Vpon which day, (the Queenes vnlucky Day)
                     The King, with iollity intic'd away,
                     And gently hauing ſlipt the ſtricter reynes
                     Of Temperance, (that ouer-mirth reſtraines)The King ſends for Queene Vaſhti.
                     
                     Roſe vp, commanded that without delay,
                     (How-e're the Perſian cuſtome doe gain-ſay
                           〈2 pages missing〉
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                     How haſt thou thus defil'd thy Yu'ry feet!
                  Thy ſweetneſſe that was once how farre from ſweet!
                  Where are thy maiden ſmiles? thy bluſhing cheeke?
                  Thy Lamb-like countenance, ſo faire, ſo meeke?
                  Where is that ſpotleſſe flower that while-ere
                  Within thy lilly-boſome thou did'ſt weare?
                  Ha's wanton Cupid ſnatcht it? Hath his Dart
                  Sent courtly tokens to thy ſimple heart?
                  Where doſt thou bide? The Countrey halfe diſclaimes thee;
                  The City wonders when a body names thee:
                  Or haue the ſounding Woods ingrost thee there,
                  And thus fore-ſtal'd our empty Markets here?
                  Sure th'art not, or hid where no man ſhewes thee,
                  Or chang'd ſo much, ſcarce man or woman knowes thee.
                  ¶ Our Grandame Eue, before it was forbid,
                  Deſired not that Fruit, ſhe after did:
                  Had not the Cuſtome of thoſe times ordain'd
                  That women from mens Feaſts ſhould be reſtrain'd,
                  Perhaps (Aſsuerus) Vaſti might haue ſtayd
                  Vnſent for, and thy ſelfe been vndenayd:
                  Such are the fruits of myrths, and Wines abuſe,
                  Cuſtomes must crack, and Loue muſt break his Truce,
                  Anger, contentious Wrath, and wrathfull Hate
                  Attend the Feast, where Wine's immoderate.
                  ¶ More difficult it is, and greater skill
                  To beare a miſchiefe, than preuent an ill:
                  Paſsion is naturall, but to bridle Paſsion,
                  Is more Diuine, and vertues operation:
                  To doe amiſſe, is Natures Act; to erre,
                  Is but a wretched mortalls Character:
                  But to preuent the danger of the Ill,
                  Is more than Man, ſurpaſsing humane skill▪
                  
                  
                     Who playes a happy game with crafty ſleyte,
                  Confirmes himſelfe but Fortunes Fauourite;
                  But he that husbands well an ill-dealt Game,
                  Deſerues the credit of a Gameſters name:
                  ¶ Lord, if my Cards be bad, yet lend me skill
                  To play them wiſely', and make the beſt of ill.
               
               
                  
                     THE ARGVMENT.
                     
                        The learned Councell plead the caſe,
                        The Queene degraded from her place,
                        Decrees are ſent throughout the Land,
                        That wiues obey, and men command.
                     
                  
                  Sect. 3.
                  
                     THe righteous Councell (hauing heard the Cauſe)Chap. 1. 16.
                     
                     Aduiz'd awhile, with reſpit of a pauſe,
                     Till Memucan (the firſt that ſilence brake)
                     Vnſeal'd his ſerious lips, and thus beſpake:
                  
                  
                     The Great Aſsuerus ſou'raigne Lord and King,Memucan's ſpeech.
                     
                     (To grace the period of his Banqueting)
                     Hath ſent for Vaſhti: Vaſhti would not come,
                     And now it reſts in vs to giue the doome.
                     But lest that too much raſhneſſe violate
                     The ſacred Iuſtice of our happy ſtate,
                     We firſt propound the height of her offence,
                     Next, the ſucceeding Inconuenience, 
                           〈2 pages missing〉
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                     Thus broke in two, he did anew ordaine
                  That theſe ſame two ſhould be made One againe:
                  Till ſingling Death this ſacred knot vndoe,
                  And part this new-made One, once more in two.
                  ¶ Since of a Rib firſt framed was a Wife,
                  Let Ribs be Hi'rogliphicks of their life:
                  Ribs coaſt the heart, and guard it round about,
                  And like a truſty Watch keepe danger out;
                  So tender Wiues ſhould loyally impart
                  Their watchfull care to fence their Spouſes heart:
                  All members elſe from out their places roue,
                  But Ribs are firmely fixt, and ſeldome moue:
                  Women (like Ribs) muſt keepe their wonted home,
                  And not (like Dinah that was rauiſh't) rome:Geneſ. 34. 2.
                  
                  If Ribs be ouer-bent, or handled rough,Coſta dura eſt & difficiliter flectitur: Sphinx. Ioh. Stig. in Poematis▪ Coniugium humanae diuina Academia vitae est.
                  
                  They breake; If let alone, they bend enough:
                  Women muſt (vnconſtrain'd) be plyent ſtill,
                  And gently bending to their Husbands will.
                  The ſacred Academy of mans life
                  Is holy wedlocke in a happy Wife.
               
               
                  It was a wiſe mans ſpeech, Could neuer they
                  
                  
                     now to command, that knew not firſt t'obey:
                  
                  Wher's then that high Command, that ample Glory,
                  Which for a patterne (left in endleſſe ſtory)
                  Your noble Sexe in former dayes atchiu'd?
                  Whoſe ſounding Fame no after-Times outliu'd.
                  What braue Command? How well-ſucceeding broyles?
                  What ſtately Triumphs? What victorious ſpoylesHand vlla vnquam ſalua manſit familia, partes priores vxor in qua geſſerit. Euripid. in Androm.
                  
                  Their hands achiu'd? They ſway'd their Scepters thē
                  
                  As well in Kingdomes, as in hearts of men;
                  And ſweet obedience was the lowly ſtayre
                  Mounted their ſteps to that Commanding chaire:
                  
                     A womans Rule ſhould be in ſuch a faſhion,
                  Onely to guide her houſhold, and her Paſsion:
                  And her obedience neuer's out of ſeaſon,
                  So long as either Husband laſts, or Reaſon:
                  Ill thriues the hapleſſe Family, that ſhowesNon placet mihi iſta domus, in qua Gallina cantat, Gallus tacet.
                  
                  A Cocke that's ſilent, and a Hen that crowes.
                  I know not which liue more vngodly liues,
                  ¶ 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Obeying Husbands, or commanding Wiues.
               
               
                  
                     THE ARGVMENT.
                     
                        
                           Aſſuerus pleas'd, His ſeruants motion
                        Propounded, gaine his approbation.
                        
                           Eſters deſcent, her Iewiſh race:
                        Her beautyes, and her perfit Grace.
                     
                  
                  Sect. 4.
                  
                     VVHen Time (that endeth all things) did aſſwageChap. 2. 1.
                     
                     The burning Feuer of Aſsüerus rage,
                     And quiet ſatisfaction had aſſign'd
                     Delightfull Iu'lyps to his troubled mind,
                     He cal'd his old remembrance to account
                     Of Vaſhti, and her Crimes that did amount
                     To th'ſumme of their diuorcement: In his thought
                     He weigh'd the cenſure of her heedleſſe fault:
                     His fawning ſeruants willing to preuent him,
                     If too much thought ſhould make his loue repent him,
                     
                        
                        Said thus: (If it ſhall pleaſe our gracious Lord
                        The Kings ſeruants ſpeech to the King.
                     
                     To crowne with Audience his ſeruants word)
                     Let ſtrict Inquest, and carefull Inquiſition
                     In all the Realme be made, and quicke prouiſion
                     Throughout the Medes and Perſians all among,
                     For comely Virgins, beautifull and yong,
                     Which (curiouſly ſelected) let them bring
                     Into the Royall Palace of the King;
                     And let the Eunuchs of the King take care
                     For Princely Robes, and Vestures, and prepare
                     Sweet Odours, choyſe Perfumes, and all things meet,
                     To adde a greater ſweetneſſe to their ſweet;
                     And ſhe, whoſe perfect beames ſhall beſt delight,
                     And ſeeme moſt gracious in his Kingly ſight;
                     To her be giuen the Conqueſt of her face,
                     
                        And be inthron'd in ſcornfull Vaſhties place.
                     
                  
                  
                     The proiect pleas'd the King, who made an ActThe King pleaſed with the ſpeech. Mordecaies parentage.
                     
                     To ſecond what was ſaid with ſoone effect.
                     Within the walls of Shuſa dwelt there one,
                     By breeding, and by birth a Iew, and knowne
                     By th'name of Mordecai, 
                        1. Sam. 9. 1. of mighty kin,
                     Deſcended from the Tribe of Beniamin,
                     
                     (Whoſe necke was ſubiect to the ſlauiſh yoke,
                     When 2. Kin. 24. 15. 
                        Ieconiah was ſurpris'd and tooke,
                     And carried captiue into Babels Land,
                     With ſtrength of mighty Neb'chadnezzars hand;)
                     Within his houſe abode a Virgin bright,
                     Whoſe name was Eſter, or Hadaſſa hight,Eſters parentage, vertue, and beauty.
                     
                     His brothers Daughter, whom (her parents dead)
                     This Iew did foſter, in her fathers ſtead;
                     She wanted none, though father ſhe had none,
                     Her vncles loue aſſum'd her for his owne;
                     
                        Bright beames of beauty ſtreamed from her eye,
                     And in her cheekes ſate maiden modeſty;
                     Which peereleſſe beauty lent ſo kinde a relliſh
                     To modeſt vertue, that they did imbelliſh
                     Each others ex'lence, with a full aſſent,
                     In her to boaſt their perfect complement.Explicit Hiſt.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Meditatio quarta.
               
                  THe ſtrongest Arcteries that knit and tye
                  The members of a mixed Monarchy,
                  Are learned Councels, timely Conſultations,
                  Rip'ned Aduice, and ſage Deliberations;
                  And if thoſe Kingdomes be but ill be-bleſt,
                  Whoſe Rule's committed to a young mans breſt;
                  Then ſuch Estates are more vnhappy farre,
                  Whoſe choyceſt Councellors but Iuuines meribus. Children are:
                  How many Kingdomes blest with high renowne,
                  (In all things happy elſe) haue plac'd their Crowne
                  Vpon the temples of a childiſh head,
                  Vntill with ruine, King, or State be ſped!
                  What Maſſacres (begun by factious iarres,
                  And ended by the ſpoyle of ciuill warres)
                  Haue made braue Monarchyes vnfortunate,
                  And raz'd the glory' of many' a mighty State?
                  How many hopefull Princes (ill-aduis'd
                  By young, and ſmooth-fac'd Councell) haue deſpis'd
                  The ſacred Oracles of riper yeeres,
                  Till deare Repentance waſht the Land with teares!
                  
                     Witnes thou luckleſſe, and ſucceedingRehoboam. 1. King. 12. 8. Son
                  Of (wiſdomes Fauourite) great Salomon;
                  
                  How did thy raſh, and beardleſſe Councell bring,
                  Thy fortunes ſubiect to a ſtranger King?
                  And laying burthens on thy peoples neck,
                  The weight hung ſadly on thy bended back.
                  Thou ſecondSonne to the blacke Prince. 
                     Richard (once our Brittaine King,
                  Whoſe Syr's, and Grandſyr's fame the world did ring)
                  How was thy gentle nature led aſide,
                  By greene aduiſements, which thy State did guide,
                  Vntill the title of thy Crowne did crack,
                  And fortunes (like thy Fathers name) were black?
                  ¶ Now glorious Brittaine, clap thy hands, and bleſſe
                  Thy ſacred fortunes; for thy happineſſe
                  (As doth thy Iland) does it ſelfe deuide,
                  And ſequester from all the world beſide;
                  Blest are thy open Gates with ioyfull peace,
                  Blest are thy heaped barnes with ſweet increaſe,
                  Blest in thy Councell, whoſe industrious skill,
                  Is but to make thy fortunes happy ſtill;
                  In all things blest, that to a State pertaine;
                  Thriſe happy in my dreaded Soueraigne,
                  My ſacred Sou'raigne, in whoſe onely brest,
                  A wiſe Aſſembl' of Priuy Councels rest,
                  Who conquers with his princely Heart as far▪
                  
                  By peace, as Alexander did by War,
                  And with his Olife branch more hearts did boord,
                  Then daring Ceſar did, with Ceſars ſword:
                  Long mayst thou hold within thy Royall hand,
                  The peacefull Scepter of our happy Land:
                  ¶ Great Iudah's Lyon, and the Flow'r of Ieſſe,
                  
                  Preſerue thy Lynes, and thy Flowers bleſſe.
               
               
                  
                  
                     THE ARGVMENT.
                     
                        Faire Virgins brought to Hege's hand,
                        The cuſtome of the Perſian Land;
                        Esters neglect of rich attire,
                        To whet the wanton Kings deſire.
                     
                  
                  Sect. 5.
                  
                     ANd when the luſtfull Kings Decree was readChap. 2. 8.
                     
                     In eu'ry eare, and Shire proclaim'd, and ſpred,
                     Forthwith vnto the Eunuch Hege's handVirgins brought to the Eunuch Hege.
                     
                     The Beuy came, the pride of beauties band,
                     Armed with ioy, and warring with their eyes,
                     To gaine the Conqueſt of a Princely prize;
                     But none in peerleſſe beauty ſhin'd ſo bright,Hege affects Ester.
                     
                     As louely Eſter did, in Hege's ſight,
                     In loyall ſeruice he obſerued her;
                     He ſent for coſtly Oyles, and dainty Myrrh,
                     To fit her for the preſence of the King:
                     Rich Tyres, and change of veſture did he bring;
                     Seuen comely maids he gaue, to tend vpon her,
                     To ſhew his ſeruice, and increaſe her honour:
                     But ſhe was watchfull of her lips, and wiſe,
                     Diſcloſing not her kindred, or alyes:
                     For truſty Mardocheus tender care
                     Gaue hopefull Eſter Items to beware
                     
                        To blaze her kin, or make her people knowne,
                     Leſt for their ſake, her hopes be ouerthrowne;
                     Before the Gates he to and fro did paſſe,
                     Wherein inclos'd (the Courtly) Eſter was,
                     To vnderſtand how Eſter did behaue her,
                     And how ſhe kept her in the Eunuchs fauour.
                  
                  
                     Now when as Time had fitted eu'ry thing,
                     By courſe theſe Virgins came before the King.
                  
                  
                     Such was the cuſtome of the Perſian ſoyle,The Perſian cuſtome.
                     
                     Sixe months the Maids embalm'd in Myrrh and Oyle,
                     Sixe other months perfum'd in odours ſweet,
                     That perfect luſt, and great exceſſe may meet;
                     What coſtly Robes, rare Iewels, rich attire,
                     Or, curious Fare, theſe Virgins did deſire,
                     'Twas giuen, and freely granted, when they bring
                     Their bodies to be proſtrate to the King:
                     Each Virgin keepes her turne, and all the night
                     They lewdly lauiſh in the Kings delight,
                     And ſoone as morning ſhall reſtore the day,
                     They in their boſomes beare blacke night away,
                     And (in their guilty breſts, as are their ſinnes
                     Cloſe priſoners) in the houſe of Concubines,
                     Euen ſo are they, vntill the King ſhall pleaſe,
                     With luſtfull bayle their bondage to releaſe.
                  
                  
                     Now when the turne of Eſter was at hand,Eſters behauiour.
                     
                     To ſatisfie the wanton Kings command,
                     Shee ſought not (as the reſt) with braue attire,
                     To lend a needleſſe ſpurre to foule Deſire,
                     Nor yet indeuours with a whoriſh Grace,
                     T'adulterate the beauty of her face:
                     Nothing ſhe ſought to make her glory brauer,
                     But ſimply tooke, what gentle Hege gaue her:
                     
                        Her ſober viſage daily wan her honour:
                     Each wandring eye inflam'd, that look'd vpon her.Explicit Hiſt.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Meditatio quinta.
               
                  WHen God had with his All-producing Blast,
                  Blowne vp the bubble of the World, and plac't
                  In order that, which he had made in meaſure,
                  As well for needfull vſe, as ioyfull pleaſure:
                  
                     Then out of earthy mould he fram'd a
                     Geneſ. 1. 26. 
                     creature
                  
                  Farre more Diuine, and of more glorious feature
                  Than earſt he made, indu'd with vnderſtanding,
                  With ſtrength victorious, & with awe commanding,
                  With Reaſon, Wit, replete with Maieſty,
                  With heauenly knowledge, and Capacity,
                  True embleme of his Maker: Him he made
                  The ſou'raigne Lord of all; Him all obay'd;
                  Yeelding their liues (as tribute) to their King;
                  Both Fiſh, and Bird, and Beast, and euery thing:
                  His body's rear'd vpright, and in his eye,
                  Stand Radient beames of awfull ſou'rainty;
                  All Creatures elſe pore downward to the ground,
                  Man lookes to heauen, and all his thoughts rebound:
                  Vpon the Earth (where tydes of pleaſures meet)
                  He treads, and daily tramples with his feet;
                  Which reade ſweet Lectures to his wandring eyes,
                  And teach his luſtfull heart to moralize:
                  
                     Gen. 2. 25. 
                     Naked he liu'd, nak'd to the world he came;
                  
                  For he had then nor fault to hide, nor ſhame:
                        〈2 pages missing〉
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                        He lik't them all, but when with ſtrict reuye,
                     He viewed Esters face, his wounded eyeThe King fauoured Eſter.
                     
                     Sparkl'd, whilſt Cupid with his youthfull Dart,
                     Transfixt the Center of his feeble heart;
                     
                        Eſter is now his ioy, and in her eyes,
                     The ſweeteſt flower of his Garland lyes:
                     Who now but Ester? Ester crownes his bliſſe;
                     And hee's become her priſoner, that was his:
                     
                        Ester obtaines the prize, her high deſert
                     Like Di'mond's richly mounted in his heart;
                     
                        Iö, now Iö Hymen ſings; for ſheEſter made wife, and Queene.
                     
                     That crownes his ioy, muſt likewiſe crowned be:
                     The Crowne is ſet on Princely Esters head,
                     
                        Ester ſits Queene in ſcornfull Vaſhties ſtead.
                  
                  
                     To conſecrate this Day to more delights,The Nuptials celebrated.
                     
                     In due ſolemnizing the nuptiall rites,
                     In Eſters name, Aſſuerus made a Feaſt,
                     Inuited all his Princes, and releaſt
                     The hard taxation, that his heauy hand
                     Laid on the groning ſubiects of his Land;
                     No rites were wanting to augment his ioyes,
                     Great gifts confirm'd the bounty of his choyce:
                     Yet had not Eſters (lauiſh) tongue deſcri'd
                     Her Iewiſh kin, or where ſhe was aly'd;
                     For ſtill the words of Mordecai did reſt
                     Within the Cabbin of her Royall breſt,
                     That was as plyent (being now a Queene)
                     To ſage aduice, as ere before ſh'ad been.
                  
                  
                     It came to paſſe, as Mardochaeus ſateMordecai ouerheares treaſon.
                     
                     Within the Portall of the Princes gate,
                     He ouer-heard two ſeruants of the King,
                     Cloſly combin'd in hollow whiſpering,
                     
                        (Like whiſtling Notus that foretells a raine)
                     To breathe out treaſon 'gainſt their Soueraigne:
                     Which, ſoone as loyall Mardochaeus heard,Diſcouers it to the Queene.
                     
                     Forthwith to Eſters preſence he repair'd;
                     Diſclos'd to her, and to her care commended
                     The Traitors, and the treaſon they intended:
                     Whereat, the Queene (impatient of delay)The Queene diſcouers it to the King.
                     
                     Betrayd the Traitors, that would her betray,
                     And to the King vnboſom'd all her heart,
                     And who her Newes-man was, and his deſert.
                  
                  
                     Now all on hurly-burly was the Court,
                     Fild with the fouleneſſe of this ſad report:
                     The watch was ſet, purſuit was ſent about,The traitors purſued.
                     
                     To guard the King, and finde the Traitours out,
                     Who found, and guilty found, by ſpeedy triall,Found, and tryed.
                     
                     (Where witneſſe ſpeakes, what boots a bare deniall?)
                     Were both hang'd vp, vpon the ſhamefull tree:Hanged.
                     
                     (To beare ſuch fruit let trees ne'r barren be▪)
                     And what ſucceſſe this happy Day afforded,
                     Was in the Perſian Chronicles recorded.
                  
               
               Explicit Hiſt.
            
            
               Meditatio ſexta.
               
                  THe hollow Concaue of a humane breſt
                  Is Gods Exchequer, and therein the beſt,
                  And ſum of all his chiefest wealth conſiſts,
                  Which he ſhuts vp, and opens when he lists:
                  No power is of man: To loue, or hate,
                  Lyes not in mortals brest, or pow'r of Fate: 
                        〈2 pages missing〉
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Who was the iſſue of a Royall breed,
                     The off-caſt off-ſpring of the curſed ſeed
                     Of Amalek, from Eſau. him deſcended right,
                     That ſold his birth-right for his Appetite;
                     
                        Haman his name; His fortunes did improue,Haman comes into fauour with the King.
                     
                     Increaſt by fauour of the Princes loue:
                     Full great he grew, preferd to high command,
                     And plac'd before the Princes of the Land:
                     And ſince that honour, and due reuerence
                     Attend, where Princes giue preeminence;
                     The King commands the ſeruants of his State,
                     To ſuit Reſpect to Hamans high eſtate,
                     And doe him honour, fitting his degree,
                     With vayled Bonnet, and low bended knee:
                     They all obſeru'd; But aged Mordecai
                        Mordecai refuſeth to reuerence Haman.
                     
                     (Whoſe ſtubborne ioynts-neglected to obey
                     The ſeed, which God with infamy had branded)
                     Stoutly refuſed what the King commanded;
                     Which, when the ſeruants of the King had ſeene,
                     Their fell diſdaine, mixt with an enuious ſpleene,
                     Inflam'd; They queſtion'd how he durſt withſtand
                     The iuſt performance of the Kings Command:
                     Daily they checkt him for his high diſdaine,
                     And he their checks did daily entertaine
                     With ſilent ſlight behauiour, which did proue
                     As full of care, as their rebukes of loue.
                  
                  
                     Since then their hearts (not able to abide
                     A longer ſuffrance of his peeuiſh pride)
                     (Whoſe ſcorching fires, paſſion did augment,)
                     Muſt either breake, or finde a ſpeedy vent:The Kings ſeruants complaine of Mordecai, to Haman.
                     
                     To Haman they th'vnwelcome newes related,
                     And what they ſaid, their malice aggrauated.
                     
                        Enuie did ope her Snake-deuouring Iawes,
                     Foamd frothy blood, and bent her vnked Pawes,
                     Her hollow eyes did caſt out ſudden flame,
                     And pale as aſhes lookt this angry Dame,
                     And thus beſpake! Art thou that man of might,
                     That Impe of Glory? Times great Fauorite?
                     Hath thy deſerued worth reſtor'd againe
                     The blemiſht honour of thy Princely ſtraine?
                     Art thou that Wonder which the Perſian State
                     Stands gazing at ſo much, and poynting at?
                     Filling all wondring eyes with Admiration,
                     And euery loyall heart with Adoration?
                     Art thou that mighty He? How haps it then
                     That wretched Mordecai, the worſt of men,
                     A captiue ſlaue, a ſuperſtitious Iew,
                     Slights thee, and robs thee of thy rightfull due?
                     Nor was his fault diſguis'd with Ignorance,
                     (The vnfee'd Aduocate of ſinne) or Chance,
                     But backt with Arrogance and foule Deſpite:
                     Riſe vp, and doe thy blemiſht honour right.
                  
                  
                     Vp (like his deepe Reuenge) roſe Haman then,Hamans paſſion.
                     
                     And like a ſleeping Lion from his Den,
                     Rouz'd his relentleſſe Rage; But when his eye
                     Confirm'd the newes Report did teſtifie,
                     His Reaſon ſtraight was heau'd from off his henge,
                     And Fury rounded in his eare, Reuenge,
                     And (like a raſh Aduiſer) thus began:
                  
                  
                     There's nothing (Haman) is more deare to man,
                     And cooles his boyling veynes with ſweeter pleaſure,
                     Than quicke Reuenge; for to reuenge by leiſure,
                     Is but like feeding, when the ſtomacke's paſt,
                     Pleaſing nor eager appetite, nor taſte: 
                           〈2 pages missing〉
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  ¶ Lord, let my fortunes be or rich, or poore:
                  If ſmall, the leſſe account; if great, the more.
               
               
                  
                     THE ARGVMENT.
                     
                        Vnto the King proud Haman ſues,
                        For the deſtruction of the Iewes:
                        The King conſents, and in his name
                        Decrees were ſent t'effect the ſame.
                     
                  
                  Sect. 8.
                  
                     NOw when the yeere had tum'd his courſe about,Chap. 3. 7.
                     
                     And fully worne his weary howers out,
                     And left his circling trauell to his heire,
                     That now ſets onſet to th'enſuing yeere,
                     Proud Haman (pain'd with trauell in the birth,
                     Till after-time could bring his miſchiefe forth)
                     Caſt Lots, from month to month, from day to day,
                     To picke the choyceſt time, when Fortune may
                     Be moſt proſpicious to his damned plot;
                     Till on the laſt month fell th'vnwilling Lot:
                     So Haman guided by his Idoll Fate,
                     (Cloking with publike good his priuate Hate)
                     In plaintiffe tearmes, where Reaſon lent the relliſh,
                     Vnto the King, his ſpeech did thus imbelliſh:
                  
                  
                     
                        Vpon the limits of this happy Nation,
                        Hamans ſpeech to the King.
                     
                     There flotes a skumme, an off-caſt Generation,
                     
                        Diſperſt; deſpis'd, and noyſome to the Land,
                     And Refractory to the Lawes, and thy Command,
                     Not ſtooping to thy Power, but deſpiſing
                     All Gouernment, but of their owne deuiſing,
                     And ſtirre the glowing embers of diuiſion,
                     The hatefull mother of a States ſedition,
                     The which (not ſoone redrest by Reformation)
                     Will ruine breed to thee, and to thy Nation,
                     Begetting Rebels, and ſeditious broyles,
                     
                        And fill thy peacefull Land, with bloody ſpoyles:
                        His requeſt.
                     
                  
                  
                     Now therefore, if it pleaſe my gracious Lord,
                     To right this grieuance with his Princely ſword,
                     That Death, and due Destruction may be ſent,
                     To take the Couie of this rabblement,
                     Vnto the Royall Treaſure of the King,
                     Ten thouſand ſiluer Talents will I bring.
                  
                  
                     Then gaue the King, from off his heedleſſe hand,The King grants Hamans ſuit.
                     
                     His Ring to Haman, with that Ring, command,
                     And ſaid: Thy proffer'd wealth poſſeſſe,
                     Yet be thy iust Petition ne'rtheleſſe
                     Entirely granted. Lo, before thy face
                     Thy vaſſals lye, with all their rebell race;
                     Thine be the people, and the power thine,
                     To doome the Traitors their deſerued Fine.
                  
                  
                     Forthwith the Scribes were ſummon'd to appeare,The Decree was made.
                     
                     Decrees were written, ſent to eu'ry Shiere;
                     To all Lieutenants, Captaines of the Band,
                     And all the Prouinces throughout the Land,
                     Stil'd in the name and perſon of the King,
                     And made authentick with his Royall Ring;
                     By ſpeedy Poſt-men were the Letters ſent;
                     And this the ſumme is of their ſad content:
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Let eu'ry Prouince in the Perſian Land,
                        The Decree.
                     
                     
                        (Vpon the 
                        The 13. day of the twelfth month, which was part of February, part of March. 
                        Day prefixt) prepare his hand,
                     
                     To make the Channels flow with Rebels blood,
                     And from the earth to root the Iewiſh brood:
                     And let the ſoftneſſe of no partiall heart,
                     Through melting pitty, loue, or fond deſert,
                     Spare either young or old, or man, or woman,
                     But like their fault, ſo let their plagues be common;
                     Decreed, and ſealed by our Princely Grace,
                     And giuen at Suſhan, from our Royall Place.
                  
                  
                     So Haman fill'd with ioy (his fortunes bleſt
                     With faire ſucceeding of his foule requeſt)
                     Laid care aſide to ſleepe, and with the King,
                     Conſum'd the time in iolly banqueting:
                     Meane while, the Iewes, (the poore afflicted Iewes
                     Perplext, and ſtartl'd with the newbred newes)
                     With drooping heads, and ſelfe-imbracing armes,
                     Wept forth the Dirge of their enſuing harmes.Explicit Hiſt.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Meditatio octaua.
               
                  OF all diſeaſes in a publike weale,
                  No one more dangerous, and hard to heale,
                  (Except a tyrant King) then when great might
                  Is truſted to the hands, that take delight
                  To bathe, and paddle in the blood of thoſe,
                  Whom iealouſies, and not iuſt cauſe oppoſe:
                  For when as haughty power is conioynd
                  Vnto the will of a diſtemper'd mind,
                  
                     
                     What e'r it can, it will, and what it will,
                     Paling. Cui ius eſt, ius non me
                           •
                        uit, ius obruitur vi.
                  
                  It in it ſelfe, hath power to fulfill:
                  What miſchiefe then can linger, vnattempted?
                  What baſe attempts can happen, vnpreuented?
                  Statutes muſt breake, good Lawes muſt go to wracke,
                  And (like a Bowe that's ouerbent) muſt cracke:
                  Iuſtice (the life of Law) becomes ſo furious,
                  
                     That (ouer-doing right) it prooues iniurious:
                     Summum ius est ſumma iniuria.
                  
                  Mercy (the Steare of Iuſtice) flyes the Citty,
                  And falſly muſt be tearm'd, a fooliſh Pitty:
                  Meane while the gracious Princes tender breſt
                  (Gently poſſest with nothing but the beſt
                  Of the diſguis'd diſſembler) is abus'd▪
                  
                  And made the cloke, wherewith his fault's excus'd:
                  
                     The radient beames that warme, and ſhine ſo bright,
                     Simile.
                  
                  Comfort this lower world with heate, and light,
                  But drawne, and recollected in a glaſſe,
                  They burne, and their appoynted limits paſſe:
                  Euen ſo the power from the Princes hand,
                  Directs the ſubiect with a ſweet command,
                  But to peruerſe fantaſticks if confer'd,
                  Whom wealth, or blinded Fortune hath prefer'd,
                  It ſpurres on wrong, and makes the right retire,
                  And ſets the grumbling Common-wealth on fire:
                  Their foule intent, the Common good pretends,
                  And with that good, they maske their priuate ends,
                  Their glorie's dimme, and cannot b'vnderſtood,
                  Vnleſſe it ſhine in pride, or ſwimme in blood:
                  Their will's a Law, their miſchiefe Policy,
                  Their frownes are Death, their power Tyranny:
                  Ill thriues the State, that harbours ſuch a man,
                  That can, what e'r he wills, wills, what he can.
               
               
                  
                  May my vngarniſht Quill preſume ſo much,
                  To glorifie it ſelfe, and giue a touch
                  Vpon the Iland of my Sou'raigne Lord?
                  What language ſhall I vſe, what new-found word,
                  T'abridge the mighty volume of his worth,
                  And keepe me blameleſſe, from th'vntimely birth
                  (Of falſe reputed flattery?) He lends
                  No curſed Haman pow'r, to worke his Ends
                  Vpon our ruine, but tranſferres his grace
                  On iust deſert, which in the vgly face
                  Of foule Detraction, (vntoucht) can dare,
                  And ſmile till black-mouth'd Enuy bluſh, and tare
                  Her Snaky fleece. Thus, thus in happy peace
                  He rules, to make our happineſſe increaſe,
                  Directs with loue, commands with Princely awe,
                  And in his brest he beares a liuing Law:
                  Defend vs thou, and heauens thee defend,
                  And let proud Hamans haue proud Hamans end.
               
               
                  
                  
                     THE ARGVMENT.
                     
                        The Iewes, and Mordecai lament,
                        And wayle the height of their diſtreſſes:
                        But Mordecai the Queene poſſeſſes,
                        With cruell Hamans ſoule intent.
                     
                  
                  Sect. 9.
                  
                     NOw when as Fame (the daughter of the earthChap. 4. 1.
                     
                     Newly diſ-burthen'd of her plumed birth)
                     From off her Turrets did her wings diſplay,
                     And pearcht in the ſad eares of Mordecai,
                     
                     He rent his garments, wearing in their ſteadMordecaies paſſion.
                     
                     Diſtreſſed ſackcloth: on his fainting head
                     He ſtrowed Duſt, and from his ſhowring eyes
                     Ran flouds of ſorrow, and with bitter cryes
                     His griefe ſaluted heauen; his groanes did borrow
                     No Art, to draw the true pourtraict of ſorrow,
                     Nor yet within his troubled breſt alone,
                     (Too ſmall a ſtage for griefe to trample on)
                     Did Tyrant ſorrow act her liuely Sceane,
                     But did inlarge (ſuch griefe admits no meane)
                     The lawleſſe limits of her Theater
                     Ith' hearts of all the Iewiſh Nation, where
                     (With no diſſembled Action) ſhe expreſt
                     The liuely Paſſion of a penſiue breſt. 
                           〈2 pages missing〉
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                     Aboue, or here below; And he that doth
                  Inioy the one, may neuer taste of both;
                  Sweating, and conſtant labour wins the Goale
                  Of Rest; Afflictions clarifie the ſoule,
                  And like hard Maſters, giue more hard directions,
                  Tut'ring the nonage of vncurb'd affections:
                  Wiſedome (the Antidote of ſad deſpaire)
                  Makes ſharpe Afflictions ſeeme not as they are,
                  Through patient ſuffrance, and doth apprehend,
                  Not as they ſeeming are, but as they end:
                  To beare Affliction with a bended brow,
                  Or ſtubborne heart, is but to diſallow
                  The ſpeedy meanes to health; ſalue heales no ſore,
                  If miſapply'd, but makes the griefe the more:
                  Who ſends Affliction, ſends an end; and He
                  Beſt knowes what's beſt for him, what's beſt for me:
                  'Tis not for me to carue me where I like;
                  
                  Him pleaſes when he liſt, to ſtroake or ſtrike:
                  I'le neither wiſh, nor yet auoyd Tentation,
                  But ſtill expect it, and make Preparation:
                  If he thinke best my Faith ſhall not be tride;
                  (Lord) keepe me ſpotleſſe from preſumptuous pride:
                  If otherwiſe; with triall, giue me care,
                  By thankfull patience, to preuent Deſpaire;
                  Fit me to beare what e'r thou ſhalt aſsigne;
                  I kiſſe the Rod, becauſe the Rod is thine.
               
               
                  How-e'r, let me not boaſt, nor yet repine,
                  With triall, or without (Lord) make me thine.
               
               
                  
                  
                     THE ARGVMENT.
                     
                        Her aydimplor'd, the Queene refuſes
                        To helpe them, and her ſelfe excuſes:
                        But (vrg'd by Mordecai) conſents
                        To die, or croſſe their foes intents.
                     
                  
                  Sect. 10.
                  
                     NOw when the ſeruant had return'd the wordsCahp. 4. 9.
                     
                     Of wretched Mordecai, like poynted ſwords,
                     They neere impierc't Queen Eſters tender hart,
                     That well could pitty, but no helpe impart;
                     Ballaſt with griefe, and with the burthen foyld,
                     (Like Ordnance ouer-charg'd) ſhe thus recoyld:
                  
                  
                     Goe, Hatach, tell my wretched kinſman thus,Eſters meſſage to Mordecai.
                     
                     The caſe concernes not him alone, but vs:
                     We are the ſubiect of proud Hamans hate,
                     As well as you; our life is poynted at
                     As well as yours, or as the meanest Iew,
                     Nor can I helpe my ſelfe, nor them, nor you:
                     You know the Cuſtome of the Perſian State,
                     No King may breake, no ſubiect violate:
                     How may I then preſume to make acceſſe
                     Before th' offended King? or rudely preſſe
                     (Vncall'd) into his preſence? How can I
                     Expect my ſuit, and haue deſeru'd to dye?
                           〈2 pages missing〉
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                     Muſt ſuit his deare indeuour to his might;
                  Each one must lift, to make the burthen light,
                  Prouing the power, that his gifts afford,
                  To raiſe the beſt aduantage for his Lord,
                  Whoſe ſubſtitute he is, and for whoſe ſake
                  We liue and breathe; each his account muſt make,
                  Or more, or leſſe; and he whoſe power lacks
                  The meanes to gather honey, muſt bring waxe:
                  Fiue Talents double fiue, two render foure;
                  Wher's little, little's crau'd, where much, ther's more:
                  Kings by their Royall priuiledge may doe,
                  What vnbefits a mind to ſearch into,
                  But by the force of their Prerogatiues,
                  They cannot free the cuſtome of their liues:
                  The ſilly Widdow, (from whoſe wrinkled browes
                  Faint drops diſtill, through labour that ſhe owes
                  Her needy life,) muſt make her Audite too,
                  As well as Kings, and mighty Monarkes doe:
                  The world's a Stage, each mortall acts thereon,
                  As well the King that glitters on the Throne,
                  As needy beggers: Heau'n Spectator is,
                  And markes who acteth well, and who amiſſe.
               
               
                  ¶ What part befits me beſt, I cannot tell:
                  It matters not how meane, ſo acted well.
               
               
                  
                  
                     THE ARGVMENT.
                     
                        Vnto the King Queene Eſter goes,
                        He (vnexpected) fauour ſhowes,
                        Demands her ſuit, ſhee doth requeſt
                        The King and Haman to a Feaſt.
                     
                  
                  Sect. 11.
                  
                     WHen as Queene Eſters ſolemne three dayes FaſtChap. 54.
                     
                     Had feaſted heauen, with a ſweet repaſt,
                     Her lowly bended body ſhe vnbow'd,
                     And (like faire Titan breaking from a cloud)
                     She roſe, and with her Royall Robes ſhe clad
                     Her liueleſſe limmes, and with a face as ſad
                     As griefe could paint, (wanting no Art to borrow
                     A needleſſe helpe to counterfeit a ſorrow,)
                     Softly ſhe did direct her feeble pace
                     Vnto the inner Court, where for a ſpace,
                     She boldly ſtood before the Royall Throne,
                     Like one that would, but durſt not make her mone:
                     Which when her gracious Lord did well behold,
                     His heart relented, (Fortune helpes the bold)
                     And to expreſſe a welcome vnexpected,
                     Forth to the Queene his Scepter he directed;
                     Whom (now imboldn'd to approch ſecur'd)
                     In gracious tearmes, he gently thus coniur'd:
                  
                  
                     
                     What is't Queene Eſter would? What ſad requestThe Kings ſpeech to the Queene.
                     
                     Hangs on her lips, dwells in her doubtfull brest?
                     Say, ſay, (my lifes preſeruer) what's the thing,
                     That lyes in the performance of a King,
                     Shall be deny'd? Faire Queene, what e'r is mine
                     Vnto the moyty of my Kingdom's thine.
                  
                  
                     
                        So Eſter thus: If in thy Princely eyesThe Queene inuites the King to a feaſt.
                     
                     Thy loyall ſeruant hath obtain'd the prize
                     Of vndeſerued fauour, let the King
                     And Haman grace my this-dayes-banqueting,
                     To crowne the dainties of his handmaids Feast,
                     Humbly deuoted to ſo great a Gheſt.
                  
                  
                     The motion pleas'd, and fairly well ſucceeded:
                     (To willing minds, no twice intreaty needed)
                     They came, but in Queene Eſters troubled face,
                     Rob'd of the ſweetneſſe of her wonted Grace,
                     The King read diſcontent; her face diuinde
                     The greatneſſe of ſome further ſuit behinde.
                  
                  
                     Say, ſay, (thou bounteous harueſt of my ioyes)The Kings ſpeech to the Queene.
                     
                     
                        (Said then the King) what dumpiſh griefe annoyes
                     Thy troubled ſoule? Speake, Lady, what's the thing
                     Thy heart deſires? By th'onour of a King,
                     My Kingdomes halfe, requeſted, I'le diuide
                     To faire Queene Eſter, to my faireſt Bride.The Queene inuites the King, and Haman to a ſecond feaſt.
                     
                  
                  
                     Lo then the tenor of my deare Requeſt,
                     
                        (Replide the Queene,) Vnto a ſecond Feaſt,
                     Thy humble ſuitor doth preſume to bid
                     The King, and Haman, as before ſhe did:
                     Now therefore, if it pleaſe my Gracious Lord,
                     To daine his Royall preſence, and afford
                     The peerleſſe treaſure of his Princely Grace,
                     To dry the ſorrowes of his Handmaids face,
                     
                        Then to my Kingly, and thrice-welcome Gheſt,
                     His ſeruant ſhall vnboſome her Request.Expl. Hiſt.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Meditatio vndecima.
               
                  HE that inuites his Maker to a Feast,
                  (Aduiſing well the greatneſſe of his Chest)
                  Must clenſe his dining roome from foule infections,
                  And ſweepe the Cobwebs of his lewd Affections,
                  And then prouide ſuch Cates, as moſt delight
                  His Palate, and beſt pleaſe his Appetite:
                  And ſuch are holy workes, and pious deeds,
                  Theſe are the dainties whereon heau'n feeds:
                  Faith playes the Cooke, ſeaſons, directs, and guides;
                  So man findes meate, ſo God the Cooke prouides:
                  His drinke are teares, ſprung from a midnight cry,
                  Heau'n ſips out Nectar from a ſinners eye;
                  The dining Chamber, is the ſoule opprest;
                  God keepes his Reuels in a Sinners brest:
                  The muſick that attends the Feaſt, are grones,
                  Deepe-ſounding ſighes, and lowd-lamenting mones:
                  Heau'n heares no ſweeter muſick, than complaints;
                  The Faſts of ſinners, are the Feaſts of Saints,
                  To which heau'n daynes to ſtoop, & heau'ns hie King
                  Tranſcends, whil'st all the Quire of Angels ſing,
                  And with ſuch ſenſe-bereauing Sonnets fill
                  The hearts of wretched men, that my rude Quill
                  (Dazeld with too much light) it ſelfe addreſsing
                  To blaze them forth, obſcures them in th'expreſsing:
                  
                     Thrice happy man, and thrice thrice happy Feast,
                  Grac'd with the preſence of ſo great a Gheſt;
                  To The power of a faithfull man. Math. 16. 19. and 18. 18. him are freely giuen the The power of a faithfull man. Math. 16. 19. and 18. 18. priuie keyes
                  Of heauen and earth, to open when he pleaſe,
                  And locke when-e'r he liſt; In him it lies
                  To ope the ſhowring floud-gates of the skyes,1. King. 18. 45.
                  
                  Or ſhut them at his pleaſure; In his hand
                  The Hoſt of heauen is put; If he command,
                  The Sunne (not daring to withſtand) obeyes,2. King 20. 9. Ioſh. 10. 12.
                  
                  Out runnes his equall howres, flyes backe, or ſtayes,
                  To him there's nought vneaſie to atchieue;1. King. 17. 22. 2. King. 4. 35. Act. 9. 40.
                  
                  Hee'le rouze the graues, and make the dead aliue.
                  ¶ Lord, I'me vnfit t'inuite thee to my Home,
                  My Cates are all too courſe, too meane my Roome:
               
               
                  Yet come and welcome; By thy pow'r Diuine,
                  Thy Grace may turne my water into Wine.
               
               
                  
                     THE ARGVMENT.
                     
                        Good Mordecai's vnreuerence
                        Great Hamans haughty pride offends:
                        H'acquaints his wife with the offence;
                        The counſell of his wife and friends.
                     
                  
                  Sect. 12.
                  
                     THat day went Haman forth; his ſwolne breſtChap. 5. 9.
                     
                     Was fill'd with ioyes, and heart was full poſſeſt
                     
                        Of all the height Ambition could require,
                     To ſatisfie her prodigall Deſire.
                  
                  
                     But when he paſſed through the Palace Gate,Mordecai neglects his ſeruice to Haman.
                     
                     (His eye-ſore) aged Mardocheus ſate,
                     With dauntleſſe head vnbar'd, and knee vnbent,
                     Vnapt to fawne, with ſlauiſh blandiſhment:
                     Which when Great Haman ſaw, his boyling breſtHaman diſcontented.
                     
                     (So foule diſdaine vnable to digeſt)
                     Ran o're; his blood grew hot, and new deſires
                     Incenſt, and kindled his auenging fires:
                     Surcharg'd with griefe, and ſicke with male-content
                     Of his diſtemper'd paſſion, home he went;
                     Where (to aſſwage the ſwelling of his ſorrow
                     With words, the pooreſt helpes diſtreſſe can borrow)
                     His wife, and friends he ſummon'd to partake
                     His cauſe of diſcontent, and thus beſpake:
                  
                  
                     
                        See, ſee, how Fortune with a lib'rall hand,
                        Hamans ſpeech to his wife and friends.
                     
                     Hath with the best, and ſweetest of the Land,
                     Crown'd my deſires, and hath timely blowne
                     My budded hopes, whoſe ripeneſſe hath out-growne
                     The limits, and the height of expectation,
                     Scarce to b'inioyd, but in a Contemplation:
                  
                  
                     See, ſee, how Fortune (to inlarge my breath,
                     And make me liuing in deſpight of Death)
                     Hath multiplide my loynes, that after-Fame
                     May in my ſtocke preſerue my Blood, my Name.
                  
                  
                     To make my honour with my fortunes euen,
                     Behold, my gracious Lord the King hath giuen
                     And trusted to my hand the ſword of Pow'r;
                     Or life, or death lies where I laugh or lowre:
                     Who ſtands more gracious in the Princes eye?
                     How frownes the King, if Haman be not by?
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Eſter the Queene hath made the King her Gheſt,
                     And (wiſely weighing how to grace the Feast
                     With most aduantage) hath (in policy)
                     Inuited me: And no man elſe but I
                     (Onely a fit Companion for a King)
                     May taſte the ſecrets of the banqueting:
                  
                  
                     Yet what auailes my wealth, my place, my might?
                     How can I relliſh them? with what delight?
                     What pleaſure is in dainties, if the Taſt
                     Be in it ſelfe diſtemper'd? Better Faſt:
                     In many ſweets, one ſowre offends the Pallate;
                     One loth ſome weed annoyes the choyceſt Sallat:
                     What are my riches? What my honour'd Place?
                     What are my children? or my Princes Grace,
                     So long as curſed Mordecai furuiues?
                     Whoſe very breath infects, whoſe life depriues
                     My life of bliſſe, and viſage ſternly ſtrikes
                     Worſe venime to mine eyes, than Baſilisks.
                  
                  
                     When Haman then had lanc'd his rip'ned griefe
                     In bloody tearmes, they thus appli'd reliefe:
                  
                  
                     Erect a Gibbet, fifty Cubits hie,The anſwere of Hamans wife and friends.
                     
                     Then vrge the King (what will the King denie
                     When Haman ſues?) that ſlauiſh Mordecai
                     
                     Be hang'd thereon; his blood will ſoone allay
                     The heate of thine; His curſed death ſhall fame
                     The highneſſe of thy power, and his ſhame;
                     So when thy ſuit ſhall finde a faire euent,
                     Goe banquet with the King, and liue content.
                  
                  
                     The Counſell pleas'd: The Gibbet fairely ſtands,
                     Soone done, as ſaid: Reuenge findes nimble hands.Expl. Hiſt.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               Meditatio duodecima.
               
                  SOme Eu'ls I muſt approue, All Goods, I dare not,
                  Some are and ſeeme not good; ſome ſeeme, and are not:
                  In chuſing Goods, my heart ſhall make the choyce,
                  My flattring eye ſhall haue no casting voyce;
                  No outward ſence may chuſe an inward bliſſe,
                  For ſeeming Happineſſe leaſt happy is:
                  The eye (the chiefest Cink-port of the Hart)
                  Keepes open doores, and playes the Panders part
                  To painted pleaſures, luring the Affections,
                  And maskes foule faces vnder falſe complections;
                  It hath no pow'r to iudge, nor can it ſee
                  Things as they are, but as they ſeeme to be.
               
               
                  There's but one happineſſe, one perfect bliſſe;
                  But how obtaind, or where, or what it is,
                  The world of nature ne'r could apprehend,
                  Grounding their labours on no other end
                  Then ſuppoſition, dinerſly affecting
                  Some one thing, ſome another, ſtill proiecting
                  Prodigious fancies, till their learned Schooles
                  Lent ſo much knowledge, as to make them fooles:
                  One builds his bliſſe vpon the blaze of Glory,
                  Can perfect happineſſe be tranſitory?
                  In ſtrength, another ſummes Felicity:
                  What horſe is not more happy farre than he?
                  Some pile their happineſſe on heapes of wealth,
                  Which (ſicke) they'd loath, if gold could purchaſe health; 
                        〈2 pages missing〉
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                        Be done to him the King ſhall most affect;
                     In Robes Imperiall be his body dreſt,
                     And brauely mounted on that very Beast
                     The King bestrides; then be the Crowne of State
                     Plac'd on his lofty browes; let Princes waite
                     Vpon his Stirrop, and in triumph leade
                     This Impe of Honour, in Aſſuerus ſtead;
                     And to expreſſe the glory of his name,
                     Like Heralds, let the Princes thus proclaime,
                     This peerleſſe honour, and theſe Princely rites
                     Be done to him, in whom the King delights.
                     
                        Said then the King, (O ſudden change of fate!The Kings reply.
                     
                     Within the Portall of our Palace Gate
                     There ſits a Iew, whoſe name is Mordecai,
                     
                     Be he the man; Let no peruerſe delay
                     Protract; But what thy lauiſh tongue hath ſaid,
                     Doe thou to him: So Haman, ſore diſmaid:
                     His tongue (ty'd to his Roofe) made no reply,
                     But (neither daring anſwere, nor deny)
                     Perforce obeyd, and ſo his Page became,
                     Whoſe life he ſought to haue bereau'd with ſhame:
                     The Rites obſerued, Mordecai return'd
                     Vnto the Gate, Haman went home and mourn'd,
                     (His viſage muffled in a mournfull vale)
                     And told his wife this melancholy Tale;
                     Whereat amaz'd and ſtartl'd at the newes,
                     Deſpairing, thus ſhe ſpake; If from the IewesHamans wife ſpeakes to him.
                     
                     This Mordecai deriue his happy line,
                     His be the Palme of victory, not thine;
                     The higheſt heau'ns haue ſtill conſpir'd to bleſſe
                     That faithfull ſeed, and with afaire ſucceſſe,
                     Haue crown'd their iuſt deſignes: If Mordecai
                     
                     
                        Deſcend from thence, thy hopes ſhall ſoone decay,
                     And melt like waxe before the mid-day Sunne.
                     So ſaid, her broken ſpeech not fully done,
                     Haman was haſted to Queene Eſters Feaſt;
                     To mirth and ioy, an indiſpoſed Gheſt.Expl. Hiſt.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Meditatio decimatertia.
               
                  
                     THere's nothing vnder heauen more glorifies
                     The name of Kings, or in a ſubiects eyes
                     Winnes more obſeruance, or true loyalty,
                     Than ſacred Iuſtice, ſhared equally:
                     No greater glory can belong to Might,
                     Than to defend the feeble in their right;
                     To helpe the helpleſſe, and their wrongs redreſſe,
                     To curbe the haughty-hearted, and ſuppreſſe
                     The proud; requiting eu'ry ſpeciall DeedSolon. Praemio & poena conſeruatur reſp.
                     
                     With puniſhment, or honourable meed:
                     Herein Kings aptly may deſerue the name
                     Of Gods, inſhrined in an earthly frame;
                     Nor can they any way approach more nye
                     The full perfection of a Deity,
                     Then by true Iuſtice imitating heauen
                     In nothing more, than in the poyzing euen
                     Their righteous ballance: Iuſtice is not blind,
                     As Poets faine, but with a ſight refin'd
                     Her Lyncian eyes are cleer'd, and ſhine as bright
                     As doe their errours, that deny her ſight;
                     The ſoule of Iuſtice resteth in her eye;
                     Her Contemplation is to deſcry 
                           〈2 pages missing〉
                        
                     
                     
                        Thy hand maid hath found fauour; let my Lord
                     Grant me my life (my life ſo much abhorr'd,
                     To doe him ſeruice) and my peoples life,
                     Which now lye open to a Tyrants knife:
                     Our liues are ſold, 'tis I, 'tis guiltleſſe I,
                     Thy loyall Spouſe, thy Queene and hers muſt dye;
                     The ſpotleſſe blood of me, thy faithfull Bride,
                     Muſt ſivage the ſwelling of a Tyrants pride:
                     Had we been ſold for drudges, to attend
                     The buſie Spindle, or for ſlaues, to ſpend
                     Our weary howers to deſerue our bread,
                     So as the gaine ſtood but my Lord in ſtead,
                     I had been ſilent, and ne'r ſpent my breath:
                     But neither he that ſeekes it, nor my Death,
                     Can to himſelfe the least aduantage bring,
                     (Except Reuenge) nor to my Lord the King.
                  
                  
                     Like to a Lion rouzed from his reſt,
                     Rag'd then the King, and thus his rage expreſt:
                  
                  
                     Who is the man, that dares attempt this thing?The Kings anſwere.
                     
                     Where is the Traitor? What? Am I a King?
                     May not our ſubiects ſerue, but muſt our Queene
                     Be made the ſubiect of a villaines ſpleene?
                     Is not Queene Eſter boſom'd in our heart?
                     What Traitor then dares be ſo bold, part
                     Our heart, and vs? Who dares attempt this thing?
                     Can Eſter then be ſlaine, and not the King?
                  
                  
                     Repli'd the Queene, The man that hath done this,The Queenes reply.
                     
                     That curſed Haman, wicked Haman is:
                  
                  
                     Like as a Felon ſhakes before the Bench,
                     Whoſe troubled ſilence proues the Euidence,
                     So Haman trembled, when Queene Eſter ſpake,
                     Nor anſwere, nor excuſe, his Guilt could make.
                  
                  
                     
                     The King, no longer able to digeſt
                     So foule a Trechery, forſooke the Feaſt,
                     Walk'd in the Garden, where conſuming rage
                     Boyl'd in his heart, with fire (vnapt t'aſſwage.)
                     So Haman pleading guilty to the fault,
                     Beſought his life of her, whoſe life he ſought.
                     When as the King had walk'd a little ſpace,
                     (So rage and choller often ſhift their place)
                     In, he return'd, where Haman fallen flat
                     Was on the bed, whereon Queene Eſter ſate;
                     Whereat the King new cauſe of rage debates,
                     (Apt to ſuppoſe the worſt, of whom he hates)
                     New paſſion adds new fuell to his fire,
                     And faines a cauſe, to make it blaze the higher:
                     Is't not enough for him to ſeeke her death,The Kings ſpeech.
                     
                     (Said he) but with a Lechers tainted breath,
                     Will he inforce my Queene before my face?
                     And make his Brothell in our Royall Place?
                  
                  
                     So ſaid, they vailed Hamans face, as he
                     Vnfit were to be ſeene, or yet to ſee:
                  
                  
                     Said then an *Eunuch ſadly ſtanding by,Harbona's ſpeech to the King.
                     
                     In Hamans Garden, fifty Cubits high,
                     There ſtands a Gibbet, built but yeſterday,
                     Made for thy loyall ſeruant Mordecai,
                     
                     Whoſe faithfull lips thy life from danger freed,
                     And merit leads him to a fairer meed.
                  
                  
                     
                        Said then the King, It ſeemeth iust and good,The King commands to hang Haman.
                     
                     To ſhead his blood, that thirſted after blood;
                     Who plants the tree, deſerues the fruit; 'tis fit
                     That he that bought the purchaſe, hanſell it:
                     Hang Haman there; It is his proper good;
                     So let the Horſeleach burſt himſelfe with blood:
                     
                        They ſtraight obey'd: Lo here the end of Pride:
                     Now reſts the King appeas'd, and ſatisfi'de.Explicit. hiſt.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Meditatio decimaquarta.
               
                  CHeere vp, and caroll forth your ſiluer ditty,
                  (Heau'ns winged Quiriſters) and fill your Citty
                  (The new Ieruſalem) with iolly mirth:
                  The Church hath peace in heauen, hath peace on earth;
                  Spread forth your golden pinions, and cleaue
                  The flitting skies; diſmount, and quite bereaue
                  Our ſtupid ſenſes with your heauenly mirth,
                  For lo, there's peace in heauen, there's peace on earth:
                  Let Haleluiah fill your warbling tongues,
                  And let the ayre, compos'd of Saintly ſongs,
                  Breathe ſuch Celeſtiall Sonnets in our eares;
                  That whoſoe'r this heauenly muſicke heares,
                  May ſtand amaz'd, and (rauiſh't at the mirth)
                  Chaunt forth, There's peace in heauen, there's peace on earth;
                  Let Mountaines clap their ioyfull, ioyfull hands,
                  And let the leſſer Hills trace o'r the lands
                  In equall meaſure; and reſounding Woods,
                  Bow downe your heads, and kiſſe your neighb'ring floods:
                  Let peace and loue exalt your key of mirth;
                  For loe, there's peace in heauen, there's peace on earth:
                  You holy temples of the higheſt King,
                  Triumph with ioy; Your ſacred Anthemes ſing;
                  Chaunt forth your Hymnes, and heauenly Roundelayes,
                  And touch your Organs on their deeper keyes:
                  
                     For Haman's dead that daunted all your mirth,
                  And now there's peace in heau'n, there's peace on earth:
                  Proud Haman's dead, who (liuing) thee oppreſt,
                  Seeking to cut, and ſeare thy Lilly brest;
                  The rau'ning Fox, that did annoyance bring
                  Vnto thy Vineyard,'s taken in a Spring.
                  ¶ Seem'd not thy Spouſe vnkind, to heare thee weepe,
                  And not redreſſe thee? Seem'd he not aſleepe?
                  No, (Sion) no, he heard thy bitter pray'r,
                  But let thee weepe: for weeping makes thee faire.
                  The morning Sunne reflects, and ſhines moſt bright,
                  When Pilgrims grope in darkneſſe all the night:
                  The Church muſt conquer, e'r ſhe gets the prize,
                  But there's no conquest, where's no enemies:
                  The Day is thine; In triumph make thy mirth,
                  For now there's peace in heauen, there's peace on earth:
                  What man's ſo dull, or in his braines vndone,
                  To ſay, (becauſe he ſees not) There's no Sunne?
                  Weake is the faith, vpon a ſudden griefe,
                  That ſayes, (becauſe not now) There's no reliefe:
                  God's* bound to helpe, but loues to ſee men ſue:By promiſe.
                  
                  Though dateleſſe, yet the bond's not preſent due.
                  ¶ Like to the ſorrowes of our Child-bed wines,
                  Is the ſad pilgrimage of humane liues:
               
               
                  But when by throes God ſends a ioyfull birth,
                  Then find we Peace in heauen, and Peace on earth. 
                        〈2 pages missing〉
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               Meditatio decimaquinta.
               
                  TO breathe,'s a neceſſary gift of nature,
                  Whereby ſhe may diſcerne a liuing Creature
                  From plants, or ſtones: 'Tis but a meere degree
                  From Vegitation; and this, hath ſhe
                  Like equally ſhar'd out to brutiſh beasts
                  With man, who leſſe obſerues her due behests
                  (Sometimes) than they, and oft by accident,
                  Doe leſſe improue the gift in the euent:
                  But man, whoſe organs are more fairly drest,
                  To entertaine a farre more noble Ghest,
                  Hath, through the excellence of his Creation,
                  A Soule Diuine; Diuine by inſpiration;
                  Diuine through likeneſſe to that pow'r Diuine,
                  That made and plac'd her in her mortall ſhrine;
                  From hence we challenge lifes prerogatiue;
                  Beaſts onely breathe; 'Tis man alone doth liue;
                  The end of mans Creation, was Society,
                  Mutuall Communion, and friendly Piety:
                  The man that liues vnto himſelfe alone,
                  Subſiſts and breathes, but liues not; Neuer one
                  Deſeru'd the moity of himſelfe, for he
                  That's borne, may challenge but one part of three;
                  Triparted thus; his Country claimes the beſt;
                  The next, his Parents; and Himſelfe, the leaſt.
                  He husbands beſt his life, that freely giues
                  It for the publike good; He rightly liues;
                  
                     That nobly dies: 'tis greateſt maſtery,
                  Not to be fond to liue, nor feare to dye
                  On iuſt occaſion; He that (in caſe) deſpiſes
                  Life, earnes it best, but he that ouer-prizes
                  His deareſt blood, when Honour bids him dye,
                  Steales but a life, and liues by Robbery.
                  ¶ O ſweet Redeemer of the world, whoſe death
                  Deſeru'd a world of liues! Had Thy deare breath
                  Been deare to Thee; Oh had'ſt Thou but deny'd
                  Thy precious Blood, the world for e'r had dy'd:
               
               
                  O ſpoyle my life, when I deſire to ſaue it,
                  By keeping it from Thee, that freely gaue it.
               
               
                  
                     THE ARGVMENT.
                     
                        Letters are ſent by Mordecai,
                        
                        That all the Iewes, vpon the day
                        Appointed for their death, withſtand
                        The fury of their foe-mens hand.
                     
                  
                  Sect. 16.
                  
                     FOrthwith the Scribes were ſummon'd to appeare:Chap. 8. 9.
                     
                     To eu'ry Prouince, and to eu'ry Shiere
                     Letters they wrote (as Mordecai directed)
                     To all the Iewes, (the Iewes ſo much deiected)
                     To all Lieu-tenants, Captaines of the Band,
                     To all the States and Princes of the Land,
                     
                        According to the phraſe, and diuers faſhion
                     Of Dialect, and ſpeech of eu'ry Nation;
                     All which was ſtiled in the name of King,
                     And canonized with his Royall Ring:
                     Loe here the tenor of the Kings Commiſſion;
                  
                  
                     Whereas of late, (through Hamans foule ſedition,)The Kings commiſſion.
                     
                     Decrees were ſent, and ſpred throughout the Land,
                     To ſpoyle the Iewes, and with impartiall hand,
                     (Vpon a day prefixt) to kill, and ſlay;* The 13. day of the twelfth moneth.
                     
                     We likewiſe grant vpon that very day,
                     Full power to the Iewes, to make defence,
                     And quit their liues, and for a Recompence,
                     To take the ſpoyles of thoſe they ſhall ſuppreſſe,
                     Shewing like mercy to the mercileſſe.
                     On poſts, as ſwift as Time, was this Decree
                     Commanded forth; As faſt as Day they flee,
                     Spurr'd on, and haſt'ned with the Kings Command,
                     Which ſtraight was noys'd, & publiſht through ye Land,
                     As warning to the Iewes, to make prouiſion
                     To entertaine ſo great an oppoſition.
                  
                  
                     So Mordecai (disburthen'd of his griefe,
                     Which now found hopefull tokens of reliefe)
                     Departs the preſence of the King, addreſt
                     In Royall Robes, and on his lofty Creſt
                     He bore a Crowne of gold, his body ſpred
                     With Lawne, and Purple deeply coloured:
                     Fill'd are the Iewes with triumphs, and with noyſeThe ioy of the Iewes▪ Simile.
                     
                     (The common Heralds to proclaime true ioyes:)
                     Like as a priſner muffl'd at the tree,
                     Whoſe life's remou'd from death ſcarce one degree,
                     His laſt pray'r ſaid, and hearts confeſſion made,
                     (His eyes poſſeſſing deaths eternall ſhade)
                     
                        At laſt (vnlook'd for) comes a ſlow Reprieue,
                     And makes him (euen as dead) once more aliue:
                     Amaz'd, he rends deaths Muffler from his eyes,
                     And (ouer-ioy'd) knowes not he liues, or dyes;
                     So ioy'd the Iewes, whoſe liues, this new Decree
                     Had quit from death and danger, and ſet free
                     Their gaſping ſoules, and (like a blazing light)
                     Diſperſt the darkneſſe of th'approching night;
                     So ioy'd the Iewes: and with their ſolemne Feaſts,
                     They chas'd dull ſorrow from their penſiue breſts:
                     Meane while, the people (ſtartl'd at the newes)
                     Some grieu'd, ſome enui'd, ſome (for feare) turn'd Iewes.Expl. Hist.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Meditatio decimaſexta.
               
                  AMong the Noble Greekes, it was no ſhame
                  To loſe a Sword; It but deſeru'd the name
                  Of Warres diſaſtrous fortune; but to yeeld
                  The right and ſafe poſſeſsion of the Shield,
                  Was foule reproach, and man-leſſe cowardize,
                  Farre worſe than death to him that skorn'd to prize
                  His life before his Honour; Honour's wonne
                  Moſt in a iuſt defence; Defence is gone,
                  The Shield once loſt: The wounded Theban cry'd,
                  How fares my Shield? which ſafe, he ſmil'd, & dy'd▪
                  
                  True Honour bides at home, and takes delight
                  In keeping, not in gaining of a Right;
                  Scornes vſurpation, nor ſeekes ſhe blood,
                  And thirſts to make her name not great, as good:
                  
                     God giues a Right to man; To man, defence
                  To guard it giu'n; But when a falſe pretence
                  Shall ground her title on a greater Might,
                  What doth he elſe but warre with Heau'n, and fight
                  With Prouidence? God ſets the Princely Crowne
                  On heads of Kings; Who then may take it downe?
                  No iuſter Quarrell, or more noble Fight,
                  Than to maintaine, where God hath giu'n a Right;
                  There's no deſpaire of Conquest in that warre,
                  Where God's the Leader; Policy's no barre
                  To his Deſignes; no Power can withſtand
                  His high exployts; within whoſe mighty Hand
                  Are all the corners of the earth; the hills
                  His fenſiue Bulwarks are, which, when he wills,
                  His leſſer breath can bandy vp and downe,
                  And cruſh the world, and with a winke, can drowne
                  The ſpacious Vniuerſe in ſuds of Clay;
                  Where Heau'n is Leader, Heau'n must win the Day:
                  God reapes his honour hence; That combat's ſafe,
                  Where hee's a Combatant, and ventures halfe:
                  
                     Right's not impair'd with weakneſſe, but preuailes
                     Nil fortitudine indigemus, ſi omnes iuſti ſimus, Plutarch.
                  
                  In ſpight of ſtrength, when ſtrength and power failes:
                  Fraile is the truſt repos'd on Troopes of Horſe;
                  Truth in a handfull, findes a greater force.
               
               
                  ¶ Lord, maile my heart with Faith, and be my Shield,
                  
                  And if a world confront me, I'le not yeeld.
               
               
                  
                  
                     THE ARGVMENT.
                     
                        The bloody Maſſacre: The Iewes
                        Preuaile: their fatall Sword ſubdues
                        A world of men, and in that fray,
                        
                           Hamans ten curſed ſonnes they ſlay.
                     
                  
                  Sect. 17.
                  
                     NOw when as Time had rip'ned the Decree,Chap. 9. 1.
                     
                     (Whoſe Winter fruit vnſhaken from the tree
                     Full ready was to fall) and brought that Day,
                     Wherein pretended miſchiefe was to play
                     Her tragicke Seane vpon the Iewiſh Stage,
                     And ſpit the venome of her bloody rage,
                     Vpon the face of that diſperſed Nation,
                     And in a minute breathe their deſolation;
                     Vpon that day (as patients in the fight)
                     Their ſcatter'd force, the Iewes did reünite,
                     And to a head their ſtraggling ſtrength reduc'd,
                     And with their fatall hand (their hand diſus'd
                     To bathe in blood) they made ſo ſtrong recoyle,
                     That with a purple ſtreame, the thirſty ſoyle
                     O'rflowd: and on the pauement (drown'd with blood)
                     Where neuer was before, they rais'd a flood:
                     There lyes a headleſſe body, here a limmeThe Maſſacre.
                     
                     Newly diſ-ioynted from the trunke of him 
                           〈2 pages missing〉
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                     Heau'n fought for Iſr'el, weakned Pharo's heart,
                  Who had no Counter-god to take his part:
                  What meant that cloudy Piller, that by dayExod. 13. 21.
                  
                  Did vſher Iſr'el in an vnknowne way?
                  What meant that fi'ry Piller, that by night
                  Appear'd to Iſr'el, and gaue Iſr'el light?
                  'Twas not the ſecret force of Moſes Rod,Exod. 14. 16.
                  
                  That charm'd the Seas in twayne; 'Twas Moſes God
                  That fought for Iſr'el, and made Pharo fall;
                  Well thriues the Fray where God's the Generall:
                  'Tis neither ſtrength, nor vndermining ſleight
                  Preuailes, where heauen's ingaged in the fight.
                  ¶ Me liſt not ramble into antique dayes,
                  To manne this Theame, leſt while Vlyſſes ſtrayes,
                  His heart forget his home Penelope:
                  
                  Our iolly Brittaine findes ſufficient Plea
                  To proue her bliſſe, and heau'ns protecting power,
                  Which had ſhe mist, her glory, in an hower
                  Had falne to Cinders, and had paſt away
                  Like ſmoke before the wind; Which happy Day,5. Nouemb.
                  
                  Let none but faithleſſe Traitors euer faile
                  To conſecrate, and let this Age entayle,
                  Vpon ſucceeding times Eternity,
                  Heau'ns higheſt loue, in that Dayes memory.
               
               
                  
                  
                     THE ARGVMENT.
                     
                        The ſonnes of Haman (that were ſlaine)
                        Are all hang'd vp: The Iewes obtaine
                        Freedome to fight the morrow after;
                        They put three hundred more to ſlaughter.
                     
                  
                  Sect. 18.
                  
                     
                        WHen as the fame of that dayes bloody newes
                        Chap. 9. 11.
                     
                     
                        Came to the King, he ſaid, Behold, the IewesThe Kings ſpeech to the Queene.
                     
                     Haue wonne the Day, and in their iuſt defence,
                     Haue made their wrong, a rightfull recompence;
                     Fiue hundred men in Suſan haue they ſlaine,
                     And that remainder of proud Hamans ſtraine,
                     Their hands haue rooted out; Queene Eſter, ſay,
                     What further ſuit (wherein Aſſuerus may
                     Expreſſe the bounty of his Royall hand)
                     Reſts in thy boſome: What is thy demand?
                  
                  
                     
                        Said then the Queene: If in thy Princely ſightThe Queenes Anſwere.
                     
                     My boone be pleaſing, or thou take delight
                     To grant thy ſeruants ſuite, Let that Commisſsion
                     (Which gaue the Iewes this happy dayes permiſsion
                     To ſaue their liues) to morrow ſtand in force,
                     For their behalfes that onely make recourſe
                     To God, and thee, and let that curſed brood
                     (The ſonnes of Haman, that in guilty blood,
                     
                        Lye all ingoar'd, vnfit to taint a Graue)
                     Be hang'd on Gibbets, and (like co-heires) haue
                     Like equall ſhares of that deſerued ſhame,
                     Their wretched father purchas'd in his name:
                  
                  
                     The King was pleas'd, and the Decree was giuen
                     From Suſan, where 'twixt earth and heauen,
                     (Moſt vndeſeruing to be own'd by either)
                     Theſe curſed ten (like twins) were borne together:
                  
                  
                     When Titan (ready for his Iournall chaſe)
                     Had rouz'd his dewy locks, and Roſie face
                     Inricht with morning beauty, vp aroſe
                     The Iewes in Suſan, and their bloody blowes
                     So roughly dealt, that in that diſmall day,
                     A leaſe of hundreds fell, but on the prey300. in Suſan ſlaine by the Iewes.
                     
                     No hand was laid, ſo, ſweet and iolly reſt
                     The Iewes enioy'd, and with a ſolemne Feaſt,
                     (Like ioyfull Victors diſpoſſeſt of ſorrow)
                     They conſecrated the enſuing morrow;
                     And in the Prouinces throughout the Land,
                     Before their mighty, and victorious hand,
                     Fell more than ſeuenty thouſand, but the prey75000. ſlaine by the Iewes in the Prouinces.
                     
                     They ſeaz'd not, and in mem'ry of that day,
                     They ſolemnized their victorious Geſts,
                     With gifts, and triumphs, and with holy Feaſts.Explicit hiſt.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Meditatio decimaoctaua.
               
                  THe Doctrine of the Schoole of Grace diſcents
                  From Natures (more vncertaine) rudiments,
                  
                     And are as much contrayr, and oppoſite
                  As Yea, and Nay, or blacke, and pureſt white:
                  For nature teaches, firſt to vnderstand,
                  And then beleeue; but grace doth firſt command
                  Man to beleeue, and then to comprehend;
                  Faith is of things vnknowne, and muſt intend,
                  And ſo are aboue conceit; What we conceiue,
                  We ſtand poſſest of, and already haue,
                  But faith concernes ſuch things, as yet we haue not,
                  Which eye ſees not, eare heares not, heart conceiues not;
                  Hereon, as on her ground-worke, our ſaluation
                  Erects her pillers; From this firme foundation,
                  Our ſoules mount vp the new Ieruſalem,
                  To take poſſeſſion of her Diademe;
                  God loues no ſophiſtry; Who argues leaſt
                  In graces Schoole, concludes, and argues beſt;
                  A womans Logicke paſſes heere; For 'tis
                  Good proofe to ſay, 'Tis ſo, becauſe it is:
                  
                  Had that old Abraham▪ Gen. 22. 10. Patr'arch cours'd with fleſh and blood,
                  Bad had his faith been, though his reaſons good;
                  If God bid doe, for man to queſtion, Why?
                  Is but an interrogatiue deny:
                  The fleſhly ballances of our conceits,
                  Haue neither equall poyſure; nor iust weights,
                  To weigh, without impeachment, Gods deſigne;
                  There's no proportion 'twixt things Diuine,
                  And mortall: Liuely faith may not depend,
                  Either vpon th'occaſion, or the end.
                  ¶ The glorious Suns reflected beames ſuffiſe,
                  To lend a luſter to the feebleſt eyes,
                  But if the Eye too couetous of the light,
                  Boldly outface the Sunne, (whoſe beames ſo bright
                  
                     And vndiſpers'd, are too-too much refin'd
                  For view) is it not iuſtly ſtrucken blind?
                  I dare not taske ſtout Samſon for his death;Iudg. 16. 30.
                  
                  Nor wandring Ionah, that bequeath'd his breath
                  To raging Seas, when God commanded ſo;Iona. 1. 12. Eſter 9. 13.
                  
                  Nor thee (great Queene) whoſe lips did ouerflow
                  With ſtreames of blood; nor thee (O cruell kind)Eſter 9. 14.
                  
                  To ſlake the vengeance of a womans mind,
                  With flowing riuers of thy ſubiects blood;
                  From bad beginnings, God creates a good,
                  And happy end: What I cannot conceiue,
                  Lord, let my ſoule admire, and beleeue.
               
               
                  
                     THE ARGVMENT.
                     
                        The Feaſt of Purim conſecrated:
                        Th'occaſion why 'twas celebrated;
                        Letters wrote by Mordecai,
                        
                        To keepe the mem'ry of that Day.
                     
                  
                  Sect. 19.
                  
                     SO Mardocheus throughout all the LandChap. 9. 20. Mordecai ſends letters to celebrate a Feaſt yeerly.
                        
                     
                     Diſpers'd his Letters, and with them, command
                     To celebrate theſe two dayes memory
                     With Feaſts, and gifts, and yeerly iollity,
                     That after ages may record that day,
                     And keepe it from the ruſt of time, that they
                     
                        Which ſhall ſucceed, may ground their holy mirth
                     Vpon the ioyes, thoſe happy dayes brought forth,
                     Which chang'd their ſadnes, & black nights of ſorrow,
                     Into the brightneſſe of a gladſome morrow;
                     Whereto the Iewes (to whom theſe Letters came)
                     Gaue due obſeruance, and did ſoone proclaime
                     Their ſacred Feſtiuals, in memory
                     Of that dayes ioy, and ioyfull victory:
                     And ſince the Lots (that Haman did abuſe,The originall of the feaſts of Purim.
                     
                     To know the diſmall day, which to the Iewes
                     Might fall moſt fatall, and, to his intent,
                     Leaſt vnproſpitious) were in th'euent
                     Croſt with a higher Fate, than blinded Chance,
                     To worke his ruine, their deliuerance:
                     They therefore in remembrance of the Lot
                     (Whoſe hop'd-for ſad euent ſucceeded not)
                     The ſolemne Feaſts of * Purim did inueſt,Interp. Lo
                              ••
                           .
                     
                     And by the name of Purim call'd their Feaſt;
                     Which to obſerue with ſacred Complement,
                     And ceremoniall rites, their ſoules indent,
                     And firmly'inroll the happy memory
                     Ith'hearts of their ſucceeding progeny,
                     That time (the enemy of mortall things)
                     May not, with hou'ring of his nimble wings.
                     Beat downe the deare memoriall of that time,
                     But keepe it flowring in perpetuall prime.
                  
                  
                     Now, leſt this ſhining day in times progreſſeEſter, and Mordecai ſend letters to confirme the feaſts of Purim.
                     
                     Perchance be clouded with forgetfulneſſe,
                     Or left the gaulled Perſians ſhould debate
                     The bloody ſlaughter, and re vlcerate
                     In after-times, their former miſery,
                     And blurre the glory' of this dayes memory,
                           〈2 pages missing〉
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                     THE ARGVMENT.
                     
                        
                           Aſſuerus Acts vpon Record:
                        The iuſt mans vertue, and reward.
                     
                  
                  Sect. 20.
                  
                     ANd Aſſuerus ſtretcht his heauie hand,Chap. 10. 1.
                     
                     And laid a Tribute, both on Sea, and Land;
                     What elſe he did, what Trophies of his fame,
                     He left for Time to glorifie his Name,
                     With what renowne, and grace, he did appay
                     The faithfull heart of loyall Mordecai;
                     
                     Are they not kept in endleſſe memory,
                     Recorded in the Perſian Hiſtory?
                     For Mordecai poſſeſt the ſecond ſeatThe greatneſſe and vertue of Mordecai.
                     
                     In all the Kingdome, and his name was great;
                     Of God and man his vertues were approu'd,
                     By God and man, both honour'd, and belou'd;
                     Seeking his peoples good, and ſweet proſperity,
                     And ſpeaking ioyfull peace to his poſterity.Expl. Hiſt.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               Meditatio vltima.
               
                  THus thriues the man, Thus proſper his endeuors,
                  That builds on faith, and in that faith perſeuers▪
                  
                  ¶ It is no loſſe, to loſe; no gaine, to get,
                  
                  If he that loſes all, ſhall win the Set:
                  God helpes the weakeſt, takes the loſers chayre,
                  And ſetting on the King, doth ſoone repaire
                  His loſſe with vengeance; Hee's not alway beſt
                  That takes the higheſt place, nor he the leaſt
                  That ſits beneath: for outward fortunes can
                  Expreſſe (how great, but) not how good's the man:
                  Whom God will raiſe, he humbles firſt a while;
                  And where he raiſes, oft he meanes to foyle.
               
               
                  ¶ It matters not (Lord) what my fortunes be,
                  
                  May they but leade, or whip me home to thee.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   