
      
         
            
            
            A LETTER of Dr. REINOLDS to his friend, concerning his aduice for the studie of Diuinitie.
            
            
            LONDON Printed by Iohn Beale, for Ionas Man. 1613.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            ¶ A Letter of Doctor Reinolds to his friend concerning his aduice for the study of Diuinity. &c.
            
            
               I Must request you to impute to my businesses, which haue diuerse waies troubled me, not to lacke of good will, my slacknesse is not hitherto answering your letters. Which assure your selfe, if I had been able, I would haue sooner answered, so much the more willingly, the better I liked of them, as being sure witnesses of your good will to

me ward, and desire of godlinesse: whereof for the one I haue heartily to thank you; for the other greatly to reioice with you. Then to shew my iudgement concerning the order which you may best follow in the study of diuinity, I can tell you nothing but that you haue already better read in others and doe know your selfe. Howbeit to satisfie your louing request, I will briefly mention the chiefest points in my iudgement, which are to be regarded: which if you well consider, and earnestly doe follow, as I trust you will, and God grant you may, your labour shall be taken

to the aduancement of Gods glory, the profit of his Church, & your own cōfort
            The chiefest point of all, to begin withis, sith that diuinity, the knowledge of God, is the water of life; the vessell must be cleane that shall receiue so precious a liquor: the house must be clensed that shal haue Gods holy spirit, not only a guest, but also a continual dweller in it. God forbid you should thinke diuinity consists of words, as wood doth of trees, diuinity without godlinesse doth but condemne consciences against the day of vengeance, and prouoke the wrath of the mighty Lord, and make

more inexcusable before the seat of iudgement. I will not ad, that true diuinity cannot be learned, vnlesse we frame our hearts and minds wholly to it. But I will desire you to consider that, only, that as the Poet saith, Symcrum est nisi vas, quodcun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   infundis acesssit: so it is written in the book of Wisedome, Wisedom cannot enter into the heart of a wicked man, nor dwell in a body that is subiect vnto sinne. I hope there is no great cause of standing vpon this point, when I write vnto you, who are, as I trust, the chosen of God, and therefore appointed also to be sanctified. Yet sith your selfe haue mentioned

vnto me your owne remisse kind of liuing (as you doe terme it;) as you loue me, take heed that this remissenesse be not the same in a mans mind, which a 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                is in the body. And in this, to conclude, consider with your selfe, that if the heathens at their sacrifices were wont to cry out, Procul ô procul este profani: what study of holinesse ought there to be in vs, whom God hath adopted, Christ hath redeemed, the holy Ghost hath sā
               ctified to be a peculiar people vnto God, zealous of good works: which if it be required at the hands of all christians, what shal be asked

at theirs, who studying diuinity to instruct others, shold shine themselues as lights in the middest of a lewd generation? Shall he euer perswade others to embrace godlinesse, that hath not perswaded himselfe that it is a pearle to be redeemed with all treasures?
            For the study it selfe, which is next to be considered, the knowledge of God must be learned of God, if euer it be learned. Of whom that we may learne it, we haue to vse two meanes, prayers and reading of holy scripture. Praiers, our selues to talke with God; reading, to heare God talke with vs. For, because

without the grace of the holy spirit, all study, especially in diuinity, is vaine: therefore we must earnestly desire of God that he will enlighten our minds, and soften our hearts, both to know and follow his will reuealed to vs. Now because the holy spirit doth teach the same doctrine which our Sauiour did, which is set forth vnto vs in the Law, and the Prophets, and the Euangelists: therefore we must diligently giue our selues to reading and meditating of the holy scriptures in tongues in which they were written by the holy Spirit. Which how much more forcible it

is then to be doubtfull among translations, if S. Austin did not show, who instructeth a christian preacher that the knowledge of the Hebrew and Greek tongues is very necessary to vnderstand the old and new testastament: yet Themistocles might shew, who hauing to speake to the king of Persia, was afraid that his minde would not be perceiued by interpreters, and therefore requested the king to grant him first a yeeres space to learne the Persian tongue. Wherefore I wish that you also ioyne Hebrew to your Greeke, though peraduenture you haue once began it,

and giuen it ouer. For in that you may follow me, sith you propose my example, so much the better, who my selfe, when I was first Master of Arts, began the study of it, and being weary, left it: the next yeer perceiuing the necessary vse of it, I set againe vpon it, and I thanke God, since continued a student in it. Wherefore the word of God, and that, if it may be, out of the very welspring, not out of the brooks of translations (if I may so tearme them) must be diligently read, and by often reading made familiar vnto vs, though it be not in all places throughly vnderstood

as the same Austin hath very well noted. As for the parts of scripture (besides this continuall reading of the whole) to be read first ouer with more diligence then the rest, I will giue you the same counsell which I heard of Doctor Villerius giuen to yong students, that first you take your greatest trauaile with the helpe of some learned interpreter, in vnderstanding S. Iohns Gospell and the Epistle to the Romans, the summe of the new Testament: Esay the Prophet, and the Psalmes of Dauid, the summe of the old▪ Howbeit in the rest, you shall doe well also if in harder places

you vse the iudgement of some godly writer, as Caluin and Peter Martyr, who haue written best on the most part of the old Testament. And because it is expedient to ioyne the reading of some compend of scriptures and summe of all diuinity, together with the scriptures, I would wish you to trauaile painfully in Caluins Institution of Christian Religion, whereby you shall be greatly profited not only to the vnderstanding of the scriptures, whereof it is a brief and learned commentary: but also to the perceiuing of points of doctrine, whither all things doe pertaine, and

may of vs be applied. Of farther reading of Doctors and histories & other treatises of religiō, I wil not adde at this present: we may hereafter (if God will) at greater leisure, when these things are done which must bee laid for the foundatiō, more conueniētly talk. Howbeit, if sometimes to recreate your selfe, you intermingle with grauer studies the reading ouer of the history Ecclesiasticall, especially as it is written more for our country by good M. Fox, you shal receiue of it, togither with great profit, great delectatiō.
            I had almost forgotten your two last points, Quae ratio annotandi, Quae exercitatio adhibenda,
               
I haue so little to say of them. For touching noting, you know I do not like the cōmon custom of common places. The best in my iudgemēt, is to note in the margēt or in some paper booke for that purpose, the summe and method of that which you read. As for examples sake, M. Bunnie hath done very wel in Caluins Institutions, shewing all his method and sum of euery sectiō, in his Compē
                  dio &c. which book you may wel ioyn with the reading of Caluin, to vnderstand his order & method the better. For the other, which is exercising, it wil be good somtimes to occupie your pen either

at large or briefly, as you list, of such godly meditations as the reading of the scriptures shall offer vnto you; praiers vnto God, reprouing of sin, commending of godlinesse, exhorting to righteousnesse, dehorting frō iniquity, consolation in miseries, confirming of the truth, refuting of heresies, & taking an occasion of doing these things som tims to other of your friends (a liuely and godly exercise,) whereby you may perfit them, or your self at the least. If you cannot find such occasions to others, I pray write to mee sometime of doubtes that you may find, or whatsoeuer you list, and

I will acknowledge my selfe in that respect as in others, beholding to you.
            Now if God giue you grace, as earnestly to follow these things, as you haue been desirous that I should prescribe them: you see the learning of the Hebrew tongue, the reading of the scripturs, of learned interpreters, of the sum of religion, of noting what you read, and your exercise therin, these things require much time, & a mind attent; to speak nothing of prayers, and the study of godlinesse, which will also require some meditation. Laborandum, mi Iohannes, non luxuriandum. You know what Tullie saith

for Caelius, that to the bare attaining of eloquence omittendae sunt omnes voluptates, relinquēda studia delectationis iocus, ludus, conuiuium, sermo pene familiarium deserendus. You know what Plato saith of his Philosopher, what a great 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                he would haue him, if euer he shall be admitted a man worthy to gouerne his city. If eloquence, if philosophie require such trauaile for ciuill and base things (in this comparison:) what shall we think that the knowledge of God, the study of diuinity, desireth for the greatnesse, & for the worthines deserueth. Whether you will take such pains

or no, or whether you will fly al entisemēts from it, I do not know; I pray God you may. Surely hitherto, which I write with griefe, (your writing, & your friendship doth embolden me to write freely that which I trust you will take in good part) you haue bin too much caried away by means of cōpany, from earnest trauaile to your study, to sweet inticemēts of the flesh, seeing of vain spectacles, ouer much eating & drinking, banqueting, frequēting of the town, deliting in vanity, resorting to tauernes, forgetting the word of God. Be not filled with wine wherin is exces but be filled with the spirit. Wil you pardon my loue for desiring to heale

you, or shall I become your enemy for speaking of the truth?) they haue made you to neglect your profit in study, they haue hurt your wit, weakned your memory, corrupted your good desire, stained your manners, enfeebled your body, toucht your good name, grieued your friends, and indeed almost quenched, but yet I thāk God they haue not put out the liuely sparks of Gods spirit in you. A great wel willer of yours, though not greatly acquainted with you, did ask me a day or two before the act, since I receiu'd your letters, what I thought of you, as one that did hartily desire your profit in learning

& godlines. When I had answered him, for that good opinion which I had alwaies cōceiued of you, both alwais for your towardlinesse, and especially for your letters, so friendly that I will not now report: he said that he was very glad to heare it, & that he asked the question in some doubt, because in few daies that here he had staid, he had seen you somwhat often in the town But it might be that by reason of strāgers you had som occasion, the Iudges being here, to be the oftner abroad. Howbeit about & since the same time, to absent your self from prayers, an exercise so necessary for christiās, that

indeed desire ye grace of God, and know it coms from him only, to absent your self from sundry exercises of diuinity, wherein peraduenture some good might haue bin done to the furthering of your study: me think these things did not so wel as I wished, agree with the profession & as it were protestatiō, whichin your letters, so shortly before you writ to me. I may seem ouerbold, & perhaps am to sharp in this my dealing with you, agreeing as some may think, rather to one that were a superior, then fit for a friend, whose degree & state is equal. But I know not how, the good will which I did bear, first being

reader to you being scholar, and euer since continued with my free aduise in all things wherin euer you haue asked my counsel (as, I thank you, you haue done in many) doth constraine me to poure foorth my inward affection to you, so much the more willingly, because I know you haue learned of Salomon, that the wounds of a friend are beter then the kissings of an enemy. Euen these things that hinder your study, & therfore at your request I was cōstrained to touch, I haue touched the more boldly, because I do not doubt but your selfe do mislike them: & I see in your letters the strife betwixt the flesh and the spirit, which S.
               
               Paul setteth down as a marke of Gods children, that you do not the good which you wold but the euill which you wold not, that you do. God giue you grace to stir vp your hart & striue as a faithful seruāt to fly from the lusts of youth, as S. Paul exhorteth Timothy, that you may set your mind to praiers & the reading of holy scripture. It wil be cōueniēt that you haue your appointed times for the one and for the other. Which to prescribe as your self knowing your own busines, may most conueniētly; so cōstātly to follow your order prescribed, I hope the grace of God, which earnestly you shall pray for, will not be failing to you. Iuly 4. 1577
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   