
      
         
            
            
            The moſt horrible
and tragicall murther of the right
honorable, the vertuous and valerous
Gentleman, Iohn Lord Bourgh, Baron
of Caſtell Connell.
            Committed by Arnold Cosby, the foureteenth
of Ianuarie.
            Togeather with the ſorrowfull
ſighes of a ſadde ſoule, vppon his funerall:
written by W. R. a ſeruaunt
of the ſaid Lord Bourgh.
            
            Tempus, fortuna, flent.
            
               printer's or publisher's device
            
            Printed by R. R. 1591.
         
         
            
            
            The moſt horrible
and tragicall murther, of the right
Honorable Iohn Lord Bourgh: Baron of
Caſtle Connell, committed by
Arnold Cosby the 14. of
Ianuarie.
            
               
                  NOt to painte it out
with vainglorious termes
of a large Exordium in a
matter where throbbinge
ſorrowe breaketh of ſuperfluous
circumſtances,
and ouer werying plaints
abreuiate the libertie of
ſpeach: nor to vſe the choice
inuention of a pleaſinge
diſcourſe, where nothing but heauy miſfortunes miniſter
cauſe of melancholike and penſiue contemplations:
But to explaine a tragicall trueth, and ſet foorth the lamentable
order, of a premeditated murther, I will brieflie
proſecute my owne gréefe, and the generall wayling
of euery gentle minde. Wherein as well ſuperiours,
as inferiours, (caſt from the quiet ſtaie of their former
affectes) ſéeme to beare their indifferent partes.
            If the loſſe of true nobilitie, whereon as vpon a rocke
of ſafe protection, conſiſteth the happie gouernement
of euery floriſhing common weale, though by honourable
ſeruice in warre, or by ſickneſſe at home, the appointed
ſcurge of humaine frailty: bee a gréeuous maime to
the ſtate, inferring a cōmon lament through euerie part
thereof. Then much more maie the ſtate complaine, and
euery priuate perſon ſhed teares of ſorrowe, when the

one looſeth the hope of expected virtues, and the other is
bereft the ſtrength of theyr peaceable fortunes, yet
not by repulſing the iniuries of forraine pride, or naturall
ſummons of diuine election, but by the poyſoned
rancour of domeſticall treacherie, as by this horrible
murther executed on the right honourable the Lorde
Bourgh may wel appeare, whoſe vertuous deſires, were
ſtedfaſtlie fixed vppon true honors exerciſes, and whoſe
heroycall conſtitution, euer abhorred the baſe practiſes
of vicious and ignoble qualities. But as the fayreſt roſe
is apt to be conſumed by a cancker, ſo Enuie the malitious
handmaide of honour, continuallie ſéeketh the ruine
of noble perſonages.
            For in the courte amongeſt the princelike traine of
her Maieſties followers, there wanderd (as the pureſte
wheat is aſſociated with infectious wéedes) one Arnold
Cosby, a man of proud conceipte, borne to miſchéefe, and
predeſtinated to deſtroie that which his lothed life is too
farre vnable to redéeme.
            This Cosby, what for countries ſake béeing an Iriſhe
man, or for the curtious affabilitie of the Noble man
(whoſe ingenuous towardneſſe carried a good conceite
of euery one) was ſo fauoured and well eſtéemed of him
as he thought nothing loſt wherein hee might pleaſure
him, til at laſt (as is the cuſtome, of ouerbold inchroching
vpſtartes) by too much familiaritie he grewe contemptuous,
and the more to manifeſt his arrogancie and the
mallice of his ſwelling ſpirite, tooke a ſleighte quarrell,
(after ſundrie diſpightfull diſgraces offered) to prouoke
and challenge the Lord Bourghe by a vile and impudent
letter, which one night vnder ſigne of fawning ſubtilty,
ſecretly he clapt into his hand. And though the offence did
not procéede by him, but principallie roſe by the reportes
of an other gentleman of Cosbyes acquaintaunce, which
offered to maintaine them to his téeth, daringe him to the
fielde, yet did he refuſe to fight with him, bendinge the
force of his conceiued hatred, onely againſt the Lorde

               Bourgh, and would not forſooth otherwiſe bee pacifyed,
but with his life and ruine of his carkaſſe, for ſuch were
his wordes in his impudent letter, ſtuft with a rable of
bumbaſted braues, ſcornefull tearmes, and odious compariſons,
binding him vpon his honour and manhoode,
the next morning to méete him in Wanſworth fieldes.
            The noble gentleman whoſe modeſt eares did glowe
at the immodeſt and ſhameleſſe lynes, as his milde and
curteous demenour, was neuer ſeene to iniure the ſimpleſt,
ſo béeing impatient of the leaſt wrong ſmiled at his
follie, and thought, though he were no waie his equal, yet
in ſo much as he was a Souldiour and in that reſpecte a
gentleman, it would not be much preiudicall to his honor,
if he met him, and with the chaſteſment of his ſword
taught him his duetye with better manners, and therefore
not in hatred of ſoule, thirſting after bloud, as it appeared
by his oppribrious letter he did: but in ſobrietie
ſent him word backe he would méete him, which reſolution
I ſuppoſe was contrarie to Cosbeyes expectation,
who imagined be like the Lord Bourghe woulde haue
ſtoode vpon tearmes of ſuperioritie with him, or elſe hée
would not haue béene ſo liberall in his challenge.
            But the night drue on, and Cosbyes ſtomacke that of
late did blowe foorth from his windie puft breſt the ſoūd
of horrour and death, began nowe to quaile, at the hearing,
of two or thrée wordes, ſpoken in a milde and temperate
vaine, and therefore as fitted the oportunitie of
time he entred into counſel, with ye curſſed ruler of darkneſſe,
howe hée might worke miſchiefe, and yet defende
his owne credite from blot of infamie. Well ſomewhat
was deuiſed and concluded vpon, as after by his actions
might be gathered: for the daie no ſooner appered, but as
prefiguring ſome diſmall accident, it couered the earth
with a lowring countenaunce, and black cloudes in ſigne
of enſuing miſeries, diſtilled repentant teres from their
watrie browes. When Cosby well ſtudied for his purpoſe,
and pricked forwarde with a deſire of deceiuinge

hope, which his wicked thoughtes had before hatched in
his braine, left his lodging and came to the Lord Bourghe
with a caſe of Rapiers, bidding him take his choyce, for
thoſe ſhould be the inſtrumentes of life or death betwixt
them.
            After this they mounted themſelues and rode
on towardes Wanſworth, neither of them hauinge made
any one priuie to their intent the one would not, in regarde
of his honour, the other in feare his villainons pretence
ſhould bee diſcouered: I neede not aime at the
thoughtes of Cosby by the waie, they may bee coniectured
to be ſuch, as commonly procéede from a minde premeditating
murther. When they were come to the place
appointed, Cosby as it ſhould ſéeme, béeing firſt arriued,
had made himſelfe readie to fight, the Lorde Bourgh cō
               ming
ſomewhat later, was not altogeather ſo ready, yet
had caſt of his cloake, tyed his horſe, and drawne hys rapier.
            Now marke the feare, wherewith treacherous hearts
doo continually tremble, though they haue neuer ſo perfectlie
ſtudyed the platforme of their pernitious deuiſes.
For Cosby although he had trained this freſh ſpringing
hope of cheualrie and honour, into a ſolitarie place farre
from reſorte, and earlye in the morninge when fewe
had occaſion to be in the fieldes, yet did hee (as miniſters
of diueliſh ſtratagems vſe) faint and gladlie would haue
bin at home againe, as by his delaies is euident, for firſt
he intreated the L. Bourgh to meaſure rapiers, the equal
length wherof he knew ſufficientlie for him ſelfe prouided
them.
            Then did he requeſt him to breake his rapiers point (auouching
it was triall enough of their manhoods, in that
they had met in field) and to ſcarre their faces, and ſo returne
and ſay they had fought. But the L. Bourgh as
one that lothed his former brags, and deteſted yt daſtardlike
motiō, told him flatly, he ſcorned ſuch puſillanimity,
nor came he to plaie boyes plaie. Why then quoth Coſby
               
my L. t'were beſt put of your ſpurres leaſt they chaunce to
hinder you.
            Now had the deuill which all this while had béene abſente
from his ſeruant, fitted him at length with a pollicie to worke
his will and endamage his owne ſoule. And now, euen nowe,
the fatall houre was come, wherein the bloudy homizide gaped
to quench his thirſt in bloud, and to acte the tragidy of his
former ſcelerous inuentions. For as the L. Bourghe (whoſe
noble minde ſuſpecting no treacherie) knéeled downe, putting
his rapyer in his left hand, and with his right, intended to vnbuckle
his ſpurres, the monſterous treachetour, taking the aduantage
as it fell, not like a Souldiour, or a Gentleman,
but lyke a brutiſhe manquellour, and murderous conſpiratour,
voyd of all virtue and humanitye, with all the violence
his coadiutor the deuill could lend him, ranne his rapyer
twelue intches into his breſt, which ſtucke ſo faſt, as hee
was conſtrained to ſet his foote vpon him and plucke it foorth,
and being caſt downe with the force of the thruſt, Cosby, that
wicked and bloodye Cosby, coulde not be content with one
mortall wound, nor might his inſatiate furie be ſtaunched, except
his vitall bloud ſtreamed in ſundrie conduites, to gorge
the fell outrage of his gréedie mawe, therefore letting fall hys
rapier, tooke his dagger in his right hande, and therewithall
gaue him thrée and twentie woundes more. Which ſcarſe
could ſuffice, for that he feared, if any breath remained in hys
bodie his tongue might bewraye the manner of that horrible
murther, and therefore would not haue left ſo, but that he ſaw
reſcue néere, which made him take his horſe to eſcape, which
was when he came vnto that place, a luſtie ſtrong Geldinge
as any is in England, but he was no ſooner on his backe, but
he preſently fell lame, and was not able to carie him, ſuche is
the iuſt iudgement of God that abhorreth murderers, and wil
not theyr villainie be concealed.
            Beſides for all thoſe woundes, which the Lord Bourghe had
receiued, it pleaſed God he ſhould liue two or thrée houres after,
time enough to commit him ſelfe to his mercie, and to reueale
the treacherous manner of his death, which hee did in
the hearinge of the right honourable the earles of Eſſex

Eſſex and Ormewood, in a houſe in Wanſworth, whether hee
was conuaied by the meanes of one Iohn Powell yeoman of
the bottels in her maieſties houſe, who comming to the reſcue,
purſued the murtherer vntill hee ſhrouded himſelfe in a
thicke wood, where he might eaſilie haue kept him ſelfe cloſe
a long time, but that the prouidence of God hauing nowtaken
place to puniſh, where before the deuill had kept poſſeſſion, for
ſin he wold not ſuffer him to reſt, but ſo ſoone as it was night,
brought him backe to Wanſworth, and the firſt houſe he came to
was ye houſe wherin ye breathles bodie of the Lord Bourgh lay,
wherunto he was no ſooner approched (which is a thing eſpecially
to be noted,) but his wounds bled more freſhlie then when
the were firſt giuen, whereby the people in the houſe béeing agaſt
at that ſuddaine and ſtraunge ſpectacle made forthe to
ſearch, for ſurelie they ſuppoſed the murtherer was not farre
off, he hearing the noyſe of their comming, fledde to Newinton,
where he was apprehended and caried to N
                  •
               wgate, and from
thence brought the fiue and twenteth daye of Ianuarie to the
Seſſions houſe in Southwarke, where he was arr
                  •
               ined and
condemed of wilfull murder, which murther he had committed
the fourth day of the ſame month. And thus haue I diſburdened
the heauy clogge of my gréeued conſcience, and done my
lateſt duetie to him dead, whom whileſt he liued, I loued and
honoured.
            Then Noble mindes, whoſe heartes full of lenitie harbour no ſuſpition of
treacherie, baniſhe all ſecure, mildneſſe from your ſoules, that ſuffers eueri
                  •
               
baſe, and ignoble Sicophante to enchroche into the leniry of your fauorable
conceite. And nouriſh not with your courteous countenaunce, the contemptuous
aſpirers of inferiour reput
                  •
               tion: For thereby groweth ſuch boſting
vanitie from the baſet inſolent, that would frame nobilitie to the inferiour
tipe of their vnworthines. As well is manifeſted by the ſodaine death
of this noble gentleman, and the publiſhed villanie of this t
                  •
               agicall murther,
a ſufficient caueat for euery miſtruſtleſſe minde to be admoniſhed.
         
      
      
         
            
            The ſighes of a ſad ſoule vpon the
vnfortunate death of the Right Honourable
the vertuous and valarous
gentleman the Lord Bourgh.
            
               The ſighes of the Night.
               
                  
                     THe gorgeous Sun hath ſpent his holy fire,
                  & ſcowling clouds are wrapped arme in arme,
                  The morning to the ſalt ſea doth retyre,
                  & deadly ſleep doth caſt an endles charme:
                  Fore-figuring ſome euerlaſting harme.
                  The Nights faire Queene doth bend hir iuory browes
                  And gleames a gloomie beaming on the boughes.
               
               
                  And Mercurie forerunner of the euening,
                  Hath bathd his golden winges in clotted bloud,
                  And euery gentle plannet ſitteth greiuing,
                  And that doth moue that euer firmely ſtoode:
                  A pitchie fogge doth couer euery flood.
                  And while the day breake ſtriueth with the ſtarres
                  The Sunne and Moone maintaine continuall warres.
               
               
                  The mountaines ſincke vnto the valleis deepe,
                  And riuers ſwell vnto the mountaines hight,
                  No pleaſaunce doth his wonted order keepe:
                  A winde remoues the waues: there teares doe ſighe
                  And liquide moyſture turnes to ſulphering drith:
                  So ſorrow burnes when dreirie teares are ſpent:
                  And ouer heat doth make a ſoft relent.
               
               
                  A ſwanniſh tune becomes my morning ſong,
                  And in my ſight hir feathers turnd to blacke,
                  No day is ſeene, but night is ouerſtrong:
                  For ſtill the morning bluſh is turned backe,
                  Becauſe no mourning eye ſhall ſorrow lacke,
                  
                     
A quire of Owles inſtead of Nightingals,
                  With Elegies my fainting ſorrow quailes.
               
               
                  The dewe that fals is like the ſent of death,
                  And brings a mortal Serene with the fall,
                  A graue is all the pleaſure of the earth,
                  and ſpringing bliſſe is but as barren gall,
                  and with our feete we digge our buriall,
                  What booteth all the pride of boaſting luſt
                  When martiall armour is a tombe of duſt.
               
               
                  Buried aliue within the graue of Night,
                  Where darknes guideth my lamenting griefe,
                  I lie bereaued of my former light,
                  As one that in diſtreſſe did finde reliefe,
                  And placed ſorrow in his ſoule for chiefe,
                  For that ſweete lampe of life that I ſo loued,
                  Is from my wonted guidance quite remoued.
               
               
                  I loath the cheerefull ioy the day doth bring,
                  becauſe the day mainteines the thing I hate:
                  Sweet is the muſick that the Screchowles ſing
                  And in good time are Minutes ouerlate,
                  For in my fancie loue is blacke debate,
                  And when I ſee my withered ſenſes ſtriue,
                  Then do I thinke my ſorowes are aliue.
               
               
                  I looke and ſee the daughters of great Ioue,
                  
                  That loude his noble vertues that I loue,
                  Sit ſighing in a melancholie groue:
                  and to combine a coronet haue ſtroue,
                  Of all the plantes that in the field doe roue,
                  For that ſwet Lord I hold the world in skorning
                  & hate day, night, the euening & the morning.
               
            
            
               
               The ſighs of the Morning.
               
                  Now as a mourning goddes comes the Morne,
                  Like to a wretched Pilgrime clothd in gray,
                  Hir lowring lookes like one that was forlorne,
                  Guſht ſhowres of teares vpon that diſmal day:
                  And when ſhe ſaw his deepe & mortal harmes,
                  She tooke my Lord within her louing armes.
               
               
                  Meeting the Lark that mounted with her notes,
                  Hir Chriſtall bodie bruſht vpon her breaſt:
                  & by that ſūmonce tunde their warbling throts
                  To ſing the burthen of my great vnreſt:
                  And when I ſigh the birds with heauie heigh,
                  Trebble their ſonnets, and approch me nigh.
               
               
                  If ſhe had loſt hir glimcing Lucifer,
                  That is familiar with hir bright vpriſe:
                  No ſorrow could ſuch greiuouſnes inferre,
                  As now departed from hir tearefull eyes.
                  And if hereafter I do ſee hir cleare,
                  Ile flie from hir, as an inconſtant pheare.
               
               
                  Hir crimiſon Mantle fell into the Sea,
                  And almoſt made the Lordlie Neptune mad,
                  But when he knew the mourning of the day
                  His royall hall with miſtie fogge was cladde,
                  And vnderſtanding of this ſadfull end,
                  He ſighed, and ſaid that he had loſt a friend.
               
               
                  When as the Nimph did know this curſed hape
                  & what bruite ſoule did act that damned deed,
                  a heauie clangor of hir armes did clappe,
                  To bidde all true Nobilitie take heede,
                  How they did truſt to flearing Sicophants,
                  
                  Or fauoured proud contemptuous miſcreants.
               
               
                  
                  Between theire browes ſee miſchefe fyrmlie knit,
                  And yet a fawning ſweetnes in their lipps:
                  VVithin there harts doth ouglie treaſon ſit,
                  And Adders venome from their pleaſure ſips.
                  Take heede faire Lordes, and feare ye to embrace:
                  The marke of nature in a flattering face.
               
               
                  The Goddeſſe ending with a greuous ſobbe,
                  Went vpp, to tell within her ſtatelie court:
                  How vice the noble did of vertue robbe,
                  And there did write his honors rare report.
                  When I beheld yt I was wel content,
                  And yet me thought I wiſht the Nights aſſent,
               
            
            
               The Third ſigh of Winter.
               
                  My fire is greater than whole Foreſts flames,
                  Eternall Winter kindleth in my breſt:
                  And in my heart a Regeſter of names,
                  Of balefull ſtormes the ſeaſon hath impreſt.
                  Somtimes the windes doe diue in to my hart,
                  And call them forth to renouate my ſmart.
               
               
                  Then euery ſtorme doth take a ſeuerall limbe,
                  And in thoſe limbes poſſeſſeth ſeuerall veynes:
                  And like Saturnus makes my bodie grimme,
                  By letting forth my bloud in paynfull ſtreynes.
                  And when I ſigh I raiſe a bremie ſtorme,
                  So all my ioyes are ſpent in winters forme.
               
               
                  This winter commeth by that flowers fade,
                  Whoſe couler brought bright comfort to my ſight:
                  Whoſe ſweete perfume my ioyfull pleaſure made,
                  Whoſe leaues reflexed like a ſtarrie light.
                  The coward malice cropt it from the ground,
                  And now in ſommer is no pleaſure found.
               
               
                  
                  As heauie as the froſtie grayberdes weight,
                  Lieth congealed ſorow on my heart:
                  And yet my burden ſeemeth but a ſleight,
                  Lightning, and thunder griefes and ſighes doe part
                  The one with ſodaine flaſhes blinds mine eyes,
                  The other with a waſting terrour flies.
               
               
                  A froſt of care hath nipt my ſpringing youth,
                  My Sun is downe ſhould make the yce relent:
                  And heaps of ſnow are gathered by my ruth,
                  All which are hillockes of cold diſcontent
                  And if this wintering chilnes euer burſt,
                  A waſhing ſtorme muſt waiſt the frozen cruſt.
               
               
                  Then from the braſen priſon breaks the winds,
                  And from their ſwelling mouthes do ſend out ſhowers:
                  And driue me to the thought of that which bindes,
                  Bundels of thornes to build vp darkeſome bowers
                  Vnder that gloomy ſhade I ſitte and ſing,
                  The greeuous loſſe of ſuch a pretious thing.
               
               
                  Wo is my Winter for ſo great a miſſe,
                  And in that ſeaſon on his ſadful hearſe:
                  A hermitage Ile build ſhall be my bliſſe,
                  And call on age my yongnes to reuerſe
                  And in his worthie praiſe my pen ſhall dwell
                  Whoſe vertue did all baſe contempt expell.
               
               
                  Ile ſit vntill my breath ingraue this grace
                  Vpon the ſtone doth couer his ſweet corſe.
                  Here vertue in a milkewhite mildnes ſtaies
                  Vntill eternall glorie by his force,
                  Conioyne his body to his pretious ſoule
                  In his ſweet boſome that doth all controule.
               
            
            
               
               The fourth ſigh of the Spring.
               
                  The Soueraigne of the Planets neuer roſe,
                  But in a cloudie vale did ſhrowd his head,
                  His Chariote couered like a mourning hearſe
                  Reiected quit his golden furniture,
                  
                     Ceres and Flora ſuffered ſuch a dearth,
                  as neuer happened on the barren earth.
               
               
                  When firſt the curſed hand, by cowards watch
                  Did ſeperate that life that loude my light,
                  The ſpring did ſprout, but blacke was al hir ſap
                  The violete turned to a tawnie hew,
                  Dim was the roſe, yet yallow were the ſeedes,
                  For mourning minds, betokening mournful weeds.
               
               
                  The wind with tragicke muſicke wiffeth ſighs,
                  Thorow the linnow ſtalks that ſhook the flours,
                  and Aiax bloud that breed the Hyacinth,
                  Congealeth care vpon the graſſie bancks,
                  But then the daintie Lillie loſt hir leaues,
                  & they were boūd amōgſt the reapers ſheaues.
               
               
                  The loftie Pines did pine within the valleys,
                  and ſtood like ſtripped champions in a ſtorme.
                  They that are cut & daunce vpon the billowes,
                  are careleſſe in the cold extreameſt chaunces.
                  and as the deepeſt brookes do murmur leaſt,
                  So they ſay little, that did loue him beſt.
               
               
                  Vpon a ſpringing oke doth keepe Joues byrde,
                  That letteth fall a feather euerie flight:
                  His ſorrow lets the Iuie haue his growth,
                  That turnes the Eagle to the bird of night,
                  When Okes and Eagles die for griefe not age
                  There feare and ruine runne in equipage.
               
               
                  
                  Tmolus hir ſelfe whereas the Safron growes,
                  Hath intermixt hir ſpice with lothſome weds,
                  Blacke woll doth grow on the Arabian ſhrubs,
                  as hard as are the quils of Porcupins,
                  Of Rauons couler lookes the Cotton tree,
                  a glorious ſpring againe ſhall neuer bee.
               
               
                  Thus is my ſpring become the leaues decaie,
                  Where Charecters of endles griefe are writ.
                  The dewfull teares do trickle from the boughs
                  That loſt their cloathing when I loſt my loue,
                  and aye to me my ſorrow writs the worſt,
                  My ioyes are barren and my ſelfe accurſt.
               
               
                  If any care bee buried in the earth,
                  Some quaking furie ſend it from hir breſt,
                  and leade my lumpe that being ouer preſt,
                  I may conucie this dead time to my reſt,
                  Where wrapped vp in bright archangels wings
                  I may behold that which my comfort brings.
               
            
            
               The Graces Funerall.
               
                  Since firſt the morning & the euening mourned
                  Since winter and the ſpring time are bereaued,
                  Of all the ioyes my inward loſſes breathed,
                  angels reioyce my loue is now receiued,
               
               
                  The Graces haue his louely bodie balmed.
                  and haue the centure of the earth perfumed,
                  Whereas that bodie ſhall not be conſumed,
                  & that which wrents the groūd is euer calmed
               
               
                  Their golden robs his bodie now hath couered,
                  & Dians Doues their Iuory breſts haue plumed,
                  Which by his bodie yet aliue haue houered,
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd his faire reſting is by heauen aſſumed.
               
               
                  
                  Foure morrall vertues haue his ſoule conueied
                  And ſpightfull fates his vertues haue deceiued,
                  And great Iehouah hath his worke ſurueied,
                  And with that bleſſed ſacrifice is pleaſed.
               
               
                  Who knew my noble louer whilſt he liued,
                  And will not ſay his vertues haue deſerued,
                  In fames huge books to haue his name deſcribed
                  And euery honour that hee had reuiued.
               
               
                  My wandring wit in ſorrowes ſourſe is drowned
                  & whē I wrought his praiſe the Muſes frowned
                  My ſhallow brain his nobleſſe hath not ſoūded,
                  Nor hath my pen his worthines renowmed.
               
               
                  Now hath immortall ſorrow neare approached,
                  And on my mazing wretchednes hath ceazed:
                  And hath my ruler night againe conducted,
                  whoſe gaping horour cannot be appeaſed.
               
               
                  Then of his ſoules ſweete ſafetie aſſured,
                  Which our redeemer by his death procured,
                  And ſince my ſorrowes cannot be redreſſed,
                  They are embrac'te as euermore diſtreſſed.
               
               FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   